Title
Review for Cradle Will Rock (1999)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Michael Redman
Whose whore are you? How far are you willing to prostitute yourself in
exchange for comfort?
In one way or another, we all pay for it. "It" in this case being social
and economic security. We work boring dead-end jobs so we can pay the
rent. We attend meaningless vacuous classes so we can get our degrees.
Worst of all, sometimes we compromise our values for financial gain.
In the desperate times of depression-era America, many people were
forced into prostitution of one type or another. With starvation just
around the next corner, we'd be surprised just what we'd be willing to
do for a meal.
Out of work actors were standing in long lines to sign up for the
federal WPA theater projects. Most of the WPA workers were out building
dams, ponds and sidewalks, but thousands were putting on plays to
entertain the masses.
"Cradle Will Rock" follows several plot lines that intersect at various
points. Orson Welles (Angus MacFadyen) and John Houseman (Cary Elwes)
are producing a pro-union musical by Marc Blitzstein (Hank Azaria).
Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack) hires radical artist Diego Rivera
(Ruben Blades) to paint a mural at the Rockefeller Center. Congress is
investigating Communists within the theater project. Industrialists are
throwing parties and being wooed by the fascists. People are falling in
love and babies, being born.
Amazingly the numerous tales flow seamlessly into one another. As the
camera zooms in on a piece of background and then pulls back out, you
are in a different place with different characters, but there's never a
moment of confusion about what is going on.
When the opening credits roll with name after name of renowned actors,
you will wonder how they can all fit into one film. Vanessa Redgrave,
Joan Cusack, Bill Murray, Susan Sarandon, John Turturro, Emily Watson:
the list goes on and on. And they're all great -- not a weak link in the bunch.
The underlying question of the film is the wisdom of public and
corporate funding of the arts. It's one big party at the beginning as
everyone focuses on their work. Then the modern Golden Rule ("He who has
the gold makes the rules") raises its ugly head. Rockefeller wants
Rivera to eliminate Lenin from his painting. Congress cuts financing to
the pinko plays. Mussolini's beautiful mistress trades old master
paintings to the Philistines for contributions to the war effort. Even
the actors union, formed to protect its members, gets in the way.
Yet it's all a joy to watch. There are heroes and villains, lovers and
enemies, disasters and triumphs. All against the frantic backdrop of
prima donas vying for position. It's like a Robert Altman film done by
the Coen brothers.
Director and writer Tim Robbins is rapidly becoming a major force in
Hollywood. With this, "Bob Roberts" and "Dead Man Walking" to his
directoral credit, and a number of wonderful acting roles, he's one to watch.
His brushstrokes are brilliant but a little broad here. The sets are
magnificent, the costumes authentic and the color schemes, inviting.
Some of the characters are charactures, but perhaps that's inevitable.
With so many things going on, the audience needs some shortcuts.
Some of the scenes are grand. The long single-shot opener follows
doe-eyed street singer Olive Stanton (Watson) from sleeping behind a
movie screen, down an alley out to the street where she washes up from a
dripping hydrant oblivious to pedestrians. Like a deer in the urban
forest, she's poor but free. The camera then moves up to Blitzstein's
apartment. Over five minutes of unedited uncut luxurious filming, it's a pleasure.
The questions the film asks don't belong only in the past. Federal arts
funding are currently under attack. Maplethorpe may not have been a
Commie but he sure was pink. Workers are being thrown out of jobs,
sweatshop conditions abound in other countries, unions are loosing power.
Welcome to the brave new world, same as the old one.
(Michael Redman has been writing this column for a long time, but his
memories of the thirties are a little foggy. He's considering taking up
selling apples on the street corner as a new career. Email your tales of
prostitution to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 1/272000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]
-- 
mailto:redman@bluemarble.net
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Created by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and approved by Congress
in 1935 as a part of the New Deal, the U.S. Works Progress
Administration was one of the most important work relief programs in
history, providing jobs for the vast legions of the unemployed affected
by the Great Depression.  Later renamed the Works Project Administration
(or WPA), the organization created over eight million jobs between 1935
and 1943.  But, oh, the havoc it wreaked on the creative community.
Cradle Will Rock takes place in 1930s New York City.  The Depression has
kicked into high gear, the red scare is well under way, and fat-cat
business owners are dreading the loss of production due to impending
union strikes.  The film is careful to show the effects of the times on
a wide array of New York citizens, covering every rung on the social
ladder from the homeless to (literally) Nelson Rockefeller.  Yet all
seem to be wrapped up in the Federal Theater Project (FTP), a WPA
venture intending to organize and provide work for unemployed theater
professionals - from actors to stagehands - while bringing cheap
entertainment to the masses.
The many characters of this film revolve around the production of a play
called The Cradle Will Rock, a federally funded, pro-union musical that
the government thinks was created by Communist insiders.  This theme of
government versus art is an argument that continues today, with the
National Endowment for the Arts replacing the WPA and witty social
commentary traded for dung-covered paintings of the Mother of Christ
portrayed with (gasp!) dark skin.  To further contrast the times, the
1930s characters ask each other if they're `for Franco or the
Loyalists,' while today, we ask each other if we've `seen that
steel-cage match between The Rock and Mankind.'
After a title card explains that the film is mostly a true story, Rock
kicks off with an amazing opening shot that goes on for several minutes,
tracking the homeless Olive Stanton (Emily Watson, Angela's Ashes) from
her makeshift bed behind a motion picture theater, through a gritty
alley, and onto the streets of New York, where the aspiring star offers
songs for a nickel.  After waiting in a giant FTP line, Olive manages to
land a job as a stagehand from a sympathetic paper-pusher (Joan Cusack,
Arlington Road) and quickly finds herself hip-deep in the elitist world
of theater folks, before landing the unlikely lead role in the new play
directed by the perpetually drunk twenty-one-year-old Orson Welles
(Angus MacFadyen, Braveheart) and produced by the perfectly snooty John
Houseman (Cary Elwes, Kiss the Girls).
The play, of course, is The Cradle Will Rock, a musical created by Marc
Blitzstein (Hank Azaria, Mystery, Alaska), a playwright haunted by a
lack of sleep and two ghosts.  The film does a fantastic job showing
Blitzstein's creation of the play, which, to his horror, begins to turn
disastrous in the hands of the continually bickering Welles and
Houseman.  Also involved in the production is a dirt-poor Italian
immigrant (John Turturro, Illuminata) that shuns his pro-Mussolini
family so that he can raise his three kids to be Americans.
But the play is just the tip of the iceberg concerning characters and
subplots.  There's a struggling ventriloquist (Bill Murray, Rushmore)
that, thanks to the FTP, is forced to instruct two hapless oafs (Jack
Black and Kyle Gass from Tenacious D) in the art of ventriloquism.
There's an Italian Jew (Susan Sarandon, Anywhere But Here) that raises
money from rich American industrialites to give to Mussolini.  One of
her targets is a steel magnate (Philip Baker Hall, The Insider), who
literally sits around and counts his money with William Randolph Hearst
(horror director John Carpenter).  There's a feud between the wealthy
Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack, Being John Malkovich) and Diego Rivera
(Rubén Blades, The Devil's Own), who was paid $21,000 to paint a mural
inside the spanking new Rockefeller Center.
And that's still not all (don't get me started on Paul Giamatti's
role).  Rock has one of the biggest casts of the year, overshadowed only
by Magnolia and Any Given Sunday.  Which brings up an interesting point
 Magnolia needed over three hours to tell its multi-layered story,
while Sunday nearly hit the 180-minute mark and still seemed to gloss
over most of its roles.  Rock packs just as many characters into a film
that clocks in at just over two hours.  You almost need a longer film
with a cast this size.  Rock doesn't immediately grab you the way that
Magnolia does and, as a result, the beginning is a bit jumbled and the
story doesn't quite gel until well into the film.
Written, directed and produced by Tim Robbins (Dead Man Walking), Rock
is brilliantly lensed by Jean-Yves Escoffier (Gummo, Good Will Hunting),
and contains some great music from the original play, scored here by
David Robbins.  I'm not sure if he's a relation to Tim, but he worked on
Dead Man Walking and Bob Roberts.  In other nepotism news, Tim's pop
appears in the film as a congressman (he previously played a reverend
and a bishop in Walking and Roberts), not to mention Sarandon, who
nabbed an Oscar the last time she starred in one of her husband's
films.  Sarandon also shares a song with Pearl Jam frontman Eddie Vedder
on Rock's soundtrack.
Rock looks fantastic, thanks to double Oscar-nominee Ruth Myers' (Emma,
The Addams Family) lovely costumes and 1999 Tony Award winner Richard
Hoover's (Twin Peaks) production design.  Stick around for the closing
credits, which feature P.J. Harvey performing `Nickel Under Your Foot,'
a song from the original production of the play.

Author
Michael Dequina
1999 appears to be the year where filmmakers pay tribute to the
entertainment medium that paved the way for celluloid: theater.  This
summer saw the release of John Turturro's stage-set _Illuminata_, and
opening this month are Mike Leigh's _Topsy-Turvy_ and Tim Robbins'
_Cradle_Will_Rock_.  All films bear their own unique qualities (on a
basic level, _Illuminata_ is a complete fiction, while _Topsy-Turvy_ and
_Cradle_ both have some grounding in historical fact), but Robbins' film
stands apart in that in addition to providing a portrait of the New York
stage circa the 1930s, it also aims to capture the political climate at
the time.  It's a grand ambition, but Robbins is able to pull it off, if
only in the end.
While politics loom large over the film, Robbins, as one well knows, is
an actor himself, and thus the theatre plays no small part in _Cradle_. 
The film is titled for _The_Cradle_Will_Rock_, a politically-themed,
pro-labor-union musical composed by one Marc Blitzstein (Hank Azaria). 
The production, directed by a tempestuous young Orson Welles (Angus
Macfadyen), is the focal storyline of the film, but it's also not the
only one.  Elsewhere, wealthy Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack)
commissions Mexican artist Diego Rivera (Ruben Blades) to paint a mural
in the lobby of his new building.  Margherita Sarfatti (Susan Sarandon),
a representative for Mussolini, gives valuable paintings to millionaires,
one of whom is one Grey Mathers (Philip Baker Hall), in return for their
support of the Italian war effort.  The American government conducts
hearings that will determine the future of the Federal Theatre Project,
which is valiantly defended by its head, Hallie Flanagan (Cherry Jones);
but helped taken down by a low-ranking employee (Joan Cusack), who in
turn is pursued romantically by a ventriloquist (Bill Murray).
With so many characters and so much going on, _Cradle_Will_Rock_
meanders with no clear agenda for most of its running time.  As messy as
it gets, the proceedings are kept watchable by the work of the stellar
cast, which also includes Emily Watson, John Turturro, Vanessa Redgrave,
and Cary Elwes.  Everyone does a fine job with their roles--though Jones
impresses the most.  The actors also have an infectious ball working
together; pairing two live wires like Cusack and Murray proves to be an
especially inspired move on the part of Robbins.  Even so, as the film
bounces between characters and plot threads, interest flags at times.
But all the disparate elements and ideas in Robbins' screenplay
gradually weave together and then cement into a rousing climax that
powerfully makes its points about the importance of artistic freedom.  In
the end, _Cradle_Will_Rock_ proves to be a very apt title; it sways
haphazardly for a while, but it does eventually find its steady rhythm.
At two hours and forty minutes, _Topsy-Turvy_ runs about a half hour
longer than _Cradle_Will_Rock_, but writer-director Leigh doesn't take
quite as long as Robbins does to find his film's footing.  A lot of that
has to do with _Topsy_'s more modest ambitions; Leigh only aims to make a
light tribute to the genius of the musical team of lyricist/librettist
William Schwenck Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and composer Arthur Sullivan
(Allan Corduner).  And Leigh has succeeded in a most delightful way,
offering a witty and engrossing behind-the-curtain look at the rocky
making of one of Gilbert and Sullivan's most celebrated works,
_The_Mikado_.  Broadbent and Corduner are the stars of this film show and
both do a splendid job (in particular Corduner), but what makes the film
an especially enjoyable romp are the supporting players who do a
wonderful job of performing selected scenes from the actual musicals. 
The long but snappily-paced _Topsy-Turvy_ isn't as deep or "important" a
work as Leigh's best-known film, the Oscar-nominated _Secrets_&_Lies_,
but it certainly a lot more fun--which is the point.  (_Topsy-Turvy_
opens December 17)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Jerry Saravia
The Depression era was rife with political turmoil, destitutes, and the Federal
Theatre threatened with  Communist accusations and a significant reduction in
number of employees. "The Cradle Will Rock," the title is from a 1937 political
musical by Marc Blitzstein, examines these trying times but the end result is
relentlessly boring and unengaging. 
There is the opening, unbroken long take of a homeless woman, Olive Stanton
(Emily Watson) waking up in a movie theatre as she leaves hastily, trying to
avoid being seen by the management and walking out of the place while other
characters march past her such as Joan Cusack as a theatre employer. Then the
camera continues to swoop above Watson as it unearths the radical composer
Blitzstein (Hank Azaria), seen playing the piano in his apartment. He is dead
tired and has had sleepless nights trying to compose the definitive musical.
Four years later, the musical is in rehearsals with the director, Orson Welles
(Angus Macfayden), who is also enjoying the run of his famous play "Dr.
Faustus," and he has producer and rival John Houseman (Cary Elwes) in tow.
Emily Watson shows up as the stagehand who hopes to share the limelight with
the cast, and wants a chance to play the prostitute role. 
There are a number of characters and subplots to juggle here, such as John
Cusack as Nelson Rockefeller who is overseeing the mural painted by Diego
Rivera (Ruben Blades), though he questions the need for a portrait of Stalin;
Vanessa Redgrave as the rich socialite, Countess La Grange, who has high hopes
for the musical; Susan Sarandon as the Italian Fascist, who is Mussolini's
ex-lover, and also questions Diego's mural; Bill Murray as a stoic
ventriloquist who reluctantly holds anticommunist ideals; John Turturro as a
loud Italian actor in the musical; the grandly titanic presence of Philip Baker
Hall as Gray Mathers, a steel magnate who objects to the musical; and lastly,
Cherry Jones as Hallie Flanagan of the Federal Theatre, accused of Communist
associations and forced to close down the theatre. 
Tim Robbins, serving as writer and director, has an ambitious project at the
helm, but he fails to make it come alive. The staging and pacing of the film
deadens to a halt - the only time the film breathes is when Cherry Jones
appears - she delivers firepower and authority as the leading player of the
Federal Theatre, defending the right to artistic freedom. The other characters,
with the exception of Blades's witty Rivera, slip in and out of the screen
barely making an impression. There is some humor in seeing Cusack's Rockefeller
arguing with Rivera, or dancing with Frida Kahlo, Rivera's sullen wife, but not
enough to take notice. Bill Murray walks away from the film without registering
half of the charisma he brought to "Rushmore." Emily Watson, a gifted actress,
is dull to watch in this film - the transition from the homeless, sympathetic
Olive Stanton to a whimpering cipher does not make for a full-bodied character.
But the biggest disappointment are the portrayals of Welles and Houseman,
presented as nothing more than two arrogant, one-dimensional boors. Macfayden
rolls his eyes and overdoes Welles's body language - Robbins's interpretation
indicates that Welles was a drunk and uncontrollable. If that is true, Welles
would not have the repertoire he established in the theatre world from the 30's
and onward. Considering this film was originally going to be written and
directed by Welles, this is more than a major offense. 
"The Cradle Will Rock" has some believably overwrought sequences where we see
what it is like to produce a musical play - the pains and frustrations are
there in ample supply. I liked the presentation of this fascinating era in all
its period decor and fashion style (an Academy Award nomination is due). The
final sequence, where we see Blitztein playing the piano and singing all the
roles at the Venice Theatre until each actor performs from their seats in the
audience, is somewhat touching and sentimental. But it is a hopelessly inert
film that caused me to shut my eyes more than once. Instead of rocking us with
excitement and entertainment, this cradle lands with a thud. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CRADLE WILL ROCK (director/writer: Tim Robbins; cinematography: Jean
Yves Escoffier; editor: Geraldine Peroni; cast: Hank Azaria (Marc
Blitzstein), Ruben Blades (Diego Rivera), Joan Cusack (Hazel Huffman),
John Cusack (Nelson Rockefeller), Cary Elwes (John Houseman), Philip
Baker Hall (Gray Mathers), Cherry Jones (Hallie Flanagan), Angus
Macfadyen (Orson Welles), Bill Murray (Tommy Crickshaw), Vanessa
Redgrave (Countess La Grange), Susan Sarandon (Margherita Sarfatti),
Jamey Sheridan (John Adair), John Turturro (Aldo Silvano), Emily Watson
(Olive Stanton), Stephen Spinella (Donald O'Hara), John Carpenter
(William Randolph Hearst), Gretchen Mol (Marion Davies), Harris Yulin
(Congressman Dies), 1999)
Cradle is a social conscience film about the creation of a leftist
musical work in 1936, during the Great Depression, which was supported
by President Roosevelt's WPA (Work Projects Administration). Cradle Will
Rock is written and directed by Tim Robbins and it centers on the first
production of Marc Blitzstein's "play in music," The Cradle Will Rock.
It's an ambitious effort about how one can preserve one's dignity in the
face of poverty. It also faces up to the dilemma of prostituting one's
art and one's soul, in order to survive, during the Depression. The
picture tries to cover much territory, in this long epic-like,
period-piece production of over two hours. It seems like a mess, as the
film has too many stories going all at once and too many characters
coming in and out of it to follow them all, and the acting is less than
compelling. As a result, it is easy to lose track of the real-life
figures for the cardboard symbols they represent, as the sides are drawn
up -- the good guys are the struggling actors-and-the bad guys the
industrial magnates. But, fortunately, the film rises to the occasion in
its uplifting finale, bringing a renewed energy for its clear-cut
message to be credibly received, at last.
This is an old-fashioned liberal film, preaching its humanitarian
message to the choir. A message of how the government must provide help
and how art has to be revolutionary to  reflect the changes needed for
the times, and how it is necessary to fight for one's freedom or else it
will be taken away. The unfortunate thing about the film, is that it is
not terribly entertaining.
Blitzstein's play about workers' rights in Steeltown, U.S.A., was
approved in 1937 by Hallie Flanagan, the head of the Federal Theater
Project. She put the production in the hands of the boy genius, the then
22-year-old irascible Orson Welles (Macfadyen), as the director, and the
more restrained but terribly witty, John Houseman (Elwes), as the
producer. The two managed to get on despite their different
personalities and artistic differences.
This is an almost true story (the dates certainly are out of order), as
the troubled history of the Federal Theater Project is depicted, along
with the telling of the Depression's consequences on the working-class,
the war fears associated with the rise of fascism in Italy, the
patronizing behavior of the wealthy industrialists toward the arts and
the worker, and, the constant battle to keep the federally financed arts
programs alive when Congress formed the House of Un-American Committee
to root out communists and leftists in the theater.
The film lumbered through by showing snippets of the theater rehearsals,
introducing and then forgetting about a cast the size of an army. The
main theater personalities presented are the fictionalized actors in the
play: Olive Stanton (Watson), a homeless naif who gets hired to be a
stagehand and gets the lead singing part of the prostitute in the show.
John Adair (Sheridan) is one of the actors who pushes her on-stage to
get the part and he becomes her boyfriend, in a story that left me
feeling unmoved, as it was just typical Hollywood goo, seen many times
before. John Turturro plays Aldo Silvano with gusto, an Italian actor
proud of his family and someone who will not be compromised by living
with his fascist relatives, choosing to get a less comfortable apartment
than live with relatives who teach his children fascist songs. Bill
Murray is the lonelyheart ventriloquist, Tommy Crickshaw, who doesn't
think Reds are funny and hates them because they are getting all the
good jobs while he is being passed over and is forced to teach
untalented actors. Joan Cusack is Hazel Huffman, a lonely woman who
detests the Reds in the theater and is a priggish office bureaucrat in
the theater who becomes the key witness against her superiors, by
telling how the Reds infiltrated the theater and about "mixed-race
dating;"her testimony results in twenty percent of the actors losing
their jobs. After her testimony, she is ostracized by the other workers
in the theater.
The real-life characters from the theater group harldy fare better when
portrayed: The bland Marc Blitzstein (Hank Azaria), who says he is not a
communist but a homosexual (but the point being made is that homosexuals
are viewed just as badly as the commies are). He is seen dreaming up his
musical while trying to get it right about how a prostitute should be
viewed. He converses with the ghost of Bertolt Brecht, who, in
actuality, did help him structure the play. Hallie Flanagan (Cherry
Jones), head of the Federal Theater, is the fervent supporter for the
theater's many radical projects. They both gave forgettable
performances.
There are intertwined stories around the theater about the
industrialists mixing with the fascists. Here, a Jewess fascist
supporter from Italy, the former mistress of Mussolini's, Margherita
Sarfatti (Susan Sarandon), is in the middle of the mix. She is a Hearst
newspaper columnist, who is the attractive liaison between European
Fascism and America's wealthy industrialists -- she advises them on art,
getting Diego Rivera (Blades) to do the gigantic mural in Rockefeller
Center for Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack), she also sets up the
purchases of embargoed steel from the industrialist Gray Mathis (Philip
Baker Hall) to help the fascist war effort back home against the
communists while lining Gray's pockets with money, and she also
transfers smuggled-in old art masters, such as Da Vinci, for the
industrialist's private collection.
Nelson Rockefeller is seen as a young fool with lots of money, who wants
to control the artists he hires. The most lively sketches in the film
come about with his relationship with the wealthy, sexually promiscuous
artist, Diego, whose work will be aborted by the industrialist after he
sees the artist won't cheer up the mural, won't take Lenin off of it,
and insists on having the rich capitalists being placed in purgatory.
These scenes could have been even more potently dramatic, if the miscast
Cusack was replaced by someone who could do a better Rockefeller.
At one point Nelson says, "I must confess that I'm more interested in
the oil in paint than the oil in derricks." William Randolph Hearst
(Carpenter), secretly confides to a fellow magnate, Gray Mathis:
"Killing strikers doesn't play to the public. You've got to find a way
to give them a dollar -- and take two!" Vanessa Redgrave, in a
stereotyped role, is Gray's lightheaded, titled wife, Countess La
Grange, with liberal aspirations and sympathy for the theater people.
All these parts seem oversimplified, with the director pulling the
strings as if the actors were puppets, and though the message is
right-on, there was no immediacy or impact in the story. There was no
art in the art, everything moved along predictably. I imagine that
someone with much more political savvy and more experience directing
than Robbins, like Mike Leigh, could have found a way to get around this
mess without altering where the sympathies should lie to pull off a more
satisfying work.
The government ended up cutting the funds for the theater project, which
resulted in the theater group having to find another theater just before
curtain time. The cast and the audience then trekked uptown through the
streets and saw the show there. There was no scenery, there was just
Blitzstein at the piano, and the play made history with a most thrilling
and memorable opening. But, ultimately, politics aside, the trouble with
the original play became what was the trouble with this movie version,
the story and the music are just too dry, though the message it
presents, is worth savoring.
But, any film that can quote Nelson Rockefeller and also leave no
mistake where those other industrial patrons of the arts stood, makes me
recommend this well-intentioned but flat dramatic film solely on that
basis. Rocky and his friends state:"Artists are whores like the rest of
us. . . .  We control the future of art because we pay for the future of
art." And, Rocky goes on to say, after his disappointment with Diego,
"That Abstract Expressionism is the future to come: Colors and form, not
politics." Ah! How diabolical are these quotations, showing the
industrialists in their true colors and the contempt they had for the
public!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
The opening scene of Tim Robbins' historical fiction CRADLE WILL ROCK shows 
a moment that sets the tone for the entire sprawling piece.  Emily Watson's 
character, Olive Stanton, awakens on the stage behind the screen of a 1930's 
movie palace.  She's homeless, and as she puts on her stockings and shoes to 
skedaddle before the manager catches her, we watch the backward images up on 
the screen.  Quickly the social milieu is clear, and Robbins has done his 
job of making history accessible:  he has shown the place of an individual 
within the roiling span of history.  The Great Depression is on, and the 
lives of countless Americans are in fact backwards.
What stands at the center of the narrative is the play "The Cradle Will 
Rock" by Marc Blitzstein.  It is a musical with a political bent, a 
pro-union diatribe against the exploitative capitalists who are scrambling 
to protect their interests from what they perceive as a very serious 
Communist threat.  As part of the Federal Theater Project - a division of 
the Works Progress Administration - the play is being produced by John 
Houseman (Cary Elwes) and directed by Orson Welles (Angus MacFadyen).  
Following the production of the play, the main plot takes us through 
rehearsals - including a few tantrums thrown by Welles - all the way through 
opening day, the day after the Federal Theater Project has been closed by 
the government.
With painstaking research and risk-taking that is quite creative, Tim 
Robbins holds our interest through the entire piece.  CRADLE WILL ROCK 
(though I don't care for the title) is a film full of ideas, inspired 
directing, and political messages that are still fresh.  There is a great 
deal of talk about prostitution, in both literal and figurative senses.  Is 
it selling out when Olive sings a song for a nickel on the street corner?  
When an artist paints a mural for a commission, or when a writer curtails 
her script to match the wishes of benefactors?  What comes first, survival 
or artistic integrity?  Robbins is to be admired for addressing these 
questions and many more.
One risk the director takes is in the strangeness of the playwright 
Blitzstein.  Hank Azaria plays the tortured writer, whom we see early in the 
film, working in his cramped apartment on the script to CRADLE.  Because 
he's not slept in two days, he seems to be hallucinating, the figures of his 
deceased wife and of the German dramatist Bertolt Brecht appearing to him 
frequently.  Later, after his arrest for being in the midst of a labor 
rally, Blitzstein composes large parts of his play from a jail cell, the 
apparitions acting as a sort of chorus.  Azaria does a nice transparent job 
with his character;  he is never obtrusive, but captures well the generous 
nature of the socially aware playwright.
Emily Watson, doing a very effective American accent, is fine as Olive 
Stanton.  After life hands her a hard time, she suddenly lands one of the 
lead roles in the Welles-directed vehicle, and her dreams proceed to come 
true.  One is reminded of Drieser's novel SISTER CARRIE, in which a young 
and vulnerable woman makes good on the stage.  Olive was selected by the 
producers because of her innocence;  even Watson's singing voice is plain 
and sincere.
As Orson Welles and John Houseman ( adults will remember Houseman from the 
television series "The Paper Chase"  and Smith Barney commercials, and 
perhaps Welles from wine commercials and appearances on the "Tonight Show" 
with his magic tricks), are done adequately by MacFadyen and Elwes.  In 
parts, though, MacFadyen overacts, and Elwes slips into pompous caricature.  
Their function in the plot is fulfilled well, however.
Robbins's wife Susan Saradon plays Margherita Sarfatti, an agent of the 
fascist dictator Benito Mussolini.  She's in the states to raise money for 
the building of an Italian war machine.  The relevance of the politics hits 
us cleverly, as we watch wealthy magnates like Gray Mathers (Philip Baker 
Hall) and William Randolph Hearst obtain masterpieces of Italian art in 
exchange for large cash stakes.  Again, art being sold out, this time in the 
most pathetic of senses, to be used by Mussolini and his ally, Hitler.  
Sarandon is best when she lets the character's politics hang all the way 
out, as when she scolds artist Diego Rivera (Ruben Blades) for his political 
idealism and how he worked it into a mural commissioned by Nelson 
Rockefeller (John Cusack) to decorate a wall inside Rockefeller Center.
This political theme is explored further through the subplot involving 
Hallie Flanagan (Cherry Jones), the administrator of the Federal Theater 
Project.  Jones gives Flanagan a sincerely mature and open-minded point of 
view; without hesitation she funds a worthwhile children's play, only to 
hear later some scandalous rumors about how the play encourages rebellious 
behavior!  In a scene out of countless movies set two decades later, we 
watch as Flanagan is grilled by misguided politicians with witch-hunting 
agendas.  Quiet but assertive, Jones tries to refute as well as she can the 
lurid assumptions surrounding her agency.  One hopes to see Jones  as a 
featured actress in many films to come.
Bill Murray, as Tommy Crickshaw the ventriloquist, and Joan Cusack, as Hazel 
Hoffman, work well together and serve as would-be love interest.  Although 
she works as a clerk in the WPA agency that hires the artists for the 
programs, Hoffman's politics eventually send her to testify against what she 
perceives as politically and racially dangerous topics.  Murray has a crush 
on the younger Hoffman, and seems to take up her torch merely because of his 
attraction.  Both actors have such sadly expressive faces as they discover 
their respective truths.
Robbins' directing chores must have kept him quite busy.  It is difficult to 
create a semblance of confusion, and the irony is that Robbins had to be 
supremely organized to make his action seem so chaotic.  In one of the most 
moving segments toward the end, Robbins employs canny cross-cutting that 
builds momentum among the subplots.  One smallish problem is that it is hard 
to tell if some scenes are meant as tour-de-force or as serious satire; but 
the sheer power of the premiere of "The Cradle Will Rock" offsets these 
concerns, with its unconventional staging and strong socio-political 
undercurrents.
The film is rated R for occasional strong language, some nudity - among 
artist Diego Rivera's models - and brief sexuality.  It would be fine for 
children 15 and above, and would definitely engage viewers who like to learn 
about history and drama.


Author
Scott Renshaw
CRADLE WILL ROCK 
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Hank Azaria, Emily Watson, John Turturro, Angus Macfayden, Bill
Murray, Joan Cusack, Cherry Jones, Cary Elwes, John Cusack, Vanessa
Redgrave, Philip Baker Hall, Ruben Blades, Susan Sarandon, Jamey Sheridan.
Screenplay:  Tim Robbins.
Producers:  Jon Kilik, Lydia Dean Pilcher and Tim Robbins.
Director:  Tim Robbins.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  132 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     CRADLE WILL ROCK is a tapestry of American social activism in the
1930s ... and a fairly tattered one, at that. Beginning in the fall of
1936, Tim Robbins' fact-based drama introduces us to the Federal Theatre
Project, a W.P.A. sub-division dedicated to employing America's artists
for the low-cost entertainment of America's Depression-era masses. Among
the works funded by the project is "The Cradle Will Rock," a pro-union
musical written by Marc Blitzstein (Hank Azaria) and staged by the
ever-feuding tandem of producer John Houseman (Cary Elwes) and director
Orson Welles (Angus Macfayden). According to Congressman Martin Dies
(Harris Yulin), it's also too typical of the left-leaning tendencies of
the arts community. When Congress abruptly declares a moratorium on all
Federal Theatre Project activities, the F.T.P.'s director Hallie Flanagan
(Cherry Jones) attempts to set things straight politically. Meanwhile,
Welles and company decide on a more direct course of action.
     The F.T.P. controversy and the staging of "The Cradle Will Rock" is
the central story of CRADLE WILL ROCK, but it's far from the only one.
Sub-plots follow "Cradle" cast members like Aldo Silvano (John Turturro),
who turns his back on his pro-Fascist Italy family, and Olive Stanton
(Emily  Watson), a homeless aspiring singer. There are glimpses into the
glittering lives of the industrialists whose efforts supported Italy and
Germany prior to the war, including Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack) and
steel magnate Grey Mathers (Philip Baker Hall). There is a tale of
Rockefeller's battle with artist Diego Rivera (Ruben Blades) over the
mural Rivera has been commissioned to create in the new Rockefeller
Center. And there are stories of anti-Communist whistle-blowers like
W.P.A. clerk Hazel Huffman (Joan Cusack) and ventriloquist Tommy Crickshaw
(Bill Murray).
     If that seems like a lot to digest, it is. Robbins' sprawling
narrative attempts to approach the era's growing class unrest from every
possible angle, and in so doing can't quite do justice to any of them. 
Olive and Aldo are walking representations of the virtuous poor more than
they are actual characters; their counterparts in Mathers and William
Randolph Hearst (John Carpenter) are cackling industrialists who sit
around counting their money (quite literally, in one scene). Characters
with the potential to develop into something intriguing and complex --
like Margherita Sarfatti (Susan Sarandon), a Jewish propagandist for
Mussolini -- barely get enough screen time for you to remember who they
are. In a cinematic season where epic running times are epidemic, CRADLE
WILL ROCK clocks in at a meager-by-comparison 132 minutes, not nearly
enough time to render all its stories fully.
     It's a shame, too, because CRADLE WILL ROCK often shows flashes of
the compelling film that might have been. Robbins has real visual flair as
a director, including a great scene-setting opening Steadicam shot and
Blitzstein's sleep-deprived creation of "Cradle" (accompanied by
hallucinatory inspirations for its staging and commentary from his muse
Bertolt Brecht. Vanessa Redgrave has a juicy role as Mathers' "socially
conscious" wife, who gets a rebellious thrill out of watching a "Negro 
production of 'Macbeth,'" or helping Welles' pirate performance of 
"Cradle." And there's the theater group, with Macfayden chewing scenery as
the egotistical Welles and Elwes his effective foil as Houseman. Robbins
says in the press notes that he originally set out to do a film just about
the staging of "Cradle," before other storylines presented themselves. You
can't help but wish he had stayed more focused.
     In this era of fuming over the National Endowment for the Arts and
its support of "questionable" works, CRADLE WILL ROCK's themes are
certainly still timely. Robbins' sympathies are clearly with the social
activists, but, as he did in DEAD MAN WALKING, he shows a willingness to
explore the other side with some semblance of an open mind (if earnest,
misguided namer of names Hazel falls into that category). The problem with
CRADLE WILL ROCK isn't politics, though, but a reach exceeding Robbins'
grasp. He has so little time to spend exploring any of his stories that he
never delves into questions of what an artist sacrifices when he accepts
patronage, or examines the irony of "The Cradle Will Rock" being sabotaged
as much by the entertainers' unions as by the government. As an overview
history lesson, CRADLE WILL ROCK has much to recommend it. As a film, it's
too cursory a glance at too complex an issue.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Hank Azaria, Joan Cusack, John Cusack, Cary Elwes, Bill
Murray, Susan Sarandon, Ruben Blades, Philip Baker Hall, Angus
MacFayden, John Turturro, Emily Watson. Directed by Tim Robbins. Rated
R.
It's difficult to find an angle on the Great Depression if you're
looking to make a serious but not a depressing drama. What jumps out at
you, understandably, is the poverty and the suffering. The million
dollar challenge is to make a movie that shows all of that without
focusing on it, without taking the viewer deep into the slums of
poverty. Tim Robbins, acclaimed actor and director of Dead Man Walking
is up to the challenge. With Cradle Will Rock, Robbins has made a bona
fide period piece, a film that, through its plot and setting, conveys a
wide range of characteristics of the time and place. Roger Ebert said
that one needs a study guide to view Cradle Will Rock; I suggest that
it is an immensely entertaining study guide in itself.
In the 1930s after the stock market crashed and took the economy with
it, part of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's comprehensive recovery program
known as the New Deal" was providing jobs for the many unemployed
citizens. In an effort to open position in as wide a variety of fields
as humanly possible, the Federal Theater Program was instituted.
Branches of the Federal Theater would put out wide casting calls and
put on moderately well-funded productions of plays for the general
public. A major part of everything, of course, was the Red Scare, a
nationwide Communism phobia and fear of anything deemed remotely un-
American.
Enter Mark Blitzstein (Hank Azaria). Poor and suffering from a few
mental disorders, Blitzstein wrote "Cradle Will Rock," a stage play
that may not have been quite anti-Capitalist, but was certainly anti-
Industrialist. It swept members of the working class off their feet but
understandably disconcerted the government, already concerned with a
possible proletariat rebellion. The Federal Theater decides to produce
the play, headed by a young and arrogant Orson Welles (Angus
MacFayden), but right before opening night the government decides to
shut it down.
Meanwhile, in an unrelated subplot, Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack)
hires a painter friend of his to paint a mural in the lobby of one of
Nelson's establishments. The painter also happens to be a Communist and
he incorporates Lenin and other such sensibilities into his creation.
Nelson wants very much to accomodate his buddy's whims but is very much
worried about how well his mural will be received by the public.
Joan Cusack plays an employee of the Federal Theater seemingly
brainwashed by the Red Scare; she goes to a Congressional Committee to
complain about traces of Communism in the plays the Theater puts on.
She develops a relationship with a sad, eccentric ventriloquist (Bill
Murray), who isn't quite sure what he himself thinks.
Like the higher-profile but hardly superior Magnolia, Cradle Will Rock
takes a unique approach to storytelling that is becoming increasingly
popular: taking a whole set of characters and only tangentially related
storylines and weaving them together to paint a complete picture. Since
this is in effect a period piece, that method is all the more
appropriate, and Robbins pulls it off admirably. I'm probably more
familiar with the history of the 1930s than the average person and I
was consistently impressed by how well this movie provided an
interpertation of the decade in an entertaining and surprising way. It
looks at the period from a whole new angle and puts it in a new light;
the result is an illuminating experience.
Many have criticized this movie for being overly ambitious; it does,
after all, try to tackle the stories of Nelson Rockefeller, William
Randolph Hearst, the Red Scare, the Federal Theater and the Great
Depression in general in one fell swoop. But I don't think that the
movie's purpose is to provide a complete history; rather, it tries to
take a snapshot of a time period. Robbins does not provide a lot of
background information. He takes us right into his story. What he winds
up doing is giving us an idea of what the 30s were like for a lot of
people -- but not necessarily how it came to be that way or even why
it's that way. He gives us the bare necessities so that we are not
thoroughly confused, but that is all. This isn't a textbook translated
to celluloid nor does it try to be one.
...and it all works like a gem. This is one of the very best films of
the year, a sweeping, enjoyable, thought-provoking epic that respects,
educates and entertains the audience all at the same time. Tim Robbins
doesn't direct very often -- he prefers to act and is superb at that,
too -- but when he does go behind the camera, what comes out is second
to none.

Author
Mac VerStandig
--- A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/cradle_will_rock.htm ---
There are some simple rules to making a feature film. They include: 1)
Try to avoid venturing over the two-hour mark. 2) Don't rip the plot
out of a history textbook. 3) Use a lead actor.
Cradle Will Rock violates all three of those rules. The work is over
two hours long, rips its plot out of the Great Depression chapter in
textbooks and uses nearly 15 supporting actors in lieu of a lead role.
The odds of a movie with the aforementioned infractions of common
practice being decent are about the same as a little Italian man who
speaks fractured English beating out Tom Hanks for Best Actor. Well,
Benigni not only won the honor but literally walked on Steven
Spielberg in doing so. Cradle Will Rock not only gets away with the
no-nos, but achieves absolute brilliance in the process.
It is the 1930's and the Great Depression has divided American into
the minority wealthy and the majority poor. In an attempt to provide
cheap entertainment for the masses and save an institution known as
Broadway, the Federal Theatre Project (FTP) is born. The mission is to
provide talented, trained and experienced actors and crew members with
jobs.
Marc Blizenstein (Hank Azaria), with the aid of sleepless
hallucinations, pens a show titled Cradle Will Rock. Orson Welles
(Angus Macfadyen) directs the piece after Hallie Flanagan (Cherry
Jones), the director of FTP, decides to produce it. Cast members
include a poor but pride-filled actor (John Torturro) and a homeless
street singer who catches a break (Emily Watson).
There is a problem with Cradle Will Rock, however. It is
pro-union. Lest we forget that Martin Dies is leading a pre-McCarthy
committee investigating possible incidents of communism and FTP is
already under examination in the most notorious witch-hunt in American
history.
The film's suporting character overdose is actually countered by the
history book issue; since the actors are wonderful playing people we
are familiar with, much of the movie works itself out. Azaria's grasp
on Blitzstein is marvelous, John Cusack's take of Nelson Rockefeller
is extremely noteworthy, Ruben Blades' Diego Rivera is fabulous and,
most impressively, Bill Murray plays Tommy Crickshaw in a convincing
and oftentimes chilling manner.
Another interesting actor in the cast is Philip Baker Hall. The
veteran actor seems to have struck gold this year, appearing not only
in this fine film but The Talented Mr. Ripley, The Insider and
Magnolia as well. It is conceivable that he could appear in three, if
not four, of the 1999 Best Picture nominates films.
If all this sounds semi-chaotic, that's probably because it
is. Keeping track of all the film's characters, their issues and the
politics is indeed challenging. However, what is being shown in the
movie is a time of equally dense chaos and uncertainty. Director Tim
Robbins should be credited, not blamed, for properly portraying the
realistic setting of his subject matter.

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE CRADLE WILL ROCK tells the "(mostly) true story" of a federally
funded musical of the same name that was shut down by the government on
the day it was to open.  It later became well known after its director,
Orson Welles (Angus MacFadyen), became famous.
It's the 1930s -- the time of the Great Depression.  Among the many
government public works activities is the Federal Theater Project, which
employs out-of-work actors as well as stage crew.  "The Cradle Will
Rock" by playwright Marc Blitzstein (Hank Azaria) tells a pro-union
story, which infuriates Congressman Dies (Harris Yulin), among others.
They suspect Communist infiltration in the arts, and Chairman Dies's
subcommittee holds hearings on the subject.
This might lead one to believe that the film is a hard-hitting
indictment of politics run amuck, but it isn't.  Writer and director Tim
Robbins has hired half of his Hollywood friends to appear in his
three-ring circus of a movie.  Everything is rushed.  Actors run onto
the set, rattle off their lines and run off again.  Robbins then quickly
cuts to an entirely different group of actors telling another part of
the story.  Adding to the unrealistic, circus-like atmosphere of the
production is a pair of lovers who have a propensity to sneak away,
remaining in view of the others and the camera, as they disrobe and have
enthusiastic sex.
Among the many stereotyped characters in the cluttered script are: A
giddy liberal socialite, Countess LaGrange (Vanessa Redgrave), who gets
her strike news delivered on a silver platter by her servants.  An
anti-Communist ventriloquist, Tommy Crickshaw (Bill Murray), who is
forced by his employer (the federal government in the form of the WPA)
to tutor two no-talent, would-be ventriloquists.  An alcoholic director
(Welles), who is so hyperactive that his feet rarely touch the ground.
And an artist, Diego Rivera (Rubén Blades), who insists on putting an
unauthorized image on Lenin in his large mural inside a skyscraper owned
by Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack).
The rest of the large and talented cast includes Joan Cusack, Cary
Elwes, Philip Baker Hall, Cherry Jones, Susan Sarandon, Jamey Sheridan,
John Turturro, Emily Watson, Paul Giamatti, Barnard Hughes, Barbara
Sukowa, John Carpenter and Gretchen Mol.  Almost all of them overact in
their brief time in front of the camera.  None of the characters are
compelling, and, if the movie had aired on television, I'm sure I would
have turned it off long before it was over.
Very much in the spirit of ILLUMINATA, which opened this past summer,
the fast-paced CRADLE WILL ROCK takes a comedic backstage look at the
production of a play.  And like ILLUMINATA, although it has its moments,
it never comes together in anything approaching a satisfying whole.  I
would be inclined to suggest that you just wait for the video and use
the fast forward to get to the good parts, but this would require you to
fast forward through almost the entire picture, making it not worth the
cost.
CRADLE WILL ROCK runs a long 2:15.  It is rated R for language, nudity
and sex and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
This film's first shot unwinds with the patience, beauty and discipline of
an ornate grandfather clock. It's a great set up for a movie that seems to
be mostly setup anyway. Rich replication of the touch and feel of a 1930's
motion picture creates the illusion of simplicity. But, the myriad
characters and motivations are so vast, the dialogue and themes so intense
that, ultimately, you'll be surprised to be viewing quite a complex film.
Writer/Director/Producer Tim Robbins (responsible also for "Dead Man
Walking," but perhaps better known as the lead actor in "Shawshank
Redemption") says he spent seven years writing and re-writing this web of a
script.
The staged musical feel lends yet another hand toward sculpting the
ironically false sense of lightness. It's a masterfully crafted, directed,
powerfully paced and dramatically filmed work whose only fault lies in the
viewer's need to wait virtually two full hours for payoff. The pace is so
fierce and the web so intricate, that the set up is completed just as the
climax begins. Still, the payoff genuinely pleases, mustering up a lump or
two in the throat.
Americans face the harsh reality of depression complicated by the
unionization tribulations and the government's commie paranoia. Along with
other Work Programs, FDR spearheads "Federal Theater" designed to put
artists back to work while providing low cost entertainment for the masses.
A fine plan indeed, until the government realizes that their commissioned
artists have rather "politically incorrect" (for the time) themes to
express. The film focuses on a theater group directed by Orson Welles
(played by Angus MacFadyen) as it develops a musical ("The Cradle Will
Rock") so controversial that the participants must jeopardize their rare and
precious jobs to continue.
Other historic personalities are brought back to life as censorship debates
arise, making this a great film for the high school history teacher to
present in class.
You'll marvel at it .. simply marvel. But you may not "feel" until the
climax.
The Cradle Will Rock. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Hank Azaria, Emily Watson, John Tuturro, John and Joan Cusack,
Rueben Blades, Cherry Jones, Angus MacFadyen, Bill Murray, Vanessa Redgrave
and Susan Surandon.
Written and Directed by Tim Robbins.
Produced by Tim Robbins, John Kilik, Lydia Dean Pilcher at Touchstone.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Michael Redman
Whose whore are you? How far are you willing to prostitute yourself in
exchange for comfort?
In one way or another, we all pay for it. "It" in this case being social and
economic security. We work boring dead-end jobs so we can pay the rent. We
attend meaningless vacuous classes so we can get our degrees. Worst of all,
sometimes we compromise our values for financial gain.
In the desperate times of depression-era America, many people were forced
into prostitution of one type or another. With starvation just around the
next corner, we'd be surprised just what we'd be willing to do for a meal.
Out of work actors were standing in long lines to sign up for the federal
WPA theater projects. Most of the WPA workers were out building dams, ponds
and sidewalks, but thousands were putting on plays to entertain the masses.
"Cradle Will Rock" follows several plot lines that intersect at various
points. Orson Welles (Angus MacFadyen) and John Houseman (Cary Elwes) are
producing a pro-union musical by Marc Blitzstein (Hank Azaria). Nelson
Rockefeller (John Cusack) hires radical artist Diego Rivera (Ruben Blades)
to paint a mural at the Rockefeller Center. Congress is investigating
Communists within the theater project. Industrialists are throwing parties
and being wooed by the fascists. People are falling in love and babies,
being born.
Amazingly the numerous tales flow seamlessly into one another. As the camera
zooms in on a piece of background and then pulls back out, you are in a
different place with different characters, but there's never a moment of
confusion about what is going on.
When the opening credits roll with name after name of renowned actors, you
will wonder how they can all fit into one film. Vanessa Redgrave, Joan
Cusack, Bill Murray, Susan Sarandon, John Turturro, Emily Watson: the list
goes on and on. And they're all great -- not a weak link in the bunch.
The underlying question of the film is the wisdom of public and corporate
funding of the arts. It's one big party at the beginning as everyone focuses
on their work. Then the modern Golden Rule ("He who has the gold makes the
rules") raises its ugly head. Rockefeller wants Rivera to eliminate Lenin
from his painting. Congress cuts financing to the pinko plays. Mussolini's
beautiful mistress trades old master paintings to the Philistines for
contributions to the war effort. Even the actors union, formed to protect
its members, gets in the way.
Yet it's all a joy to watch. There are heroes and villains, lovers and
enemies, disasters and triumphs. All against the frantic backdrop of prima
donas vying for position. It's like a Robert Altman film done by the Coen brothers.
Director and writer Tim Robbins is rapidly becoming a major force in
Hollywood. With this, "Bob Roberts" and "Dead Man Walking" to his directoral
credit, and a number of wonderful acting roles, he's one to watch.
His brushstrokes are brilliant but a little broad here. The sets are
magnificent, the costumes authentic and the color schemes, inviting. But
some of the characters are charactures. Perhaps that's inevitable. With so
many things going on, the audience needs some shortcuts.
Some of the scenes are grand. The long single-shot opener follows doe-eyed
street singer Olive Stanton (Watson) from sleeping behind a movie screen,
down an alley out to the street where she washes up from a dripping hydrant
oblivious to pedestrians. Like a deer in the urban forest, she's poor but
free. The camera then moves up to Blitzstein's apartment. Over five minutes
of unedited uncut luxurious filming, it's a pleasure.
The questions the film asks don't belong only in the past. Federal arts
funding are currently under attack. Maplethorpe may not have been a Commie
but he sure was pink. Workers are being thrown out of jobs, sweatshop
conditions abound in other countries, unions are loosing power.
Welcome to the brave new world, same as the old one.
(Michael Redman has been writing this column for a long time, but his
memories of the thirties are a little foggy. He's considering taking up
selling apples on the street corner as a new career. Email your tales of
prostitution to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 1/27/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]

Author
Nick Lyons
  Cradle Will Rock is the latest effort from director/actor Tim Robbins. While
he may have had an Oscar worthy film back in 1995 (Dead Man Walking), he gets a
little overconfident and sloppy here.
  The story is confusing, and filled with many subplots, so I'll try my best
and explain it as simply as possible. The film is based on a "mostly" true
story about a Federal theater in the 1930s, that produced a play (The Cradle
Will Rock) that apparently was offensive to some, so the government shuts it
down. It's during the time of the depression, and all this theater wants to do
is entertain and cheer up those who do not have jobs, or are poor. Between this
conflict lies what seems like 10 subplots, about those who work in theater, or
those associated. Also along the way are some other messages mashed together to
create an even more overwhelming experience. Tim Robbin's just keeps piling on
political views, and characters, that we just give up on the film, or in some
cases walk out. For Robbin's it may be a nice achievement, but to me it seemed
more like a friendly get together with slightly more sophisticated dialogue,
and fancy outfits.
  I thought the main reason for seeing the film would be for the outstanding
cast, unfortunately are all uninteresting, except for a few. Let me recap what
each important character does, so please bear with me (it's the least you can
do, especially if you were considering seeing this). I'll begin with those
involved with the play. There's Orson Welles (Angus Macfadyen) who of course is
the director of the play, the producer John Houseman (Cary Elwes), Marc
Blitzstein (Hank Azaria) the writer of the play, Emily Watson, a woman who gets
her break by playing the main part in Cradle Will Rock. Outside the play
there's the: ventriloquist (Bill Murray) who wants a relationship with a
Federal Theater clerk (Joan Cusack), another subplot involving a painter Diego
Rivera (Ruben Blades) who's unhappy that his painting is too be destroyed by
Nelson Rockefeller because he feels it to be an outrage (John Cusack). There's
a few other actresses and actors who have their own stories (Susan Sarandon,
Philip Baker Hall too name a few) but those that I mentioned, were the most
significant to the story. Anyway, most of these talented Hollywood stars were
completely wasted, except for Emily Watson, who does another great job, and one
of my personal favorite actors John Cusack, who always delivers through thick
and thin.
  Now although most of the film was weak to say the least, there were some nice
moments and some involving subjects, but all this is overblown. Sure the free
speech segment was a nice feature, but not when it becomes repetitive. The
whole film is like this, and it's basically nothing but a headache.
  On the brighter side, Tim Robbin's direction was masterful. His camera
direction seemed reminiscent to the works of Paul Thomas Anderson's latest
Magnolia, only smoother In my opinion, but even that can't make a movie that
much better.
  Although it has it's moments (not many of them, but they're there), Cradle
Will Rock stays true to it's title, because the cradle rocked too far and
tipped over.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Touchstone Pictures
 Director: Tim Robbins
 Writer:   Tim Robbins
 Cast: Hank Azaria, Ruben Blades, Joan Cusack, John
Cusack, Cary Elwes, Philip Baker Hall, Cherry Jones, Angus
Macfadyen, Bill Murray, Vanessa Redgrave, Susan Sarandon,
John Turturro, Emily Watson
   In a film which opened a few days after this one, Chen
Kaige's "The Emperor and the Assassin," the titled emperor
of the Qin kingdom of ancient China (Ying Zheng) tells his
mistress (Lady Zhao) that they were happier in the old days
when they were poor and hungry and relished the times they
rolled in the haystacks.  This from an emperor, no less!  He
may have been confusing youth with poverty, but not entirely. 
When you're struggling but not reduced to begging, you're
more likely to be committed to a genuine, worthwhile cause
than when you're rolling in gold simply soaking up life's
material pleasures, although since the finish of the Age of
Aquarius there seem to be no more social movements that
have captured the hearts of large groups of people in the
U.S. or elsewhere in the West.
   But during the Depression, when so many people were out
of work that you did not have to feel like a aberration to be
similarly unemployed, politically conscious Americans could
join in a crusade just like the 19th century French canonized
in the Broadway musical "Les Miserables."  The people who
felt that their privation was largely the result of their
exploitation by the big industries like steel backed by right-
wing newspapers like the Hearst chain could affiliate with the
labor union movement or move even further to the left and
identify with communism.  Their insurgence led to
congressional investigations, notably the Dies committee, which
sought to investigate the operations by subpoenaing
individuals to testify about their possible connection with the
Soviet Union or with domestic radicals.  Like the late sixties
and early seventies, the thirties was a politicized era, causing
people to engage themselves in fervent discussion,
particularly about the fascist programs and politics of Spain,
Italy and Germany.
   "Cradle Will Rock" takes place during this agitated time in
America's history, and while many events and persons are
added to the plot of the 132-minute movie written and
directed by actor Tim Robbins, the incidents are largely true. 
Because the story is loosely constructed, ultimately bringing
together what appear to be diverse stories with little
connection, the movie may be a hard sell for a public that
largely demands easy-to-follow, tightly plotted tales.  The
rewards of watching the movie are many, not the least being
that Robbins shows those of us who did not live through such
polemical eras what it means to be connected to events
larger than our own immediate families; what it's like to
discuss and act upon political causes more dramatic than the
quotidian races between today's often tweedledum-
tweedledee political parties.
   Robbins uses as his metaphor the huge canvas on which
Diego Rivera (Ruben Blades) paints a mural in Rockefeller
Center depicting his view of major events transpiring during
this century.  The mural is commissioned by Nelson
Rockefeller (John Cusack) at a price of $21,000, and though
Rivera is a well-to-do communist, he leaps on the project as
an opportunity to construct such unexpected images as a
portrait of Lenin--to Rockefeller's disgust.
   We observe Marc Blitzstein (Hank Azaria) who is sitting on
a park bench in 1936 composing a radical musical called
"The Cradle Will Rock," while being advised by the ghostly
presence of Bert Brecht.  At about the same time, a
homeless waif, Olive Stanton (Emily Watson) is wandering
the streets about New York's theater district offering to sing a
song for a nickel while desperate to become an actress in
these difficult times.  An astonishing range of characters of all
polemic stripes is introduced including a ditzy socialite,
Countess La Grange (Vanessa Redgrave); Hazel Huffman
(Joan Cusack), a clerk in a government employment office
who is rabidly anti-communist; steel magnate Gray Mathers
(Philip Baker Hall) whose social circle includes conservative
newspaper baron William Randolph Hearst (John Carpenter);
a passionate director of theater pieces, Orson Wells (Angus
Macfadyen); a ventriloquist, Tommy Crickshaw (Bill Murray)
who blames radio-based communists for destroying his
vaudeville career; a Jewish Italian fascist, once Mussolini's
mistress, Margherita Sarfatti (Susan Sarandon); and the head
of the government's Federal Theater program which gives
jobs to unemployed actors, Hallie Flanagan (Cherry Jones).
   Essentially a history lesson taught by a truly interesting
professor, the film moves swiftly along, honing in on the lives
and concerns of these diverse New Yorkers, interpreting their
troubles and showing all seek in their different ways to
resolve their dilemmas.  While the quandary faced by
magnate Gray Mathers, which is dealing with a threatened
steel strike, is a different matter from the predicament of
Olive Stanton, who is not eligible for an acting job because
she was never employed on the stage, each is consumed
with a passion to make life conform to his or her hopes and
partisan passions.  The most involving scenario takes place
inside the theater which is stage Blitzstein's radical play, a
play which, in effect, states that "when the wind blows the
cradle will rock"--or, when the revolution comes, the
foundations of government will fall.  Barred on federal order
by soldiers surrounding the theater, the thesps take their fight
to the streets and ultimately perform their piece before a
cheering crowd of like-minded folks.
   Robbins' film is an intrepid one, a daring venture into
cutting-edge celluloid by Disney studios, particularly when
considering the view of Variety critic Emanuel Levy who
states in his new book "The Cinema of Outsiders" that
"mainstream movies are uneasy with displaying any extreme
ideology, which means that their narratives are
centrist...Hollywood films...don't want to offend any segment
of their potential audience."  If a large number of moviegoers
stay away from "Cradle," more's the pity.  You can count on
your fingers the number of genuinely political films that the
major studios have put out during the decade. (Sorry, those
strictly action-adventure stories centering on terrorists do not
count.)  "The Insider" is one of them, yet another daring adventure
Disney.  Because "The Insider," who box office was somewhat
disappointing, and "Cradle Will Rock"-- deal with political
activity, both translated to the screen in striking manners--
we can only wonder why anyone who professes to be concerned
about the machinations of business, government and labor can
afford to stay away.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on April 12, 2000; 
certificate 15; 134 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Tim Robbins; produced by Jon Kilik, Lydia Dean Pilcher, Tim 
Robbins.
Written by Tim Robbins.
Photographed by Jean Yves Escoffier; edited by Geraldine Peroni.
Tim Robbins's "Cradle Will Rock" has many qualities that make us want to like 
it -- it's ambitious, left-wing, and rich in photography, with a great cast, 
flamboyant characters, and an interesting setting. But after it's thrown 
itself into its situation, and sniffed around with a lot of style, it comes 
out without finding what it was looking for. Although I'm tempted to ignore 
the movie's failings and recommend it for its politics alone, what would be 
the point? Liberals don't need to see it to confirm their beliefs, and 
conservatives are probably beyond hope.
The "(almost) true" story takes place in the 1930s. One of President 
Roosevelt's schemes to rebuild America was the Federal Theatre Project, 
intended to employ artists and provide free entertainment for the public. 
Unfortunately it was formed in a time of heated paranoia about Communism, 
when Republicans were behaving in a manner that would later be repeated more 
famously by Joseph McCarthy. The climate of witch-hunting was so ridiculous 
that the Theatre Project was in danger no matter how benign its productions 
were. At one point we learn that a children's pantomime called "The Eager 
Beaver" was accused of being an allegory about proletarian revolution.
While suspicious snitches try to get the theatres in legal trouble, Orson 
Welles (Angus Macfadyen) and John Houseman (Carl Elwes) decide to provoke 
them, by putting on a play called "The Cradle Will Rock", whose writer is a 
gay Communist sympathiser, Marc Blitztein (Hank Azaria). The script is said 
to deal with taboo themes and promote anarchistic ideas. What a stir it 
should cause!
And does. The film's many characters -- white and blue-collar, male and 
female, poor and rich, artistic and philistine -- all find themselves somehow 
arguing about it, one side of the fence or another. At the height of the 
controversy, a judicial committee sends armed guards to close the playhouse 
in which the performance is scheduled. FDR would no doubt disapprove, and 
there is protest, and a way found around the upset, but none of that is the 
point -- the mere fact that a development like that can happen in the freest 
country in the world is shocking.
The movie is exuberantly performed, and although the actors' loud, jumpy 
movements and self-consciously put-on accents often annoy us, they just as 
frequently create delicious humour, when their characters are caught up in 
the topsy-turvy atmosphere of collapsing sets, childish arguments and 
ludicrous obstacles. But somehow "Cradle Will Rock" doesn't quite work. I 
don't think it's that the comedy undermines the drama; the problem is that 
the picture is so epic it feels like it's trying to say more than it does. 
Robbins, who wrote and directed, probably intended a parable about the value 
of freedom in general. All he's given us is a tale about a show causing a 
fuss.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Robert Marley
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Robert Marley.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/993d20f242f91f128825684400600d7d?OpenDocument
Arguably, one of the best directors of the motion picture industry,
Orson Welles was once quoted as saying, "When I die, they'll be picking
over my creative bones. The films will suddenly get financing; the films
will get restored. Old scripts that we couldn't get financed, they'll
find the financing for some kid to direct."
Strangely enough, Welles couldn't have been more prophetic.
Actor Tim Robins has donned the writer/director hat for his mostly-true
depiction of the wild chain of events surrounding one of Welles' more
notable career setbacks.
In 1937, Welles, along with his co-producer John Houseman directed a
musical catering to the mass of unemployed people designed to help them
cope with living though the depression era. The musical, entitled The
Cradle Will Rock was a strong pro-union, stab at big business,
encouraging the common man to stand up for what he believed in.
Unfortunately for Welles, 1937 was not just the tail end of the
depression, it was also an era rich with the paranoia of communist
sympathizers and a growing tension between socialism and fascism. The
musical was quickly accused of being communist propaganda and was closed
by the military on the night it was to open.
Not missing a beat and standing true to the adage that "the show must go
on" the cast of the musical marched to a smaller theater some 20 blocks
away and performed the musical in front of a packed audience without the
use of sets, props or even costumes. Union rules at the time prevented
them from even performing on a stage.
Robin's film makes it clear early on that this film is less of a
portrayal of the actual events surrounding the fateful musical and more
of a satirical  look at the sum of its parts. The characters are more
like caricature and it seems clear that Robbins had a bit of an ax to
grind towards Welles.  Angus MacFadyen (Braveheart, The Rat Pack)
portrays Welles as a money-grubbing, pretentious, drunkard, (alright, so
maybe that wasn't so far from the truth). In one scene at a night club,
the playwright (played by Hank Azaria) goes so far as to question
Welles' loyalty to the art by asking, "How soon before you are doing
soap commercials?" -- an obvious stab at his Ernest and Julio Gallo
commercials from the 80's.
This film seems slow and confusing at the start but warms up nicely as
it goes along, thanks to the talents of a surprisingly large and
impressive cast. There are several really blatant pieces of symbolism
throughout the film, and there are a few odd moments that leave you
thinking that you just missed something. However, Tim Robbins does a
great job of tying all of this neurotic, erratic hypertension together
in the end so that it inevitably tells a story of hope and survival for
such an often taken-for-granted ideal as freedom of speech.
The film is witty, entertaining and different. Unfortunately, due to an
acute case of cinematic intelligence, infected with meager support from
Buena Vista Pictures, this movie will most-likely be overlooked by the
majority of moviegoing audiences while they opt for the bigger,
flashier, and easier-to-understand blockbuster flicks being released for
the Christmas season.
But if you happen to find yourself in front of one of those old, small,
artsy theaters, I would recommend stopping in and checking this film
out.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the 1930S during the Great Depression massive numbers of
Americans were out of work.  In 1934 the number was 11 million.  To cut
unemployment and get people working again the Works Progress
Administration was established.  It eventually employed 8.5 million
people to improve the infrastructure and culture of the country.
Laborers built roads, bridges, parks, buildings, and airports.  Artists
were employed by the Federal Arts Project, The Federal Writers Project,
and the Federal Theater Project.  The Federal Theater Project (FTP)
lasted from 1935 to 1939 when it was shut down by the House Committee
on Un-American Activities for its left-leaning plays.
     CRADLE WILL ROCK combines the stories of two incidents of the
1930s.  In 1933 Nelson Rockefeller objected to the mural that Diego
Rivera was creating for Rockefeller Center which depicted Lenin as a
liberator.  In 1937 Marc Blitzstein's play "The Cradle Will Rock" was
to be produced under the aegis of the FTP staged by Orson Welles and
John Houseman, but the government withdrew support with dramatic
consequences.
     The film begins with a homeless woman Olive Stanton (Emily Watson)
catching some sleep behind the screen of a movie theater.  The theater
is showing a newsreel about the spread of Fascism in Europe, but how
things are better and more optimistic in the US.  Stanton clearly knows
more about conditions in the US than the patrons of the theater.
Chased from this shelter she looks for a job with the Federal Theater
Project.
     The FTP is an explosion of creative chaos presided over by the
tireless Hallie Flanagan (Cherry Jones).  She reads new plays, makes
production assignments, and does a wealth of other jobs.  We are soon
introduced to Orson Welles (Angus Macfadyen), John Houseman (Cary
Elwes) putting on a creatively-staged production of Marlowe's DOCTOR
FAUSTUS.  They are also preparing a polemical play, "The Cradle Will
Rock," for the FTP.
     The wealthy also mix in with a strong interest in the arts.  We
meet Nelson Rockefeller (John Cusack), an oil magnate more interested
in art and Latin America than he is in petroleum.  He has commissioned
the admired Diego Rivera (Ruben Blades) to paint a mural for
Rockefeller Center, the theme of which is to be "Man's Intelligence
Controlling Nature."
     But not everybody is happy with this flowering of creativity.  Icy
Hazel Huffman (Joan Cusack) and a frustrated vaudeville ventriloquist
Tommy Crickshaw (Bill Murray) do not like the leftist message of many
of the plays present.  They are organizing to fight what they think is
becoming a liberal establishment.  The film chronicles their collision
with the artists and playwrights they oppose.
     The casting is quite good.  Especially notable is the Angus
Macfadyen impression of Orson Welles.  Welles has now been portrayed by
a number of different actors on the screen but never by someone who
with so close a physical resemblance or who got the facial expressions
down so well.  Less familiar is John Houseman but Cary Elwes at least
sounds a good deal like Houseman.  Cherry Jones just sparkles as Hallie
Flanagan.
     The characters of CRADLE WILL ROCK are in a kettle with a seething
stew of politics and art.  Tim Robbins who wrote and directed, sees the
events of this film to be the beginnings of the 1950s Congressional
witch hunts for communists.  It also provides much of the reason that
even today there are few plays on Broadway with any real political
meat.  Art today is about colors and textures and not political ideas
for the most part.  Few works in art museums have strong political
comment and much of Broadway is given over to fluffy plays with little
political bite.  Ironically Robbins makes a very clear statement that
only some censorship is bad.  Aldo Silvano (John Turturro) does not
want to see "The Cradle Will Rock" be censored for its unpopular
political message.  Yet he is outraged when he hears his children
singing a song that is sung by the Brown Shirts in Italy.  In this case
he is censoring his own children's singing of a Fascist song.  That
seems right, but where is the line to be drawn?  Plays of this time
could appeal to any political persuasion instead of having to appeal to
people of every political persuasion as they do today.  The wealthy and
powerful do not want art to have messages that threaten their
interests. The rich who have been the patrons of the arts do not what
to have to choose between what is good for art and their own welfare.
     The film is good entertainment.  Is it accurate history?  There is
some distortion, certainly.  Just having two art and political
censorship events occurring at the same time instead of years apart
leads one to believe that such clashes were more frequent than they
really were.  Robbins portrays the people who agree with his political
viewpoint being likable, intelligent, artistically fulfilled people.
Those who oppose artistic freedom are maladjusted neurotics if not
out-and-out wackos.  By leaving no doubt as to whom the viewer should
credit as being in the right, Robbins talks down to his audience and
demonstrates that he does not trust them to choose the correct side of
the debate.  One could ask if Lenin was the great liberator that Rivera
wanted to portray, where are all the people who genuinely believe that
he liberated them? History seems to have sided with Rockefeller.
     While CRADLE WILL ROCK plays a little fast and loose with history,
it still is an enjoyable watch and one of the best films of the year.
I rate it a 9 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
