Title
Review for Girl (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
John Smyth
Girl tells the story of an eighteen-year-old girl, Andrea Marr
(Dominique Swain, who was the object of desire in the remake of
Lolita) in her last summer of high school, and the events that take
place before she leaves for a prestigious university. She is a grade-A
student, her family is wealthy and she leads a straightforward, if
uneventful, life. Her only concern, shared with her best friend,
Darcy, is when she will 'become a woman' (i.e. lose her
virginity). Feeling that she needs more 'life' experience, she heads
to a seedy part of town, where she encounters the lead singer of a
local underground band, Todd Sparrow (Sean Patrick
Flanery). Completely smitten, she decides to ditch her prim and proper
lifestyle and embrace the 'alternative' scene, in order to impress
Todd.
It is easy to see how this movie got made. Take a confused but 
savvy Nineties teenager (My So-Called Life), add a humorous take 
on the rites and passages of high-school (Clueless) and add a 
background of an alternative music scene (Singles). Unfortunately, 
despite slavishly copying bits of each of those productions, the 
result is a trite and boring teen flick. Clichés abound, from the 
thick-headed jocks, the randy and drunk college students trying to 
deflower Andrea, to the shy but artistic boy that no one but Andrea 
appreciates.
The film is essentially a journey - Andrea must find her real self, 
as she becomes a woman. In addition to having sex (and experiencing 
love for the first time), she is also trying to discover what is 
her philosophy for life. She embraces the alternative scene, which 
means that she ditches her best friend for a group of students 
generally regarded as the school losers. This group has formed a 
struggling rock-band, consisting of Cybil, the brash, devil-may-care 
lead singer (whom Andrea secretly admires), and the geeky duo of 
Greg (David Moscow) and Kevin (Channon Roe). Andrea latches onto 
this group, since it brings her into contact with Todd. Andrea 
soon becomes obsessed with Todd and becomes what she had previously 
despised - a groupie.
There used to be a TV series called Midnight Caller, which starred
Gary Cole as a late-night DJ on a talk-radio station. At the end of
every episode, Gary would sign off portentously with a bit of
philosophy which was invariably inane, stating something so blindingly
obvious that it served only to illuminate why he was working the
graveyard shift. I was reminded of that show while watching this film.
Like Clueless and My So-Called Life, Girl has a narration by Andrea.
Unfortunately, she tends to babble incessantly without being either
funny or meaningful.  It was a mistake to use the music scene as a
backdrop, too. Singles managed to capture the Zeitgeist of the grunge
era when it was released (and would have featured Nirvana's debut if
it hadn't been for the corporate boot of their record company). Part
of Todd's charisma is that he is a struggling artist, an image that is
swiftly dispelled once he starts singing. The movie devotes far too
much time to his performances on stage, which sound like the result of
a whinging competition between Neil Diamond and Jon Bon Jovi. Not a
pleasant prospect, by any means.
What finally sinks the movie is the last twenty minutes, when the 
film attempts to become a serious teen drama and fails miserably. 
Having ignored almost every character except Todd and Andrea for 
most of the movie, suddenly the peripheral characters take centre 
stage and then disappear after a few scenes. In addition, Andrea's 
life takes some unexpected turns, which are so unbelievable (compared 
to the earlier part of the film) that I presumed it would all be 
explained as a dream sequence. I presumed wrongly.
The one saving grace (and it's a big one) is the performance of 
Dominique Swain. Despite the lack of even one original line of 
dialogue, she manages to be funny, sexy and vulnerable. The film 
works best when it's trying to be funny - there are a couple of 
good scenes between Andrea and her well meaning (if perpetually 
worried parents, particularly when they attempt to explain the facts 
of life to her). However, those scenes are too few, and are not 
enough to save a movie, which feels like a very bad episode of 
Beverly Hills 90120.

