Title
Review for Pleasure of His Company, The (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
The sugary stepdaughter (Debbie Reynolds) of a wealthy
businessman is to be married.  She lives in a mansion
with her mother (Lilli Palmer) and stepfather (Gary Merrill).  
She adores her real father (Fred Astaire), whom she 
does not remember, and wants him to appear at her wedding 
to give her away.
Astaire is a hedonistic world traveller.  He speaks many
languages fluently, and is sufficiently famous that his
daughter has been able to keep a scrapbook of newspaper
articles and photos of his adventures.  While superficially 
charming, he is self-centered to the point where he regards
his external environment (including other people) as mere
objects to be manipulated for his own pleasure.
Astaire arrives at the mansion and makes himself at home,
rearranging the furniture and changing the wedding plans,
infuriating Merrill.  The mother, having married
and divorced Astaire, is immune to his charm, but for 
Reynolds, her father is still the greatest.  Reynolds
maternal grandfather has also visited and, amused with the
bickering between Astaire, Merrill and Palmer, decides
to stay at the mansion until after the wedding.
There are lots of long conversations and arguments between
the primary characters throughout the movie.  These grow
tedious and repetitious.  Everyone excepts Reynolds drinks
and smokes constantly.  
Astaire gives Reynolds a tour of the town, filling her
pretty head with his prattle as if wooing her.  On one
occasion, her fiance (Tab Hunter) is obliged to come along,
and steams with resentment at Astaire's high-handed
behavior.  Hunter and Reynolds get into such a row over 
Astaire that Reynolds' parents have to smooth things over.
Now the question is, will Astaire succeed in keeping Reynolds
from marrying Hunter?  On the day of the wedding rehearsal,
Astaire falls from a horse while impressing Reynolds, and
shows up at the church in a sling.  He triggers another 
long-winded argument between the betrothed couple.
Reynolds wants to postpone the wedding to tend to Astaire's
injury.  Curiously, Astaire has a change of heart, does not
want sympathy, and is able to reconcile the couple.
After the wedding, the stepfather has something new to
worry about: he discovers that Astaire has two flight
reservations to Japan and concludes that Astaire is taking
his ex-wife with him.  But it turns out that Astaire is just
taking Toy, who is the family servant and a grating stereotype.
