Title
Review for Dear God (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Garry Marshall.
Screenplay:  Warren Leight, Ed Kaplan.
Producer:  Steve Tisch.
Starring:  Greg Kinnear, Laurie Metcalf, Maria Pitillo, Tim Conway, Roscoe
Lee Browne, Hector Elizondo.
     Every movie-goer, whether he or she is conscious of it or not, has a
list of warning flags that a movie could be trouble.  Sometimes it is as
simple as an actor or genre to avoid; other times, it can be a more subtle
realization, like the risk of anything promoted with a soundtrack tie-in
or a rave from Jeff Craig of "Sixty Second Preview."  Critics inevitably
have longer lists by virtue of more extensive film experience, and I think
I have just added another item to mine:  beware of films with half a dozen
gratuitous cameo appearances.  The problem with that particular caveat is
that by the time you are in the theater and subjected to the guest star
deluge, it is too late.  DEAR GOD, a miserable excuse for a "feel-good"
comedy, is a film with no sense of direction whatsoever, causing a barrage
of cameos to feel all the more desperate.
     Greg Kinnear stars as Tom Turner, an inveterate gambler and con man
trying to pay off his debts with small-time scams.  When he is nabbed in
the act, he is given an ultimatum by the judge:  get an honest job or face
jail time.  Tom uses family connections to land a job in the Los Angeles
Post Office as holiday temporary help, assigned to the dead letter office 
where burnouts like Dooley (Tim Conway) and Rebecca (Laurie Metcalf)
collect undeliverable mail, including letters addressed to God.  When Tom
inadvertently answers one of those letters, his co-workers see an
opportunity to put spark back into their jobs by bringing some holiday
cheer to people asking God for help.  Tom, however, is unsure how to
handle the unfamiliar role of good Samaritan, even as publicity swarms
around the Post Office's "God Squad."
     DEAR GOD might have had a chance at being moderately amusing if it
had stuck to the formula of a lovable rascal who undergoes a conversion.
Kinnear's smirking wise-guy persona is perfectly suited to the role of
Tom, and he can also trot out a chastened charm which ingratiates himself
with the audience.  The problem is that the car wreck of a script churned
out by Warren Leight and Ed Kaplan includes so many minor characters and
superfluous side plots that DEAR GOD becomes thoroughly incoherent.  Tom
is given five sporadically interesting cohorts in the dead letter office
where two truly interesting ones would have been a significant
improvement, and even though both Laurie Metcalf and Tim Conway have nice
comic moments, they are playing essentially the same character.  Naturally
there is also a love interest (Maria Pitillo), a divorcee with a
distressingly precious young son (Seth Mumy); Tom also has a blind mother
(Rue McClanahan) to care for.  Things get so bloated that the sub-plot
involving Tom's loan shark (John Pinette) vanishes into thin air when he
is hit by a bus, as though even director Garry Marshall realized there was
no screen time to spare.
     For a film overflowing with diversions, DEAR GOD is far from
overflowing with laughs.  Since none of the business swirling around the
actual plot of DEAR GOD is remotely funny, Marshall spends most of the
film finding places to insert random celebrities.  Here we have a holiday
parade featuring Tony Danza, David Hasselhoff and (pulled out of
mothballs) "Happy Days'" Erin Moran; there we have Jack Klugman as a
suicidal old man.  Here we have Dr. Joyce Brothers appearing on
television; there we have O. J. Simpson prosecutor Christopher Darden as a
court broadcaster.  Even Marshall himself gets in on the act, appearing as
the Postmaster General.  The effect of these cameos is not simply to
distract you from what the film is about, but to convince you that they
_are_ what the film is about.  DEAR GOD may begin as a comedy, but it
rapidly turns into a bus tour of Hollywood where the only response it
inspires is pointing and giggling every time a familiar face appears.
     There are a few amusing bits in the courtroom finale which finds Tom
on trial for tampering with the mail, notably a goofy piece of acting by
Metcalf which at least will shake you out of your stupor.  When we are
expected to get emotionally roused, however, by the fact that every postal
worker in Southern California is rallying behind Tom (none of the people
helped by the "God Squad" appears to give a damn), you wonder if anyone
has any control over where DEAR GOD is going.  You might find yourself
wishing it would turn into the re-hash of MIRACLE ON 34th STREET it seems
headed for, so that at least it might make _cliched_ sense, only you
wouldn't be surprised to find Lance Ito turning up as the judge, or Buddy
Hackett as Kris Kringle.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Greg Kinnear, Laurie Metcalf, Maria Pitillo, Tim Conway, 
      Roscoe Lee Browne, Jen Seda, Hector Elizondo
Director: Garry Marshall
Producer: Steve Tisch
Screenplay: Warren Leight and Ed Kaplan
Cinematography: Charles Minsky
Music: Jeremy Lubbock
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     At least after seeing this movie, I understand where the title came 
from -- starting about thirty minutes into this interminable, unfunny 
feature, I began looking at my watch every few minutes and thinking, 
"Dear God, is this ever going to end?"  A sickeningly bad pastiche of 
much better pictures -- IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET, 
and (believe it or not) SPARTACUS all leap to mind -- DEAR GOD is the 
worst excuse for a holiday film since Nora Ephron's hideous MIXED NUTS.
     I suppose it's understandable why Greg Kinnear accepted the lead in 
this film.  With SABRINA, he was bitten by the acting bug, so, when the 
opportunity arose to get not only a part in a major motion picture, but 
top billing, he grabbed it.  Kinnear plays Tom Turner, a small-time L.A. 
con artist who would rather dupe kind-hearted souls out of hard-earned 
money than get honest work himself.  His life of crime comes to an end, 
however, when he is arrested and sentenced to hold down a job for one 
year or face jail time.  His employer becomes the U.S. post office, 
where he's assigned to the "dead letter office" -- the place where 
unaddressed and unreturnable mail comes to die.
     One day, Tom opens a letter addressed to God (there are bins for 
Elvis, Santa Claus, and the Martians, too), and, through a series of 
contrivances too dumb to describe, he ends up surrendering his paycheck 
to a worthy cause.  His fellow workers, including a burned-out lawyer 
(Laurie Metcalf) and a mailman (Tim Conway) who "went postal" and bit a 
dog, find out about his unintentional good deed, and show interest in 
helping with the next one.  Tom wants no part of playing God, but, 
eventually, his desire to impress a pretty waitress (Maria Pitillo) gets 
the better of his cynicism, and he is suckered back into the miracle 
business.
     There's a lot wrong with this film, beginning with its sit-com 
situations and humor.  I have the feeling that anyone who spends endless 
hours staring at a television screen will be right at home watching DEAR 
GOD.  Even the faces will be familiar, since almost everyone in this 
movie is better known for small-screen roles.  There are cameos by the 
likes of Tony Danza, Erin Moran, Jack Klugman, and Rue Maclanahan.  Of 
the main actors, only Tim Conway is passably enjoyable.  Kinnear isn't 
very impressive, and Laurie Metcalf is downright bad -- some of her 
scenes caused me to wince.
     Director Garry Marshall, whose last disaster was the ill-advised 
EXIT TO EDEN, has managed to top that debacle for sheer awfulness.  DEAR 
GOD wavers between sickeningly sweet moralizing ("It's not easy getting 
off the ground."  "Faith isn't arrived at easily.") and moronic comedy.  
Even Marshall's attempts at parody fall flat.  His attempts to skewer 
the vacuous media coverage of high-profile trials is trite.  It has been 
done before, and much better.  Hasn't he heard of TO DIE FOR?
     Right-wingers who espouse "family values" will probably be 
delighted by the pap that passes for entertainment in DEAR GOD.  Maybe 
as soon as Bob Dole loses the election, he'll pay a visit to the local 
multiplex -- this is the kind of movie he can champion.  Hopefully, he's 
in a very small minority, because the last thing we need is a flood of 
DEAR GOD copycats.  It's just too bad dead movies can't be forgotten 
about and recycled the way dead letters can.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
          DEAR GOD is a pleasant enough comedy and Tom Turner (Greg
Kinnear) is a pleasant enough young man and all would have been well
if the very talented director had not gone overboard and made the
comedy utterly ludicrous and unbelievable.   The one saving grace is
that of Rebecca Frazen (Laurie Metcalf).  Metcalf turns in a most
hilarious performance when she suddenly emerges as an attorney in one
of the funniest bits of acting I can remember.  She is a gem!
          The story is simple.  Tom Turner is a conman.  He owes his
"friends" money that he cannot repay.  When a judge gives him a choice
of sentence, either prison or get a real job, he has to stop and think
before opting for the job.  Reminded me of Jack Benny when, in one of
his stingy skits, he is confronted by a holdup man who says "Your
money or your life" and Benny has to stop and think.  Turner finally
opts for the job.
          Turner works in the dead-letter department of the post
office with a bunch of weird characters played by Tim Conway, Roscoe
Lee Browne, Anna Maria Horsford and several more.  Also in the cast
are Hector Elizondo as the supervisor, Rue McClanahan and Jack
Klugman.  Nancy Marchand is the judge at film's end.  Maria Petillo is
the love interest.
          Turner wonders what to do with letters addressed to God from
people asking for help.  He decides to help them, an unlikely turn for
a conman . . . and so no one on the outside believes him.  But the
film gets crazy when hundreds of postal workers, with their vehicles,
surround the courthouse, and others with placards saying "Save Tom"
kind of moves the film from funny to utterly silly.  On the other
hand, it is a feel-good film so let us not carp.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Greg Kinnear, Laurie Metcalf, Maria Pitillo, Tim Conway, Roscoe
Lee Browne, Jen Seda, Hector Elizondo
Director: Garry Marshall
Screenplay: Warren Leight and Ed Kaplan Cinematography: Charles Minsky
When a con artist (Greg Kinear) is given the choice of prison or
community service, it's not surprising he chooses service – being a
pretty boy. In the dungeons of a mailroom, he is given the task of
sorting dead mail, with an odd ball group of socially impaired
co-workers. When they take to the habit of opening ‘Dear God' letters,
and then answering them – i.e. giving away money, stopping suicides,
babysitting etc, they begin to find some common purpose in life.
So why doesn't this premise for a feel good movie work? Well there isn't
a specific reason why, just a lot of little annoying things that seem to
weigh it down. Like the constant whining of Laurie Metcalf (ROSEANNE's
sister), the general low IQ of the actors, the annoyingly tedious ways
of getting a miracle to happen. I know they're not angels, but at least
God has a plan. It's surprising that this severely, dysfunctional group,
are able to put a single constructive idea together between them. I
guess I should count my blessings, and include this as one of God's
miracles.
The movie then takes another tedious downward turn, when the City of New
York decides to take this group of muffin heads to court for answering
‘Dear God' letters. When they win the case and everyone starts rejoicing
in the city streets, one would have thought they had just discovered the
cure for AIDS. Now that would be a worthwhile miracle in response to a
‘Dear God' letter.
Greg Kinnear once again plays cute - something he does well i.e.
SABRINA, AS GOOD AS IT GETS. Whilst director, Garry Marshall, has chosen
an unusual subject material for his latest movie, far removed from the
PRETTY WOMAN stuff he is renown for.
In future, let God answer his own letters.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Brian Koller
"Dear God" is an alleged comedy.  The film stars Greg Kinnear
as a con artist brought before a judge and given the choice
of work or jail.  Kinnear chooses a job at the post office,
serving his time in the dead letter office.  There, he meets
his co-workers, most of whom are eccentric.  You will recognize
Tim Conway and Laurie Metcalf.  Conway isn't awful, but he
isn't given much to work with.  Metcalf is a candidate for
Most Disappointing Supporting Actress.
An attempt by Kinnear to steal money and valuables from the mail
to pay off bullying loan sharks somehow leads to a campaign by
his postal co-workers to do good deads for troubled folks who have
written letters to God.  This leads to a second confrontation with
a judge, for tampering with the mail.  I guess God is upset when
others read his mail.
This is a really bad movie.  I would never have suffered through
it, except that relatives actually paid money to rent it, and
kept waiting forlornly for Tim Conway to be funny.  Nothing in
the movie is funny, which is rare even for very bad comedies.
Kinnear has a love interest who doesn't care that he is a broke
con artist in trouble with both the law and the mob.  The film is
full of scenes that make little sense, such as a downtown parade
featuring five second cameos of has-been stars, and Metcalf
giving a bizarre courtroom demonstration that involves dogs,
chanting, and beating a trashcan like a drum.
The real con here is "Dear God" as a comedy.  Garry Marshall,
the Director and thus the man most responsible for this waste of
videotape, has a few cameo scenes.  Lock him up and throw away
the key, and tell Kinnear to read the script before signing
another contract.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
