Title
Review for Blood, Guts, Bullets and Octane (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The after-movie talk is likely to be not so much about the
quality of "Blood, Guts, Bullets and Octane" but about how it
got to be made at all.  While some studios are vying for who
can make the most expensive film, others compete for
bargain-basement figures.  Since this film, written and
directed by Joe Carnahan, got into the can for $7300, it joins
"El Mariachi" in a fight to make the Guinness Book for
flourishing penury.  Consider that Mel Gibson was paid $25
million for his role in "Lethal Weapon 4."  Let's say he takes
off after taxes with $15 million.  Remember: that's for a couple
of months' work!  (It would take me, wow, three YEARS to
earn that sort of bread.)  If Mr. Gibson is not rushed into
"Lethal Weapon 5" but decides instead to become a producer
or director, how many "Blood, Guts, Bullets and Octane"'s
could he make?  Two thousand fifty-four.  In every likelihood
two thousand of them would be better than a "Lethal Weapon
5."
   Put it another way.  Joe Carnahan's movie at under eight
large is actually superior to three of Gibson's police dramas. 
Its cast and crew were paid in Doritos and its star performer
reliably comes through on a gallon or so of gas.  A 1963
Pontiac LeMans is the center of attention, a vehicle which
turns out to be worth more than Richard Quine's solid gold
Cadillac.  It's worth so much, in fact, that a guy is willing to
pay two used-car dealers $250,000 just to give the LeMans a
space for forty-eight hours.  What gives this oversized
convertible its value?  You'll have to wait till the end for that,
and you'll be glad you did.  Carnahan's ultimate payoff is 
keenly realized, a remuneration explained in thorough,
philosophic and sentimental terms by its most morally immoral
character.
   The indie film, considered by Village Voice critic Amy
Taubin one of the two most captivating works to come out of
the 19th Independent Feature Film Market, was shot in
thirteen days, though its conception stretched out for half a
year while Mr. Carnahan scraped up needed funds and
equipment.  Filmed in 16mm, transferred to video, and then
relocated again to whatever could give it a grainy, indie feel,
"Blood, Guts" highlights Sid (Carnahan) and Bob (Dan Leis)
as its car's supporting individuals.  They own a used car
dealership about to go under, crushed by the next-door
competition of Danny Woo (Dan Harlan), who has sewed up
the market so tighly that Sid and Bob cannot even get
deliveries of the autos they need.  They get the chance of a
lifetime to reinvent themselves when a thug offers them
$250,000 if they would simply hold on to the LeMans and
leave it in their fallow plot of land for two days.  Though the
more practical Bob is suspicious, he is talked into the deal by
his partner, who would not have cared if forty people were
killed over the lemon--as indeed they were.
   Did somebody say "talked"?  The folks in this accomplished
film could always go into rap if their careers as actors were
curtailed.  Fast talkers all, they keep up such an outpouring of
chatter that their seemingly improvised prattle will distract you
from worrying about a plot hole.  The flawed plotline would
have you consider that in order to get the auto from South
America to its final destination it became necessary over and
over to sell and then to shoot and kill every bargain-hunter
who fronted cash to get behind the driver's seat.  Like
business partners everywhere, Sid and Joe would spend their
time bickering about the small things, seeming to disagree
about every aspect of the business.  Much of the film's fun is
in the robust interchange of ideas between the plump,
overbearing, excitable Sid and his handsome, practical
partner Bob.  
   The actors, who obviously contributed their time, turn in
professional ensemble work.  Ken Rudulph as FBI Agent
Jared embodies the no-nonsense federal cop of the Janeane
Garafolo ("Clay Pigeons") variety, getting comic mileage as
the straight man supervising the uncovering of bloody body
parts in a hotel dumpster.  As Danny Woo, Dan Harlan is the
sentimental hub, a happily married man who will do anything
for his sick, wheelchair-bound wife Dottie (Karla Cave). 
Carnahan provides an assortment of hillbilly oddballs and
nerdish car buyers as well, in this nonlinear narrative about
taking risks and about doing good by doing evil.  The hand-
held camera takes frequent breaks for quick, frequent
flashbacks in color and in black and white as though
Carnahan were gently spoofing film-school antics.  On the
whole, "Blood, Guts, Bullets & Octane" shows that with the
right volunteer help and a financial incapacity to shoot the
same scenes over and over, you can evoke enough
spontaneity to capture the full attention of an intelligent
audience.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
BLOOD, GUTS, BULLETS & OCTANE (director/writer: Joe Carnahan;
cinematography: John A. Jimenez; cast: Joe Carnahan (Sid French), Dan
Leis (Bob Melba), Ken Rudulph (F.B.I. Agent Jared), Dan Harlan (Danny
Woo), Hugh McChord
(Reich), Kurt Johnson (Hillbilly Sniper), Mark S. Allen (F.B.I. Agent
Franks), Kellee Benedict (F.B.I. Agent Littel), Max Ancar (F. Manzano),
Mark Priolo (F. R. Priolo), Michael A. Saumure (Vernon Cash), Stew
Oleson (Milt Huggins), 1998)
Another Tarantino look alike indie, filmed in thirteen days for $7,300,
and it sure gets its money's worth for the effort. The filmmaker has
come up with a crime-thriller spoof done at a hyper-frenetic pace that
is as good if not better than most Hollywood high-budget action films of
this type. Joe Carnahan is both star and director, playing a fat,
sleazy, fast-talking used-car salesman named Sid French, whose partner
in the Bob & Sid's Auto Emporium, is almost as sleazy as he is, but who
is more practical-minded, Bob Melba (Leis). Faced with an eviction
notice, their car lot located in the hinterlands of Needles, California,
have only unsellable gas guzzling cars on their lot and the boys are
getting desperate to get their hands on some sellable cars.
The opening scene is a contemptuous look at the salesman trying to
hustle their customers. Their routine runs through every bit of disdain
they have for their customers and the integrity of their profession. But
it went on for too long and the fun subsided and soon became grating
just like a bad commercial.
But the quick pace of the film kept things moving briskly and their use
of quirky titled chapters to each little skit, kept the level of
juvenile humor this film was imbued with at a  bearable level. One such
chapter was titled "Coldblooded Hotheads," just to give you an idea at
what the film was driving at.
Their former boss and now competitor, Danny Woo (Harlan), whom they
absolutely despise, asks the boys to do him a favor, the IRS is doing an
audit on his business and would they say nice things about him to their
investigators and he will return the favor with a favor. The boys agree,
after bad-mouthing him to each other and telling about all the crooked
things he has done. As they recall working for Woo, they remember him
telling them that he doesn't hire salesman, he hires hit men. But they
are envious of the big dealership he runs and the divorced Bob is
envious of how Woo dotes on his crippled wife in such a loving manner,
sadly thinking of his divorce.
Meanwhile they press their car broker to get them cars other than
Gremlins and Pintos to sell, and he comes by their lot with an offer
that they can't refuse but are very suspicious of. It's a vintage
Pontiac Le Mans burgundy convertible that will soon be dropped off to
them and they will be paid $250,000 if they allow it to sit on the lot
for two days without trying to sell it or even touch it. They are told
the trunk is wired to explode if they open it and there will be
surveillance people watching them at all times, armed with shotguns to
kill them if they try to weasel out of the deal.
The car has a history to it, as the FBI is aware that a driver of that
car was killed by car jackers and they suspect a drug smuggling
operation going on that is connected with the stolen car and with the
recent deaths of a tribe of Indians in Ecuador, where the car was
spotted. Also, butchered bodies are turning up on the road and in a
garbage dump that have a connection to the stolen car.
Sid talks his partner into extorting $500,000 ransom for the car from
the one's phoning them. Believing they are being set-up, as they manage
to get away from the redneck shooting at them, they drive the car to a
mechanic they know and have him inspect it. He tells them they are
riding in a car with nitro-glycerine in it and that there is blood
dripping from the trunk, but those details can't stop them from going to
the meeting place where they arranged to collect their money.
The film comes to its slick ending after the last rendezvous point is
arranged with the ponytailed blond psycho killer (Hugh McChord), who is
the main hit man for the big boss. A number of preposterous twists come
about, as the film winds its way to its final payoff, where we see
suitcases filled with money being exchanged, cocaine lined up in the
trunk in plastic baggies, all sorts of high-powered guns exhibited, and
mysterious packets of blood. The immoral main characters end up talking
about what is right and wrong with themselves and the world they live
in, which adds a nice touch of absurdity to the already absurd story.
The film had energy, a ready made metaphor in the Pontiac and the
used-car lot, a semi-plausible plot, some promise in the filmmaker's
ability to tell a story, some choppy dialogue that could be amusing at
times, and enough nerve from the actors who at times improvised and got
by with it, as it looked better than a film school film, which is what
it most reminded me of. It was not innovative enough to be a superior
work, it needlessly displayed too much homage to other contemporary
indies to make this film seem special. Yet it was engaging and at times
very funny.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
