Title
Review for Guilty as Sin (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David N. Butterworth
     All too often in the movies we're presented with a tough,
professional woman who, at the very first opportunity, acts both weak
and unprofessional.
     The latest example of this annoying trend is GUILTY AS SIN, a
glossy yet run-of-the-mill courtroom drama from director Sidney Lumet,
whose previous successes with this genre (12 ANGRY MEN, THE VERDICT,
etc.) have been anything but routine.  Although the film is
entertaining despite its inconsistencies, your enjoyment of it will
largely depend on your tolerance of logic loopholes.
     GUILTY AS SIN is a drama very much in the JAGGED EDGE vein.  In
fact, as far as characterizations go, it's almost identical: we've got
the hotshot, no-nonsense criminal lawyer who likes to win; we've got
her experienced confidante and leg man who's a little rough around the
edges; and we've got the charming accused, a handsome playboy who may
or may not have murdered his wife.  The only character missing from
GUILTY AS SIN is the antagonistic prosecuting attorney.  While this
gives the film more time to concentrate on the relationship between the
two leads, it leaves the cross-examination sequences a little
top-heavy.
     Rebecca De Mornay (THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE) plays Jennifer
Haines, the successful defense attorney who knows what it takes to get
her clients acquitted.  She's well-dressed and confident, with a ballsy
courtroom demeanor.  De Mornay carries herself well in this picture,
but in the courtroom scenes she's definitely guilty of bad posture.
     When murder suspect David Greenhill asks her to defend him, she is
inexplicably drawn to this suave and sophisticated womanizer (or is
that ladykiller?).  After some coy game-playing, Haines agrees to take
the case.
     Greenhill is played by Don Johnson, who's still trying to prove
he's a "serious" actor since his big break on TV's MIAMI VICE.
Greenhill comes across as a smarmy pig in GUILTY AS SIN, yet somehow
the women in this film seem to be attracted to him.  His patronizing
badinage may be played for laughs, but it doesn't help explain why
Haines is interested in this outrageous flirt.
     As Greenhill begins to reveal less-than-desirable character
traits, Haines finds herself trapped in a nightmare of attorney/client
confidentiality, having to defend a man she suspects might be ... well,
check out that title!
     Jack Warden (THE VERDICT) plays Haines' longtime friend and
investigative ally Moe Plimpton.  Warden's presence is a constant
reminder of just how good THE VERDICT was, and how good this movie
might have been given a better script.  Writer Larry Cohen, better
known for his schlock horror screenplays, fails to give the characters
any credibility, too often thrusting them into unbelievable situations
and having them act inappropriately therein.
     And for a thriller, there just aren't enough plot twists.
     When Greenhill starts prying into Haines' personal life, she moves
to drop the case.  For a tough, experienced lawyer, severing this
client relationship should not present a problem, yet Haines' handling
of the situation is laughable.  And later in the film, when it's clear
why Greenhill has visited Plimpton in his dingy, flammable office, Moe
fails to see that this ain't no social call.  It's when the
protagonists behave stupidly and out-of-character like this that GUILTY
AS SIN really falls down.
     As an actress, De Mornay is somewhat of a lightweight, but you can
hardly blame her when the script calls for her to start blubbering and
trembling whenever Johnson threatens.  Johnson is actually quite good
in his role, but again--decent acting is defeated by indecent writing.
     For all its flaws, GUILTY AS SIN still manages to be entertaining
in a trashy sort of way thanks to the enthusiastic performances of De
Mornay and Johnson.  The high production values also contribute to the
film's appeal.  But for all the dramatic possibilities inherent in the
attorney/client relationship, there's not much to recommend here.
There's not even a good sex scene (we do get to see De Mornay's legal
briefs, but that's about it).
     A year or even a week from now you won't be able to tell this film
from any number of JAGGED EDGE clones--BODY OF EVIDENCE, GUILTY BY
SUSPICION, SUSPECT, etc.  GUILTY AS SIN is probably worth seeing on a
slow night, but only if you want to keep things that way.


Author
James Berardinelli
     David Greenhill (Don Johnson) is about to go on trial for the
murder of his rich socialite wife.  To prepare his defense, he solicits
one of the best young female lawyers in the country, Jennifer Haines
(Rebecca DeMornay).  After an initial bout of reluctance, Jennifer
decides to take the case--she realizes that David is a womanizer and
manipulator, but she believes him to be innocent ("People who are
guilty are rarely this blunt," she confesses) and sees his case as a
challenge.  However, from the moment she accepts him as a client, she
finds herself in over her head as David, obviously not possessing the
most stable of personalities, begins to toy with her personal life--
and her mind.
     Trials and questions of guilt and innocence are nothing new, but
GUILTY AS SIN has a few twists that give this film a different slant
than many other courtroom thriller/dramas.  Limited though it is, the
strength of this picture lies not in a tense verbal jousting match
between prosecuting and defense attorneys, because there isn't one, nor
is it to be found in the "did he do it/didn't he" theme, since the
truth is revealed relatively early.  Instead, the centerpiece is the
cat-and-mouse game played between Jennifer and David as the two twist
and manipulate circumstances, people, and each other.  Much of the
story, while admittedly overplotted, is cleverly-conceived and fun to
watch.  That's what makes the ending such a colossal disappointment.
     Often, the final act of a film has little impact on the overall
quality of the product.  There are a number of good films that have
weak conclusions, and a few horrible movies that surprise with
unexpectedly-solid wrap-ups.  GUILTY AS SIN, however, is an example of
how an ending can ruin the entire picture.  Without revealing anything
plot-wise, let me simply state the final moments lead to an inept and
feeble letdown.  Everything that was carefully developed during the
first ninety-five minutes is thrown away in the last ten.  It's almost
as if someone different was brought in to do the writing.  What's worse
is that it's easy to construct scenarios that would have made a fitting
conclusion to an otherwise-intriguing and entertaining film.
     While the end of GUILTY AS SIN is by far the film's most grievous
fault, it is by no means the only sour point.  Some of the dialogue
could have used a re-write or two.  There are a number of lines that
are unintentionally funny, and this is a bad sign for a movie trying to
develop tension.  There's also a truly horrible performance given by
Stephen Lang, who fails to infuse his Phil Garson (Jennifer's lover)
with anything remotely resembling humanity.  Fortunately, he doesn't
have a large role.
     Rebecca DeMornay is inconsistent.  There are scenes when she does
an excellent job, but an equal number when she is amateurish, stilted,
or unconvincing.  She's at her best playing someone of cool, ruthless
intelligence and at her worst attempting to give an impression of
vulnerability.  Strong emotion appears to be something that she has
difficulty portraying effectively.
     Don Johnson, on the other hand, is wildly charismatic as David
Greenhill.  He plays the role to the hilt, pulling out all the stops
and more than occasionally overacting.  What he does is perfect for the
movie, and immensely fun to watch (it also helps to erase the memory of
an execrable performance in Born Yesterday).  There aren't many movies
when I find myself sympathizing with the villain, but this is among the
exceptions, Johnson's acting putting me solidly in Greenhill's corner.
Oddly enough, another recent example of this occurred when I rooted for
DeMornay's Paige in THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE.
     Comparisons can be made to JAGGED EDGE, but most of the
similarities are superficial.  Aside from EDGE being a better-crafted
piece of entertainment, there's a lot to differentiate the two.  While
it's true that Jack Warden's character in GUILTY AS SIN is uncannily
like Robert Loggia's in EDGE, and that in both films there's a strange
attraction between the female lawyer and a client that she believes to
be innocent, each of the movies focuses on something different.  GUILTY
AS SIN pushes Greenhill's guilt or innocence into the background, along
with his trial, to zero in on his bizarre and weirdly fascinating
relationship with Jennifer.
     GUILTY AS SIN will not win any awards for realism, but as escapism
it's fine--until the ending, that is.  It's disappointing and amazing
how a few ill-conceived pages of script can shatter what might
otherwise have been a shallow-but-enjoyable thriller.  What a waste.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
