Title
Review for Land Girls, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Alex Bryson
It is 1941 and as the men of Britain's farming communities leave to
fight their roles are assumed by women of the Women's Land Army. The
Land Girls tells the tale of three such ‘girls' brought together from
different backgrounds: Rachel Weisz' Cambridge graduate ‘Ag',
Catherine McCormack's Stella and Anna Friel's (predictably chirpy)
hairdresser, Prue.
Underneath what is ostensibly a story about friendship forged in a
time of adversity, about pulling together and female bonds that
transcend boundaries of class and so on, a more subdued tale of regret
and thwarted happiness lies. Disguised for most of the film by
digestible sentimentality this makes for a bittersweet experience
ultimately.
This is a period drama with a pastoral theme almost out of a Hardy
novel, but the producers know what they are doing and pull it off with
ease. The impossibly picturesque farming community is photographed
beautifully, and this pretty facade will no doubt satisfy those
looking for a BBC costume piece (the costumes are wonderful too
actually).
For such a long film the plot is slight - really just a series of
vignettes chronicling the development of the main characters, but the
acting holds it together. Steven Mackintosh is charged with bedding
the entire female population of the South-West it seems (it is
particularly welcome seeing the Our Mutual Friend pair again), and all
three ‘Land Girls' are a pleasure to watch.
There are many moments of comedy, but in some ways the ethos is grimly
stoic. In keeping with the times duty and sacrifice are paramount, and
additionally we are provided with an examination of guilt and regret
at the choices we make. Don't let that put you off this rewarding look
back at what is fast becoming ancient history though.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Wars, at least those, unlike our mess in VietNam, that are considered
"just," have a way of uniting the population in ways that put aside race,
gender and class.  Everyone pitches in to help our men in battle,   Long
before this happened in the U.S. in WWII, in Britain, as far back as the
first World War, they had the Women's Land Army, commonly  known as the
Land Girls, women who worked on the farms and in factories while their men
were fighting the enemy. As many as 100,000 women were part of that "army"
since its inception.  This film is about three women in WWII and their
adventures on a farm in England.
Based on a 1994 popular book by Angela Huth, it is about three pretty
women with varying backgrounds and personalities.  There is Stella
(Catherine McCormack), a banker's daughter, whose fianc‚ is a Naval
Officer.   Ag (Rachel Weiss), is a graduate of Cambridge University,
brainy and capricious.  Rounding out the threesome is  a  working-class
hairdresser, Prue (Anna Friel.)
The three live on a farm owned by the Lawrences, (Tom Georgeson and
Maureen Obrien).   Also on the farm is the Lawrences' handsome son, Joe,
who wants to be a fighter pilot but has to help out his parents on the
farm.   Before very long the girls and Joe, with pre-war inhibitions out
the window, become "good friends."    Before the war's end, each has gone
through some rough periods; tragedy is a great part of war.  General
Sherman said it better: War is hell.
As with so many films being made these days, this one runs too long.  At
least, the one hour and fifty minutes seems longer than that because the
epilog could have been omitted.   Showing what happened to each of the
characters after the war's end turns out to be on the corny side and
spoils what would otherwise have been a better film.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Ask schoolchildren today for the name of America and
England's great enemy in World War II and you'd likely as
notg get the answer, "Russia."  There was a time not so long
ago that every schoolkid knew the correct reply, and for a
select few who want to delve more deeply into a sidelights of
the era, some more details on the conflict is welcome.  In his
film "The Land Girls," David Leland provides fascinating
coverage of a little-known facet of the struggle in his Rosie-
the-Riveter sort of movie of British women who volunteered
for farm work in order to free young, male tillers for the front--
and incidentally, to afford a new kind of freedom for the
workers.  The women, not themselves eligible to go into
actual combat, provided a much needed service whether as
volunteers or draftees, squeezing cow udders and turning
over the soil so that the brave soldiers and the folks back
home could be nourished with their accustomed staples.
   While only a documentary would try to focus on the
actual work on the granges of the brave island nation, Leland
correctly underscores romantic motifs in his involving work
which, while not being a spitfire action adventure by any
stretch, provides insight into a now-forgotten drama which
unfolded during the war years.
   While moviegoers will be reminded of Bruce Beresford's
"Paradise Road," a tale of women in Japanese POW camps,
Leland's film avoids a kaleidoscopic view by concentrating on
just three women of different temperaments to show how their
experience changed them forever.  Convincingly acted by
Catherine McCormack as the romantic Stella, Rachel Weisz
as the more cerebral and innocent companion Ag, and Anna
Friel as the working-class, talkative Prue, "The Land Girls"
traces their years on the farm with its aging owner Mr.
Lawrence (Tom Georgeson), his wife (Maureen O'Brien) and
their handsome son Joe (Steven Mackintosh).  As if to prove
that separation from their beaus can turn women as well as
men into flirts, Leland hones in on the appeal which young
Joe has for the three recruits.  Steven Mackintosh, known to
lovers of indie movies for his recent role as a transsexual in
"Different for Girls," here looks more like a young Peter
O'Toole than like Richard Spence's elegant woman, and we
quickly accept the fact that this rugged individual, the only
eligible male in the vicinity, will soon wind up bedding all three
working visitors.
   A sentimental rather than edgy film, "Land Girls" exhibits
the friendship which develops among the three women who
are surprisingly without jealousy despite their competition for
the young man's attentions.  Despite her engagement to a
naval officer and a college graduate, Stella falls in love with
the relatively uneducated Joe, who resents his role on the
farm and seeks to enter the air force despite a genetic heart
condition.  In another episode displaying a liaison which takes
place across the lines of social class, Ag, a graduate of
Cambridge University, loses her virginity to Joe after brazenly
but naively asking him, "Will you do me?"  
    Photographed by Henry Braham in Western England, the
film possesses lush production values, using Caroline Amies's
period design including a 1940's locomotive which frames the
story and some rattling old autos reminiscent of the era. 
Because there is so little drama of the action-adventure sort,
an incident involving the downing of a German plane which
crashes into the Lawrence acreage is particularly agitating,
dramatizing the love which Joe has grown to feel for Stella
and also the compassion which the farmers have for the
aircraft's hapless pilot.
   Keith Dewhurst and David Leland's screenplay provides for
a quiet film which will be appreciated by fans of Masterpiece
Theater, though the dialogue is quite accessible and the story
an earthy one.  It is acted with dignity and humor all-around,
a bittersweet tale of a conservative public's acceptance of
anomaly during a period of emergency. Not Rated.  Running
Time: 110 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten
