Title
Review for Absolute Power (1997)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Walter Frith
     'Absolute Power' is another testament to Clint Eastwood's ability as a
talented filmmaker.  What makes Eastwood so good is not only his diversity in
subject matter from 'Play Misty for Me' (1971) to 'Unforgiven' (1992) but his
uncanny ability to take films with relatively long scenes and stretch them
into the most absorbing films made anywhere by anyone.
     'Absolute Power' is an extremely powerful motion picture filled with
intrigue (both political and social) that manages to construct its plot line
in a manner suitable for building to a daring climax but also in a way for
serious discussion after you leave the theatre.
     A life long criminal who specializes in high profile burglaries
(Eastwood) forces his way into a mansion one evening and upon committing a
routine heist is forced to hide in seclusion when others arrive.  From his
viewpoint he witnesses a sexual escapade which leads to a murder involving a
billionaire's wife and the most powerful man in the world, the President of
the United States (Gene Hackman).  Also involved in the clandestine crime are
two Secret Service agents (Scott Glenn and Dennis Haysbert) and the
President's Chief of Staff (Judy Davis).
     The investigating homicide officer who tracks Eastwood to the scene of
the crime (Ed Harris) is the film's protagonist who is the key to the film's
central focus.  Eastwood has an estranged daughter (Laura Linney) who gets
dangerously close to the investigation not necessarily for her own good.
 Rounding out the film's cast is veteran character actor E.G. Marshall as a
billionaire and political king maker.  It's his wife who is murdered.
     Oscar winning screen writer William Goldman ('All the President's Men')
is credited with this clever screenplay based on the novel by David Baldacci.
     What makes 'Absolute Power' so enjoyable to a large extent is seeing
Eastwood gradually move into parts that fit his age.  He is well seasoned in
this film (Eastwood is 66)
and he doesn't perform any silly physical stunts and the film isn't filled
with unnecessary violence.  Instead it relies on heightened scenes of keeping
the audience guessing what's to come next.
     This is a smart film brimming with conniving wit that manages to remain
highly entertaining and credible throughout its entire running time.

Author
James Brundage
Produced and Directed by Clint Eastwood.
Starring Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Scott Glenn, Ed Harris, and Laura
Linney
 Let me start off saying two things to two people.  Number one, to William
Goldman: I'm not saying this because I'm supporting or defending Clinton
(which I'm NOT), but do please stop writing political thrillers.  Number
two, to Ed Harris: well, at least it was better than Stepmom.
 Number three actually would have gone to Clint Eastwood: pleas stop
starring, producing, and directing your own movies but he obviously got the
point as nary a frame of the intriguing Midnight in the Garden of Good and
Evil shows him.
 That said, let's go on to my review of Absolute Power, which is twenty
notches above Murder at 1600, which I saw being filmed, but a hundred
notches below Six Days in May, In the Line of Fire, or about any other
political thriller you can name.
 Absolute Power is pleasantly mediocre.  You don't expect much, and you
don't get much.
 It is yet another film following the Clinton chic of films, books, etc
which show our nations President as someone who's able to get laid, in
contrast to someone who couldn't get it up without Viagra (if we had Dole,
folks, NONE of this crap would be happening). Absolute Power is the story of
a President who has sex with a girl and, whoops, ends up killing her.
Unlike Murder at 1600, which shows the girl being done right in the opening
credits, Absolute Power waits a nice ten to fifteen minutes before getting
down to business.
 When it gets down to business, Luther (Clint Eastwood ) is breaking into an
estate to steal millions.  His perfect heist is interrupted by something
unplanned: the president is going to have sex with the billionaires wife.
Things get a little rough, one thing leads to another, and the girl ends up
shot by secret service agents seconds before she's going to give President
Al (Gene Hackman) a Lorraina Bobbit.
 Of course, since we live in the wonderful democracy where everyone is free
to make a dumbly plotted and cliche film as they want, the Chief of Staff
decides its for the best if the girl stumbled upon a burglary and was shot.
Forget for a second that her dress has been ripped, the President's
fingerprints are all over her, and a secret service agent (Scott Glenn) made
sure he hadn't done a Bill Clinton.
 Now, going out of the character of a jewel thief who just witnessed a
murder from a secret room and stole $5,000,000 worth of material, Clint
grows a heart, picks up the piece of evidence left behind, and leaves.  Of
course secret service agents chase him.  Of course he runs into a cop (Ed
Harris) who believes him because the facts don't add up, and of course his
daughter (Laura Linney) grows closer to the old man through a complicated
process of stocking her fridge at just the right time and saving her life.
 The only really redeeming aspects to the film, the saving graces against
terrible performances by the ensemble cast and William Goldman's piss-poor
script is the steely direction by Clint Eastwood.  Mixing in just the right
amount of light, the right tone and time of the music and working with such
a terrible script, Clint Eastwood does directing up to par with A Perfect
World and Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil.  He's as good of a
director as he always was, and that alone makes the film enjoyable.  He
gives as much that he can to a movie with such a bad script, as do the
actors.  This will be on the movie's gravestone: "They tried, they really
tried".
 Now, from all of this, you'd expect that I'm telling you to skip Absolute
Power.  I'm not.  I'm just saying don't drive to rent it.  Should Absolute
Power be on TMC or ShowTime, like it was for me, go ahead and watch it.
You'll have fun.  If you're a Clint Eastwood, Dirty Harry jag, see it.  It's
just up in the air.

Author
Brian Takeshita
In ABSOLUTE POWER, Clint Eastwood plays Luther Whitney, an expert cat
burglar who breaks into a mansion, but is caught in the master bedroom
when people show up unexpectedly.  Hiding behind a two-way mirror, he
witnesses an older man and a younger woman enter the room and begin to
engage in romance, which soon turns rough.  It quickly turns too rough
and when the woman protests and struggles to get away, the man becomes
violent, striking her and wrestling her to the ground.  In the
entanglement, the woman grabs a letter opener and attempts to stab the
man.  The man cries out for help, and two other men burst in on the
couple and shoot the woman dead.  The gunmen are Secret Service
agents; the other man is the President of the United States.
After the woman is shot, the President's chief of staff (Judy Davis)
rushes in and immediately starts damage control.  The woman's death
must be made to look like she was shot by an intruder in her home.  We
quickly realize that it is not so much the death that must be covered
up, but rather the circumstances surrounding the death.  Shooting a
person to defend the President is always justifiable, but doing so in
the midst of an affair involving the President could cause a lot of
problems.  This is an interesting premise to say the least:  The
cover-up of a presidentially justifiable homicide as a means to a
political end.  It's focus on the President of the United States is
equally intriguing.  Movies in the past have given us scandals,
conspiracies, and even murders close to the presidency, but rarely
have they actually involved the President himself.
Unfortunately, the premise does not live up to its potential.  Instead
of showing us some of the myriad ways the unique and all-encompassing
powers of the presidency could be used for self-serving goals,
ABSOLUTE POWER quickly falls right into line with any number of
thrillers.  The two Secret Service agents find out that Luther, whom
they chase from the mansion, has taken a key piece of evidence which
could provide undeniable proof that President Alan Richmond (Gene
Hackman) was involved in the woman's murder.  The rest of the film
concerns itself with the Secret Service's attempts to hunt Luther
down, and does so in the same ways we've seen before.
Whereas the storyline is the movie's main liability, the cast is the
movie's main asset:  Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Ed Harris, and
Scott Glenn comprise this formidable lineup.  However, although the
others put in solid performances, in the end it's all Eastwood.  He is
convincing as the man who, through his chosen profession, has
alienated his daughter to the point where she has taken the direct
opposite path and become a prosecuting attorney.  Luther may or may
not like what he does for a living, but he definitely doesn't like
what it has done for his relationship with his daughter, Kate (Laura
Linney), and Eastwood does a great job at making this come through on
screen.  His convincing emotion is also displayed in a pivotal scene
where Luther is watching President Richmond on television, embracing
philanthropist Walter Sullivan (E.G. Marshall), Richmond's mentor and
husband of the murdered woman.  Luther talks to the TV screen:  "You
heartless whore.  I'm not about to run from you."  From almost any
other actor, this would have been the biggest slice of cheese you'd
ever laid eyes on, but because it's Clint Eastwood, you eat it up and
ask for more.
Every time there's a big caper, Luther is brought in for questioning,
but nothing sticks.  This time, D.C. homicide detective Seth Frank (Ed
Harris) finds Luther at a museum and questions Luther over lunch,
resulting in a wonderful scene where Seth and Luther exchange opinions
on who might have broken into the mansion the night Walter Sullivan's
wife was murdered.  Seth almost knows it was Luther, since he is one
of only a handful of people capable of pulling off a job like that,
and Luther knows Seth knows.  The two of them engage in a discussion
which subtlely makes each other aware of what they're thinking without
saying it out loud.  Particularly enjoyable is the way Luther
indirectly pays compliments to himself.  "Do you know the skill of
breaking the security of the security company?  I don't know how those
guys do it," he says.  Seth smiles and nods knowingly.  In this scene,
you realize you are watching two pros:  Luther, so confident because
he's been through this kind of thing so many times, and Eastwood,
acting with the confidence provided by decades of experience.  Both
the actor and the character play it free and easy, and it's fun to
watch.
Throughout most of the film, Eastwood's direction is evenhanded, and
in some cases, masterful.  For example, the way he uses visuals and
sound to build tension while Luther is trying to disable the mansion's
security system is very effective.  However, there are also evident
inconsistencies which detract from the movie as a whole.  The music,
while beautiful in some places (Eastwood actually composed much of
it), degenerates into cheap horror movie-type synthesized monotones in
others.  While some of the characters are very authentic, others are
right out of bad movies with near over-the-top lines.  I have a
feeling that with a better screenplay which could have closed some of
the gaps in storyline, this film could have been much better.  In the
end, ABSOLUTE POWER is enjoyable, with Eastwood's scenes nearly making
up for its flaws.  It's too bad that the rest of the film doesn't keep
up with Eastwood himself.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ABSOLUTE POWER ** Directed by Clint Eastwood. Written by William Goldman
from the novel of David Baldacci. Photography, Jack N. Green. Editing, Joel
Cox. Production design, Henry Bumstead. Music, Lennie Niehaus. Cast: Clint
Eastwood (Luther Whitney),Gene Hackman (President Alan Richmond), Ed Harris
(Detective Seth Frank), Laura Linney (Kate Whitney), Judy Davis (Gloria
Russell), Scott  Glenn (Bill Burton), Dennis Haysbert (Tim Collin), E.G.
Marshall (Walter Sullivan), Melora Hardin (Christy Sullivan). A Sony
release from Columbia Pictures of a Castle Rock presentation of a Malpaso
production. 120 min. R (violence)
The historian John Emerich Edward Dalberg Acton (1834-1902), who became
Lord Acton of Aldenham in 1869, was the first great modern philosopher of
resistance to the evil state. He stressed morality above all. Though known
mostly to specialists today, millions (mis)quote his aphorism, from a
letter he wrote to Bishop Mandell Creighton in 1887:  "Power tends to
corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely."
In theory it is hard to resist a political thriller with the explicit title
"Absolute Power," especially when it is by and with Clint Eastwood in his
familiar persona as an enemy of misused and abusive authority. Enticing too
is that Clint plays an master cat burglar, an avocation beloved by readers
and moviegoers --vide Cary Grant in "To Catch a Thief" or The Saint.
Yet, except  for one dud ("The Rookie") the film is not in the league of
Eastwood-directed works since 1990: the shamefully neglected "White Hunter,
Black Heart," "Unforgiven," the acceptable "A Perfect World,""The Bridges
of Madison County."  In spite of changes by sometimes excellent
screenwriter William Goldman, "Absolute Power" does not raise the shabby
source novel to any heights, or add anything to the spate of pictures about
US. Presidents. Though the actors and techniques are very good and
polished, the plot is a salad of incoherences, disconnections and non
sequiturs, arbitrary moves, laughable incredibilities, improbabilities and
impossibilites, coincidences and plot craters. Over those ingredients is
poured a sauce of movie cliches.
The story centers around aging, much decorated Army veteran and veteran
thief Luther Whitney, played with the steely nerves, the cool, the
tongue-in-cheek humor expected of Eastwood. One night, he burglarizes a
mansion to end all mansions, defeating in ho-hum seconds state-of-the art
locks and security systems. (There's a dumb gag that Luther is unable to
program his VCR). As he moves carefully in semi-darkness, he glimpses
paintings by masters and other art treasures. The sequence has good tension
but is stretched out, as if the filmmakers wanted to get their money's
worth for their elaborate movie set.
Luther fills his bag with millions in jewelry, coins and cash. Sudden
noises force him to retreat behind a most convenient two-way mirror. He
watches a dissolute older man (Gene Hackman) and a trampish young woman
(Melora Hardin) both drunk and playing sexual games. These turn violent. As
the man seems ready to strangle his companion, she stabs his leg with a
letter-opener. In a flash,two men materialize and shoot her dead.They're
Secret Service men who guard U.S. President Alan Richmond.
The playmate turns out to be the young, openly and regularly unfaithful
second wife of widower Walter Sullivan (E.G.Marshall) a tycoon in his
eighties. His flushed complexion speaks of illness or alcohol. He is a
king-maker, a very good FOA (Friend Of Alan's).  "I gave him the
Presidency" he says later.
A cover-up follows, led by Chief of Staff Gloria Russell, played by Judy
Davis  with  campy black humor. The hunt for the killer is on. Luther is a
major suspect because, as per the old cliche "there are only seven men" who
can burglarize so well.
That Clint can be very likable is a given. But he allows his film to grow
exponentially  absurd. To flesh it out, newish widower Luther has an
estranged daughter, Kate. She is cute, unattached, and of all things, a
prosecutor. You can sniff instantly the reconciliation to come. Or the
mutual attraction between Kate and chief investigating detective Seth Frank
(Ed Harris). He too is conveniently unattached."I live by myself" is his
leitmotif to Kate. Frank is nice, decent, well-mannered, simpatico.
Eastwood and Harris have by far the best scene as they lunch together, play
wittily cat-and-mouse, and like each other.
In a baffling scene, Luther, about to catch a plane and disappear abroad,
is at the airport. He sees on  TV the President delivering a piously
hypocritical declaration concerning his "like-a-father-to-me" mentor
Sullivan. Instantly Luther decides to stick around and do the right thing.
Had he not realized that the man he had watched through the mirror was the
President? Go figure.
Try also to make sense of the many appearances of key people in places
where they couldn't possibly be. Or how they get to their desinations in
mere minutes. Or how quick-change artist Luther disguises himself so fast.
I have a weakness for disguises. My first publications, in a children's
magazine, were signed "Detective X" after my pulp fiction hero in stories
by Brand House. "X" had a stupendous ability for instant transformations
that made him a clone of anyone he wished to impersonate. Still, to quote
Corinthians: "When I was a child, I spake as child, I understood as a
child, I thought as child; but when I became a man, I put away childish
things." Like suspension of outrageous disbelief.
In another mega-silly sequence, for reasons hard to fathom, a cafe meeting
is set up between Kate and her dad. Dozens of Washington, D.C. cops,
sharpshooters and marked cars skulk around --but no Army tanks or rocket
launchers. Yet no one seems to notice. There's also a gunman hired by old
man Sullivan. How he knew eluded me.Clint appears in a beard, hat and
designer long coat. He escapes a fracas in a flash, because under the coat
he wore a policeman's uniform and a cop's cap.Try it. D.C. becomes DC
comics.
One more item among many. Kate is now in danger. "Good news," Harris tells
Eastwood on the phone "the Secret Service is taking over surveillance."
It's  like saying"Great, the foxes will protect the chickens." How much
better did Alfred Hitchcock's "The 39 Steps" manage when the hero tells his
new host in Scotland that the archvillain is unknown but has a finger
missing. "Like this?" says the host, showing his hand.
No character is dimensional, nothing is thoughtful or thought through or
cerebral. The  "exposes" of the Washington establishment are nullified by
caricature. In spite of occasional good moments, the film is merely a
tabloid, the screen equivalent of the National Enquirer.
===========================
 This review and others can be found at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Nick Schaden
        Ever notice how too many movies are getting geared for the "young"
audience?   You know what I mean, little substance, too little plot,
just fast action, violence and sex that make millions at the box
office.   Amazingly enough, "Absolute Power" seems like a movie geared
for people in their 70s, with a great plot and great acting, but
atrociously slow and devoid of any excitement.
        "Absolute Power" tells the story of Luther Whitney (Clint Eastwood), a
cat burglar who, while pulling off a robbery, gets in a hairy
predicament:  The supposedly "empty" mansion that Luther is robbing from
has visitors.   Luther hides, and sees a young women enter the room with
an older man; we can see from the expressions on Luther's face that he
vaguely recognizes the face.   The couple start to perform rough sex,
when things get too rough, the two start to fight, climaxing in a
violent struggle where the woman nearly kills the man when BLAM!   A
Secret Service agent has shot and killed the woman, and this mysterious
man is none other than: the President (Gene Hackman)!   What a great and
original plot!
        To boot, Clint Eastwood and Gene Hackman do a great job acting their
respective roles.   So you ask, why does this picture get a -2?
        First of all, the movie is SLOW, and in many ways boring.   For
example, there is only one action piece in the entire movie, which
starts and ends quickly.   In addition, too much time is spent with the
sub-plot showing the relationship between Luther and his daughter (Laura
Linney).   Simply put, there is too much time in the
movie for interviews and talking, not enough for true suspense, plot
development, and action.   Even the opening robbery draws out for too
much time.   To put the nail in the coffin, the movie and plot wraps up
far too quickly and easily.
        Maybe it's my young mind at work, but "Absolute Power" crawls at a
snail's pace.  Only the strong acting by the two leads Eastwood and
Hackman save the picture from further punishment.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Ed Harris, Laura Linney, Judy Davis,
Scott Glenn, Dennis Haysbert, E.G. Marshall Director: Clint Eastwood
Screenplay: William Goldman based on the novel by David Baldacci
    "A two way mirror separates the master bedroom from a hidden vault
housing the accumulated wealth of an aged billionaire. In the vault, on
a chair, amidst bank notes worth one million, a jewel thief trapped
watches in deathly silence, as the young wife toys with a powerful
stranger on her master's bed. Laughter is mixed with the fragrance of
alcohol as the two tease and fondle each other playfully. Heightened by
the excitement of wine boiling blood, they toss and tantalise the other
with careless whispers and kisses. He wants more. She plays hard to get.
Furniture scatters like chips on a gaming table in this struggle for
dominance in the roulette of lust.
    He likes it rough. She enjoys the tease of the waiting game. Enough!
He strikes her. She hits back not so gently. Lust changes to anger as he
tears the silk fabric draping her slim body. He mounts her from behind.
She screams and squeezes him where it counts. It shocks him momentarily,
but doesn't dissuade his intent in this contest for sexual supremacy. He
pins her body to the ground with his own. With hands wrapped around her
neck, he tightens with the excitement of feeling her breathless and
writhing beneath him.
    Her hands grasps thin air, desperately she is losing this silent
crying game. A cold blade comes to reach. She blindly stabs. He pulls
away from her in pain, like a moth burnt by the flame. Mounting over her
tormentor in triumph, she raises both hands upwards ready to plunge the
blade into the heart of the beast. He cries for help. The bedroom door
bursts open. Gunfire. The woman drops into a pool of her own blood. She
has just lost the round in this 'Game for Absolute Power'."
Talk about a star packed action thriller - Eastwood, Hackman, Harris and
Scott. So were there enough pieces go around?  Sure. Eastwood is by my
accounts a fair director. So the distribution of power roles goes like
this. Gene Hackman gets to release his 'seven year urges', in 'ten
minute surges' (perhaps best left of screen); which is all too suddenly
ended by the 'boom boom' of Scott Glenn's long schlick fiery 'stick';
resulting in much overreaction by the 'anaemic' Judy Davis; soon
followed by an investigation headed by the 'Mr lonely hearts' Inspector
E. Harris; who longingly eyes the 'lovely' Laura Linney before she is
prematurely knocked of a sandy cliff, without hearing those unsaid words
'I love you'.
Clint Eastwood by far gets the best role - the 'fatherly', jewel thief
who has a conscience to uphold and a daughter to behold. It is this
particular character which stands above the rest. A man who does not
walk away from an unpardonable crime or an angry daughter, even when his
own life and fortune is at stake. If this movie is to be commended, it
should be for Eastwood's strong character and direction, if not for the
improbable plot and excessive sexual violence.

Author
Phil Curtolo
In his career, Clint Eastwood has directed some of his best movies. For
example, The Outlaw Josie Wales, Unforgiven, A Perfect World and The
Bridges of Madison County were all done by Eastwood. He has recently
been married to Dina Ruiz in March of last year. Then he made a mistake:
Absolute Power. 
Although this film had some interesting grounds for a potentially good
plot, its gaping holes and poor character development left Absolute
Power in the dark, which was where Luther Whitney (Eastwood) spent the
first half hour or so of the film. As one of the best thieves of the
past 50 years, Whitney was on another routine job, stealing a few
million dollars of jewels and cash. However, unexpectedly, the owner
returns with a man, and both are drunk. It turns out that he witnesses
the President of the United States beat the woman and the secret service
murder her in cold blood.
Then, Whitney sees the chief of staff try to cover up the murder and
make it look like the girl stumbled on an attempted robbery. However,
she and the secret service men leave behind a key piece of evidence: a
letter opener with the president's blood and fingerprints on it. After
they leave, Whitney takes the knife and escapes out the window.
So it is up to veteran police lieutenant Frank James (Ed Harris, The
Rock) to solve the case and he suspects foul play. And foul is exactly
the way the game is played, as Whitney leads him on a wild goose chase
to the truth.
Now the plot sounds very interesting and rather original. However, the
disappointing final conflict comes down to a press covered event between
an old man and the President. You have to see the film to know what I'm
talking about, but if you have, you're probably as disappointed as me.
Most of the characters were atrociously put together. Harris' character
was a pathetic single cop, with a likeness for Whitney's daughter, Kate
(Laura Linney, Congo). She, too, could've been more explained, although
her fondness for her father is played out rather well. The President
himself (Gene Hackman, The Birdcage) was a poorly developed character.
The only really excellent characters were Eastwood's Whitney, a
conflicting father and artist with "great hands," and secret service
agent Bill Burton (Scott Glenn, Courage Under Fire). He ends up
confronting himself when faced with the question, "Do you love your
country?," which is also very interesting to see played out.
Although the plot was wide open and the acting could have been pulled
off by a bunch of ambitious young actors, this film is full of talented,
Academy-Award winning stars, which gives it some enjoyment. But when it
comes down to entertainment, Absolute Power comes up absolutely
powerless.
Grade: C-, **1/2 out of *****

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Ed Harris, Laura Linney, Judy Davis, 
      Scott Glenn, Dennis Haysbert, E.G. Marshall
Director: Clint Eastwood
Producers: Clint Eastwood and Karen S. Spiegel
Screenplay: William Goldman based on the novel by David Baldacci
Cinematography: Jack N. Green
Music: Lennie Niehaus and Clint Eastwood
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     In 1997 movies, the White House is under siege, although not as 
literally as in last year's INDEPENDENCE DAY.  No less than three major 
motion pictures released between New Year's Day and the twilight of the 
summer season have stories that postulate high level government cover-
ups.  The first, SHADOW CONSPIRACY, was a terrible film that vanished 
from theaters almost as soon as it opened.  The third, MURDER AT 1600, 
is slated for a warm weather bow, and will feature Wesley Snipes as a 
police officer investigating a homicide on the grounds of the White 
House.  In between these two pictures comes Clint Eastwood's ABSOLUTE 
POWER, a fairly routine thriller that gets high marks as a result of 
tight pacing and top-notch acting.
     In 1993's IN THE LINE OF FIRE, Eastwood played a Secret Service 
agent.  Here, he's hunted by a pair of them.  Frankly, the actor seems 
equally comfortable on either side of the badge, just as he does on 
either side of the camera.  Unlike UNFORGIVEN and THE BRIDGES OF MADISON 
COUNTY, there's nothing remarkable about this motion picture; ABSOLUTE 
POWER is a straightforward thriller that, while entertaining, will not 
go down as an example of Eastwood's best work.
     Luther Whitney (Eastwood) is a master thief; he's one of only six 
people who can defeat the Sullivan mansion's alarm system.  Once inside, 
he makes his way into the bedroom, finds the hidden vault, and proceeds 
to fill his bag with cash and jewelry.  But this isn't Luther's night.  
Just as he's finishing up the robbery, the lady of the house (Melora 
Hardin) arrives home with a gentleman guest.  Luther is forced to hide 
in the vault, behind a one-way mirror.  What he sees next not only 
shocks him, but makes him the target of a hit man, the Secret Service, 
and the Washington D.C. police.  Christy Sullivan's inebriated escort is 
none other than Alan J. Richmond (Gene Hackman), the President of the 
United States.  And, after some rough foreplay, she's dead and a cover-
up is underway. Luther witnesses all this from his hiding place, but 
it's not long before the detective leading the murder investigation, 
Seth Frank (Ed Harris), realizes that the aging thief was in the house 
when the crime occurred.  But was he a witness or a participant?
     ABSOLUTE POWER, adapted by veteran screenwriter William Goldman 
from the novel by David Baldacci, is an intriguing story told in an 
effective manner.  It's entertaining for the most part, sporadically 
clever, and occasionally gripping, but thoughtful viewers will easily 
recognize a number of sizable plot holes.  This is one movie that looks 
better while you're watching it than when you reflect upon it 
afterwards.  Ultimately, the reason to see ABSOLUTE POWER is for the 
pleasure of the cat-and-mouse game between Luther and everyone who's out 
to get him.  The end isn't the fun part; getting there is.  At the 
appropriate moments, Eastwood ratchets up the level of tension to keep 
us involved.  
     The "A-list" cast for ABSOLUTE POWER says a great deal for the 
prestige of the project and Eastwood's reputation.  The director plays 
Luther as a sage, somewhat laid back character -- more like BRIDGES' 
protagonist than Dirty Harry.  Hackman, who last worked with Eastwood on 
UNFORGIVEN, is effectively amoral as the president (some viewers may be 
reminded of the actor's previous cover-up/conspiracy thriller, NO WAY 
OUT, where Hackman's Secretary of State accidentally killed his 
mistress).  Judy Davis (HUSBANDS AND WIVES) plays Gloria Russell, 
Richmond's Chief of Staff and the author of the cover-up.  Scott Glenn 
(SILVERADO) and Dennis Haysbert (LOVE FIELD) are the Secret Service 
agents involved in the plot.  Laura Linney (PRIMAL FEAR) is Luther's 
estranged daughter, whose uncertain relationship with her father leads 
to the film's most emotionally honest moments.  E.G. Marshall is the 
extremely wealthy husband of the dead woman.
     In the wrong hands, ABSOLUTE POWER could have resulted in a 
splashy, inept film.  For, while the material here is inherently better 
than that of SHADOW CONSPIRACY, it takes strong performances and a sure, 
steady hand at the helm to lift the production above the level of its 
uneven script.  Eastwood's approach is slow and deliberate; he develops 
characters and relationships and doesn't rely on cheap gimmicks to 
generate tension.  The favorable result speaks for itself.  The final 
cut of ABSOLUTE POWER isn't shocking or surprising, but seeing it is 
worth the commitment of a couple of hours on a cold February night.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ABSOLUTE POWER (director: Clint Eastwood; screenwriter: William Goldman;
cinematography: Jack N. Green; cast: Clint Eastwood (Luther Whitney),
Gene Hackman (President Richmond), Ed Harris (Seth Frank), Laura Linney
(Luther's daughter), Judy Davis (Gloria), Scott Glenn (Secret Service
Agent), Dennis Haysbert (Secret Service Agent), E.G. Marshall
(Sullivan), Melora Hardin (Mrs. Sullivan), 1997)
For three quarters of the film, an exciting, somewhat plausible thriller
takes place, that is even occasionally intriguing. Then it comes apart
and turns into routine Hollywood, cop-out stuff. As a result, this film
wastes splendid acting jobs by Clint, Ed, and Scott.
Clint is Luther Whitney, a renowned thief, who finds his way into the
hidden vault of the billionaire Sullivan's (Marshall) mansion and robs
him of his jewels and cash. But complications arise while Luther hides
in the vault, looking out from behind a one-way mirror, and Mrs.
Sullivan (Melora) comes home inebriated and begins having some rough sex
with Alan Richmond (Gene). He happens to be the President of the United
States. Things get out of hand, and when the two secret service agents
(Scott and Dennis) see that the President is about to get knifed to
death, they shoot Mrs. Sullivan. Gloria Russell (Judy), the President's
Chief of Staff, then starts the cover-up rolling. The result is that
Luther has to go on the run.
What remains entertaining is that the bad-good guy, Luther-- being
chased by the good-bad guy Alan-- while the good-good guy, the chief
police investigator in the homicide and robbery, Seth Frank (Ed), tries
to unravel the mysteries of the case. It is no mystery to the audience,
because they saw exactly what happened. So what this film is all about
is the amorality of the President and the absolute power he wields, and
the cat-and-mouse games between the police and secret service, and
Luther. There is also some romance going on, but of the blandest kind
imaginable, between Clint's estranged daughter (Laura), whom he still
cares a great deal about, and Seth Frank.
It is watchable hokum, with a hardly credible story, getting by solely
on solid acting jobs from the leads. The script calls for no bold
statements about the politics of the White House, which makes the film
rather weak in scope and purpose. Yet, the film is bearable, fortunate
to be in the hands of someone as deft as Clint; or else, with a lesser
director, it could have certainly sunk to an abysmally lower level,
though one wouldn't be far wrong thinking it has already sunk to that
level.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Rizzo
        In "Absolute Power", the latest entry into the ever-expanding
genre of White House scandal movies, Clint Eastwood and Gene Hackman
reteam in an attempt to duplicate the success of their Oscar-winning
masterpiece, "Unforgiven".  While it is likely that no effort could
recapture the critical and commercial praise of the first, the failure of
"Absolute Power" largely reflects upon the paths their respective careers
have taken since their first teaming.  Eastwood, while remaining one of
Hollywood's true giants, built upon his introspective performance in
"Unforgiven" with "The Bridges of Madison County", another sensitive,
mature picture which won critical raves as well as an Oscar nomination for
his costar, Meryl Streep.  Hackman, meanwhile, has moved away from the
types of roles which made him famous as well.  However, his
bad-guy-with-ideology roles in such underwhelming productions as "Extreme
Measures" and "The Chamber" have evinced no sign of a maturing performer;
rather, they seem more stale each time out.  These two patterns come
together in "Absolute Power" with unspectacular results.
        Eastwood plays Luther Whitney, and aging, recently-out-of-jail
burglar who has resumed his criminal activities.  Since he's played by
Eastwood, it goes without saying that Luther is the very best
recently-out-of-jail burglar in the business.  In the midst of robbing the
mansion of a wealthy political insider, he is interrupted by the
unexpected entrance of a couple - whom we immediately recognize as Hackman
and an unknown female acquaintance - returning from a late-night
rendezvous.  When the flirtation turns violent, the woman pulls a
knife.  At this point, two men break into the room and save the drunken,
battered Hackman.  Only then does Luther, and we the audience, realize
that the two men are Secret Service agents, the woman is the wife of the
insider, and Hackman is (surprise!) the President of the United States.
When the Chief of Staff  (a flustered Judy Davis) shows up, predictable,
the coverup goes into motion.  When the conspirators leave behind the
bloody knife ( a relatively important piece of evidence, one would think) 
Luther grabs it and escapes.  Predictably, Da visrealizes the mistake,
finds out about Luther, and decides to pin the murder on him.  Thus we
have "Absolute Power"'s biggest problem:  its highly implausible, often
ridiculous plot.  And it doesn't stop there.
        Eastwood is hereafter hounded by lonely D.C. homicide cop Ed
Harris (whose earnest performance lends the film a much-needed jolt of
credibility), who naturally suspects the involvement of the ex-convict.
Rather than flee the country, Eastwood decides to stay in Washington and
expose the coverup, unfazed by the idea of taking on the most powerful man
in the world.  Sure.  Eastwood does everything we would expect him to do,
and does it well.  He gets angry, scowls, furrows his brow, jokes about
his age, protects his estranged daughter (Laura Linney) and eludes both
the cops and the Secret Service.  In Hackman's defense, his
slimy-President character really doesn't have all that much to do, as the
overwrought plot and overabundance of name actors cut his scenes and lines
to the bare minimum.  The real bad guys here are Davis in her silly
Hillary Clinton-meets-Al Haig caricature, and the Secret Servicemen,
played by Scott Glenn and Dennis Haysbert.  Glenn, deserving of more
on-screen time as usual (see "Courage Under Fire", "Silverado", etc.)
plays the one with the conscience.  Haysbert's character, all deep voice
and sneer, is so ridiculously, cold-bloodedly evil that it stretches the
imagination to think that this man would be charged with protecting the
President of the U.S.  Eastwood's air-tight direction and his and Harris'
solid performances give you the feeling that this movie is better than it
really is, but in the end, it's a mishmash of too many characters and too
many plot-necessitated leaps of faith spoiling the already-iffy soup.

Author
Martyn C Winkler
        Absolute Power, the new film produced and directed by Clint
Eastwood, attempts to be a thriller set in the world of hypocritical
presidents and their murderous political staff. It is about as thrilling
as a lecture on the mating habits of the South American grasshopper. One
can only wonder how an utterly absurd script like the one written by
William Goldman could have ever interested Eastwood. Not only is the plot
unbelievable and contrived, but even the writing itself lacks any
consistency or intelligence. Continually underestimating the audience, the
film gives us information we already know or dont even need. Details
essential to the story are so improbably convenient they are annoying
(like why would two unprepared secret service men carry two night-vision
goggles in their car?).
        Oddly enough, the initial setup for Absolute Power offers
interesting possibilities. A masterful jewel-thief (played by Clint
Eastwood) witnesses the murder of the wife of a powerful millionaire
(played by E.G. Marshall). While robbing one of Marshalls mansions, he is
forced to hide in the bedrooms vault. There, through a two-way mirror, he
sees the wife and another man engage in passionate foreplay. Their game of
love quickly turns into a violent struggle as the man starts beating the
woman. In self defense, the woman grabs a letter-opener and stabs the man
in the elbow. She raises her arm to stab again when she is fatally shot by
two secret service men. The man? He is the president of the United States
of America.
        Where does the film go wrong? It cannot be the acting. Clint
Eastwood, Ed Harris and Gene Hackman as the president give type-cast, but
decent performances. The cinematography is sufficient; wild and erratic
during action sequences, dark and mysterious during psychologically
suspenseful scenes, and calm and warm during dramatic dialogue. Even the
music is not as bombastic as it usually tends to be in the
thriller/suspense genre.
        The fault clearly lies in the screenplay, and the screenplay
alone. While setting up a story about misuse of power, about the true
possessors of that power, and about intrigue and double-crossing, it does
not resolve it. Not one buildup of suspense is resolved by an exciting
climax. Rather, the tense situations are left dangling at the end, giving
the viewer an uneasy sense of incompleteness.
        An example of this is a very promising and tense buildup of a
scene: in an attempt to arrest Clint Eastwood, the police have set up a
trap at a small restaurant. Police officers are everywhere, incognito of
course. At the same time, not one but two hit men are preparing to kill
Clint Eastwood when he arrives. All three parties are unaware of each
others presence. This scene is tremendously exciting and the audience is
wondering how Clint Eastwood, who might suspect this is a trap, will get
himself out of this difficult position. He will probably have a brilliant
plan, involving ingenious preparations. However, when he arrives at the
trap, both hit men miss (how convenient) and in the confusion Eastwood
simply walks away. The buildup of this scene took about ten minutes. Ten
minutes of close ups of the hit men loading their weapons intercut with
the police preparing for the trap. The scene was resolved in less than 20
seconds...
        Parallel to the story line of catching the real killer is a cliche
emotional tale about the estranged relationship between father Eastwood
and his daughter. The daughter blames her father for never being there for
her, because he was either in jail or robbing a house somewhere. Of course
their relationship takes a turn for the better during the adventure and
they end up a happy family. Again, it is commendable that Absolute Power
tries to deviate from the mainstream suspense film by giving room for a
dramatic subplot. However, trying is simply not enough! The second story
line should be subtle, original and preferably unpredictable... everything
this film is not.
        How could a screenplay like Absolute Power ever get the funding to
be produced? How could Eastwood, who has successfully produced and
directed many outstanding films such as the brilliant Unforgiven, ever
believe in a project like this one? I am sad to say that my respect for
the actor/director/producer has diminished substantially due to this film.
Director Quentin Tarantino once said: "I can make a good movie out of any
bad script." Director Clint Eastwood obviously cannot.

Author
Marty Mapes
It's Clint vs. Clinton! Knowing Clint Eastwood's Republican slant,
Absolute Power is an interesting jab at the presidency and at the
current president. Gene Hackman plays President Alan Richmond, a slimy
politician who uses his power for sexual favors and official coverups.
Clint Eastwood is Luther Whitney, the "master thief" with a heart of
gold. One night while robbing a mansion, he is surprised by noises in
the supposedly empty house. He hides in a vault with a two-way mirror
and watches a man and a woman enter the bedroom. They flirt and play for
a while, then the man starts getting rough. When the woman finally gets
the upper hand the man calls for help and two other men enter and shoot
the woman dead. The scene is covered up to look like a failed burglary
attempt (which puts Luther in a tough spot, him being a burglar and
all).
The man was no less than the president of the United States, accompanied
by his chief of staff and two secret service agents. Luther feels the
heat, and considers leaving the country. But when the president uses the
dead woman's husband for PR, Luther decides to stay and fight.
The story is interesting, and it is told without all the polish and hype
of a mainstream Hollywood thriller. Eastwood is good at breaking from
the formula and this movie is helped immensely by it. For example,
Luther is interested in art and sketching. He leaves his keys in the
plant on his front porch. He is as old as Eastwood and jokes about being
in the AARP. In short: he is not the caricature that he could have been
in a worse but slicker movie. (In contrast I recall the previews for
Murder at 1600, where Wesley Snipes lands at the White House and tells
his dispatcher [with a straight face, I might add] "There's been a
murder at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue: an address that changes all the
rules.")
The movie also appears to have been made on a shoestring budget. The
credits rolled by in just a few minutes, and there were no lavish stunts
or expensive computer effects. At the time I didn't even notice, but
it's refreshing to think that good movies can still be made with only
actors, a script, and some nice locations. I won't be surprised if this
movie is much better than Murder at 1600, or if it's better because it
focused on the basics.
There is a subplot involving Luther and his daughter which feels
contrived and probably didn't need to be included. I suppose it gives
some depth to Luther's character, but their relationship was predictable
in an otherwise original movie. Luther worries about Kate's health; Kate
worries about dad's career. They are estranged at first, but going
through this conflict together reunites them. Blah blah blah.
The movie ended abruptly and left some loose ends. We know (from a TV
voice-over) what happens to many of the main characters, but we get no
time to digest that information. Rather than spending time on Kate's
life, screen time could have been better spent putting closure to some
of the smaller issues in the film.
Check out more current movie reviews at 
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Ben Hoffman
Given that the cast of ABSOLUTE POWER consists of some of our best
actors; and given that Clint Eastwood  turned out some fine films in
recent years, we have to wonder why this film is so bad.   Is Clint a
victim of the adage, "You can't win them all?"    Or is it the
improbable story of a President of The United States murdering a woman
with whom he is having a rendezvous and then having his aides involved
in a coverup? Whatever. The results are not good.
Luther Whitney (Clint Eastwood) is an expert thief, a master of
disguise (we are lead to believe. . . the disguises we see would not
fool a blind person)  who, after just getting out of prison wants to do
one final big job before retirement.   That seems like a rather stupid
reason to risk getting caught,  While in a mansion he has cased to rob,
he hears a noise and hides in a vault which just happens to have a
one-way mirror so he can see President Richmond (poor Gene Hackman is
hardly in the film)  perpetrate a murder. .  Talk about coincidence.
Once the murder is committed,  the Secret Service agent Tim Collin
(Dennis Haysbert) who is assigned to guard the President, has to
arrange getting the President out of the house and so on.  Another
agent (Scott Glenn) is also in on everything and even Gloria Russell
(Judy Davis), the President's Chief of Staff, has to save the day.
Davis has the one good role in the movie and, fine actress that she is,
she makes the most of it.
Others wasted in this nonsense are Ed Harris (a homicide detective), E.
G. Marshall (a millionaire wheeler and dealer who helped elect the
President) and Laura Linney who has the role of Luther Whitney's
daughter whom he has not seen in years . . . but that is another
story.   Ms. Linney looks very much like Helen Hunt, acts very much
like her, has her charm and even her hairdo.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Absolute Power (1997) * out of ***** - Cast:Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Ed
Harris, Scott Glenn, Judy Davis, E.G. Marshall, Laura Linney. Writer:William
Goldman. Director:Clint Eastwood.
In 1992, Clint Eastwood won a Best Director Oscar for his excellent western
"Unforgiven". The next year he followed that up by directing the equally
excellent "A Perfect World". In 1995 he received great acclaim for directing
"The Bridges of Madison County". Something has happened to Clint Eastwood.
Something bad.
"Absolute Power" is an absolute mess. The film opens with two very pointless
scenes, and then dives into the story. It seems that Eastwood is a burglar
and one night he decides to break into the house of a millionaire
(Marshall). While in the vault of the house, a drunken couple enters the
room. Eastwood is able to hide in the vault, and luckily it has a two-way
mirror so that he can see everything going on. As it turns out, the two
people are the millionaire's wife, and the President of the United States
(Hackman). As they play around with each other, the film keeps cutting to
Eastwood every three seconds so he can look disgusted. We must see this
reaction 75 times during the scene. The President then decides he's going to
slap the girl around, and then turns into a raving psychotic. He tries to
kill the girl (this is the President of the United States folks) and during
the struggle the secret service breaks into the room and kills the girl.
Eastwood now must decide whether or not to run or to try and bring down the
President of the United States.
Eastwood is also supposed to be a "master of disguises". His brilliant
disguises consist of a hat and jacket, sometimes a fake mustache. Amazingly,
even though he just looks like Clint Eastwood with a hat on, he is able to
fool people who are just 10 feet away.
Eastwood has used the same composer for his films since the mid-80s, a
person by the name of Lennie Niehaus, who is absolutely terrible. However,
in "Unforgiven", "A Perfect World", and here again in "Absolute Power"
there's about 5 minutes of really good score. Each and every time, Clint
Eastwood has composed that score himself. So why can't he do the entire
film? He obviously knows what good score is. Why he lets Niehaus compose a
boring score for each movie he makes is beyond me.
There is one decent scene in the film. It's when the cop assigned to the
case (Harris) goes to talk to Eastwood about his possible connection with
the crime. It's a very simple scene, it's just two men talking. But the two
stars seem to play off of each other well and I was hoping for more
interaction between their two characters.
The resolution of the events in the film is both unsatisfying and unclear.
But the main problem with the whole premise is that the villain of the film
is the President of the United States. It's absurd. Another problem is that
the President, being an insane psychopath, should be the main focus of the
film. He's not. Hackman is in the film for maybe 15 minutes, most of that
being the scene where he's trying to rape and kill the girl. I hope Hackman
got paid a lot of money for his cameo appearance. It's also equally absurd
that we are supposed to be rooting for Eastwood, who is also a criminal. But
I guess since he's not a violent criminal then that makes it ok.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In ABSOLUTE POWER, master jewel thief Luther Whitney (Clint
Eastwood) is not having a good day.  A billionaire has hired a hit man
to kill him, the Secret Service, acting like a third world death squad,
has their own assassin out to murder him, and the local DC police want
to arrest him for burglary and murder.
     When his estranged daughter, Kate (Laura Linney), asks him to meet
her, he suspects it's a trap but goes anyway.  You see, he is a master
of disguise and figures that he can pull it off.  Director Clint
Eastwood is a master as well, and the carefully choreographed sequence
of Luther's converging enemies is the best part of the picture.  Even
if the end result is predictable, the elements of his escape are not.
     Earlier in the film Luther pulls off a big heist at the four story
mansion of Walter Sullivan (E. G. Marshall).  While there, the
President of the United States, Alan Richmond (Gene Hackman), arrive
for a secret tryst with Walter's wife Christy (Melora Hardin).  The
president is into sex tinged with violence.  When things go awry,
Secret Service agents Bill Burton (Scott Glenn) and Tim Collin (Dennis
Haysbert) murder Christy.  The president's Chief of Staff, Gloria
Russell (Judy Davis), decides they will make it look as though a
burglar murdered Christy.  Soon the President's people and others are
out to get Luther.
     Thrillers like this hinge on the ability of the audience to buy
the story's logic.  Even if they have to suspend disbelief some, they
want it to be within some parameters of reason.  ABSOLUTE POWER pushes
these limits of credibility.  Although there are many of these
implausible events throughout the story, let me just give a couple of
early examples.
     "Your life could be a whole lot simpler if you could learn to
operate a VCR," says bartender Red (Mark Margolis) to his friend
Luther.  Since Luther can crack safes and foil sophisticated security
systems, he must smart enough to able to program his own VCR.  In this
story Luther suffers from highly selective brilliance.
     William Goldman's screenplay, based on David Baldacci's novel,
does not know where to stop.  Where along the following continuum does
plausibility go out the window?  While in office, a married President:
a) has an affair, b) has multiple affairs, c) has a staff who covers up
his affairs, d) engages in sexual harassment, e) likes violent sex,
f) has a staff who will kill for him, g) has a staff who will cover up
murder, and h) has a staff who will kill even more people for his sake.
     I usually stick to reviewing films as written, but I will break
my pattern for this movie.  They could have easily made the President's
character more credible.  He could have been having a single affair
where something went wrong, and the woman died.  The cover-up could
then have started simple but gotten out of hand without the overly
massive and sinister overtones of ABSOLUTE POWER.
     Besides the ridiculousness of the plot, some of the acting is
terrible.  Embarrassingly bad as the President, Hackman wastes his
great talent on a poorly written character.  Judy Davis overacts so
much that her part becomes a parody.  She could easily have been
replaced by Martin Short doing his comedic shtick.
     Along with the disastrous parts of the film, there are several
promising subplots.  Luther and his grown daughter Kate touch our
hearts with the possible reuniting of a dysfunctional family.  He tells
sadly her, "You're the only family I have."  To which she retorts
bitterly, "Luther, you don't have me."
     The best subplot, and regretfully the least developed one, has
Ed Harris as police Detective Seth Frank.  Detective Frank cannot
figure out all the inconsistencies in the burglary and murder at
Goldman's.  When Detective Frank first confronts Luther about the
crime, Luther tells him he could not have done it since the thief left
by scaling a four story building.  "Go down a rope in the middle of
the night?"  laughs Luther.  "If I could do that, I'd be the star of my
AARP meetings."  At the end of the interview, Luther tells him, "I've
got to go have my pacemaker checked, it has been so exciting talking
to you."
     Some of the acting is exceptional albeit relatively wasted.
Harris, Eastwood, Glenn, and Linney are all wonderful, but as soon
as you get interested in their characters, the script insults your
intelligence again.
     This frustrating film finally comes to an satisfying ending,
but one that wraps up the loose ends all too neatly.
     ABSOLUTE POWER runs too long at 2:00.  It is rated R for blood,
violence, rape, murder, and profanity.  Most teenagers should be able
to handle the picture.  (We were astounded that there was a 5 or 6 year
old girl behind us.  Imagine being that young and seeing a woman raped
and murdered on an enormous screen right in front of your young eyes.
What kind of parents would subject their child to that?)  The film gets
a mixed review from me, but the good slightly outweighs the bad so I
give it thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Columbia/Castle Rock)
Starring:  Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Ed Harris, Laura Linney, Scott
Glenn, Judy Davis, Dennis Haysbert, E. G. Marshall.
Screenplay:  William Goldman, based on the novel by David Baldacci.
Producers:  Clint Eastwood, Karen Spiegel.
Director:  Clint Eastwood.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, sexual situations)
Running Time:  120 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     When we first encounter Luther Whitney (Clint Eastwood) in ABSOLUTE
POWER, he is sitting in an art gallery sketching hands and eyes from
paintings in one of those slow, silent moments characteristic of an
Eastwood-directed film.  Whitney, it turns out, is a professional thief,
and when he breaks into a massive house with walls covered in art, we
expect him to begin snaring the paintings.  Instead, he finds a walk-in
vault where he begins clearing out jewels, coins and cash.  At that
moment, you may be tempted to break into a slight smile, impressed that
Eastwood has merely fleshed out his character under the guise of plot
development.  Perhaps, you think, this won't be just another plot-driven
conspiracy thriller.  Perhaps three-dimensional characters are going to
make it something special.
     Just wait sixty seconds.  The events in ABSOLUTE POWER revolve around
what happens while Luther is in that vault, staring through one-way glass
at the two people who show up in the middle of the robbery.  One of them
is Christy Sullivan (Melora Hardin), wife of Washington power broker
Walter Sullivan (E. G. Marshall); the other is Alan Richmond, who happens
to be rather powerful in his own right -- he is the President of the
United States.  Both Christy and Richmond are drunk, their sex play gets
rough, and just as she is about to stab the President with a letter opener
Christy is blown away by two Secret Service men (Scott Glenn and Dennis
Haysbert).  Luther manages to escape, but the President's people know
there was a witness.  As they try to find Luther, the design a cover-up of
the murder as the result of a botched robbery, making Luther a prime
suspect.  And thus begins the plotboiler.
     Almost any other director would have taken this material and made it
a big, dumb Hollywood thriller -- and frankly, that probably would have
been the best thing for it.  Eastwood is a director with a precise control
over the details of his films, but in ABSOLUTE POWER he spends so much
time fussing over those details that he fails to notice that the story is
completely absurd.  Luther is able to take perfect photos of his estranged
daughter Kate (Laura Linney) without being noticed, but he does a complete
sketch of the Sullivan estate before robbing it; the President's tough
Chief-of-Staff (Judy Davis) turns into a giggling schoolgirl when she
thinks the President has given her a diamond necklace, then has a
conversation with him about the cover-up while they are dancing in front
of hundreds of people at a state dinner.  While Eastwood is able to
construct clockwork sequences like an ambush at a coffee shop, he doesn't
seem to care that, like much of what goes on in ABSOLUTE POWER, it is
resolved through pure coincidence.
     Even the casting manages to get in the way, specifically the casting
of Hackman as Richmond.  The press notes for ABSOLUTE POWER boast of
Hackman's career that "there is no such thing as a 'Gene Hackman role,'"
but that simply isn't true.  Hackman has gotten stuck in a rut as the
arrogant authority figure, and there is nothing to discover in his
performance.  It is also hard to figure out how the pathetic, libidinous
drunkard of that opening scene becomes the take-charge whip-cracker, or
why his press conference in support of his grieving friend Sullivan
demonstrates such a lousy poker face you wonder what kind of politician
this guy could possibly be.  The script, by the legendary William Goldman,
does offer a few nice touches and typically snappy dialogue, and Ed Harris
plays the detective investigating the murder as a courtly and respectful
spin on the usual foul-mouthed cop.  When a central character seems to be
a different person from scene to scene, however, those little details lose
a lot of their charm.
     That brings us to Eastwood's Luther Whitney, as baffling a screen
character as I can recall.  Eastwood's acting has grown more interesting
with the passing years, more relaxed and subtle, but he has devoted nearly
every ounce of energy in the creation of ABSOLUTE POWER to making his own
character sympathetic.  A pivotal moment in ABSOLUTE POWER finds Luther
catching the President's hypocritical press conference on television just
as he is preparing to flee the country, and deciding at that moment to
stay and fight the power.  Never mind that before that scene we had no
indication that Whitney even knew the man in the Sullivan house was the
President; in fact, the scene plays funnier and more interesting if
Whitney is such a recluse that he doesn't even know what the President
looks like.  But everything is subjugated to giving Luther the moral high
ground, making him a doting father and a good citizen with a handful of
quirky traits.  I'm willing to grant the conceit that Whitney is a
master of disguise even though it doesn't seem particularly necessary for
a sneak thief -- maybe he needed a hobby when he tired of sketching the
Old Masters in the Smithsonian -- but ABSOLUTE POWER lost me when it
became clear that this man who could disarm any security system in the
world couldn't program a VCR for his alibi.  Eastwood has turned out a
film which doesn't make a shred of sense, but at least we understand that
Luther was just an ordinary Joe Six-Pack who was stealing a million
dollars in jewels when he witnessed the President commit a sexy murder.

Author
Andrew Campbell
1997
Directed by Clint Eastwood
Screenplay by William Goldman, from the novel by David Baldacci
Starring Clint Eastwood, Laura Linney, Gene Hackman, Scott Glenn, E.G.
Marshall, Judy Davis, Ed Harris
Running Time approx. 2 hrs. 5 minutes
Clint Eastwood is a consummate professional whose efficiency as both an
actor and director are virtually unparalleled in the business of
Hollywood.  He's fairly consistent as well- does anybody really remember
'Pink Cadillac' or 'The Rookie'?
Clint's latest, 'Absolute Power,' in which he serves as both director
and star, also wrapped under time and under budget.  Plucked from the
galleys to be adapted for the big screen even before it was published as
a novel, the film has a plot of the sort that makes conspiracy-theory
lovers drool.  Written by veteran , Oscar-winning scribe William Goldman
of 'Misery' and 'Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid,' it features a
stellar supporting cast, some tight editing and thoroughly professional
performances.  This, in fact, is the least that can be expected of a
Hollywood picture, especially one with as much pedigree as there is
here; unfortunately, there's not much more.
The premise is shocking:  a burglar (Eastwood) witnesses a murder and
subsequent coverup involving none other than the President of the United
States.  So far, so plausible.  The first twenty minutes, like Clint's
best efforts, are spare, taut, gripping.  From there out, however, the
tension dissolves into a jumbled-up mess of chases,
reconciliation/revelation scenes, Dirty Harryish one-liners, one
contrived set piece so obviously shot on a studio backlot as to defy
credibility entirely, plus a campy, grossly miscalculated Presidential
tango sequence that takes the cake as far as implausibility goes.
Laura Linney (who was cast in part, undoubtedly, due to her resemblance
to Eastwood's daughter Alison) is the thief's estranged lawyer daughter,
and the director's interest obviously resides in this relationship,
making their scenes together, while unremarkable, rooted and
believable.  This kind of story, however, with its far-reaching
implications and intrigue, requires a larger canvas than Eastwood wants
to use.  Neither he nor the screenplay are interested in examining the
motivations for any of the perephrial characters; instead, character and
plot details are explained away in dialog, if they are at all.  Scott
Glenn, Judy Davis, Dennis Haysbert and Gene Hackman are the
conspirators, and each registers as type more than as understandable
characters- the conscience, the bitch, the coldblood, the hardass,
respectively (Hackman=92s performance could be taken from any number of
his last few films).  There may have been scenes left on the cutting
room floor, but one suspects they truly didn't have that much to do.=20
Only Ed Harris (particularly in a terrific, tensely playful exchange
over lunch with Eastwood's thief), registers as a specific human being,
while E.G. Marshall, as the President=92s benefactor, gets asked to be
little more than old.  It's as if Lord Acton's phrase ('Absolute power
corrupts absolutely') serves as the subtext of the film by default, and
that leaves =91Absolute Power=92 resembling not much more than an expensi=
ve
second-rate TV movie- which it probably would have been without the
names attached to it here. =20
The idea of a corrupt President isn't so far fetched, of course, but it
doesn=92t go without saying, and the film panders to the lowest regard of
its audience for government and political power without revealing
anything new or remotely interesting about the nature of power or, at
the least, the nature of the people of the film.  (Why does Eastwood=92s
burglar return to thieving?  What makes Haysbert=92s Secret Serviceman a
ruthless assassin, while Scott Glenn=92s has a tortured conscience?)  All
of this makes a movie uninteresting, but at its worst, 'Absolute Power'
indulges the more base instinct of the audience, glossing over
interesting questions of responsibility and national security (not to
mention the corrupting nature of power) with movie conventions.  This is
one of those pictures with intended lines and moments of humor which, if
you catch yourself laughing and stop to think, isn't funny at all; it's
a sinking feeling to know that the filmmaker has taken the easy route,
letting the audience off the hook.  Only the professionalism of
Eastwood, his fellow actors and the film=92s technicians make 'Absolute
Power' watchable.
