Title
Review for Come Blow Your Horn (1963)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Come Blow Your Horn" was an early, semi-autographical
Broadway success for playwright Neil Simon.  Norman
Lear, later of 1970s sitcom fame, wrote the screenplay.
Commercial success and critical acceptance were assured
when Frank Sinatra took the lead role.  Sinatra sings
the title song, but it is the only musical number.
"Come Blow Your Horn" is a comedy, with comfortable,
familiar characters and predictable plot turns.
Sinatra's presence is the film's chief asset: he gives
an excellent performance.
The story has 21-year-old Buddy (Tony Bill) leaving
home to live with his swinging, womanizing older brother
Alan (Sinatra).  Alan's conquests include dumb-dumb
blonde Peg (Jill St. John) and the smarter, more
troublesome Connie (Barbara Rush).  Alan teaches
Buddy the ropes, perhaps too well, as Buddy becomes
a more aggressive and successful hedonist than Alan
ever was.  Meanwhile, Alan is pressured into settling
down by Connie, his father, and even his brother, who
tells him that his swinging days are over.
None of the characters in "Come Blow Your Horn" will
surprise you.  They are all chosen from a familiar
set of light comedy stereotypes: the bellowing father
(Lee J. Cobb), the housekeeping-obsessed mother (Molly
Picon), the stupid blonde, the classy woman demanding
marriage, the swinging bachelor, the beefy jealous husband
(Dan Blocker), etc.  A recurring gag is somebody
unexpected at the door.  Buddy makes jarring character
transitions from innocent freeloader to smarmy con
artist, then back again.  Sinatra is old enough to
be Buddy's father.
Still, the patient viewer will find a few good jokes.
Dean Martin has a cameo as a wino, and Sinatra does
a brief impersonation of John F. Kennedy.  Cobb, a
highly successful veteran character actor ("On the
Waterfront") is well-cast as the blustering, foreign
born father.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
