Title
Review for Meet the Deedles (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Matt Williams
Part buddy comedy, part fish-out-of-water story, part nature tale, Meet
the Deedles is not nearly as interesting as any of those archetypes. In
fact, it is an invitation you ought to disregard.
Phil and Stew Deedle (Paul Walker and Steve Van Wormer) are the twin
sons of the famous millionaire, Elton Deedle (Eric Braeden), founder of
Deedle Enterprises.  Elton wants his sons to be the perfect heirs to his
fortune...instead the two are careless Hawaiian surf bums.  To set them
straight, he enrolls them into a strict Wyoming boot camp, to which the
pair inevitably go.
After several misadventures in Wyoming, where the duo is stunned to
discover there's no surf, the brothers Deedle stumble upon a routine
mistaken identity plot.  They arrive at Yellowstone National Park, where
they are believed to be two new park ranger recruits.  Rather than
slinking back home and disappointing their dad, the Deedles play along.
Phil, actually, has other motives:  the beautiful park ranger Jesse (A.
J. Langer), who unfortunately happens to be the beloved stepdaughter of
the overprotective Park Ranger Captain Douglas Pine (John Ashton).
Yellowstone has a problem.  It's only a week before the famous geyser
Old Faithful celebrates its one billionth birthday, and the park is
being overrun with prairie dogs.  Not just one or two...thousands of
them. The Deedles are assigned to eliminate the P.Dog menace, not
knowing that it all is part of a fiendish plan by disgraced former Head
Ranger Frank Slater (Dennis Hopper).
The Brothers Deedle aren't supposed to be out-and-out stupid, like the
team from Dumb and Dumber, or Bill and Ted.  Instead, their brains just
operate in a different, simpler, realm.  A more accurate comparison
would be  with Carrot Top in Chairman of the Board, a film which,
unfortunately, this one resembles in several hideous ways.
The central problem with Meet the Deedles is that it simply just isn't
funny.  There's a moment when Phil utters the line, "Insert Laugh Here",
which nearly sums up the entire Meet the Deedles experience.
The result isn't bad in a run-shrieking-from-the-theater type of way.
Instead, it's merely bad in an excruciatingly boring sort of way. The
cast seems decent, but they're never asked to do anything remotely
interesting.  Instead, the film inundates the audience with countless
shots of people and/or cars rolling downhill in the forest, and with
constant annoying references to other Disney films.
You'll have much better luck finding a good spot to surf in Wyoming than
finding entertainment in Meet the Deedles.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Walt Disney spent over thirty years turning the Disney name into the
gold standard for charming family entertainment.  In only a handful of
months, the clown princes currently ruling the Magic Kingdom appear to
have made it their mission to make the name an indicator of pure garbage.
The annual animated feature aside, Uncle Walt's factory has taken to
churning out insulting, embarrassing live-action features which stink like
the flatulence they so often feature:  101 DALMATIANS, THAT DARN CAT,
ROCKET MAN, MR. MAGOO, KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE and now MEET THE DEEDLES.
     The story this time revolves around a pair of ne'er-do-well teenage
brothers, Phil (Paul Walker) and Stew Deedle (Steve Van Wormer), who spend
all their time surfing and slacking in Hawaii because their Dad is filthy
rich.  When Pa Deedle (Eric Braeden) finally grows tired of his layabout
sons, he sends them off to Wyoming for a character-building camp
experience.  A few misadventures and cases of mistaken identity later, the
young Deedles are rangers-in-training at Yellowstone National Park,
charged with ridding the park of a prairie dog infestation threatening to
undermine -- literally -- the Billionth Birthday Celebration for Old
Faithful.
     Predictably, a bunch of tenuously connected action-slapstick
sequences ensue.  Even more predictably, those action-slapstick sequences
include a dose of content entirely inappropriate for the target audience.
At best, we're talking about taking the toilet humor in the creative
direction of incontinent pigeons bombarding the Deedles'
stuffy-but-ultimately-sympathetic antagonist Chief Ranger Pine (played by
career stuffy-but-ultimately-sympathetic antagonist John Ashton).  At
worst, we're talking about the omnipresent smack-in-the-groin shot.  I'm
sure MEET THE DEEDLES is going to have plenty of pre-teenagers in
hysterics.  It's just depressing to watch the same Disney which used to
bring kids goofy, harmless fare like THE LOVE BUG and THE MILLION DOLLAR
DUCK resorting to such blantant pandering.
     An important programming note at this point:  in no way do I consider
myself "above" low humor.  In Mel Brooks' HIGH ANXIETY, a similar barrage
of pigeon excrement during his parody of THE BIRDS still makes me guffaw.
The problem with films like MEET THE DEEDLES is that they trot out
scatological gags with a weary inevitability, as though it wouldn't really
be a kids' film unless someone let one rip.  All of which makes it even
more puzzling when scripter Jim Herzfeld tosses in a reference to "suicide
doctor" Jack Kervorkian, which of course would be familiar to every
headline-hungry middle-schooler.  If that's Herzfeld's idea of throwing a
bone to the parents forced to squirm through this mess with their kids,
perhaps a better one might have been making the slang-spewing Deedles a
bit more than one-joke copies of Bill and Ted.  Or giving Dennis Hopper
(as the vengeance-seeking former ranger running the prairie dog scheme) a
sense of irony about his own performance.  Or providing a way to explain
to young girls why a competent female ranger (A.J. Langer) turns to mush
when an 18-year-old moron woos her with sweet nothings about how he
"totally craves (her) wave."
     MEET THE DEEDLES didn't have to be smart.  There's a place in our
multiplexes for dopey-but-innocuous family fare.  The key word there would
be "innocuous."  If Disney execs are interested in salvaging what remains
of the studio's reputation -- and its dignity -- they might stop for just
one moment to think about what Uncle Walt might say.  That is, what he
might say after he picked his jaw up off the floor and stopped slapping
the responsible parties insensible.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Perhaps the most disturbing thing about a film as painfully awful as
Meet the Deedles is that there are people in this world who thought
conscious members of the human race would enjoy it.  I typically don't
find low humor entertaining, but I can tell when it's been done with a
little bit of intelligence.  Meet the Deedles is not intelligent, nor is
it funny, entertaining, or bearable in even the loosest sense of the
word.  
See, it's about these two brothers, Stuart and Phil Deedle (Paul Walker
and Steve Van Wormer).  They're a couple of surf bums who live in Hawaii
with their rich father.  One day, they get kicked out of school for
missing a day, so their father sends them away to a camp in Wyoming to
make men out of them.
But wait, all of this setup is useless, because when they get to
Wyoming, there's a big mountain man-looking fellow there who claims that
the camp was his but that the government took it away from him.  So,
after an elaborate escape from him, the Deedles end up taking a couple
of women's clothes to wear; at this point, they skateboard down the
mountain and crash land in the offices of Yellowstone park, where they
are subsequently mistaken for the two women whose clothes they stole. 
They are recruited to be park rangers-in-training, and their job is to
solve the prairie dog problem that is consuming the entire park.
See, the prairie dogs are present because a psycho (Dennis Hopper)
hates the head park ranger (John Ashton) and wants to make him look bad
by destroying Old Faithful (a geyser).  Somebody sat down at their
computer one day and said, "I think I'll write a brainless movie about a
couple of surfers who go to camp, but then go to be park rangers."  Meet
the Deedles is the product of this line of thinking.  
The film starts off terrible, with the brothers getting pulled out of
bed on their birthday and then being forced by a bunch of friends to
parasail.  But, when the school police man (the school police in Hawaii
apparently use boats) tracks them down, they outsmart him by flying over
him and making him wipe out.  This moment is poorly filmed and boring,
and pointless, and it's hard to do the stupidity of the stunt justice in
words:  it needs to be seen.
The whole film, really, is as bad.  It never let up, and it never got
funny.  The film also resorts to toilet humor, which I never like in any
situation.  Feces and flatulence should be reserved for . . . anything
other than movies.  The toilet humor makes its way into this film
because the Deedles use a high-powered laxative to get the prairie dogs
out, but it's in gas form so it goes into the air where birds can breath
it, and then quickly dump their waste on the head park ranger.  
Walker and Van Wormer are innocuous, and I can at least say that they
are not to blame for this heinous disaster.  They play their
character-less characters competently, but the material is just too
awful to accept.  A.J. Langer, whom I like, manages to make her lines
sound good, but she is wasted.  And Dennis Hopper, as I'm sure you can
imagine, doesn't give his all as this particular psycho.  
I'm trying to think . . . I know there was one thing I laughed at in
the movie.  Well, I can't remember.  I do remember, however, that writer
James Herzfeld throws in a lot of jokes that only adults who keep up on
current events would understand.  Too bad they aren't funny, but that's
not the real problem--the target audience for Meet the Deedles are boys
between ten and thirteen (I'm guessing).  There were two kids sitting in
front of me in the film, and they were squirming silently the entire
film.  Two guys my age were behind me, and they expressed their distaste
after the film was over.  The only guy laughing also found the bird
feces funny, so he doesn't count.
I thought Disney used to make good films.  The last three I've seen
from them--Krippendorf's Tribe, Flubber, and now Meet the Deedles--are
all bad films.  But they aren't just bad:  they're offensive,
audience-insulting garbage.  Meet the Deedles is a film that should
appeal to no one.  It lacks even a hint of the self-consciousness that
is required for a stupid film to simultaneously be funny and at least
somewhat intelligent.  And, as I said, intelligence is not one of its
strong points.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As the twin surfer dudes, Stew and Phil Deedle, lay bandaged and
unconscious in the hospital, Phil comes to first and chooses the
coolest way to wake his brother.  Yanking out his IV, he uses it like a
water pistol to soak his brother's face.  This bit of lame physical
humor is typical of Disney's MEET THE DEEDLES, a movie more to be
endured that watched.  (I stopped looking at my wife during the
screening, since every time I did, she'd start sticking her finger in
her throat.  And she's right, it is that bad.)
     Directed without any imagination by Steve Boyum, whose long
background in film is mainly in stunts and in second unit direction,
the film limps along at best.  Boyum attempts to keep the pace moving
by staging stunts, stunts and more stunts.  Amazingly for someone with
his background, he seems incapable of finding any fresh ones, and we
have a car go off the road five different times -- maybe more.  But
who's counting?
     And then there is the script by James Herzfeld, whose only other
film, TAPEHEADS from a decade ago, was so awful that it is considered a
cult classic.  MEET THE DEEDLES, however, is painfully bad rather than
laughably bad.  It will probably be in and out of the theaters like a
tornado and is in no danger of becoming a classic anything.  Herzfeld
treats us to gratingly abysmal dialog that includes "Your geyser's a
geezer," and "I'd like to put a Deedle in her haystack."
     As the movie opens, the twins, who at one point describe
themselves modestly as "a walking Kodak moment," are celebrating their
18th birthday.  As they ride a parasail high above the waters of
Waikiki, a truant officer pursues them on his jet ski.  As heirs to the
fabulous fortune of the Deedle empire, the boys are sent by their
father to Camp Broken Spirit at Yellowstone to transform the two
laid-back beach bums into men.
     As they arrive in their wetsuits in Yellowstone, they've got their
surfboards, skateboards, and a Hawaiian drink machine the size of an
armoire.  Their camp has gone out of business, but they are mistaken
for new Park Rangers.  The rest of the movie has them fighting the
park's overpopulation of prairie dogs as well as a deranged ex-ranger,
played by Dennis Hopper, who is out to stop Old Faithful before its
billionth birthday celebration, scheduled for later in the week.
Hopper, who has made some wonderful movies, CARRIED AWAY being a recent
favorite, does have a propensity for choosing some truly odoriferous
material.  This isn't his worst acting, but MEET THE DEEDLES is
arguably the worst movie he's ever been in.
     Steve Van Wormer and Paul Walker, as Stew and Phil, give lifeless
performances.  The only actor in the movie with any demonstrable talent
is a cute little prairie dog named Petey.
     Even the cinematography by David Hennings is so prosaic that it
manages to make Yellowstone look dull.  To add insult to injury,
Hennings is fond of inappropriate close-ups, which only serve to remind
us of the inanity of the dialog.  Put a ten-foot pair of lips on the
screen, and you naturally pay extra attention to what is said.
     Although Boyum says in the notes that he is proud that his film is
appropriate for families, one wonders how many skateboarders will
attempt the movie's stunt of lying on your back on a skateboard while
negotiating a busy and twisting mountain road.  They make it look like
so much fun that I'm sure many will try some variation of the stunt.
     "How could this possibly be worst," asks Phil.  Just when you
suspect it can't, the movie takes a turn further downhill.  Its low
point may have you looking for an airline barf bag.  After Phil's
girlfriend digs up a big mount of moist soil, they suck in a long worm.
Like the two dog lovers eating spaghetti in LADY AND THE TRAMP, their
lips finally meet in a kiss.  As they pull back, their faces are full
of the dirt that encased the worm they have just ingested.
     MEET THE DEEDLES runs about an hour and a half.  It is rated PG
for a little bathroom humor and would be acceptable for kids around 6
and up.
     My son Jeffrey and his friend Nickolas, both almost 9, gave the
show ***.  They both thought the scenes with Petey were among their
favorites.  Nickolas also mentioned the scene in which the circus bear
drives a jeep, and Jeffrey especially liked the one in which the circus
elephant was referred to as Dumbo.
