Title
Review for Splendor (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Splendor
Rated [R], 93 minutes
Starring Kathleen Robertson, Johnathon Schaech, Matt Keeslar,
Kelly MacDonald and Eric Mabius
Written and Directed by Gregg Araki
A threesome is about all that Splendor has in common with last year's
Two Girls and A Guy, but the symmetry of words was just too damn
attractive to dismiss. And, no, the girls didn't do each other in 2
Girls and the guys don't do each other in Splendor,
writer/producer/director/editor Gregg Araki's far lighter and funnier
flick. That's more comparison than I'm supposed to do, so let's move on.
Poor, bedraggled, dateless starving actor Veronica (Kathleen Robertson)
is lugged to a Halloween rave by her vicious and nasty lesbian best
friend Mike (Kelly MacDonald) who has the hots for a singer in the band.
[Costuming: V's a tampon. M's the tampon box. They're glued together. Go
figure]. Veronica is having a perfectly awful time, not expecting to
meet her Prince Charming but . . . there he is. PC is Abel (Johnathon
Schaech), a polite, handsome, freelance rock critic dorkily dressed as
Prince Charming. It's love at first sight, and the visuals lack only
floating animated hearts and cupids to make it, well, in keeping with
the twisted and very funny nature of the story to be. For just as V and
her PC share their first embrace, the band takes the stage. Behind the
drum kit is Zed (Matt Keeslar), properly described as having "the face
of an angel and the abs of an underwear model." We'll discover that he,
too, is struck, so, what's a gal to do when faced with the daunting
prospect of two perfect, although diametrically opposite, potential
dates?
Hell, do 'em both, says Mike. Which is a perfectly logical thing to do
at age 22. (Hell, it's a perfectly logical thing to do at age 40, though
it's a helluva lot harder on the knees, says Cranky.) It's a very funny
situation, one which could drag on for at least twoor three seasons of a
teevee sitcom, except that this is the movies and the animal vs.
intellectual battle plays out better in small spaces. As in 3 people in
one oversized apartment that none of them can afford. It works for
Friends and it works for Splendor, and we haven't even gotten to the
kink in this considerably less than kinky relationship. His name is
Ernest. He's a director on one of Veronica's jobs. You can guess his
background just by looking at the demographics of our principals. I'll
make it easier by ruling out old, fat and ugly and leave the rest of the
story to your imagination, 'cuz I've said too much.
And what is it about Splendor that has made me say too much?
Interestingly enough, the scenes of the threesome and/or Veronica with
her friend Mike are all so beautiful designed and photographed that
Cranky started thinking, "this looks like a Gap commercial as if shot on
a set designed by whoever did Friends." The digs are too big and they're
overdesigned up the wazoo -- totally gorgeous, magnificent setpieces.
Nothing realistic about any of it, but I can live with that fairy tale
feeling (Veronica did drop the Prince Charming/ Knight on Shining Armor
reference into the descriptive dialog that frames the film as a
flashback), so let's give a proper credit goes to Production Designer
Patti Podesta who did fine work. Here's the interesting thing. The
scenes with Ernest, the super-rich director dude are all grainy, with
the look of a 16mm documentary. Sure enough, DP Jim Fealy has shot both
commercials and documentaries. So what's the point of this divergent
paragraph?
The point is that if the film story were strong enough, Cranky would not
have been distracted by the set design and photography. Again, both are
marvelous. But both draw attention from the story and the story is what
counts. So points off for distraction.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Splendor, he would have paid...
Rental level for this old fart. If I were back in the post-college to
pre-yuppie days, Splendor would've passed nicely as a dateflick. It's
light and funny and most of what you see feels fairly realistic if you
buy the reasoning behind the menage.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Gregg Araki is best known as the writer/director of the `Teen
Apocalypse Trilogy'; three films (`The Living End', `The
Doom Generation' and `Nowhere') which predicted the end of
life as we know it. Araki, who usually lets his style undermine his
substance, quietly triumphs with `Splendor', an upbeat,
sparkling comedy about a woman trying to make her menage a trois
relationship work.
The plotline and mood of `Splendor' are a refreshing change from
the over the top nihilism of Araki's first few films, but it still
features his best asset: his colorful, inventive portrayal of Los
Angeles in the not too distant future.
Kathleen Robertson, a former `Beverly Hills, 90210' beauty who
was discovered by Araki for `Nowhere', plays the twenty-ish
Veronica with a perfect mixture of sweetness, vulnerability and
confidence. One Halloween night, she meets Abel (Johnathon Schaech), a
fun music critic, and Zed (Matt Keeslar), a sexy, dimwitted drummer.
Veronica begins to date both simultaneously, and is attracted to each
of them equally. She decides that it would be a good idea to let them
know the situation, and a metaphorical boxing match ensues.  But
slowly, through their love for Veronica, they relinquish their
selfishness and share her. Before long, both have moved in, and are
sharing a bed.
Meanwhile, Veronica, also a starving actress, lands a role in a
terrible TV movie, and the director, Ernest (Eric Mabius), starts to
put the moves on her. Veronica has no real feelings for him, but she
realizes that she craves financial stability. The next day, she learns
of her pregnancy, and she thinks about giving her child the life she
never had. Abel and Zed, who are each penniless, aren't too
surprised when she leaves them for Ernest. But conscience creeps up on
her, and she has to decide between a life of luxury and stability and
one of love and spontaneity.
Kathleen Robertson is amazing! As the lead character, she almost
singlehandedly carries the film, and evokes the splendor of the
title. Schaech and Keeslar are around mostly to look good and act
dumb, but they manage to make their characters quite charming.
Gregg Araki doesn't go for too much with this film, which is a
welcome relief and helps `Splendor' shine. His screenplay is
snappy, though not as good as James Toback's similarly themed
`Two Girls And A Guy'. `Splendor' is slight, instead of
edgy, and that making it quite a pleasant diversion.
`Splendor' has a brighter outlook on life than Araki's
previous work, which is surprising since it is his last film before
the new millennium. The quirky assurance that a three person
relationship could work may make this a hit with the indie crowd.
Araki has a knack for finding talented young actors. Famous faces such
as Ryan Phillippe, Heather Graham, Rose McGowan, Christina Applegate
and Mena Suvari all owe much to Araki's clever casting. His highly
entertaining, offbeat and emotionally hollow `Nowhere', for
example, features one of the best teenage casts I've ever seen.
Gregg Araki may be veering towards the mainstream, but
`Splendor' is his most accomplished work to date. More so, it is
the film that establishes Kathleen Robertson as a performer to watch.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some decades ago Freud made his most notorious pronouncement, "What
do women want?" Since then writers and movie-makers have obliged with
their answers.  We seem never to get over the idea that what the
female of the species wants is a gentle Prince Charming, a guy who
will take her to his condo in Maui for a weekend, get her a job in the
film he's making, surprise her with a 3-carat diamond and whisk her
off to the altar, a honeymoon in Tahiti, and a happy life ever ever
after.  He'll also remember--without being asked--to put the toilet
seat down after he uses it. This may work for some but the idea that
not all women are enamored of this ideal is nothing new.  Seventy-odd
years ago Noel Coward challenged Prince Charming in his "Design for
Living," a play about a menage a trois focussing on a woman who lives
with a painter, then selects the painter's playwright friend, finally
marrying a third guy, a stuffy, financially successful fellow with
whom she soon grows bored.  Deciding that the conventional life is not
for her, she bolts from her stifling union and heads for the sunset
with her two unpredictable bohemians.  Coward is all but saying
society be damned: do what makes you happy and not what your
traditional parents tell you is appropriate.
   Filmmaker Gregg Araki is obviously inspired by this modern
stage classic in fashioning his current offering, "Splendor."
Araki is known to a generation of teens for his anarchic
"Totally F***ed Up" (about a gang of gay, alienated L.A. kids
who hang out, talk about sex, and complain about
homophobia) and for his breakthrough film "The Living End"
(a road movie about two twenty-something gays who similarly
rage about their circumstances).  This time, Araki considers
the plight of a band of heteros of entirely diverse personalities
who make choices and learn to cope with the difficulties
inherent in their options.
   A zany, postmodern treatment that may suggest the
screwballs comedies of the 1930s, "Splendor" features
Kathleen Robertson ("Dog Park," "I Woke Up Early the Day I
Died") as Veronica, a pretty, promiscuous 23-year-old who
has fled her small town for the life of a temp in L.A. and who
hangs out with an irritating best friend, Mike (Kelly
Macdonald) who recalls the exasperating Mari Hoff of Mark
Herman's "Little Voice."  Almost simultaneously meeting a
witty music critic and unpublished novelist, Abel (Johnathon
Schaech) and the brainless but muscular sexual athlete Zed
(Matt Keeslar), she falls in love with both and develops a
solution to the dilemma.  She comes clean to her two
boyfriends, generates a diabolical party game to get the two
together, and sets both suitors up in her apartment where
they learn to overcome their jealous rivalry and become a
cohesive team.  Becoming weary of their slacker ways and
inability to make even a minimum wage, she walks out on
them and takes up with a handsome and rich but terminally
nerdish TV director, the appropriately named Ernest (Eric
Mabius), who tries to overcome their lack of chemistry by
giving her a role in a his drama, taking her on a whirwind
courtship to his condo in Maui, and presenting her with an
immense diamond ring.  
   Much of the comedy during this latter period comes from
the arrangement made between former rivals Abel and Zed
who--unlike Leo and Otto in the Noel Coward comedy--
continue to live together in Veronica's flat, mutually
whimpering about the pitiful hand they'd been dealt.
The scenes are divided by straight-at-camera narrations by
Veronica, Woody Allen style, as she summarizes events to
date and--completely absorbed in herself--informs us and
also her friend Mike about her thoughts, feelings, and hopes
for the future.
   "Splendor" is a thin, one-premise comedy without
the polished wit of the Noel Coward play that inspired the
script.  Still, Araki has taken a substantial step forward from
his violent, anarchic previous works to assert his take on the
old French theme of the menage a trois.  Women in the
audience are likely to root for the continuance of the
threesome in spite of themselves, as the wholly
compassionate new man in her life, Ernest, looks awfully
good for someone faced by Veronica's predicament.  Araki
films the production with bold, comic-book colors that should
appeal to MTVers as well as to adult looking for a zany, yet
seasoned comedy, though some in the audience may hope
for a break from the terminal frivolity of the enterprise.  The
choices that Veronica makes in the concluding scenes seem
impractical: we wonder how long she can remain deliriously
happy, a woman who seems not to have learned any lessons
from her experiences.  The acting is uniformly appropriate
though Johnathon Schaech has been seen to better
advantage in the off-the-wall "Welcome to Woop Woop."  A
hip sound track with works by The London Suede, Lush, and
Everything but the Girl.
