Title
Review for Baby Geniuses (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
Some comedies are not funny no matter how hard they try, but BABY
GENIUSES, easily one of the worst films in years, doesn't even try that
often.  Directed by Bob Clark (PORKY'S and PORKY'S 2), the film is a
flat as the flat line on a heart monitor when the patient has died,
something this comatose picture does in the very beginning.
The plot revolves around a secret experimental lab for toddlers run by
Elena Kinder.  I regret to inform you that a woman who has taken the
name of the once talented Kathleen Turner plays Elena Kinder.  This
would-be Kathleen Turner overacts with such abandon that her performance
could only work in a parody, which this movie isn't.  She is aided by a
overly serious guy named Heep, who is played by someone having the same
name as Christopher Lloyd from the BACK TO THE FUTURE series.
Although the movie is shot in ugly, dark and sinister tones that would
befit a horror movie about demonic babies, the movie does not
intentionally try to scare us.  The actors, who drone with all the
emotive power of someone reading the phonebook, do get to participate in
a few comic sketches, with repetitive injuries of the gonads being the
most common.
The moronic script by the writing committee of Steven Paul, Francisca
Matos, Robert Grasmere, Bob Clark and Greg Michael is an insult to human
intelligence.  The on-going joke in the movie is that the viewers get to
understand baby talk.  And what do these almost 2-year-old "babies"
actually say to each other?  Well, they discuss the "Jerry Springer
Show" and theories for reducing a family's disposable income.  These
toddlers are among the most unfunny in the history of cinema.
"You idiots!  You imbeciles!  You morons!" Kinder screams at her
employees.  You may feel like yelling those exact words at the screen.
BABY GENIUSES runs 1:34.  It is rated PG for some profanity, sexual
innuendo and comic fist fighting violence and would be acceptable for
most ages.
My son Jeffrey, almost 10, liked the characters and gave the movie ***.
His friend Jessica, almost 10, thought the movie was really cute and
gave it ***.  Her brother George, age 7, especially liked the baby
karate part and gave the movie ***.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
An experience like Baby Geniuses can have certain effects on an average
moviegoer. You may be scarred for life after seeing this petrified piece
of garbage, which is so disarmingly horrible that it may cause you to
ponder it's Hollywood existence.
When I think of the screenwriters behind this film, I picture a room
full of monkeys. The monkeys are pounding on their typewriters while
scratching themselves. All of the monkeys combine their efforts, hop in
a cab and take the finished product downtown to director Bob Clark's
office. The designated monkey explains the plot by jumping up and down
on Clark's desk while flailing his arms and shrieking. The director
appears to be deep in thought, until he slams his fist down on the
desktop and exclaims `I LOVE IT!!!'
The writing behind this project is embarrassing. For your amusement, I
will explain the plot. Dr. Kinder (Kathleen Turner) and Dr. Heep
(Christopher Lloyd) are two of the cold-hearted executives at the Baby
Geniuses Institute, where peculiar studies are going on. As the story
goes, there is an ancient myth explaining that babies (ages 2 and under)
know all the secrets of the world from previous life experiences. When
they move past this phase, they become like any other drooling toddler.
Kinder and Heep want to unlock the secrets using their test babies,
namely little Sylvester (Sly for short), who can break in or out of any
given situation so efficiently that he would be right at home on the
Mission: Impossible team. There is so much crap derived from this
premise, despite the fact it's virtually identical to the plot in Look
Who's Talking! (a far superior film in any league).
You will be able to determine the quality of the film by examining the
opening scene. Sylvester has broken out and managed to elude several
security guards with his amazing intellect and kung-fu tactics.
Question: it's obvious the babies are super-smart, but why are they able
to fight like Jackie Chan?? The adults in this film are furiously beaten
by these youngsters in diapers. It's a shock when writers will stoop
this low just to draw cheap laughs by using John Hughes' familiar Home
Alone formula. I also found it disturbing that the babies in this film
have attitude and endless 90's knowledge, quoting numerous movies and
insulting their adult captors. The effects in Baby Geniuses (similar to
the talking animals in Babe) are pathetic, the editing is a disaster,
and the jokes are never funny. The only reason viewers may avoid
vomiting is the argument that the babies are `cute'.
I suppose they are. I can admit to smiling a few times because the
babies were cute. Other instances, though, I was howling in laughter due
to the inane stupidity of the script. There are supporting characters
who have no personality whatsoever; their entire existence is based on
punch lines. Peter MacNicol and Kim Cattrall, as an unwilling couple who
have adopted Sylvester's twin, are both miscast. Then again, I don't
suppose any performer could handle the uneven material without looking
incredibly stupid. Meanwhile, Dom Deluise plays a fellow who gets hit in
the crotch with a monkey wrench (hahaha).
I would avoid Baby Geniuses at all costs. Instead of watching this, I
would recommended filling your bathtub with cement and going snorkeling.
Or perhaps you would consider going diving in shark-infested waters.
Anything to avoid this painful movie. The final line in the film, spoken
by the bratty Sylvester, is `If they think I'm doing the sequel for less
than $20 mill, they're nuts'. Sequel?  Please have mercy.

Author
Greg King
Baby Co annually spends millions of dollars in
experimentation, research and development, aimed at trying to
understand the intelligence of early childhood and artificially create
super intelligent babies.  The corporation is headed by the ruthless
Elena Kinder (Kathleen Turner), who is prepared to do anything to
conclude her research.  The company owns a string of orphanages, which
provide her with an endless supply of research material.
As part of a controlled experiment, enabling her to compare
early growth under her laboratory methods as opposed to an ordinary
childhood, Elena has secretly separated identical twin boys Sly and
Whit.  In a seemingly magnanimous gesture she gives Whit to her niece
(Kim Cattrall) and husband Peter Bobbitt (Ally McBeal's Peter
MacNicol), a childless couple.  Peter is also a researcher with an
interest in early childhood development, but he lacks the technology
and scientific tools at her disposal.
But Elena's plans begin to unravel.  Sly manages to escape
from the laboratory and hides out in a local mall, where he and Whit
accidentally cross paths.  Kinder's goons kidnap the wrong child,
while Sly goes home with the Bobbitts.  The film climaxes as the
clever kids stage a desperate rescue within the gigantic Baby Co HQ.
Although the film has a rather silly premise, Baby Geniuses is
technically quite clever and moderately entertaining.  Unlike the
increasingly tiresome Look Who's Talking series, director Bob Clark
(Porky's, etc) takes advantage of the latest in computer generated
animation technology to make it seem as though the babies are actually
talking.  Much of their dialogue and many of their jokes will probably
go right over the head of younger audiences though!  Clark directs the
material with his usual lack of subtlety.
Turner and Christopher Lloyd enter into the spirit of
proceedings, and both overact hysterically, while MacNicol and
Cattrall bring more restraint to their performances.  The Fitzgerald
triplets play twins Sly and Whit, while child star Miko Hughes
(Mercury Rising, etc) provides their voices.
Most of the winning charm of this decidedly low brow film
derives from the antics of the two- year olds with attitude.  The
tykes effortlessly combine brawn and brain, and they also perform
complex martial arts and dance floor moves with remarkable ease.
Touches of Home Alone-like slapstick humour and low level violence and
some neat sight gags will entertain the youngsters, while the sly
movie parodies and one-liners will please older audiences.

Author
James Sanford
Every so often at the movies, we stumble across a certain moment
that's so appallingly conceived and ineptly executed you literally
can't believe your eyes, the kind of sight that causes your jaw to
drop, your stomach to lurch and your mind to boggle.  Midway through
"Baby Geniuses" comes just such a scene.
Our toddler hero Sly has escaped the underground lab of Dr. Elena
Kinder (Kathleen Turner) and is hiding out in a mall, where he comes
across a carriage occupied by a baby girl. Sly dives into the pram,
surprising the little beauty.
"Take off your clothes," he orders. "OK, but you could at least take
me to dinner first," the girl replies. Seconds later, Sly is dressed
in drag, while his accomplice is reclining on her back, smoking a
cigar and murmuring "call me."
An exceedingly unpleasant combination of cutesy kiddie matinee hijinks
and outright smarminess, "Baby Geniuses" could only be the work of
director Bob Clark, the man whose previous cinematic triumphs include
"Loose Cannons," "Porky's" and "Rhinestone," in which Sylvester
Stallone and Dolly Parton pretended to be Nashville's answer to Sonny
and Cher.  "Geniuses" shares with most of Clark's other films an utter
lack of taste and a genuinely ugly look; not only is the movie less
funny than a case of diaper rash, it's even less picturesque.
"Geniuses" does include a few mildly interesting computer-generated
special effects that allow the infants to dance and run, although the
trickery is unlikely to wow anyone familiar with the now-famous
"dancing baby" from "Ally McBeal." That the movie has spent more than
a few months on the shelf at Sony is evident in its use of the
"Mission: Impossible" theme as a joke and "show me the money" and
Austin Powers' "oh, behave, baby" as punchlines.  Nothing puts an
expiration date on a film quite like trendy humor.
Then again, "Geniuses" is so desperate to get any sort of a laugh it
sees nothing wrong with stealing liberally from both the "Home Alone"
and "Look Who's Talking" series. The story's gimmick - tots who excel
in judo as well as innuendos - wears thin about five minutes into the
film, forcing adult leads Turner, a visibly embarrassed Christopher
Lloyd and Dom DeLuise to mug and shriek nonstop in the hopes of
keeping the comedy going. Hopefully everyone received a generous
paycheck in exchange for trashing whatever artistic credibility he or
she had left.

Author
Matt Williams
Going in to the movie Baby Geniuses, I tried to reassure myself that the
movie couldn't nearly be as bad as its premise makes it seem.  After
all, some good talent (Kathleen Turner, Christopher Lloyd, Dom DeLuise)
is attached, and the idea of intelligent talking babies could be cute...
Boy, was I wrong!
Unbeknownst to the rest of the world, young babies are actually
geniuses. Children are born knowing all the secrets of the universe, and
communicate in their own "pre-language" (which sounds exactly like
babbling to grown-ups), though they can read and understand every other
spoken language.  At the age of two or so, the babies "cross over",
forgetting everything they once knew.
The evil day care scientist Elena (Kathleen Turner) suspects this,
mainly by stealing ideas from Dan (Peter MacNicol), the husband of her
niece, Robin (Kim Catrall).  Elena, with the help her henchman, Heep
(Christopher Lloyd), has been running secret tests on babies and
toddlers in the hopes of cultivating the world's next batch of geniuses.
As part of her evil plans, Elena has separated two identical twins: Sly
and Witt (played by Leo, Myles and Gerry Fitzgerald).  Sly has been
raised in her underground "Kinder" bunker with a batch of
proto-geniuses. Witt, on the other hand, is being raised by the
unwitting Robin and Dan. But Sly is difficult to keep in captivity.  The
smartest kid in the world, he is capable of building sophisticated
electronics out of the simplest legos, and before you know it, he is on
his way to explore the real world.
The technology used to make the children talk, perform karate, and so on
is actually fairly good...about the only good thing that exists the
movie. However, no matter how good the means are, there's no
justification for the ends.  The supposedly "intelligent" babies making
juvenile wisecracks is one thing...when they start disco dancing, you'll
start praying for that coma to strike.
The flimsy plot is merely an excuse to go from one overly "cute" scene
to another even more so.  I'll admit it, the first few giggling,
talking  babies are a little cute...but by giggling baby shot #503 the
prospect becomes simply terrifying.  An idea which would have been
excessively cloying in a mere television commercial is practically
numbing when seen on the big screen.  However, the experience is so
painful that you'll wish it provided full anesthesia.
Whatever happened to Kathleen Turner?  She hasn't made a decent film in
ten years...and Baby Geniuses is certainly no exception.  The only thing
she has going for her in this film is that she's the villain.  Any enemy
of those babies must be a friend, even if she's a friend with a one-note
monotonous performance.
This is a film so completely bankrupt of ideas that the last few minutes
are composed entirely of short clips from elsewhere in the  film...as if
anyone would want to relive this travesty, even in the form of
bite-sized none sequiturs.  Why couldn't they have simply ended the film
a bit earlier and given the unfortunate few who stayed during the whole
film a tiny bit of their lives back?
For those of you tempted to see this movie, just pop in your Ally McBeal
"Dancing Baby" videotape, and thank me later.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "BABY GENIUSES" (Columbia TriStar Pictures)
If you enjoyed the "Look Who's Talking" trilogy, then this is
the kind of comedy you'll enjoy. The gimmick of having babies speak is
revisited here with a plot that revolves around the idea that all
babies are born with the wisdom of the ages and the ability to speak
with each other.  So, what adults hear as gurgling "baby talk" is
actually a sophisticated dialogue. And, through CGI technology, the
babies' lips move exactly like adults' lips, simulating conversation,
along with appropriate facial expressions. Writer/director Bob Clark
and co-writer Greg Michael have concocted a morality play, with its
conflict between good and evil, in which twins are separated at birth
by a scheming, wildly ambitious child psychiatrist, Dr. Kinder
(Kathleen Turner) who runs BABYCO, the world's largest manufacturer of
baby products. She keeps one, named Sly, to be raised with constant
discipline and training in a secret, experimental research research
lab - where he interacts with the best and brightest of other baby
geniuses - except he's always trying to escape. Meanwhile, his twin,
Whit, is raised by Dr. Kinder's niece (Kim Cattrall) who, with her
husband (Peter MacNicol), runs an old-fashioned nursery school, where
love, tenderness, and good sense reign. It's the antithesis of
BABYCO. Inevitably, the babies meet - at a shopping mall at
Christmastime - and, in a mistaken-identity switch, they find
themselves in each other's environment. What works in this film is the
inherent whimsical appeal of the babies - who are actually played by
the Fitzgerald triplets from Vancouver. What doesn't work is the
psychobabble and contrived amusement. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Baby Geniuses" is a flimsy 5. Cute but cloying - unless you're
really into watching the screen antics of two-year olds.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bob Clark.
Cast: Leo Fitzgerald, Myles Fitzgerald, Gerry Fitzgerald, Kim Cattrall, 
Peter MacNicol, Kathleen Turner, Kyle Howard, Ruby Dee, Dom Deluise, 
Christopher Lloyd.
1999 - 93 minutes
Rated PG (for mild profanity and violence).
Reviewed March 19, 1999.
In "Baby Geniuses," directed by the wildly uneven director of some great 
movies (1974's "Black Christmas" and 1983's "A Christmas Story") and a 
particularly awful one (1981's "Porky's"), the key selling-point that is 
brought up is that babies are actually geniuses who hold the key to all 
of life's questions and are able to understand all languages (even 
though they speak in "baby talk"), and it is only once they "cross over" 
at about age two that they forget everything and become a so-called 
normal person. Although this theory is far-fetched in the extreme, it 
also is admittedly kind of intriguing. The film itself, however, throws 
all original ideas out the window in the very first scene to become a 
sort of junior version of "Look Who's Talking," minus practically all 
the wit and brightness of the story and situations. After enduring this 
mainstream family movie (kids deserve a lot better than this, even if 
they may enjoy some of it), I think it's safe to say that director Clark 
should go back to making movies about Christmas, since that is 
apparently the only thing he's good at.
Partially set at Babyco, a company that includes the world's largest 
indoor amusement park (a visual delight for the limited amount of time 
it recieves), the evil founder, Dr. Childers (Kathleen Turner), has 
secretly turned the basement into a scientific test area where she keeps 
a slew of baby prodigies and studies them. One of the children, Sly, who 
is the leader of the baby group, actually has a twin named Whit (both 
are played by real-life triplets, Leo, Myles, and Gerry Fitzgerald), who 
is living with a nice family unknowing of this separation (Whit was 
adopted). Through a series of incidents, Sly escapes from his confines 
at Babyco and gets loose out in the city where, the following morning at 
the mall, he comes into contact with Whit and is switched with him by 
his mother (Kim Cattrall). And so on...and so on...and so on...
In its whole 93-minute running time, "Baby Geniuses" included about four 
or five amusing lines of dialogue by the babies ("The first words I say 
to my parents aren't going to be 'mama' or 'papa,'" says Whit's 
15-month-old sister, "I'm just going to recite the whole Gettysburg 
Address"), but that's painfully stretching things, especially when 
nothing else works at all. Director Clark and screenwriters Clark and 
Greg Michael assume that audiences will fall for the movie if they stuff 
a whole bunch of "as-cute-as-sbutton" babies down our throats, but in 
the process, they forgot to add a few vital elements, such as charm and 
entertainment. To top everything off, the baby talk that we hear in 
english is completely unconvincing when looking at the children, who 
obviously are the subjects of cheesy visual effects that make it look 
like they are moving their mouths.
That there are a few actors in "Baby Geniuses" that have proven to be 
talented in the past, the fact that they have stooped so low to appear 
in this clap-trap is mind-boggling. Kathleen Turner vamps her villainess 
role up, but like everyone else, has nothing at all to do except look 
mean and bothered. Faring even worse is Christopher Lloyd, who has 
lately fallen on hard times (he also appeared in the award-winning "My 
Favorite Martian" in this year alone!), and it was only once the movie 
was over that I wondered to myself, "did I really even see Christopher 
Lloyd in it?" I questioned myself on this not because Lloyd had a 
blink-and-you-miss-him part, but because he seemed to simply stand in 
the background of shots (or in extreme close-ups) and do nothing but be 
Turner's nasty henchman. Also making embarrassing appearances are the 
aforementioned Cattral, MacNicol, Dom Deluise, and of all people, Ruby 
Dee! By the way, feel free to laugh at these actors' plummeting film 
careers whenever the mood hits you.
By the time the tiresome, surprisingly violent climax began, the last 
nail had already been hammered in this unfortunate film's coffin, as we 
are subjected to seeing giant robotic babies and scary-looking clowns 
jumping out, and people falling from helicoptors onto the roof of a 
building. If this sounds at all like a nice, fun-for-the-whole-family 
children's movie, then I feel sorry for you, but by all means, take the 
kids. If, on the other hand, you think that your children deserve 
better, then I am sure you will also agree with my final point: the 
makers of "Baby Geniuses" were so concerned with, yes, making the babies 
geniuses, that they seem to have forgotten to include an inkling of 
intelligence into the film itself.
       - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
         Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
