Title
Review for For Whom the Bell Tolls (1943)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Ernest Hemingway won a Pulitzer Prize for his dramatic
novel about an American sabateur briefly joining a
loyalist guerilla band during the Spanish civil war.
For the screen adaptation, he supposedly insisted
upon Gary Cooper and Ingrid Bergman as the leads,
against the wishes of studio moguls who had already
cast (and cropped the hair of) Vera Zorina.
Cooper has orders to blow up a bridge during a
loyalist offensive.  In this operation, he is
aided by a small band of rebels led by Pablo (Akim
Tamiroff) and his 'woman' Pilar (Katina Paxinou).
Others at the camp include elderly patriot Anselmo
(Vladimir Sokoloff) and a comic relief gypsy.
Cooper, as always, plays the stolid hero well,
with his eyes showing much more emotion than his
voice or expressions.  Bergman, surprisingly
unattached despite living for months with a
nearly all-male guerilla band, predictably falls
immediately and deeply for Cooper.  The screenplay
has a heavy emphasis on their courtship, with
many of the lines either tedious or unintentionally
humorous.  Much drama is also made of Pablo's
character, a grating 'cowardly' drunkard whose
loyalties are always in question.
The screenplay was de-politicized by Dudley Nichols,
removing references to Franco, loyalists, and Falangists.
However, there is a prophetic comment about German and
Italian war machines using Spain for target practice.
Despite the setting, only a handful of Spanish actors
are used.  Bergman's hair is blonde, Paxinou is Greek,
with Tamiroff and several others ethnic Russian.
The Academy was duly impressed, and "For Whom the Bell
Tolls" received nine Oscar nominations, including Best
Picture, Best Actor (Cooper), Best Actress (Bergman),
Best Supporting Actor (Tamiroff), and Best Color
Cinematography (Ray Rennahan, whose nomination was
well deserved).  Paxinou was the only winner, taking
home the Best Supporting Actress Oscar.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
