Title
Review for My Girl 2 (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     The original MY GIRL was something of a mildly-entertaining,
inoffensive motion picture that adequately blended light comedy with
some occasionally-manipulative drama.  The sequel retains not only the
characters from its predecessor, but much of the same feel, as well.
     Several years have passed since the events of MY GIRL.  Harry
Sultanfuss (Dan Aykroyd) is now married to Shelly (Jamie Lee Curtis),
and the two are expecting their first child.  Vada (Anna Chlumsky), now
thirteen, is jealous of the treatment her as-yet unborn sibling is
receiving, and begins wondering about her mother, who died shortly
after her birth.  Vada's quest for knowledge takes her away from an
overprotective father to Los Angeles, where she stays with her uncle
Phil (Richard Masur).  There she meets a boy of her age, Nick (Austin
O'Brien), who agrees to help her track down old friends and
acquaintances of her mother's.
     At its worst, MY GIRL 2 is light on plot and heavy on 70s pop
hits.  At its best, the film is good-natured and occasionally
touching.  MY GIRL 2 has its share of corny moments, too many of which
occur around the climax, but these don't invalidate the movie's
strengths.  While not possessed of the most original storyline, the
picture manages to make Vada's quest mostly-believable, enabling the
audience to actually care about how things turn out.
     Even more than the first installment, this film focuses on Vada.
Her father and Shelly, each of whom had significant roles in MY GIRL,
are reduced to supporting characters, as is Uncle Phil.  Nick's
otherwise superfluous presence gives Vada a chance for a quick
romance.
     The movie's biggest mistake is the inordinate amount of time spent
on the recycled "man who cannot commit to a relationship" involving
Vada's uncle.  Phil is a weak character to begin with, so this subplot
quickly becomes tedious.  MY GIRL 2 would have been enhanced, not
diminished, by the deletion of those offending scenes.
     Dan Aykroyd and Jamie Lee Curtis seem comfortable in roles which
demand little or no effort.  Anna Chlumsky, looking much more mature
than previously, is still "rough around the edges" in her acting, but
she gives a performance that's generally convincing.  Austin O'Brien,
last seen riding sidekick to Arnold Schwarzenegger in LAST ACTION HERO,
is almost Ms. Chlumsky's match.
     MY GIRL 2 is unlikely to win any awards, and its arrival on movie
screens is relatively unheralded, but it provides a reasonably
entertaining ninety-eight minutes.  While the original concept didn't
demand a continuation, this is a rare sequel that manages to do what
it's supposed to--advance the story without becoming redundant.  The
film is undemanding of its audience, and those that enjoyed the first
installment will likely be pleased by this one.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     With a new baby on the way for Shelly (Jamie Lee Curtis) and Henry
(Dan Akyroyd) Sultenfuss, Vada (Anna Chulmsky) feels a bit left out in
her home life and her pubescent social life.  She decides to visit
Uncle Phil (Richard Masur) in LA, birthplace of her deceased mother, in
hopes of finding out more about her mom.  During her five-day quest,
she learns that her mom wasn't what she expected, as well as learning a
great deal about herself.
Tak Thoughts ------------
     Okay, I admit I liked MY GIRL, even though it did have the
loathsome Macaulay Culkin in it, though he was tolerable there.  So I
knew what I thought MY GIRL 2 would feel like.  And I was right.  I got
to see some old friends, and make some new ones.  There were even a few
of those verge-of-tears-of-happiness moments that are kinda nice.
     Uncle Phil has found a job as a mechanic and is living with Rose
and her son (Austin O'Brien).  Rose is a great character.  She
complements Phil nicely and has a twinkle in her eye that emotes a very
playful attitude that's fun to watch.
     Vada's adventures as she tracks down information about her mother
are interesting too, especially a series of scenes where she begins to
realize her mother isn't the sweet little thing that she had expected.
But of course, her search culminates in a real treasure trove of good
information and good will.
     I'll briefly mention some things that didn't go well so I can
maintain my honorary grouch/cynic card....
     The romance between Vada and Rose's son seemed forced, but still
had some cute moments.  Vada's "black stage" (suggesting black
wallpaper for her room) back in Pennsylvania didn't seem to fit her too
well, nor did the childlike grumpiness at getting a new brother.  It
all happened too quickly and didn't fit her smiley, cheerful
disposition.  Happily, the awkwardness passes rapidly.  With her rapid
tracking, detective and schmoozing skills (plows thru red tape, travels
all over, and interviews half a dozen friends of Mom) she's got a great
career as a bounty hunter ahead of her.  But all these are really just
token objections.  I was more than happy to brush them aside, suspend
my disbelief, and enjoy the show.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     I did like the movie, but I wouldn't recommend it at the movies
unless you're a big fan, which I'm not. There was nothing really WRONG
with this movie.  A friend thought MY GIRL 2 was "a cute movie" and I
agree.  This will make a great VCR rental.  And if you liked the first
one, this'll make a great nostalgia/warm-fuzzy home double feature.
