Title
Review for Awfully Big Adventure, An (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Sue Roberts
Portman/Wolfhound Productions together with British Screen and BBC
Films.
Directed by Mike Newell
Script by Charles Wood from the novel by Beryl Bainbridge
Starring Alan Rickman (O'Hara), Hugh Grant (Meredith),
         and Georgina Cates (Stella.)
     Atmospherically staged against a backdrop of post-war Liverpool,
young Stella gets to experience more than just work behind the scenes.
The film manages to capture her youth, the observer whose innocent
conclusions dissolve into confusion, then gradual understanding of
everyones behaviour.
     The significance of the telephone, like so many of the details
which seem initially inconsequential, turns out to be a clue of
infinite relevance.  As the light dawned one was reminded of the style
of another novelist of the period, Agatha Christie.  The director
manages to convey an atmosphere of  artless simplicity whilst filling
the frame with the artifice of the theatre.  It is not until afterwards
that one realises just how frightfully clever he has been in laying the
trail!
     I loved all the bits where Meredith Potter gets to explain "What
the play is about."  What might he have made of this tale?  Why should
the seduction of a young man seem wrong whilst that of a young girl
appears acceptable? And who can see that people are mistaken to apply
double standards?
     Alan Rickman as O'Hara is utterly charismatic.  In this moving
performance he captures the unwitting carelessness of a man perceived
by all as a realist and yet at odds with reality.  It appears at first
glance to be a relationship of  maturity attracted by young love, but
perhaps  Stella may be the most aware of what she is doing as "Peter
Pan" unfolds....
     And what an array of talent in the supporting cast.  All
exquisitely characterised.  Bunny, (Peter Firth) Geoff-ew-ry, (Alan
Cox) and Prunella Scales (Rose, the theatre manager) to mention only a
few.
     Heaven knows what Liverpool F.C. will make of the soccer match!
However, this is a sensitive and thought provoking piece of cinema.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1995
U.S. Availability: 8/95-10/95 (limited)
Running Length: 1:52
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, sex, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Alan Rickman, Hugh Grant, Georgina Cates, Alun Armstrong,
      Alan Cox, Carol Drinkwater, Peter Firth, Nicola Paggett,
      Edward Petherbridge, Prunella Scales
Director: Mike Newell
Producer: Hilary Heath, Philip Hinchcliffe
Screenplay: Charles Wood based on the novel by Beryl Bainbridge
Cinematography: Dick Pope
Music: Richard Hartley
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     AN AWFULLY BIG ADVENTURE, director Mike Newell's followup to his
international hit, FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, has little in common
with that riotously funny comedy.  Grim, somber, and chaotic, this film
takes a look at life behind the scenes of a small, low-budget theater
troupe performing in Liverpool during the late 1940s, with special
emphasis on one young girl's loss of innocence.  The Stella who starts
this story as a generally well-adjusted sixteen-year old with acting
aspirations is far from the dispirited, disillusioned young woman who
ends it.
     It's potentially compelling material, but the script and editing
are a mess.  AN AWFULLY BIG ADVENTURE is so badly disjointed that it
never really gets on track.  Entire scenes seem to be missing and often
what is there makes little sense.  Added to that, a crucial character
doesn't make his first appearance until more than halfway through the
proceedings.  By that time, my patience with this rambling motion
picture was wearing thin.
     Stella, as nicely played by Georgina Cates, is ostensibly the
film's central character--at least for the first hour.  After that,
things get muddled, with the viewpoint switching back and forth between
Stella and aging ex-matinee idol P. L. O'Hara (Alan Rickman), who has
entered the company to play Captain Hook in "Peter Pan" following an
unfortunate accident to his predecessor.  Neither Stella nor O'Hara
really captures the audience's sympathy, so the shifting perspective
further distances the viewer from the lives being autopsied by Newell's
direction.
     Anyway, Stella joins the theater troupe of Meredith Potter (Hugh
Grant) as an unpaid assistant stage manager.  The actors are a ragtag
bunch--"the very best... for [virtually no] money"--and appear
better at drinking and engaging in other scandalous behavior than in
delivering on stage.  Exposed to such excellent examples of human
degradation, it's no surprise that Stella's own moral character goes
into rapid decline.  It isn't long before she's sleeping with a man she
doesn't love while pining for Potter, who shows more interest in boys
than girls.
     The cast is top-notch, with only Hugh Grant struggling to find his
character.  There are a number of familiar faces on hand for those who
enjoy British TV, including Prunella Scales (FAWLTY TOWERS), Edward
Petherbridge (LORD PETER WIMSEY, version two), and Nicola Paggett (ANNA
KARENINA).  Despite the solid performances, however, the uneven tone
and porous script keep the viewer at arm's length.  Several attempts at
comedy are off-putting, primarily because they occur at inappropriate
moments.
     A vast departure from recent Newell successes like FOUR WEDDINGS
and ENCHANTED APRIL, AN AWFULLY BIG ADVENTURE aims for, and largely
misses, a rich emotional vein.  Stella's story is a tragedy with the
sort of universal scope everyone can understand.  Unfortunately, this
film mishandles its primary subject matter.  The behind-the-scenes
wrangling of actors is entertaining, as is the sniping between Potter
and the members of his troupe, but these are peripheral issues.  And
that's the problem--the movie doesn't have a clear idea of what it's
really trying to do.  The result is that AN AWFULLY BIG ADVENTURE is
awfully unsatisfying.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
