Title
Review for BookWars (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   My favorite Ray Bradbury sci-fi novel is "Fahrenheit 451,"
made into a relatively unemotional, slow-moving movie in '66
by Francois Truffaut--his only English language contribution. 
My view is that sci-fi at its best must not only tell a great
story but must have an edge, preferably satiric.  It must say
something about contemporary society that can best be put
into an imaginative, futuristic setting.  In "Fahrenheit 451" all
printed materials were banned by the government because,
among other reasons, the government held that books can
make people sad.  This was to be a "don't worry, be happy"
era.  But one small rebellious group of book lovers retreated
to a sylvan utopian settings, each having memorized one
book, each with the task of transmitting the text of that tome
to future generations.
  Would you be surprised if we suggested that we today in
the U.S. are living in that sort of time?  Look at the subways. 
When I was a kid, everyone read.  Even if the newspaper of
choice was the tabloid Daily Mirror or Daily News at two
cents a pop, people were reading!  Barber shop seats were
crammed with all the newspapers that flourished in New York:
the Journal America, The World, The Telegram, The Sun,
PM, the Herald Tribune, the New York Times.  What do you
see today on the trains?  People are wired.  Walkmans have
replaced periodicals just as the cell phone seems to have
replaced a good deal of face-to-face conversation.
   If this situation makes you mad, make you furious, you've
gotta like "BookWars," which won the Best Documentary
award at this year's New York Underground Film Festival
last March.  By the conclusion of its seventy-seven minutes,
the doc may have just about reached the end of its welcome
since, after all, "BookWars" is the product of just one guy,
Jason Rosette, who spent five years making this on a
shoestring.  Rosette, who studied philosophy at New York
University and switched to the film school from which he
graduated in 1991, borrowed some bucks to get the project
launched, while the only establishment decent enough to give
him some post-production funding was the Playboy
Foundation.  Maybe only a few people will look at
"BookWars" as an epilogue to "Fahrenheit 451", but as I see
the picture, we're dealing with a raggedy-taggety group of
true Kerouacian entrepreneurs who defy the TV culture, and
go against the mega-corporate structures of Amazon and
Barnes and Noble. (Even these book businesses have turned
to pushing CD's and greeting cards and calendars and other
non-book items to survive.)
   Though "BookWars" gets its title from the conflict between
the peddlers of the printed page and a particularly mean local
government in New York City, its focus is on the dealers
themselves.  These folks--scruffily bearded, long-haired,
bearing ethnic accents (except for the movie's Ohio-bred
narrator), opinionated, edgy--have been thought of by some
local denizens as homeless, as bums, as bearers of stolen
property.  This is true in a small minority of cases only, if we
are to believe the hard-working director-writer-editor-narrator
of this unusual underground movie.  Truth to tell, they get
their mostly used fare--good stuff too, like Kerouac,
Dostoevski, Mailer and the like which seem to sell better on
the street than even popular fiction--from yard sales and
estate purchases.  They haul crates and boxes of
paperbacks, hardcovers, some of which have seen better
days and have been Elmer-glued, scissored and carefully
wrapped in plastic by these street capitalists, and often put in
long, long days on the curbs.  Often working from 8 a.m. to
10 p.m. during decent weather, they consider a take of $200
to be decent enough--and that's gross, not profit.  Despite
their enthusiasm, their energy, their commitment to a literate
public averse to spending $27 for a 200-pager at the local
Waldenbooks and to people who insist that they are finding
stock unavailable anywhere else--they are being harassed by
the Giuliani administration.  Because of the First Amendment,
they cannot be summarily kicked off the block.  But the
mayor has mandated Tax I.D. cards and carefully painted
borderlines under his so-called quality of life program, an
approach that seems curiously designed to protect traditional
business and the principal university in the area.
   Rosette focuses on just a couple of blocks of Manhattan,
all in the Greenwich Village area.  Sixth Avenue around 9th
Street sees a concentration of comic books and some porno
while the good stuff is on West Fourth Street, embracing the
director's alma mater, NYU.  Rosette introduces us to a
variety of idiosyncratic characters who are really only a step
away from welfare, who probably live on pizzas sold by the
piece throughout their working days, and though he does not
go into the nitty-gritty details, one wonder how they even take
breaks to relieve themselves given the absence of public
restrooms in our heartless town.
   California-born Thomas is the mega-guy, a bearded but
neatly trimmed slim guy who seems in his thirties and who
eventually opened up his own indoor store.  Another is
Pete, a loft artist from Newark who picked up gobs of
volumes to make collages and wound up selling the books
themselves.   Adding to the variety of types is Rick, who does
street magic to pick up a few extra bucks; Boris from Russia;
at least one fellow from Jamaica who is quite opinionated
about the mayor's office and another guy from Poland.  The
customers seem almost as odd as the sellers, but given the
nature of the Village and of a large urban metropolis like New
York, that's to be expected.  A couple of young girls are
fooling around with passersby asking to get a better look at
their butts.  An elderly woman with a colorful hat is being
flattered shamelessly by one salesman and predictably
enough, she buys.  A few of the so-called customers are
downright deranged and give these enterprising workers a
hard time by leaning on their tables.  One clean-cut fellow
has a volume in his hand about the size of War and Peace.
The camera stares at him for what we are told is twenty
minutes, the implication being that he's not the Big Spender
from the East but someone who shows up every day at the
same time to read another chunk of printed material from that
tome, standing up, only to replace it gently when lunch hour
is over.
   This doc is not as amusing as something that could come
from the camera of Upper-West Sider Michael Moore, but
then again Moore has a lot more dough at his disposal than
Rosette--who has yet to pay off his student loan at NYU.  Nor
do we expect the camerawork featured in John Woo's
"Mission Impossible 2," given the dimes and quarters that
were used to finance "BookWars."  The film sometimes looks
as grainy as the sellers are scruffy, as Rosette used Mini DV,
Super 8, Regular 8 and Hi-8 video and Super VHS and
what's more he had to keep his cameras as unobtrusive as
might James Bond.  "BookWars" gains variety from its
combination of eloquent narration and some patter from the
sellers and kibitzers that would set Henry Higgins' hair on
end.  In the final analysis, this movie is as urban as the
World Trade Center, a reminder of what makes us
Gothamites live in and love the Big Apple.
Not Rated.  Running time: 79 minutes.  (C) 2000 by Harvey
Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     There are a million stories in the naked city, and a new
documentary from Jason Rosette does a remarkable job at ferreting out
one of them -- and where you'd least expect it.
     BookWars examines the strange and unexpectedly intense world of
street booksellers in Manhattan -- specifically, a little stretch of 4th
Street near NYU, where otherwise unemployed types set up an 8-foot
table, covered with treasures of the printed word.
     Rosette tells the story from the inside, having spent three years
on 4th, selling precious volumes of Dostoyevsky, Kerouac, and
Kierkegaard.  We meet his colleagues, who range from surprisingly well
adjusted to almost completely insane.  And we discover the origins of
the books -- estate sales, libraries, the trash, and even other street
sellers when they inevitably wash out.
     But Rosette's tale is especially remarkable from several
perspectives.  First, the streetwise merchandising tactics you learn in
BookWars' 79 minutes teach you more about business than any MBA
program.  Second, the socio-political microscope the booksellers find
themselves under when Giuliani's "Quality of Life" program is introduced
(thus attempting to whisk them off the sidewalks) makes a powerful
statement about who programs like these are really helping out.
Corporate America and academia are the understated targets as the
independent street booksellers are gradually given less and less
"official" space in which to operate.
     While Rosette's over-earnest narration can get thick at times and
the finale feels a tad dismissive, his story is never short of
enthralling.  Altogether, it's a fresh break from more sanitized
documentary filmmaking, giving us a unique look into a part of life I've
always wondered about.
