Title
Review for Town That Dreaded Sundown, The (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
"The Town That Dreaded Sundown," is not a film that relies on a 
narrative, as much as it is a wholeheartedly visceral experience, in 
which it is not the characters that stand out, but the situations. Based 
on a true story that took place in Texarkana, Texas, circa Spring 1946, 
a town becomes horrified when two young people are attacked one night at 
a Lovers' Lane by an inexplicable hooded killer. They narrowly survive 
the ordeal, but the people of the town, not used to such violent crimes 
taking place so close to them, enter into a frenzy, terrified that he 
might strike again. Exactly twenty-one days later, two more lovers are 
found in a similar setting, but this time viciously murdered. 
Immediately, Deputy Sheriff Norman Ramsey (Andrew Prine) and Texas 
Ranger J.D. Morales (Ben Johnson) are brought onto the case, fearing a 
possible pattern is starting every three weeks. Nicknamed "The Phantom 
Killer," the community goes into panic as the slayer goes into overdrive 
during that Spring, only to vanish without a trace thereafter.
We learn very little about the characters, whether it be the police 
officers or victims, and, in fact, one of the supporting policeman is 
played inapprorpriately as a comic device to most likely lighten the 
subject matter up. Instead, "The Town That Dreaded Sundown," goes for a 
quasi-documentary feel throughout, as the crimes are documented, and 
that is why the film is successful. What is so absolutely fascinating 
about the case is that it was, and still remains, a completely baffling 
occurrence in which no one ever found out who the "The Phantom Killer," 
was. And there is also the mystery about what finally happened to him 
after he abruptly stopped his murder spree.
The film is matter-of-factly narrated throughout, which was a wise 
choice. It largely makes the film seem more real, and it is helped out 
by the exact way the story is played out, as the film alternates 
throughout from the investigation to sequences of shocking power as the 
murders are vividly and brutally reenacted. One particular scene 
involving the prolonged, unsettling torture of a teenage girl in the 
woods, is, no doubt, tough to watch and frightening, but it is not 
filmed as a means of pointless exploitation, but rather as an example of 
how accurately drawn and realistic Director Pierce wanted the film to 
be. 
By the conclusion of, "The Town That Dreaded Sundown," a brief 
confrontation between the authorities and the killer occurs, but nothing 
comes of it, as the "Phantom" vanishes afterwards without a trace. In 
the penultimate moment, we are left to ponder not only the whereabouts 
of the culprit, but the effect that such an inconceivable crime can have 
on any one person. "The Town That Dreaded Sundown," leaves us with such 
striking moments of stark, raw terror, that it puts many less serious 
horror films to shame. After all, this crime actually happened, and just 
the thought of that is petrifying. 
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
