Title
Review for Princess Caraboo (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     1817 in England was during a time of great awakening in England.
The recently ended Napoleonic Wars had brought an awareness that there
was a lot of world beyond the shores of Britain.  Coleridge and Byron
wrote about exotic lands and the aristocracy hungered to know more of
faraway lands with poetic names.  And in the midst of this craze for
the foreign and exotic, Princess Caraboo shows up wandering in a field
near an English village.  The turbanned Caraboo speaks an unknown
language, writes in totally unknown pictograms, and has seems to have
fashion tastes molded on some Pacific Island or someplace in Asia.  She
is adopted by the affluent Mrs. Worrall (Wendy Hughes) and her less
charitable husband (Jim Broadbent).  Little by little the Princess's
story comes out of how she was kidnapped by pirates and managed to
escape from them off the coast of England.  But nobody is sure if the
story is true or a fraud.
     Michael Austin's film is not so much about the title character but
about the phenomenon and controversy that surrounded her appearance.
The mysterious woman's fame soon spreads across England.  Some believe
her to be a Javanese princess, others believe her just a woman with a
vivid imagination.  But many of the experts who first doubt her are
confounded by the evidence that she is the genuine article.
     Phoebe Cates is the Princess who acts like Asian royalty, but
Cates herself just does not look Asian enough to be convincing.  In an
interview at the Montreal Film Festival Michael Austin said that he
first cast Phoebe Cates and since her husband Kevin Costner [sic] came
along to tend their baby, the director gave him a part in the film
also.  Actually Kevin Kline really grabs the attention of the audience
as Frixos, the Greek dandy who is the Worrall's insolent butler.  As an
early and overly candid sceptic of Caraboo his role is a comic gem.
What was probably a minor or even non-existent role expanded just for
his talents becomes the most engaging characterization in the film.
Wendy Hughes is a good actress, but this film does not give sufficient
depth to her character.  Perhaps it was pushed aside by the Kline role,
but she is a little too sweet and understanding, a bit too good to be
true.  Jim Broadbent has more to do as Mr. Worrall who married into the
aristocracy without any touch of nobility.  Stephen Rea is Gutch, who
narrates the story.  As a newspaperman Gutch is romantically attracted
to Caraboo but also feels a responsibility to investigate the truth of
her story.  John Lithgow rounds out the cast as a linguistic expert won
over in multiple ways by the princess.
     A film with Freddie Francis's camerawork will always be worth
seeing.  His work goes back at least to THE INNOCENTS and his feel for
creating a period atmosphere in films like THE FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S
WOMAN is always excellent.  Under Austin's direction his images here
have more of a storybook feel than usual.  But we do get a look at
village life from the fancy manors to the town square with its ale
houses and gibbets.  The score by Richard Hartley often has majestic
moments but is not memorable on first hearing.
     The film is a light enjoyable look at an England that rarely is
shown in historical films.  It is short at 96 minutes, but also sweet.
I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Phoebe Cates, Wendy Hughes, Jim Broadbent, Kevin Kline, Stephen
Rea, John Lithgow Director: Michael Austin Screenplay: Michael Austin
and John Wells
"A princess of royal blood Caraboo she. Descended from dynasty upon
dynasty of South Javanese Royalty. Who ruled the waves of the Pacific
Seas; and through evil's twisted fate, our princess be captured by an
evil pirate of no name. Escaped she did, by miracle's untwisted hand and
thrown upon the green shores of Jerusalem (England), that unfriendly
land. Bearing only the clothes she wore, with only a few silver pieces
to spare the poor. So this wretched child of Caraboo our lives plead,
help me, love me, mercy. Not English, nor Spanish or Hindi speak. Who is
this girl full of mystery? She is Princess Caraboo."
 From 'The Forgotten Annals of Rare Princesses'  by T.M.T. Voon.
So the question which is nicely posed to the viewer throughout the movie
is - Is Princess Caraboo, who has been accepted whole heartedly into
England's highest social circles, truly a princess of the bluest blood,
or is she merely the greatest con artist of her time? I'll give you a
clue below.
"Give me a turban, or give me a name. Paint a tattoo on my arse and you
can call me Prince Voondavoodaloo. I speak no English, or so I claim,
but I can say 'Attoya Matoolie Estromish Zardoo', which in my language
means 'God Be With You'. So throw me a party, or show me around. I know
how to have a good time, all I have to do is smile. I am a prince of the
truest blood, or so I claim. I am after all the prince of my heart."
 From 'The Forgettable Annals of Jerky Princes' by T.M.T Voon
As a film directed towards the family audience, I would say this works.
Not a great fan of any film which claims to be a family film, I have to
say that this film isn't bad; and since it brought smiles to my parent's
faces, who give it two thumbs up, I'll refrain from being nasty.
What we have here is a tale of unprecedented imagination. Also a tale of
self-belief. Like 'The Little Princess' which claims that every little
girl is as special as a princess, so 'Caraboo' follows this same message
to the end. For those of you who get a little sensitive over gender
equality and equal opportunities, and since the rec.arts.movies.reviews
seems to be overpopulated by politically conscious males, yes, every
little boy can also be a prince.
Princess Feel Scale:
0% Princess Diana / *PRINCESS CARABOO* / Sleeping Beauty 100%

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Want to really relax and see an enchanting upbeat movie?  Want to
see a movie that gives you the feeling you had when you were a small
child reading books about faraway kingdoms?  Interested in true stories
that feel like fairy tales?  How about a movie that you can take your
kids (say 8 or older) to see but are not kid's movies?  Like good
acting?  Like mysteries?  Like Masterpiece Theater type flicks set in
rural England?  Want to be spellbound?  Well, you need to see PRINCESS
CARABOO.
     I avoided this movie many times figuring it was one of those
cutesy films with adults acting like idiots and set in some place like
Baghdad in the 1500s but with sorcerers and evil spirits.  Wrong all
around.
     PRINCESS CARABOO is based on a true story from the early 1800s in
rural England.  It seems a princess from a faraway land has escaped
capture on a ship in the Bristol channel.  The princess (play perfectly
by Phoebe Cates) speaks no English.  A local professor (well done by
John Lithgow) does the research on her language to determine her small
country.
     The princess comes to live in a large manor house where the butler
(played very funnily by Kevin Klein) does not believe her, but the
owners (Jim Broadbent and Wendy Hughes) do.  A local reporter
(excellently done by Stephen Rea from THE CRYING GAME) finds her
absolutely fascinating and enchanting--as I am quite sure you will
too.  The reporter is not sure if her story is true or false and he
sets out to determine the facts.
     The mysterious princess has many adventures after the plot set up.
The mystery in the story does work even though it is a simple one.
Cates acting really carries the day.  It is almost impossible not to
like her--a lot.
     The script was written by the director, Michael Austin, and I
think you will find several surprises since I suspect most people do
not know obscure English history of over 150 years ago.  The pacing was
good and the casting of all parts, even the most minor, was well done.
     This is not GANDHI, but for what it is, I have no complains or
suggested improvements in the movie at all.  A fun and delightful time
at the movies.
     PRINCESS CARABOO runs 1:34 and is rated PG for a five-second 3/4
naked leg scene.  There is no profanity.  I have no idea how it avoided
getting a G other than you would need to be about 7 or 8 to like it I
think.  I recommend it to every one except Ebenezer Scrooge.  I think
young girls would especially like it, but I can attest to the fact that
males would like this show too.  I give it ***.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 13, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Based on a true story, this is a delightful romantic comedy with
the lovely Phoebe Cates as a woman who shows up in an English village
in the year 1817, wearing a turban and speaking a language no one there
has ever heard.  With her expressive hands and eyes she conveys that
her name is Caraboo.   Knowing nothing about her, the authorities jail
her for vagrancy but her manner is so regal that she wins the attention
of the local aristocrats, Mr. and Mrs. Worrall (Jim Broadbent and Wendy
Hughes), when she conveys to them that she is a princess.
     Among the skeptics is newspaperman Gutch (Stephen Rea) who, while
trying to get to the bottom of the mystery, finds himself falling for
Caraboo.  The Worrall butler, (Kevin Kline) is another who suspects she
is a fake but is taken in by her charm.  An Oxford academic, Professor
Wilkinson (John Lithgow), is brought in to check Caraboo's authenticity
but he, too, becomes enamored of her. Should she prove to be a
charlatan, the sentence would be death.
     All the cast (Cates and Kline are married in real life) are
exactly right for their roles so that the story's romance and comedy
are completely believable.  Kline. wearing a large mustache, and
dressed in livery, is sneaky.  Rea (THE CRYING GAME) tries to hold back
from succumbing to Caraboo's beauty while Lithgow (THE WORLD ACCORDING
TO GARP and TERMS OF ENDEARMENT) at first says Caraboo is a fake but
one look at her and he changes his mind in a hurry.
     The film follows the rather weird but true story very closely and
knowing that, it enhances the entertainment value.  John Wells, who
co-wrote the script with Director Michael Austin, has written a book,
PRINCESS CARABOO: HER TRUE STORY, which is being published in
September.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Phoebe Cates, Jim Broadbent, Wendy Hughes, Stephen Rea,
Kevin Kline, John Lithgow.
Screenplay:  Michael Austin and John Wells.
Director:  Michael Austin.
     Every once in a while, a film sneaks up on me and takes me
completely by surprise.  I don't necessarily mean in terms of quality;
rather, I'm referring to the mere knowledge of its existence.  Usually
I know what films are on the way a year in advance, but two weeks ago I
had never heard of PRINCESS CARABOO.  It has slipped rather quietly
into limited release, and appears destined to slip out just as
quietly.  That's a shame, because PRINCESS CARABOO is a delightful
fable, romantic, gentle and very appealing.  What's more, it's
surprisingly insightful and provides a sharp-witted lesson in English
social history.
     PRINCESS CARABOO is based on an actual event in early 19th Century
England, involving a young woman (Phoebe Cates) who is found wandering
the countryside.  Apparently unable to speak any English, she is taken
in by good-hearted gentlewoman Mrs. Worrall (Wendy Hughes).  Her banker
husband (Jim Broadbent) is none-too-pleased about this strange
houseguest, until the Worralls begin to believe that the woman may be
royalty from an East Indian island, the Princess Caraboo.  This
development inspires plans for a lucrative trading venture for Mr.
Worrall, and an introduction into elite social circles for Mrs.
Worrall.  However, local journalist John Gutch (Stephen Rea) is not
convinced that the woman is what she seems to be, and sets out to find
out the truth about Princess Caraboo.
     As a social satire and comedy of manners, PRINCESS CARABOO is a
winner.  It takes place in an era when it was common practice in
England to jail vagrants and hang beggars, and that practice comes in
for an obvious hazing.  But it is handled most effectively through the
character of Mr. Worrall, a drunken womanizer whose bank is in deep
trouble thanks to his corruption and ineptitude.  He is worse than one
of the idle rich; he is one of the actively odious gentry so eager to
distance themselves from the lower class they think nothing of simply
eliminating them, and since the house and money are all from Mrs.
Worrall, he is a bit too close to them for comfort.  While hypocrisy is
an easy target for ridicule, director and co-writer Michael Austin
keeps the treatment too light-hearted to be heavy-handed.  He also
takes a unique stab at the trendiness of the upper classes, as the
Princess becomes a "sensation" at court.  In one of the film's best
sequences, Princess Caraboo is the guest of honor at a party hosted by
the Prince Regent (a wonderfully foppish turn by comic John Sessions),
and the lords and ladies end up following her around in a thoroughly
silly native dance.  It is then that PRINCESS CARABOO shows how easily
people are swept up in "sensations," an idea that takes on a timeless
quality (and makes the film an interesting companion piece to the
current QUIZ SHOW).
     Social commentary aside, PRINCESS CARABOO is simply an eminently
enjoyable entertainment.  The performers are mostly delightful,
particularly Phoebe Cates, who is radiant in a part that requires a
gift for pantomime.  Her supporting players are also appealing:  Wendy
Hughes as the patient and kindly Mrs. Worrall; Kevin Kline as Frixos,
the Worralls' suspicious and superior Greek butler; Stephen Rea as the
world-weary but ultimately romantic Gutch.  Only John Lithgow is a
disappointment, turning in a limp performance as a scholar who attempts
to verify the Princess's identity.  The story twists and turns just
enough so that the question of whether or not the Princess is really a
princess is always in some doubt, without becoming gimmicky.  It is
unfortunate that the growing attraction between Gutch and Princess
Caraboo isn't given more time to develop, because the potential seemed
to be there.  When it finally does blossom, it seems too quick to be
plausible.
     PRINCESS CARABOO is patient enough in establishing its sense of
time and place that it might seem a bit slow to viewers seeking a
fantasy romp.  Still, it has both escapist and intellectual appeal, and
is well worth seeking out.  It is the kind of film that makes my job
its most rewarding--a hidden gem.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Phoebe Cates, Wendy Hughes, Jim Broadbent, Kevin Kline, 
           Stephen Rea, John Lithgow 
Director:  Michael Austin 
Producers:  Andre Karsch and Simon Bosanquel 
Screenplay:  Michael Austin and John Wells 
Cinematography:  Freddie Francis 
Music:  Richard Hartley 
Released by TriStar Pictures 
     With a cast like this, it's probably very difficult (if not
impossible) to make a bad movie.  The strength of PRINCESS CARABOO, a
likable SOMMERSBY wannabe, is in its performers, who manage to submerge
a great many script-related flaws.  The result is a story that, if not
high on originality or inventiveness, makes for a palatable fable.
     At the heart of PRINCESS CARABOO lies a question of identity: is
the title character (Phoebe Cates) a real Javanese princess who had
been kidnapped and sold into slavery, or is she a wonderfully creative
English servant girl who has invented this character to mock an
aristocracy that exploits her class?  The story, which takes place in
1817, is told from the point-of-view of Gutch (Stephen Rea), a
newspaper reporter trying to get to the truth.  During the course of
his investigation, he becomes obsessed by the Princess, and predictably
falls in love.
     The screenplay has a tendency to go off on unexpected and, for the
most part, undesirable tangents.  There's a subplot about crooked bank
dealings, a long-winded examination by a local "expert" (John Lithgow)
of the Princess' authenticity, and a tediously overblown sequence in
which Caraboo is introduced to the Prince Regent.  These distractions
keep the film from ever finding a stable focus.
     The romance between Gutch and Caraboo isn't especially compelling
or, for that matter, believable.  The two spend very little time
together and, with Caraboo unable to speak English, they certainly
don't hold any lengthy conversations.  Rea and Cates do what they can
with limited material, but the best they manage to come up with is
"cute."  There certainly aren't any sparks.
     Wendy Hughes and Jim Broadbent play Mrs. and Mr. Worrall, a
wealthy upper-class couple under whose roof Caraboo takes refuge after
she is nearly imprisoned for being a vagrant.  These two veterans form
stable anchors around which the rest of the uneven production can
swirl.
     Phoebe Cates, having used roles in recent films like BODIES, REST
AND MOTION to shed her GREMLINS image, is the picture of serene
beauty.  She is effectively mysterious and equally acceptable as either
a foreign princess or a lower-class pretender.  Her real-life husband,
Kevin Kline, steals a few scenes with his buffoonish, over-the-top
portrayal of Fixos, the Worralls' Greek butler.
     Although PRINCESS CARABOO tries a lighter approach to a subject
dealt with more seriously by THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE and its
American remake, SOMMERSBY, the issue of the central character's
legitimacy is similar.  In this case, however, resolving the mystery
becomes a secondary diversion to watching so many accomplished
performers struggle to fashion something entertaining out of an
unpolished script.  Their success, though qualified, proves the value
of a strong cast to any motion picture.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
