Title
Review for O.K. Garage (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Everyone has their specialties.  Unfortunately, Rachael, an inner city 
teacher, has the bad luck to have taken her car to a garage, the 
ironically named "O.K. Garage," which specializes in not fixing cars.  
The garage does little or nothing and then charges inflated prices for 
the work they claimed to have done.  Needless to say, anyone getting 
their car "repaired" there will need it worked on again, and Rachel with 
her meager income, takes her car back to the same place, hoping that 
they will finally solve the problem.  Instead, the owner, a slimy 
character named Yannick (Olek Krupa), keeps trying to extract more of 
Rachel's hard-earned money.  
In writer and director Brandon Cole's sweetly quirky and nicely cast 
O.K. GARAGE, the characters warm your heart even if the script doesn't 
exactly dazzle your brain.  Cole, a better director than a writer, gets 
the staging and the bizarre mood just right.  His characters are 
inviting and charming, more by the way they act than by what they say, 
their lines having little punch or vibrancy.
ARMAGEDDON's Will Patton plays Sean, a quiet, distant character who 
keeps pet lizards in his pocket.  A writer by profession, Sean loves 
Rachel, but he's such a loner that he has trouble connecting with 
anyone.
Sean's friend Johnny is a painfully shy welder who doesn't cash his 
checks because he's in love with the teller at his bank.  Close 
proximity to her is just too much for him; he can't stand the pressure.  
Well regarded actor John Turturro, who has been in a host of good 
supporting roles from QUIZ SHOW to HE GOT GAME, is perfectly cast as 
Johnny.
Lili Taylor, first seen in the delightful MYSTIC PIZZA, plays the sweet 
teacher, Rachel.  She will have two shy guys contending for her 
affection when Johnny gives up on his married teller in favor of the 
more accessible Rachel.  The love affair between the two of them shows 
the most promise, but the story, regretfully, doesn't develop it as it 
should -- a great missed opportunity.
The story really doesn't amount to much, nor does it try to.  It's a 
small character study of two awkward guys who are lost in the world, 
especially when it comes to love.  Still, the movie has appeal as it 
speaks to the loner part of all of us.
O.K. GARAGE runs 1:30.  It is not rated but would be an R for some 
profanity, sexuality and violence and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Murali Krishnan
[Screened at the Cinequest Film Festival 9, San Jose]
The O.K. Garage is not a place you would really want to have your car
repaired, but Rachel finds this out the hard way when her car breaks down on
the way to work. Although the owner cheerfully claims all the work is
satisfaction guaranteed, he usually will do practically nothing and still
overbill for the work he claims to have performed. Besides this simple petty
crime, he is collaborating with bigger mobsters in a scheme to steal the
cars of some former customers, which should be easy since he has their
addresses and even car keys.
Rachel has a friend, Sean, who is a rather odd character. He is a writer who
of late has taken to playing with and carrying around lizards. Although
there is an obvious attraction between them, so far their relationship has
been platonic. Russell has an acquaintance, Johnny, who is himself a bit
odd. He refuses to deposit his paychecks because he is attracted to a bank
teller, but is so shy about it that he cannot get himself to go to the bank.
This is basically the story of these three characters, brought together when
Rachel seeks Sean's and Johnny's help in recovering her money.
Writer and director Brandon Cole confesses that he provided very little
direction and let the actors interpret the characters; Lili Taylor as
Rachel, John Turturro as Johnny, and Will Patton as Sean. The strength of
the film are the performances of Taylor and Turturro. Taylor is particular
strong as Rachel. The way she actually stomps up stairs reflects the
confidence and pluck (and attractiveness) of the character. Turturro is also
good as Johnny, but the character is often uneven, due mainly to the writing
rather than Turturro's performance. However, Patton was rather grating as
the odd Russell. With a constant wry smile and vacuous expression, he
appeared to be rigidly forcing his performance as a stereotypical eccentric,
rather than allowing the character have a natural flow. Having heard Cole
speak before and after the film, it appears that Patton based his portrayal
of Sean on the style and demeanor of Cole, but the character would have been
better with more definition.
The subplot of the garage owner's relationship with the mobsters injects
some life into the story. The developing romance between Johnny and Rachel
is telegraphed early and feels slightly forced, but it is not dwelled upon
so it is not objectionable. Ultimately the story feels as if Cole is trying
to communicate a larger point, but fails.
Marginally Recommended. There are good performances, but the writing was
rather empty. It is entertaining, but quite uncompelling.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
