Title
Review for Castaway Cowboy, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: James Garner, Vera Miles, Robert Culp, Eric Shea 
Written by: Don Tait, Richard Bluel and Hugh Benson 
Directed by: Vincent McEveety 
Running Time: 91 minutes 
James Garner's charm goes a long way in this Walt Disney western about
Lincoln Costain (Garner), a Texas cowboy who mysteriously washes up on
the shore of a small Hawaiian island (it's unclear as to how he actually
got there... something nefarious no doubt).  He is rescued and taken in
by widowed potato farmer Henrieatta MacAvoy (Vera Miles) and her son
Booton (Eric Shea).  We soon learn that their potato farm is going
under. 
The crops are being trampled and destroyed by wild cattle you see, and
after Henrieatta sees Garner rescue her son from a charging bull, she
convinces him to stay on the island and help her raise cattle.  Two
problems: the hired hands on the farm are a bunch of silly Hawaiian
natives who would rather goof off than work, and the note to the land is
in the hands of a shady businessman (Robert Culp) who wants to ensure
that the farm never becomes profitable.  So, you think there might be
some silly hijinx with the Hawaiians trying to learn how to become
cowboys?  Any guess as to who ends up with the land by film's end?  Sure
you'll know the answers to these questions before you start the film,
but it's still mildly entertaining nonetheless. 
It is nice to go back and watch some of the old Disney live action films
again... reminding me of a time when Disney films focused on simple fun
and good natured values.  Garner is great as the "cowboy out of water"
(he even breaks into song at one point, with full orchestration!), but
Culp is wasted as one of the nicest, most restrained villains in movie
history.  I wouldn't have even know he was the bad guy had I not read
the back of the case.  Culp never really gets to have fun with his role,
which is a shame because given the chance he could have been
particularly slimy and fun (he does get to wear a cool suit though). 
The Castaway Cowboy also boasts a good score and some nice location
shooting.  The fun, campy moment of the film comes when Costain tracks
down a witch doctor in some caves and the two battle it out. 
Two off-putting things though: nearly every scene is dubbed, and every
once in a while a shot will be edited in using the characters in front
of a blue screen (or rear projection or whatever it was back then), when
there seems to be no reason for it.  For example, two characters will be
talking to a third at a beachside resturaunt... two of them are actually
there, but the third is on a soundstage with footage of the beach
running behind them.  Weird. 
The Castaway Cowboy is available on DVD from Anchor Bay Entertainment. 
The disc contains the film in full-frame only and features no extras
whatsoever.  The print isn't exactly what I would call pristine either
(the phrase "fair at best" comes to mind), as the image is plenty grainy
and filled with artifacts.  It's a shame this film wasn't given better
treatment... it's a fun little western that's good for young and old
alike. 
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
