Title
Review for Sunset Blvd. (1950)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Sunset Boulevard" is one of Billy Wilder's
most commercially successful and highly praised
films.  Nominated for eleven Academy Awards,
including all the major ones, the film later
was adapted into a long-running musical by
Andrew Lloyd Webber.
"Sunset Boulevard" has a great story.  A hack
screenwriter (William Holden), bitter and broke,
is hired by an imperious has-been actress from
the silent era (Gloria Swanson).  Much younger
than her, he becomes her kept man, living at
her luxurious estate with her devoted, humorless
manservant (Erich Von Stroheim).
Norma Desmond (Swanson) has written a dreadful
screenplay, which she believes will launch her
comeback as an actress.  But her handpicked director,
Cecil B. De Mille, continues to gently put her
off.  As the gap between her aspirations and
reality widens, Desmond loses her sanity.
Some consider "Sunset Boulevard" to be a black
comedy.  But it is too gloomy and pessimistic
to be anything but a drama, with Swanson playing
her role for tragedy rather than campy laughs.
von Stroheim may have considered his role as
a servant to be humiliating, but it is a sizeable
role and his character is the most sympathetic.
It is odd seeing Jack Webb, later typecast as
robotlike Joe Friday, playing the film's liveliest
character.  Silent film star Buster Keaton has a
cameo, ironically without any lines.
"Sunset Boulevard" opens by giving away the ending:
Holden is shown floating dead in a swimming pool.
This adds tension to the film, knowing that the
Holden-Swanson 'romance' has a tragic end.  Still,
and this is only my opinion, I feel that "Sunset
Boulevard" is overrated.  Holden's character is
so misanthropic and ill-humored that it seems
unlikely that Desmond would fall for him, much
less perky Nancy Olson.  People seem all too willing
to accept the character of Norma Desmond, as if
middle-aged women are indeed prone to becoming
imperious, conceited, desperate lunatics.  Most
disappointing for me is the film's somber, pessimistic
tone, which seems to be more a condemnation of human
relationships than a commentary about Hollywood.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Long Che Chan
Sunset Boulevard
Directed by Billy Wilder
Starring Gloria Swanson, William Holden, Erich von Stroheim, Nancy Olsen
The set, the cinematography, the costumes, the performances, the score-
all of Sunset Boulevard's components give off a glowing, Gothic feel.
Billy Wilder's most intriguing film is not one of his timeless romances:
his rendezvous with Lemmon and Monroe, Lemmon and MacLaine, or Bogart
and Bacall- it is the ultra-sinister Gloria Swanson classic Sunset
Boulevard.  Gloria Swanson is eerie as Norma Desmond, a silent film star
who has faded into the background after the coming of the microphone.
She has a quality few actresses have anymore: a powerful, blatant dark,
mysterious, enigmatic quality about her that envelops her acting and
enhances and furthers its complexity and awe-inspiration.  She becomes
Norma Desmond and, looking back at Swanson's career, we can see she had
her share of hard times after the silent era ended, just like Desmond.
The difference between the two women- the performer and the character-
is that Gloria Swanson has been given a chance after her silent film era
stint and has given her best performance in a talking picture.  There is
no hope for the washed-up Norma Desmond.  She is focused on making
silent movies and has not moved with the times.  She is obsessed with
being the center of attention, of making her "return" (she hates the
word "comeback").  She is the scariest has-been ever put on screen.
The film starts with a film-noir-cynical style monologue by William
Holden's character Joe Gillis.  His career as a screenwriter is not
going very well at all.  His car is in jeopardy of being taken away- he
has not made any payments for months.  He is desperate- he has lost his
agent, his latest script has been turned down, and he has been receiving
harsh criticism.  All he has are B-movies under his name.  While being
chased by two men who are after his car, he pulls into the driveway of a
silent, old mansion on Sunset Boulevard.  He parks his car in the garage
to hide it.  He enters the home to realize it is Norma Desmond's.
"I know you.  You used to be in silent pictures.  You used to be big,"
he says to the dark, miserable old woman in sunglasses.  "I am big,"
Desmond insists, her head up high, "It's the pictures that got small!"
She is a woman so full of her own faded majesty and oversized ego, she
cannot face the facts or harsh criticism.
She hires Joe Gillis to edit a screenplay she has been working on for
years.  The movie, Solomi, will be her "return" and she has already set
high expectations- "It is to be a big picture.  I will have [Cecil B.]
DeMille direct it."  Gillis is full of skepticism and he moves in with
her, to his reluctance, because her script is too important to leave the
grounds.
The mansion creeps him out.  It is gloomy and is a shrine to its owner.
There are Norma Desmond photographs everywhere.  The butler, Max, plays
the ghostly organ every morning.  All the locks and doorknobs have been
cut out of the doors; it was suggested by Norma's doctor after she
attempted suicide.  She had been married three times.  Norma is very
protective of her "treasure" of a script, she refuses to take out excess
from it because she believes that her billions of fans "who have never
forgiven her for leaving the screen" will want to see more and more of
her.
Through the weeks, the relationship between Gillis and Desmond becomes
more than professional or platonic- it becomes dreadfully, slyly
romantic.  Gillis has no feelings for this shriveled up hag, but he is a
kept man.  She buys him everything under the sun- fur coats, gold
cigarette cases, watches.  He has feelings for his friend's fiancee,
Betty and we, the audience, know that such a beautiful romance between
Betty and Joe should be followed through.  Betty feels the same way
about him, but Joe's devotion to his best friend and his demanding
ultimatums at the Sunset Boulevard house get in the way.
Meanwhile, the Solomi script is sent to Paramount Pictures for Mr. Cecil
B. DeMille to read, but soon we discover he thought it was awful.  On
Desmond's trip to Paramount, she reminisces with old pals at the studio
and with Mr. DeMille, who doesn't have the heart to tell her he hated
the script for they worked together several times during the silent
era.  She leaves the studio thinking she will have a long career ahead
of her with DeMille, "The old team together again!"
I'm already beginning to give away the plot twists of the film which
make it incredibly fun and haunting from the opening credits to the
classic finale- "All right, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up."
Sunset Boulevard has a classic negativism on Hollywood and the
fickleness of fans.  It is perfect- the acting by the cast is well-done,
at times flawless; the photographer creates a dark habitat for Norma
Desmond- a near-extinct animal, giving the film an exceedingly gloomy
feeling; the set is quite remarkable- the production designer has
created a memorable location for Norma Desmond to seduce her prey; the
score is sharp and staccato- murderous like Norma.  The film is
phenomenal really and it should be experienced as soon as possible.
