Title
Review for Luchadoras contra la momia, Las (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Just in case you aren't all mummied out from that high-tech waste of time
starring Brendan Fraser, the Dryden Theatre at the George Eastman House has
dug deep into their vaults and unearthed a film guaranteed to satisfy the
cravings of those of you who love films about guys wrapped in toilet paper.
Or flicks featuring professional wrestling.  Or badly dubbed Mexican movies
from the early '60s.  Or films with really tall women who know how to kick
ass.  That's right -- The Wrestling Women vs. the Aztec Mummy is a hybrid of
all those sweet, wonderful things.
Aztec Mummy tells the story of a crazy genius named The Black Dragon (Ramón
Bugarini) who is killing off members of an archeological group in order to
obtain missing pieces of a codex that, presumably, will lead him to a secret
treasure and all the power he'd care to wield. Only one archeologist remains
alive -- Dr. Tracy (Víctor Velázquez), who just happens to be the uncle of
Mike Henderson (Armando Silvestre), who just happens to be romantically
involved with Loretta Venus (Lorena Velázquez, Víctor's real-life daughter),
who just happens to be one-half of the country's favorite women's tag-team
wrestling duo.
The BD and his henchmen have several battles with Tracy, Henderson, Venus
and a handful of other characters, including the obligatory Lou
Costello/Shaggy character (played by Chucho Gómez).  It all culminates in a
ten-minute scene that pits Venus and her partner, The Golden Ruby (Elizabeth
Campbell), against The Dragon's Judo champion twin sisters.  The winner
takes control of the codex pieces.
You're probably wondering when the Aztec Mummy factors into the story (I
know I was -- he doesn't show until the last 20 minutes).  The reformed
codex pieces tell the story of Tezumuc (Gerardo Zepeda), who was buried
alive to protect the breastplate of an Aztec Princess, said breastplate
containing a map that leads to untold riches.  The film doesn't really get
campy until Tezumuc is brought to life when the Princess' breastplate is
stolen, but, brother, those final 20 minutes are a smorgasbord of terrific,
B-movie horror.
Tezumuc is supposed to be a mummy, but he walks and sounds like Frankenstein
and can change into a bat like Dracula.  He resembles Jim Carrey's Fire
Marshal Bill from In Living Color more than anything.  Other unintentionally
funny incidents occur thanks to a stationary hidden camera that can pan
across a room, zoom in for a close-up and, apparently, see through walls
(Mexican technology has really taken a few steps back since the early '60s).
The wrestling scenes involve stunt doubles that look nothing like the
primary actors they're replacing, and several of the women's hairstyles
change within scenes.  It's all so fantastically awful.
Despite the title, there's a surprising lack of
Wrestling-Women-on-Aztec-Mummy action, and the ending doesn't quite resolve
anything.  It's hard to believe, but these characters say even dumber things
than the crap that flew out of Brendan Fraser's pie-hole in The Mummy
Returns (they could blame it on the bad dub job, but Monkey Boy has no
excuse).
Aztec Mummy is actually a sequel to 1962's The Wrestling Women vs. the Aztec
Ape, and it's far from the only Mexican horror flick to feature the titular
Aztec Mummy.  Writers Guillermo Calderón and Alfredo Salazar also penned The
Curse of the Aztec Mummy, The Aztec Mummy vs. the Human Robot, and Attack of
the Aztec Mummy.
