Title
Review for Higher Learning (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Omar Epps, Kristy Swanson, Michael Rapaport, Ice Cube,
           Laurence Fishburne, Tyra Banks, Jennifer Connelly.
Screenplay/Director:  John Singleton.
     When I learned that John (BOYZ N THE HOOD) Singleton was making
a film about issues of race and gender on college campuses, I was
intrigued and optimistic.  Though POETIC JUSTICE was a misfire, BOYZ
showed that Singleton could tell a story, and after nearly ten years
around Stanford, one of the nation's hotbeds of multicultural
experimentation, I knew that there were many stories to tell.
HIGHER LEARNING shows that Singleton recognized that fact as well;
unfortunately, he tried to tell them all in one movie.  It's an
ambitious but unfocused effort which is admirable for its balanced
perspective but leaves critical characters as mere representations
of the stereotypes it seems to be challenging.
     HIGHER LEARNING follows three freshmen at fictional Columbus
University.  Malik (Omar Epps) is an African-American track star who
is challenged by the incendiary anti-establishment views of
sixth-year senior Fudge (Ice Cube) and by the more moderate opinions
of his political science professor (Laurence Fishburne); Kristen
(Kristy Swanson) is a Southern California blonde who is drawn to a
lesbian upperclassman (Jennifer Connelly) after an acquaintance
rape; Remy (Michale Rapaport) is a white male from Idaho whose
desire to fit in somewhere leads him to a group of white supremists.
The truce between these students and their respective factions is an
uneasy one at best, but it explodes into violence when a conflict
between Malik and Remy goes over the edge, drawing the entire campus
into it.
     For fully half of its running time, HIGHER LEARNING appears to
be headed in the right direction.  Unlike contemporaries Oliver
Stone and Spike Lee, Singleton does know how to present challenging
and controversial subject matter without shouting at the top of his
lungs in every frame.  In a Stone film, the hero's two mentors would
be manifestations of Good and Evil; Singleton, on the other hand,
makes both Fudge and Professor Phipps smart and sensible characters,
leaving the audience to draw its own conclusions.  It doesn't hurt
that both roles are played by magnetic screen presences.  Ice Cube
has true star potential, a powerful personality and a fine actor,
and he keeps Fudge from being simply a spouter of dogma.  Laurence
Fishburne's Phipps doesn't really need a West Indian accent, but he
shows a genuine concern for Malik, and also keeps his speeches from
sounding didactic.  Malik's storyline is the most carefully plotted,
and Omar Epps' fine performance as the young man weighing two views
of being black in America makes it the most interesting to watch.
     But Singleton fails to give his other two principles the same
kind of depth.  Kristy Swanson shines in early scenes which show her
trying to fit in with other girls and learning to express her own
point of view in Phipps' class.  Then, as Kristen's sexual
experimentation becomes the focus, Singleton pulls back, and never
tries to get inside her head after a love scene in which she is
alternately with Jennifer Connelly's Taryn and Malik's gentle
roommate (Jason Wiles); both relationships are sadly
under-developed.  Michael Rapaport's Remy has almost identical
problems, beginning as a lost soul and ending up a crazed skinhead.
His story could have been an opportunity to examine why real,
intelligent young people feel so threatened in a multi-cultural
society, but he's pushed so far to the fringe that he becomes a
cartoon.
     The problems with those two characters are representative of
what is most wrong with HIGHER LEARNING, particularly in its second
half.  While Singleton seems to want us to "unlearn" stereotypical
perceptions (as his none-too-subtle coda informs us), it is exactly
stereotypes that he traffics in.  The feminist character is an
earnest lesbian, the frat guy is a rapist, the campus security
guards are posturing racists, every African-American male is angry
and the one Sensitive White Male is a long-haired bohemian type.
Once the "sieg heil" shouting Hitler youth take center stage, it
becomes clear that Singleton has eschewed examining the complexities
of the way young people learn to interact at a university in
exchange for an operatic, hiss-at-the-bad-guys kind of drama.
HIGHER LEARNING is awash in good intentions, but too often it's
terribly simplistic, taking a story which should have been about the
shaping of minds and reducing it to a matter of who's got the guns.

Author
Eugene R Ahn
Directed by John Singleton
Starring Malik (Omar Epps), Kristen (Kristy Swanson), Remy (Michael
        Rappaport), Professor Philps (Laurence Fishburne), Taryn 
        (Jennifer Connelly), Fudge (Ice Cube) etc
     HIGHER LEARNING searches for the meaning of American Identity in
an age of rich diversity on a college campus, Columbus.  The problem
with any movie or novel in dealing with such a subject is that the good
intentions of the director or writer are subverted by the almost
inevitable simplifications required to fit the art material into the
standard time length or page length.  John Singleton does not escape
these pitfalls and the only saving grace would have been excellent
characterizations.
     Singleton, who also wrote the screenplay, nearly pulls it off.  In
the first half hour, he introduces us to the three main protagonists:
Malik, Kristen, Remy--three ... freshpersons who step onto campus,
trying to fit in to varying degrees.  Malik, despite initial rebellion,
decides to pursue track for a scholarship to stay in school, but
battles resentment from his peers for being just another "slave" for
the school.  Kristen quickly associates with sorority-type party-goers,
but after being date-raped, she withdraws and is thrown into
disequilibrium.  Feminist, Taryn (played perfectly by Jennifer
Connelly, who no doubt benefited from her "higher learning" experience
at Yale University) helps Kristen find her new identity.  Finally,
Remy, a seemingly-innocuous midwestern neophyte, struggles to mix in
with the others, but fails completely.
     Remy's character is the most crucial to the flow and overall
effectiveness of the movie.  His character drives the plot forward.
Rappaport does an amazingly unscripted job of conveying the turmoil
within Remy as he slowly becomes alienated from his peers.  Remy
doesn't know who he is from the beginning.  And it is clear under
Singleton's direction and script that Remy is carefully watching his
diverse peers, trying to find ways to be "similar" and therefore
accepted.  An engineering major, he tries to be "cool" at a frat party
by complimenting Kristen's date-rapist for "scoring" which obviously
gets him villianized.  But there is clearly a double standard here as
the frat members, in earlier scenes, were high-fiving each other when
Kristen and her friends started to get wasted drunk at a bar (not to
say these two actions are of equal magnitude).
     But it simply is too haphazard and too quickly that Remy shifts
from alienated loner to enthusiastic skinhead.  Besides being booted
from his apartment (roommate Fudge played his music too loud) and being
dissed by his other roommate for a game of pool, Remy sure gives up
rather quickly.  The Kurtz-like Nazi leader befriends him, and the
skinheads immediately welcome him to their ranks without question, to
which Remy says thanks and shaves his head.  Singleton pushes Remy's
character too far into a Psycho-type killer role and it was completely
unnecessary as well as destructive.  It crossed HIGHER LEARNING from
the cerebral and dramatic to the cartoonish and cheesy in one fell
swoop.  Remy, as he was developed in the movie, never possessed enough
confidence to be such a determined mass murderer.  Singleton does show
how Malik unknowingly pushes Remy further into a pit of frustration and
self-hate, but after setting up the conflicts fairly well Singleton
really botches it up with an all-or-none response from Remy.
     The essence of what the movie discusses are these double
standards.  The virtue of avoiding violence and direct confrontation,
the powerlessness of those who become victims to violence, the
temptation to retaliate with greater violence.  Which is greater
empowerment and self-determination?  Malik running for a track
scholarship or Fudge withdrawing in disgust as a matter of principle
from what he perceives to be a racist society?
     Singleton clearly favors the former.  Malik's girlfriend angrily
asks him, "When are you going to stop pointing your finger at other
people and start pointing at yourself?"  He also shows how Fudge's
polar-race world view is a self-fulfilling prophecy.  But most
importantly he shows why these self-evident truths are so hard to live
by.  Malik's rage, Remy's frustration (and Kristen's ... well, more on
that later) are vividly presented.
     Professor Philps (if you ignore the nearly comical accent) is well
played by Fishburne who also appeared in Singleton's first movie BOYZ
IN THE HOOD as Furious Styles.  He plays a similar father figure, the
"center" of the chaos that takes place around him as he provides sage
but non-judgemental advice to his students ("In the real world, there
are no handouts").
     Finally, Kristen's development was another weak spot in the
movie.  Her trials bore little substance to the themes of the movie.
After her trauma of date-rape she basically explores her affection for
Taryn, finds gentle love with another guy (Oh look he uses condoms),
and becomes a 60's peace nut (she plans a "peace festival" which
becomes the site of Remy's violence).  One of the beauties of Quentin
Tarintino's PULP FICTION is the vivacious manner in which the
unpredictable can happen to its characters, and as a result, a vastly
entertaining movie was born.  Many of the connections between its main
characters were haphazard and random, and the movie never made
apologies for doing so.
     Here we have the opposite side of the spectrum.  As the Malik/Remy
conflict becomes the center of the plot, Kristen becomes more
peripheral.  Singleton tries to work her back into the midst of things
by having her plan the 60's peace festival.  Yet there are apologies
written all over Kristen's contrived character.  Singleton desperately
tries to force her into a symbolic shaking of hands with Malik in the
end and it just flops like dead fish.  There were potential themes to
be emphasized in Kristen's relationship with Taryn, which could have
molded with the violence between Malik and Remy but that's all
conjecture now.
     Despite problems with two of the three protagonists, Singleton
protrays college life very believingly.  For the most part, the casting
and acting is superb (Omar Epps, Ice Cube, Jennifer Connelly, Michael
Rappaport in particular) and the soundtrack keeps the mood just right.
The points I make about the two characters focus on the essential
problem of this movie in which the movie has the tone of seriousness
and importance, yet offers way too much cheese and cartoon convention.
This movie is probably a star's worth more enjoyable for recent college
graduates than its parent generation, and since I'm only two years
separated from college....

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Omar Epps, Kristy Swanson, Michael Rapaport, Ice Cube, 
          Laurence Fishburne, Jennifer Connelly, Tyra Banks, Regina King, 
          Jason Wiles 
Director: John Singleton 
Producers: John Singleton and Paul Hall 
Screenplay: John Singleton 
Cinematography: Peter Lyons Collister 
Music: Stanley Clarke 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     With his third feature, writer/director John Singleton (BOYZ 'N
THE HOOD, POETIC JUSTICE) has turned his focus from the inner city to
the college campus.  Set on the grounds of a fictional California
school, Columbus University, HIGHER LEARNING strives to examine the
political, sexual, and racial undercurrents that coalesce in such a
volatile atmosphere.
     For most people, the years spent at college are those of
exploration and discovery.  Confusion and heartbreak are as vital to
the maturation process as understanding and joy.  Universities across
the world represent buffers between life at home and "the real world";
places where boys and girls become men and women.
     In this film, John Singleton has chosen to look beneath the
peaceful veneer of college life, but the narrative that emerges is
decidedly unbalanced.  Focusing almost exclusively on the violent,
negative aspects, it ignores many of the positives.  Viewing HIGHER
LEARNING, we get little sense of community.  Columbus seems to be a
place where people go to have bad things happen to them.
     Three freshmen guide our steps through HIGHER LEARNING.  True,
they are stereotypes, but Singleton, as an accomplished filmmaker, is
able to imbue his characters with a vitality that allows them to escape
the boundaries which might normally constrain them.  Each grows and
evolves, albeit predictably.
     Malik Williams (Omar Epps) fits the traditional athlete type:
cocky and arrogant.  An urban black male on a partial track
scholarship, Malik is at school to run, not learn.  His attitude is
that the world owes him, not the other way around.  The reality that he
can lose comes as an ego- bruising lesson.
     Kristen Connor (Kristy Swanson) is a typical California girl.
Blond and carefree, she's at college for the whole experience--until
that experience includes going home with a guy who won't take "no" for
an answer.  She doesn't report the rape, but it affects every aspect of
her life thereafter and leads, in part, to her questioning her own
sexuality.
     Remy (Michael Rapaport) is a quiet, geeky engineer who enrolled at
Columbus to take courses and learn a profession.  But his social life
is barren and no one seems to understand him, except a group of shaven-
headed young men who claim he's one of them.  It doesn't take much
convincing before the lonely Remy joins the skinheads and embraces
their racist creed.
     Perhaps HIGHER LEARNING tries to cram too much into two hours.  On
top of that, in striving for a gut-wrenching finale, Singleton pushes
the issue of racial tension to a violent climax.  On most college
campuses today, there is racism, but it smolders and simmers, rarely
reaching this sort of explosive level.  This ending feels forced and
overplotted.  The tragic, ironic twist that punctuates the film is
anything but surprising.  In fact, most of what happens in the final
fifteen minutes is easily predicted.
     The film also loses an element of potency in its depiction of the
main antagonists.  The skinheads are presented as one-dimensional
caricatures.  As a result, the audience's enmity is equally as
shallow.  In SCHINDLER'S LIST, Steven Spielberg recognized that one key
to a powerful drama is a fleshed-out villain.  Thus, Amon Goeth was
intelligent, charismatic, and monstrously evil.  Similarly, the
skinheads of ROMPER STOMPER were frightening because of their realism.
In HIGHER LEARNING, however, there is little more dimension to these
neo-Nazis than there was to Michael Douglas' victim in FALLING DOWN.
They serve a function in the plot, but little more.
     Solid acting abounds, and helps immeasurably when the script
weakens.  None of the three main performers displays an overabundance
of talent, but all are more than equal to their roles.  Supporting
players the likes of Laurence Fishburne (as a professor with a lot to
say but very little to do) and Jennifer Connelly (as a lesbian who
befriends Kristen) round out a fine, if somewhat unorthodox, cast.
     Singleton's views of modern college life are considerably better-
rounded than those presented by many recent pictures (PCU and THREESOME
leap to mind).  Despite excesses and missteps, there is still a wealth
of digestible, thought-provoking material in HIGHER LEARNING.  The best
parts tend to be the most subtle ones--racism shown by a glance or
friendship by a kind word.  When this movie is quiet and introspective,
it speaks with a clear voice.  That insight gets muddled, however, the
more forceful Singleton becomes.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Eric Grossman
     Bad roommates, rape, race wars, College life can be tricky,
especially if you are a  student at Columbus University, the fictitious
setting of the new film, HIGHER LEARNING.
     Directed by John Singleton (BOYS `N THE HOOD), HIGHER LEARNING
follows three freshmen for a semester as they struggle to find
themselves against a backdrop of racial tension and sexual
victimization.  The central character is Malik Williams (Omar Epps), a
hotshot track athlete who, with the help of his friend Fudge (Ice Cube)
and his professor (Laurence Fishburne), discovers there is more to life
than running.  There is also Kristen (Kristy Swanson), eighteen years
old and sheltered until she is date-raped by a fraternity guy and
becomes a beacon for campus activism.  Finally, there is Remy (Michael
Rapaport), a lonely, unstable kid from Idaho who is overwhelmed by the
diversity of campus life and falls in with a group of skinheads.
        HIGHER LEARNING begins on the right foot.  The first half-hour 
focuses on the three characters and their friends in a college world that 
seems quasi-realistic.  There are entertaining scenes of roommates and their 
problems, financial-aid offices and boring lectures.  Singleton begins with 
subtlety, revealing little hints of what is to come for our characters and 
the paths they are to take.  Malik resents his coach and professor while 
Kristen attempts to fit in with her sorority sisters but we see quiet signs 
of her unease with that group.  Remy never quite works as a character because 
he begins as a seemingly good, quiet guy who gets stepped on and then all of 
sudden, he's a lunatic, ready to kill every minority he finds.  
     After the first act, Singleton abruptly changes gears into the
Oliver Stone/Spike Lee school of sledgehammer filmmaking.  All of the
nuances of the first thirty minutes are thrown out the window in favor
of overbearing stereotypes and clics.  The rest of the film is a drawn
out race war between Remy and his psychotic skinheads and Malik and his
angry African-American buddies.  There are haphazard time-outs to show
Kristy as she becomes infatuated with Taryn (Jennifer Connelly), a
feminist activist and her other relationship with Wayne (Jason Wiles).
     One thing that can be said for HIGHER LEARNING is its solid cast.
Epps, Swanson and Rapaport rise above Singleton's good to mediocre
dialogue.  As Malik's friend and mentor Fudge, Ice Cube is one of the
movie's highlights.  A limited actor but possessing a powerful persona,
Ice Cube steals every scene he's in.  It is ironic that he gives a much
stronger performance than Laurence Fishburne.  Normally a superb actor
with tremendous presence, Fishburne is maddeningly weak in his
portrayal of Professor Phipps.  With an accent that is somewhere
between Jean-Claude Van Damme's and some other dialect, Fishburne's
magnetism is undercut and he is never able to rise above the material.
     The cast also includes: Regina King, Tyra Banks, Jason Wiles, Cole
Hauser and Busta Rhymez.  Director of photography was Peter Lyons
Collister and the editor was Bruce Cannon.  Keith Brian Burns was the
production designer and Stanely Clarke wrote the score.
     Full of good intentions but lacking the proper execution, HIGHER
LEARNING is sometimes a movie, most of the time a polemic.  Singleton
has a lot to say but the problem is that he forgot the first valuable
thing you learn in film school, that in movies, it is more powerful to
show, not tell.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Written and directed by John Singleton
Starring: Jennifer Connelly, Ice Cube, Omar Epps, Kristy Swanson,
          Laurence Fishburne
Title sequence by Elaine and Saul Bass
     Everyone in HIGHER LEARNING has the same first name.  It's "The."
There's The Athlete, The Black Activist, The Stern Professor, The
Lesbian Feminist,  The Skinhead and The Clueless  Blonde.  Except the
professor, everybody belongs to organized campus groups.  The
advertisement for the film points to the main problem with the film.
There is a totem pole like object with the actor's faces superimposed
onto icons- a swastika, a black power fist,  a double-female lesbian
symbol plus others..  This is topped by a gun.  The actors are not
people but walking sets of values.  The gun alerts us that the values
will be in conflict.
     One of the best things about the film is Saul (PSYCHO) Bass's
pulsating title sequence set to Shaft-like music.  The energy rapidly
dissipates when the film cuts to a too obviously staged pep rally.  You
can imagine an assistant director off screen yelling,"OK now, everybody
chant in unison."  An obviously set-up quality plagues much of the
film, both visually and narratively.  The prop statue of Columbus at
the fictitious Columbus University oddly kept reminding me of the
"Knowledge is Good" sign in ANIMAL HOUSE.
     HIGHER LEARNING does get going eventually.  A protracted series of
small conflicts over music and roommate manners leads to more
substantive issues.  Once the characters are established, several of
them do become interesting, if not entirely credible.John Singleton did
give an amount of depth to his iconic characters.  They do more than
just espouse their party lines.  Even one of the neo-Nazi skinheads
shows some evidence of having thought through the things he believes
in.  When characters discuss similar topics among their own groups, the
lack of common ground among these ideologies becomes clear.
     Kristy Swanson (BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER) is in a group called
something like Students for a Non-Sexist Society.  Men are not allowed
to join.  When a man asks if that isn't sexist, he is treated as if he
is dense to suggest that.  Obviously it is a women's issue and a
women's group.  Singleton has his actors underplay the scene.  It
becomes a casual boy-meets-girl scene, more sweet than pointed.  Groups
that state their purpose as unity but only let a narrow group join do
abound on college campuses.
     Best among the ensemble cast is Laurence (DEEP COVER) Fishburne.
The character of the highly educated and Jamaican accented political
science teacher is a big departure from his typical cop and hoodlum
roles.  Through many years of teaching, he has seen it all and heard it
all.  I suspect that billing for the film was alphabetical since top
billed Jennifer Connelly (CREEPERS) was only a few scenes.  The film
stereotype for feminists is often an angry bitter woman with a bad
haircut.  Connelly gives us something quite different.  She is a gentle
and supportive character, relaxed with her friends and at peace with
the world.  Of all the students, she is the one that comes off most as
real person.  In a larger role, Ice Cube (BOYZ N THE HOOD) shows a
talent for both comedy and drama.  Unfortunately he is surrounded by a
less interesting collection of followers, and has one too many
confrontations with the racist University Police.
     Much of the story development is too obvious.  When a character
gets a leaflet warning about a crime problem on campus, that person
becomes a victim of that crime the very next day.  The Black activists
and the neo-Nazis are on an obvious collision course.  Singleton tries
to create a SHORT CUTS like world where people's offhand actions affect
others in unforeseen and unknown ways, but the world is too tightly
connected.  Out of 33.000 students, the core group of a dozen
characters has way too much effect on eachother.  HIGHER LEARNING
should have been another DO THE RIGHT THING, but it winds up as a
warmed over SCHOOL DAZE.  Still, with more and more Hollywood films
about absolutely nothing, credit should be given to John Singleton for
making a film about relevant ideas in our society.  Several excellent
performances and some thought provoking writing make the film worth
seeing.
     I would like to recommend a somewhat better and quite overlooked
film that examines the forces in society by juggling a microcosm of
people,  John Sayles' CITY OF HOPE.

Author
Pete Croatto
I first saw John Singleton's Higher Learning when I was 17.  Back in
1995, my friend and I left the theater feeling like we had seen an
important commentary on American society.  We felt informed.
It just goes to show you how clueless teenagers are.  At 23, I rented
the movie again and realized that I had no idea what the hell Singleton
was talking about.  Certainly, a lot of big issues are broached in the
movie: racism, sexuality, democracy, college education and its value. 
Higher Learning poses a lot of issues, but rarely does it offer any
meaningful answers.
The movie takes place at the fictional Columbus University, where we
meet the world's oldest freshmen class, which includes a track star
(Omar Epps); a wide-eyed innocent (Kristy Swanson); a troubled loner
(Michael Rapaport) and a sensitive guy (Jason Wiles).  As the first
semester unravels, the students will undergo a series of emotional
struggles that will change their lives forever.
The plot would all mean something if Singleton offered his characters
any engaging conflicts--they all seem recycled from movies of the week. 
Swanson gets raped and starts hanging out with a lesbian student
activist (Jennifer Connelly).  Epps rants and raves about black
oppression to his professor and girlfriend.  In response to seemingly
being insulted by Ice Cube and Busta Rhymes, Rapaport becomes a
Skinhead.
And the most maddening thing is that Singleton seems reluctant to tackle
the issues his characters endure.  He's like a bad TV anchorman---he
sticks to the highlights and avoids the background.  Epps' rage is
actually handled well, as he finds himself mulling different points of
view.  However, I'm still not sure how the campus skinheads managed to
pick Rapaport out of the entire student population, or what pushed
Swanson to joining Connelly's activist ways.
The one subject Singleton seems to know a lot about is that white people
simply can't be trusted, which is alarming considering the movie's goal
toward understanding.  At least twice, white security cops assault Epps,
thinking he's the suspect in a campus crime.
I'm not naďve.  There are white people who are prejudiced against black
people, as much as I'd like to think differently.  But in Higher
Learning the white characters create all the problems.  They rape, they
kill, they show little emotional growth.  Aside from so many people from
The Program having lead roles, it's probably the most distressing
presence in a movie that should be more about peace, love and
understanding.
Director: John Singleton
Producers: John Singleton, David Alonzo Williams, Paul Hall
Writer: John Singleton
Starring: Omar Epps, Kristy Swanson, Laurence Fishburne, Michael
Rapaport, Tyra Banks, Ice Cube, Jason Wiles, Jennifer Connelly, Cole
Hauser, Regina King
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        If DO THE RIGHT THING had taken place on a college 
campus, it might have gone something like this. Director John 
Singleton (of BOYZ IN THE HOOD fame) brings us this compelling 
story whose theme is that people tend to congregate within their 
own demographic, whether it be age, sex, race or all of the above. 
Singleton mainly focuses on racism which, narrow-minded and 
primitive as it is, will never completely vanish in this country. Had 
America's background been different, racial harmony may have been 
achieved, but with things and people the way they are, it's not going 
to happen.
        On one hand you've got the skinheads like Michael 
Rappaport, who goes through his first two months at college scared 
and alone before being recruited by a bunch of neo-Nazis, who offer 
companionship while filling his head with that Aryan Nation crap. 
On the other you've got the black people like Omar Epps, who sees 
the injustice inflicted on the African race and adopts the notion that 
all white people are to be distrusted and hated. Epps blames every 
wrong thing in his life on his skin color and soon withdraws to the 
comfort of "Super Duper Senior" Ice Cube's bachelor pad (also 
inhabited by charismatic rapper Busta Rhymes), where giant "Black 
Power" posters abound.
        Singleton doesn't just focus on the race problems, he shows 
feminine problems as well, when Kristy "Buffy" Swanson is date 
raped her second night on campus and is taken under the wing of 
Jennifer Connelly, one of those penis-boycotting feminists. I could 
guess right off that Connelly's character was a lesbian, albeit one of 
those beautiful Hollywood lesbians. Connelly makes it clear that she 
doesn't want to pressure Swanson into swearing off the male gender 
entirely, but there's always a breast to cry on if she wants it.
        Not every character is an extremist. There are some people 
in the movie with sense, like the Political Science professor 
(Lawrence Fishburne) who can actually look beyond sex and skin 
color and tries to explain to Epps that his defeatist attitude won't get 
him anywhere in the world; Epps' girlfriend, the lovely supermodel 
Tyra Banks, who also hasn't given up on success just because she 
was born black; Swanson's roommate, Regina King of "Family 
Matters," who's fought off Urkel's advances for six seasons and now 
has to worry about getting hit on by a lesbian roommate; and Epps' 
roommate, a white boy with no racial prejudice who tries to befriend 
Epps but can't break down the race barrier.
        Eventually, as in DO THE RIGHT THING, the racial 
tension builds to the point at which it manifests itself in violence, 
but not in just one scene and not just in one way. In the end, little 
ground is gained by either side. Thankfully, Singleton's realistic 
outlook prevented him from making a sugar-coated, harmonious 
ending. As one of the characters points out, that kind of "We Are 
the World" outlook is a crock. Certain individuals will always think 
society has screwed them over for the wrong reasons. And other 
individuals will think themselves superior to everyone else. The rest 
of this know none of this is right but some people's minds just aren't 
going to be changed. The race problem can't be eliminated entirely, 
but intelligent films like this can change individuals' thoughts and 
actions for the better.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
From noraruth@aol.com Mon Jun 10 15:04:47 EDT 1996
Article: 3656 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.att.com!not-for-mail
From: noraruth@aol.com (Andrew Hicks)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: HIGHER LEARNING (1995)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 10 Jun 1996 18:26:25 GMT
Organization: University of Missouri - Columbia
Lines: 69
Sender: ecl@mtcts1.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: ecl@mtcts1.att.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: noraruth@aol.com (Andrew Hicks)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtcts2.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #05427
Keywords: author=Hicks
Originator: ecl@mtcts2
Status: RO
        If DO THE RIGHT THING had taken place on a college 
campus, it might have gone something like this. Director John 
Singleton (of BOYZ IN THE HOOD fame) brings us this compelling 
story whose theme is that people tend to congregate within their 
own demographic, whether it be age, sex, race or all of the above. 
Singleton mainly focuses on racism which, narrow-minded and 
primitive as it is, will never completely vanish in this country. Had 
America's background been different, racial harmony may have been 
achieved, but with things and people the way they are, it's not going 
to happen.
        On one hand you've got the skinheads like Michael 
Rappaport, who goes through his first two months at college scared 
and alone before being recruited by a bunch of neo-Nazis, who offer 
companionship while filling his head with that Aryan Nation crap. 
On the other you've got the black people like Omar Epps, who sees 
the injustice inflicted on the African race and adopts the notion that 
all white people are to be distrusted and hated. Epps blames every 
wrong thing in his life on his skin color and soon withdraws to the 
comfort of "Super Duper Senior" Ice Cube's bachelor pad (also 
inhabited by charismatic rapper Busta Rhymes), where giant "Black 
Power" posters abound.
        Singleton doesn't just focus on the race problems, he shows 
feminine problems as well, when Kristy "Buffy" Swanson is date 
raped her second night on campus and is taken under the wing of 
Jennifer Connelly, one of those penis-boycotting feminists. I could 
guess right off that Connelly's character was a lesbian, albeit one of 
those beautiful Hollywood lesbians. Connelly makes it clear that she 
doesn't want to pressure Swanson into swearing off the male gender 
entirely, but there's always a breast to cry on if she wants it.
        Not every character is an extremist. There are some people 
in the movie with sense, like the Political Science professor 
(Lawrence Fishburne) who can actually look beyond sex and skin 
color and tries to explain to Epps that his defeatist attitude won't get 
him anywhere in the world; Epps' girlfriend, the lovely supermodel 
Tyra Banks, who also hasn't given up on success just because she 
was born black; Swanson's roommate, Regina King of "Family 
Matters," who's fought off Urkel's advances for six seasons and now 
has to worry about getting hit on by a lesbian roommate; and Epps' 
roommate, a white boy with no racial prejudice who tries to befriend 
Epps but can't break down the race barrier.
        Eventually, as in DO THE RIGHT THING, the racial 
tension builds to the point at which it manifests itself in violence, 
but not in just one scene and not just in one way. In the end, little 
ground is gained by either side. Thankfully, Singleton's realistic 
outlook prevented him from making a sugar-coated, harmonious 
ending. As one of the characters points out, that kind of "We Are 
the World" outlook is a crock. Certain individuals will always think 
society has screwed them over for the wrong reasons. And other 
individuals will think themselves superior to everyone else. The rest 
of this know none of this is right but some people's minds just aren't 
going to be changed. The race problem can't be eliminated entirely, 
but intelligent films like this can change individuals' thoughts and 
actions for the better.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
