Title
Review for Bad Company (1995/I)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Laurence Fishburne, Ellen Barkin, Frank Langella.
Screenplay:  Ross Thomas.
Director:  Damian Harris.
     There is a trick to pulling off a neo-noir thriller like BAD
COMPANY successfully.  Many young filmmakers and screenwriters seem
convinced that it's all about mood-drenched cinematography, or a
suitably twisty-turny plot.  The fact is that while those elements
might give a film a healthy start, they can't really make anyone
care about what's going on.  John Dahl (RED ROCK WEST, THE LAST
SEDUCTION) has re-ignited interest in the genre, not simply because
he knows how to push the right technical buttons, but because he
weds a great story with interesting characters.  BAD COMPANY is
loaded with double- and triple-crosses, but it's hard to care much
because the characters are so flat and bored-looking.
     Laurence Fishburne plays Nelson Crowe, a former CIA operative
now looking for a job after an agency "downsizing."  He goes to work
for a private organization known as the Tool Shed, which specializes
in doing dirty work like espionage, blackmail and bribery for
corporate clients, run by former CIA agents Vic Grimes (Frank
Langella) and Margaret Wells (Ellen Barkin).  Crowe's first
assignment is buying the vote of a state supreme court justice
(David Ogden Stiers) on a client's case, but he's not exactly
working for the tool shed.  Secretly still employed by the CIA,
Crowe's job is gathering evidence against the Tool Shed.  But he
also has plans of his own, chief among them trying to stay alive.
     BAD COMPANY is the kind of movie with tech credits so slick
that for a while I was tricked into thinking I was watching a good
movie.  It's a good *looking* movie, to be certain, with great
production design by Andrew McAlpine (THE PIANO) and glossy
photography of Vancouver locations by Jack N. Green (UNFORGIVEN).
Then, gradually, it became clear that BAD COMPANY was all attitude.
Everyone walks with maximum swagger, they wear sunglasses everywhere
and they engage in threat-filled, under-the-breath conversations
through a haze of cigarette smoke.  There is also, of course, some
steamy sex, and it may be BAD COMPANY's strongest selling point.
It's not that the sex is all that spectacular, but it is between
Barkin and Fishburne, and it's almost unheard of for a Hollywood
movie to include an inter-racial relationship without being *about*
the inter-racial relationship.
     It's easy to see why a studio would green light this story
without fear of controversy, though:  Fishburne and Barkin may be
black and white, but they're barely human here.  Fishburne plays
Crowe with a sleepy detachment, trying to play suave but instead
coming off as mechanical.  Barkin, meanwhile, is even less
interesting.  She's supposed to be a sexy "Ice Queen," but even a
femme fatale needs some sort of personality.  A subplot in which
Margaret tries to take Grimes out with Crowe's help seems primarily
intended to give her something vaguely interesting to do, because as
far as I could tell the real story could have taken place just as
easily without her.  Almost every supporting character is the same,
interchangably cool and devious:  Michael Beach as a Tool Shed
operative; Michael Murphy as Crowe's CIA superior; Daniel Hugh Kelly
as a professional card player.  In fact, there are so many
dispassionate performances in BAD COMPANY that Spalding Gray's turn
as the neurotic CEO of the Tool Shed's main client looks like he got
the only cup of coffee on the set that day.
     The plotting in Ross Thomas' screenplay is reasonably clever,
an interesting look at post-Cold War espionage as a growth industry.
While there are plot twists aplenty, they never feel piled on, nor
did I need a scorecard to keep up with who was screwing over whom.
The problem with BAD COMPANY isn't *what* happens, it's to *whom* it
happens.  It isn't always necessary for characters to be likable,
and in a dark thriller it may not even be desirable, but they need
to be more than robots whose sole function is moving the plot
forward.  Laurence Fishburne, Ellen Barkin and company are fine
actors, but they couldn't manage to act interested in anything that
their characters had to say or do.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Laurence Fishburne, Ellen Barkin, Frank Langella, Gia Carides, 
          Michael Beach, David Ogden Stiers 
Director: Damian Harris 
Producers: Amedeo Ursini and Jeffrey Chernov 
Screenplay: Ross Thomas 
Cinematography: Jack N. Green 
Music: Carter Burwell 
Released by Touchstone Pictures 
     There's one fundamental question that has to be asked about films
like BAD COMPANY: is the script one step ahead of the audience, or is
it the other way around?  In large part, the answer determines whether
suspense mysteries are pulse-pounding or pedantic.  In this case, it's
something of a mixed bag.  For, while director Damian Harris shows
aptitude with a kind of picture that's oh-so-easy to mess up, his film
occasionally moves too slowly to sustain tension.  There are times when
guessing what's around the corner becomes secondary to how long it
actually takes to make the turn.
     With one foot in the noir camp and the other in the modern-day
world of covert operations, BAD COMPANY builds its cleverly-layered
plot around two central characters.  The first, Nelson Crowe (Laurence
Fishburne) is an ex-CIA agent with a healthy sexual appetite, an IQ of
141, and a personality that's slightly paranoid.  The other, Margaret
Wells (Ellen Barkin), aka the "Snow Queen", is Nelson's kind of
woman--equally hard and soft, and a graduate from the same femme fatale
class as last seductress Linda Fiorentino.
     Invoking Fiorentino's name immediately calls to mind John Dahl,
and BAD COMPANY is his sort of movie.  Although lacking the full
atmospheric richness of, say, a RED ROCK WEST, the film nevertheless
possesses a stylish appeal.  Nasty characters always make for delicious
viewing, especially when they attempt to outplot each other.  The main
difference between Dahl and Harris, however, is that while the former
has his actors approach their roles with tongues planted in cheek,
Fishburne and Barkin play it straight--sometimes too straight.
     As is explained in a terse introductory section, Nelson was riffed
from the CIA after $50,000 in gold vanished while in his care.  With
his field of job options limited, Nelson applies to an outfit called
the "Tool Shed", a group of skilled ex-agents who use bribery and
blackmail to further the goals of their wealthy clients.  The Shed is
run by Vic Grimes (Frank Langella), a hard-nosed cynic with a passion
for fishing, and Margaret Wells.  Together, the two hire Nelson and,
after a quick baptism involving a video camera and a revealing tape,
he's given his first assignment:  corrupt a superior court judge (David
Ogden Stiers).
     Despite its share of delectable moments, BAD COMPANY is far from
the perfect double-cross thriller.  Borrowing heavily from dozens of
previous entries, this movie stirs the mix to arrive at something that
alternates between playfully fresh and poorly-paced.  BAD COMPANY
frequently sacrifices character development for plot twists, but that's
arguably the right choice--force of personality, as embodied by
Fishburne and Barkin, is often sufficient.  Certainly, film noir
doesn't appeal to everyone, but for those that enjoy this sort of
darkly convoluted plot, BAD COMPANY isn't as unpleasant as its title
might suggest.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Raymond Johnston
Starring Laurence Fishburne, Ellen Barkin, Frank Langella, Spalding Gray
Written by Ross Thomas
Directed by Damian Harris
     It takes guts to come straight out and put the word 'bad' right in
the title.  It's like waving a red flag in of a bull.  It challenges
wags such as myself to come up with witty bon mots about how the film
is aptly named, list the bad parts of the film and compare it to other
self proclaimed 'bad' films.  The problem is that BAD COMPANY isn't
really bad so much as it is simply mediocre.  It's not great cinema,
but it is halfway decent trash.
     The story is some nonsense about renegade ex-secret agents and a
murder/blackmail operation run by Frank Langella.  It never quite
manages to generate any interest.  The double and triple crosses are
simply by the book plot twists.  Since there is no reason to expect
that anybody is playing an honest game, the double crosses are never a
surprise.  At least BAD COMPANY manages to be  a post cold war thriller
without demeaning stereotypes of Latin American drug lords.  It's not
about drugs, the new universal threat.  What it is about, well that
unfortunately is never very clear.
     Since the plot is a wash what the film is about, by default, is
style.  There is more tension created by the clash between Laurence
Fishburne's saturated primary-color apartment decor and the unfinished
bomb shelter chic of Langella's corporate office than there is tension
created by any of the characters themselves.  Well-realized sets, a
good pace and some spiffy costumes dress up the goings on.
     Supporting the sets in the film are several performances full of
attitude.  Laurence FIshburne's character doesn't have nearly the depth
of his professor in the still current HIGHER LEARNING, but it is a very
slick performance.  He gives his ex-secret agent man a cool strut and a
tough demeanor.  Ellen Barkin has a BASIC INSTINCT type role, the
heartless femme fatale, a sexual manipulator using her charms to
advance her agenda.  Barkin makes her character seem to be at least
fairly intelligent.  She manages to bring a decent amount of allure to
her stock character, and tries to match Sharon Stone's notorious BASIC
INSTINCT scene.  Frank Langella and Spalding Gray create smarmy amoral
rich characters, complementing their costumes nicely with solid
performances of their routine lines.
     The film, however, ultimately is completely forgettable.  It is
all wrapper and no candy bar.  Strip away the window dressing and the
story is nothing more than a thin excuse to stage a few
well-choreographed gun play scenes and some fairly explicit sex
scenes.  There is no development of any themes, no attempt to raise
political or moral questions.  The film is about absolutely nothing
except sex and gun play.
     Better films of this type include THREE DAYS OF THE CONDOR
(based on the novel SIX DAYS OF THE CONDOR), THE PARALLAX VIEW, THE
MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE and WINTER KILLS.  All four of these manage to
offer some tight suspense and some food for thought as well.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This a film about espionage.  That used to mean countries spying
on each other.  But about ten years ago, with the end of the Cold War,
the need for spies was no longer as urgent and on one day the CIA laid
off a hundred of its employees.  As most of us know, being unemployed
is not a good situation in which to find oneself and the former CIA
spies had to look for other work.  What else did they know but spying?
     Fortunately, for them, there are still lots of spying jobs
available except now it's within our own country with corporations
spying on each other and on their own employees.  The new head of the
CIA has claimed that economic espionage is the hottest current topic in
the Intelligence field.  And in April 1993 the FBI's industrial case
load leaped from ten to five hundred in only nine months.  So the film,
Bad Company, is not entirely a work of Ross Thomas' imagination.
     Nelson Crowe (Laurence Fishburne) is a CIA agent who is in
disfavor because he said he turned over some X millions of dollars to
"someone" as ordered by the CIA but he has no receipt and the "someone"
claims he never got paid.  Sounds like the Iran-Contra fiasco.
     The Agency tells Crowe to get a job with The Grimes Corporation,
get the goods on them and get back his own good standing with the CIA.
The Grimes Corporation does all sorts of spying and frequently uses the
information it gains to blackmail and pick up a few extra millions for
itself here and there.  (You cannot trust anyone these days.)  That,
you will agree, could give spying a bad name.
     All would have been well for Crowe who did start out to do an
honest job of infiltration but along the way he got a bit greedy
himself.   This was not entirely unexpected because the President of
the Grimes Corp, Vic Grimes (Frank Langella) has as his right-hand
"man" an unscrupulous and pretty woman, Margaret Wells (Ellen Barkin).
     The dialogue is good, the action moves nicely, the actors are
first-class but somehow the film does not come up with that necessary
"something" to set it in a class by itself.  Maybe it is the number of
fornicating scenes and that they seem to go on so long that the
tendency is to laugh.  That will kill an espionage film in a hurry.
Whatever.  It could have been a better film.
