Title
Review for Full Monty, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Watching the most infectious comic moment in the British import THE
FULL MONTY -- a film rich with infectious comic moments -- can teach you a
lot about what so many Hollywood comedies get so wrong.  The scene is set
in a Yorkshire unemployment office where the film's six protagonists,
laid-off steelworkers in training to become male exotic dancers, are
waiting for their bi-weekly dole cheques.  As the office radio begins
playing Donna Summer's "Hot Stuff," the men begin swaying unconsciously to
the beat, eventually easing into their bump-and-grind choreography for the
song.  It's a wonderful bit of comic film-making, surprisingly restrained
and staged with impeccable momentum and timing.
     It also comes in a context which gives the laughter more bite.  The
main characters in THE FULL MONTY are frustrated and emasculated by their
unemployment:  divorced Gaz (Robert Carlyle) faces losing joint custody of
his son for non-payment of child support; overweight Dave (Mark Addy) is
rendered impotent by his feelings of physical and economic inadequacy;
middle-manager Gerald (Tom Wilkinson) is so shamed that he still hasn't
told his wife of his sacking six months after the fact.  Their spontaneous
burst of energy in that dole queue is a physical manifestation of
optimism.  They're trying something to become men again, by God, even if
it's as ridiculous a notion as dropping trou -- or going "the full monty"
in Brit-speak -- in front of 400 howling women.
     Now I'm not saying it isn't worth several chuckles simply watching
the out-of-shape mates muddle their way through their pirouettes and
pelvic thrusts; incongruity is the mother of classic physical comedy.  I'm
willing to wager, however, that a Hollywoodized version of THE FULL MONTY
would miss the point entirely.  In this hypothetical American MONTY, the
idea of six working-class blokes becoming strippers, none of them ideal
physical specimens, would be treated as inherently hilarious.  It would
become a broad farce, with Chris Farley re-creating his "Saturday Night
Live" sketch challenging Patrick Swayze for a spot in the Chippendales
line-up.  THE FULL MONTY isn't an effective comedy because the stars are
unattractive.  It's an effective comedy because the characters _are_
attractive, because their dilemma is genuine and their solution is ripe
with possibilities.
     Ironically, the most noteworthy flaws in THE FULL MONTY might have
been erased by a good old Hollywood script doctoring.  Screenwriter Simon
Beaufoy dangles a few too many plot threads for no apparent reason,
including a gay romance which never matters much to the story.  Dramatic
confrontations interfere with the comedic flow, as though Beaufoy didn't
trust the performances and basic plot situations to generate enough
sympathy for his characters.  Though not nearly as pedantic as the
similarly-themed BRASSED OFF!, THE FULL MONTY still treads dangerously
close to pathos at times, clashing with the lads' growing enthusiasm for
their new calling.
     THE FULL MONTY may be a high-concept premise, but the execution is
resolutely low-concept.  That's a combination Hollywood is having a tough
time putting together in its comedies.  Comedy with ideas doesn't have to
be leaden; comedy with big laughs doesn't have to be simple-minded.  THE
FULL MONTY gives depth to dole-line disco..._that's_ high comedy.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

FULL MONTY, THE (director: Peter Cattaneo; screenwriter: Simon Beaufoy;
cinematographer: John DeBorman; cast: Robert Carlyle (Gary 'Gaz'
Schofield), Tom Wilkinson (Gerald Arthur Cooper), Mark Addy (Dave
Althorpe), Steve Huison (Lomper), Paul Barber (Barrington "Horse"
Mitchell), Emily Woof (Mandy Schofield), Hugo Speer (Guy), 1997-UK)
A "feel good" movie about unemployment in the steel-mill town of
Sheffield, England, and how these layed off workers overcome their
misfortunes and gain self-respect by using their will power to do
something that is out of character for them; that is, they become
strippers. Yes, they become male strippers...The story is predictable,
likable, and soapy. It leaves one all fuzzy and cuddly inside, as the
film uses risque material to make its point, yet it is almost totally
devoid of hot sex. It traps you in its formula mode; you can't help
wishing these blokes do well. They represent a universal paradigm: there
is the loner, the aging man representing the minorities, the prude who
is really a swell guy, the untalented but well-endowed fellow, the
insecure one who is also obese, and the regular "Joe" down on his luck.
Well, rest assured, things turn out well, they all have a good sport
with their one night of a full monty (which is a total strip) in front
of a ladies only audience.
The film's popularity does not surprise me, people seem to like quick
solutions to their problems and films where thinking is not a
prerequisite for enjoying it. I have a feeling that this film will age
poorly, and like a lot of trendy films, will not look good a few years
from now. I thought it offered just so-so entertainment value. It never
gave me the impression that I was seeing something that mattered. The
full monty as promised, was not even delivered.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Takeshita
In the beginning of THE FULL MONTY, we are shown a cheesy early 70's
promotional film for the city of Sheffield, England.  Sheffield, we
are told, is a city based on steel.  Massive factories employ
thousands of workers in an industry which will never die.  Fast
forward 25 years into the present, where Sheffield is now somewhat
less than a boom town, with a large portion of its male population
looking for jobs.
We meet Gary (Robert Carlyle) and Dave (Mark Addy), two unemployed
steelworkers reduced to stealing scrap from the abandoned factory
which for ten years was their place of work.  Gary has a son who is
shuttled back and forth between living with Gary and his ex-wife and
her live-in lover.  The ex lives in a comfortable house in a good
section of town, while Gary lives in a cramped apartment in a near
tenement neighborhood.  What Gary lacks in material possessions, he
tries to make up for with love for his boy.  Dave, on the other hand,
is married, albeit not happily.  He suspects his wife of looking for
another man to replace him, due to his current state of unemployment
and his overweight condition.  To top it all off, he's battling a bout
of impotence.
While walking home from a botched attempt at "liberating" a steel
girder from their old factory, Gary and Dave notice hundreds of women
lined up to enter a nightclub to see the Chippendale Dancers.  They
first scoff at the performance, but when Gary finds out he needs 700
pounds in order to file for joint custody of his son, they realize
that male exotic dancing would be an easy way to make some quick cash.
Their first obstacle, however, is that neither of them can dance very
well, so they attempt to enlist the help of their former boss, Gerald
(Tom Wilkinson), who happens to take weekly dance lessons.  Gerald,
like Gary and Dave, is unemployed, but he can't be involved in such
foolishness because he has "standing."  Besides, he's on his way to a
job interview, his first in six months.  Gerald also points out a
second problem.  Dave is fat, Gary is skinny, and they're both ugly.
In retaliation, Dave and Gary manage to sabotage Gerald's interview,
but quickly realize their mistake when Gerald has a near breakdown,
confessing that this was his last hope.  He hadn't told his wife he
was jobless, and "she's still got credit cards.  She's out there right
now, shopping!"  After making amends, Gerald agrees to help Dave and
Gary learn to dance and audition other dancers.  After all, he needs
the money, too.
In general, the characters are quite likable.  For example, even
though Gary takes his son Nathan (William Snape) along with him to
steal scrap, and has him run the tape player when grown men are
stripping to Donna Summer's "Hot Stuff", you know it's only because he
wants to spend time with his boy.  You can't help but like a character
who's willing to take off his clothes and risk being a laughing-stock
for a reason like that.  Robert Carlyle brings a lot of earnestness to
his role, and the scenes involving Gary and Nathan have a tangible
sense of genuine affection.
The accents and terminology get in the way in a few places, and I
think I lost out on several of the jokes due to the fact that some of
the dialog was unintelligible.  If I were from Sheffield, I'm sure I
would have been rolling in the aisles.  Luckily, this wasn't a major
problem as most of the jokes were sight gags anyway.  About 80 percent
of the movie's laughs are derived from watching these unemployed
steelworkers trying to shake their moneymakers.  One might think that
the same joke would grow tiresome after a while, but director Peter
Cattaneo does a good job of making each attempt at learning a little
different.  A funny little scene involves the would-be dancers trying
to get tips by reviewing a tape of FLASHDANCE.  They get encouraged
when they notice that the Jennifer Beals character is a steelworker,
too.
One problem I saw was the way the main characters bonded so quickly.
Gary and Dave already know each other, but everyone else is basically
thrown together in a very short time.  One day they are strangers, and
the next day they are working as a team to pursue a goal.  The
relationship between Gary, Dave and Gerald even has to overcome
animosity and a class boundary.  I suppose a case could be made for
the common plight of unemployment, but since the movie only runs an
hour and a half, a little extra time could have been taken in order to
cultivate the relationships a little more carefully.
All in all, THE FULL MONTY is an enjoyable film.  While laughing at
the characters, we are also wrapped up in the desire to see these
folks get a little better each time.  While part of this has to do
with the characters' likability, I also think it's because they're
just regular guys like the rest of us, and not muscle-bound hunks.
We'd like to see normal people get the same success and adoration that
the top of the genetic pyramid so often hordes.  Although I didn't
really need to see them take their clothes off, I was rooting for them
all the same.

Author
Steve Kong
I've love movies that leave me with a silly grin when I step out of a
theatre. The Full Monty is just that kind of movie.
Two men in Sheffield, England are down and out. They are out of their job
at a local steel mill and just wander around. They spend their extra time
steeling steel bars and hanging out at the local job-hunting office. Also
at the job-hunting office is their former foreman. One day Chippendales
visits their town and all the local women are there. One of the down and
out men, Gaz, gets an idea. They could make a bundle of money if they did
the same thing as the Chippendale men, except taking it all off. Going for
"The Full Monty."
The two men seek out the help of their former foreman, who knows how to
dance. Then they go looking for other men. They put together a group of
six, them included, of a strange mix. One guy is extremely good looking,
but can't dance (watch as he does the "wall walking" dance). Another is
overweight and thinks that his wife is cheating on him. Another can dance,
but has a bad hip and is a bit old. The there is the guy whose wife is
using the credit card to the max but does not know that her husband has
been out of a job for over six months. All of them have their troubles and
this makes for a hilarious rag tag group of men.
The movie follows Gaz (Robert Carlyle) most of the time. He has been out of
his job, lost his wife, and now a court is saying that he cannot see his
son because he hasn't paid his child support. His son is hesitant of
staying at his place because he can't afford heating.
The Full Monty is a great mix of comedy and a bit of drama. The striptease
act is erotic at all, unlike the recent bad attempts by Striptease and
Showgirls, The Full Monty throws out eroticism and puts in comedy.
Worth mentioning is the beautiful cinematography by John de Borman. He
captures the beauty of the countryside and the gritty looks of the city.
Also worth mentioning is the upbeat score by Anne Dudley.
Since this was a film from England, I had a hard time at the beginning and
sometimes during the film, understanding what they were saying on screen.
Though later on in the film the accents sunk in.
The Full Monty is a hilarious film with a good mix of comedy and drama. I
highly recommend this film. Don't miss this one in the theatres. You just
might find yourself walking out of the theatre will a silly smile on your
face.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert Carlyle, Tom Wilkinson, Mark Addy, Steve Huison, 
      Paul Barber, Hugo Speer, Lesley Sharp, Emily Woof, Bruce Jones
Director: Peter Cattaneo
Producer: Uberto Pasolini
Screenplay: Simon Beaufoy
Cinematography: John de Borman
Music: Anne Dudley
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     THE FULL MONTY is the third recent dramatic comedy to emerge from 
the United Kingdom to illustrate the effects of unemployment on the 
individual and the family.  Like BRASSED OFF! and THE VAN, THE FULL 
MONTY combines humor with light drama to explore the manner in which a 
group of men cope with the emotional and financial toll of being "force 
adjusted."  Moreso than its two immediate predecessors, however, THE 
FULL MONTY is interested in getting the audience to leave the theater 
with a warm feeling, and, considering this undemanding agenda, it's 
reasonably successful.
     No one would ever call THE FULL MONTY ambitious.  In fact, with its 
confident reliance upon formulaic situations and familiar characters, 
it's anything but that.  Most of the credit for the film's success must 
go to the game troupe of actors and director Peter Cattaneo, who allows 
the story to develop in an unforced, easygoing manner.  Originality may 
be at a premium here, but THE FULL MONTY offers plenty of opportunities 
for laughter and genial smiles.
     The movie opens in Sheffield, England, a major steel working city 
whose central industry has been modernized and mechanized.  Productivity 
is up, but the victims of the automation are the workers, many of whom 
have been laid off.  THE FULL MONTY focuses on one such man, Gaz 
(Scottish actor Robert Carlyle, who played Begbie in TRAINSPOTTING), who 
can't find an appealing job and is hundreds of pounds behind on child 
support payments to his ex-wife, Mandy (Emily Woof).  Gaz's best friend, 
Dave (Mark Addy), and his former boss, Gerald (Tom Wilkinson), are also 
unemployed.  Their collective inability to find work is eating into 
their self-esteem.  Gaz's son doesn't want to spend time at his dad's 
house because it's always cold, Gerald is frightened to tell his credit 
card-obsessed wife that he doesn't have a job, and Dave loses his 
ability to perform sexually. 
     Things change when the Chippendales arrive in Sheffield to perform 
a show.  The tremendous crowds that turn out for the event give Gaz an 
idea.  If male strippers who don't take it all off can rake in the 
money, what about those who are willing to show "the full monty"?  In 
short order, Gaz has recruited an unlikely group of dancers:  a sad 
loner (Steve Huison), an aging black man with rhythm and a bad hip (Paul 
Barber), and a cheerful, well-endowed young man (Hugo Speer) who has the 
body but not the moves.  Drawing upon Gaz's enthusiasm and Gerald's 
experience as a ballroom dancer, the band of six develop a routine, 
dancing with and without clothes to the songs of Donna Summer, Gary 
Glitter, and Tom Jones.
     Unlike other recent stripper movies (SHOWGIRLS and STRIPTEASE, for 
example), THE FULL MONTY throws pretended eroticism out the window.  
There isn't a sexually provocative moment in the film.  The nudity is 
discretely handled, although the actors did in fact perform a live strip 
show in front of 400 extras in a sequence that was, according to the 
director, "a one-take deal."  This lends a degree of spontaneity to THE 
FULL MONTY that makes the movie's climactic scenes more believable and 
enjoyable.
     The degree to which the actors manage to bring their characters to 
life is a key reason why THE FULL MONTY is a little better than 
countless other pictures with similar goals.  The six members of the 
group relate well to each other and engage our sympathy.  Robert Carlyle 
plays Gaz with the right mix of pathos and energy.  The actor continues 
to impress with his range, adding this film to an impressive resume that 
includes Ken Loach's RIFF-RAFF, Michael Winterbottom's GO NOW, and the 
aforementioned TRAINSPOTTING.  Tom Wilkinson (SENSE AND SENSIBILITY) has 
the "stuck up bastard with a good heart" role down pat.  And, as the 
overweight Dave, Mark Addy brings to the fore feelings of insecurity 
that almost anyone can relate to.  
     THE FULL MONTY is basically about overcoming adversity and 
succeeding is spite of certain perceived shortcomings (no pun intended).  
Cattaneo borrows a tactic that numerous, recent Australian comedies have 
adopted:  incorporating a slew of pop hits into the soundtrack.  What 
THE FULL MONTY lacks in depth, it makes up for in good will and 
likeability.  This isn't a great movie, but it's breezy, enjoyable, and 
easy to sit through.  And sometimes, even when dealing with a serious 
issue like unemployment, that can be the perfect tone to drive home a 
message.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Martin Rich

Seen within a few minutes of one another last week in London: a series 
of advertisements for computers running the Windows NT system, with the 
slogan 'The Full MoNTy', and a headline in a tabloid newspaper crying 
'Give us the Full Monty, Gordon'.
It's a measure of the film's success that the description 'the full 
Monty', until now more often associated with the English cooked 
breakfast, has become so widely used in recent weeks.  And, given that 
the film is about male strippers, the mind boggles at that tabloid 
headline, which was actually about Britain's reluctance to commit to a 
fiscal union with the rest of Europe.
The plot of the film is very simple - a group of redundant Sheffield 
steelworkers are looking for alternative ways to earn their keep and, 
in desperation, come up with the idea of mounting a strip show.  But 
the effect is in the execution, and in the acting; there are such 
wonderful moments as when a redundant foreman, played by Tom Wilkinson, 
has a visit from the bailiffs, or when the slightly tubby steelworker 
played by Mark Addy attempts a very novel approach to losing weight.
Starting with an archive film from the 1970s, about Sheffield's then 
thriving industry, 'The Full Monty' actually tells us a great deal 
about the collapse of a society based on heavy industry.  Light-hearted 
as it is, it addresses a very important question: when the traditional 
sources of livelihood in places like Sheffield disappear, what needs to 
replace them?
It's good fun, and good-natured fun as well because the characters are 
invariably both fallible and likeable.  Despite being set among such 
economic desolation, a genuine feel-good film.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Achive reviews at http://www.us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Remember the old adage "We're not laughing AT you, we're laughing WITH 
you"? That's what makes the delightful British film "The Full Monty" work 
so well. Over the course of 90 minutes spent with the most unlikely male 
strip troupe ever, their friends and neighbors go from laughing at them 
to laughing with them, and so do we. In addition to big laughs, "The Full 
Monty" has a big heart.
A series of vignettes sets up the sad plight of a group of men in 
Sheffield, England. They had been workers at the town's booming steel 
factory, but times have changed. Now the unemployed gents hang around the 
job center, playing cards and smoking while looking forward to nothing in 
particular. That is, until Gaz (Robert Carlyle, memorable as the 
explosive psycho in "Trainspotting") spies on a group of women at a 
Chippendale-style strip show. He overhears a lady gush "It's not their 
bodies, it's what they do with them" and decides that organizing a troupe 
of male strippers is the ticket to financial stability. Unfortunately, 
Gaz and his mates are light years from being buff, so they decide to 
overcome their liabilities in the physique department by stripping down 
to the full monty - - British slang for the works, which in this case 
means total nudity.
"The Full Monty" is smoothly paced, blending comedy and pathos deftly to 
create a breezy, enjoyable ride. The able cast takes a group of more-or-
less stock characters and makes them sympathetic and three-dimensional. 
Carlyle is beguiling as the scrawny Gaz, an energetic soul desperate to 
catch up on his support payments so he can continue spending time with 
his son. Gaz's best pal is Dave (Mark Addy), a chubby fellow whose 
insecurities have rendered him impotent. 
The men recruit their former boss, the now unemployed Gerald (Tom 
Wilkinson) because of his skills in ballroom dancing. A hilarious 
sequence of auditions result in three more additions to the troupe; a red-
headed suicidal loner (Steve Huison), a 50 year old who can do the funky 
chicken when his bad hip isn't acting up (Paul Barber), and cheerful, 
skinny Guy (Hugo Speer), who can't dance a lick, but will happily display 
his huge willy.
The men's financial and spiritual despair is crucial to "The Full Monty". 
Not only does it humanize the characters, but it makes the comic scenes 
even funnier, and make no mistake, "The Full Monty" is VERY funny. One of 
the highlights of the film is a sequence set in the unemployment office. 
While the glum men stand in line waiting to collect their checks, Donner 
Summer's "Hot Stuff" begins to play on the radio. The guys try to ignore 
it, but their toes begin tapping and, when the song hits a key passage, 
they involuntarily thrust their pelvises forward in unison, just like in 
rehearsals. 
Another great moment comes when a police officer happens on the men 
rehearsing in their red leather G-strings and arrests several of them for 
indecent exposure. In the police station, officers run a surveillance 
tape showing the men's rehearsal and Gaz and Gerald immediately begin 
critiquing their performances, ignoring the raucous laughter of the cops. 
When the local newspaper prints the story of the arrests, the men's 
secret plans become public knowledge and events swing towards a giddy 
conclusion. Forced to be honest with their spouses and friends about the 
planned performance, the men are mortified, but things take an unexpected 
and charming turn. 
"The Full Monty" is advertised as a comedy, but it is more than that. In 
unassuming fashion, the film deals with love, pride and despair, body 
shame, and the joy of abandoning inhibitions. The film also boasts a 
strong sense of community. The citizens of Sheffield have all suffered in 
varying degrees from the town's recession. Initially they scoff at the 
men's absurd plans, but when the idea sinks in, moods begin to change. 
The sheer audacity of the guys' idea strikes a chord with their neighbors.
 When the big performance finally rolls around, it's extremely funny, but 
not in any derisive fashion. The spectacle of the men prancing onstage 
becomes an act of defiance, of liberation. Do the men actually show the 
full monty? You'll have to wait and see, but it is safe to predict that 
few people will leave the theater without broad smiles on their faces. 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE FULL MONTY (UK, 1997) ** 3/4  Directed by Peter Cattaneo. Written by
Simon Beaufoy. Photography,  John de Borman. Editing, David Freeman  &
Nicholas Moore. Production Design, Max Gottlieb. Music, Anne Dudley. Cast:
Robert Carlyle (Gaz), Tom Wilkinson (Gerald), Mark Addy (Dave), Paul Barber
(Horse), Steve Huison ( Lomper), Hugo Speer (Guy), Emily Woof (Mandy),
Lesley Sharp (Jean),William Snape ( Nathan), et al.  Distributed by 20th
Century Fox. 90 min. Rated R (language, full rear male nudity)
Films about working-class Britons have always been a big chunk of the
United Kingdom's cinema. They were particularly strong and inventive during
the post World War II period, in which they coincided with the Angry Young
Men movement in the theater. Later yet, from the 1980s on, independent
filmmaking, generally produced by television --for TV as well as theatrical
release--consistently focused on working class themes and/or characters. To
a great extent those works reflected anti-Thatcherism and the new
multi-racial society. The approach was veristic/naturalistic, yet often
combined with imaginative techniques, as in the films by Terence Davies
("Distant Voices, Still Rooms," "The Long Day Closes"), or by Mike Leigh
("High Hopes,""Naked," "Secrets and Lies").
"The Full Monty," a first feature for both its director and its
scriptwriter, brings nothing radically new to the working-class genre in
its combination of socially conscious drama, humor, sadness and realism. It
is built, however, around a "high concept." "High" does not refer to
elitism or aristocracy but rather to a plot that can be summarized in few
words: six out-of-work men from Sheffield in Yorkshire, out of work like
many others, decide to make a bundle by doing a strip-tease for an
all-female audience.
Sheffield, once a thriving steel town --as shown at the movie's opening in
a 25-year old, gung-ho, faded documentary--has fallen onto hard times.
Steelworkers have been made redundant, and while unemployment moneys
apparently still keep coming through for months, they do not suffice. With
enforced idleness, there is also psychological trauma, loss of
self-respect, loss of respect from the men's wives, generalized sadness,
even inability to perform in bed.
For divorced Gaz who loves his most likable teen-age son, there's also the
burden of child-support payments  that he cannot meet. But then everyone
has additional problems. Gerald, formerly the immediate (hence disliked)
superior of Gaz and friends, has a lower-middle-classish lifestyle that
includes ballroom dancing and terrible taste in home and garden decoration.
For months, he has been hiding from his missus the fact that he too was
laid off.
One day, Gaz (Robert Carlyle, familiar to some US audiences from
"Trainspotting" and "Priest") notices--and sneaks into--a very well
attended male strip show "For Ladies Only." Not without difficulty he
rounds up colleagues -- including former "enemy" Gerald -- and sets up
interviews.
One recruit, a black man called Horse, has leg trouble but can still "do
the Funky Chicken." Others are inept. And so on. As expected, Gaz's wild
scheme has the built-in makings of comedy as it goes through reticenses,
stumbles and goofs before a motley crew of Chippendale (male strippers)
dancers materializes. The bonding of the men is not far behind.
There are nice inventive bits in the story, but there are also redundant
sections in this tale of redundancy: some protracted footage as the plot
builds up; a somewhat belabored gimmick of Gerald being distracted during
his first job interview in six months; a dead-end glimpse of two of the
would-be dancers discovering mutual attraction. The film comes to an abrupt
ending, with the fellows doing "the full monty," that is, stripping
totally. (We see only a rear view of them)
There must be a trend these days for movies with no closure, as in the last
three films I have seen :"The Edge," "Box of Moonlight" and "The Full
Monty." They stop without showing us if and how their characters have been
modified by their experiences and what happens next.
On the other hand there are semi-throwaway parts that flesh out the
characters: Dave's relation with his wife, his self-consciousness of being
fat (but there's a lot fatter!), Gerald's being repossessed, the moving
moment of a brass band playing "Abide with Me" at a funeral and other
touches. There is also a funny sequence of a police raid after which the
group is proven not to have been breaking-and-entering because a
surveillance tape of their rehearsal is found. (The video might have served
as a learning-through-errors tool but this is not developed).
The acting is excellent. It is as though the private Robert Carlyle's
strong, leftist political convictions (he used to be a labor organizer) not
only underlie his performance but influence the acting of some of his
colleagues as well as the overall mood of the film.
I surmise that had "Monty" been an American product, it would have stressed
very broad comedy, even slapstick, for better or worse. Worse, by
undermining realism through exaggerations such as a bulkier, John
Candy-like Dave in the buff, by leering, by neglecting its socio-political
side. Better, by accelerating some sequences. As it is, the film is amusing
in a way that gets more chuckles than loud laughter. Interestingly, in the
audience I watched it with, the great majority of chuckles came from women.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Robert Carlyle, Tom Wilkinson, Mark Addy, Steve Huison, Paul
Barber, Hugo Speer, Lesley Sharp, Emily Woof, Bruce Jones Director:
Peter Cattaneo Screenplay: Simon Beaufoy
It seems that unemployment in England has driven her unemployed subjects
to unusually high levels of creativity. First there was "Brassed Off"
where emotions are expressed through music, and now "The Full Monty",
where clothes come off, and women roll in for a peak at the real thing.
Well at least it's an honest living and a decent days wage.
These men come in all shapes and sizes, different ages and colour. It's
not necessary how you look or how you dance. It's who you are, and
whether you are capable of stripping in front of five hundred women AND
men. Imagine how difficult it must be to take your clothes off in front
of a single stranger, or having to piss in a urinal when there's
somebody looking over your shoulder. Well that's how it must feel when
six ordinary, unemployed men decide to strip for very different reasons.
Sure there's always the dole, but at least these men have the courage
to take action against their sinking fortunes.
The six male leads are relatively unknown to the general public, but
successfully engage the audience's attention with their problems and
failures. Director Peter Cattaneo has succeeded with the "Full Monty",
where "Striptease" and "Show Girls" both failed. It carries both heart
and humour, and enough male dignity to keep one's head high even when
the "Full Monty" is finally revealed. What the US of A needs is a full
scaled reply to unemployment. With perhaps the likes of say Tom Cruise,
Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt, Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves and Richard
Gere doing their bit with "The Full Monty" - the proceeds would
naturally go towards feeding hungry mouths.

Author
Walter Frith
It's a tired statement but it sticks.  1997 has been such a bad year
involving big budget films that have fallen flat on their faces that an
entertaining film made for scale such as 'The Full Monty' is a certified
comedy gem with some important dramatic overtones.  What is so striking about
this film is that it's nothing like you would excpect.  It's about male
strippers but contains absolutely nothing of a sexually provocative nature.
Set in England, it's basically about six men who find work as exotic dancers
and the story builds to the climactic scene which asks 'Will they or won't
they'?  Take it all off, that is.  It centres primarily on three leads,
Robert Carlyle (Begbie from 'Trainspotting') Tom Wilkinson ('Priest') and
Mark Addy.  The three of them used to work together in the steel industry but
are now unemployed looking to improve their lives.  What's interesting is
that Carlyle and Addy are best friends and Wilkinson used to be their boss so
they now must come to terms that they're all in the same boat sometimes
rocking it a little too hard.
The comedy is leisurely presented and the movie contains the type of shrewd
wit often desired but hardly ever seen.  The rehearsal scenes in preparation
for the big show are hilarious as the men don't have an ounce of go-go
ability and the physical comedy is presented perfectly as a well timed string
of gags.  But along the way 'The Full Monty' does more than that.  It also
combines the main story with some touching moments of reality involving
Carlyle's struggle in presenting himself as a role model to his young son who
finds the growing pains in a life of borderline poverty more than a struggle.
Director Peter Cattaneo illustrates his movie by slowly drawing the audience
in to a film which has excellent character development, medium pacing and a
genuinely good nature to it.  See it with friends.  It is an audience picture
that like a good television sitcom, sells better with a natural laugh track.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 10 September 1997 for $8/75  at the SONY 19th Street
In British slang, "the full monty" means to be completely naked. While
*The Full Monty* is about a sextet of out-of-work blokes who decide to put
on a strip-tease act, a lot more than their bodies are laid bare.
"Sheffield, a city on the move!" cries a propaganda film of the 1950s,
declaring a boom for Sheffield and all of Britain. This is a stark
contrast to the present, where steel plants that once helped produced the
flatware on your dining table lay idle and rusting. The streets are not
bustling; Sheffield often looks like a ghost town. The ghosts in this case
are the flesh-and-blood men who are out of work, on the dole, with time on
their hands. The few jobs that are available are low-paying security guard
j obs.
Robert Carlyle plays Gaz, a former steel worker who cannot afford to do
much with his son Nathan (William Snape). Along with his friend Dave (Mark
Addy), they meander around town like a pair of middle-aged teenagers. 
A brief bit of eavesdropping in the mens room of a strip club catering to
ladies for the evening gives Gaz an idea--he should form a strip troupe
and raise money far quicker than the few jobs available to him. Then he
would have money for child support, a nd joint custody. 
What ensues is not unlike *The Seven Samurai*, with a highly entertaining
and comic story of how the other members of the troupe are found and
incorporated. First there is the suicidal Lomper (Steve Huison), followed
by the middle manager cum dance instru ctor Gerald (Tom Wilkinson),
pentagenarian Horse, who knows how to move, and Guy, who wants to dance
like Gene Kelly but winds up flat on his back everytime he tries to walk
up a wall. Luckily, Guy is extremely well endowed, which guarantees his
entry to the troupe.
As is often the case with movies set in Great Britain, there is a lot of
social commentary going on that often passes us by. Gerald lives a
middle-class lifestyle (gnomes all over the garden) and has a house full
on unnecessary luxuries. Lomper lives in a Victorian attached house with
his aged mother.  Dave has sexual troubles with his wife, likely stemming
from not having meaningful work. Many of these men had once been part of a
great nation, and empire, and now, they haunt their old places and the
high street has been supplanted by superstores and megamalls.
Men often define themselves by their work and their relative success in
work defines their overall "worthiness." This is clear in The Full Monty.
What makes it a winning movie is that the actors are able to pull off the
dual roles of physical comedy and e motional depth. That is certainly no
easy task, but the actors all pull it off. It's hard to find a favorite
performance because they all do so well.
Some scenes to watch for: Dave and Gaz meet the Lomper; Gerald's
interview; the six men waiting in line for the dole and spontaneously
jiggling to the strains of Donna Summer's "Hot Stuff." The soundtrack is a
lot of fun, too. 
As with many British movies, you often wish subtitles were included.
Luckily, the Full Monty website (via Fox Searchlight pictures) has a
little phrasebook included. 
----------------------------------
Copyright (c) 1997, Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com.
Other movie reviews with graphics can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. 

Author
Brandon Stahl

"The Full Monty" (*** out of four)
        I bet no one on this campus would want to see me strip.  It's not that I'm ugly, my mother insists that I'm not, but I'm just not buff enough to show everything for paying fans.  A British comedy about unemployed steel workers down on their luck, `The Full Monty,' takes that idea a bit further,  and has average looking men stripping for money.
The critics have given extremely high praise to this movie and it has been the art house hit of the year, so going in I expected to see one of the best shows of the year.  That being said, I was entertained by the movie and it was well worth watching, but somehow I was a little disapointed. It was reviewed as a non-stop laugh machine, but I found it more sad than humorous.  So many places and situations that The Full Monty looked for it's humor are depressing.
That's not to say that the movie isn't funny.  There are some of the hilarious moments on screen I have seen in the past few years.  A scene involving elves is nearly worth the price of admission, and the finale of the film was perfect.  But the movie is laced with so much sadness in the characters; each man seems pathetically beaten down, unwilling to look within himself to find salvation.  Rather, they seem content to be ignorant without a job and lie to themselves and others about their situation.  One man is suicidal and a momma's-boy, another hasn't told his wife that he's been laid off (and it's been six months).  
Robert Carlisle, the leader of the men, is stripping to pay child support.  That's a noble thought, but he brings his son to all of the practices and to the actual strip show itself.  I guess if I were a father trying to convince people that it was okay to see my son, I wouldn't bring him to strip shows.  
There is a scene where Carlisle interviews a man who is auditioning to be a stripper.  The man fails miserably, but Carlisle asks him to stay awhile and bring his children in to watch. "Sorry," he says.  "This is no place for me, and this is no place for kids."  Carlisle was affected by the words at the time, but he didn't learn anything - he kept bringing his son to the practices.  I have a tough time laughing at that.
Another plot line involves a man who believes that he is too fat to strip in front of an audience.  To lose weight, he hides in a shed in his backyard and wraps himself in saran wrap while he eats a snickers bar.  There's a strange mentality in that - ask yourself, how desperate would you be to lose weight if you wrapped yourself in saran wrap? 
The Full Monty is an entertaining movie, but I think it's more of a character study than a comedy.  Would it be a better movie without the sad elements? No, but I wish it weren't advertised the way it is. 
The Full Monty Directed by Peter Cattaneo.  Starring Robert Carlyle, Tom Wilkinson, Hugo Speer and Steve Huison

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) "The full Monty" is a British phrase meaning full frontal
nudity. That might explain the movie's rabid popularity in England. 
No, even with a lesser title, this movie deserves its popularity. 
The movie starts with an industrial film from 25 years ago hyping the
economic paradise of the steel town of Sheffield. The film jumps 25
years forward to two friends stealing scrap metal from the now-closed
factory. Hard times have since fallen on Sheffield and the people are
desperately unemployed. 
On their way home from their unsuccessful visit to the steel factory,
Gaz (Robert Carlyle) uses a poster for the visiting Chippendale Dancers
show to illustrate the ironies of unemployment to his friend Dave (Mark
Addy). But the poster gives Gaz an inspired idea on how they can make
some money. They'll put on their own strip show, but they'll offer
something Chippendale's doesn't: The Full Monty! 
Dave is reluctant and self-conscious, but decides to humor Gaz, thinking
the notion will pass. But Gaz persists. 
In one of the movie's many visually funny scenes, Gaz does a great
striptease in an old garage to show his friends how it's done. What
makes the scene so funny is that Gaz is so good at the
you-know-you-want-me, over-the-shoulder look. Until now, Gaz has been
your average, former steel worker, GUY. Suddenly, he has all the right
moves and all the right looks. The change is so unexpected and so well
executed, we can't help but laugh. 
Gaz hires more and more out-of-work steel workers; some for their
dancing, some for their moves, and one of them for his . . . . uh . . .
. Monty. Soon there are enough of them to stage a show. 
The story is rather predictable, but that doesn't detract from the movie
any. It still has just the right mix of comedy and sympathy. Its
characters are funny, but they are not made fun of. 
For example, Gaz and Dave cause another character to flub a job
interview. The way they do it is hilarious (another one of those great
visually comic scenes), but the victim is human, and when we see the
joke from his point of view, it's more painful than funny. 
And when they remove their clothes, we can see the dancers'
insecurities. We laugh not because they are the butt of a joke, but
because they can laugh at themselves in an awkward and uncomfortable
situation. 
The only flaw I perceived was that the ending of the movie was too
abrupt. After an entire movie leading up to one inevitable climax, I
would have liked a little more time to come down. 
If you do go see THE FULL MONTY, there is an interesting question to ask
yourself afterwards. Could the movie have worked if the sex roles were
reversed. Would it be possible to make a comedy about "average" women
becoming strippers to earn a little money? Mabye it could be called Full
Reverse Monty.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
c:\modem\homepage\reviews\pea_jr97.htm

Author
Ryan Davis
        THE FULL MONTY is a whole lot of fun, its wacky, witty, and original.
It's written and directed by relatively unknowns , Simon Beaufoy and Peter
Cattaneo, who both turned up Oscar nominations. How did this movie with a
budget under 10 Million gross over 175 Million worldwide? Its been rumored
that this film may be the second most profitable movie of the year! And to
think its about male exotic dancers, and not sinking ships.
        Six steel workers who have been recently been laid off and are all
looking for jobs. Inspired by the success of a Chippendale's production, Gaz
(Robert Carlyle) decides they should all put on a strip show to make some
money quickly. As the six team up to put on the show of their lives, they run
into a few problems. For instance, Dave(Mark Addy) is worried about his
weight, Horse (Paul Barber) thinks he may be inadequate, and Gerald(Tom
Wilkinson) is worried about his reputation and timing. So when the night of
the show comes, will the men be able to do the "full monty"?
        As I said before this is a fun movie, and not just that its really
artistically good. The writing and direction are great.  The acting is
appealing, all the performances have a human quality to them, so you can
relate to at least one of the characters. THE FULL MONTY received four Oscar
nominations including Best Picture. Which left me wondering one thing, why
didn't TRAINSPOTTING get a Best Picture nomination last year? While THE FULL
MONTY is a great lighthearted comedy, it doesn't carry the social impact of
the brilliant TRAINSPOTTING. Still, THE FULL MONTY is a great film,  a must
see!
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Homer Yen
 25 years ago, the town of Sheffield, England was a thriving community
 that saw no end to it's growth.  Their steel industry was booming, the
 economy was robust, and the outlook was nothing but prosperous.  But
 that was 25 year ago.  Now, the once-great community has fallen victim
 to hard times.  The steel industry has all but died, unemployment runs
 rampant, and all evidence of prosperity has faded like the dyes of an
 overwashed shirt.  
 Yet, there are a few local denizens who remain in Sheffield, hoping to
 find a way to elevate themselves from their situation.  One is named
 Gaz (the sociopathic Begbie from Trainspotting).  He is a pessimistic,
 chain-smoking, and somewhat delusional bloke who can't seem to make
 anything work.  He has dreams and ambitions and is genuinely
 good-hearted, but the reality is that he is a separated, deadbeat Dad
 with a cute 11-yr. old son, whom he can not adequately take care of.
 Gaz loves his son very much, but the mother is fighting for sole
 custody of the boy, and Gaz needs to find work to pay for the
 expensive court battle ahead.  
 Gaz comes up with a crazy idea after passing by a club featuring the
 visiting Chippendales.  He convinces himself that if women would pay
 to see men strip, then he could do the same and make the money he
 needs.  But he can't do it alone and enlists the help of his best
 friend, Dave.  Dave, is also a casualty of the economic depression,
 but desperate times calls for desperate measures.  Calling themselves,
 HOT METAL, they begin to embark on their plan of assembling a group of
 studly men who will try to rival the Chippendales.  Of course, those
 that apply are not of Chippendale caliber.  They are either
 overweight, ugly or old.  They also can't dance and have no rhythm.
 Watch them in their first practice session and you'll see them running
 into each other, falling down, and being generally oblivious to
 anything that resembles a beat.  
 In another scene, a few women approach them, expressing reluctance in
 watching less-than-average looking blokes strip.  "Why would we want
 to look at you," they ask.  And with a spark of inspiration, Gaz
 declares that they'll get more than they expect.  "We're going to give
 you the full monty!" This is an expression meaning that they are going
 to go all the way - taking it all off!  But can they really go through
 with it?  Even Gaz doesn't know if he really wants to go through with
 it.
 What you'll find pleasing about this British, offbeat comedy is the
 way that the writers draw you into the group of aspiring strippers and
 through the various stages of emotions as they prepare for their
 once-in-a-lifetime gig.  You feel the moments that are shameful and
 embarrassing, silly and triumphant.  You'll watch how destiny brings
 these desperate souls together, and how they begin to gel as a family
 and as a team.  You begin to root for these people as they continue to
 practice and set their sights on their final performance.  You want to
 see them succeed and retain the manhood that left with the steel
 industry years ago.
 I have to give credit for the way this film was executed.  It has an
 intelligent screenplay, which allayed any fears that I had that this
 would be some weird knock-off of last summer's disappointing
 "Striptease."  What could have been racy is instead a nice balance of
 pathos and comedy.  The story is straightforward and moves quickly to
 its winningly funny conclusion.  The characters are all engaging.
 And, while I felt this weird feeling in my stomach every time I
 thought the actors on screen would begin to peel away layers of
 clothing, there was the proper dosage of humor injected into the
 scenes to act as an antidote.  Potential queasiness quickly turned
 into laughter.  However, be prepared to handle heavy English accents
 and several of out-of-shape butt shots.
 The Full Monty is a cute story that shows us how far people will go to
 attain the unattainable.  To do so, sometimes, we must bare our souls
 (and in this case, our bodies).  Fortunately, all you'll have to part
 with is a couple of dollars.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
How many of us would become strippers? For those of us who wouldn't, is it a
moral reason, or purely a lack of confidence? That's probably not a fair
question, and for a lot of us, it could very well be for neither of those
reasons. As you watch THE FULL MONTY, however, you may begin asking yourself
these kinds of questions. Would you be willing to grin and bare it to bring in
some much needed dough?
In case you haven't guessed, THE FULL MONTY is about stripping, but STRIPTEASE
it ain't. It's actually quite a charming comedy that uses its ideas with a
great deal of tact and sophistication. It is the story of six out-of-work,
out-of-shape blue collar Brits whose recent job losses have left the boys
penniless, but not without need. What to do? It hits our main character Gaz
(Robert Carlyle) as he notices the large crowds of women who pour into a local
male strip club on a regular basis. It seems that simple: take it off and
bring in the cash.
Eventually, Gaz is able to convince his friends to join him in starting their
own exotic dance routine despite their initial reluctance. These include the
overweight, confidence-lacking Dave (Mark Addy), the uptight, overly-officious
Gerald (Tom Wilkinson), the once suicidal Lomper (Steve Huison), and two
additional fellows who gain their place among the group by audition: Horse
(Paul Barber), an older gentlemen chock full of graceless energy, and Guy
(Hugo Speer), a young well-endowed looker who compares himself to Cary Grant.
When the sextet is complete, we're given a hefty dose of physical comedy. We
watch the bumbling middle-aged men choreograph pseudo-sexy dance numbers, all
the while proving why none of them were strippers in the first place. As if
there anti-appeal wasn't enough, they decide to boost interest in the group by
promising "the full monty" on opening night, which for us Americans, means
baring it all . . . and I mean *all*.
The movie actually ends on opening night; a hilarious applause worthy ending I
might add. It's sure to leave nothing short of a big smile on your face as you
leave the theater. With the subject matter, you might not expect THE FULLY
MONTY to be such a feel-good, almost inspiring film, but it surprisingly turns
out that way. The amount of light, touching drama also comes as a nice
surprise, never feeling off-balance from the otherwise highly upbeat moments
of the film. There's a lot more to this movie than you might think in other
words, and the ensemble cast couldn't be better. Each character is completely
individual, interesting, funny, and most importantly, real.
THE FULL MONTY is never offensive, a very impressive attribute since its
subject matter alone could've easily fallen prey to tastelessness. It's one of
those movies that is best described as a solid piece of entertainment, perfect
for a great night on the town, or as a Saturday night movie rental. Either way
you see it, it shouldn't let you down in the slightest. And, pun heavily
intended, when it's all said and done, you'll be smiling from cheek to cheek.

Author
Rory Mackay
In Brief: Fun, enjoyable, amusing and touchingbut maybe a tad over-rated.
THE FULL MONTY, I believe, has become the most successful British film of
all time, surpassing FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL which previously held that
distinction. To be honest, its success is perhaps a bit baffling -- I mean
it certainly has a lot going for it (a lot more than its title or premise
would seem to suggest) but it's not the type of film that seems to thrive
in the Film industry nowadays. It's low-key, understated, with no real
big-star names (perhaps excepting Robert Carlyle), no big action scenes, or
no gimmicky special effects. Unfortunately, that's the kind of film that
seems to be most popular these days, and low-key character pieces tend to
slip by unnoticed, regardless of how good they are.
In a way, the success garnered by THE FULL MONTY is quite encouraging. It
goes to show that we're capable of watching and enjoying something other
than the brainless or violent mediocrity than generally tends to
proliferate Hollywood. THE FULL MONTY is a quiet, rather unassuming
character drama (touted as more of a comedy, I know) which has heart. Let's
face it, though, based on its premise -- unemployed guys who decide to
become strippers -- it doesn't exactly sound enthralling. If it hadn't been
for its critical and commercial success, I very much doubt I'd have had the
urge to go and see it.
But it takes a potentially iffy premise and builds on it, adding some
emotional resonance and milking it for all the humour its worth. It has to
be said that as a comedy, THE FULL MONTY isn't one of the funniest I've
seen. The humour is very much understated, and whilst some may find this
disappointing, it's still quite effective. However, the film's biggest
triumph is the adept way it portrays an ensemble of interesting,
three-dimensional and very human characters. It avoids lapsing into
redundant sentimentality but still manages to be quietly touching. It
touches upon some very real issues that affect real people, such as
divorce, impotence, and unemployment. It looks at how we tend to value
ourselves on the jobs we have and the money we make, and how losing that
stability can shatter one's self esteem.
The film follows several blokes who have recently lost their jobs, and they
decide to become male strippers. The justification is rather flimsy, but
it's merely a plot device - the real gist of it is them reclaiming their
sense of self-worth, realising that it's basically up to you whether you
lose your sense of purpose or simply move on in life. That's a relevant,
important message to get across, and I suspect that's why the film has
struck a chord in so many people. It's a feel-good film, not too reliant on
its slippery plot nor its humour as much as its undertones of optimism.
THE FULL MONTY boasts some charismatic performances by its solid cast,
including Robert Carlyle, who gives his characteristically understated, yet
compelling performance. Directing-wise it's certainly proficient, if
perhaps lacking much visual flair. As far as production goes, well, it's
not a film that required a huge budget, and all the more effective for it,
being eloquent in its simplicity. 
The more I think about this one, the more I like it. But it's not, as some
suggest, one of the very best films ever made. It takes a good while to get
going, and the plot itself is pretty thin. The humour, as I've noted, feels
rather restrained, and as well-played and poignant as it is, the character
drama often lacks the emotion to give it real punch. What makes THE FULL
MONTY so enjoyable is, to a large extent, the reasoning behind the plot.
The story's wonderfully optimistic, feel-good underpinnings are both
inspiring and uplifting. And that more than overcomes the film's (few)
shortcomings.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For more Film and TV Reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Folks don't laugh [at you] when you have a grand in your back
pocket," reckons Gaz, a working-class bloke living on the dole in
Yorkshire.  He has a scheme, and what a scheme, that should raise
several thousand for himself and his unemployed buddies.
     British audiences may know the term "full monty," but Americans
probably will not.  The closest American slang might be "buck naked,"
and where either term comes from remains a mystery.  The film's title,
THE FULL MONTY, refers to Gaz's crazy idea.  After a group of
Chippendales comes to their mining town and cleans up, Gaz decides that
he and his friends could summon the courage for one night and outdo the
Chippendales.  His group will take it all off and not stop at
G-strings.  There is, however, a slight problem of talent and looks.
The local men being anything but buff.
     The result is a typically zany British comedy dripping with pathos
for the workers.  One can reasonably view the film as a social satire,
but that would be taking director Peter Cattaneo's comedy way too
seriously.  Still, one of the show failings is that sometimes it cannot
figure out what it wants to be and lets it morose aspects dominate at
inappropriate moments.  First-time screenwriter Simon Beaufoy's script
has rough edges that need working out, but the overall feel is of a
writer with much promise.
     The film opens with arguably the funniest scene in the picture.
We are treated to a hokey but real documentary short promoting
Sheffield, "a city on the move."  Taken 25 years ago, it shows a
prosperous Sheffield with booming industry and a good environment for
raising a family.  The music is so relentlessly upbeat that I thought
we were going to see a pseudo-documentary a la the much more hilarious
WAITING FOR GUFFMAN.
     As soon as the opening credits end, we skip to the present where
Gaz, his son, and one of his friends are trying to steal an iron girder
from a derelict warehouse.  We soon learn that Gaz and all of his
friends spend their days at the unemployment office where they wile
away their time smoking under the "no smoking" sign and doing all they
can to avoid even looking for a job.  Only Gaz's ex-foreman Gerald (Tom
Wilkinson), who has not even told his wife he was laid off 6 months
ago, is actually trying hard to find a position.  And when he gets his
only interview, his "friends" screw it up.  Tragic scenes like this
work but only to the detriment of the film's comedic effect, and they
would have been better placed in a more serious film.
     Gaz is played with resoluteness by Robert Carlyle from PRIEST and
TRAINSPOTTING.  Although it is an ensemble cast, Carlyle's role is so
central that without his strong but vulnerable portrayal, the picture
could easily have sunk.
     Once Gaz concocts his idea for a momentary ticket out of poverty,
he needs two things, a guide and a cast.  He steals a copy of
FLASHDANCE for their instructional video, and they conduct auditions
for cast members.  These auditions are among the show's funniest
sequences.  Some guys are overweight and others are painfully skinny.
One guy shows up who can't sing or dance, but who does have an
incredible large male organ -- which is stared at in disbelief but not
shown.  He is hired on the spot along with a fiftyish black guy, who
can actually dance, albeit only routines from the 60s.
     In another beautiful scene, the guys have just about given up and
are back in the unemployment line to collect their checks when one of
their dance numbers comes on the loudspeakers overhead.  Slowly they
start dancing to the rhythm until each of them realizes they must
follow through on their big plan.
     Until the very end, it is still not clear if some, all, or none of
them will actually bare it all.  You may even find the ending a bit of
a surprise.  With a subtext of desperation and anti-Thatcherism, the
film tries too hard to deliver a message, but it remains quite funny
nevertheless.
     THE FULL MONTY runs a breezy 1:30.  It is in English so thick with
Yorkshire accents and slang that American audiences are doomed to miss
parts of it but not enough to detract from the film's comedic punch.
The movie is rated R for one scene of male nudity and for some
profanity, and it would be fine for teenagers.  I recommend this
sometimes too bittersweet comedy to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Sheffield, England, in the early 1970s had an economy a strong as
the steel it produced, as a public relations documentary under the
credits tells us.  But this is twenty-five years later and the mills
have closed.  The people who planned to work in the mills the rest of
their lives are on the dole and scratching to find subsistence jobs.
Gaz (played by Robert Carlyle--the weird Begbie of TRAINSPOTTING) has
lost his wife and son to another man, mostly because he cannot provide
for them.  He has only tenuous visiting rights with his son, Nathan
(William Snape) but pushes the law and has his son as a nearly constant
companion. Gaz does have an idea how to make a little money.  When the
Chippendales male strippers play in town they pack a local rented hall.
If they can make money so easily, perhaps Gaz and his friend Dave (Mark
Addy) can put on the same sort of a show.
     The problem is that the people he can get on the stage to strip
are incredibly ordinary-looking people, not the Chippendales sort of
hunks.  And they dance worse than they look.  With more reluctant pluck
than looks and talent put together a group of six men including their
old foreman Gerald (Tom Wilkinson) and Horse, an aging black drifter
with a bad hip but who can teach them the moves.  (How they assemble
this troop while still keeping their plans secret is not really clear.)
But the question is why would women who have seen Chippendales be
willing to pay to see such losers strip?  Gaz thinks that if they go
the "full monty," baring all, that that will give them the edge.  The
idea seems doomed from the start.  If they cannot make a living at what
they were good at, how can they expect to be cocky enough to entertain
an audience stripping, particularly looking so ordinary, this one
skinny, that one out of shape, another one over the hill.
     THE FULL MONTY manages to be about a lot of things and work on
several levels.  In part it is about the sad state of much of the
British economy and the effects, obvious and subtle, of unemployment,
broken dreams, and failure on the community.  Sheffield is city where
the balance of power between the men and the women has been destroyed
by so many of the men's inability to earn a living.  Gerald, the former
boss of Gaz and Dave has spent six months maintaining a ruse for his
wife that he still has his job.  When he can no longer provide luxuries
his wife wants the marriage breaks apart.  We are led to assume
something similar has happened to Gaz's marriage well before the action
of the story.  The film is also about how closely tied is Dave's self-
image to his ability to earn a living.  In fact the most touching
personal relationship in the film is Dave's with his wife.
     This is a cast that will seem to most American audiences to be
unknowns.  Robert Carlyle of course is from TRAINSPOTTING.  Curiously
he is the lead, but his performance is not one of the better ones of
the film. For me the performances I will remember will be Mark Addy's
Dave and Tom Wilkinson's Gerald.  It is these people pushed to the
point of desperation and for whom the audience generates the most
sympathy. Tom Wilkinson of SENSE AND SENSIBILITY and THE GHOST AND THE
DARKNESS would seem to be the most secure of the three and yet he has
the fewest options and clearly feels it.  Sadly we do not see very much
of Horse, played by Paul Barber.  In some ways his is the most
enigmatic character and the film could have used more story about him.
     The only serious problem with THE FULL MONTY is that it is our
third or fourth film about the sad state of the economy in the English
hinterlands.  This film reminds one a bit too much of BRASSED OFF!  And
having a brass band making the best of a bad situation in an early
scene may be an unfortunate coincidence. But a comedy-drama with good
characters is always worth seeing.  Listen sharply to pierce the thick
accents.  I give this a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
Trailing the success of brit humour in the movie industry with the likes of
the semi-dramatic THE COMMITMENTS and the nearly slapstick A FISH CALLED
WANDA, THE FULL MONTY is one film which delivered the depth of the former
and the humour magnitude of the latter. The film opens with a narrated
documentary reel showing the improving economic and living standards of
Sheffield in the 60's, then cut to the harsh reality of the present.
Sheffield has become some sort of a semi-slum with the only visible
increase in anything was the amount of layoffs from steel-factories; a once
flourishing industry.
Gaz (Carlyle) spends most of his time in the Worker's Club, a sort of place
where jobless people sit around to wait for job offers. He and his `plump'
friend Dave (Addy) as well as their former foreman Gerald (Wilkinson) have
been sitting around the club for months without any `call for duty'. What
seemingly was just a passing hard time for Gaz suddenly transformed itself
into desperation when he cannot afford the 700 pounds of child-support
money to his ex-wife. Suddenly finding himself facing the possiblity of
losing custody of his son, he goes on to concoct an enterprising wild-idea
to get the money he desperately requires. 
Dave and Gerald too have problems of their own. On top of his lack of
employment, Dave is also faced with the paranoia of his wife leaving him
because of his current financial state as well as his`plump' appearance
while Gerald have been cheating on his wife by not telling her of his
layoff for as long as 6 months, leaving home for `work' when he was
actually a long-standing member of the Worker's Club. There we have it;
people with real problems and a not-so-practical solution for them. Gaz
manages to get the support from them and sure enough they managed to get a
few other poor jobless blokes to join in their gag : to perform a strip-act
at the local pub. In Gaz's own words while looking at an add for a
strip-act featuring hunky `beautiful' men, `If women are willing to pay for
this, they sure as well will pay for REAL-men'.
THE FULL MONTY is very simple in nature and not a trace ambitious at all.
It is a small film which delves in the harsh-reality of unemployment and
the desperation it drives people to. It also is a very light movie to watch
despite the theme it delves in because it has a lot of human-factor going
for it. Never for once, was it trying to be manipulative at all, THE FULL
MONTY was true to itself all the way. While the hilarity level of this film
soared unexpectedly high, audience will find that they are in no way being
cheated of a laugh, something lacking in many comedy films (wannabes?) from
Hollywood. 
Other than Carlyle, who acted as the psychotic Begbie in TRAINSPOTTING, the
rest of the actors were definitely very new to me on-screen. However, the
acting presented in this film is more than satisfying. Carlyle's work here
is a stark contrast to his character in TRAINSPOTTING, implying real acting
skill and flexibility on-screen. Kudos to the people involved in this film,
especially to director Peter Cattaneo for being able to put together an
excellent film which is has so much potential in ending up as your
just-another-STRIPTEASE. 
Already a critical and financial success for such a small film, THE FULL
MONTY is a humble film which deserves applause throughout. While TITANIC
managed to feast the eyes and soul in an epic way, THE FULL MONTY gives one
the same satisfaction.in half the time.

Author
Alex Fung
THE FULL MONTY (Fox Searchlight - 1997)
Starring Robert Carlyle, Tom Wilkinson, Mark Addy, Lesley Sharp,
  Emily Woof, Steve Huison, Paul Barber, Hugo Speer
Screenplay by Simon Beaufoy
Produced by Uberto Pasolini
Directed by Peter Cattaneo
Running time: 91 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
As the summer films begin to dwindle in numbers at theatres, it
becomes increasingly clear that in 1997, only two films have been
able to breach the gulf between specialty theatres and the mainstream
to become indisputable crossover successes -- Victor Nunez's family
drama ULEE'S GOLD and Peter Cattaneo's striptease comedy THE FULL
MONTY, both of which in recent months improbably made appearances in
weekend domestic Top 10 box office totals, typically dominated by
mainstream fare.  (One could also make a case for John Madden's
historical drama MRS BROWN and Masayuki Suo's uplifting SHALL WE
DANCE? as similar crossover successes; neither of them were able to
crack weekend box office Top 10 listings, but they have both had
long, relatively successful runs.)
As has been well publicized, the focus of THE FULL MONTY is a group
of unemployed men who, inspired by the success of a visiting troupe
of Chippendale dancers, form a striptease act in order to scrape up
some money.  The kicker is that our protagonists are not the hunky
beefcakes which typify a lineup for the Chippendale dancers -- one is
decidedly overweight, two are scrawny, and the only two which know
how to perform anything resembling dance aren't exactly in the prime
of their youth anymore.  Uh oh.
The opening reels of THE FULL MONTY sets up the basic framework for
the predicament our heroes face in order to arrive at their
striptease solution.  Set in Sheffield, proudly proclaimed in a
sardonic 1970s promotion reel as a thriving, healthy "City On The
Move", we cut forward in time -- indeed, this may be the first film
I've seen where a title card reading "Twenty five years later"
precedes any live-action footage -- to a city rife with unemployment,
where the town's steel mills, its primary industry, have been shut
down.  Gaz (Robert Carlyle) and best friend Dave (Mark Addy) frequent
the local unemployment centre, ostensibly to write employment inquiry
letters, but spend most of their time instead playing cards.  Even
their priggish former steel mill foreman, Gerald (Tom Wilkinson), has
been released, humiliatingly putting him on equal terms with his
ex-employees.  It's an all-too-familiar situation in the contemporary
reality of working-class towns, where an aura of resigned
hopelessness, broken dreams, and wounded pride permeates the
environment.
However, THE FULL MONTY is such a determinedly cheerful film, full of
levity and upbeat moments, that there's no real sense of despair or
gloom in the characters' situation of unemployment; it's really a
superficial depiction of their dilemma.  Admittedly, given that the
film is a comedy, it would probably be inappropriate for THE FULL
MONTY to deeply delve into the characters' plights in a mournful and
downcast fashion, but the film is so jovial and spirited in nature
that the artifice of the construct of THE FULL MONTY is blindingly
clear and mildly distracting -- everything is centered around and in
service of the striptease storyline.
Simon Beaufoy's debut screenplay, save for the wickedly funny
premise, is a rather bland one.  THE FULL MONTY's protagonists are
essentially a group of collected idiosyncratic individuals who make
for unlikely pals, but the film gathers them together in a trite
manner which fails to fully exploit its full comic potential, and the
three principal characters are given would-be touching personal
subplots which are too familiar in nature (Gaz is threatened with
loss of shared custody for his obligatorily cute son due to his
inability to afford child support; Dave's insecurity with his
appearance results in a faltering relationship with his spouse;
Gerald, too ashamed to tell his wife about his lack of employment,
bravely continues a charade of heading off to work every morning) to
be as affecting as aspired.  THE FULL MONTY's characters are
consequently likable, but lack real depth and aren't particularly
compelling.
While THE FULL MONTY seems to explore aspects of social realism in a
halfhearted manner, there is a detectable momentum built up towards
the film's dance scenes, which are very funny indeed.  The scenes
where the uncoordinated men are being taught how to dance by Gerald
-- himself intuitively not the most obvious instructor for a
striptease endeavour, given that his dance repertoire seems to
consist primarily of amateur ballroom dancing; hardly suitable
credentials to school on the art of gyrating pelvises, one would
think -- are terribly amusing (two great scenes in this vein are
where one whips off his belt, lashing the fellow next to him, and
where Gaz twirls his leather jacket over his head, pelting onlookers
with spare change from his jacket pockets), while the group lineup
dance in the unemployment office to Donna Summer's "Hot Love", as
revealed in the film's trailers, is a real scream, an unadulterated
burst of infectious, joyous energy.
The ensemble cast in THE FULL MONTY is invariably solid, with the
standout performance coming from chameleonic Mr. Carlyle, who in a
role completely different from his most famous turn as the
temperamental Begbie in Danny Boyle's TRAINSPOTTING, shows great
expressiveness and demonstrates the ability to be irrepressibly brash
and unrestrainedly free-spirited while remaining empathic.  He makes
a fine central character in THE FULL MONTY, and shows promise as an
unconventional, down-to-earth leading man.
THE FULL MONTY is a feelgood crowd-pleaser, and inevitably, after the
film reaches its low point at the end of its second act, there is a
build up towards the big nightclub stripping performance which serves
as the film's showcase.  All loose ends are dutifully resolved in a
suitably upbeat manner, and in front of a full house, the boys
finally hit the stage to the strains of "You Can Leave Your Hat On".
They, of course, do not.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"I'll shoot for the Queen, and you can shoot for, well, whomever."
                               - Richard Harris, UNFORGIVEN

Author
Jamie Peck
Fox Searchlight / 1:30 / 1997 / R (language, nudity)
Cast: Robert Carlyle; Tom Wilkinson; Mark Addy; Steve Huison; Paul 
Barber; Hugo Speer; William Snape; Lesley Sharp; Emily Woof 
Director: Peter Cattaneo 
Screenplay: Simon Beaufoy 
The male dancers in the much-hyped "The Full Monty" are more hamburger 
than beefcake, but the unanticipated surprise is that a group of Average 
Joes -- some shrimpy, some overweight, some, well, just plain average -- 
hesitantly getting down to tunes by Tom Jones, Sister Sledge and Gary
Glitter yields some of the best laughs of the season. What "The 
Birdcage" did for drag performers, The Full Monty does for strippers. A 
lot. 
Robert Carlyle, whose turn as "Trainspotting"'s violent psychopath 
Begbie earned him rave reviews last summer, has the lead role of Gaz, an 
ex-steelworker in Sheffield, England suffering from problems both 
monetary and family-related -- trips to the unemployment agency are 
frequent, the amount of time his ex-wife allows him to spend with his 
son (William Snape) is not. The same goes for his best friend Dave (Mark 
Addy), an overweight security guard who is upset over his current
inability to perform sexually, and his ex-foreman Gerald (Tom 
Wilkinson), who is too afraid to tell his big-spender wife about his 
recently-acquired pink slip. After the Chippendales come to town,
strip down to their boxers and attract a large female crowd, Gaz hatches 
a plan -- he'll recruit a team of his own dancers, and they'll get an 
even larger following by takin' it all off (i.e., the "full
monty"). 
Three more unlikely subjects join Gaz's troupe: Horse (Paul Barber), a 
middle-aged black man who can do the funky chicken with the best of 
them; Lomper (Steve Huison), a timid, suicidal security guard; and Guy 
(Hugo Speer), who makes up for an amazing lack of coordination by having 
quite a full monty himself, if you take my meaning. Together, the 
half-dozen males attempt to cast their daily difficulties and physical 
inadequacies (or surplus thereof, in Guy's place) aside and begin a 
rehearsing schedule that includes choreography, practice, breakaway 
pants and tiny red leather G-strings. 
"The Full Monty" is very similar to last summer's Demi Moore vehicle 
"Striptease" in setup -- her character, like the ones here, turn 
exhibitionist to get themselves out of dire financial and familial
circumstances, and they, like she, react to their situation with more 
than a little trepidation. In execution, however, you can't find two 
more different films. The latter movie was ineffective because it used 
Moore's well-toned and -oiled bod to promote better living through 
stripping. "Monty," however, fully realizes that its basic story is 
plenty rich in comedic value, and mines the predicament for all it's 
worth. Moore's "Striptease" daughter (played by her real-life kid) was 
on hand to obviously condone her actions. A child also plays a part in 
"Monty," but he is allowed be an active component of the humor and has 
no ulterior motives. There are themes here (concerning determination and 
self-confidence), but "The Full Monty" never attains the level of naked
preachiness that "Striptease" tapped into regularly. 
The actors are uniformly good, and thankfully so. If the performances 
weren't as game or farcical, the movie could have easily sank. Carlyle, 
in particular, carries Gaz to memorable lengths. In one early scene, he 
does an impromptu strip to "You Sexy Thing" to demonstrate to his 
cohorts how easy it all is. Haplessly swinging his jacket around his 
head and unintentionally pelting the chortling onlookers with pocket 
change, he creates a character that is both self-effacing and reckless.
Everyone else appears to be having a jolly good time too, whether pelvic 
thrusting their way through the unemployment line or getting moves for 
their routine by studying "Flashdance." 
"The Full Monty" is so intent on delivering a crowd-pleasing strip 
finale that its promised agenda brings around some of its few flaws -- 
several dramatic developments that center around the 
"will-they-or-won't-they?" issue feel unnecessary even if they do (no 
pun intended) flesh out some of the personality of the cast members. And 
for those of you with no ear for thick foreign brogue (think 
"Trainspotting"), most of the dialogue and references will likely stump. 
A few subplots venture into problematic areas; one in particular not 
only feels modish but also underdeveloped and unnecessary. 
Despite those errors, however, "The Full Monty" is still an exhilarating 
comedic blast. It has its head and heart in the right place and succeeds 
in making you either laugh, smile or nod in agreement with every joke or 
sight gag. It even ends on just the right note -- even though some of 
the female audience will reasonably be a tad disappointed. Gaz and 
company may have quite a few shortcomings, but The Full Monty sure 
doesn't. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
David N. Butterworth
"It all comes off this summer" is the tag line for "The Full Monty," the
latest take on how the working class of Britain's industrialized north
contend with the devastating effects of economic depression.
As for Peter Cattaneo, the director of this audaciously sweet comedy, it
*does* all come off: "The Fully Monty" is as big a crowd pleaser as they
come, a film full of little, special moments rather than big ideas or
ambitions.
"The Full Monty" opens with an authentic-looking documentary trumpeting
Sheffield's burgeoning steel industry.  "This is a town on the move!"
warbles the enthusiastic narrator.  He neglects to say in which direction,
however.  Twenty-five years later the factories have closed and with them
the loss of thousands of jobs.  Men like Gaz (Robert Carlyle, the psychotic
Begbie in "Trainspotting") and his best mate Dave (Mark Addy) are two of
the affected, reduced to stealing steel girders from the abandoned mills in
order to make ends meet.
When they happen upon a packed-to-the-rafters nightclub hosting an
appearance of the Chippendales, the Gazzer has an idea to scrape up some
dosh.  How about him and his mates going one better?  The full monty!  Or
sans G-strings, as we might say over here. The only problem is they're all
either overweight, over the hill, or overly ordinary.
"The Full Monty" is, essentially, a one-joke movie but it's handled with
such charm and levity that the one joke is funny enough.  "Brassed Off,"
another recent example of the genre, was distinctly lacking in charm, full
of irritating characters that you didn't really care about.  The unemployed
steelworkers of "The Fully Monty," by comparison, are sympathetic,
endearing, even lovable blokes.  You laugh with them, not at them.  And
because they actually try to do something about their plight--earning, in
Gaz's case, enough money to be able to pay child support to see his
son--you wind up rooting for them, no matter how ill-advised their scheme
might seem.
The scene at the Job Centre is even funnier in context than it is in the
trailer: a gangly line of shiftless factory workers starts shifting, slowly
and instinctively bumping and grinding in unison to Donna Summer's "Hot
Stuff" wafting in over the loudspeakers.  It's a wonderful moment of
perfect comic timing.
Simon Beaufoy's script touches on some serious matters (such as the
objectification of women, when the guys realize that the audience might
find them as lacking as they find some of the models in the girlie
magazines), but doesn't let these get in the way of the tomfoolery.  It's a
wise decision.  Carlyle is solid as Gaz, but more impressive are Addy, and
Tom Wilkinson as their former foreman, the garden gnome-fancying Gerald,
who teaches the boys a step or two.  Addy and Wilkinson skillfully portray
men who's self-esteem has been badly bruised and it's these honest
characterizations, coupled with a breezy, easygoing style that make "The
Full Monty" as infectious as a Donna Summer disco hit.
It's sure to leave a silly grin on your face.

Author
Ted Prigge
"The Full Monty" is another one of those comedies from England that put
American comedies to shame.  Yes, we make funny movies over here, but
there's almost no debate that British cinema is funnier than American. 
And "The Full Monty" is a prime example of that.  It's not only a funny
film, but it's surprisingly engaging, touching, and, well, revealing. 
It's not the greatest film in the world, but it proves that even the
most cringe-inducing idea can be funny as hell.
"The Full Monty" deals with a group of urban Englishmen who were all
laid off from a once-prominent steel factory and are all seeking jobs. 
Their group "job club" meetings are pretty much wasted, with the old
foreman seeming to be the only one with any aptitude to get a job.  In
fact, the other guys waste time by trying to steel from the closed
factory, and even one of them is up for a bit of suicide.
The protagonist of the film (Robert Carlyle) comes up with a plan to
exploit his town's apparently popular Chippendales entertainment by
seeing if this group of normal-looking men (one of them actually being
quite fat) can raise money by stripping in an elaborate club, much like
Chippendales, all to hokey music and nice spotlights.  In an American
comedy, this would probably star Chris Farley and have him running into
a wall repeatedly and screaming at the top of his lungs for no reason
whatsoever.
But since Brits made this, and since Brits do have a better sense of
humor (it's a fact, okay?), this film is funnier more often, and also
has a bit of a brain.  Yes, this is a lovely concept for a comedy, but
it takes some intelligence to bring it to the screen in a good fashion,
and make the concept work out fully.  Luckily this film does.
There are six men who end up being in the dance/strip group, and they
are all explored interestingly.  They're not all explored in fullness,
but nevertheless interestingly.  The protagonist is a divorced father
who's wife has remarried some jerk, and who has a kind of buddie-buddie
relationship with his son, who hangs with him like they were chaps.  He
is, however, in danger of losing him due to a bit of a custody battle,
and needs some money to pay for it.  Hence, his motivation for getting
into this, other than paying for his smokes.
There's also a fat guy (Mark Addy), who is characterized as being rather
self-concious about his weight (and with good reason), and being a bit
suspicious of his much-thinner wife, who flirts with other men and likes
them Chippendales.  Then there's the ex-foreman (Tom Wilkinson) who
hasn't even told his wife he was fired six months ago, and who can
actually dance.  And there's also a rather quiet and lonely suicidal guy
who still lives with his mother (Tom Huison); an old black man
mysteriously nicknamed "Horse," (Paul Barber) who used to be quite the
break dancer; and a kind of studly guy (Hugo Speer) who can't dance,
can't sing, but who's favorite movie is "Singin' in the Rain" and also
has another formidable quality which is helpful in their "mission."
The ending of this film would be anti-climactic in a lesser film, but
here it's the high point, and it reaches it nicely.  It builds up to the
ending, and when it happens it not only delivers but adds some element
of surprise (will the men actually go "the full monty," if you know what
I mean, nudge, nudge).  And there are scenes that are absolutely
hysterically funny.
The acting is very good too.  The best performances come from Mark Addy
as the insecure fat man, and Tom Wilkinson as the former foreman who
starts off as tough and distanced (he was the foreman, man), but
eventually assimilates into their little microcosm.  But the film is
stolen by Robert Carlyle, who has the lead and does it so well.  He is a
bit immature, but has a kid who is more of a buddie to him than a son,
and who he kind of looks at as a peer (at one point when his son is kind
of ashamed of him, he comes across not only as being hurt since he's the
kid's father, but also as a friend).  Carlyle, you might remember, was
also brilliant as Begbie in last year's "Trainspotting," a role exactly
180 degrees away from this one.  To play a drunken asswhole then turn
around to play a somewhat immature divorced father/stripper just shows
that Carlyle is a great actor.
"The Full Monty" is funny as hell, but it's not totally funny.  There
are touches of melodrama (will the fat guy strip?), and the occasional
dramatic scene (a funny scene results in a bit of crying from one of the
strippers).  But overall, this film is hilarious, well-written, and
just-plain great.  And, the Brits are still funnier than us.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
Trailing the success of brit humour in the movie industry with the likes =
of the semi-dramatic THE COMMITMENTS and the nearly slapstick A FISH =
CALLED WANDA, THE FULL MONTY is one film which delivered the depth of =
the former and the humour magnitude of the latter. The film opens with a =
narrated documentary reel showing the improving economic and living =
standards of Sheffield in the 60's, then cut to the harsh reality of the =
present. Sheffield has become some sort of a semi-slum with the only =
visible increase in anything was the amount of layoffs from =
steel-factories; a once flourishing industry.
Gaz (Carlyle) spends most of his time in the Worker's Club, a sort of =
place where jobless people sit around to wait for job offers. He and his =
`plump' friend Dave (Addy) as well as their former foreman Gerald =
(Wilkinson) have been sitting around the club for months without any =
`call for duty'. What seemingly was just a passing hard time for Gaz =
suddenly transformed itself into desperation when he cannot afford the =
700 pounds of child-support money to his ex-wife. Suddenly finding =
himself facing the possiblity of losing custody of his son, he goes on =
to concoct an enterprising wild-idea to get the money he desperately =
requires.=20
Dave and Gerald too have problems of their own. On top of his lack of =
employment, Dave is also faced with the paranoia of his wife leaving him =
because of his current financial state as well as his`plump' appearance =
while Gerald have been cheating on his wife by not telling her of his =
layoff for as long as 6 months, leaving home for `work' when he was =
actually a long-standing member of the Worker's Club. There we have it; =
people with real problems and a not-so-practical solution for them. Gaz =
manages to get the support from them and sure enough they managed to get =
a few other poor jobless blokes to join in their gag : to perform a =
strip-act at the local pub. In Gaz's own words while looking at an add =
for a strip-act featuring hunky `beautiful' men, `If women are willing =
to pay for this, they sure as well will pay for REAL-men'.
THE FULL MONTY is very simple in nature and not a trace ambitious at =
all. It is a small film which delves in the harsh-reality of =
unemployment and the desperation it drives people to. It also is a very =
light movie to watch despite the theme it delves in because it has a lot =
of human-factor going for it. Never for once, was it trying to be =
manipulative at all, THE FULL MONTY was true to itself all the way. =
While the hilarity level of this film soared unexpectedly high, audience =
will find that they are in no way being cheated of a laugh, something =
lacking in many comedy films (wannabes?) from Hollywood.=20
Other than Carlyle, who acted as the psychotic Begbie in TRAINSPOTTING, =
the rest of the actors were definitely very new to me on-screen. =
However, the acting presented in this film is more than satisfying. =
Carlyle's work here is a stark contrast to his character in =
TRAINSPOTTING, implying real acting skill and flexibility on-screen. =
Kudos to the people involved in this film, especially to director Peter =
Cattaneo for being able to put together an excellent film which is has =
so much potential in ending up as your just-another-STRIPTEASE.=20
=20
Already a critical and financial success for such a small film, THE FULL =
MONTY is a humble film which deserves applause throughout. While TITANIC =
managed to feast the eyes and soul in an epic way, THE FULL MONTY gives =
one the same satisfaction=85=85.in half the time.
