Title
Review for Call Northside 777 (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Nusair
Whenever I sit down to watch a Jimmy Stewart film, I always have the
expectation that I'm going to thoroughly enjoy myself.  Stewart always
manages to rise above his material, even when it's bottom-of-the-barrel
stuff.  Not that that tends to happen, though, because somehow Stewart
always managed to pick the most engaging and entertaining scripts. Not so
with "Call Northside 777".
The movie casts Stewart as a not-too-ambitious reporter assigned to cover
the execution of a death-row inmate accused of murder.  The prisoner says
that he's innocent, but Stewart (initially) does not believe him. 
Eventually, though, after reviewing the facts and speaking to a number of
people close to the prisoner, he begins to believe him and starts his own
investigation.
Intriguing premise, right?  There's no way a filmmaker could go wrong with
a setup like that, and Jimmy Stewart in the lead, right?  Wrong.  "Call
Northside 777" is an overlong bore.  For some reason, *every* single scene
in the film goes on much longer than they need to.  And to make things
worse, the movie is presented to us in a quasi-documentary style, so all
the dialogue is extremely dry and without humour.
Another problem with is that everything is over-explained to the max.  For
example, there is a scene in which the prisoner is hooked up to a
lie-detector.  Now, since most audiences in 1948 likely had no idea what a
lie-detector machine was, the characters spend far too much time
explaining how it works.  We even see the machine being calibrated for the
prisoner, a process that takes about five minutes.  Was it really
necessary to show all this?  I don't think so.  This ten minute scene
could have easily been cut in half.  And there are other examples of
scenes that run on much longer than they need to.
At the beginning of this review, I mentioned how Jimmy Stewart is always
good in his movies.  Sadly, this is not so here.  None of his usual charm
is present.  Instead, he plays the character very somberly, I suppose
because it's based on a true story.  Stewart looks like he's trapped in
this role.  You can see, ever-so-briefly, moments in which his engaging
personality bubbles to the surface, but these moments are very sparse.
"Call Northside 777" could have been an exciting, tension-filled thriller.
Instead, it's technically flawless, but there's no heart.
