Title
Review for Cliffhanger (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Baumgarten
     Although a two-word review would be nearly sufficient for this one
("Climb Hard"), it wouldn't be nearly as much fun to write, and it
would be a tad misleading.  I should say at the outset that if nothing
else, CLIFFHANGER proves how difficult it is to make a top-notch action
film, no matter how much money or how many digital effects you throw at
it.  It also shows quite convincingly why Arnold Schwarzenegger is the
biggest box office draw of his generation, while Sylvester Stallone is
quickly becoming an embarrassing curiosity, someone who apparently
cannot be convinced to settle for his decade worth of fame and fortune
and fade gracefully into the background.  (In fact, Stallone's
performance in CLIFFHANGER does more than that:  it really forces us to
think about which other action/adventure star has done so much to ruin
a film so promising.  None come to mind, though perhaps as I get
further into this review I'll suffer a DOUBLE IMPACT / UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER flashback and decide upon Jean-Claude Van Damme.  Though at
least Van Damme is still cheap.)
     Stallone is not cheap; in fact, nothing about CLIFFHANGER is
cheap.  Unfortunately, nothing about CLIFFHANGER is all that good,
either; as a virtual clone of DIE HARD, it hardly merits a mention in
the same paragraph, though on the surface it's not immediately clear
why.  After all, CLIFFHANGER is chock full of nasty, sneering European
terrorists; high-tech explosions; graphic violence; hundreds of
thousands of dollars that can be accessed only through the use of a
computer code; and a bare-chested, steroidal hero who wreaks havoc on
the terrorists and single-handedly saves the day.  Even the altitude of
the two films is nearly the same; although come to think of it, Bruce
Willis never seemed to be suffering from oxygen deprivation -- and yet
oxygen deprivation is the only thing that could reasonably explain
Stallone's unrelievedly awful dialogue.
     Yes, Stallone wrote the screenplay (or should I say, "rewrote" it,
since however execrable it seems in its current form, it was apparently
even worse before Sly "improved" it).  And CLIFFHANGER's terrible
screenplay is its Achilles heel, for although director Renny Harlin
(who did a respectable job in the similarly implausible DIE HARD 2)
does what he can to keep our minds off of Stallone's dialogue,
inevitably the film slows down and we find ourselves stuck on a ledge
with nothing between us and a perilous fall into unintentional hilarity
but the thin rope of Stallone's wit.  Rope?  Better make that
thread...
     There are also other, more subtle problems with the film.  One
that looms particularly large is the sheer unoriginality of the
screenplay -- as I mentioned, the writer(s) seemed to want to remake
DIE HARD on a mountain instead of inside a skyscraper.  That they did,
though in doing so they missed many of the elements that made DIE HARD
so successful (putting aside clever dialogue and a hero who didn't make
the audience cringe every time he appeared on the screen).  Primarily,
they missed DIE HARD's single-minded, pared-down focus.  We never got a
lot of background or human interest stories in DIE HARD; in fact, one
of its best qualities is that it went from civilized Christmas party to
Bruce Willis running bare-foot through broken glass in an astonishingly
short amount of time.  Yes, much of DIE HARD was silly; much was
entirely implausible; much was downright maudlin.  But because its
pacing was so superb, the filmmakers were able to trick us into
overlooking all its flaws and instead see only the film's central
vision.  At heart, DIE HARD was little more than a high-tech spaghetti
Western, with Bruce Willis as -- quite literally for most of the film
-- The Man With No Name, who against unbelievable odds must save the
town and the woman he loves from death and destruction at the hands of
sinister bad guys.
     But I defy anyone who has seen CLIFFHANGER to tell me what this
film's vision is.  Actually, I'll settle for a conference call with
Harlin, Stallone, and anyone at all at Carolco willing to admit to
paying Stallone what amounts to $2 million for each of his unbroken
string of duds since RAMBO to star in, rewrite, and ruin this one.
     CLIFFHANGER is, in fact, three films, two of which star Mr.
Stallone and only one of which is particularly interesting.  The first
film provides background for Stallone's character, Gabe Walker, who
loses his confidence as a rescue ranger when he lets an inexperienced
climber slip from his grasp and plunge to her digitally enhanced doom.
That Walker could have done little to save her and that in fact he did
nothing at all to put her life in jeopardy is treated by the screenplay
as one of those small, unimportant details that only sticklers for
plausible motivation will care about.  Since the filmmakers assume that
their audience will be comprised, for the most part, of unthinking
dolts, it hardly matters what happens in the scene, as long as Stallone
gives himself a reason to look disheartened and forlorn for the next
half hour.  (Not to give anything away, but in a surprise twist
Stallone ceases looking disheartened and forlorn when he learns that
his best friend is in trouble -- rendering the whole of the film's
first sub-plot entirely pointless.)
     After its breathtaking opening sequence, the film crashes back to
earth for what seems like an eternity as the second of the three
sub-plots is laboriously set up.  Here we are introduced to us the
terrorists, lead by John Lithgow in predictably over-the-top,
sociopathic style, and their own plot to hijack a Treasury plane
transporting three suitcases filled with thousand-dollar bills.  I
won't go into the details of their plan here, as its execution is
surely the high point of the film and provides CLIFFHANGER with a much
needed -- though meager -- dose of originality.  It also keeps Stallone
and his inability to act off the screen for 20 minutes or so, which
certainly doesn't hurt -- though it does make us wonder whether
CLIFFHANGER could have been further improved by eliminating Stallone's
character entirely and allowing Michael Rooker to share in the heroics
with Janine Turner.  Both are accomplished actors, and both are just as
qualified as Stallone to allow stunt doubles and digital compositing to
handle the action part of this action-adventure film.  As for running
around in snow-covered fields waving automatic weapons, well, anyone
can do that.  The real question is whether CLIFFHANGER would have been
as much of a draw without Stallone; I'd argue that it might have been
even more of one without his ham-handed presence both in front of the
camera and behind the scenes.
     As long as the hijacking is in progress, the film seems fresh,
fun, and original.  But once the terrorists crash-land and begin trying
to find the suitcases, things take a decided turn for the worst.  This
happens in two ways: first, although there is a surfeit of running
around, shooting and hiding, there seems a remarkable paucity of
mountain climbing.  Perhaps this is because Stallone looks nothing at
all like a mountain climber (and in fact looks absolutely ridiculous as
he pulls his way up the side of a cliff in one of the rare climbing
scenes); perhaps it's because the filmmakers decided that mountain
climbing -- being a slow and deliberate process that can't be quick-cut
edited into random places in the film -- just wouldn't be exciting
enough for their supposedly jaded audience.  If so, they made a
terrible mistake.  One need only sit with an audience watching the IMAX
film TO THE LIMIT to realize the profound effect real mountain climbing
can have on people who rarely take the stairs at their places of work,
let alone set out to scale the side of a cliff.  Certainly we've all
seen people shooting at each other with automatic weapons; given the
choice between a clever (but relatively bloodless) cat-and-mouse chase
up and across perilous cliffs, and the usual mindless Hollywood
violence, I suspect people would much rather pay to see the former.
     What we get, however, is the latter.  The "running around and
shooting" portion of the film is CLIFFHANGER's third sub-plot, and it
is without a doubt the weakest, if only because it is the least
original and most mean-spirited of the three.  I mentioned above that
once the terrorists crash-land, things take a turn for the worst in two
ways, and as this third sub-plot unfolds, we quickly discover that as
lively and as fresh the first half of the film seemed, the second
becomes just as mean-spirited and vicious.  I thought this incredibly
unfortunate, partly because I'd believed we'd left such inane violence
and cruelty behind us in the films of the late eighties, and partly
because it seems so much at odds with the film's beautiful natural
surroundings.  It's one thing for Bruce Willis to pump dozens of rounds
of automatic weapon fire into a terrorist in a high-tech office
building in 1988; it's another thing to watch this same scene unfold
beneath delicately snow-capped trees and in front of breath-taking
natural vistas.  Nature is not without its own kind of violence and
cruelty, but Wild Kingdom this is not.
     This third sub-plot is also greatly weakened by some of the
sloppiest editing I've seen this year.  To be honest, much of the last
half-hour of the film simply doesn't make sense -- it seemed to me that
CLIFFHANGER had been hacked down to its 118-minute running time from an
original film of much greater length, and given that the screenplay (at
any length) was never a paragon of logic, this editing rendered the end
of the film nearly incomprehensible.  Too many scenes simply exist in a
vacuum -- we often have no feeling for how Stallone or the terrorists
got from one cliff to another, or where any individual location is in
relation to any other.  The film does feature one character who walks
around with an electronic suitcase-finder; too bad he doesn't also have
a continuity-finder, for at times we feel about as lost and abandoned
as those suitcases.
     This lack of continuity reaches its nadir when Stallone attempts
to follow the terrorists across a foot bridge between two cliffs.  The
scene is featured prominently in the film's advertising, and those of
us who saw the ads expect Stallone to make it most of the way, trigger
an explosion, and then leap to safety at the last moment.  At least we
expect a stunt double to do this.  Or $5 million worth of T2-style
computer animation.  Something, anyway.  But in fact what happens is
that Stallone jumps *back* to the cliff whence he came.  While this may
seem marginally more plausible, it does pose a small problem: sans a
telephone booth nearby (into which Stallone might run to don his
Superman outfit so as to fly across the chasm), it's not clear how the
pursuit of the terrorists will continue.
     But continue it does, of course, logic be damned.  That kind of
contempt for an audience's intelligence really bothers me, since it's
so unnecessary.  It's one thing to ask us to believe that Treasury
planes fly around with suitcases full of thousand-dollar bills; perhaps
they do.  But how can we be expected to buy a chase scene set in the
mountains that -- somehow -- never involves any mountain-climbing?
Putting people on a ledge is inherently dramatic; having them run
around shooting each other (or worse, beating each other up in ways
that make the ROCKY films look tame in comparison) is not.
     That said, it's clear that much of the action is diverting and
generally entertaining, especially if you can turn your brain off after
buying your popcorn and soda.  (My feeling is that something like this
happened as soon as Stallone rolled blank paper into his typewriter.)
The scenery upstages everything, even Stallone's lovingly photographed
and scantily clad body.  The special effects are usually very good, but
often they don't look particularly convincing, perhaps because the
two-dimensional characters, awful dialogue, and incoherent plot keep us
from fully suspending disbelief.  Or perhaps because they're just not
consistently good (as the special effects in T2 were).  Scenes that
were shot indoors look like they were shot indoors, especially one in
which Stallone chases the film's plausibility out on to thin ice.
(Hint: only he survives.)  The situation might have been helped had
Stallone himself ever gone near a step ladder, let alone a mountain;
less optical printing and more actual rock climbing might have left
more money for better special effects used less frequently.  As it is,
all of the scenes set on cliffs -- and that were actually filmed
outdoors, rather than simulated on a sound stage -- utilize stunt
doubles, and most are filmed from quite a distance.  A nice close-up or
two of Stallone actually on a cliff might have helped lend some
authenticity to the proceedings.  But as he's afraid of heights, that
wasn't a possibility, so the burden of making a realistic-looking film
was pushed off on to the many special effects houses involved with the
production.
     Rooker and Turner are largely wasted; in fact, it wasn't clear to
me why their characters were written into the screenplay in the first
place.  Remember that John McClane's wife in DIE HARD served no purpose
other than to be taken hostage; yet although Turner plays side-kick to
Stallone throughout much of the film, she's allowed to do little more
than dilute the film's focus.  And when it comes to focus, CLIFFHANGER
seems more than a little astigmatic -- the last thing Stallone needs
are two other "good guys" getting caught up underfoot, doing little
more than showcasing his inability to act.
     CLIFFHANGER opened when it did for a reason: faced with
competition from JURASSIC PARK and LAST ACTION HERO, Tri Star wisely
opted for an otherwise action-adventure-free weekend, at least three
weeks before the two biggest summer draws were scheduled to open.  With
competition coming only from a handful of light spring comedies,
CLIFFHANGER is bound to do well at the box office.  But come August,
when people may well be seeing the best of this summer's blockbusters
for a second and third time, I doubt if anyone but Carolco's bankruptcy
attorneys will remember this strictly-by-the-numbers film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Can Rockies rescue ranger Sylvester
     Stallone recover from a trauma, and get it together enough to
     clobber nasty super-criminals trying to recover three
     suitcases of stolen money that fell out of a plane over the
     Rockies?  Hint: Stallone co-authored the screenplay.  Lots of
     action, lots of cliche, a few stunts.  Rating: low +1 (-4 to
     +4).
     Sylvester Stallone is back in a pure action, non-comedy role.  He had
tried breaking out into comic roles in OSCAR and STOP OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT.
OSCAR I like to spring on unsuspecting people since it really is about the
funniest comedy I have seen in the last ten years, though probably not due
to Stallone's efforts.  On the other hand, STOP OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT is
reputedly just awful.  So Stallone is back in a sort of mountain-climbing
equivalent of DIE HARD that might have been called FALL HARD.  Stallone
himself co-authored the screenplay with Michael France, undoubtedly to make
sure the story gave audiences exactly what they wanted--breath-taking stunts
tied together with brain-numbing cliche.
     Stallone plays Gabe Walker, a Rocky Mountain rescue ranger who was once
great but lost his nerve after a horrible traumatic experience on a wire
high over a valley that should have been called Macho Grande.  Gabe is back
in the Rockies a year later, testing to see if he can get together with his
woman friend Jessie (played by Janice Turner), patch things up with a buddy
(played by Michael Rooker), and pull his life together.  Just at that moment
a plot to steal $100,000,000 is falling apart overhead.  John Lithgow plays
Qualen, a British master criminal with an accent that occasionally fades.
Qualen heads a team of killers who intended to hijack the cash but ended up
accidentally dropping it in three suitcases over the Rockies and who now
want the rescue rangers to retrieve the suitcases.
     Of course, the real stars of the film are the three S's: Stallone,
scenery, and stunts.  While some of the scenery really is the Rockies, some
is the Italian Alps near Cortina D'Ampezzo, and some is sets.  The stunts,
which I will not describe so as not to spoil them, are impressive, though
not really too different from those you would probably think of if you were
scripting a similar story.  Trevor Jones's score bears a marked resemblance
to his score for THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS.
     This is about what you would expect Sylvester Stallone would be
releasing in the summertime.  It is nearly two hours of action and familiar
plot against a less familiar setting.  I give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Phineas Narco
     CLIFFHANGER is the new "comeback" film for Sylvester Stallone, a
high-altitude adventure taking place mostly on snowy (Rocky?) mountain
peaks (actually shot in the Italian Alps).  Stallone stars in the film
and also did massive re-writes of the script.
     The opening sequence is promising enough--Stallone tries to rescue
Michael Rooker's character's girlfriend dangling precariously from a
rope thousands of feet above a rocky canyon floor.  Well, things do not
turn out well, and the movie jumps eight months ahead to show Stallone
coming back home to the mountains to reconcile himself with his group
of friends who shared in the harrowing experience.
     At the same time, hundreds of millions of dollars in cash are
being readied for air transport by the U.S. Treasury.  The cash is
being transported by plane to avoid the hazards of the cashload being
robbed on route.  But John Lithgow, the obligatory gun-toting
psychopathic bad guy has other ideas.  However something goes terribly
wrong and the three bulky suitcases of thousand-dollar bills fall from
the plane and are lost somewhere in the mountains (a new Samsonite
commercial?).  The hijacking sequence includes some great mid-air
plane-to-plane stunts and the resultant plane crash is the best since
ALIVE.  Stranded in the mountains, Lithgow and crew call for help and
Stallone and Rooker come climbing to the rescue.
     The rest of the movie basically consists of the group's efforts to
recover the lost money while Rooker, Stallone and friends thwart them
at every turn.  There's lots of action, explosions, gun battles,
fistfights, more explosions, avalanches, and people hanging by their
fingertips above yawning chasms.
     The problem is: who cares?  So much time is spent on action,
pyrotechnics and dizzying camera angles and so little time and effort
is spent on even the most perfunctory character development that we
just don't care what happens to these people.  What's the point of
putting someone in a precarious, ostensibly suspenseful situation when
that person is obviously just an actor playing a character as flat as
the cliff face they're hanging from?  The characters in this movie are
just not believable, one-dimensional, sketchily drawn at best, and
unworthy of our concern.
     Stallone is ... well, Stallone.  He may suffer now from the same
fate of Madonna, i.e. he's become a caricature of himself, he is
upstaged by his own 'real life' persona ... the guy has never had much
of a range anyway ... it's hard to see him as someone other than
Stallone.  Every Stallone movie has to have that moment of 'idiot rage'
where his mouth twists itself into that familiar shape, his eyes
scrunch up and he screams something like "Adddriiiiiiiaaaaaaannn!!!!"
or "Nooooooooo!!!"   Every Stallone movie has to have at least two
scenes in which the hero gets the living bejesus beaten out of him
only to come back at the last possible instant and decimate his
attacker.  The feeling it gave me was that the movie had some nice
stunts, camera work and scenery, but otherwise I've seen it all
before.  Like BATMAN RETURNS (with which this movie has a lot in common
in that it's very big on look and style and very short on substance),
the mark of a bad film is when the hero does or says something clever
or heroic in a scene--calculated, obviously, to make the audience cheer
(there's usually a lapse in the dialogue at this point so the audience
doesn't miss any one-liners while they hoot and holler)--but instead,
the audience just sits there and says, "Yeah?  So?"  Or worse, laughs.
And there were sequences in the film that were like that.
     Rooker by far gives the best performance of the lot, though it's
sad to see an actor of his caliber wasted in something like this.
     Lithgow, again, is simply not believable, not that he's a bad
actor (I thought he did a pretty good job as the villains in BLOW OUT
and RICOCHET) it's just the character is again ... cliche.  His fake
English accent is the worst since Keanu Reave's in BRAM STOKER'S
DRACULA.
     Technically, it's not bad ... in fact, there are some stunning
visuals.  However there's a long pull out shot of Stallone on a
cliff-face where you can just see the matte line.  Some of the rear
projection stuff looks to be not quite suited light-wise to the
foreground, and the 'underneath the ice' sequence is obviously done in
a studio.
     It's too bad, some good characters, some good writing, and this
could have been a tremendous film.  I heard on USENET that this picture
cost $140 million to make which, I believe, if true, would make it the
most expensive movie of all time.  There's a scene in the picture where
Stallone and friend cuddle next to a fire of burning thousand-dollar
bills.  For me, that scene captured the essence of this picture.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Sylvester Stallone, John Lithgow, Michael Rooker, 
           Janine Turner, Paul Winfield
Director:  Renny Harlin
Producer:  Alan Marshall and Renny Harlin
Screenplay:  Michael France and Sylvester Stallone
Music:  Trevor Jones
Released by Carolco through TriStar Pictures
     Gabe Walker (Sylvester Stallone) is a member of a mountain
climbing rescue team.  When one of his operations goes wrong and the
girlfriend of his best friend Hal Tucker (Michael Rooker) is killed,
Gabe blames himself and leaves.  Eight months later, after setting up a
life in Denver, he returns to the mountains to persuade his lover
Jessie (Janine Turner) to come with him.  While he's there, a call for
help comes in and Gabe decides to become involved in one last rescue
attempt.  However, unknown to him, the rescue call is a fake, put out
by a group of hijackers stranded in the mountains after the crash of
their plane.  Led by the psychotic Qualen (John Lithgow), they're after
three suitcases of money ($100,000,000) that are lost somewhere in the
peaks and valleys of the Colorado Rockies.
     Hey, what's a down-and-out street fighter from South Philly doing
climbing mountains in a tee-shirt?
     Seriously, though, Sylvester Stallone's newest character may be
named "Gabe," but he takes an awful lot from the likes of men named
"Rocky" and "Rambo."  There's also a little of John McClane in him as
well.  This is not an original or interesting personae, and it shows
what can happen when an actor becomes too-easily identified with one
(or two) roles.  To his credit, Stallone tried to do something
different (two terrible comedies called OSCAR and STOP! OR MY MOM WILL
SHOOT), but when the "great experiment" failed, he returned to the
genre where he made his money.  Whether CLIFFHANGER will bring
Stallone's name back into the top echelon of action movie stars has yet
to be determined, but if this film can't, the task may be impossible.
     Before I get too deeply into what inevitably will be a
mostly-negative review, let me say that I enjoyed much of CLIFFHANGER
on a purely mindless level.  Although seriously flawed in many aspects,
there's enough action and adventure to keep just about anyone
interested.  CLIFFHANGER is the motion picture equivalent of a roller
coaster--lots of thrills and chills without much substance, and almost
immediately forgotten the moment it's over.  Unlike the roller coaster,
however, this isn't a ride you're likely to take over and over again.
Once is certainly enough.
     The first scene typifies the entire movie.  There's a lot of
action and a fair degree of tension (even though it's pretty obvious
what's going to happen).  Stallone's muscles are shown to their best
advantage as he reaches out to save the life of a girl hanging by a
thread.  Bad dialogue abounds, as does lame acting.  "Please don't let
me die!" begs the girl at least half-a-dozen times before plunging to
her doom.  This is not an example of a well-written dramatic moment,
but it's indicative of how all of CLIFFHANGER has been put together.
     When the film goes for drama, it invariably fails.  The dialogue
is routine, frequently punctuated by cliches, and the
character-building scenes do little more than waste time.  One could
argue that there's not enough action in the picture because of these
long, drawn-out sequences.  They don't work, so their inclusion damages
CLIFFHANGER's pace.
     The editing is suspect.  The final product appears heavily cut.
Numerous transition scenes have been trimmed in favor of the
above-mentioned character moments.  There are also several useless
scenes featuring a couple of high school kids who have no purpose
whatsoever in the overall storyline.  I'm sure none of the expensive
shots were eliminated, but the curious choice of what to use has given
CLIFFHANGER an uneven tone.
     There are several moments of unintentional humor.  Stallone's Gabe
is clearly someone with superhuman stamina.  No real person could take
the pounding that he does and stay alive, not to mention on his feet.
This film makes DIE HARD look like a cakewalk.  How many times can a
person survive crashing into the side of a mountain or falling thirty
feet into an ice-packed crevice?  Suspension of disbelief is an issue.
Some action films achieve this with little effort, but CLIFFHANGER too
often struggles to entrance the audience.  The fault lies mostly with
the pedestrian script.
     Renny Harlin showed in DIE HARD II that he has skill when it comes
to directing action sequences.  This ability is evident in
CLIFFHANGER.  Sure, the movie borrows from other action films (most
notably the original DIE HARD), but it does so in a big, bold way, and
there's enough new stuff to keep scenes fresh.  Unfortunately, as
strong as Harlin is with the mountains and hardware, he's that weak
with the actors.  He gets little out of them, seeming more interested
in the next avalanche than a reasonably delivered line.
     John Lithgow is surprisingly ineffective as the villain.  Given
his past track record, one would think he would be perfect to play the
Alan Rickman clone (a smooth-talking, British-accented psychotic who's
out for the money).  However, the role is woefully underplayed and
Lithgow's Qualen becomes the least-hated member of his group of thugs
and mercenaries.  CLIFFHANGER takes pains to make us loathe the bad
guys, but it's the ringleader that we have the least antipathy for.
     What more can I say about CLIFFHANGER?  If you're in the mood for
something that's completely visceral and mindless (really mindless--
the plot is a joke, filled with contrivances and coincidences), this
movie will fit the bill.  Parts of it are excruciatingly bad, but there
are numerous examples of well-directed action that, on balance, tend to
make up for the worst gaffes.  This is a poor man's DIE HARD.  It has
the explosions, gunplay, and spectacular stunts, but little of the wit
and intelligence.  In other words, it's a typical summer action flick.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David N. Butterworth
     CLIFFHANGER is everything you'd expect from a summer blockbuster
starring Sylvester Stallone--big, predictable, and dumb as houses.
     As action pictures go, CLIFFHANGER has its fair share of
white-knuckled, sweat-inducing sequences, and those sequences aren't
bad.  But when Sly isn't falling off a cliff, or perched high atop a
precipice, or flexing his muscles in general ... well, the movie's just
plain dull.  Perhaps Stallone's stunt double would have been better
employed in the acting department!
     The plot, for want of a better word, is your standard
Hero-Who-Has-to-Prove-Himself story.  Park ranger and expert
mountaineer Gabe Walker (Stallone) goes into seclusion after being
involved in a fatal, botched rescue attempt, but is lured out of
"retirement" when a government plane carrying $100 million in cold
currency goes down in the Colorado Rockies.
     Unbeknownst to our fearless rescue ranger, it wasn't the storm
that brought the plane down.  It's been skyjacked by a ruthless gang of
politically incorrect anarchists, led by international crackpot Qualen
(John Lithgow, in danger of playing one psycho too many).  Lithgow does
seem to be having some fun with this role; his Qualen is a malevolent,
single-entendre quipping maniac, with a stock generic European accent.
It's a shame the writers give him some of the flattest one-liners
since, well, Stallone's last movie (the addle-brained STOP! OR MY MOM
WILL SHOOT).
     Qualen's bunch of assorted heavies get more than they bargained
for when they force Walker to "fetch" the scattered suitcases of
booty.  Aided and abetted by ex-partner Hal Tucker (the familiar-faced
William Rooker), Walker goes mano-a-mano with the bickering thugs, a
sort of man-against- the-mountain in reverse.  Tucker's still smarting
over a hand-holding incident between his ex-girlfriend and Walker, so
there's interpersonal tension and then some!
     Walker's ex-girlfriend--there are a lot of ex's in this
movie--Jessie Deighan is played by TV's Janine Turner (NORTHERN
EXPOSURE).  Her emotional range in this film is severely untested; she
huffs and puffs up the mountainside, screeches in a cave full of
vampire bats (in one of CLIFFHANGER'S several allusions to the INDIANA
JONES movies), and whines in a ho-hum "Don't hog all the guilt for
yourself, spread it around some" head-to-head with Stallone that
detracts from all that pretty scenery.
     Bringing up the rear is the craggy-faced Ralph Waite (resurrected
from TV's THE WALTONS) who plays Frank, a forest ranger with a wacky
artistic bent.  Further comic relief is provided by a couple of
surfer-dude base jumpers, whose luck you just know will run out.
     Trevor Jones' overblown score is virtually identical to his
collaboration on last year's THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, give or take a
chord.  It's fine when the visuals comprise grand, sweeping shots of
the majestic Italian Dolomites (doubling for the Rocky Mountains), but
its oft-repeated theme grows tiresome during some of the film's less
cinematic scenes.
     Director Renny Harlin (DIE HARD 2) is in familiar terrain here,
but Stallone's larger-than-life Gabe Walker is no John McClane (Bruce
Willis moves his mouth when he speaks, for starters).  As expected, the
punch- drunk Stallone gets the crap kicked out of him, but barely lets
out a grunt (saving those for the film's more dialogue-bound moments
instead). After all, anyone who can survive being smashed into a cliff
face by the weight of a disabled helicopter and still work in a
one-liner can't be bothered by a little internal bleeding.
     All this adds up to a very tired formula that cries out for a
boost of adrenaline, but co-writer Stallone can contribute only
testosterone.  Will the two rangers battle the bad guys and make up by
the film's conclusion?  Will Jessie be suitably impressed by Gabe's
rock climbing skills?  Will Gabe ever find it in his heart to forgive
himself?  Will the audience wish they'd paid matinee prices instead?
     This movie isn't even worth trashing.  It's Sly Stallone up a
mountain with bad guys.  But then what else did you expect?  For all
its spectacular aerial footage and gravity-defying stunt work,
CLIFFHANGER is a snowjob of a movie that amounts to nothing more than
thin peaks.


Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring Sylvester Stallone, Janine Turner, and Michael Rooker
Directed by Renny Harlin
     The return of Stallone?  I would assume this question is on the
mind of the wary movie-goer wondering whether or not he/she should put
down his/her $7-$9 and see Sly climbing on rocks and dodging bullets.
Well, if you're one of those wary viewers, I have two reviews to offer
you of this movie: the review for those looking for an art movie and
those looking to have a good time.  The first is the former, the second
is the latter.
     CLIFFHANGER is one those flicks that a total cynic would have a
ball tearing apart and ripping to shreds.  The dialogue is less than
intellectually intelligent, the acting is not Oscar caliber, and
sometimes you can tell that the actors are not five codzillion miles
into the air hanging by their very lives.  Most of the sequences are
implausible, the meanie villain doesn't do most of the dirty work, and
there are plenty of 'talking killers.'  Lots of foreign accents too (as
if only foreigners are bad).  One might think that this movie is a
clone of DIE HARD or the like, but ask even the most light-hearted
cynic and he/she will tell you even DIE HARD was ridiculous.  So why do
they compare all other action flicks such as CLIFFHANGER to DIE HARD,
if DIE HARD was so ridiculous?  (Answer in the second review.)  Yep,
there's lots to ridicule in this movie, and if you go to the movies
just to bitch and moan about plots, special effects, acting, blah blah
blah, DON'T go see this movie.
     As for the others, who like to have a good time at the movies
(this excludes most cynics), CLIFFHANGER just might be a good vehicle
for consideration.  Most of the stunt sequences in this movie are
amazing, and well worth the price of admission.  The story is mediocre;
it is enough to put the characters into some sticky situations, but
that's about all.  But the actions sequences make you feel like you're
on a roller coaster (which is what I believe was the intent).  Yes,
Stallone does do some acting, and it is tolerable, considering his
previous movies (OSCAR, STOP OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT).  I believe
Stallone's best acting is the subtle type, not the overtly comedic.
This movie is a good way to get back into the acting fray.  I don't
think he's Oscar material, but if he sticks to this kind of movie he
will be fine.  As for the rest of the movie, the action sequences are
the real star of this movie, and if you want a decent thrill, check
this movie out.  (By the way, cynics don't think DIE HARD was as
ridiculous as they would have you believe--it's merely convenient for
comparison purposes.)
     I have skimmed the gamut on this movie; some see it as an
adrenalin ride, others get sidetracked by Stallone and his previous
movies (interestingly, not this movie, but his previous ones).  If you
hate Stallone, of course, don't see this one.  But if you can tolerate
him, or if you like him (I'm sure there are some out there--the
silent minority), check this one out.  It's a good romp at the movies.
