Title
Review for Knightriders (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Not the feature version of that TV show about the crime-fighter and his 
talking car, although it does sound just as silly in summary: A performance 
troupe in modern-day America motorcycles from town to town in full mediaeval 
regalia and stages combat with each other.  This would be an odd choice for 
any director, but is certainly out of character for George A. Romero, who 
until this point was known only for his popular (though heavily cult-bound) 
horror films.  I guess because it is so out of character that we have to 
assume that this was a personal project of the director's - the film he 
always 'wanted' to make.
Ed Harris is the self-appointed king of the motorcyclists, but there is a 
pretender to the throne (Romero's favorite makeup artist Tom Savini, who 
really looks the part as Morgan) who has more progressive ideas for the 
troupe.  The twist is that the microcosm - or microkingdom - of the 
traveling players is unconsciously playing out the last days of Camelot, 
chivalry, and the whole Arthurian mythos.  Harris is a throwback to an 
outmoded (and erroneous) notion of knights in shining armor - much like the 
legendary Arthur his world is overtaken by science (technology/machines) and 
reason (commerce/business).  His romantic milieu is breaking down, and its 
conflicts are plain to see - half of the troupe is named after tales of 
Arthur and Robin Hood while the other half is nondescript and ordinary; his 
minstrels are drowned out by disco music; dangerous weapons are 
indistinguishable from props; one half of his men must replay battles 
against the other, again and again; and of course his knights ride 
motorcycles instead of horses.  I have the feeling that this latter point 
was the main inspiration behind Romero's film (it dominated the film's 
advertising) and that the paradoxical image of knights jousting on 
motorcycles was of more interest to him that any desire to rework mediaeval 
mythology.  Unfortunately, it's only when Romero is aware of what he's up to 
that the film has its clunkiest moments - Harris' dialogue may be in keeping 
with his character, but if that's so, then his character isn't inspiring, 
just drippy (his scenes with Merlin, for example).  In fact any scenes where 
the characters address each other as 'my liege' or 'my king', or act as if 
they are bound to their artificial world are the ones that are least 
effective - whenever there's a conflict or confrontation we wonder whether 
it's based on personal issues or some wider concept inherited from the roles 
they have collectively locked themselves into.  By the end we're ready to 
believe Harris should step down as king only because he's been playing the 
role too long and should just get back in step with the times.
Issues like these are not the heart of KNIGHTRIDERS, however, and the 
drawcard for many theatregoers in 1981 would have been the expertly handled 
action sequences - it didn't hurt that these would have cashed in on the MAD 
MAX films that were also around at the time.  Abrupt conclusion to film 
pretty much denies all the naiveté that underpins its central idea.  An 
unusual  assortment of music helps this look like a product of the 
mid-seventies.  Actually, it could also be read as a palimpsest about the 
end of the 1960s, under the more obvious Arthurian analogy - these guys come 
across more as burnt-out hippies than historical role-players.  Watch for 
horror writer (and friend of Romero's) Stephen King in a cameo as a 
spectator.

