Title
Review for Place in the Sun, A (1951)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"A Place in the Sun" was an enormous commercial
and critical success.  Starring sensitive
Montgomery Clift, beautiful young Elizabeth Taylor,
and featuring a tragic love triangle as the story,
the film had substantial appeal, particularly
to women.
George (Clift) has been scraping out a living as
an unskilled laborer.  He visits his well-to-do
uncle, who gives him a job in his bathing suit
factory.  George starts his new career at the
bottom, meeting frumpy Alice (Shelley Winters) as a
fellow drudge on the assembly line.  Despite a company
rule against fraternization, they see each other.
Alice becomes pregnant, and presses him for a marriage
that would mire him deeper in poverty.
Meanwhile, George has begun dating boss's daughter
and brunette goddess Angela (Taylor).  George has
also been promised a promotion to management.  However,
Alice is in the way of his plans.  George decides to
take her boating...  and you guess the rest.
"A Place in the Sun" is based on Theodore Dreiser's
novel "An American Tragedy", which was filmed in 1931.
Not having seen this movie, I compare "Place" with
the 1927 classic "Sunrise", which also features a
love triangle, a boating accident, and second thoughts
from the protagonist.  Clift's character is as
gentle and earnest as ever, but has some of
the ambition and duplicity of his role from
"The Heiress".  Winters, who played a dynamic
romantic lead in "Winchester '73" from the year
before (1950), is depicted as poor, drab, clinging
and self-pitying.  The contrast between her and
dazzling rich girl Taylor could not be greater.
Perhaps Taylor's breathless character isn't fully
credible.  She falls too quickly and deeply in love
with Clift, and remains loyal to him to the end,
even paying him a visit on death row.  Also, Raymond
Burr acts both as police detective and prosecutor
(it must be quite a small town).
High production values and a good script and cast
paid off at the Academy Awards as well as the box
office.  "A Place in the Sun" was nominated for Best
Picture and won six Oscars, including Best Director
(George Stevens), Screenplay (Michael Wilson, Harry Brown)
and Black & White Cinematography (William C. Mellor).
Clift and Winters were also nominated for Best Actor
and Actress.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
