Title
Review for Triple Bogey on a Par Five Hole (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Alan Jay
Director: Amos Poe
Leading Players: Eric Mitchell, Daisy Hall, Alba Clemente, Robbie Coltrane
USA 1991
Shown at the 35th London Film Festival.
Capsule: A fictional investigation into the lives of the children of
parents killed while robbing a golf foursome some 14 years before.  +2
     This fascinating little film takes place on a 120-foot motor yacht
that circles Manhattan and is home for three children whose middle class
parents were killed at the end of a summer of bank robberies while
holding up a golf foursome.  The story is told as a screen writer
interviews the protagonists and associated parties to get a feel for the
lives and what led up to the death on the golf course.
     The film mixes colour Super-8 footage home movie footage shot by
the parents with black-and-white photography of the rest of the movie --
the majority of which was shot on the boat with the Manhattan skyline as
a backdrop.
     This film is fun; its whole premise is unbelievable and as you
learn more about the characters and the lives they leave the become even
more unreal, and yet there is a feeling that given just the right
circumstances it would all be possible.
     If you get a chance to see this movie jump at it.  TRIPLE BOGEY
shows that a pure flight of imagination made by a film maker for just
$350,000 can be so valuable in cinema.
Here is a bit more about the plot of the film which may be of interest.
     The film starts with an interview with a literary agent who by a
fluke of lunch appointments took a phone call from a 13-year-old girl
with a book.  The literary agent tells how the orphans without any
surviving relatives are about to be sent to various foster homes when
the daughter stands up for herself and sells an alternative scenario
pleading to the passion of the American masses and with a cheque for an
advance on her book being waved in front of the cameras.
     The plot then follows the story of the current set-up and mixes the
extraction of what happened in the past with the current changes that
are going on in the lives of those aboard the boat.
