Title
Review for Shooting Fish (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael Dequina
Shooting Fish (PG) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
Dylan (Dan Futterman) and Jez (Stuart Townsend) have made a career out of
"shooting fish"--i.e. pulling off con jobs.  Dylan is the cocky
smooth-talking Yank who masterminds each elaborate schemes; the Burt
Bacharach-loving Jez is the socially-impaired British technogeek whose
electronic wizardry makes such swindles possible.  A host of complications,
romantic and otherwise, arise after sweet medical student Georgie (Kate
Beckinsale) joins their fold, helping the boys out in the belief that the
illegally-obtained proceeds go toward building an orphanage.
Director/co-writer (with Richard Holmes) Stefan Schwartz has crafted a
light, easy-going fluff piece whose pleasance is elevated by the appeal of
the top trio of actors, particularly the pixie-tressed Beckinsale.
Unfortunately, her main subplot about a loveless engagement is so poorly
developed it seems like an afterthought, even as it eventually takes center
stage toward film's end.  But the more curious miscalculation is that, for
a comedy, Shooting Fish is rather light on real laughs.  There's a sly dig
at the musicals of Andrew Lloyd Webber, but a number of the big con scenes
are more amusing than funny.  However, there is a certain amount of charm
about the film, which is as agreeable as it is refreshingly unpretentious.
(opens May 1)
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When a movie like SHOOTING FISH has a big heart and three likable
leads, a reviewer feels a certain undeniable guilt when he doesn't care
much for it.  Moreover, when you have a picture that has nothing wrong
with it, just not enough right with it, the guilt of giving it a
mediocre review increases.  All of this notwithstanding, SHOOTING FISH
starts well enough but runs completely out of ideas by the midway
point.  After that, director Stefan Schwartz just runs out the clock
until he brings the film in at a minimal length of an hour and a half.
If ever there was a case for a cute short film, this is it.
     "I owed a lot of money to big guys with hairy shoulders," Dylan
(Dan Futterman) explains why their life of crime begin.  He and his
partner Jez (Stuart Townsend) are non-stop swindlers.  Self-described
Robin Hoods, they steal from the rich, which generally means the
middle-class, to give to the orphans, which means them.  Their goal is
a stately home for themselves - something on the order of Blenheim.  As
a temp, they hire a bright-eyed medical student named Georgia, played
charmingly by Kate Beckinsale, who was Emma in last year's television
mini-series of the same name.
     Ah, the scams they pull off.  Although they attempt con games
large and small, the show opens on one of their most masterful.  They
bring in company executives for a demonstration of their sixth
generation computer system.  Complete with the most amazing and
accurate speech input and output system, the machines can be held for
just a ten percent deposit, payable immediately.  Like the nineteenth
century chess playing machines all done with a hidden human chess
expert, their computers are controlled remotely by Jez and Georgia
while Dylan oozes charm out of every pore talking to the clients.  Who
couldn't believe such a bright young salesman with such an incredible
product?
     Another confidence game has them selling the same batch of
insulation to every household in a row of homes.  Since the homes are
joined together, they sneak the materials from house to house through
the attics after collecting their fee.  In the movie's best scene, they
are chased by a dozen suits who are on to them.  In unison, all of the
professionals pull out their personal digital assistants and record the
license number of the crook's (stolen) van.
     By the middle, with the writers having used up all of their ideas
for petty thievery, we're down to listening to comedic small talk and
admiring the, admittedly fascinating, set decoration by Max Gottlieb
from THE FULL MONTY.  Dylan and Jez share an apartment that is, in
equal parts, science fair, flea market, greenhouse, appliance workshop
and palace.  Still, one nice set and few comedy sketches does not a
full-length movie make.  Or shouldn't.
     SHOOTING FISH runs 1:36.  It is rated PG for a few mild
profanities.  Although acceptable for any age, a kid would have to be
at least ten to be at all interested.

Author
Matt Williams
Stefan Schwartz directs this con-game comedy from his own script...a
script has a few good idea, but which is overwhelmed by problems.
Dylan (Dan Futterman) and Jez (Stuart Townsend) are a pair of hard
working con artists seeking to earn 2 million pounds for poor orphans
(they're both orphans, you see...).  Dylan is the smooth talker, while
Jez is the technical genius.
For one of their scams, they hire a typist, Georgie (Kate Beckinsale),
to pretend to be a computer.  However, each of the men fall madly in
love with Georgie, who doesn't want anything to do with illicit scams.
You see, Georgie has problems of her own.  She's secretly (at least from
Dylan and Jez) engaged to marry a man she despises, yet must marry. Yet
she yearns for the sense of adventure she experiences while around Jez
and Dylan.
Shooting Fish has an occasional bright moment scattered here and there.
Some of the cons are amusing, but most of them are a little too
prolonged.
The movie seriously runs aground during its last act, when it contorts
to deliver a cloyingly happy ending.  Its intent may be self-parody at
this point, but whatever the intentions, it rings a note shockingly out
of tune with the rest of the film.
The cast is pleasant, but nothing special.  Of the three leads, Kate
Beckinsale is the most congenial, and has the strongest character.
There's not much more to Dylan and Jez than has been put down in this
review.
Shooting Fish ends up being a nice, but unmemorable little film that had
the chance to be much better.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Ken Varnum
"Shooting Fish" is a delightful romantic comedy with a strong cast.  Dylan
(Futterman) and Jez (Townsend) are orphans, the first American and the
second British.  They grew up in similar circumstances (in orphanages) and
with similar desires (their own house, a place to create the home neither
had as a child). Dylan, who is dyslexic and relies on Jez to help him jot
down addresses and other notes, is "Mr. Personality" and can charm the most
hardened executive. Jez, a technological genius, claims to have received a
degree in the "Psychology of Electronics," can repair anything electronic,
but is as socially inept as the stereotypical Silicon Valley wonk.
While they are both intelligent, even brilliant, neither has found his
niche in society.  The two, who are as close as brothers, get along
famously.  Unable to succeed in the real world, they have made a career of
confidence games, cleverly bilking unsuspecting and gullible (but always
wealthy) individuals and companies.  They see themselves as modern-day
Robin Hoods, robbing the rich (who don't really need the relatively small
amounts they pilfer) for the sake of the poor -- in this case, orphans.
Things start to go awry shortly after their success leads them to hire a
temporary secretary/assistant Georgie (Beckinsale).  Georgie is a young
medical student, betrothed to a wealthy businessman.  While Georgie is
initially taken in by Dylan and Jez's stories, she begins to doubt their
stories.  At the same time, she is attracted to both of them -- and both of
them, to her.
Between Dylan and Jez's schemes, which grow ever more complex, and
Georgia's own financial problems, the plot grows more complicated.  The
script, written by Stefan Schwartz and Richard Holmes, is witty and treads
a fine line between being too clever for its own good and too obvious.  As
the characters find their way into and out of trouble, their conflicting
means begin to coincide in a single end.
The movie is marked by several visual cliches that let the audience know
the production crew is enjoying its work.  Beckinsale steals the show as
the young fiancee torn between her responsibilities, her choices, and her
heart.  The interplay of the three main characters is utterly entertaining.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Dan Futterman, Stuart Townsend, Kate Beckinsale
Director: Stefan Schwartz 
Producers: Richard Holmes, Glynis Murray 
Screenplay: Richard Holmes, Stefan Schwartz
Cinematography: Henry Braham
Music: Stanislas Syrewicz 
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     SHOOTING FISH is a feather-light comedy about a pair of "likable" 
con men whose plans to live the good life are knocked off track by bad 
timing and an unexpected romance.  While the British release, which 
probably has aspirations of connecting with the FOUR WEDDINGS AND A 
FUNERAL crowd, offers an occasional worthwhile joke, it's ultimately so 
lacking in substance that it becomes difficult to care about anyone or 
anything.  The probable argument in favor of SHOOTING FISH is that the 
movie generates a warm, fuzzy feeling.  My response to this is to note 
that the only ones likely to experience such a sense of muted bliss are 
those who turn off their brains.  The film is preposterous to the point 
of distraction, where the necessary level of suspension of disbelief 
exceeds the capacity of a normal, thinking person.  The approach would 
be forgivable if the movie was genuinely funny or otherwise endearing, 
but moments of laughter and charm are infrequent and widely-spaced.
     Con men often make for delightful motion picture protagonists, 
because their presence allows screenwriters to devise all sorts of 
intricate moves in various games of deception.  Alas, that's not the 
case here.  The heroes are Dylan (Dan Futterman) and Jez (Stuart 
Townsend), and, although they have devoted their lives to bilking rich 
people out of money, their schemes are so banal that it's understandable 
if a viewer loses interest.  Even the opening gambit, with the pair 
selling a "voice-activated computer," isn't remotely credible.  And it's 
hard to feel any sympathy for the victims, who are either (a) nasty men 
getting what's coming to them, (b) gullible fools who deserve to be 
ripped off, or (c) both.
     Theoretically, Dylan and Jez are in the con business because it's 
the fastest way to make the two million pounds they need to buy a big 
mansion.  In reality, that's just an excuse for their lifestyle of 
adrenaline-generating close shaves.  As Georgie (Kate Beckinsale), their 
secretary-turned-accomplice-turned love interest notes, they're 
"compulsive risk-takers who thrive on danger."  Of course, hanging out 
with Dylan and Jez has an effect on her, and it's not long before she 
too catches the bug and is flirting with the law in order to swindle 
money out of a thoroughly despicable, filthy rich victim.
     Dan Futterman (Robin Williams' son in THE BIRDCAGE) plays Dylan, an 
American in London, with a certain oily charm.  Supposedly, there's a 
heart lurking beneath his slick exterior, but it's not often in 
evidence.  Stuart Townsend is Dylan's partner, Jez, a technical wizard 
with no social skills.  In the glorious tradition of motion picture 
nerds, he gets hopelessly tongue-tied around women.  The third member of 
the trio, and the one with the most spark, is Kate Beckinsale.  With her 
dark hair cropped short, Beckinsale looks different than in her previous 
roles, which include Hero in Kenneth Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING 
and the lead in John Schlesinger's COLD COMFORT FARM.  
     Watching SHOOTING FISH is a lot like drinking carbonated water.  
There's a little bit of fizz, and the sensation isn't unpleasant, but 
the whole experience fails to offer much satisfaction.  SHOOTING FISH is 
a harmless dud, and any minor pleasure it generates vanishes so quickly 
that it's hard to believe it was actually there in the first place.  The 
movie frequently treads a line between being marginally engaging and 
painfully trite.  Unfortunately, when all is said and done, a majority 
of the scenes fall in the latter camp rather than in the former.  
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Alex Fung
SHOOTING FISH (Fox Searchlight - 1998)
Starring Dan Futterman, Stuart Townsend, Kate Beckinsale
Screenplay by Stefan Schwartz, Richard Holmes
Produced by Richard Holmes, Glynis Murray
Directed by Stefan Schwartz
Running time: 109 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   What *is* it about Burt Bacharach these days?  His banal, decades-old
   handiwork seems to be invading contemporary cinema at an alarming
   rate for some reason or another.  We had a plethora of Bacharach
   tunes used in memorable fashion by P.J. Hogan in MY BEST FRIEND'S
   WEDDING, and ol' Burt himself even made a cameo appearance in Jay
   Roach's supremely silly AUSTIN POWERS: INTERNATIONAL MAN OF MYSTERY.
   So, after a successful 1997 run in the United Kingdom, here comes
   Stefan Schwartz's zany comedy SHOOTING FISH, serving as yet another
   homage to Bacharach -- the soundtrack is dominated by his music, the
   film's protagonists have a jukebox shrine to the popmeister in their
   bizarro home, and there's even an impromptu spirited rendition of "Do
   You Know The Way To San Jose?"  I don't know what Mr. Bacharach is up
   to, but whatever it is, it's working.
   Meanwhile, SHOOTING FISH is an effervescent comic romp with charm to
   spare which finally spins out of control in its third act.  The
   film's protagonists are the young team of sleek, smooth-talking Dylan
   (Dan Futterman) and awkward technical wizard Jez (Stuart Townsend),
   along with their new temp Georgie (Kate Beckinsale), and after an
   amusing prologue which depicts Dylan and Jez's innate characteristics
   as fully formed while mere little tykes growing up in respective
   orphanages, we open to find Dylan in a boardroom confidently
   demonstrating a new voice-recognition capable computer to an
   impressed business executive.  Claiming that the machine has a
   vocabulary of 80 000 words (this figure is upped on successive
   pitches), Dylan astonishes his potential customers by
   conversationally speaking to the computer, which politely responds in
   turn.  (The machine physically resembles a TRS-80, enabled with an
   appropriately tinny, HAL-like speaking voice).  It doesn't take long
   it to sink in that Dylan and Jez are con artists (as for the talking
   computer, visualize the *most* silly way in which this feat can be
   pulled off), and soon the trio are gleefully fleeing the office
   complex to the safety of their parked vehicle, advance payment
   cheques in hand.
   The two young men are scammers, all right, but they're likeable,
   relatively harmless ones that consider themselves present-day Robin
   Hoods ("Thin fish", Jez whispers to Dylan when a potential target
   turns out to be an elderly lady that can ill-afford to be ripped-off;
   they respectfully retreat.)  As for Georgie, she's initially not sure
   what to make of all of this, but after she's reassured that the
   proceeds of their spoils are going to orphans (a claim which isn't
   *entirely* inaccurate), she agrees to along with their exploits.
   SHOOTING FISH subsequently rockets through their series of misdeeds,
   and therein lies the principal weakness of the film.  It barrels
   along at such a breakneck pace that it's often a struggle to keep up
   with the developing plot.  There are points, particularly in the
   film's latter half, where one is left so dizzied by the frantically
   energetic plot zinging by that it becomes increasingly difficult to
   attempt to piece things together.  While the film has some very
   amusing elements, its wicked pacing leaves much to be desired; the
   primary narrative is maintained, but minor elements are often not
   immediately clear upon first consumption, to the detriment of the
   comedy.
   This is an unabashedly silly, light-hearted film, but it does
   occasionally run out of palatable comic ideas -- you know that when
   you're resorting to old inflatable doll sight gags, you're scraping
   the bottom of the barrel.  Still, the madcap hijinx of our heroes are
   generally droll and inventive, and the film has a sort of breezy and
   whimsical feel to it that helps to quash a more cynical perspective
   of the proceedings.
   Predictably, SHOOTING FISH is compelled to throw a love triangle into
   the mix, and a subplot deals with both Dylan and Jez vying for
   Georgie's affections.  While Dylan's the more photogenic and suave of
   the pair, Jez's feelings for Georgie are more genuine and heartfelt;
   it's no surprise whom Georgie ultimately sides with.  (Besides, the
   come-on line employed when Georgie's taken on a date to a nightclub
   isn't typically a successful one.)  The courtship's all played out
   well enough, and the characters are likeable, but there's no real
   resonance in the relationship; it's rather unengaging.
   What drives this film are the winning performances by its appealing
   trio of actors.  Mr. Futterman, with an assured manner and
   mischievous gleam in his eye, demonstrates good leading man
   potential, while Mr. Townsend is quite sympathetic as the awkward,
   soft-spoken Jez.  And Ms. Beckinsale, who positively exudes star
   qualities, successfully breaks type as a period piece mainstay in
   delightful fashion; lively and high-spirited, she's remarkably
   captivating.  SHOOTING FISH benefits tremendously from its impressive
   young cast.
   While its comedy is somewhat hit-and-miss and all of its elements
   don't satisfactorily gel in the final act, SHOOTING FISH is an
   irreverent little comedy that makes for an often pleasing lark.  The
   film's gags aren't exactly sophisticated, but with its simplistic,
   innocent comic outlook lies much of its charm.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Unlike you, I'm tolerant of weirdness."
     - Jennifer Jason Leigh, CROOKED HEARTS
