Title
Review for Daens (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Some films come around once in a while, and rather than re-affirm an
entertainment value for your money, they, give us, instead something that is
less fun to deal with, but no less important. This film, walks into that
category, and instead of trying to be politically correct, where an American
audience might enjoy it, it uses every inch of baseball bats to punch its
point home... and nothing is sacred here.
The story of Priester Daens, who in the late 19th Century, found himself at
odds with his peers, but most of all, he was not at odds with any
parishioners, who enjoyed listening to him. Like many priests, they talk and
talk, and never say anything of value. Daens has woken up to listening to
those around him, even if they don't understand him, or vice versa. And one
day, he is walking the streets and sees a little girl, who had frozen to
death over night. She was another victim, not only of most people's moral
stance of hypocrisy, but the local church's desire to support only the
causes that it is favored for, that is, the rich people's causes.
Priester Daens, becomes involved with the a couple of families, and
eventually takes up a stand in favor of the families, who are now raising
children simply to put them to work in factories, at a very early age. The
wages are horrible, and the working hours are worse. But this is a dangerous
fight. The rich class, is powerful, and they own the government. The workers
are being manipulated, and moved around, and their emotions played with. But
Daens' efforts, bring about a Government Commission, to visit to look at
things. No one believes them, but Daens thinks it's a good first step.
But the war only starts further down the line. An adversary, Charles Woeste,
is a hell bent politician, and his best work is in deals with the church. He
has been asking for the church to defrock Daens, and make an effort to stop
him. Figuring that the defrocked priest could not pull off what he is doing
as well, and the public will forget about it. But Daens, doesn't quit. He is
eventually asked to go to Rome, to see the Pope, but this is nothing but a
stalling tactic to try and make him lose time, and effort in his work in
Flanders. When he comes back, he becomes a part of the local election, and
finds that the vote was inordinately in favor of him, which gets the
parliament worried. They lie, and invalidate the vote. Another vote is done,
and Daens is elected. His war is just beginning. Charles Woester, is his
bitter enemy, and while discussing the plight of the poor, he never fails to
comment on the poor's needs for more money. The worst one comes later when
Daens wants schools created to educate all people, and Woester states his
vile breath .. "what are the poor going to do with an education ( all laugh
around him ), buy another _____ ( bigger laugh )" ... and we know that the
real stench that Daens is fighting is not going to be over very soon.
Amidst serious political games, this film plods along. Its tightly packed
story, becomes all the more confusing, but never the less powerful. In many
ways, it shows us how busy Daens was all the time, and how so many things
tried to help him and stop him at the same time. There is a serious sub plot
between a socialist group and the other mainly catholic group, of which a
Romeo and Juliet story is developing. And Woeste has his own "bucks", who
are the sons of rich people, who take law into their own hands many times.
But worse of all is the renegade cavalry, that also takes the law into its
own hands, assaulting people, and probably telling parliament that the
people scared the horses. The "bucks" are bent on hurting the socialist
activities, but worse, they decide to work on Daens' activities instead.
They go after Daens' brother's newspaper, which Daens has been using for a
while and writing his articles that are inflaming the upper class.
The worst thing in this film, and something that the church will never
repent for, is its inability to be worthless and pray on people's emotions.
In a sermon, Daens speaks of Christ, and the rich class begins walking out
of the church right in front of all the poor people. In Italy, the Vatican
comes off as petty, political, and just a painted building. And in
parliament, Daens, finds himself ridiculed amidst nobles that couldn't
careless but for their own fortune. And the king, who sits above it all and
says that all those beneath him are responsible for all the troubles.
While not a very pleasant film, this is so strong, and unrelenting, that it
is difficult to look at it and think it is not good. The balancing act,
works, between the political fashions, and how Daens is lucky enough to get
both of them to break, long enough, that they can find a cause that they can
fight together to win, rather than lose... and the fight for the worker's,
has to be fought with them, not without them, or their bickering. Daens
states, in a heightened moment, that this is not about ideas, or beliefs,
it's about your faith, and your life. It shuts their arguments out
immediately.
The film ends with an epitaph, telling us that Daens won a second term in
the parliament before he dies just prior to the First World War.
A very powerful film, that does not let up. Words are important here, as
they are used as vicious weapons all over the place. And the inner workings
of the factories, a game that rich people played, is even more unpleasant.
