Title
Review for Pee-wee's Big Adventure (1985)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jeff Alan
For various reasons, Paul Reubens, who created and played Pee Wee Herman for
more than a decade, is sometimes dismissed by critics.  There is no question
that Mr. Reubens's downfall was perpetuated (or climaxed) by the incident a
few years back where he was enjoying himself a little too much in a movie
theatre.  America was stunned:  The person that they let their children watch
on Saturday morning was now a sexually ambiguous figure.  Parents do not like
ambiguity when it comes to sexual orientation:  Take Ellen DeGeneres for
example, she in a matter of weeks will come out of the closet in a television
sitcom.  No public outcries here folks (except for the always outspoken Rev.
Jerry Falwell).
It is unforunate that Mr. Reubens's brilliancy is masked by one night in his
life which turned out to be a huge mistake.  Brilliancy?  Why would I say
that?  Well it's fairly simple:  The character in Pee Wee Herman that was
created by Reubens was an extremely unique character that first started off
being raunchy in specials he did in the late 70's for HBO, but then turned
into kids' oriented, really being perpetuated by the movie Pee Wee's Big
Adventure.  
Some very creative talents collaborated on this film:  Phil Hartman (co
writer) who is of SNL fame, and Tim Burton, one of this earliest movies,
which really showed how masterful he could direct with weird and make-believe
worlds (just as he showed us with EDWARD SCISSORHANDS and THE NIGHTMARE
BEFORE CHRISTMAS).  It is my point, that this film and Mr. Reubens's are
highly underrated:  I think Mr. Reubens's has done a lot more than people
think in the film industry.
Pee Wee's Big Adventure was a great film.  It was an entertaining piece of
film that was extremely appealing:  It involved a world where everyone was
happy and nothing could hurt you (well, except maybe your feelings when you
get your big red bicycle stolen!).  Some critics lauded it.  Some looked down
upon it, dismissing it as stupid.  I don't think you can appreciate this
movie if you do not appreciate the creative genius that Paul Reubens
possesses.  
Sure, Pee Wee Herman is now an old character.  Sure, Mr. Reubens has went on
to different projects, like playing small roles in films like BATMAN II and
GEORGE, and even the annoying product of nepotism in MURPHY BROWN, playing a
guy named Andrew.  But Mr. Reubens's creative genius should be noted.  Why?
 I think that if he and Burton and Hartman had not made that effort, there
would not have been an EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, nor would there have been a MARS
ATTACKS.  
In a nutshell, Pee Wee's Big Adventure was an entertaining film that let
creative genius be shown in the sheer limelight, allowing other directors to
expand upon the efforts of the film's creators.

Author
Brian Koller
"Pee-Wee's Big Adventure" was a surprise summer hit in 1985.
Kids loved it, leading to a lengthy Saturday morning television
run for star Pee Wee Herman.  But while the TV show was
only twenty minutes and tightly structured, the film version
has only a thin plot that must cover ninety minutes, leading
to inconsistent humor and an episodic storyline.
Pee Wee Herman's prize possession is his eyesore neon-red
bicycle.  After it is stolen, Pee Wee searches nationwide
for it.  He runs into various characters that are almost as
eccentric as he is.  There is a chase scene involving
Godzilla and Santa Clause.  There is a happy ending.
For those who have escaped American eighties culture, as
well as episodes of Murphy Brown, I will attempt to describe
the character of Pee Wee Herman.  He is nerdy, pre-adolescent,
asexual, and uninhibited.  He makes curious faces, has a
goofy laugh, and has no visible means of support.  When
standing, his arms jut at odd angles from his body, as
if imitating a tea kettle.  He has no clue about what
impression he is making, and has no qualms about turning
people he dislikes into enemies.  He is naively trusting
when it comes to meeting strangers.
While kids embraced the film, the intention was to make a
comedy that adults would enjoy.  But the supporting cast
of chums and antagonists are all cartoonish, especially
a gang of look-alike bikers that share the same two emotions 
of joy and anger.
The best thing about this movie is the soundtrack by 
Danny Elfman, which bounces along merrily.  Burton's direction 
is hit and miss, much as we would expect a movie to be if a 
camera simply follows Herman around.  It is sometimes funny 
and always a little odd.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Shane Burridge
This got terrible notices when first released but has earned a following, 
especially by fans of director Tim Burton.  The title would have you 
believing that this is a children's film, and you'd be partway right.  It 
marks the feature debuts of both Burton and its star, Pee-Wee Herman (Paul 
Reubens).  Reubens had previously introduced the Pee-Wee character in a 
television special and continued with a savvy children's show after his film 
got attention.  In case you haven't seen any of these: Pee-Wee is an adult 
who behaves like a child and dresses in the types of suits the Beatles might 
have discarded early in their grooming phase.  Basically, he's a boy who 
never grew up - the 'Big Adventure' of the title echoes Peter Pan's 
oft-expressed wish to someday experience a Big Adventure.  He lives in a 
glorified playhouse, speaks in a ducky, cartoon-character voice, and 
treasures a bike as his most valuable possession.  The bike turns out to be 
the catalyst for the story, an EASY RIDER spoof which takes the form of a 
quest.  It's the most suitable plot device for this character, who would 
probably drive you crazy if he was stuck in the same setting for too long.  
As Pee-Wee sets off across America to find his bike (which is stolen early 
in the film) he runs into a series of characters just as two-dimensional as 
he is.  It all ends with a chase, which might seem lazily predictable but 
makes sense here, as it's an ideal context for the spirited boy-and-bike 
reunion we've been waiting for.
PEE-WEE's BIG ADVENTURE communicates a genuine sense of eccentricity that 
keeps it bubbling along.  Former Oingo Boingo band member Danny Elfman is a 
perfect choice for composer, despite his only previous experience being a 
film score written for his brother; Burton had worked on two quirky animated 
features for Disney which were shelved; and Pee-Wee's bizarre track record 
speaks for itself.  Together these three outsiders created a product unique 
in cinema - even the non-Burton sequel BIG TOP PEE-WEE couldn't replicate 
it.  Pee-Wee manages to keep us from disliking him despite his flaws, 
although strangely we never feel sympathy for him either.  Even though he is 
in every scene of this movie we don't tire of the character because he lets 
the supporting cast handle most of the dialogue.  The film's biggest mistake 
is to put in a 'meaningful'  scene with a roadhouse waitress - it's really 
only a means to (a) have Pee-Wee menaced by a jealous boyfriend (this 
doesn't really go anywhere), and (b) have him undergo some kind of learning 
curve which he reiterates in a phone call to his non-girlfriend (he tells 
her he's changed, but he plainly hasn't, rendering the scene obsolete - 
unless the point of it is to prove to us that he will never change).  Some 
years after his films and television appearances as Pee-Wee, Reubens would 
suffer the embarrassment of being arrested for 'indecent exposure' at a 
porno house.  At the end of PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE his alter ego Pee-Wee is 
no more wiser or sophisticated than when he started.  Thank goodness.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1985, PG, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Paul Reubens (Pee Wee Herman), Elizabeth Daily (Dottie), Mark
Holton (Francis), Diane Salinger (Simone), written by Paul Reubens, Phil
Hartman, Michael Varhol, produced by Robert Shapiro, Richard Gilbert
Abramson, directed by Tim Burton.
"Pee Wee's Big Adventure" is a live action cartoon farce that epitomizes
stupidity... and I  liked it. It's the story of an immature, idiot manchild,
and because he is so ridiculously silly, it makes for brilliant comedy.
Paul Reubens stars as Pee Wee Herman, an adult with a 4-year-old boy's face
and personality. Pee Wee does not live in the real world; his house is a
cross between an amusement park, a funhouse, and a huge toy store. He has an
"Absent-Minded Professor"-type device that makes his breakfast for him while
he wraps Scotch tape around his head in the bathroom. This opening scene is
only the first of countless sight gags, and what's amazing is they actually
work! 
The zaniness continues throughout the film with one of the best scenes
occurring when Pee Wee opens his secret storage facility for his bicycle
(which looks like the kind of bike the guys from "Mission: Impossible" would
have used as kids). The music becomes overly dramatic and spotlights and
dramatic camera angles are used to highlight the bike's gizmos and gadgets
and its importance to Pee Wee. 
But where there is good there must be evil, and we get the typical rich,
snobby "kid" Francis (Holton), who wants Pee Wee's bike more than anything.
As Pee Wee goes shopping for x-ray glasses and boomerang bow ties (to match
the tight grey suit he always wears), he is shocked to find his bike missing
from the robotic clown he chained it to. 
And so we get the typical road trip comedy as our small hero tries to
hitchhike 2,000 miles to San Antonio, Texas because a phony psychic told him
his bike is in the basement of the Alamo. First he is picked up by an escape
convict, who kicks him out after he drives the car over a cliff, then he is
picked up by an eccentric old truck driver who turns out to be a ghost. And
if that wasn't enough, he must escape the 300-pound boyfriend of a friendly
waitress, and is almost killed again when he accidentally messes with a biker
gang.
Although most of the jokes stem from Pee Wee's wild antics and zany sight
gags, there is a good amount of witty satire here. In fact, the film uses its
childish attitude to make for some of the funniest satire I've ever seen.
There are many "goofs" throughout this film where crew and/or equipment is
visible, but since there is such a "don't care" attitude to everything, it's
funny and quite original.
"Pee Wee's Big Adventure" isn't anything genius, but it is very funny. There
is a laugh-out-loud joke a few times a minute and most of them work (unlike
most commercial comedies). Maybe it's likable because it speaks to the child
inside of us, or maybe we just like to see stupidity once in a while. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
