Title
Review for Dante's Peak (1997)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Universal)
Starring:  Pierce Brosnan, Linda Hamilton, Charles Hallahan.
Screenplay:  Leslie Bohem.
Producers:  Gale Anne Hurd, Joseph M. Singer.
Director:  Roger Donaldson.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, intense situations)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I have been anticipating the arrival of DANTE'S PEAK, the first of
1997's two volcano films, with a combination of dread and...well, still
more dread.  The return of the disaster film has been about as welcome a
pop culture phenomenon as 70s nostalgia, both of them reincarnating
uncalculated vapidity as calculated vapidity.  It only takes one TWISTER
to turn you off the genre; throw in INDEPENDENCE DAY and DAYLIGHT and any
critic could be excused for walking into DANTE'S PEAK with an attitude.
But if I have to sit through more disaster films, I only hope they can be
as thrilling as DANTE'S PEAK.  Though just as plot- and character-impaired
as its genre cousins, DANTE'S PEAK delivers a solid hour of relentless
tension and excitement.
     Our story begins in Colombia, where U.S. Geological Survey volcano
expert Harry Dalton (Pierce Brosnan) suffers a tragic loss during a
volcanic eruption.  Four years later, Harry is sent to the picturesque
town of Dante's Peak, Washington to investigate possible activity in the
town's long-dormant namesake volcano.  Harry believes he sees enough
evidence of a threat to suggest an evacuation plan to mayor Rachel Wando
(Linda Hamilton), but Harry's boss Paul Dreyfus (Charles Hallahan) is
unwilling to cause unwarranted alarm.  The evidence continues to build,
however, and when Dante's Peak finally blows the town erupts into chaos.
With little time to evacuate, Harry must help Rachel and her family escape
a force of nature with plenty of tricks up its crater.
     DANTE'S PEAK is a strange kind of success, because it includes many
of the noteworthy flaws of TWISTER, and then some.  We get the same
obligatory romantic pair thrown into danger with a minimalist back-story
tagged on, along with a team of quirky scientists to provide comic relief.
Brosnan is ruddy and somber for most of the film's running time, Hamilton
is frazzled and likeable, and both of them trudge dutifully through fifty
minutes of exposition as though any unnecessary acting might tire them out
before the big finish.  Leslie Bohem (the scripter of record on DAYLIGHT,
apparently a specialist in films which end with traumatized people wrapped
in heavy blankets) also adds a dose of JAWS, but doesn't give us the
pleasure of an actual villain.  Charles Hallahan provides the political
voice who ends up causing more damage, and there is a teasing sub-plot
about a potentially skittish business developer.  Neither one offers
enough conflict, however, forcing the audience to sit and wait out the
plodding first half for the big show.
     And what a show it turns out to be.  The surprising thing about the
post-eruption second half of DANTE'S PEAK isn't necessarily that it is
effective, but that the reason for its effectiveness doesn't exist
entirely on a hard drive somewhere.  There are certainly a few impressive
visual effects sequences, including a cloud packing the concussive force
of a small nuclear weapon, but director Roger Donaldson gets just as much
mileage out of the time-honored technique of jiggling the camera to
represent an earthquake.  No, DANTE'S PEAK is an effective thriller
because the characters repeatedly find themselves in new and apparently
impossible situations, and the direction gives those sequences an
edge-of-the-seat tension.  From a dizzying truck ride through town
destined for the Universal Studios Tour, to the crossing of a
flood-threatened bridge, to a mine shaft which threatens to turn Brosnan
into a sardine, DANTE'S PEAK provides the kind of relentless, well-crafted
action which is what movie-goers should be talking about when they talk
about certain films being like roller-coasters.
     The biggest surprise of all may be that the man behind that action is
Donaldson, who has served up cinematic backwash like SPECIES, THE GETAWAY
and COCKTAIL.  Nothing in any of those duds suggested the skill to create
the best scene in DANTE'S PEAK, where Harry, Rachel and Rachel's family
attempt to cross a lake which has been turned by volcanic gases into
sulfuric acid.  As the lake begins bubbling through the bottom of their
metal motorboat, the occupants begin a quavering round of "Row Row Row
Your Boat."  It is an eerie moment, and Donaldson manages to get you
itching for the fate of the characters even though they haven't been given
any personalities.  More impressive still, he does it without assaulting
your senses.  In many ways, DANTE'S PEAK is a very conventional disaster
thriller, even duplicating the Heroic Canine Leap to Safety which
INDEPENDENCE DAY turned into a moment in camp history.  There is, however,
something rare in a film which can generate the kind of tension DANTE'S
PEAK generates.  Maybe it is possible to present a disaster without being
one.

Author
Christopher Null
     For those keeping score, here's the new Hollywood movie formula: 
TWISTER - tornado + other disaster = $$$!
     $$$ may be right, but ***** is definitely not forthcoming, at least
not in the case of DANTE'S PEAK, a shameless and blatant rip-off of the
mildly entertaining aforementioned film that is largely responsible for
the return to prominence of the disaster movie.  This time around, it's
a volcano that threatens the peace of little Dante's Peak, and it's
Pierce Brosnan who comes to the rescue.
     Here's how frightening the similarities are.  Both films open with
a flashback explaining why this particular act of nature is so traumatic
to the hero (Helen Hunt in TWISTER, Brosnan in PEAK).  Both feature a
team of gosh-darn-nutty scientists investigating the disasters, plus an
unlikely romance-on-the-run for the leads.  Both sport far-too-crisp
digital effects.  Both are full of small-town kitsch (TWISTER is set in
the midwest, PEAK is a sleepy Northwestern village).  Both are full of
bad jokes and bad acting to go along with the bad weather.  Both have a
"grandma" character *and* a dog who are injured by the force of nature. 
Hell, both even feature a big red truck that gets destroyed by the
disaster in question!
     DANTE'S PEAK, trying to outdo TWISTER with a volcano, ups the level
of things that are destroyed, and it features lots of ash raining down,
flowing lava, and lots and lots of buildings blowing up(!)  And that's
really about it.  Really.
     But what makes PEAK so bad, where TWISTER was passably good?  Is it
the cheeseball dialogue and a really horrid performance from Linda
Hamilton?  Or is it the precocious children?  Is it the fact that if
everyone in the town of Dante's Peak wasn't dumber than a post, this
whole disaster would have been avoided (that means you, grandma)?
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Phil Curtolo
Recently, disaster has been fresh on the minds of many movie
director's. For instance, just last year, director Jan De Bot released
the blockbuster hit Twister. It's success surprised no one, from
esteemed critics to ordinary fans. It toppled the box office charts,
remaining in the number one spot until the next disaster flick was
released. Director Roland Emmerich's  Independence Day, the 6th highest
grossing film in movie history, again, took critics and fans to the edge
of the seats in suspense and awe. It's astounding special effects
astonished sell-out crowds in every theater throughout the nation.
As of today, just about every natural disaster has been covered in
movies. Earthquakes, typhoons, hurricanes, alien invasions, towering
infernos and whatever else picks at your brain has been covered by movie
directors, each one having it's own high points of success. Yet the only
natural disasters yet to be focused on and to become successful are the
terror-wrenching volcanoes. On February 7 of this year, this fact ceased
to exist, as director Roger Donaldson let loose on of the most
death-defying, special effects enhanced films ever made. Dante's Peak
had finally arrived with much acclaim.
Dante's Peak, Washington has just been named the second most desirable
town in America, population under 20,000, in which to reside. It seems
all is perfect for Mayor Rachel Wando (Linda Hamilton, The Shadow
Conspiracy) and the town's people, as the huge celebration kicks off
with a mammoth, possible multi-million dollar investment by a large
corporation. However, little do they know the danger they are actually
in, due to their dormant, fire-breathing mountain.
In Vancouver, Washington, word spreads of reading from the near extinct
Dante's Peak. Head of Operations Paul Dreyfus (Charles Hallahan,
Executive Decision) sends his best volcanologist, Harry Dalton (Pierce
Brosnan, Goldeneye) to examine the napping beast.
Dalton has quite a past with volcanoes. As it turns out, he lost his
only love and  fiancée to a volcano in Columbia. Yet he still proceeds
with all tasks at hand.
Now for the main event. When Dalton investigates the mammoth creature
of destruction, he becomes suspicious of his scientific evidence,
revealing a possible eruption. However, his boss, Dreyfus, doesn't want
to alarm the people and scare off the investor over something that had
no hard-core proof. When Dalton presents the evidence needed, it's too
late, and the evacuation is on. In a mad panic, the people of the town
rush to escape without thinking of the consequences. In an extremely
well done scene, citizens are trampled, cars are smashed, and roads turn
to ruins, as the volcano spits out it's fiery flem. 
But this is just the beginning, as the party has just begun and Dante's
Peak has only just begun to begin it's reign of terror. In a desperate
attempt to escape, Dalton's team of experts barely make it alive.
However, he, Mayor Wando, her children, their grandmother, and her dog
are stranded on the mainland, as the town's only escape point, a rickety
old bridge, has already collapsed. So it's survival of the fittest
between man and nature.
The movie is filled with many strong points. It's release date was it's
only weak point. Why would someone release this big-budget flick one
measly week after the much anticipated re-releasing of the first episode
of the critically acclaimed Star Wars Trilogy. There is simply no
logical answer to this question, however, no movie could go flawless,
even though this one came pretty darn close. It's astonishing special
effects, were obviously the strong point of this movie. With the
creeping lava, the incredibly detailed, exploding buildings, throwing
each brick through the air, the blinding ash storms, and the acid-filled
lake, Dante's Peak's effects were twenty times more powerful than
Twister's and ten times more captivating than those of Independence Day.
Although a poor release date may hamper this movie's success, any movie
fan would do anything it takes to see this movie. Beat up your grandma
and steal her Social Security check, or rob a homeless man of his pencil
money and see one of the best special effects movie's of our time, in
our opinions. Dante's Peak is a must see.
Grade: A+, ***** out of *****

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Disaster films have a tendency to be very formulated and very cliched. To see
a disaster film with actual originality, or at least a decent plot twist,
would definitely be a welcome surprise. Unfortunately, folks, it's not
likely.
DANTE'S PEAK is cliched,  and at times corny, but also pretty decent. To be
honest, I wasn't very interested in seeing this film, and word of mouth, as
well as several reviews, didn't make it sound promising. So I was pleasantly
surprised that to find that this movie wasn't bad at all. It's pretty run of
the mill, but it's not something I would say is merely "ok" to watch.
In case you don't know, DANTE'S PEAK is about a volcano and the city which
lives in it's shadow, Dante's Peak (who would've guessed, eh?). Pierce
Brosnan plays the volcanologist sent to study the volcano and, perhaps more
by hunch than actual scientific proof, is determined that the volcano will be
arupting in the very near future. Due to the lack of more substantial
evidence, nobody warns the small town, and when they finally do, it's in the
middle of the town meeting that the volcano finally blows.
Brosnan, all around good guy, will, of course, save the day . . . or at least
the mayor of Dante's Peak (Linda Hamilton). Naturally the two will become
infatuated with one another. (If you think I just ruined a plot development,
you haven't seen very many movies!) There's also the virtually neccessary
kids and pet dog to tug at your heart strings. And of course, the kids or the
dog (at least one or the other) will do something heroic . . . but hey, I
don't want to ruin all the surprises!
If there was a part of you that was hesitating seeing DANTE'S PEAK merely
because it was rumored to be a waste of time, I urge you to watch it and
decide for yourself. It's not brain food, but it succeeds at what it's meant
to be . . . an enjoyable, suspenseful movie about the fury Mother Nature can
unleash!

Author
Max Scheinin
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
In the last few years, the disaster film has been making a comeback. Last
year we had Independence Day and Twister. Now we have Dante's Peak and
Volcano. Disaster films can be great fun--they can also live up to their
title. For an example of the latter, take Dante's Peak a completely silly
little picture about a volcano. Yep, nobody knows that it is alive, but it
is. It explodes. So, uh, is this movie gonna make sense? No, just watch.
Uh, is it gonna be fun? If you don't think--just watch. But, uh, shouldn't
it require intelligent participation? No, just watch. 
Sound like fun? Judge for yourself--I found this movie completely
disrespectful to my intelligence. The special effects were not very good.
It was never convincing. I wanted to, y'know, walk out. After five minutes.
It is truly ludicrous. I don't mind a movie that isn't "deep", but this
movie fails to "entertain".
Now take Volcano, a simple little film that came a few months later. Maybe
they were doing extra filming--don't ask me. How's it compare? Next to
Dante's Peak, it's Citizen Kane. It's exciting and well-edited and makes
the concept of volcanos seem quite realistic. It does what it wants to. You
might not find yourself cheering, but you'll probably be on the edge of
your seat. Sure I think of the cinema as an art form, and sure, I like to
be challenged by a film--to have my morals questioned--but by no means am I
so
snobbish that I can't appreciate escapist entertainment--and that's what
this film provides. I don't think you should pay more then $4.50 to get
in--but I don't think you'll altogether regret it if you do. 

Author
Marty Mapes
While I was watching it, I loved Dante's Peak. It was a great
action/disaster movie with lots of interesting sequences, riveting
special effects, and likeable characters. Afterwards, the movie left my
mind completely. It didn't resonate with any interesting themes or
ideas; it was just a story, and it was done. But really, what else could
anyone ask from an action movie?  The effects-laden previews made this
movie look like Twister, which I did not like. Many critics have called
the two movies similar. Roger Ebert even outlines the "rules" for such
disaster movies in his review. But I disagree that adherence to the
genre necessarily makes a sub-par movie. Some formula movies work and
others don't. Dante's Peak works.
Pierce Brosnan plays Harry Dalton, a volcanologist from the U.S.
Geological Survey, who is sent to the perky little town of Dante's Peak.
Strange things are happening in Dante's Peak; or maybe they aren't.
That's what Harry has to find out. He arrives and hooks up with mayor
Rachel Wando (played by Linda Hamilton) who shows him around. The movie
spends some time getting to know Rachel, Harry, his colleagues, and the
town. The characters are likeable, largely because Brosnan and Hamilton
are so charismatic. And thankfully, as Andrea says, Rachel's kids aren't
too annoying, (as many movie kids are these days).
The movie really takes off, though, when the mountain blows. At first
there is panic among the townspeople and the panic is well-staged. Quite
often action sequences comprise a bunch of close-ups, cut together.
(That's cheaper, easier, and less interesting than actually spending
time to choreograph the sequence.) The confusion in Dante's Peak is not
entirely created through editing. There are actually carefully staged
wide shots of townspeople running and driving amok. The freeway at the
edge of town collapses and it looks like footage from the San Francisco
earthquake. A flood of water, ash, and logs sweeps down the mountain and
it looks like footage from Mt. St. Helens. Harry Dalton (the character)
is trapped in a cave-in and I fear for Pierce Brosnan's (the actor's)
safety.
After the preliminary eruption, the main characters rush from one
dangerous situation to the next, and each of these sequences is riveting
and frightening. The characters never do anything inhumanly stupid to
bring the danger on themselves (as characters often do in horror
movies), but there's always one more dangerous situation for the
characters to face. Having survived several close geologic encounters,
Harry and Rachel try to drive down off the mountain, only to discover
that the road is blocked by a lava flow. Driving on might get them stuck
in lava, but turning around might trap them on a doomed mountain. Credit
the writing of Leslie Bohem for keeping these situations tense without
feeling contrived, and for including enough of these vignettes to keep
the pace moving.
I assume that most of these situations were computer generated (like the
flood and the freeway collapse), and if it's true, these are the best
computer-generated graphics I have seen. They were crude at the
beginning of Dante's Peak (the peak is clearly inserted into the
backgrounds), interesting in Terminator 2 and passably believable in
Jurassic Park, but the flood scene in Dante's Peak looked frighteningly
real and the freeway collapse had me riveted. They didn't work
everywhere, like when the lava burst though the back wall of the cabin,
but perhaps for the first time, some of the computer graphics are
seamless.
This movie was crafted and not slapped together. There is some
interesting camera work during the setup of the movie. The camera, in
two parallel shots started on the face of a character, then pulled back
and swung around to reveal the whole scene. It's not much, but it showed
me that some care and thought were put into the movie. There was no
superheroism, no dumb luck, no coincidences, no token sex scenes, and no
irrelevant pop music sprinkled in as an excuse for a soundtrack. Also,
three PhDs were credited as advisors. I am not qualified to say if the
science was true to life, but it felt about right and it wasn't
condescending.
Although this movie may be totally forgotten in five years, it is great
entertainment.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Brian Takeshita
It's time to take cover.  After a hiatus of about fifteen years, the
disaster movie has come back with renewed zest.  In early 1997, there
were no less than three movies about volcanoes alone, one on
television and two in the theaters, with DANTE'S PEAK and VOLCANO in
heavy competition for the moviegoing dollar.  Of the two, I had heard
that DANTE'S PEAK was the better film, so I decided to check it out
when it was released on video.
The film begins with a slow motion scene of people in a third world
country trying to evacuate their little town.  The town is being
covered in ash and sulfuric water from what we presume is a volcanic
eruption.  Flaming rocks of various sizes also fall from the sky,
crushing homes and people.  We see people panicking, people crying,
and even horses rearing.  It is a disaster of biblical proportions,
signified to us by one person dragging a cross down a road.  Symbolism
doesn't get much more blatant than that.
We learn that Harry Dalton (Pierce Brosnan), a volcanologist with the
U.S. Geological Survey, was there with his wife when the eruption
occurred.  Harry survived, but his wife did not.  A few years later,
Harry is sent to investigate some unusual seismic activity detected
near the small town of Dante's Peak, Washington (which, we are told,
has been voted Second Most Desirable Place to Live (Under 20,000) by
the readers of Money Magazine).  There Harry meets Rachel Wando, a
single mother of two who serves as mayor of Dante's Peak and
proprietor of a small coffee shop.  Although the mayor doesn't seem to
be alarmed by the presence of a man sent to determine if the mountain
next to their town is going to blow up, a few members of the city
council are.  They are afraid that Harry's presence is going to scare
off an investor who has pledged to put millions of dollars into
developing Dante's Peak.  They would rather have any news of possible
stirrings within the neighboring dormant volcano swept under the rug.
However, when an amorous young couple takes a skinny-dip in the local
hot springs, they turn up cooked by lava which bubbles up from a small
fissure underneath.  Thus begins a chain of events leading up to the
inevitable eruption.
This film contains a number of cliches.  The amorous couple is one.
As soon as they doff their clothes, you know they're going to die.
The town busybody and the abrasive mother-in-law make appearances, as
does the death-defying dog.  Countless familiar scenarios only serve
to make this film very predictable.  Watching the movie, I was able to
not only anticipate each of the major plot elements, but some of the
dialogue as well.  Unfortunate, since much of the dialog is terrible.
For example, Harry's boss, Paul (Charles Hallahan),  and a team from
the U.S. Geological Survey join Harry to assess the situation.  Paul
basically tells the townsfolk that Harry's eruption predictions aren't
cause for alarm.  This causes Harry to leave in a fit of rage, only to
turn up the next day, ready for work.  When Paul asks Harry why he
stayed, he says with grim determination, "Cause this town's in trouble
and I'm the best man you've got."  Even better is when Harry is trying
to explain the need to jolt the residents into leaving.  He likens the
situation to how a frog will jump out if dropped into a pot of boiling
water.  If the frog is in cold water which is gradually heated up,
however, the frog won't move and will allow itself to be cooked.  "Is
that your recipe for frog soup?" asks one of the team members.  "It's
my recipe for disaster," responds Harry.
DANTE'S PEAK has a singular talent for pointing out the obvious.  Our
heroes are in a boat in the middle of a lake which Harry realizes the
volcanic activity has turned to acid.  Mayor Wando demonstrates her
brilliant powers of deduction by proclaiming, in a very grave tone,
"Acid eats metal."  Thanks for the tip.  When we first see the U.S.
Geological Survey building, there's a caption labeling it as such.
This wouldn't have been so bad if it weren't for the fact that the
caption is right above a sign on the building which reads, in large
letters, "U.S. Geological Survey."  I suppose the caption is for
people who can't read signs.
Although Harry and Mayor Wando become an item by the end of the film,
the viewer has no idea why.  There is a severe lack of chemistry
between the two characters, and the relationship seems rushed because
of this.  When they get close to kissing, I was asking myself, "Why do
they want to kiss?  Were they even attracted to each other?"  If I
were the mayor, I would sure think twice about kissing a guy who
doesn't even crack a smile through the whole movie, trying to pull off
the rough-yet-debonair act.  Who does he think he is?  James Bond?
The eruption of the volcano feels similarly rushed.  There are several
"warning signs" prior to the eruption itself, but they are so
lackluster and without suspense that we don't feel as if they are
leading up to anything.  For example, one of the survey team members
makes his way down into the crater of the volcano in order to retrieve
a remote controlled robot.  A tremor occurs.  Does he plunge headlong
to his death?  Is he engulfed in lava which shoots up from below?  No,
a couple of rocks fall on him and break his leg.  The sole purpose of
this scene seemed to be to set up the subsequent chopper rescue scene,
which I suppose was intended to be dramatic as well.  It wasn't.
One plot thread left noticeably hanging was the investment in the town
of Dante's Peak.  In a disaster movie, there's usually one guy who's
greedy enough to cover up the possibility of
eruption/fire/earthquake/explosion/tsunami/tornado/meteorite, and
usually gets killed by the disaster.  It's okay, of course, because we
all think he got what he deserved.  If you're going to be unoriginal,
you might as well go all the way.  In DANTE'S PEAK, the city
councilmembers are concerned, but they don't really try hard enough.
Maybe the mayor's abrasive mother-in-law should have been the one.
For no apparent reason, she snaps at Harry for even positing that the
volcano could erupt.  Perhaps her ancestors invested in some Pompeii
real estate.
There are a couple of good things about this movie.  The first is the
scenery.  There are panoramic shots of forests, lakes and mountains
that are absolutely beautiful.  The second is the special effects.
They are the closest I've ever seen to a real pyroclastic eruption.
But when elements which don't speak are going to be the best parts of
your movie, you'd probably better rewrite the script.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
After sensing small amounts of seismic activity, the USGS (United States 
Geological Survey) send vulcanologist expert Harry Dalton (played by Pierce 
Brosnan) out on what they think is a routine discovery to the small town of 
Dante's Peak.  After finding a pair of skinny dippers dead in a creek next to 
the mountain, Dalton fears that a volcanic eruption is not far away.  
Suggesting the town should be put on alert, government experts doubt him but 
Dante's Peak mayor Rachel Wando (Linda Hamilton) starts to believe him after 
more volcanic activity is found and the lives of her children are threatened.  
Desperately trying to convince everyone of his theory before its too late, 
disastrous consequences occur as the volcano finally blows its lid after a good 
hour into the film.  Now more of a race against time then anything else, Dalton 
must get himself and his companions to safety while attempting to pass little 
"obstacles" like an acid lake and a house surrounded by lava.
Pierse Brosnan's character Harry Dalton is the typical disaster movie hero - 
he's young, good looking, determined and has an on screen radience that can 
carry a movie.  Yet more importantly, Dalton has a very nifty talent for 
sensing when a volcano is about to erupt after a close friend and partner of 
his was killed in the opening scene.  Being surrounded by Rachel Wando and her 
two children gives a nice aspect of romance to the film, yet sometimes can be a 
little tedious as Pierce Brosnan can be often seen of as more of a fatherly 
character rather than a hero constantly running from eruptions.  But overall, 
Brosnan's performance is very well suited to the movie and gives Dante's Peak 
the boost it needs to be a successful action film.
For an area of disaster never really covered before, Dante's Peak does 
extremely well in providing realistic special effects cleverly produced by 
computer and digital technology and directed by Australian-born Roger 
Donaldson, who happens to be a geology major with a passion for vulcanology. 
However impressive Dante's Peak may be, if you are anxious for lots of java and 
volcanic activity (and not just flying rocks) I would probably suggest that you 
wait for Volcano, which is scheduled to be released later this year.
Suspense builds but lava is not fit for the boil 


Author
Steve Kong
Lately there have been a string of special effects driven movies that
are lacking in story and characters.  And Dante's Peak is not unlike
these movies.
If you've seen Twister, you'll know the basics for Dante's Peak.  A
scientist driven by a memory of a loved one lost to the "monster" of
nature.  In Twister the monster was the tornado, and the scientist was
Helen Hunt's character Jo.  In Dante's Peak, the monster is a volcano
and the scientist is Pierce Brosnan's Harry.
But, is that all the coincidence between the two movies?  No, Dante's
Peak also has the rag-tag team of scientists, the red truck, the corny
love story, and the opening scene showing how "the loved one" was
lost.
You might me wondering how a 2 hour movie can be made out of one
volcano blowing.  I know I did.  The movie starts with a bang (pun
intended).  But it quickly slows to a smoldering.  The movie then
spends the next hour building the antagonistic relationship between
Harry and his boss and the love story between Harry and the mayor of
Dante's Peak (Linda Hamilton).  This part is slow going, and had me
looking at my watch.  Then all the sudden Dante's Peak explodes (who
could have predicted that?) and although the action is dry and stale,
there is enough tension to keep the movie going from here on.
On a special effects level, Dante's Peak is incredible.  On a story
level it's nothing more than cold slowing lava.  Is it worth seeing?
If it is a matinee showing, sure, go see it on the big screen for the
special effects.
Steve
--
steve kong  (dt@wco.com steve@mp.sbay.org)      the mookie online network
bbs - +1.408.942.1984 (mp.sbay.org)          web - http://www.wco.com/~dt/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Linda Hamilton, Charles Hallahan, 
      Jamie Renee Smith, Jeremy Foley, Elizabeth Hoffman 
Director: Roger Donaldson 
Producers: Gale Ann Hurd and Joseph M. Singer
Screenplay: Leslie Bohem 
Cinematography: Andrjez Bartkowiak
Music: John Frizzell and James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     DANTE'S PEAK is obviously predicated on the dubious idea that 
bigger is better.  1996's TWISTER brought in hundreds of millions at the 
box office by showcasing relatively small (if something so destructive 
can be gauged as "small") natural disasters -- namely, tornadoes.  The 
next logical step would be to go for something larger and more 
devastating.  Apparently, hurricanes weren't deemed visually impressive 
enough and earthquakes have been done to death, so Hollywood has set its 
sights on volcanoes with not one, but two, similarly-themed disaster 
flicks.  Let's just hope VOLCANO shows a glimmer more intelligence, not 
to mention a higher energy level, than DANTE'S PEAK.
     No one is ever going to accuse TWISTER of being a masterpiece of 
originality, but, as roller-coaster movie go, it's a great deal of fun.  
Part of the reason is the effective use of audio and visual effects; the 
other part is that director Jan de Bont knows how to get the adrenaline 
flowing.  TWISTER is a rush.  DANTE'S PEAK, on the other hand, is a 
bore.  Oh, it has its moments, but most of them are concentrated in the 
final forty-five minutes.  The first hour, which is all typical disaster 
movie setup, is interminable.  
     In keeping with time-tested formulas, we have a male/female 
pairing, children and animals in danger, a voice of reason that no one 
listens to until its too late, and a character with a tragedy in the 
past.  Volcanologist Harry Dalton (Pierce "Bond, James Bond" Brosnan) 
lost his beloved girlfriend four years ago when they were studying an 
erupting volcano in South America.  As a result of this incident, he 
tends to be jumpy about any possible volcanic activity, and when there 
are signs that the snowcapped mountain overlooking the tiny Washington 
state town of Dante's Peak (population 7400) may be about to blow its 
top, Harry calls for an evacuation.  The local mayor, Rachel Wando 
(Linda Hamilton), backs him up, but the others on the town council 
aren't so sure.  Enter Harry's boss, Paul Dreyfus (Charles Hallahan), 
and his group of roving geologists (who look like refugees from 
TWISTER's ragged band of storm hunters).  Paul, sensitive to the 
delicate political situation of spreading panic without proper 
scientific evidence, calls off the evacuation.  So, of course, when 
disaster inevitably strikes, people are needlessly killed.  
     The first hour of DANTE'S PEAK is spent getting to know the 
characters.  Not that we need that much time, since they're all familiar 
types.  In addition to Harry and Rachel (who predictably become 
romantically involved), we're introduced to two kids, an independent old 
lady, and a dog.  If you manage to stay awake through fifty-five minutes 
of drivel, you'll be rewarded with some nifty special effects as the 
mountain throws everything it has at the town:  fire, water, air, and 
earth.  No stone (literally) is left unturned.  It's pretty impressive, 
I admit, but there's an unwelcome sense of deja vu.  As recently as the 
aforementioned TWISTER, we've already been there and done that, and it 
was a lot more enjoyable last time around.
     Brosnan and Hamilton gamely try to generate some chemistry, and, 
while both are appealing in their own right, the moronic plotline and 
dumb dialogue defeat them at nearly every turn.  It will come as no 
surprise for astute viewers to learn that the screenwriter for DANTE'S 
PEAK, Leslie Bohem, also wrote Stallone's DAYLIGHT.  Both movies feature 
some similarly embarrassing bad lines.  Meanwhile, director Roger 
Donaldson (NO WAY OUT, THE GETAWAY) fails repeatedly to do anything 
interesting to enliven the proceedings.
     Even discounting the first hour, DANTE'S PEAK still isn't all that 
satisfying.  I suppose there's a certain degree of tension as Harry and 
company flee rivers of molten lava and volcanic shockwaves in their 
attempt to get out of town before it's buried in ash, but, with 
everything being done according to a well-established formula, the level 
of excitement stays low.  Once the film is over, you'll likely 
acknowledge that, although there's some nice eye candy, the experience 
as a whole leaves something to be desired.  
     And there aren't even any flying cows to redeem the situation.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chuck Dowling
Dante's Peak (1997) *1/2 out of ***** - Cast:Pierce Brosnan, Linda Hamilton,
Charles Hallahan. Writer:Leslie Bohem. Director:Roger Donaldson.
Much has been said about the "return" of the Irwin Allen-style disaster
film. I don't think that the comparison is entirely accurate. Sure there
were lots of cheesy "disaster" movies in the 70s, "Airport", "The Towering
Inferno", "The Poseidon Adventure" and "Earthquake" are just a few. What
made those movies watchable was the fact that every character in the film
was played by a HUGE star. That made it tolerable enough. Nowadays, all the
money goes to the special effects, so we're stuck with maybe one star, one
minor star, and a huge group of bit actors or unknowns. That's not a lot of
fun. I'd rather hear a big star spout out a silly line, than a nobody spout
out a silly line.
"Dante's Peak" is the first of two volcano movies to be released in 1997.
"Volcano", the other one, is set to be released later in the year. Even
though it has the dumber title, I think that "Volcano" should easily be
superior to this insult to our intelligence. The premise for "Volcano"
sounds interesting, an unknown volcano underneath the city of Los Angeles
erupts. The premise of "Dante's Peak" is limp. Scientists think a volcano
may erupt in a small northwestern town and spend the first hour of the film
debating whether or not to evacuate the town. The first hour of the film is
hereby proclaimed worthless, because everyone in the theater KNOWS the
volcano is going to erupt. That's why we're there.
Brosnan plays volcano expert (keep that in mind, he's an EXPERT) Harry
Dalton. In true disaster-movie style, he has suffered some sort of trauma
due to a volcano. In the first scene in the movie we see his girlfriend
killed when a hot rock hits her in the head. While this may seem tragic on
paper and it must be heartwrenching in real life, on film its pure cornball.
Hard to keep from laughing at that. And thus the tone is set for the film.
Flash forward some months to now, or whatever. We see a building. On the
building is a big sign which reads "United States Geological Institute" (or
something very similar). Then these words appear on the screen: "United
States Geological Institute" telling us that we indeed are looking at the
"United States Geological Institute". This is the mentality we are dealing
with here. We are letting people make big budget motion pictures who don't
realize that we can READ THE WORDS WRITTEN ON THE BUILDING. Director Roger
Donaldson we salute you.
Anyway, inside the "United States Geological Institute" we learn that there
is volcano activity in Dante's Peak and so Dalton's boss sends his best man,
volcano expert Harry Dalton, to investigate. Keep in mind that Harry Dalton
is both a volcano expert and the best man they've got at the "United States
Geological Institute".
Meanwhile in Dante's Peak, two punk teenagers decide to go skinny dipping in
a hot spring. As they start to make out, the creepy music plays, the volcano
gets "angry" and really heats up the hot spring, killing the naughty teens.
We're watching a slasher movie here folks.
Volcano expert Harry Dalton arrives in town and is escorted around by the
town's mayor and coffee shop owner (Hamilton). The mayor is divorced with
two kids, and gee whiz, I wonder if hunky Brosnan and sultry Hamilton will
end up together at the end? You know, I wish there were more movies where
the two leads, a male and a female, went through hell on earth and then go
their separate ways.
Anyway, volcano expert Harry Dalton makes his expert conclusion that the
volcano is going to erupt and the town should evacuate. But before they can
begin, his boss and a team of volcano experts show up. They listen to his
expert opinion, and immediately brush it off. His boss basically reacts like
"I know you're an expert and my best man and all, but next time, why don't
you just stick to what you know?"
The volcano teams goes up to the volcano to send some sort of robot down the
volcano to take scientfic readings. Again, slasher-movie mentality takes
over. The robot malfunctions, creepy music starts to play, and one scientist
goes down, alone and against all logical advice, to repair it. The scene
plays as if this action angers the volcano, and the volcano makes rocks fall
onto the scientist. I know that's not how it's intended to seem, but it
does.
Well AS WE ALL KNOW, the volcano does erupt, and the movie gets SO stupid at
this point that it makes the first hour look like "Citizen Kane". For
various inane reasons which I don't even feel like talking about, Brosnan,
Hamilton, and the kids all travel TOWARDS the volcano instead of away from
it, and then spend the rest of the film trying to get back out. Thank god
volcano expert Harry Dalton is along to help out. For example, when
journeying across a lake to escape a rapid flowing river of lava, Dalton
notices that the lake has turned to acid. He is able to scientifically
deduce this because the bottom of the boat is being eaten away by acid. His
expert advice to the group is "don't touch the water". Thank god he's with
them.
"Dante's Peak" is an hour of nothing, twenty minutes of special effects (all
of which are in the trailers), and then has just about the most
ANTI-climatic ending to any disaster movie ever. I could have written the
script in less time than it takes to actually run the film. I've got my
money riding on "Volcano".
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Why are disaster movies so frequently disasters?  Probably because
they are disasters first and movies second.
     That director Roger Donaldson's DANTE'S PEAK would be unsuccessful
is obvious from the first scene.  Rule number one of horror movies is
that the length of time until the monster appears is directly
proportional to the quality of the film.  (Natural disaster movies are
little more than glorified horror flicks.)  DANTE'S PEAK starts with
people dying under the flying boulders and burning debris of a volcanic
eruption.
     In the opening, Pierce Brosnan makes his debut as shrill
vulcanologist Harry Dalton.  In Harry's first words he screams
something incomprehensible that sounds like "Get out of here."  The bad
news is that you will be able to hear the rest of the dialog in the
film.  ("I've always been better at volcanoes than figuring out people
and politics," Harry tells us.  "I move around a lot, wherever there's
a volcano with an attitude," he explains in another scene.)
     If you liked TWISTER, you'll probably find DANTE'S PEAK equally
satisfying.  In both films, the star is backed up by a rag-tag team of
nerds ready to save their hero at a moment's notice.  (The team is at
its funniest when the volcano erupts.  When the team runs to their
computers to see the images, the only female nerd, looking out the
window, chides them, "Why look at the computer when you can look at the
real thing.")  Like TWISTER, the only reason for the film to exist are
the special effects.  Although the special effects by Thomas Kittle are
spectacular, the sound effects by David MacMillan are even more
impressive.  Some of the explosions had me almost jumping out of my
seat.
     The story happens in the small and isolated town of Dante's Peak.
Linda Hamilton plays the town's miniskirted mayor, Rachel Wando.
Unlike her usual, harsh macho role, Hamilton gives a tender and
vulnerable performance.  She is lovelier and more alluring than I have
ever seen her.  With better acting than Brosnan's, there could have
been a believable love story.
     The plot is pure formula.  Dante's Peak has just been voted by
Money Magazine as "the second-best place to live in America for cities
under 20,000," but trouble is brewing.  Harry arrives and soon warns
the town he thinks their long dormant volcano is about to blow.  (Key
evidence: He finds 2 dead squirrels, and 2 nude campers who got cooked
in a natural hot springs.)  The city council refuses to warn the town
lest a rich developer pull out.  Harry's boss comes in and decides that
it would be better not to alert the town prematurely since property
values might plummet.
     After leaving the theater, my wife and I shared our oral reviews
with each other as is our tradition.  This time it became almost a
contest of who could come up with the largest number of ridiculous and
predicable scenes.  Let me give you some samples.
     Shortly after our would-be lovers touch, they are interrupted by
the volcano's evidence of imminent eruption.  Rachel's young kids drive
a car by themselves up a winding mountain road through ash so thick
that they cannot see anything at all.  When confronted with a long
river of fiery lava, Harry drives his car through it but only the tires
melt -- the gas tank does not explode.  When the roads are full, Harry
drives his car through a river almost as deep as his car is tall.
Rachel's mother-in-law decides she can ride out the lava flow and does
not need to evacuate her home.  Finally, I learned one rule not in my
chemistry book.  If you have to keep your hand in acid, you can protect
yourself completely by wrapping a coat around your hand.  And the list
goes on.
     DANTE'S PEAK runs 1:52.  It is rated PG-13 for gory and
frightening images of disaster's carnage.  Several times the filmmaker
is gratuitous in his use of violence.  In one scene, for example, Harry
breaks his arm and the camera moves in for a close-up of the bone
sticking out.  Some kids under 13 will probably get a kick out of the
show, but I would be quite careful since the chance of significant
fright is substantial.  I found the film so bad that I was laughing
frequently.  It could easily have been altered slightly into a very
funny parody, but as is, I could not recommend it to anyone.  For the
tremendous special effects and the massive sound, I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Walter Frith
     I must confess that before I went to see 'Dante's Peak' I was expecting
it to be a repetitive disaster movie fashioned after the succes of last
year's 'Twister'.  A quick studio cash grab to capitalize on the tremendous
box office rewards reaped by that film.  'Twister' has made well over two
hundred million dollars and there are usually copycats abound after a hit
like that.
     'Dante's Peak' is nothing like 'Twister'.  It's a film that builds
momentum slowly before unleashing its fury of special effects.  'Twister'
took a dive right at the beginning and was nothing more than a lamentable
chase picture and gave us characters we never really cared about where as
'Dante's Peak' is a thoughtful rendition of characters and technical
academics blended nicely for pure entertainment courtesy of director Roger
Donaldson ('The Bounty', 'No Way Out'.)  
     The town of 'Dante's Peak' is on the verge of a major volcanic eruption
after lying dormant for quite a while.  A geologist (Pierce Brosnan) who lost
his wife in a volcanic disaster in Columbia four years earlier is sent by his
superior along with a research team to investigate disturbing activity around
that area.  Brosnan is convinced that the town is in for a major eruption but
his superior and the town's politicians urge him not to jump to any
conclusions which could upset major economic plans to be set in motion by a
businessman who will pump eighteen million dollars into the local economy and
create about eight hundred jobs.  Should word of a natural disaster get out,
then they can kiss the cash goodbye.  The town's mayor (Linda Hamilton) leans
towards Brosnan's theory of a disaster brewing but goes along with the
majority and puts off alerting the town.
     This movie has state of the art special effects which are truly
convincing and eye popping.  If you think the movie will only display visual
effects of volcanic activity, you are very wrong.  Bridges collapsing, hydro
lines falling, buildings breaking apart and mine shafts in chaos are only a
few goodies to enhance the audience's viewing enjoyment.
     In film, the rule of suspension of disbelief should be applied to truly
enjoy 'Dante's Peak' but it is a slam bang adventure film which takes its
time to get where its going and never looks back once its there.

Author
Adam Joyce
"Dante's Peak" is the next instalment in a series of disaster movies which
are coming our way this year. It is written and acted very much to a
formula, but this should do it no discredit. After all, when there is a
small town lying at the base of an immense dormant volcano named Dante's
Peak there can be little doubt that it will erupt. Where could the
storyline go if it didn't?
Harry Dalton (Pierce Brosnan), a vulcanologist, comes to the town of
Dante's Peak following reports of seismic activity. He is taken on a tour
of the volcano by the town's mayor, Rachel Wando (Linda Hamilton of
Terminator fame). Both of them are single, and Rachel has two young
children who instantly like Harry. On the tour of the volcano we also
discover that Rachel's mother-in-law lives halfway up the volcano.
Following the discovery of two bodies (which have been boiled to death
quite graphically) in the local hot springs, Harry calls in the US team of
volcano experts. These experts refute Harry's emphatic advice and decide
that there is no need to put the town on alert. Once blessed with this
information the rest of the story is not hard to decipher.
The reason most people see disaster movies is because they are exciting,
'on the edge of your seat' action. It matters little that the storyline is
predictable. "Dante's Peak" features amazing shots of the ominous,
gigantic, but silent volcano which overlooks the tranquil town. The actions
shots are exciting, and the lead characters (most of them, anyway) escape
from death by the skin of their teeth hundreds of times. Although we hate
the tension from these 'skin of your teeth' shots, they are the scenes
which make a movie such as this one. With the digital effects, it is
impossible to tell that the scenes are fake. The fast flowing lava, and
immense water which flows down the local river is terribly frightening and
detailed. "Dante's Peak" should give you enough excitement to last you
until the next disaster movie. 
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When I see a historical film I ask myself whether it is a good
story and whether it is accurate to history.  Similarly when I see a
disaster film, particularly one in which the menace is caused by
something scientific, I ask myself is it a good story and is it
scientifically accurate.  I tend to weigh the latter as important much
more than most people since for me a good deal of the value of the film
is to show me something that could happen to me.  I can escape into a
film much better if I think that what I am seeing is reasonably
possible.  Well, DANTE'S PEAK deserves only very lukewarm interest for
its story, which is in large respects a very off-the-shelf disaster
film plot.  For me, however, a big plus is that most of the time it was
not really very far from scientific accuracy.  There are a few
unrealistic scenes (most I recognized from having read the FAQ included
below), but for the most part the film was fairly believable.
     DANTE'S PEAK opens with a scene in a volcanic eruption.  The force
of the eruption has nature reversed in some fundamental ways.  The sky
is blotted out and flaming rocks are falling, seemingly from the
clouds.  Volcanologist Harry Dalton (Pierce Brosnan) has allowed
himself to get to close to the eruption he was studying and it paying
the price.  This is four years before the action of the story, but it
effectively conveys the Biblical doomsday feel that is associated with
being caught too near a volcanic eruption.  A few years later he still
works for the U.S. Geological Survey when he is asked to take a look at
some seismic activity in a place called Dante's Peak, Washington.  Even
he points out that it is a cornball name for a volcanic mountain.  This
place was just voted to be the second best small town in the country.
Shortly after he arrives Dalton decides that small town number three is
due for a promotion and this region which has not seen an active
volcano since some time about 5000 BC may be ready to go active again.
     It will come as no surprise to the viewer that Dalton's suspicions
are well-founded and the volcano does indeed erupt.  The plot follows
the familiar disaster film formulae of disagreement over whether there
real is a threat to the small town, with Dalton's supervisor (Charles
Hallahan) unwilling to commit to believing an eruption is coming.
Having been involved with the politics of having called a false alarm
in the past, he wants to avoid at all costs a false alarm here.  But
the cost turns out to be high with many people caught in the town at
the time of the disaster.  Once the eruption comes there are familiar
sequences of people getting into danger and of rescue.  But at least
the threats are relatively realistic for the eruption as are the
numbers of people killed.
     There are some nice touches in the script.  There are financial
reasons for the citizens of Dante's Peak to want to ignore the
warnings.  However the townspeople, led by town mayor Rachel Wando
(Linda Hamilton of TERMINATOR), are smarter than townspeople usually
are in disaster films.  If the U.S.  Geological Survey says it is time
to go, they seem ready enough.  The film is much more about the USGS
team's wrangling to decide if they feel the mountain is really going to
go.  That seems fully believable.  Much of what we see seems realistic,
even at the expense of some visual excitement.  The sky is darkened and
ash is falling so it looks a lot like a dismal snowy day.  One scene
that does seem to be driven by the effects rather than logic shows
elevated highway just outside this tiny isolated town.  The special
effects work is very convincing particularly in a flood scene near the
end.  There is a somewhat contrived setting near the end of the film.
I might almost believe it would be there, but that the ELF would work
from there seems unlikely.
     The makers of other recent disaster films could take a lesson from
DANTE'S PEAK.  Unlike VOLCANO or JURASSIC PARK characters you get to
know and get to like do not survive.  There is some risk in killing off
a good character, but it maintains the dramatic tension of the film and
keeps the story realistic.  The team sent from the U.S. Geological
Survey actually look like a team of people that the USGS might send,
not a bunch of attractive young actors.  Other nice touches in the
script include the fact there is no human villain.  You would think
that a film with a volcano does not need a human villain, but the
makers of a major film like OUTBREAK, for example, felt necessary to
put in a human to defeat as well as the title threat.
     While the story values are weaker than they might be, DANTE'S PEAK
is a good cinematic recreation of what it must be like to experience an
erupting volcano.  It is certainly the better of the two volcano films
being released this spring.  Not a great film but worth a high +1 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
     Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler...
Spoiler... Spoiler...
     The following is an excerpt from the U.S. Geological Survey web
site at http://vulcan.wr.usgs.gov/News/ DantesPeak/dantes_peak.html.  I
am very pleased that the U.S. Geological Survey created this
information page, as I think it much enhances the enjoyment of the film
and also sets the record straight where the film strayed from accuracy.
There are references to the film throughout the site, thought this
section most directly discusses the science of DANTE'S PEAK.
DANTE'S PEAK FAQ'S (frequently asked questions)
U.S. Geological Survey Volcano Hazards Program February 10, 1997
Q: Is the eruption depicted in Dante's Peak realistic?
A: In many but not all respects, the movie's depiction of eruptive
hazards hits close to the mark, especially as regards the enormous
power unleashed during an eruption. Stratovolcanoes in the Cascade
Range and Alaska erupt explosively and produce pyroclastic flows,
clouds of volcanic ash, and debris flows (lahars) that behave much as
shown in the movie. Lava flows at these volcanoes, though, are usually
thick and slow moving, unlike the fluid flows in the movie.  Fast-
flowing flows of basalt lava are common in Hawaii, though. Real
eruptions may be considerably larger or smaller, and affect larger or
smaller areas, than those shown in the film.
Q: Can eruptions really threaten helicopters, as in the movie, and
other aircraft?
A: Yes. Encounters between aircraft and clouds of volcanic ash are a
serious concern. Jet engines and other aircraft components are
vulnerable to damage by fine, abrasive volcanic ash, which can drift in
dangerous concentrations hundreds of miles downwind from an erupting
volcano.
During the past 15 years, at least 80 aircraft have accidentally
encountered volcanic ash clouds, and in 6 cases jet engines temporarily
lost power. An international consortium of government agencies,
including the U.S. Geological Survey, Federal Aviation Administration,
and National Weather Service, is now monitoring ash-producing volcanoes
and tracking volcanic ash clouds to reduce the likelihood of future
encounters.
Q: Can the temperature of hot springs near a restless volcano change
quickly enough to injure bathers?
A: Temperature changes can and do occur, but usually more slowly than
shown in the movie. In fact, the temperature of hot springs may
increase, decrease, or stay the same during volcanic unrest. Increases
in water temperature, when they do occur, usually take days or weeks to
develop, rather than a few seconds as shown in the movie.
In rare cases, earthquakes can suddenly disrupt a volcano's hot
groundwater system, changing its temperature. And earthquakes have been
known to temporarily increase the flow of water from hot springs,
sometimes causing geyser-like activity that could threaten bathers.
Q: Do earthquakes large enough to collapse buildings and roads
accompany volcanic eruptions?
A: Not usually. Earthquakes associated with eruptions rarely exceed
magnitude 5, and these moderate earthquakes are not big enough to
destroy the kinds of buildings, houses, and roads that were demolished
in the movie. The largest earthquakes at Mount St. Helens in 1980 were
magnitude 5, large enough to sway trees and damage buildings, but not
destroy them. During the huge eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the
Philippines in 1991, dozens of light to moderate earthquakes (magnitude
3 to 5) were felt by several hundred thousand people. Many houses
collapsed, but not primarily because of the shaking. Heavy, wet ash
from the eruption and a hurricane accumulated on roofs and crushed
them.
Stronger earthquakes sometimes DO occur near volcanoes as a result of
tectonic faulting. For example, four magnitude 6 earthquakes struck
Long Valley caldera, California, in 1980, and a magnitude 7.2
earthquake struck Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii, in 1975. Both volcanoes were
quiet at the time. The Hawaii earthquake triggered a small eruption at
the summit of Kilauea. No eruption has yet occurred at Long Valley, but
the area has been restless since the 1980 earthquakes.
Q: Can a town's water supply become contaminated when a volcano is
restless?
A: Yes, but probably not as quickly as shown in the movie. If a town's
water supply originates directly from a volcano's groundwater system or
from a stream that has been covered with volcanic ash, the water could
become contaminated with foul-smelling gases or fine ash and other
sediment. Some volcanic gases such as sulfur dioxide dissolve in
groundwater, making the water acidic. Sulfurous odors, however, are
caused by hydrogen sulfide gas, which smells like rotten eggs.
Q: Do scientists drive across moving lava flows?
A: No. Any attempt to drive across an active lava flow, even one that
has partly solidified to form a thin crust, is likely to lead to
disaster. With a temperature of 1,700 degrees Fahrenheit or higher,
fresh lava will quickly melt rubber tires and ignite gas tanks. And if
a vehicle gets stuck in moving lava, well, you know the rest of the
story.
Q: Can carbon dioxide gas from volcanoes kill trees and wildlife?
A: Yes. At several volcanoes around the world, carbon dioxide gas
released from magma has accumulated in the soil in sufficient
concentrations to kill vegetation or has collected in low areas and
suffocated animals. At Mammoth Mountain in California, carbon dioxide
has killed about 100 acres of trees since 1989, and visitors to this
area have occasionally suffered symptoms of asphyxiation when entering
cabins or below- ground excavations. USGS scientists have concluded
that the gas is escaping from a magma body beneath Mammoth Mountain.
The magma itself is not currently moving toward the surface, but the
USGS is monitoring the situation carefully.
Q: Can volcanoes suddenly become restless and erupt within one week of
the first signs of activity?
A: Yes. The first steam eruption at Mount St. Helens on March 27, 1980,
was preceded by only 7 days of intense earthquake activity. The
climactic eruption, on May 18, followed seven weeks later. An eruption
of Redoubt Volcano in Alaska on December 13, 1989, was preceded by only
24 hours of intense earthquake activity. But other volcanoes have been
restless for months or years before an eruption occurred, and sometimes
a period of unrest doesn't produce an eruption at all.
Q: Are robots used by the USGS to monitor volcanoes?
A: No. We rely on observations and measurements made by experienced
scientists and on critical data sent by radio or satellite relay from
monitoring instruments installed around a volcano. These instruments
include seismometers, tiltmeters, Global Positioning System (GPS)
receivers, gas sensors, mudflow (lahar or debris flow) sensors, and
temperature probes.
NASA has tested a robot named Dante at Mount Erebus volcano in
Antarctica and Mount Spurr volcano in Alaska. The USGS believes that,
on Earth, experienced volcanologists are a better and more cost-
effective alternative for monitoring dangerous volcanoes.
Q: Can volcanoes produce large explosive eruptions and rivers of fluid
lava at the same time?
A: Not usually. During a single eruption, a volcano CAN produce both
lava flows and ash, sometimes simultaneously. The red, glowing lava
fountains and lava flows in Dante's Peak (including the active flow
across which Harry Dalton drives) are characteristic of a fluid magma,
called basalt. In contrast, explosive gray ash columns and pyroclastic
flows shown in other scenes are characteristic of more viscous magmas,
called andesite, dacite, or rhyolite. It's uncommon for a volcano to
erupt magmas of widely different composition at the same time.
Q: Can lakes near volcanoes become acidic enough to be dangerous to
people?
A: Yes. Crater lakes atop volcanoes are typically the most acid, with
pH values as low as 0.1 (very strong acid). Normal lake waters, in
contrast, have relatively neutral pH values near 7.0. The crater lake
at El Chichon volcano in Mexico had a pH of 0.5 in 1983 and Mount
Pinatubo's crater lake had a pH of 1.9 in 1992. The acid waters of
these lakes are capable of causing burns to human skin but are unlikely
to dissolve metal quickly. Gases from magma that dissolve in lake water
to form such acidic brews include carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide,
hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen chloride, and hydrogen fluoride.  However,
the movie's rapidly formed acidic lake capable of dissolving an
aluminum boat in a matter of minutes is unrealistic.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Pierce Brosnan; Linda Hamilton; Jamie Renée Smith; Jeremy Foley &
Elizabeth Hoffman
Pierce Brosnan stars as volcano expert Harry Dalton who works for the US
government's geological department. He is sent into the quite town of
Dante's Peak when geological readings indicate a higher than normal level of
activity around the dormant volcano on which the small community is built.
When Harry arrives, he also notices a variety of other factors which lead
him to believe that Dante's Peak may have some very big problems on its
hands in the not too distant future. Harry tries to warn the mayor (Linda
Hamilton) and town council of the impending danger, but is over ruled by his
boss who prefers to take a wait and see approach to the possible problem. Of
course, in the end, Harry is proven right, and the volcano awakens with some
of the best special effects that movie producers can buy.
While the special effects are great, Dante's Peak is more about the story
leading up to the impending disaster than the disaster itself. Which is not
to say that when the volcano eventually erupts that the producers don't milk
it for all it's worth. Now at this point, there is probably some fool out
there thinking "gee thanks for spoiling the movie for me by telling me that
the volcano blows". To that guy I say  hey moron, what did you think was
going to happen in a movie about a volcano? That they were going to spend a
pleasant day looking at it while eating a picnic lunch? Although I guess
that kind of is a small problem with movie like Dante's Peak -- you pretty
well know from the get go that massive property damage is going to occur at
some point in the film.
While most of the movie takes place before the actual eruption, there is
enough tension in the air to keep the audience interested. I really didn't
notice that the movie isn't filled with high-end special effects. And
towards the end of the film when the computer-generated lava rears its ugly
head, it makes the wait well worth it. I think a good deal of credit for the
tension should go to the amazing score of the movie. I don't think it would
be possible to match up a score to a movie better than what was done in
Dante's Peak. When we do get to the eruption, the volcanic effects are
impressive and very realistic. Pierce Brosnan does a great job in the
leading man role here, although this should come as no surprise to James
Bond fans. An impressive supporting cast backs up Brosnan and Linda
Hamilton. Most of whom are relative unknowns, but they all do a very solid
job.
There will be no doubt in your mind that this is what it feels like to be in
the midst of a volcanic event. My hat goes off to director Roger Donaldson
for the film's impressive realism. This was the first of 1997's two lava
movies, the other being Volcano. Of the two, Dante's Peak has the stronger
story and is just a tad bit more on the realistic side. While it might not
have the dizzying number of special effects that populated Volcano, I think
it is fair to say that Dante's Peak's effects budget was put to slightly
better use, by concentrating on making the volcanic activity look more
realistic as opposed to simply over the top. Good movie -- well worth
checking out.

Author
David Wilcock
A disaster movie starring Pierce Brosnan and Linda Hamilton
A UNIVERSAL PICTURE
Now, this may sound like a bad joke, but I'll say it anyway. This film
is a "disaster." Ha ha, etc. As with any disaster movie, the plot is
frankly pitiful, the acting is terrible, the script is naff, and theres
no charecter development at all. But the worse thing is, not even the
speacil effects are terribly exciting.
The 'plot' centres around a town called, of course, 'Dantes Peak' And
Dantes Peak has a nice big volcano in the background just waiting to
erupt. Pierce Brosnan knows this of course, but when the tells the
council...guess what!...no one believes him except the (female) mayor.
But, of course, the volcano erupts, and Brosnan must go around rescuing
the mayor, her child, and the aunt who refuses to budge from the
volcano because it 'isn't going to erupt!'
Of course, before the volcano erupts, the movie tries to build
charecter, and a bit of story, but as soon as it does erupt, this is
thrown down the drain.
Quite frankly, this has to be one of the worse movies I've seen for a
long time. My advice...AVOID IT LIKE THE PLAGUE!!!!
