Title
Review for Othello (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Shakespeare's drama, OTHELLO, is one among many of his great
plays.  This story of the beautiful Desdemona (Irene Jacob), the
daughter of a Venetian nobleman, who elopes with her lover, Othello the
Moor, (Laurence Fishburne), a renowned warrior, like most of
Shakespeare's plays ends in betrayal, deceit and tragedy.  Some years
ago I saw James Earl Jones in a live performance that made me burst
into tears as he tore at his breast, as he bemoaned his having killed
his beloved wife.  You could feel his terrible hurt.   Fishburne, one
of my favorite actors, (What's Love Got To Do With It?) however, is not
quite ready to do justice to Shakespeare; at least not to the role of
Othello.
     Iago (Kenneth Branagh) is the conniving villain who despite having
been Othello's right hand man for some ten years, is overlooked and
instead, a promotion goes to Cassio (Nathaniel Parker).
>From then on Iago plots against Othello and Desdemona, to make
Othello suspicious, jealous of his wife.  Othello is filled with
disbelief and demands proof;  Iago supplies the "proof."  Branagh
plays it cool without histrionics but then, Branagh is not new to
Shakespeare.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 12/15/95 (limited)
Running Length: 2:04
MPAA Classification: R (Nudity, sex, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Laurence Fishburn, Irene Jacob, Kenneth Branagh, Nathaniel Parker, 
      Michael Maloney
Director: Oliver Parker
Producers: Luc Roeg and David Barron
Screenplay: Oliver Parker based on the play by William Shakespeare
Cinematograpy: David Johnson
Music: Charlie Mole
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     It seems that hardly a year goes by without a new cinematic 
adaptation of one of Shakespeare's plays, and, of late, Kenneth 
Branagh's name has become intimately entwined with that of the Bard.  
While Branagh, who helmed HENRY V, MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, and is now 
working on HAMLET, does not sit in the director's chair for this latest 
version of OTHELLO, he is very much in evidence on screen in the key 
role of Iago.
     To condense OTHELLO into a reasonable, two-hour running time, 
writer/director Oliver Parker has lopped approximately 50% of 
Shakespeare's original text from the screenplay.  Yet, even with so much 
gone, the movie remains faithful to the play's central themes and 
conflicts, and the streamlined narrative is surprisingly easy to follow 
(well, as "easy" as anything written by Shakespeare can be).  For sheer 
impact, this OTHELLO can stand side-by-side with the versions brought to 
the screen by Orson Welles (as restored in 1992) and Lawrence Olivier.
     Laurence Fishburn plays the Moor Othello, a gifted general who is 
commissioned to confront a Turkish army at Cyprus.  Always by Othello's 
side are his two right-hand men:  Cassio (Nathaniel Parker) and Iago.  
However, for reasons that are never fully explained, Iago is not the 
faithful retainer Othello believes him to be.  In fact, hatred bubbles 
just beneath Iago's cool, rational exterior, and he has put a plan into 
action by which he intends to cause Othello's downfall and shatter the 
relationship between the Moor and his devoted wife, Desdemona (Irene 
Jacob).
     Othello's "tragic flaw" is his jealousy, and it's this quality that 
Iago exploits with his complex scheme.  Much of the audience's ability 
to identify with the characters is dependent upon the trio of central 
performances that grace OTHELLO.  It's an entirely different experience 
to read the play or see a live performance than it is to view a 
cinematic rendition.  The visual aspects of Parker's production are 
especially noteworthy.  OTHELLO is dark, and makes creative use of light 
and shadow as only a motion picture can.
     Laurence Fishburn, a black actor playing the black title role (in 
some of his various other film incarnations, Othello has been essayed by 
the likes of Orson Welles, Lawrence Olivier, and Anthony Hopkins – none 
of whom are black), gives a stirring and powerful interpretation of a 
man haunted by uncertainty about his wife's faithfulness.  Irene Jacob 
(THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE, RED) imbues Desdemona with far more 
vitality than she has had in any other movie version.  Kenneth Branagh, 
perhaps better focused since he's only acting in this piece, makes Iago 
a chillingly rational character whose acerbic asides to the camera draw 
the audience into his plot almost as an accomplice.
     Certain Shakespeare purists will probably dismiss Parker's OTHELLO 
because of its sex scenes and liberal cuts.  Such a reaction might be a 
mistake, however, since this director's view of Othello's tragedy has an 
unusual slant.  Parker is careful to play up the love affair between the 
title character and his wife so that when the inevitable occurs, it has 
a more profound impact.  When Othello declares, "My life upon 
[Desdemona's] faith", you believe him.
     With this version of OTHELLO, Parker wanted to create a 
Shakespearean film that anyone could see, relate to, and enjoy – a 
degree in English literature not being required.  In large part, he has 
accomplished this.  OTHELLO has never been one of my favorite of the 
Bard's plays, but, at times, I found myself engrossed by this 
adaptation.  Using the visual aspects of film to enhance certain story 
elements, Parker has crafted a fine motion picture.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia)
Directed by   Oliver Parker
Written by    Oliver Parker, from the play by William Shakespeare
Cast          Laurence Fishburn, Irene Jacob, Kenneth Branagh
MPAA Rating   "R" (presumably for sex, violence, and nudity)
Running Time  124 minutes
Reviewed at   The Rialto, Raleigh, NC (18JAN96)
     Moor is less in this new adaptation of the "Bill" Shakespeare
classic.  Veteran stage actor Oliver Parker, who's making his feature
film debut, is aiming for mass appeal.  He's excised almost half of the
original text, included plenty of sex and violence, and recorded the
whole thing in big, booming stereo sound.  For the leads, he's cast a
few good faces:  Laurence Fishburne as the Big Guy, French actress Irene
Jacob (RED) as Desdemona, and Kenneth Branagh as Iago.  It all sounds
good on paper, and, for the first few scenes, it almost works.
     The biggest problem is Fishburne, who's flat.  He has the look and
can deliver the lines, but he never burns with the fire that the role
requires.  Jacob, a lovely presence, stumbles a bit through her Eliz-
abethan English, while Branagh has a jolly olde time talking to and
winking at the camera.  The artist formerly known as Mr. Emma Thompson
is clearly in his element, even if he has about twelve too many asides.
(Parker's loose direction doesn't help, especially when we can't tell if
Branagh is talking to himself, to us, or to someone off-screen.) If you
really want to brush up your Shakespeare, go rent Orson Welles' superior
1952 version.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit the MOVIE HELL site http://www-nvision.com/hell/>

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When adapting Shakespeare to the screen there are conflicts
involved that the Bard never knew about.  He wrote in an artificially
poetic Elizabethan English that conveys better to a 20th century
audience than many people realize, but still requires acting skill to
help get the idea across.  He also intended his plays to be an
afternoon's entertainment that would last a lot longer than a standard
film.  Most film adaptations are nowhere near accurate representations
of the plays.  They are usually trimmed down, and often lines and even
scenes are given out of order.  There seems to be a particular respect
for Shakespearean actors because it is no easy matter to make the
original prose flow naturally.  Orson Welles was a master filmmaker who
had more experience than perhaps anyone else did at adapting the great
works of literature to other media.  But if you look at his own
adaptation of OTHELLO one sees a tremendous visual style and only the
barest respect getting the original play on film.
     Kenneth Branagh has a better understanding than most about how to
do cinematic adaptations of Shakespeare and did about as good a job as
is possible for any director in his MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.  As an
actor he has an expressive face and conveys by just slight exaggeration
many of the ideas in his face.  It takes extreme skill to do that
without making the performance hammy and unrealistic, but Branagh is
has the kind of face that allows him to convey much of the meaning.  In
MUCH ADO and now in OTHELLO one can almost tell what he is saying
without hearing the words.
     Unfortunately, in OTHELLO he is not directing, so is responsible
for only his own performance.  His acting is not shared by the other
performers in OTHELLO making the understanding of this film much more
labored than that of MUCH ADO.  Laurence Fishburne does a reasonable
but much more traditional Othello, conveying all the emotion, but
without Branagh's articulation.
     Unfortunately acting honors go only to these two.  For once the
two name actors really are the best thing on the screen.  Irene Jacob
is fetching as Desdemona, but her line readings are uninspiring.  Much
of the end of the play should work on pity for the wrongly accused
Desdemona, but she just does not convey enough emotion to have us feel
a lot of sympathy for her character.  Other performances, with the
possible exception of Anna Patrick as Emilia, get the lines read but
are indifferent.
     The play has moments of visual style as we might expect from
Oliver Parker.  Parker does not have much experience as director but is
a familiar face acting in Clive Barker horror films, which themselves
depend more on visual impact than on story.  Occasionally we wonder why
Parker dwells so long on a single scene.  Even the very first scene, a
gondola slowly making its way past the camera, seems to go on too long
and then pay off with only a very trite image.  Feeling the need for a
little action he adds a minor chase scene, apprehending Iago, at the
end.
     This is a film that will be remembered as "1995's OTHELLO," not
"The OTHELLO" in the same sense that MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING is the
interpretation for our generation.  I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Christopher Null
     Seldomly have I been so outright disappointed by a film.  OTHELLO's
problems are numerous, and given the outstanding cast put together for the
film (and an admitted masterpiece to work with), it's amazing that this
film comes off as being so downright bad.
     The story's been around for 400 years.  Othello (Lawrence Fishburne)
is a Moorish general in the Italian army, and he is the victim of constant
prejudice.  Desdemona (Irene Jacob) is his Italian lover, and when the
pair secretly marry, Othello finds himself the victim of a fiendish plot
by his servant Iago (Kenneth Branagh).  Iago's motives are also magnified
by the presence of young Cassio (Nathaniel Parker), who serves as
Othello's right-hand man despite Iago's longer term of service.
     And as with any Shakespearean tragedy, there are a number of
misunderstandings and, as a result, *everybody* dies.
     The prime difficulty with OTHELLO is the language.  Dripping with
archaic English, anyone unfamiliar with Shakespeare's original play is
going to have a really tough time following the barest facts of the
story.  The truly sad thing is that the archaisms are largely not
Shakespeare's.  Rather, first-time writer/director Oliver Parker changed
70 percent of the play during his adaptation, in order to, I guess, make
it much more confusing than it really is.
     Other problems abound.  Iago's motivation (in the film) is never
clear at all, Branagh's acting here is pathetic, the very French actress
Jacob is woefully miscast as an Italian speaking in English, and while the
last 20 minutes of the film are pretty good, they don't make up for the
first 100, which are just dreadfully boring.  By the time the end finally
rolls around, I was *hoping* they'd all die, and soon.
     The few good points?  OTHELLO's thinly-veiled message about racism is
worthwhile, if a bit obvious, and Fishburne does turn in a great Moor.  If
he'd had more to work with here, we'd probably have the definitive version
of the play.  As it is now, it's just a lot of death in Venice.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, let me confess that I am a big Shakespeare fan.  I have
loved most of the movies based on his plays, and Franco Zeffirelli's
ROMEO AND JULIET and Kenneth Branagh's HENRY V are among my favorites
of all the movies of any type that I've ever seen.  Sad to say, that
OTHELLO proves that, with the poor direction, even Shakespeare can be
made boring.  When I kept seeing the trailers for the movie, I wondered
why there was little dialog shown.  I now know why.  First time
director Oliver Parker has the actors read their lines slowly, softly,
and without a hint of emotion.  Shakespeare on Prozac.  There is little
to offend in the movie, but neither is there much to engage the
audience.
     I will not cover the story here other than to say that the cast
consists of Laurence Fishburne as Othello, Irene Jacob as Desdemona,
Kenneth Branagh as Iago, Nathaniel Parker as Cassio, and Michael
Maloney as Roderigo.  Most of you probably already know the story.
     The surprise for me was the acting by Laurence Fishburne.  I think
he is awesome and have admired his work, especially WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO
DO WITH IT and SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER.  He sleepwalks through
OTHELLO.  I am convinced that, with proper direction, he could have
given a compelling and original rendition of Othello.  Oliver Parker
does not appear to have a clue as what he wants from his actors, and
they all seem confused as to what to do.  Only Kenneth Branagh attempts
to breath a little life into his character, but in the end he gives the
worse performance of his career.  His soliloquies to the audience are
vapid.
     The director decided to have his actors attempt heavy Italian
accents.  The thick accents coupled with the low delivery and the
Shakespearean language means it is very hard to follow the film.  Take
along a Cliff's Notes with you if you go so you can keep up with it.
On the other hand, the lack of energy Parker gives the movie may put
you to sleep before you get around to opening the pamphlet.
     At one point, Iago says, "Pleasure and action make the hours seem
short".  And vice versa I thought to myself.
     There are many small things wrong with the movie.  Most of the
costumes (Caroline Harris) are standard issue from the Shakespeare part
of the costume department, but the armor that Othello wears in the
beginning seems not to fit Fishburne and overall just looks silly.
     The only thing done right in the movie is the cinematography
(David Johnson).  It is full of warm and realistic candlelit rooms.
Granted it is nothing unusual, but it is pleasant to watch.
     OTHELLO runs 2:00.  It is rated R for brief nudity and a little
sex.  A PG-13 rating might have been more appropriate.  The scenes
getting it the R rating added little and without them, the movie could
have been PG.  This movie would be fine for anyone over ten, but I can
not see why people would want to waste their time at it.  If you must
see Othello, then rent the Franco Zeffirelli directed film version of
the opera with Placido Domingo staring in it.  If you hate opera, then
rent one of the other fine film adaptations of Shakespeare's plays.  I
give this film one star because although it was boring, it was not
painful.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Laurence Fishburn, Irene Jacob, Kenneth Branagh, Nathaniel Parker,
Michael Maloney Director: Oliver Parker Screenplay: Oliver Parker based
on the play by William Shakespeare Cinematograpy
Would you think your wife was having an affair with your best friend, if
you saw him with her handkerchief?
That's an unfair question. Handkerchiefs were probably significant items
of clothing in the days of Shakespeare, and this in particular, was a
special handkerchief. So let's rephrase the question.
Would you think your wife was having an affair with your best friend, if
you saw him with her panties?
I probably would not, because women's underclothing all look alike to
me, BUT Othello would.
Othello (Fishburne), the greatest general of his time, the respected
governor of Cyprus whose one failing was jealousy. Fed by the subtle
lies of Iago (Branagh), Othello is led to believe that his wife (Jacob)
is having an affair with his lieutenant (Parker). He is driven into such
a jealous rage that he has convulsions thinking about it (I didn't know
that Othello was an epileptic?). One can only be as jealous as much as
one loves, and Othello was jealous enough to kill his wife.
This is not one of the better adaptations of Shakespeare to screen. I'm
biased because I personally prefer Shakespeare performed as a play.
Nevertheless, the lesson must be taught, that jealousy breeds contempt,
and if you're having marital problems - seek a marriage counsellor or
you may end up with four dead bodies on your bed.
Strong performances from Fishburne, Branagh and the rest of the cast.
Comment: Shakespeare at his morbid best.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, let me confess that I am a big Shakespeare fan.  I have
loved most of the movies based on his plays, and Franco Zeffirelli's
ROMEO AND JULIET and Kenneth Branagh's HENRY V are among my favorites
of all the movies of any type that I've ever seen.  Sad to say, that
OTHELLO proves that, with the poor direction, even Shakespeare can be
made boring.  When I kept seeing the trailers for the movie, I wondered
why there was little dialog shown.  I now know why.  First time
director Oliver Parker has the actors read their lines slowly, softly,
and without a hint of emotion.  Shakespeare on Prozac.  There is little
to offend in the movie, but neither is there much to engage the
audience.
     I will not cover the story here other than to say that the cast
consists of Laurence Fishburne as Othello, Irene Jacob as Desdemona,
Kenneth Branagh as Iago, Nathaniel Parker as Cassio, and Michael
Maloney as Roderigo.  Most of you probably already know the story.
     The surprise for me was the acting by Laurence Fishburne.  I think
he is awesome and have admired his work, especially WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO
DO WITH IT and SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER.  He sleepwalks through
OTHELLO.  I am convinced that, with proper direction, he could have
given a compelling and original rendition of Othello.  Oliver Parker
does not appear to have a clue as what he wants from his actors, and
they all seem confused as to what to do.  Only Kenneth Branagh attempts
to breath a little life into his character, but in the end he gives the
worse performance of his career.  His soliloquies to the audience are
vapid.
     The director decided to have his actors attempt heavy Italian
accents.  The thick accents coupled with the low delivery and the
Shakespearean language means it is very hard to follow the film.  Take
along a Cliff's Notes with you if you go so you can keep up with it.
On the other hand, the lack of energy Parker gives the movie may put
you to sleep before you get around to opening the pamphlet.
     At one point, Iago says, "Pleasure and action make the hours seem
short".  And vice versa I thought to myself.
     There are many small things wrong with the movie.  Most of the
costumes (Caroline Harris) are standard issue from the Shakespeare part
of the costume department, but the armor that Othello wears in the
beginning seems not to fit Fishburne and overall just looks silly.
     The only thing done right in the movie is the cinematography
(David Johnson).  It is full of warm and realistic candlelit rooms.
Granted it is nothing unusual, but it is pleasant to watch.
     OTHELLO runs 2:00.  It is rated R for brief nudity and a little
sex.  A PG-13 rating might have been more appropriate.  The scenes
getting it the R rating added little and without them, the movie could
have been PG.  This movie would be fine for anyone over ten, but I can
not see why people would want to waste their time at it.  If you must
see Othello, then rent the Franco Zeffirelli directed film version of
the opera with Placido Domingo staring in it.  If you hate opera, then
rent one of the other fine film adaptations of Shakespeare's plays.  I
give this film one star because although it was boring, it was not
painful.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
