Title
Review for Memoirs of an Invisible Man (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark Santora
     The teaming up of John Carpenter and Chevy Chase, sounds
interesting, doesn't it?  Well, I was uniquely intrigued.  I am not a
very big Chevy Chase fan.  But, because I am a very big fan of
Mr. Carpenter's work, I decided that I would give the film a chance.
Here are my findings.
     First, this is not a typical John Carpenter film.  There are no
underlying messages in the film.  There are no clever subtexts for the
audience to wrestle with.  I must admit, it threw me.  But as soon as I
realized that the film was simply for enjoyment, I started to get into
the film.
     I must admit, although Chevy Chase's recent films have recently
made me quite weary of him, this should do a great deal to revitalize
his carrer.  First, he plays the movie straight.  Granted, he should
have been doing this years ago, but the film benefits from it.  Of
course, playing an invisible man, Chevy gets to walk and bump into
things for a little slapstick.  But it is part of the film's natural
progress.
     Here is a quick plot summary.  Chevy Chase plays an investment
banker who meets Daryl Hannah one night.  They hit it off.  Anyway,
after she leaves, he gets drunk.  The next morning he has a lecture to
attend.  When he arrives hung over, he goes to find a bathroom.  Chevy
falls asleep in a sauna.  An accident makes the science lab loose
control over their machinery and causes portions of the building to
appear invisible.  This is a *great* effect, from the fun guys at ILM.
Anyway, when some CIA guys find out about him, headed by Sam Neill, they
instantly start out after him.
     The effects are good.  The mirror images of Chevy are not overused
in an attempt to make him appear invisible (oxymoron).  John Carpenter's
direction is again top-notch.  I believe that this is his biggest studio
film since BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA (a personal favorite).

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  It is unusual to find a film of quality
     and style being released outside the summer fluff season.
     Generally pretty good special effects from ILM are the real
     star of this very lightweight sci-fi (as opposed to science
     fiction) adventure.  Rating: high 0 (-4 to +4).
     Stories of people with the ability to make themselves invisible (and
the power this gives them) go back to ancient Greece.  Perseus had a cap of
invisibility, Gyges made himself king with a ring of invisibility,
H. G. Wells questioned just how powerful a totally transparent man could be
in THE INVISIBLE MAN.  (Wells, incidentally, recognized that a totally
invisible eye would not focus and hence would be blind.  The serum in his
novel leaves the lenses of the eye intact and Wells says, questionably, that
his invisible man just has to take care that the lenses of his eyes are not
seen.)
     Early silent films would occasionally have people turn invisible,
usually for comic visual effect.  1933 brought Universal's adaptation of
Wells's novel and a whole series with it using the special effects of Arthur
Edelson.  Since then there have been only occasional films with invisible
people.  Mexico made a series of "Invisible Man" films; there have been two
television series claiming to be based on the Wells.  Films  like THE
INVISIBLE BOY, THE AMAZING TRANSPARENT MAN, and THE INVISIBLE DR. MABUSE
have used the gimmick.  The 1970s television series with David McCallum was
an early application of bluescreen for the effect.  The latest film version
is MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN based on the novel by H. F. Saint and
directed by John Carpenter.
     Like most of the people Chevy Chase plays, Nick Holloway is in the
wrong place at the wrong time.  In Nick's case the wrong place is
Magnescopics, a high-tech research lab.  The wrong time is when their fusion
experiment goes awry.  (Computer experts beware.  You will NOT like the
scene that shows how the experiment went wrong.  VOYAGE TO THE BOTTOM OF THE
SEA fans might like it, though.)  Through some freak accident, large
portions of the building are rendered invisible.  So is Nick.  What is the
most pedestrian and predictable plot that could come out of this beginning.
Yup!  You got it.  Sam Neill plays the villainous CIA operative who wants to
get hold of Nick and use him as a weapon.  Can one man with the power of
invisibility outwit a CIA assassin who has a whole brigade of men in suits
and sunglasses with guns?  The suspense is terrible and the writing not much
better.  Of course, this is a part made for Chevy Chase since it involves a
lot of falling down and knocking into things.  One of the things he bumps
into is Alice Munro (played by Darryl Hannah) who does not really take much
of an active part in the story.  She is there more to react and to give the
audience someone attractive to look at.  They certainly don't have Chase to
look at.
     Industrial Light and Magic no doubt was anxious to see what their
technology could add to Edelson's invention for the 1933 film.  Edelson's
approach was to put an actor in a black suit so that nothing showed, then
put visible pieces of clothing on the actor and film it against a black
background.  The negative would then be nearly transparent except for the
visible clothing.  Superimposing this on a scene of a room and then printing
the result would give a look of empty clothing.  Bluescreen--ILM's
specialty--is a refinement of this process using video technology.  ILM's
imagination shows with some new invisibility effects, the nicest being a
mask of facepaint visible from front and back.
     The special effects are about the only thing to see this film for.
Well, ..., perhaps there is a little original playing with the concept of
invisibility, but not enough to make it worthwhile.  I give this film a high
0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is a film directed by John Carpenter.
The script was written by Robert Collector, Dana Olsen, and William
Goldman, based on a novel by H.F.  Saint.   It stars Chevy Chase, Darryl
Hannah, Sam Neil.  Rated PG-13, for mature humor, mild profanity.
     MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is an agreeable, likeable, barely-there
piece of special-effects fluff.  It's entertaining but it leaves you
wanting to see a real movie, with some substance.
     Certainly, this is Chevy Chase's most engaging and energetic
performance in years, although it cannot compare with the screwball
comedy-mystery he made with Goldie Hawn in the Seventies, except that
both films are set in San Francisco.  And we get to see him briefly nude
twice, which is a pretty high ratio of occurrence for a film in which we
can't see him at all half the time.  Chevy's character could have been
quite interesting: he's a non-ambitious yuppie, a coaster who makes
money despite himself, a b.s. artist, whose comfortable apoliticalness
should be more challenged by his predicament.
     The thing about this Invisible Man movie that is supposed to make
it interesting is its depiction what it would really be like, what would
be the unexpected disadvantages.  Except as a vehicle for the Industrial
Light and Magic magic and for the extended chase that makes up most of
the movie, this psychological (and physical) dynamic is given a pretty
short shrift.
     Sam Neil, as the heavy, gets to turn in a likeably vile
performance.  Ever since the Garden of Eden, the bad guy's been stealing
the show and MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN is no exception.  Of course,
his viciousness and duplicity and ruthlessness are completely
unexplained as character traits.  There are just givens, that is, he's a
spook and that's all we need to know to understand him.  Too bad.
     Carpenter, who was hired on the strength of his STARMAN, does some
wonderful intercutting of Chevy visible and invisible to the audience.
The effects are pretty good, but frankly they are not convincing, that
is, they never fail to look like effects.  Indeed some of them are
amateurishly clumsy, such as the gun held to Neil's head and a headless
Chevy running through a park.  The best is the bubble gum bit and that's
about two minutes into the movie.  Chevy's voice-over hints at a darker
vision, probably inherited from the novel, but Carpenter lets it slide
every time.  Goldman's (et al.)  dialog is consistently intelligent, but
the ending is abrupt and screams sequelitis.
     I might be moved to recommend MEMOIRS OF AN INVISIBLE MAN to you at
matinee prices, but really it all so pointless, isn't it?
