Title
Review for Anna Karenina (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Sophie Marceau, Sean Bean, Alfred Molina, Mia Kirshner, James Fox,
Fiona Shaw Director: Bernard Rose Screenplay: Bernard Rose based on the
novel by Leo Tolstoy
The deranged mind ramblings of a majorly depressed woman.
'God Forgive me... I love my son, but I also love the Count... I like my
husband, but its the Count who really counts... My husband won't give me
a divorce, damn that Russian house keeper with a great English accent
for turning him against me... I need opium to dull this deep, unbearable
pain within me... God forgive me... I'm lonely... I'm a fool to think
the Count still loves me... Damn his mother.... Why does he get to go to
the opera every night and I have to stay at home.... It's not fair! He's
having an affair with Princess Georgina, I just know it... I can feel it
and see it in his eyes.... Why won't they let me see my son? I need
more opium.... I've cheated on my husband, what makes me think that I'm so
special that the Count won't also cheat on me... Ooooh look at that
pretty train on the tracks.... Reminds me of swimming when I was a kid...
Gosh, I really feel like swimming right now.... God forgive
meeeeeeeeee!'
Really Anna, pull yourself together. Fast trains and pretty bodies are a
no no. 'Arsenic and Old Lace', now that's a more lady like way to go.
Where's the Prozac when you really need it?
On a more serious note. This movie must be commended for its outstanding
costumes, sets and cinematography. Sophie Marceau doesn't carry quite
the same tense, woman on edge, feel that Vivien Leigh portrayed in the
1948 version of 'Karenina'. But few can, considering the amazing
parallel's between Leigh's real life and that of 'Anna Karenina'. Sean
Bean is a believable Count Vronsky, and James Fox carries the tortured
husband look well. Please get rid of that Russian Countess housekeeper,
with an English accent suitable only for 'tea and scones' within the
confines of Windsor castle. When she first spoke I broke into fits of
laughter in the cinema, and I apologise for my unruly behaviour to
anyone who may have witnessed it.
Be swept away by the romance of the Russian country; twirl till midnight
to the tune of Tchaikovsky and Rachmaninov; waltz the evening away in
palatial ballrooms draped with silks and satin; and watch the 'dying
swan' performed by artists who made the term 'ballet' famous; but above
all, keep a weary eye on that damn fast moving train.
Comment: One mind sweeping, breath taking, Russian operatic, Tol story.
Feel Scale: 0% Danielle Steel / *TOLSTOY* / The Bible 100%

Author
Winona Kent
This film deserves to be nominated for Best Cinematography. The scenes
- and not just the scenery - are exquisite. Other people have
mentioned that when one starts to focus on the scenery and not on the
story, the film is doomed, but I'm not sure I agree. What Bernard Rose
presents us with here is a series of canvases depicting life in Russia
in the latter half of the 19th century. Landscape is everything. We
have great sweeping views of snow fields. We have long shots of
reapers at work. We have set scenes of the breathtaking architecture
of the city, of gently undulating ice floes on a river, of the opulent
luxury of stately homes. Onto these canvases, Rose places Tolstoy's
characters. We dart in and out of their lives, briefly glimpsing the
events which colour their existences. We are, in fact, patrons of an
art gallery on a Saturday afternoon, wandering from tableau to
tableau. The result is not three-dimensional, but flat, both literally
and figuratively. 
There just isn't enough time to immerse ourselves fully in the lives
of Anna (Sophie Marceau) and Vronsky (Sean Bean), Kitty (Mia Kirshner)
and Levin (Alfred Molina). The film is about two hours too short. To
do it justice, Bernard Rose would have needed to have kept us in our
seats for far longer, or he would have needed to have done it as a
mini-series on television.
There is no doubt the film suffers from far too much editing. The
scenes in the first half are choppy - and that long-awaited seduction
- blink and you've missed it! 
But what is the film, Anna Karenina, about? Is it really about Kitty
and Levin and their conventional marriage? Is it really about
unhappily married Anna and her lover Count Vronsky? Or is it a
character study of a woman placed on the canvas of life, unable to do
anything to alter her final destiny?
Time and again we are presented with the inevitability of events. I
could go on forever about the symbolic imagery in this film. Prime
among the images is the train, the fateful train. It introduces Anna
and Vronsky, it cuts across the landscape, it provides a place where
the characters can be alone to think, it transports them to their
various destinations and it ushers Anna out of her mortal life at the
end. It even shows up on her son's playroom floor, a miniature toy on
a track, going round and round. 
There are other images of the inevitable, the constant - the force, if
you will, which drives everyone's lives -  the field of reapers, which
Levin joins, even mentioning in his voice-over that after a while, the
movements of his arm with the scythe became automatic. The horse race,
with the camera focusing on the driving power of the animals, and
their headlong, almost blind run, dead ahead, with no finish line in
sight.  Even the lavish surroundings of the ballroom at a dance take
on a certain symbolism, as evidenced when Kitty runs through doorway
after doorway, down a long hallway, before reaching the dancers. This
scene is echoed later on when Anna, in the throes of depression,
wanders down a similar hallway, although now it is dark and almost
sinister in appearance.
For all the critics' rantings and ravings about how inappropriate
Sophie Marceau is in the role of Anna, I found her performance
compelling. Each critic has brought his or her own prejudices to the
movie theatre, based on their previous viewings of other versions of
the film, their reading of the novel, their reading of other peoples'
reviews, their perception of what a film about "romance" should be in
1997. Anna Karenina, as directed by Bernard Rose, IS, essentially, a
weak character. That is the entire point of the story. She blames
Vronsky when he finds himself unaccountably attracted to her, and
never stops to consider that there might be something in HER behaviour
and demeanor which is sending out those intoxicating pheremones. She
consumates the relationship, takes Vronsky as her lover, and enjoys an
idyllic sort of existence until the day of the fateful horse race,
when she reveals all to her husband.
Said husband has all along been warning her about what people in
society are saying about her behind her back, and she has been
oblivious to it. She finds herself pregnant with Vronsky's child, but
is frustrated because her husband refuses to give her a divorce. She
miscarries the child, her husband decides he will accept her
transgressions and take her back, she instead goes off with Vronsky to
live in the country.
In the last half of the film, we see Anna's descent into a tortured
sort of existence, denied access to her son, wrought with suspicion
over Vronsky's fidelity, addicted to laudanum, rejected by Russian
high society. Because of the social constraints of the time, but more
importantly, because of her her weak character, she is totally
incapable of seizing control over any aspect of her life to any
successful degree. There are other female characters in this film who
are also at the mercy of Russian society, yet they manage to exist and
thrive as strong-willed mistresses, whores, princesses, and mothers.
It is only Anna who seems to have trouble navigating her way around
the canvas.
We know how the film ends; it ends with Anna and the train, and with
Vronsky taking himself off, a broken man, to offer himself as a
"weapon" in war. We knew how the film was going to end when we first
sat down. The story, then, was the story of how Anna embarked on this
journey and how she was, almost literally, unable to get off the train
as it steamed towards its predetermined destination.
Before I go I have to say something here about the casting of the four
main characters: Kitty, Levin, Anna and Vronsky. All four actors, Mia
Kirshner, Alfred Molina, Sophie Marceau and Sean Bean, will be
remembered, I think, for their roles in this film. Of the four, I
believe Sean Bean was done the most disservice by the choppy editing.
If ever there was a film that cried out for some explicit passion, it
was this one, and I cannot even begin to imagine what was left on the
cutting room floor. If you're going to cast an actor who has earned an
absolutely solid reputation in the UK playing characters who are
intense and angry and passionate - for heaven's sake, let him BE
intense and angry and passionate.
And finally, let me sum up by saying that this is a film set in the
past, but it is very much about today. Rose takes ample swipes at the
hypocrisy of a society where people are cast out for their behaviour,
by influential people who, behind closed doors, engage in exactly the
same sort of behaviour themselves. 

Author
Ben Hoffman
Everything about the film is lush and beautiful.  From the wonderful
photography that enhances every bit of film, to the breathtaking decor
in the ballroom and on the skating rink, to the well-chosen cast, the
film is a winner. Anna (The French Sophie Marceau) has a classically
lovely face.  Her every emotion, her passionate love affair with Count
Vronsky (Sean Bean)  is revealed in her eyes.   We know at once that
the affair will override losing her husband (James Fox) and risk the
loss of the child she adores,   Nothing can stop the passion  since she
first lays eyes on the Count.   Little wonder that it has always been
and still is a timeless story, one that people who love good literature
continue to read.
Tolstoy included in his story that of another marriage, the everlasting love affair of Levin (Alfred Molina) and his stunningly beautiful wife, Kitty (Mia Kirshner) to contrast the two marriages with which the film concerns itself.
The acting by all five principals, Marceau, Bean, Fox, Molina and Kirshner, are all perfection and in keeping with the era, a time only a few years before the Russian Revolution.   The movie is further enhanced by the music of
Tschaikowsky, Prokofiev and Rachmaninoff (even if some of the music was written after the time of the film).
A hint of why a revolution was inevitable (but only a hint) is seen
when Kitty is breathlessly running through the mansion room to get to
the ballroom so she can dance.   As she is about to enter, a servant
picks up the trailing skirt and hands it to her and she, without so
much as a glance at him, accepts the skirt part which she now holds in
one hand and joins the dance.  For a fleeting moment, seeing the many
servants one wonders about the Russian people who are outside, unseen,
and poverty-stricken.  None of that is allowed by the director to
intrude on the gay, happy life of those who were "in" . . . nor was it
allowed by the noblemen and women of that era.  Nevertheless, a fine
film!

Author
Han Kuo
If you haven't read the 800-plus-page novel, this is the 
movie that will compel you to do so. And you will be 
grateful for it afterwards. It is the best movie adaptation 
of Leo Tolstoy's timeless tragic love story "Anna Karenina" 
thus far. Beware of that reading a novel and watching a 
movie are never meant to be the same experience. They are 
functionally different and a head-to-head comparison is 
seldom fair or meaningful. Bear that in mind and watch this 
movie for its own sake, you will find yourself immersed in 
this beautiful film.
The cast is brilliant. Sophie Marceau (as Anna) had a 
splendid performance. Besides her ineffable beauty and 
exquisite elegance reflected on the screen as Anna is meant 
to be, it is remarkable to watch how her facial expressions 
convey those most subtle emotions Anna possess, joy, 
happiness, shame, sorrow and despair. More amazingly, the 
sentiments are communicated not only through her tender eyes 
but also from those sensational lips. In addition her French 
accent adds the intoxicating foreign flavor to the 
character, which makes you wonder what it would be like if 
they all speak French instead (in that period, the Russian 
aristocrats often spoke French).
Sean Bean  (as Vronsky) did a wonderful job in protraying 
Vronksy who had the crushing love and  desire for Anna 
except the lack of dashing look is less persuasive. All the 
other supporting cast had a first-rate performance which 
makes the movie so enjoyable.
The breathtaking cinematography (which was all shot in 
Russia), the sumptuous  19th century aristocratic costumes 
and the absorbing Tchaikovsky music provides an magnificent 
and realistic ensemble for the story. The grand ball, the 
subsequent train station encounter, the horse racing and the 
tragic finale are the several memorable scenes.
Understanding the difference between the expressive means of 
the literature and those of the cinema, the director/writer 
Bernard Rose made a great effort in extracting the essence 
of this great novel with some modification, and he did a 
respectable job.  The exact dialogues excerpt from Telstoy's 
masterpiece exhibit some of the most powerful and 
unforgettable words rarely seen on screens.  The only 
unfullfillment is that the showing version was cut into less 
than 2 hours. It is too short to include some integral 
scenes to make the film more complete. Hopefully, this will 
be mended on vedio version.
The experience of watching this movie is definetely a 
rewarding one not only because it is a great film but also 
it stirs up some deep thoughts about love and life. It sure 
will linger in my mind for quite some time.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sophie Marceau, Sean Bean, Alfred Molina, Mia Kirshner, James Fox, 
      Fiona Shaw
Director: Bernard Rose
Producer: Bruce Davey
Screenplay: Bernard Rose based on the novel by Leo Tolstoy
Cinematography: Daryn Okada
Music: Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninoff, and Prokofiev
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     LEO TOLSTOY'S ANNA KARENINA, Bernard Rose's (IMMORTAL BELOVED) 
attempt to bring the great Russian novel to the screen, is, in its own 
way, as flawed and unsuccessful as its illustrious predecessors.  As an 
unabashed fan of the novel, I have never been impressed by Hollywood's 
tepid attempts to film it.  Even with luminaries like Greta Garbo and 
Vivien Leigh in the title role, the stripped-down story has barely 
resembled its inspiration, looking instead like an overplotted, costume 
melodrama.  ANNA KARENINA is not unfilmable (a 10-part BBC mini-series 
made during the '70s was quite good), but, given the time constraints of 
a theatrical feature, it's next-to-impossible to make an effective 
adaptation.  Rose's brave-but-disappointing attempt reinforces this 
belief.  400,000 words cannot be condensed into two hours.
     The storyline for ANNA KARENINA is widely-known, so I won't spend 
much time recapping it here.  The title character, Anna (Sophie Marceau) 
is a vibrant, young Russian noblewoman trapped in a passionless marriage 
with a much older man, Karenin (James Fox).  She begins a disastrous 
love affair with a dashing army officer, Count Vronsky (Sean Bean).  
Ultimately, the liaison threatens to destroy four lives:  Anna's, 
Karenin's, Vronsky's, and that of Anna's young son.  This story unfolds 
in parallel with the less tragic ordeal of another Russian couple:  
brooding Konstantine Levin (Alfred Molina) and flighty Kitty 
Shcherbatsky (Mia Kirshner).  Levin is desperately in love with Kitty, 
but she is indifferent to his attention, preferring instead to 
concentrate on men like Vronsky.  
     Rose's boldest stroke in this version is to leave in the 
Kitty/Levin subplot, rather than excising it (which is what happens in 
most adaptations).  This decision is two-edged.  While retaining Levin's 
story provides the overall tale with greater balance and depth, it eats 
up valuable time and dilutes the focus.  What works in the book doesn't 
necessarily succeed on screen, and the result is a choppy and uneven 
motion picture.  In fact, everything in ANNA KARENINA races by in a 
blur.  Character development is almost nonexistent as time pressure 
forces Rose to push on without giving the audience an opportunity to 
digest what's happening or get into the protagonists' heads.  There are 
times when ANNA KARENINA seems not like a filmed version of the 
Cliffnotes, but of the abridged Cliffnotes. 
     I have several casting quibbles, as well.  French actress Sophie 
Marceau (BRAVEHEART) is a cool, regal beauty -- not the right type at 
all to play the hot-blooded, passionate Anna.  Marceau is a good 
actress, but she's wrong for this role, and her icy rendering of Anna 
leaves viewers largely unconcerned about the fate of the character.  
Likewise, Mia Kirshner (EXOTICA) as Kitty and Alfred Molina (THE PEREZ 
FAMILY) as Levin are miscast.  Kirshner's North American accent is out-
of-place, and Molina never properly captures Levin's deep-rooted 
melancholy.  Sean Bean (GOLDENEYE) fares somewhat better as Vronsky, 
although there are times when his performance is on the stiff side.  The 
only truly successful job is turned in by James Fox (THE REMAINS OF THE 
DAY), who essays a sympathetic and entirely human Karenin.
     Despite the problems with story, characterization, and acting, ANNA 
KARENINA is far from a complete bust.  Visually, it's nothing less than 
stunning (with outside locations filmed in Russia) -- the most eye-
catching motion picture since Kenneth Branagh's HAMLET.  Ballroom 
interiors, landscapes, and even close-ups of faces leave the viewer 
entranced.  At one point during the movie, when Karenin remarks, 
"There's so much splendor here.  One's eyes are bedazzled," he might 
have been talking about the look of the film.  The soundtrack, which 
features the work of Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninoff, and Prokofiev, is 
equally arresting.  
     Had the script for ANNA KARENINA matched the production values, 
this movie would have been a rousing success, but that's not the case.  
Once, near the very end, as a broken Vronsky reflects on what has 
transpired, the movie finally allows us to feel for a character, but, as 
the saying goes, it's too little, too late.  LEO TOLSTOY'S ANNA KARENINA 
has its good points, but there's nothing here to warrant such an 
extravagant remake.  For anyone who really wants to enjoy the story, 
with its rich characters, stimulating ideas, and wrenching tragedy, a 
copy of the paperback book should cost about as much as a movie ticket, 
and will provide a more lasting and worthwhile investment.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
