Title
Review for Washington Square (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Just as it is most assuredly determined from birth whether one
will like liver or not, so it is with actors and costume dramas.
Helena Bonham Carter, for example, was undoubtedly born in long dress
with full period regalia.  As seen most recently in the film version of
the Henry James novel, THE WINGS OF THE DOVE, she is in her element
when dressed from head to toe in full period attire.
     Jennifer Jason Leigh, on the other hand, is not genetically
predisposed toward petticoat pictures.  Casting her as the female lead
in a film version of another Henry James novel, "Washington Square," a
role that won an Oscar for Olivia De Havilland in 1949, represents
significant risk for WASHINGTON SQUARE's director Agnieszka Holland.
(The 1949 version was called THE HEIRESS, but the new movie is titled
WASHINGTON SQUARE since, according to the press notes, it attempts to
recreate the novel much more faithfully.)
     Jennifer Jason Leigh is a brilliant actress who specializes in
hard-hitting contemporary roles, such as the devastating LAST EXIT TO
BROOKLYN, SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, and the film that should have gotten her
an Academy Award nomination, GEORGIA.  As in her most recent
performance in A THOUSAND ACRES, she makes a strategic error in
WASHINGTON SQUARE and underplays her part.  All of the above
notwithstanding, her performance, which remains central to the
enjoyment of the film, is delightful even if sometimes strained.
     Czech director Holland approaches each film with a passion for
detail.  Known abroad for EUROPA, EUROPA, her best English language
film was the lovely and magical film, THE SECRET GARDEN.  Her
meticulousness shows in WASHINGTON SQUARE in many small ways.  The
story starts with the birth of Catherine Sloper, played as a young
adult by Leigh.  After Catherine's mother has died in childbirth, the
director manages to wait until the baby playing Catherine has such a
remarkably wise and soulful look that one feels the baby understands
the tragedy.
     Catherine's father, Dr. Austin Sloper, is played by that master of
all periods, Albert Finney.  He believes his daughter to be without
accomplishment or beauty.  Although basically true, his protection of
her has cruel consequences.  Most of the show, except for an
incongruous scene of a fat preteen Catherine, takes place when
Catherine is a young woman of marriageable age.  (For the record, fat
people can become and stay thin ones -- I, for one, did -- but it is
not likely, and the story creates a visual discord by not explaining
the transformation.)
     Catherine's costumes by Anna Sheppard, Academy Award nominee for
SCHINDLER'S LIST, make Catherine look exceedingly plain and gawky.
When she comes to show off her first ball gown, her father is told he
must wait.  "If a prelude is necessary," he says sternly.  "The news
must be bad."  It is.  Draped in what appears to be a old curtain of
gold tassels on a badly contrasting royal blue base, Catherine grimaces
and looks terrible.  With her make-up and her downcast mouth, Leigh
turns herself from naturally cute into an extremely homely young woman.
     When Catherine goes to the ball, a dashing but penniless young man
named Morris Townsend appears instantly smitten with her.  Morris,
played with charm and panache by Ben Chaplin from THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS
& DOGS, becomes the story's enigma.  Are his intentions honorable as he
says, or is he, as her father believes, just a rogue whose only
interest is Catherine's considerable fortune?
     In James's poetic language, they banter sweet nothings at each
other when they first meet.  "A woman of such uncommon grace has no
need of guile," he assures her at one point.
     Maggie Smith plays Catherine's Aunt Lavinia Penniman.  She is a
ninny whose putative position is to chaperone Catherine.  Smith's
delicate performance engenders a wave of giggles in the audience
whenever she opens her mouth.  During one tiresome session of watching
over the young lovers, she makes an awkward exit.  "You'll have to
excuse me, Mr. Townsend," she explains.  "I have a fortuitous
headache."
     Jan A.P. Kaczmarek's heavy violin music is as rich as the paneled
rooms in which much of the action takes place.  To recreate the
Washington Square of 1840s New York City, production designer Allan
Starski chose a Baltimore setting.  The lovely Federalist houses there
dot a richly textured urban landscape.
     When Catherine's knees buckle from her first kiss by Morris, her
first beau, Leigh manages to make it believable.  Slumped almost on the
floor, her face is flushed and her blood rushes.  Never had the
ungainly Catherine expected such rapture.  In a time of R-rated
show-'em-everything sexuality, it is refreshing to visit a time when
more was not necessarily better, and when a kiss was, well, a kiss.
     Chapin's performance is as dead-on as Finney's.  When Morris
explains, "My vanity requires an audience," we come to understand one
of the reasons he likes Catherine, who dotes on his every word.
     "It is a perfectly fitting conclusion," says Catherine as the
story begins to wrap up.  "I like it very much."  I couldn't have said
it better myself, and not being Henry James, I'm not expected to.
     WASHINGTON SQUARE runs 1:55.  It is rated PG for adult themes.
The film would be fine for any age, but those below ten would probably
not be interested.  I recommend the film to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
WASHINGTON SQUARE
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Hollywood Pictures/Caravan Pictures
 Director:  Agnieszka Holland
 Writer:  Carol Doyle
 Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Albert Finney, Maggie Smith,
Ben Chaplin
   "How obscene that your mother should give her life so that
you could have her space on earth."  Imagine the hurt a
young woman must feel to hear words like that from the father
she once adored.  As though this utterance were not enough
of a cross to bear, this vulnerable individual hears an outburst
from the lover for whom she waited one year, who proclaims
that since he has all the charm and she nothing but money,
he should be entitled to a share of her wealth after marriage. 
What gives "Washington Square" its particularly inviting
quality is that throughout the film the audience does not truly
know whether the young, handsome and captivating suitor of
a shy, innocent person is after her for her money or whether
he truly loves her.  What's more, Henry James, who wrote his
novel about a family high in New York social circles, wants us
to have mixed feelings about the cynical and verbally abusive
father.  Does he want to protect his only daughter from the
pitches of fortune hunters, or is just plain ornery about a girl
whose delivery resulted in the childbirth death of his wife?  It's
no wonder that this readable classic was the subject of a
major film forty-eight years ago, entitled "The Heiress" and
starring Ralph Richardson, Montgomery Clift and Olivia de
Havilland; and of a recent stage version at New York's
Roundabout Theater with Philip Bosco and Cherry Jones in
the leading roles.
   Given a moderately feminist twist by Agnieszka Holland in a
beautifully photographed new movie, "Washington Square"
features Jennifer Jason Leigh in the role of Catherine Sloper,
an awkward girl who becomes her own woman and gains a
comeuppance against the two men whose mixed feelings
toward her caused so much distress.  Adapted from the Henry
James novel by screenwriter Carol Doyle and photographed
in Baltimore by Jerzy Zielinski, this "Washington Square" may
disappoint those who prefer the theatrical revenge conclusion
of the Roundabout Theater's production but will please those
who like their movies to remain close to the literary designs of
the novelists.  "Washington Square" shows its wares
realistically with only a brief outpouring of histrionics, and
conveys a tidy look at a portion of New York society a century
and a half ago.
   In dealing with the life of Ms. Sloper before she meets her
eager suitor, director Holland selects a few seminal episodes
in her early life to impart the young girl's awkwardness. 
Particularly moving, almost painful to watch, is a song recital
she is about to give to an audience of father, aunts, uncles
and cousins, only to freeze with stagefright and urinate
copiously on the living room floor.  Despite the
embarrassment and shame she seems to cause the father
she tries heartbreakingly to please, her dad, Dr. Austin Sloper
(Albert Finney), makes clear that she has no social graces,
limited looks, and an inability to capture the attentions of an
eligible bachelor.  Encouraged by a slightly dotty and loving
Aunt Lavinia (Maggie Smith) who lives with the family,
Catherine accepts the attentions of a handsome, magnetic
suitor, Morris Townsend (Ben Chaplin), a penniless member
of society who at first appears to have ardent feelings for her. 
When Dr. Sloper--who calls Morris an idler who is out for
money--threatens to disinherit Catherine unless she breaks off
the relationship, even taking her on a one-year trip to Europe
to allow Catherine's feelings to cool, the lines are effectively
drawn.
   While Ms. Holland does furnish the flavor of New York
society by giving us glimpses into the parties, by carefully
showing us the far-reaching and lavishly furnished home at 21
Washington Square, by offering a look at the many servants,
she avoids the lush and stilted theatricality of Merchant-Ivory
productions while displaying a movie far more toned down
than her own "Total Eclipse" (about the relationship between
Paul Verlaine and Arthur Rimbaud).  Her calm approach
provides a note of authenticity and realism to the goings-on
while retaining dramatic punch through a single, showdown
scene between Catherine and her suitor, Morris Townsend.
   While Cherry Jones, who shone in the cast of the
Roundabout Theater production some years back, might have
offered a more genuine reading of Catherine's character,
Jennifer Jason Leigh does fine, broadening her range after
appearing previously in terminally cynical roles such as that of
Dorothy Parker.  Albert Finney is more in tune with the
doctor's persona than the blustery and less witty Philip Bosco,
who re-created the role alongside Cherry Jones, and Ben
Chaplin plays the part subtly enough that we are kept
speculating about his motives.
   "Washington Square," then, is a down-to-earth piece of
moviemaking filled with solid performances and a mildly
feminist resolution which should please many without
offending audience members of a conservative bent. Rated
PG.  Running Time: 115 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh, Albert Finney, Ben Chaplin, Maggie Smith
Director: Agnieszka Holland
Producers: Roger Birnbaum, Julie Bergman Sender
Screenplay: Carol Doyle based on the novel by Henry James
Cinematography: Jerzy Zielinski
Music: Jan A.P. Kaczmarek
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     Love is supposed to be one of the most wonderful things known to 
humanity, and Hollywood has produced countless pictures that place it on 
the highest pedestal.  But there is another kind of love -- a darker, 
uglier sort that rarely reaches the screen because the public, it is 
deemed, finds it too unpleasant.  So, while most films are content to 
explore the lighter, romantic side of love, WASHINGTON SQUARE takes a 
cold, hard look at the painful, destructive aspect of the same emotion.
     Two years ago, motion pictures enjoyed a flirtation with Jane 
Austen, adapting no less than four of her novels into major motion 
pictures and/or television mini-series.  Last year, it was Shakespeare's 
turn.  Now, in 1997, the classic author du jour appears to be Henry 
James.  Within a twelve-month period, three of his novels have been 
adapted for the screen (PORTRAIT OF A LADY, WASHINGTON SQUARE, THE WINGS 
OF THE DOVE).  Curiously, however, James' best-known works, THE TURN OF 
THE SCREW and THE GOLDEN BOWL, have not received new treatments, which 
leaves the door wide open for further exploration in the near future.
     WASHINGTON SQUARE is actually the second film to be made from the 
James novel of the same name.  The first, 1949's THE HEIRESS (directed 
by William Wyler and starring Olivia De Havilland, who won an Oscar for 
her role), was based on a stage play version of the book that eliminated 
many of the more subtle aspects of James' text.  For this interpretation 
of WASHINGTON SQUARE, director Agnieszka Holland and screenwriter Carol 
Doyle have returned to James' original story and created a quiet, 
thoughtful examination of the author's favorite theme:  the difficulty 
of balancing love and money, and the pernicious influence of the latter 
upon the former.
     As WASHINGTON SQUARE opens, we are greeted with a tragic scene:  a 
young woman lying dead in the aftermath of childbirth.  Her husband, 
Austin Sloper (Albert Finney), barely looks at his newborn daughter, 
Catherine, as she is presented to him.  Flash-forward several years.  
Catherine, an awkward adolescent, is shown trying to please her father 
on his birthday.  But, despite her best efforts, everything goes wrong, 
and she is forced to flee from his party in embarrassment.  When we next 
meet Catherine (now played by Jennifer Jason Leigh), she is an adult, 
but is still slavishly trying to win her father's adoration.  However, 
in his characteristically brusque manner, he finds fault with nearly 
everything she does.
     The domestic tranquillity of the Sloper household changes 
dramatically on the day that Catherine meets Morris Townsend (Ben 
Chaplin), an adventurer and wanderer who has just returned to America 
from abroad.  Catherine falls in love with him, and, although he 
apparently returns her feelings, Austin is suspicious of his motives.  
Morris is penniless and Catherine is wealthy, and all Austin sees in the 
young man is a fortune hunter.  He refuses to sanction a marriage and 
indicates that if Catherine defies him, he will disown her.  
     The crux of Catherine's dilemma isn't whether to surrender money 
for love -- that would be no choice, since physical pampering is largely 
unimportant to her.  Instead, she must struggle with the consequences of 
giving up her father's love for her suitor's.  Initially, she is 
unwilling (and perhaps unable) to go against her father's wishes.  The 
real meat of WASHINGTON SQUARE focuses on Catherine's growth as an 
individual to the point where she can see that her father's feelings for 
her are not as pure as she once believed them to be.  Jennifer Jason 
Leigh manages to capture the essence of Catherine by avoiding 
histrionics, finding the core of innocence that forms Catherine's 
center, and showing the inner strength that blossoms from it.
     Austin could easily have become a black-and-white villain, but 
Finney's performance defies the audience's desire to label him as such.  
While many of Austin's actions are reprehensible, we understand that he 
is not just motivated by selfishness.  There is a great wellspring of 
pain in his life -- a void left by the absence of a beloved wife whose 
death he blames on his daughter.  And, although in one sense he resents 
Catherine, it is also clear that, in his own way, he loves her as well.  
Finney handles the complex motivations of his character expertly, 
creating a fascinating antagonist.
     The third major character is the most ambiguous.  WASHINGTON SQUARE 
keeps us guessing about Morris' real motivations.  Is he truly in love 
with Catherine because she feeds his vanity and makes him feel "like the 
most important thing in the world"?  Or is he, as Austin suspects, after 
her money, and an easy path to a pampered life?  While Ben Chaplin's 
performance is not the equal of Leigh's or Finney's, he is solid enough 
not to give away the truth about Morris until the script reveals it.
     Lest WASHINGTON SQUARE seem too serious and downbeat, there's 
always the character of Aunt Livinia (Maggie Smith) on hand to provide 
comic relief.  Austin's sister, who has served as Catherine's surrogate 
mother, delivers many of the film's most witty lines, and her presence 
single-handedly keeps the tone gentler than one might otherwise expect.  
In part because of her, WASHINGTON SQUARE is considerably lighter than 
the other currently-available (and similarly-themed) James adaptation, 
THE WINGS OF THE DOVE.
     The best thing about WASHINGTON SQUARE is that it draws us into the 
world of the characters and challenges us to understand them and 
question their views and motivations.  The film is emotionally effective 
without going overboard.  Director Agnieszka Holland (whose previous 
efforts include EUROPA EUROPA and OLIVIER OLIVIER) opts to avoid the 
temptation of reducing WASHINGTON SQUARE to the level of a costume 
melodrama.  Her careful, modulated handling of the material makes this 
resemble Merchant-Ivory's better work (like THE REMAINS OF THE DAY).  
WASHINGTON SQUARE is faithful representation of James' text, and a 
moving and satisfying portrait of one woman's struggle for independence 
in a society where everything is defined by love, money, or both.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Jamie Peck
Hollywood / 1:55 / 1997 / PG (intense childbirth, brief sexuality)
Cast: Jennifer Jason Leigh; Ben Chaplin; Albert Finney; Maggie Smith;
Judith Ivey
Director: Agnieszka Holland 
Screenplay: Carol Doyle 
Because Academy Award nominations are just around the corner, autumn
is the one season that brings around a surplus of big "small" films --
motion pictures that may boast strong credentials but rely more on
powerful story-telling than showy special effects to wow you
over. Most of these movies are period pieces, and most of these period
pieces have been among the best filmmaking of our time -- 1993's "The
Age of Innocence," 1994's "Little Women," 1995's "Sense and
Sensibility" and last November's "The English Patient." This year's
hopeful appears to be "Washington Square," and whether or not it's got
the potential to be Oscar bait has yet to be seen due to its
early-fall release date. But don't let timing throw you off --
"Washington Square" deserves a whole mantlepiece of awards.
Adapted from the Henry James novel, "Washington Square" tells the
story of Catherine Sloper (Jennifer Jason Leigh), an heiress who lives
in the titular New York estate in the mid-1850s. Catherine's birth
killed her mother, and she has spent her entire life listening to
resentful remarks from her wealthy physician father (Albert Finney)
that she holds none of his late wife's beauty, charm or
elegance. Catherine's whimsical Aunt Lavinia (Maggie Smith) dismisses
her brother-in-law's harsh criticism and tries to encourage her aloof,
shy niece.
At a party, Catherine attracts the attention of alluring wastrel
Morris Townsend (Ben Chaplin, last seen in "The Truth About Cats and
Dogs"). Overcome with the prospect of a loving relationship, she
whole-heartedly commits herself to Morris. Mr. Sloper, however, has
other ideas, namely that the young, penniless man has ulterior motives
-- that instead of wanting her, he might want her money -- and
threatens to cut Catherine off financially if she marries him.
After Hollywood's recent obsession with Jane Austen ("Clueless,"
"Emma," "Persuasion" and "Sense and Sensibility"), it's completely
reasonable that they should move onto Henry James -- "Washington
Square" is the second James adaptation (after last winter's "The
Portrait of a Lady") in less than a year, and his "The Wings of the
Dove" is scheduled for release next month. Those put off by
"Portrait"'s bizarre execution needn't worry at this James go-around,
because "Washington Square" is told in a much more accessible,
straightforward manner. The story is extremely easy to be pulled into
because, presumably, we can all relate to the awkwardness and
confusion Catherine feels.
As far as acting is concerned, "Washington Square" is flawless. Leigh,
usually cast as problem-plagued yuppies, makes a strong case as to why
she should do period films more often. She's exhibits a strong,
emotional presence, and when her heart breaks, so does ours. Smith
steals the movie with her dotty characterization; when Lavinia
secretly meets Morris in a house of ill repute, her suggestive
mannerisms brighten the proceedings up to an unbelievably lively
level. Chaplin and Finney are excellent in very difficult roles. Their
subtle, focused acting allows us to read their motivations differently
at various times. Is Morris offering pursuit for a monetary gain? Or
is Mr. Sloper simply underestimating his daughter's beauty? Chaplin
and Finney are so good at masking their impetuses that when these
questions are finally answered, it's a shock.
Also on display in the film is my wonderful Baltimore locale, with
Union Square making a surprisingly exceptional substitute for
Washington Square. (Who knew how gorgeous the place would look with
all of the drug needles swept up?) To be fair, though, everything in
this movie sparkles with period detail; the costumes, the art
direction, the set design, the original score -- they all contribute
to every accurate, beautiful spectacle. All of the high-level
technical credits never allow "Washington Square" to look bad for a
single moment -- even a scene where Catherine collapses in the rain on
a muddy street is a sigh-worthy sight.
Director Agnieszka Holland showed off her visual prowess for adapting
the classics a few summers ago with "The Secret Garden." That was a
nice movie, but with "Washington Square," she has created a place to
go back to again and again. Eloquence can often hide missteps, but not
here -- it heightens the film's uncountable strengths. From opening
credits to final scene -- which, by the way, is done with
applause-inducing originality -- "Washington Square" is an honestly
majestic gem.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
James Sanford
         Although the movie ``Washington Square'' bears the same title
as Henry James' novel, it takes considerable liberties with the source
material, much in the same way the recent ``Wings of the Dove'' did
with another James novel.
  Carol Doyle's screenplay remodels the character of Catherine
Sloper into something of a fledgling feminist, rather than the meek
and pathetic victim she was in ``The Heiress,'' the popular stage
adaptation by Ruth and Augustus Goetz.
  The transformation works, thanks to a typically edgy
performance by Jennifer Jason Leigh and unfussy direction by Agnieszka
Holland. Despite its turn-of-the-century setting, this retelling of
the story rings with contemporary resonance, and although Doyle has
tweaked the original, particularly with regard to the ending, she has
retained the gist of ``Washington Square.''
  It's still the bittersweet tale of well-to-do, woebegone
Catherine's flirtation with the penniless Morris Townsend (Ben
Chaplin) and her domineering father's (Albert Finney) stringent
objection to it.
  Holland and her production team have created an excellent
example of how to open up a play and make it cinematic by taking the
action out of the Sloper family's parlor and moving it into the
streets of New York, the gardens of high society, the mountains of
Europe and a variety of beautifully evoked locations.
  With her usual abandon, Leigh at first loses herself in
Catherine's gaudy dresses and nervous tics. As the story progresses,
however, the actress lets us see there is considerably more going on
with this girl than first meets the eye.
  Beneath her awkwardness is a hint of a sharp, sly mind at
work, and Doyle allows us to wonder whether Catherine is being used by
Morris or if she is in fact using him to make one final stand against
her father.
  Finney's vivid portrait of Dr. Sloper is one of the actor's
strongest performances since ``Under The Volcano'' 15 years
ago. Throughout the story, Sloper drops potent little bombs on his
graceless daughter's dreams, building up to the devestating moment
when he laments, ``How obscene that your mother should give her life
so that you can inhabit space on this earth.''
  Yet Finney doesn't allow him to sink into either
conventional villainy or melodramatic excess.
  Sloper remains imposing and, even though he's a terrible
father, he isn't entirely heartless. Though he may well be more
concerned with his daughter embarrassing him than shaming herself,
Sloper at least wants to spare her any undue humiliation.
  Chaplin - best known as the love interest in ``The Truth
About Cats and Dogs'' - lends surprising richness and depth to
Morris. Like Leigh, Chaplin is purposefully oblique about Morris'
motives, thus enhancing the drama.
  As played by Maggie Smith, the spinster aunt Lavinia comes
off as being slightly smarter and a trifle more infatuated with Morris
than she was in ``The Heiress.''
  Even so, ``Washington Square'' is ultimately Leigh's show,
and she effortlessly carries the picture. Few other young actresses
have Leigh's knack for quietly exposing tormented souls.
  Her consistently intriguing performance here should sway
those who still have reservations about her, while giving her cult of
admirers one more reason to celebrate her gift.

Author
Duncan Stevens
The Jane-Austen-goes-to-Hollywood craze has subsided, but Austen has a
replacement, it seems, in Henry James; with last fall's "Portrait of a
Lady, and this fall's "Wings of the Dove," "Washington Square" represents
one of three James novels to hit the silver screen lately. But though the
treatment of them by Hollywood may be superficially similar--sumptuous
costumes, elaborate sets, a liberal dose of British acting--James and
Austen could hardly be more different: whereas Austen's novels are largely
comedies with some character development but little social critique
(Austen's villains are products of the same milieu as her heroes, and
their failings tend to be conventional human faults rather than anything
emblematic of their societies), James generally has different priorities.
Put another way, one can rely on the plot to keep the audience entertained
in an adaptation of an Austen film, but taking James' stories as a basis
for a film is less than a sure thing. 
Director Agnieszka Holland accordingly takes some liberties with
"Washington Square," though far fewer than Jane Campion's "Portrait"--and,
as it happens, far more successfully. The story is fairly simple:
Catherine Sloper (Jennifer Jason Leigh), plain and shy, falls for
penniless socialite Morris Townsend (Ben Chaplin), but her father Austin
(Albert Finney), suspecting that Morris is out for Catherine's
considerable wealth, threatens to disinherit her should the two marry.
This is the stuff of countless uninteresting films and novels, on the one
hand, but James has more in mind than the average writer, and the plot
reflects it; the focus is as much on the illusions associated with
romantic love as on its virtues, and the father is as compelling--and, in
a way, as sympathetic--as the suitor. And Holland, in her turn, puts her
stamp on the story; what was a fairly pessimistic ending becomes more
hopeful, with a distinctly feminist element. The initial scene, set up by
a skillful and elaborate tracking shot, depicts Catherine's birth and her
mother's resulting death, and Holland illustrates in it the relationship
that is central to the film.
Leigh has, to say the least, played a motley crew of neurotics and damaged
souls--but it is here, where her scars are displayed by facial tics and
barely visible body language, that her acting genuinely shines. Whereas in
films like "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" and "Georgia" she was
given room to express pain loudly and angrily, there are few such moments
here--but those few moments (at the reading of her father's will,
following Morris' carriage along a muddy street) are all the more
effective. When she declines Morris' invitation to dance, her
movements--looking down, twisting away--say as much as any lines could.
Leigh's delivery has been described as "lockjaw"--a promising career in
ventriloquism awaits her should she give up acting--but the murmuring
serves to reinforce her character's shyness here. Her awkwardness is
equally well realized; in dropping a pile of papers and clumsily
scrambling around picking them up, she conveys the humiliation of the
moment. Leigh's face is immensely expressive; watching her closely yields
real insight into her character's conflicts. And she does manage to
develop the character over the course of the film; her final confrontation
with her father is both dramatic and thoroughly believable.
The other performances are, mostly, strong. Finney goes well beyond 
conventional father-villain in portraying Austin: though we see his
limitations, we also see where they come from. His grief for his wife
keeps him from relating to his daughter fully: the gulf between them is
established in the first scene and reinforced in a variety of ways
thereafter. But the audience never doubts the genuineness of his grief,
nor that his distance from his daughter saddens him. This is a flawed
character, not a monster, and there is much more to his resistance to
Catherine's marriage than malice. Chaplin, for his part, does well with
the ambiguities of his character--though the final revelation is not as
believable as it might be, and the concluding scene between Morris and
Catherine feels a bit incongruous, it is possible throughout to understand
how Catherine can see him as a good-hearted boy while her father considers
him a parasite. Maggie Smith is as effective as usual as Catherine's
fluttery, sentimental Aunt Lavinia, though her character has little to do
with the central plot and sometimes feels more like a device for comic
relief.
The appeal of "Washington Square," particularly for those who want 
something more than authentic costumes and backdrops in a period piece,
lies in the way it subverts expectations. Catherine begins the film as an
awkward wallflower, but, for once, that is not a signal that she will soon
become a society belle; though her confidence grows as the film
progresses, she is recognizably the somewhat clumsy, homely girl. Points
for realism, at any rate. Moreover, this is not a story of tragically
denied lovers, though it may seem so at first; rather, it focuses firmly
on Catherine and the various treacheries and cruelties that she deals
with. The result, though slow in coming, is intriguing. Finney's character
is central to many of the surprises; his real feelings regarding his
daughter are not obvious until well along in the proceedings, but when
they become apparent, the real focus of the story shifts somewhat. 
Holland's visuals are particularly effective; she uses stark, even brutal,
images to reinforce her point, for instance when Austin discovers
Catherine secretly modeling a wedding gown, or in the young Catherine's
humiliation at a birthday recital. Though one is miscalculated--a showdown
between Catherine and Austin atop a rocky peak in the Alps--most are
effective, and the cinematography, mostly, fits the screenplay well.
It has been observed that, as is often the case with James, the conflict
between love and money predominates--but it's not clear that that's the
real point here. Certainly, that conflict is the source of much of the
plot, but arguably it masks the real tension, between a daughter too old
to be kept at home and a father whose opinion of her is so low that he
refuses to believe that she can make a viable life for herself. As it
stands, love and money are not genuinely in conflict--there is sufficient
money for Catherine to leave and marry Morris, were that the entirety of
the problem. Moreover, Morris does, eventually, land a job, satisfying
Austin's request that he make something of himself. But the problem
persists, and as we see no evidence that Austin is by nature a miser, it
seems logical to look deeper, at what truly motivates him. As usual with
James, there are hidden motivations at stake; the "money" angle is
relevant, though not in entirely expected ways, but more vital is Austin's
inability to see Catherine as anything other than an awkward, insecure
girl.
Though the ending of "Washington Square" is satisfying, it also provides
one of the film's major flaws, in that the script seems to rush to its
conclusion. After a climactic scene between Catherine and Morris, there is
little further resolution of either character--at least, not on 
screen--and we are forced to infer most of what happens after that. It 
could be argued that subsequent events are obvious, but it would have been
nice to see them--if for no other reason than to see how Leigh handles
them--and it's a bit jarring when a rather deliberately paced film
suddenly speeds up.
On the whole, though, this is a strong adaptation that captures many
of the most important elements of the novel but also gives the plot a
contemporary twist. Memorable chiefly for Leigh's portrayal of Catherine,
"Washington Square" deserves recognition for being something other than a
conventional period piece, in style and in plot.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Author
Alex Fung
WASHINGTON SQUARE (Buena Vista - 1997)
Starring Jennifer Jason Leigh, Albert Finney, Ben Chaplin,
  Maggie Smith, Judith Ivey
Screenplay by Carol Doyle, based on the novel by Henry James
Produced by Roger Birnbaum, Julie Bergman Sender
Directed by Agnieszka Holland
Running time: 115 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
With the 1996 Gramercy release of Jane Campion's THE PORTRAIT OF A
LADY, the upcoming Miramax release of Iain Softley's THE WINGS OF THE
DOVE, and this Buena Vista release of the Agneiszka Holland-helmed
WASHINGTON SQUARE, it is abundantly clear that film adaptations based
upon the works of Henry James are currently in fashion.  It is no
accident that both period melodramas WASHINGTON SQUARE and the
forthcoming THE WINGS OF THE DOVE are late-year releases, as was last
year's intricate THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY; they are strategically being
positioned in film release schedules in aspirations of possible Oscar
gold.  While the Oscar campaign for Ms. Campion's film fared somewhat
disappointingly, eventually netting only two Academy Award
nominations, WASHINGTON SQUARE, while generally a decent adaptation
of Henry James' novel, should consider itself lucky to do so well
come February 1998.
It will be inevitable that comparisons will abound between Ms.
Holland's version of WASHINGTON SQUARE and William Wylder's 1948
film, THE HEIRESS, featuring an illustrious cast including Ralph
Richardson, Montgomery Clift, and, in an Academy Award-winning role,
Olivia de Havilland, given that both films draw from the same source
material.  Such comparisons will invariably conclude in favour of the
much-revered earlier film, and while there may be merit in such a
conclusion, the mannered WASHINGTON SQUARE, which while more faithful
to James' original novel is also slightly instilled with a modern
feminist edge, remains fairly successfully moving and engaging.
Despite the film's one-sheet, which features Catherine Sloper
(Jennifer Jason Leigh) and her dashing suitor Morris Townsend (Ben
Chaplin) in a passionate if pensive embrace, WASHINGTON SQUARE's key
relationship is not that between the suitor and the painfully shy
heiress, but that between Catherine and her domineering father, Dr.
Austin Sloper (Albert Finney).  Skittishly devoted to her
contemptuous father to the point of tackling him at the front door
upon his daily return and waiting upon him hand and foot, Catherine
is an awkward young woman, sheltered and seemingly oblivious to the
standards of ladylike behaviour as deemed in the 1850s, yet she
appears content with her life in servitude to her beloved father.
The prosperous Dr. Sloper, on the other hand, looks upon his only
daughter with thinly-veiled disdain and embarrassment, resentful of
her mother's death during childbirth and brutally certain that the
eager-to-please Catherine is dim, charmless and has amounted to
nothing.  (His retort to a declaration that his daughter has a great
deal to offer is a genuine, incredulously bland "Such as?")
The status quo in their lives is irrevocably shattered upon the
arrival on the scene of Morris, a handsome young man who begins to
court Catherine, lavishing upon her great interest, attention, and
affection, much to the delight of Catherine's idealist Aunt Lavinia
(Maggie Smith) and to the suspicion of Dr. Sloper, who immediately
concludes that the penniless Morris is interested in her solely for
her inheritance.  While Catherine swoons for Morris, her relationship
with her father becomes increasingly strained, and she
heartbreakingly begins to understand for the first time how unworthy
she has always been in his eyes when Dr. Sloper vows to disinherit
her should she continue to encourage Morris' attentions.
It is not immediately intuitive casting to put Ms. Leigh in the role
of an unattractive spinster, and even moreso as a meek, clumsy
wallflower, but she fares suitably well, imbuing her piteous
character with a desperate craving for affection finally sated by her
romance with the Morris character.  It is in the latter half of
WASHINGTON SQUARE, where Catherine becomes more self-assured and
strong in her resolve, that Ms. Leigh predictably is strongest; her
vivid portrayal of a woman forever changed results in the film's
denouement being as affecting and emotionally resonant as it is.
However, it is Mr. Finney's performance which is the standout in
WASHINGTON SQUARE; his is an imposing and forceful presence in the
film which commands every scene in which he appears, and although his
character's cruel dismissals of his daughter are distasteful, it is
to Mr. Finney's credit that, far from coming off as despicable, there
remains a certain strength, authority, and deeply-buried sense of
genuine concern (if only, perhaps, in his own self-interest) in Dr.
Sloper which is oddly compelling.
The remaining supporting performances are solid.  Ms. Smith is very
amusing in a supporting role, while Mr. Chaplin nicely handles his
character's ambiguous motives with a great deal of subtlety.  While
the Morris character is a challenging role, Mr. Chaplin pulls it off
well, never tipping his hand too early and leaving the audience
hopeful, but uncertainly wavering about its true intentions.  With
his performance here and in Michael Lehmann's THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS &
DOGS, he has built up fine credentials for future thoughtful
Hollywood romantic leads.
WASHINGTON SQUARE's final third is markedly stronger and more
compelling than the previous two-thirds, which may be due to the
turgid manner in which Ms. Holland handles the romance storyline
which is prevalent throughout most of the film's second act.  While
done in a sincere fashion, there isn't a much-needed dizzying,
enthralling sense of passion evident which captures the essence of
Catherine's budding first romance and begins to transform her from a
gawky spinster into a poised, dainty beauty; Catherine and Morris'
affair seems far too polite and mannered.
Attempts to open up the story by screenwriter Carol Doyle are
ill-advised.  The additions of early scenes in Catherine's life fail
to add any added insight not already evident in the main body of the
story, although it does provide Ms. Holland with the opportunity to
open the film with an impressive POV tracking shot.  Sadly, the
costume design by Anna Sheppard, production direction by Allan
Starski, and WASHINGTON SQUARE's score by Jan A.P. Kaczmarek are all
decent but undistinguished.
While Ms. Holland's adaptation of WASHINGTON SQUARE is not a complete
triumph, the intrinsic strength and power of James' story, as
filtered through Ms. Doyle's screenplay, remains intact, and the film
benefits from good performances from its principal cast.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"I'll shoot for the Queen, and you can shoot for, well, whomever."
                               - Richard Harris, UNFORGIVEN
