Title
Review for Bulletproof (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Damon Wayans, Adam Sandler, James Caan, James Farentino,
Kristen Wilson.
Screenplay:  Joe Gayton, Lewis Colick.
Director:  Ernest Dickerson.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     All right, let's dispense with the preliminaries first:  Yes,
BULLETPROOF recycles material which has been done before -- and done
better -- in MIDNIGHT RUN and 48 HRS., among others.  Yes, it is the kind
of movie which has been a thorn in the paw of everyone who has dreamed of
a day when Hollywood values an original idea.  And yes, it includes the
kind of sexist and homophobic bits which have been all too characteristic
of films of its kind, targeted at the whooping goons of the movie-going
world like the one sitting next to me at this film.  All these things are
true, yet they are not exactly the reason why BULLETPROOF comes up short.
You see, BULLETPROOF is frequently quite funny, and it irritated me that I
was unable to enjoy the laughs as much as I should have.
     BULLETPROOF begins with partners in crime Rock Keats (Damon Wayans)
and Archie Moses (Adam Sandler) stealing a car, just one of many they have
stolen in the previous year.  They are best friends, with one small hitch:
"Keats" is actually an undercover police officer named Jack Carter, who
has befriended Archie in order to get inside the operation of drug lord
Frank Colton (James Caan), for whom Archie is a courier.  During the bust
in which Jack's cover is blown, Archie inadvertently shoots him in the
head, but somehow Jack survives.  Months of physical therapy later, Archie
is back on the job, and his first assignment is not a pleasant one.
Archie, captured in Arizona, has decided to turn state's evidence against
Colton, with one provision:  Jack has to be the man to bring him back to
L.A.  As though the company were not troublesome enough, Jack has to
contend with the killers Colton has hired to take Archie out, and who seem
to know his every move before he does.
     It is somewhat ironic that Archie frequently chides Jack for seeing
the world as "just black and white," since that is just one of many ways
this film follows the pattern of 90% of "antagonistic buddy cop" movies.
Just as a little test to check if you've ever seen a movie in this genre
before, see if you can guess whether Archie and Jack are friends when
BULLETPROOF ends.  That's right, this film takes you where every film of
its kind has taken you before, on a bickering ride to an inevitable
conclusion, and it is abundantly clear that writers Joe Gayton and Lewis
Colick are aware of that fact as well.  At only 85 minutes, BULLETPROOF
still feels long, because there is nothing of any consequence happening,
nothing to build momentum towards a resolution.  There is a recipe for a
film of this kind, and Gayton and Lewis follow it, and we are simply
watching them follow it.  The experience is like watching an hour and a
half long cooking show in which the final result is a bowl of cereal.
     I wish it had been easier to dismiss BULLETPROOF given all those
problems, but the fact is that it is also quite often funny.  Adam
Sandler, who turns in his least annoying screen performance to date (and
if that isn't damning with faint praise, I don't know what is), gets most
of the prime lines, taunting Jack and wise-cracking about the porno films
on the motel television where the two spend the night.  When Sandler isn't
trying to play a goofy character, he can deliver a line with a casual
zing, and when he isn't screaming he can be funny.  The problem is that
the story requires Archie to be hurt and angry at Jack's betrayal, and
that manifests itself in a performing style which can best be described as
"volume equals emotion."  Of course, it might also be true that screaming
is just Sandler's way of keeping a straight face; if you've ever seen
Sandler perform live, you know that he finds himself hilarious, and when
he is trying to "act" in BULLETPROOF it always seems that he is trying not
to snicker.
     Damon Wayans isn't much better as a thespian, and he is placed in the
uncomfortable role of straight man.  He does get a few brutal put-downs,
but most of the time he is simply playing put-upon, and it doesn't suit
him.  Except for the first fifteen minutes, when he is still in his
undercover role and allowed to be loose, Wayans moves as though the only
way to be serious is to clench every muscle in his body and speak very
slowly.  When he and Sandler are allowed to go toe-to-toe, the
confrontations are enjoyable, but they are interrupted regularly by
tedious and obligatory action sequences.  The result is a strange
inversion of the formula which made TWISTER so frustrating:  I wanted to
be around for the scenes when Wayans and Sandler were trading jibes, but I
was ready to head to the lobby as soon as the gunfire started.  It is
clear that both Wayans and Sandler -- and the audience -- would have
enjoyed 90 minutes of their stand-up routines more than this routine of a
somewhat different kind.  For all its humor, the real joke in BULLETPROOF
is on anyone who expected it to be more than this month's variation on a
theme.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Damon Wayans, Adam Sandler, James Caan, James Farentino, 
      Kristen Wilson, Bill Nunn, Mark Roberts
Director: Ernest Dickerson
Producers: Robert Simonds
Screenplay: Lewis Colick, Joe Gayton
Cinematography: Steven Bernstein
Music: Elmer Bernstein
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     On paper, it sounds like a strange idea:  Damon Wayans and Adam 
Sandler paired in a 48 HOURS/LETHAL WEAPON-type buddy/action film.  Of 
course, this isn't the first time two comic actors have done this sort 
of thing (for a recent example, recall Martin Lawrence and Will Smith in 
the better-to-be-forgotten BAD BOYS), and, to be fair, Wayans has 
previously appeared in shoot-'em-ups (like THE LAST BOY SCOUT, opposite 
Bruce Willis).  Surprisingly, however, this unlikely match works, due 
primarily to the charisma of both participants.  What doesn't hold up, 
however, is the ho-hum storyline that Wayans and Sandler find themselves 
stranded in.
     Universal Pictures has labeled BULLETPROOF as a "comedy action 
film", and that's precisely what it is.  The problem is, while some of 
the humor is very funny, there's nothing remotely interesting about the 
action stuff.  It's all redundant and recycled, with a few feeble riffs 
added in a failed attempt to give things an original look.  There are 
the usual car chases, foot chases, barroom brawls, and shootouts.  The 
only thing to elevate the material slightly is the use of more elaborate 
jokes than the one-line wisecracks that permeate the genre.
     The film's premise has undercover cop Jack Carter (a.k.a. Rock 
Keats, played by Damon Wayans) coming to the end of a one-year 
assignment that had him become best friends with criminal Archie Moses 
(Adam Sandler) in order to get the goods on drug lord Frank Colton 
(James Caan).  During the warehouse drug deal where Jack's police sting 
concludes, things go wrong.  Frank gets away, Archie accidentally shoots 
Jack in the head, and a number of people are killed.  Running from both 
the police and Frank's men, Archie heads for Mexico.  Before he gets 
there, however, he is picked up by Arizona authorities and agrees to a 
deal to inform against Frank.  Meanwhile, Jack is recovering from his 
injury with the help of a beautiful therapist (Kristen Wilson).  No 
sooner is he back on duty, however, when his captain (James Farentino) 
calls him into the office with a special assignment:  bring in Archie.  
Jack agrees to the assignment under protest, but when he sets off for 
Arizona, Frank's men are close behind.
     Jack and Archie's friendship forms BULLETPROOF's cornerstone. And, 
while cinematographer-turned-director Ernest Dickerson (JUICE) doesn't 
bring tears to our eyes by delving into the rich complexity of their 
relationship, he gets us to care about them.  A secondary aspect of the 
film concentrates on the consequences of betrayal, and, while this 
subject matter is handled somewhat haphazardly, there is a nice little 
twist that emphasizes it.  
     At times, BULLETPROOF delights in parodying action staples, which 
makes it all the more disappointing that the film ultimately relies on 
so many of them in a straightforward, traditional fashion.  The 
homoerotic subtext apparent in many "buddy movies" is toyed with in an 
inoffensive, over-the-top fashion, as is the formula necessitating that 
the bad guy has a mole working in the police department.  (Could it be 
the captain?  The DEA agent?  The two tough-guy cops?)  And, if you've 
seen the previews, you know how funny Adam Sandler's off-key rendition 
of "I'll Always Love You" (from THE BODYGUARD) is.  That, and the entire 
sequence surrounding it, represents BULLETPROOF's indisputable high 
point.
     Sandler and Wayans work so well together that a future teaming 
(with a more daring script) would be welcome.  Another noteworthy 
performance is given by Mark Roberts, who has a brief-but-memorable 
comic turn as an off-the-wall desk clerk at the porno lodge where Rock 
and Archie take a room.  James Caan, as yet another loud-mouthed tough 
guy with no redeemable features, mails in his portrayal.  He may not be 
losing interest in this kind of role, but I'm getting bored of seeing 
him do it.  Then there's Kristin Wilson, who, aside from her gorgeous 
eyes, brings little to the tired love interest role.
     Largely because it provoked a few hearty laughs, I found myself 
enjoying BULLETPROOF more than I expected.  With a little extra 
imagination invested in the action elements, this could have been a 
worthwhile "popcorn" endeavor.  As things are, it's a marginal feature 
likely to appeal to those who don't demand much from their comedy action 
films.  Anyone hoping for something more meaty will find that 
BULLETPROOF has a few too many holes.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, R, 85 minutes [1 hour, 25 minutes]
[action/comedy]
starring: Damon Wayans (Rock Keats/Jack Carter), Adam Sandler (Archie Moses),
Kristen Wilson (Traci), James Caan (Frank Colton), written by Joe Gayton,
Lewis Colick, produced by Robert Simonds, directed by Ernest Dickerson.
I'm trying to decide which has more influence over me: a really good laugh
or a really bad story. I can't decide if I'd recommend "Bulletproof" for its
funny comedy or not recommend it for its mindless, action-driven story. Ah,
the old "cop-buddy-action-flick-with-a-humorous-undertone," we've seen these
before, and only a few of them actually work. What I don't understand is how
nobody can figure out that those were the exceptions, not the rules.
The story revolves around a pair of car thieves who have become the best of
friends over the course of a year (so we are told). One of them is actually
an undercover cop (Wayans as Rock Keats) and the other is an idiot hood
(Sandler as Archie Moses) who somehow has connections to a major drug lord
(Caan as Frank Colton). 
Right away we are inundated with cop movie cliches: lots of jargon and
rhetoric about a major dope deal going down (of course in a warehouse on the
docks with punks, machine guns, etc.). Of course, when the criminals become
suspicious of the Keats they find out he is actually a cop and of course
Archie feels betrayed and of course the cops bust in and a bloodbath ensues. 
Now our two main characters are at war with each other when five minutes
before they were best of friends. During the scene Archie accidentally shoots
Keats in the head, but it doesn't kill him (nah, gunshot wounds to the head
never kill anyone!). To make a long story short, Keats (whose real name is
Jack Carter) recovers, meets a cute woman, and is assigned to protect Archie
because he can turn states evidence against Colton, the most powerful drug
lord who also wants to kill him.
Sandler and Wayans make a pretty funny duo, I'll have to admit it, but why
put the two in a genre that doesn't fit them? Both of these actors have
starred in comedies up until this point, what are they doing shooting guns
and jumping from airplanes? The action scenes and the stunts in this movie
are just so cliche and recycled, even James Caan can't make for a remotely
convincing villain, and thus all we get is a big cartoon (although cartoons
can be funny).
There are more double crosses in this movie than I've ever seen. Naming any
of them would give away the entire story. By the end we get a lot of
bloodshed over nothing. There's not much here to make us really care about
what's going on.
For what it's worth, the funny parts of "Bulletproof" are really funny, but
the bad story and mindless violence is a real turn-off. The entire film has a
choppy surface to it, there's no depth to it at all. Mixing comedy with
action is a difficult process, why does Hollywood continually try it?
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html
