Title
Review for Empire Strikes Back, The (1980)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997 (original 1980)
Release date: 5/21/80 (wide)
Special Edition Release date: 2/21/97 (wide)
Running Length (special edition): 2:06
MPAA Classification: PG (Mild violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams, 
      Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, David Prowse, Kenny Baker, 
      Alec Guinness, Frank Oz, voice of James Earl Jones 
Director: Irvin Kershner
Producer: Gary Kurtz
Screenplay: Leigh Brackett and Lawrence Kasdan, based on a story by 
      George Lucas
Cinematography: Peter Suschitzky
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     Indulge me for a moment as I time travel back to 1980.  
Historically, it was a signficant year -- the Iran hostage crisis raged, 
Ronald Reagan won the Presidential election, and the United States 
boycotted the Moscow Summer Olympics in response to the Soviet invasion 
of Afghanistan.  But, for science fiction movie lovers, there was only 
one event:  the May 21 opening of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK.  For the 
first time in three long, merchandise-clogged years, new STAR WARS had 
reached screens.  The movie was a guaranteed success before its first 
public show.
     Although it lacks the pioneering "newness" of STAR WARS, THE EMPIRE 
STRIKES BACK is in many ways a superior motion picture.  The storyline 
is more interesting and ambitious, the characters -- little more than 
appealing types in the original -- are allowed to grow and develop, the 
special effects are more mature, and the tone is deliciously dark and 
downbeat.  It's the latter quality that has made THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK 
the least favorite among young STAR WARS fans -- excepting Yoda, there's 
nothing cute to be found, and the film definitely doesn't leave viewers 
with a warm, fuzzy feeling.  In the first film, good triumphed 
decisively over evil; here, it's almost the other way around.
     For the SPECIAL EDITION, Lucas has chosen to do considerably less 
re-engineering than he did with STAR WARS, which is evidence that 
EMPIRE, as originally presented, was close to his vision.  The 
soundtrack has been digitally beefed up, a few new scenes have been 
inserted (including some extended shots of the Wampa ice creature's 
attack), and certain effects sequences have been noticably enhanced (the 
MILLENIUM FALCON's approach to the Cloud City being the most obvious).  
In general, however, the changes to EMPIRE are less obvious than those 
to STAR WARS, which were subtle enough in their own right.  There's 
nothing in the SPECIAL EDITION that changes the scope, quality, or 
intent of the film.  It's a little bigger, a little brighter, and a 
little louder.
     The movie does not pick up where STAR WARS left off.  The Death 
Star's destruction is a thing of the past; Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) 
and Han Solo (Harrison Ford) have been with the Rebellion for quite some 
time.  There's a love triangle involving the two friends and Princess 
Leia (Carrie Fisher), although Han, the perpetual scoundrel, has the 
upper hand.  When an Imperial Probe Droid turns up on the ice world 
Hoth, where the current Rebel base is located, it's time for a quick 
evacuation.  Darth Vader (David Prowse, voice of James Earl Jones) 
detects his quarry, Luke, there, and orchestrates a full-scale invasion.  
Suddenly, the Rebels are on the run, with Han taking the princess, 
Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and C-3P0 (Anthony Daniels) on board the 
FALCON and into an asteroid field to avoid pursuing TIE fighters.  
Meanwhile, Luke, along with the faithful R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), heads for 
the swamp planet of Dagobah to learn from the wizened Jedi Master, Yoda 
(Frank Oz).
     The defining moment of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK occurs in the final 
fifteen minutes, and, during screenings in 1980 (before the nature of 
the secret became public knowledge), one particular scene provoked 
collective gasps.  In terms of the mythological antecedents that Lucas 
based much of his STAR WARS trilogy on, there was nothing startling 
about Vader's origins, but, considering the darkness it would inevitably 
inject into the series, it was a bold stroke.  The scenes that begin 
with the Luke/Vader lightsaber duel and end with the young hero's 
despairing decision to allow himself to plummet out of Vader's reach 
represent the most compelling sequence offered by any of the three 
movies.
     The structure of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK is more complex than the 
relatively linear path traversed by STAR WARS.  Instead of keeping the 
heroes together, as was the case in the first film, Lucas, along with 
director Irvin Kershner and screenwriters Leigh Brackett and Lawrence 
Kasdan, elects to split them up.  As a result, we have Han and Leia 
fleeing through asteroid fields, flying headlong at Star Destroyers, and 
facing betrayal in the Cloud City, while Luke fights Imperial Walkers 
and trains to become a Jedi.  Everything comes together at the end, and 
there's a reunion of sorts, but THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK concludes with 
so many unanswered questions that it's tantamount to a cliffhanger.
     All of the primary actors are more relaxed here than in STAR WARS.  
Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher have matured in their craft and are sure 
of themselves in their roles.  Harrison Ford, easily the most successful 
of the three leads outside of STAR WARS, shows obvious improvement, 
honing his cynical-but-lovable performance to a fine edge.  Billy Dee 
Williams joins the cast as Lando Calrissian, an old buddy of Han's, and 
Frank Oz lends his voice and manipulative talents to the Muppet-like 
Yoda (who sounds just like SESAME STREET's Grover).
     The visual effects in THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK are far more 
impressive than those of STAR WARS.  From the approach of the imposing 
Imperial Walkers to the escape from the Cloud City, there's a lot here 
to delight the eye.  Likewise, John Williams' score, which uses multiple 
cues from STAR WARS, displays the richness and maturity necessary for a 
darker, more operatic motion picture.  "The Imperial March (Darth 
Vader's Theme)" is the standout new track, giving a unique musical sound 
to the chief villain.
     Seventeen years after its intial release, THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK 
is still as thrilling and involving as ever.  Because of the high 
quality of the original product, it doesn't show a hint of dating.  
Neither the first nor the third chapters (or, properly, the "fourth" and 
"sixth") of the STAR WARS saga were able to match the narrative scope of 
EMPIRE, which today remains one of the finest and most rousing science 
fiction tales ever committed to the screen.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Brian Koller
Probably the best of the "Star Wars" series,
"The Empire Strikes Back" was the sequel to the
immensely successful "Star Wars" film from 1977.
The follow-up retains the strengths of the original:
great sets, costumes, cinematography and special
effects.  The story is even tighter and with more
action than "Star Wars", and there is plenty of
quality comic relief.  Upon its release, "The
Empire Strikes Back" became the second highest
grossing film of all time, with only "Star Wars"
ahead of it.
The theme once again is good versus evil.  Evil
is represented by Darth Vader (chillingly voiced by
James Earl Jones), made more imposing by his black cape
and helmet.  Vader represents the Empire, which is
bent on interstellar domination.  Battling Vader is
Jedi master Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), cynical
but passionate Han Solo (Harrison Ford), lovely but
humorless Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), marvelous
clumsy comic relief invention and robot C3PO (voiced by
Anthony Daniels), feisty, bleeping robot R2D2, and
incoherent but endearingly loyal Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).
Skywalker takes time out from battling the Empire
to receive training from wise, aged Yoda (voiced by
Frank Oz), while Solo and company try to hide from
the Empire on a planet run by the unpredictable
Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams).
"The Empire Strikes Back" is a highly entertaining
film.  It is difficult and even pointless to look
for flaws, although one could ask why only a handful
of creatures can effectively use the Force, and
one can wonder if those who can use the Force
constitute an exclusive club that one can still
attend even after death.  You may conclude that Imperial
Stormtroopers are all really bad shots and should
attend remedial marksmanship classes, while their
counterparts manning the controls of Empire ships
share their inability to hit a target.
In the end, the viewing must discard a cynical
approach to the film, and simply enjoy the production
values that come from a massive budget and meticulous
planning by producer George Lucas.  The dual protagonists
of Skywalker and Solo, working independently, with
different goals and methods, and yet acting in concert
against the Empire, creates much more variety and
depth than found in a typical action film.  Minor
elements of the film, such as Vader's method of
promoting Empire officers, and his sinister pleasure
in serving Solo to the Alien bounty hunter, work very
well.  And comic relief is always around the corner,
especially from C3PO, but also from Yoda and Solo.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Christopher Null
     I was excited to see the rerelease of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK, but
I had forgotten about how masterful the film is realized, and I had
especially forgotten what it looked like on the big screen.
     EMPIRE, newly restored by George Lucas and his cronies, makes the
remastered videotape look like a comic book.  While not much new has
been added (what has is pretty obvious, mainly an impressive sound
clean-up and digital animations of the Millennium Falcon's descent into
Cloud City), the story has held up monumentally against the INDEPENDENCE
DAYs and TWISTERs of the world.
     I've always found EMPIRE to be the HAMLET of science fiction,
basically because nothing good happens to the hero in the entire story. 
Luke Skywalker almost dies in the tundra of Hoth (watch for the
still-cheesy claymation(?) Tauntauns), sees the rebels sent on the run
through the galaxy, meets Yoda and fails to complete his Jedi training
on Dagobah, sees his pal Han Solo encased in carbonite, and loses his
hand in a fight with Darth Vader, whom he has learned is his father. 
All that, and C-3PO gets blasted, too!
     It's enough to make you cry, or enough at least to make you really
really want to see RETURN OF THE JEDI when it hits theaters again in
March.  I know I'm hooked!
     EMPIRE was always my favorite of the trilogy, and seeing it on the
big screen is not to be missed.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael Redman
Oddly enough, I had forgotten much about this middle film of the Star
Wars trilogy so seeing it on the big screen again was an unexpected
treat. The darkest and arguably the best of the films suffered from the
second-act syndrome when you had to wait three years for the next movie.
It works much better as a part of the whole.
Everything goes wrong in this one. The rebels are on the run. Han Solo
is captured by the bad guys. Luke fails to complete his Jedi training,
loses a hand and gains a father (You already knew that, right? I'm not
ruining anything for you, right?) =97 none of which are good things. The
ending is just the opposite of the triumph of "Star Wars". The Dark Side
may just come out on top.
There aren't as many changes from the original as the Special Edition of
the first film featured. A few fixes here and there, short new scenes
and a punched-up soundtrack are fairly unobtrusive and make it easier to
watch the film rather than be pulled into the "What's New" game.
Now I'm looking forward to "Return Of The Jedi" even with those
terminally cute fuzzy things.
[This appeared in the 2/27/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more Star Wars reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Darth Vader is pissed at, and in search of, Luke Skywalker, in the hopes of
swaying him over to the dark side. He does so by chasing his friends, Solo,
Leia and Chewie, into his lair, while Luke is off studying the ways of the
Jedi from Yoda, the Jedi Master. The Force continues...
CRITIQUE:
Great follow-up to the original tale of a galaxy far, far away, this film
has plenty of action, one-liners, special-effects, good vs evil rivalries
and a pleasantly dark ending. This is the episode that also features one of
the biggest revelations from the trilogy (mum's the word), and a very good
snow battle scene in the very beginning of the movie. Watching the digitally
re-mastered version of this flick, I did notice several fake-looking special
effects, especially in the explosions, and an obvious blue screen scenario,
but overall, fantastic! The budding romance between Leia and Solo also
worked in this film, while the whole Yoda training sessions with Luke left
me a tad dry, feeling long-winded at times. The latter complaint may come
from having seen this film too many times, so don't pay it much attention.
All in all, a fun times in the world of the stars and droids, packed with
humor, action and romance, a superb score, excellent battle sequences, and
Darth getting as nasty as he wants to be. Now if I could only use the Force
to levitate my TV remote control and nachos right next to me by my
pillow...the Empire would be in serious trouble.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars: (Most facts gathered from
the IMDb)
Unbeknownst to many people, George Lucas only directed the first of the Star
Wars trilogy. This one was directed by Irvin Kershner, the man who went on
to direct such "classics" as NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN and ROBOCOP 2.
Screenwriter Leigh Brackett, a noted science fiction/fantasy author who was
prolific in science-fiction and other pulps in the 1940's, died of cancer
after writing the first version of the script of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK.
Because it was an unfinished script George Lucas revised her draft and
engaged Lawrence Kasdan to finish the screenplay. It was Lawrence's first
film writing credit, as he went on to write and direct the 1981 hit BODY
HEAT with Kathleen Turner. He returned to the Force in 1983's RETURN OF THE
JEDI, which he helped co-write with Lucas.
In his early twenties, George Lucas was in a severe road accident and spent
many months in the hospital. It was during his time in the hospital that he
created the concept of the Force.
On the planet Hoth, General Rieekan says "Send Rogues 10 and 11 to sector
38," a veiled reference to THX 1138, one of Lucas' earlier films.
The character of Boba Fett is never referred to by name, except in the
credits.
In the asteroid scene, one of the asteroids is actually a shoe. The rumor is
that Lucas asked the SFX people to redo the scene so many times that they
got annoyed and one of them threw in their shoe.
Security surrounding this movie was so intense that George Lucas had regular
reports about "leaks" from actors. Lucas was so determined that the ending
be kept secret that he had actor David Prowse (Darth Vader) say "Obi Wan
Kenobi is your father" ("Obi-Wan killed your father" by some reports), and
dubbed it later to be "I am your father".
An extra fell sick, and Jeremy Bulloch (Boba Fett) was called in as a
replacement. He can be seen as the Imperial Guard who pulls Princess Leia
into the elevator after she screams "Luke! It's a trap!". He can also be
seen as the Imperial Guard who is captured by Lando Calrissian's men.
Denis Lawson plays Wedge Antilles. Wedge was not originally scripted to
appear in this film, but intense fan interest prompted Lucas to include him.
This is Carrie Fisher's favorite movie of the trilogy. The scene where Han
Solo (Harrison Ford) was to be carbon frozen was a long and complex scene
which required many takes. Eventually, Leia says "I love you" to Han Solo.
Ford had heard this line so many times that he changed the scripted "I love
you too" to "I know". Lucas didn't want to film the scene again, and thought
it read much better that way, so it remained.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
STAR WARS EPISODE V: EMPIRE STRIKES BACK by John Sylva (DewyNGale@aol.com)   
Rating: A
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), Han Solo (Harrison
Ford), C-3P0 (Anthony Daniels), R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), and Chewbacca (Peter
Mayhew) all return for the sequel to the best movie of all time (as of yet
anyway).  Everyone says sequels are bad, huh?  Not when it's a Star Wars movie!
 Empire Strikes Back is one of the best sequels of all time, almost meeting the
standards the first film set.  In Empire Strikes Back, we are informed that
Darth Vader (Voiced by James Earl Jones, David Prowse in costume) is obsessed
with finding Luke Skywalker.  Currently, Luke is with Leia, Solo, Chewbacca,
C-3P0, and R2-D2 at the ice planet of Hoth, in which they are fighting a battle
against the empire which wants to capture the young Skywalker.  Vader believes
that Luke can be a great help to the dark side, because he is very powerful,
and the "force" is with him.
Luke is summoned during the snow battle by Ben Kenobi (Alec Guinness) that he
is to find a Jedi warrior named "Yoda" in the "Dagobah System."  Of course,
this means nothing to Luke, so he must bring R2-D2 along with him on his
journey to Dagobah.  Once arriving there, he learns that Jedi training is very
difficult.  Yoda, voiced by Frank Oz, is a very wise, old creature that will
guide Luke through his path to become a great Jedi warrior.  Yoda and Ben
Kenobi both believe that Luke must be trained to become a Jedi and to fight for
the good side, before Darth Vader and the evil Emperor try to summon him to the
dark side.
Meanwhile, Han Solo, Princess Leia, C-3P0, and Chewbacca must stop at a city in
the clouds, called Cloud City, where an old friend of Han's lives.  Lando
Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams), Han's friend, becomes a main character as he
tags along for all of the crazy adventures.  From here, Darth Vader starts
getting involved with Luke and the others.  We get into the same sort of theme
as we did in A New Hope, only not quite as good.
The special effects in Empire Strikes Back are up there with the stunning
effects of A New Hope.  We get to see some new creatures and ships this time
around, which were very interesting and original.  The space scenes in Empire
Strikes back were done much more nicely than in the original, giving more of a
variety of set pieces.
Empire Strikes Back seemed much more mature than A New Hope in many ways.  This
is both good and bad.  On the good side, the acting performances, especially
from Carrie Fisher and Mark Hamill, are so much better and more realistic than
their performances in the first film.  Harrison Ford was just as brilliant as
he was in the last one.  Billy Dee Williams, who is appearing in his first Star
Wars movie, made an impact on the film.  In my opinion, he was a wonderful
edition to the saga.  On the bad side, Empire Strikes Back wasn't as much fun
as A New Hope.  It was a lot more serious, and didn't seem to have the same
charm that A New Hope had to it. 
Another way that the Star Wars series matured in Empire Strikes Back is the use
of set design.  Many of the settings in A New Hope seemed a little incomplete,
but in Empire Strikes Back, we are taken through wonderful, realistic worlds
with great settings.  Cloud City and Dagobah in particular stood out visually
from other set pieces.
The Star Wars Special Edition version of Empire Strikes Back includes a much
better film technically, with beefed up special effects, sound, and some new
images here and there.  The special effects seemed a lot more realistic in this
version, and so did certain creatures that roamed among the worlds in Empire
Strikes Back.  The Special Edition is certainly the way to go.
The Bottom Line- Sequels are terrible?  I don't see how you can say that with
this original, terrific sequel.

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1997, PG, 130 minutes [2 hours, 10 minutes]
[fantasy]
Starring: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie
Fisher (Princess Leia), Billy Dee Williams (Lando Calrissian), James Earl
Jones (voice of Darth Vader), written by George Lucas, Leigh Brackett,
Lawrence Kasdan, produced by Gary Kurtz, directed by Irvin Kershner.
"The Empire Strikes Back" will always be considered the best or the worst of
the "Star Wars" trilogy. Unlike the other two films, there is no major
victory here and bad things happen to the heroes. On the other hand, this
film contains the greatest amount of detail, continues the definition of The
Force and the universe, and establishes a vivid mood, all of which can be
just as moving as the swashbuckling adventure.
Truly the most notable improvement for the special edition re-releases of
these films is their images on a big screen and digital surround sound. I
don't remember seeing this movie in theaters back in 1980, so I have
essentially become four years old again as I am able to view this film as it
was meant to be seen. 
I noticed many things happening around the perimeters and in the background
that had either been cut or unfocused before. Also, the sound and sound
effects editing are greatly improved with this edition; you can hear pieces
of debris hitting the ground; people talking in the background; and every
footstep on the metal floors.
Unlike the special edition of "Star Wars," this print does not contain as
many additions. The first major enhancement occurs early in the film as Luke
Skywalker is held captive by the snow monster. In the original version the
monster scene seemed like a bit of a cop-out, but now it actually has some
meaning to it. When Luke uses his lightsaber to defeat the monster, it
doesn't seem so "implied" anymore because of the detail.
One of the best aspects to this film is its mood and atmosphere, especially
that of Yoda's swamp planet Degobah and Lando Calrissian's Cloud City. Cloud
City was already a beautiful, blissful place and although only a few
enhancements are added here, they are profound on a subconscious level. When
the Millennium Falcon arrives, it is shown flying throughout the entire city,
and we can see people and buildings in the background; it no longer looks
like a studio set at all. When characters walk by windows, we can see
activity happening outside, instead of just still pictures. In fact, of the
greatest enhancements only lasts a few seconds - as Lando uses a public
address system to warn the population to flee the city, we see hundreds of
people stop in the streets, in the halls, and in their homes to listen.
Luke's Jedi training is one of the most important elements in all of the
films, and the words of Yoda are so simple and yet so profound at the same
time. I have heard The Force is a Hollywood disguise for New Age philosophy,
but I doubt it. This is a completely different universe and its ability to
define such a complex place through relatively simple methods is nothing
short of genius.
"The Empire Strikes Back" could be seen as the best of the trilogy for its
definition of its reality and great designs. Or it could be seen as the worst
of the series because of its sad tone and choppy storytelling (I always
wondered how Luke knew where to find Han and Leia out of the entire galaxy
and how Darth Vader knew Luke was coming). But it's the fascinating story
that makes this a great film. (2/24/97) (6/11/97) [see "The Empire Strikes
Back" for critique of original film, see also: "Star Wars: The Special
Edition," "Return Of The Jedi: The Special Edition"] 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Mark Hamill; Harrison Ford; Carrie Fisher; Billy Dee Williams &
Anthony Daniels
The Empire Strikes Back is the second film in the original Star Wars
trilogy, and the darkest of the three. And easily the worst. Although worst
is a relative term when it comes to Star Wars films, since I would still
rank The Empire Strikes Back as one of the ten best films of all time.
The film picks up shortly after Star Wars left off. The Death Star has been
destroyed and the Empire is none too happy about it. In particular, Darth
Vader wants to get his hands on Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), and will go to
any lengths to do so. Vader and his men track Skywalker and company to the
Rebel's new base on the ice world of Hoth. The ensuing battle is still one
of the best in film history. The Rebels manage to escape (if they didn't it
would be a real short film). Luke, along with R2-D2 goes off to find Yoda,
the Jedi master, to learn how to become a Jedi like his late father. In the
mean time, Vader's forces pursue Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Princess Leia
(Carrie Fisher), Chewbacca and C-3PO. There is not much point saying more,
since the movie has been out almost two decades everyone knows what happens
from here. Let's just say it involves asteroid fields, swamps and a way cool
cloud city.
Even after this many years, the special effects still look good. Although
now that the Special Edition has been released, you may find it difficult to
find a copy of the original. This is by far the darkest movie of the
three -- it's almost depressing in places. But it still finds time to inject
some humor. No surprises when it comes to acting, directing or story. All
are impressive. Harrison Ford continues his trend from the first movie by
stealing pretty much every scene he is in with his roguish charm. And the
scenes that Ford doesn't steal go to Frank Oz in his performance of Yoda,
and Kenny Baker as R2-D2.
As stated earlier, one of the ten best movies of all time, always worth
checking out again and again. My guess is that you will probably have to
settle for the newer digitally mastered Special Edition though. But on the
up side, the differences are fairly insignificant, and some of the minor
flaws of the original version have been corrected.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK is the first sequel to STAR WARS, but
using a bit of revisionist history, George Lucas renumbered it to be
the fifth in the series and STAR WARS to be the fourth.  A more
intriguing marketing gimmick I have never seen.  For my money, nothing
like STAR WARS could be as good, but THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK is
certainly excellent with some characters stronger and one weaker than
the first, but the script is as impressive and innovative as ever.
Over 15 years after THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK was released, I got to see
it anew with my seven year old son Jeffrey.
     Basically the plot of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK is that the rebels
are continuing to fight the Empire.  Darth Vader (David Prowse acting
with voice by James Earl Jones) leads a mission to destroy the rebels'
base on Hoth where our old rebel friends Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill),
Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), Chewbacca
"Chewy" (Peter Mayhew), C3PO (Anthony Daniels), and R2D2 (Kenny Baker)
are.  In a vision Obi-Wan (Alec Guinness) tells Luke to go to Dagobah
to train under the Jedi master Yoda (Frank Oz).
     The movie is an adventure and a comedy like STAR WARS, but THE
EMPIRE STRIKES BACK's main theme is the duality of The Force and the
struggle between good and evil as manifested in Luke and Darth Vader.
Vader reveals a big secret in the show, which was a shock back then.
Although everyone probably knows it by now, I will not repeat it lest
one of the few people to have never seen the movie may be reading this
review.
     One of the parts of this episode that I was particularly fond of
the way is that the romantic aspect is more fully developed.  There is
a genuine chemistry between Han and Leia that starts off as verbal
sparring, such as when Han sarcastically says, "Fraid I'd leave without
giving you a good-bye kiss?"  Leia turns up her nose and says, "I just
as soon kiss a Wooky!"  Eventually the ripostes stop, and their
relationship evolves into genuine and explicitly proclaimed love.  My
god, they even have three brief mouth-to-mouth kisses!
     Ford was immature, but hilarious in the original.  In this episode
he isn't quite as funny, but his character is much more central to the
plot.  To me this was Ford's movie even if it appeared to be Luke's
story.  Overall, I liked Ford just as much as before, but Fisher
better.  She warmed up to the part more and was given a more
substantial role.
     Whereas George Lucas was STAR WARS, having directed and wrote it,
in this episode he was only listed as the executive producer and was
credited with the story idea, but not the script itself.  The director
this time was Irvin Kershner and the script was by Leigh Brackett and
the great screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan (WYATT EARP, THE BODYGUARD,
GRAND CANYON, THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST, THE BIG CHILL, BODY HEAT, and
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK).
     The script again is imaginative and full of laughs.  Poor Chewy
remains the brunt of the many of the jokes.  When Chewy starts
guffawing, Han tells him, "Laugh it up fuzzball!"
     Yoda provided the figure that was the fountainhead of wisdom much
as Obi-Wan did in the original.  Yoda plays his role like some good old
boy Ph. D. from the south.  He looks and sounds like a yokel who knows
nothing, but actually possesses almost infinite knowledge.  He tells
Luke, who doesn't know he is Yoda, "Looking for someone?  Found someone
I'd say."  When Luke is having trouble moving rocks by using The Force,
Yoda tells him, he can do it.  Luke responds, "Okay, I'll try."  Yoda
gets angry with his pupil and admonishes him, "No, try not.  Do or do
not.  There is no try."
     C3PO still gets some of the best lines.  When the going gets
tough, C3 would just as soon give up.  When in a jam, he suggests to
his companions, "Surrender is a perfectly acceptable alternative in
such situations."  He tells R2D2 what computer veterans know, "R2D2 you
know better than to trust a strange computer."
     The visual special effects (Richard Edlund and Brian Johnson) are
even more imaginative than last time.  As just an example, consider the
Imperial Walkers.  They are essentially 10 story tall, mechanical, four
legged dinosaurs with human operators and laser cannons in the head
portion.  The design makes absolutely no sense, but creates a great
visual.  The way they lumber along is the piece de resistance.
Watching them was actually my favorite part of the film.  My son, I
should point out, does a great Imperial Walker imitation.
     The kids learn creativity when they watch any of the STAR WARS
episodes.  Consider in this one the dilemma of how to stop these huge
Imperial Walkers.  The answer?  Why spin a web like a spider from the
fighters and lasso their legs cowboy style of course!  Actually, there
are a lot of parallels with cowboy shows and the STAR WARS movies.
     I have a single, but significant criticism of this episode.
Although I know they had to do it, I did not like the casting of Mark
Hamill to play Luke Skywalker again.  The other actors had matured and
improved, whereas Hamill seems to have gone downhill.  Missing was his
enthusiastic and fresh outlook.  In its place was someone who looked
constantly haggard as if he were out drinking late every night before
the morning shooting.  He was boyishly handsome in STAR WARS, but in
this episode, he had curiously seemed to have lost all of his good
looks, and his energy level was too low.
     THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK runs 2:04, and I think Paul Hirsch's
editing needed the tighter focus that STAR WARS had.  The film is rated
PG.  Again, the film is beautifully devoid of foul language.  Would
that modern screenwriters would realize that bad language should
generally be saved for R rated films and above.  The story has cartoon
level violence although there is one realistic, but not graphic picture
of a hand being cut off.  There is no sex, nudity, smoking or drug use.
I think it would be fine for most kids over 4.  My son Jeffrey (age 7)
loved it as did his Dad.  Even with my above noted one major
reservation, THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK still gets my top recommendation
and rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Steve Kong
THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK SPECIAL EDITION (1997)
The Empire Strikes Back is the middle child of the Star Wars Trilogy. It is
darkest of the three and, for me, the best of the Trilogy.
The Empire Strikes Back introduces us to two new characters:  Lando
Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams) and the immanently smart Jedi Master Yoda
(voiced by Frank Oz).  My favourite, as all my friends know, is Yoda.  Yoda
serves as the voice of the Trilogy creator George Lucas and he has many
things to say and teach both Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and us.  Many of
the most memorable lines from the Star Wars Trilogy come from The Empire
Strikes Back and from Yoda.  (My favourite is "Try not. Do... or do not.
There is no try.")
I find ESB my favourite of the Trilogy because it has a good mix of action
and adventure.  This along with all the intelligence of Yoda makes for a
movie that I love to watch over and over again.  From the opening Hoth snow
battle to the escape through an asteroid belt and to the final lightsaber
duel, ESB is a joy to watch.
The updates for the special edition include some new views of Cloud City,
extra footage of Darth Vader, and some really pumped up sound.  The sound
is the thing that makes the biggest difference between seeing the original
version and the Special Edition version.  Star Destroyers now not only
cruise from back to front, they rumble from back to front.  The extra
allowances in the fidelity of today's audio equipment make for some pretty
exciting enhancements throughout the film.
I am glad that Lucas decided to leave in most of the original special
effects, instead of running rampant throughout the film and replacing them
with digital effects.  Lucas shows restraint and really only adds little
bits here and there to the special effects of the original.  Which I thank
him for because the original special effects are still quite impressive.
John Williams again scores this film and the score is like all of Williams'
other scores -- brilliant.  The best of the new score is "The Imperial
March" which is Darth Vader's theme, something that brings a feeling of
dread when you hear it.  Irvin Kershner does a great job taking over the
director's reign with The Empire Strikes Back.  He does not lose any of the
pacing set by George Lucas.
My favourite character of the whole Trilogy is Yoda.  Full of good advice
and intelligence, Frank Oz has created a creature that is the best addition
to the whole Trilogy.  And for The Empire Strikes Back Yoda is the best
actor of the film.  Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, and Mark Hamill have
settled in to their respective roles quite nicely.  The ever quibbling
C-3PO and R2-D2 are again in the film for some comic relief, which I loved.
ESB shows, more than Star Wars: A New Hope, how it is not the special
effects that make a movie, but the characters, story, and pure fun of the
adventure that makes the movie.  ESB pulls us into the tight circle of
characters and their adventures.  We follow Luke on his adventure to
Degobah to train with the Jedi Master Yoda while we cheer and bite our
nails as we follow Han, Leia, and C3-PO while they try to escape from the
Empire.  There is much for modern day Hollywood to learn from the Star Wars
Trilogy.
Don't Miss The Empire Strikes Back Special Edition.  I would recommend the
Special Edition of The Empire Strikes Back over the original for the sole
reason that it sounds so much better.  And be sure to see it wide screen --
if it's still running in a second run theatre catch it there, if not, get
the letterbox VHS release or the Special Edition Laserdisc collection.

Author
David Wilcock
A sci-fi/adventure starring Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Peter
Cushing,Harrison Ford, James Earl Jones and Frank Oz
The second in the Star Wars trilogy is quite different to the first.
While the first one was full of action and adventure, it was also very
happy. However, the second one is not. The film itself is very dark,
and has a totally different atmosphere to the first.
The film starts off happy enough. An excellent walker scene sets off
the pace, with the walkers being destroyed (of course) and Luke going
off to visit Yoda, and Hans, Leia, Chewbacca and C3P0 trying to escape
from TIE Fighters in an asteroid. (With the princess giving hints of
her love to Solo) However, it is when Luke arrives at Yodas planet that
the atmosphere changes. The planet is very dark, and misty, filled with
strange noises. Also, after being taught a bit by Yoda about how to use
the force, Luke must confront his worst nightmare, which involves
facing Lord Vader, and chopping off his head. I found these scenes
really depressing compared to the oringal, and just not very
enjoyable.
Things pick up when Hans and Co arrive at Landos shipdock, although
even this gets dark when Han actually loses to the Empire, gets frozen,
and sent to the Empire. To add even more depression, Lukes arm gets
chopped off by the Vader. However, the film is very enjoyable, but I
just don't like the way that while the first was happy, this one gets
annoyingly depressing.
Overall, I rate this not as good as Star Wars, but must a bit better
than Jedi. Depressing bits aside, the film is well shot and made, and
there are some good set pieces (and some clever suprises) And, of
course, its Star Wars, which makes it great anyway.

Author
Dragan Antulov
When people discuss the slow yet unstoppable decline of
quality film-making within commercial Hollywood cinema, they
like to point out sequels as one of the symptoms. Sequels
might also be taken as a symbol of those trends, because
they illustrate the lack of creativity within big budget
cinematography; instead of innovation, resources are poured
into well-established and repetitive formulas. Naturally,
the movie often blamed for inspiring such bad trends, STAR
WARS, had the sequel of its own. But, luckily, it was one of
those precious few exception to the rule - THE EMPIRE
STRIKES BACK was the sequel that rose above the high
standards set by its glorious predecessor.
Unfortunately, the quality and real importance of this movie
is often ignored due to the simple fact that it is often
referred as "the second in STAR WARS trilogy". Unlike the
original, who could be seen by as standalone adventure, THE
EMPIRE STRIKES BACK required built-in audience, and those
audience, as well as the critics had some difficulties in
appraising the movie as a single artistic achievement. Those
who did mostly consider the second movie to be the best in
trilogy. The author of this review shares that sentiment,
same as the heroes of Kevin Smith's CLERKS. I might also add
that I consider one of the best in many splendid science
fiction movies made in that golden age between 1977 and
1982.
The same era was perhaps splendid for the fans of science
fiction cinema, but the content of those films, like MAD
MAX, ALIEN or BLADE RUNNER, was mostly pessimistic. The
feeling of gloom influenced even such light-hearted and
fairy-tale saga like the STAR WARS. Dark atmosphere is
evident from the beginning; the previous chapter ended with
Rebels celebrating the destruction of Death Star, powerful
weapon of evil Empire. Yet, despite their triumph, they are
far from decisive victory in the war. The Empire still has
the upper hand, and that is clearly demonstrated when
Imperial forces destroy the main Rebel base on the ice
planet Hoth. In order to save itself from total
annihilation, main Rebel force is dispersed all over Galaxy.
Heroes from the previous film are separated into two groups;
first group is Rebel commander Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill)
who, together with his faithful robot R2D2 (Kenny Baker)
flies to swap planet Dagobah. His goal is to fulfil his
personal vision and find Yoda (voice by Frank Oz), 900 years
old Jedi master, that would complete his training in the
ways of mystic Force. Another group of our heroes - rogue
pilot Han Solo (Harrison Ford), his co-pilot Chewbacca
(Peter Mayhew), Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) and robot C3PO
(Anthony Daniels) - are on the spaceship Millennium Falcon,
being mercilessly pursued by Imperial fleet, whose leader,
evil lord and former Jedi knight Darth Vader (David Prowse,
voice by James Earl Jones), wants to capture Luke Skywalker.
The sequel to the megapopular STAR WARS defied many
unofficial Hollywood rules about sequels. Instead of simply
enhancing well-established, attractive and obviously
successful elements of the previous film, this sequel used
it a foundation for its own, original narrative structure.
Instead of relying on bigger special effects, bigger
explosions or more spectacular sights and sounds, like many
sequel makers do these days, creators of THE EMPIRE STRIKES
BACK actually worked very hard to remedy those few flaws the
original had. Most notable of all was in cardboard
characterisation. That task was given to the talented
creative team of Leigh Brackett, respected Fantasy/SF
author, and Lawrence Kasdan, whose directorial star would
shine in the next decade. They managed to develop their
characters, breath some life and new dimension in their
appearance, and also forced them to make some difficult
moral dilemmas. The clear boundary between Good and Evil was
slightly blurred in this movie, when even the some members
of Imperial military were given opportunity to express their
human emotions. But, most of all, difference between STAR
WARS and THE EMPIRE is in plot and sinister overtones; the
heroes of the movie aren't superhumans immune from misery
anymore. They get maimed, hurt, tortured, both physically
and emotionally, and this time the viewers, even those who
consider the whole trilogy to be escapist fantasy, are
really compelled to care what would happen to them in the
end. The aliens, who used to be one of the more entertaining
attractions of the previous movie, are mostly left out of
the picture; there aren't nice fuzzy creatures here - apart
from Yoda, all the aliens are hostile or, either, prosaic
domesticated animals that "smell bad". That was another
element of gritty realism, that distinguishes this film from
the rest of trilogy. The movie is also full of surprise
twists, and the final one is probably the best known in the
entire history of cinema.
Even the acting, often regarded as the weakest segment in
whole STAR WARS saga, is here at its prime. Mark Hamill is
very convincing as the suffering hero, probably because bad
things that happen to his characters corresponded with some
bad things that happened to him in real life. Carrie Fisher
was also brilliant, especially in her scenes that witness
the unresolved sexual tension between Princess Leia and Han
Solo. Even Billy Dee Williams is good in his limited role of
Lando Karlisian, one of the rare new characters of the saga.
However, the most impressive character addition is Yoda,
small and frail, yet spiritually strong figure. The magic of
the Muppet creators, suggestive voice of Frank Oz, combined
with Yoda's sharp lines (one of them would become the
nemesis for Beverly Hills plastic surgeons)  left the strong
imprint on many generations of STAR WARS fans.
Apart from the a screenplay and well-defined characters, THE
EMPIRE STRIKES BACK also benefited from the superb direction
by Irvin Kershner, whose career reached its peak here. The
look of the film corresponds with the changes of the
atmosphere; the blue colour dominates Peter Suschitzky's
photography throughout the whole picture. Special effects
are improved over STAR WARS, and still impressive after
eighteen years (one of the proofs is 1997 special edition,
that, unlike other two parts of STAR WARS trilogy, leaves
most of them untouched and brings only small improvements).
Even the musical score by John Williams, with his immortal
"Imperial March" theme, sounds like the best in the trilogy,
with its dark overtones brilliantly corresponding with the
general feel of the film.
Grim atmosphere of the movie, however, can't prevent the
many generations of viewers to experience the very same
"sense of wonder" that overwhelmed them in the previous
picture. THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK is the original, very
special segment of STAR WARS saga, but also the element of
STAR WARS saga nevertheless. But even those who somehow
managed to escape the magic charms of George Lucas' universe
and failed to become hard core fans, could enjoy in the
magnificent quality of this masterpiece.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams;
voices of Frank Oz, James Earl Jones and Anthony Daniels.
Screenplay:  Leigh Brackett and Lawrence Kasdan.
Producer:  Gary Kurtz.
Director:  Irvin Kirshner.
MPAA Rating:  PG (violence)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     If pressed, I think most aficionados of the STAR WARS trilogy would
agree that THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK is the best of the three -- the best
written, the best acted and the most skillfully constructed.  However, it
is not nearly as beloved as the original STAR WARS, and though the newly
released THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK: SPECIAL EDITION is certain to be a
success, it is unlikely to come close to inspiring the mania the return of
STAR WARS did on January 31st.  So why will the same person who tells you
to your face that EMPIRE is the better film only see it once this time
around after seeing STAR WARS two or three times?  The answers to that
question -- and there are several -- are in some ways specific to this
film.  In other ways, they explain a lot about what people go to the
movies to see, what they go to see _again_, and why.
     The story in the second installment begins an unspecified number of
months after STAR WARS ends, with an Imperial attack on the new rebel base
on the ice world of Hoth, then splits into two largely parallel story
lines.  In one, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) parts with the rebels to
study with a gnome-like Jedi master named Yoda (performed by Frank Oz) on
a swampy planet in the distant Dagobah system; the other follows Han Solo
(Harrison Ford), Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew)
and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) as they attempt to elude the Imperial ships
pursuing them.  The climax finds Luke dueling Darth Vader, Han facing
capture by bounty hunters, and the entire cast grappling with unresolved
issues as the credits roll.
     What makes EMPIRE so extraordinary in retrospect is how many chances
George Lucas and his new crew -- director Irvin Kirshner and screenwriters
Lawrence Kasdan and Leigh Brackett -- took when they had everything to
lose by doing so.  No image in STAR WARS is as dark and creepy as Luke's
dream vision of his own face behind Vader's mask, and Obi-Wan's vague
homilies about the Force in the original become Yoda's extended lessons in
an almost Zen philosophy in EMPIRE.  Following a film which was the very
definition of a crowd-pleaser, EMPIRE concluded with the good guys in
disarray, one of them captured and another one crippled (emotionally, if
not ultimately physically).  Here was a blockbuster which had the audacity
to mess with the most successful film formula anyone had yet discovered, a
feature film which ended the way feature films just weren't supposed to
end:  with a cliff-hanger worthy of the old radio serials.
     Those twists made THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK exciting and challenging in
a way STAR WARS wasn't, but they also made it a less satisfying
movie-going experience.  STAR WARS ended with a victory for the heroes, a
fanfare and a rousing ovation, allowing the audience to leave both
entertained and with a basic sense of resolution.  EMPIRE was not so
generous.  It took the simple good-vs.-evil universe of STAR WARS and
introduced uncertainty; suddenly, our hero Luke was shown to have the
capacity for becoming a villain, and evil was allowed to win victories
over good, if only temporary ones.  The audience for a story set in that
kind of world is smaller than the audience for a story set in STAR WARS'
morally bi-polar universe, and it's hard to imagine THE EMPIRE STRIKES
BACK would have been a success if it had been the first film to feature
these same characters instead of STAR WARS.  The pure throw-back adventure
of STAR WARS was undemanding, but you were almost certain to leave the
theater smiling, and ready to hop back on the ride again for yet another
chance to come out smiling.  Meanwhile, the very complexity which made THE
EMPIRE STRIKES BACK a richer film also made it a film less likely to
inspire multiple visits to the theater.  After all, how many times did
viewers want to be reminded that it was going to be another three years
before they found out if Darth Vader was really...you know?  
     Fortunately, the SPECIAL EDITION will inspire those who know STAR
WARS line for line to take a closer look at THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK, and
it's not just what was there in 1980 which may impress them.  There are
fewer new touches than there were in the STAR WARS: SPECIAL EDITION, and
those which are there -- a longer, more tense scene in which Luke escapes
a Wampa on Hoth; enhanced footage of the arrival on Cloud City -- are both
less obtrusive and more useful.  It is the sound, however, which is most
spectacular in this new incarnation, an awesome demonstration of the kind
of experience even a "home theater" can never possibly duplicate.  THE
EMPIRE STRIKES BACK deserves its second theatrical life every bit as much
as STAR WARS, if not more, yet there were notably fewer people applauding
at the end of EMPIRE.  I'm not convinced that means the audience enjoyed
it less; I do think it means they will see it less.  The amazing thing is
that, in a cinematic economy where an unhappy ending is the kiss of death,
George Lucas dared to lure the STAR WARS audience into a darker world at
all.
