Title
Review for Harriet the Spy (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Bronwen Hughes Cast Michelle Trachtenberg Vanessa Lee
Gregory Smith (I) Rosie O'Donnell J. Smith-Cameron Robert Joy (I) Eartha
Kitt Charlotte Sullivan Marion Hawthorne Teisha Kim Written by Louise
Fitzhugh (book) Douglas Petrie (I) Theresa Rebeck
There's something wonderful about childhood which allows us to believe
we are capable of anything. The future shines brightly ahead like the
rising sun in the distant horizon. Life's bitter lessons haven't taught
us to believe otherwise, as we stand invincible on the promising steps
of hopes and dreams. When I was young I believed that I could fly to the
moon and back in my space craft composed of broken down radio and hi-fi
set; that it was indeed the Millenium Falcon, and I was Han Solo
journeying to rescue Princess Leia. I won't tell you what I used for a
substitute light sabre, but that's my private childhood fantasy. For
Harriet M. Welsch it was to become the world's greatest spy. Whatever
she saw, whatever she heard, she wrote down in her very 'private'
notebook. For she aspired to be a great writer, and one has to start
somewhere in life, why not earlier.
So our tale of childhood dreams begins, with a girl sheltered beneath
the loving wings of her nanny Ms Golly (Rosie O'Donnell). Harriet has
been neglectfully ignored by her busy parents, leaving her to seek
thrilling sessions of spying and writing. Wherever she goes she carries
her book, and within it writes the most painful truths about her dearest
friends Sport and Janie, her greatest enemy Marion the class president,
and much, much more. Through a shift of unfortunate circumstance Ms
Golly is called to leave, forcing the young Harriet to spread her tender
wings. With much anticipation and under preparation, the spy is faced
with her first taste of cruelty that lost innocence brings. When Marion
exposes her most private thoughts from that most secret book, Harriet
becomes the object of much despise and ridicule. The once great spy is
flung into lonely solitude of careless abandon.
So for the first time in her young life, Harriet of the sixth grade
faces self doubt and wavering uncertainty. The child who once showed
unwavering confidence, now lies marred and wounded, confused and
vulnerable. With Ms Golly gone, her parents a distant relation, and
excommunicated by her closest friends, Harriet stands alone. Arising
from this adversity, angry and vengeful at first, the spy who would be,
learns to resolve her differences peacefully - to forgive those who have
hurt her most, her parents and best friends. Thus, Harriet the Spy has
learnt her first and most painful lesson in life, what it must be like
to be human.

Author
L. O'Connor
        I had high expectations of director Bronwen Hughes,
having read Louise Fitzhugh's quirky, insightful children's book
no fewer than twenty-six times since the age of eight.  The book,
published in 1964, bears these irresistible words:  "The zany
adventures of a child spy."  Director Hughes, producer Marykay
Powell, and the screen writers do not disappoint:  the film is
refreshingly imaginative and sensitive, from casting to sound-
track to characterisation.  Just as author Fitzhugh credits her
young readers with intelligence, Hughes presents us with a fully
believable Harriet.  Eleven-year-old Michelle Trachtenberg is an
intense, bright-eyed, intelligent young actor with a wide experssive
range and an arresting credibility.
Harriet is in Grade 5 or 6 and lives in New York City, the
only child of uninvolved parents, whose true caregiver is her nanny,
Golly (Rosie O'Donnell).  Golly's function is more that of a mentor,
and behind her stern exterior we know immediately that she takes
Harriet's individuality and ambition to become a writer seriously.
Nothing Harriet sees goes unnoticed -- or unrecorded in her
spy notebook, marked "PRIVATE" -- from thoughtful musings on the
characters and antics of her New York neighbourhood (the movie was
filmed in Toronto, quite convincingly) to scathingly accurate 
commentaries on her classmates, friends, family, neighbours and
teachers.  The singular child spy has two remarkable friends:
Sport (Gregory Smith), who at age eleven is the capable caretaker of
his "starving artist" writer father, and Janie (Vanessa Lee
Chester), a young Marie Curie.  But the most influential person
in Harriet's life -- and Harriet knows it -- is certainly Golly,
who sees to it that Harriet is given ample opportunity to explore,
observe, and record.  Golly is Harriet's source of wisdom and
encouragement, and delivers pithy one-liners:  "A good spy never
gets caught."  "You're an individual, and that makes people
nervous."  When Harriet's parents fire Golly, Harriet is on her
own, and pursues her "spy route" with redoubled energy.
Harriet's spy route continues to our delight (with an
unforgettable cameo appearance by Eartha Kitt) until, one day,
Harriet's secret notebook is found by the hateful Marion
Hawthorne, and each classmate finds himself or herself skewered
in writing by Harriet's "dossiers", even Sport and Janie, who
too turn against Harriet in an affecting scene.  Even the quality
of light in the film changes as Harriet's life is turned upside
down.  Harriet, always an outsider, now finds herself completely
shunned.  She turns inward again;  What would Golly say?
Harriet's classmates form a "Spy Catchers' Club" to
torment Harriet and follow her on her spy route, and Harriet 
finally retaliates by targeting each classmate and exposing or
using a conceit or a vulnerability:  she knows all, because she 
has observed them all.  Hostilities escalate -- director Hughes
"tells it like it is" in the often-ruthless world of children --
and Harriet's frantic parents finally take her to a psychologist
(whom Harriet is forced to admire because he, too, keeps copious
notes!), and her notebook is taken away.
Just as Harriet declares "I have nothing left to lose,"
Golly reappears for a visit and solemnly tells Harriet what she
must do:  apologise, and lie!  Harriet's strong character is
revealed as she sincerely attempts to tell her friends she is sorry.
"Good friends", in Golly's words, "are one of life's blessings.
Don't give them up without a fight."  
Sport and Janie soon lose interest in the petty hierarchies
of the Spy Catchers' Club, and events finally turn around when
class elections are held for the position of class newspaper
editor, for which Harriet, despite the still-hostile environment,
is nominated.  Not only does Harriet redeem herself by publicly
retracting what she had written privately (a white lie, graciously
handled), but she embarks on a writing career, her long-held
ambition.  Harriet is able to conclude:  "The truth is important,
and so are your friends... if you can have both, it's a good life."
The film has captured the atmosphere and the wisdom of the
book, of equal charm for child and adult viewers.  It is a delight to
see a film about individuality and integrity which never misses
a beat in telling, with humour and depth, a story of an exceptional
girl.  The casting is faithful to the spirit of the book, and the
soundtrack is energetic and upbeat. 
I would recommend "Harriet the Spy" to viewers of all ages.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Nickelodeon's first foray into feature filmmaking is an overlong
kiddie drama that stars Michelle Trachtenberg as a precocious sixth-
grader and self-proclaimed spy.  Her afternoons are spent sneaking
around and spying on people.  She writes down everything she sees in a
private notebook, which later falls into the hands of her classmates
with predictably disastrous results.  The story, adapted from the
classic children's book by Louise Fitzhugh, plays like a pre-teen
version of WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE.  They act cruel, she acts crueler,
and then everyone goes off to apologize and live happily ever after.
Unlike Dawn Weiner, the central character from DOLLHOUSE, Harriet also
gets to exact revenge on her classmates.  However, this being a movie
intended for kids, she must be taught a lesson and doesn't get to savor
the pleasures of being mean.  Too bad she can't get back at her busy
parents, who have long-since delegated the responsibility of raising her
to a live-in nanny.  Now *that* could be considered cruel.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Kevin Maguire
Director: Bronwen Hughes
Producers: Tons Of People From Nickelodeon
Starring: Michelle Trachtenburg, Rosie O'Donnell.
        In the new movie HARRIET THE SPY, Michelle Trachtenburg plays an 
intrepid young girl set on spying people and things. However, as any 
movie must have it, Trachtenburg gets stuck several times doing things 
and spying on things that aren't really appropriate for her to be seeing. 
She has every piece of spy gear possible, glasses, rope, a huge 
treehouse. What more could go wrong?
        The movie she's in. HARRIET THE SPY, although sometimes strangely 
validating, and in one scene, touching, is a comedy that has been cranked 
out of a machine. Although the idea is based on a good book, it's not 
supposed to be funny. The idea is that Harriet can go around spying on 
people, and we should be able to really sense her intensity level. But 
comedy once again woes us. There are stupid fights, and flatulence 
attacks.
        Indeed, one of the biggest problems in HARRIET THE SPY is within 
its producers. Workers for Nickelodeon, these producers have made a half 
funny, half touching, and no thrilling movie that reminds me of sugar in 
a Pixy-Stik. It's just sugar, there's no real flavor in the different 
colors. Rosie O'Donnell, hot off her Merv Griffith approved TV program, 
THE ROSIE O'DONNELL SHOW, surprisingly keeps going on a roll. Her 
performance is spunky, and charged with wit that I don't see in a Woody 
Allen film. 
        To bad the writing shrinks her to another one of the movie's 
concocted characters. In HARRIET THE SPY, there's no way to separate 
what's corny, and what's not. Ideally, the movie would be an IT TAKES TWO 
takeoff. It does one step better than that movie, but this one's still 
way off base.
