Title
Review for Midnight (1934)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David M. Arnold
I like to prowl through the used videos bin at our local 
second-hand bookstore to see if I can locate anything 
interesting.  One film that turned up was "Call It Murder", 
starring Humphrey Bogart.  I bought the video in order 
to have an example of an early Bogart role for my 
collection.
"Call It Murder" was originally titled "Midnight" and 
was produced by Universal in 1934.  This was before 
Bogart's breakthrough performances in "The Petrified
Forest" (1936), "High Sierra" and "The Maltese Falcon" 
(both 1941) that made him a star.  During the early 
1930's, Bogart often played crooks who were either hanged, 
shot, or fried by the end of the film.  His role in 
"Call It Murder" was no exception.
The film looks like a programmer, those low-budget 
pictures made to fill the bottom half of a double 
feature.  I found it to be an enjoyable film, and in 
ways a precursor to the Film Noir genre that "Maltese 
Falcon" helped initiate:  It posesses the Film Noir 
elements of cynicism and irony, and its subject is 
the seamier side of life.
The video was transferred from a print distributed by 
Guaranteed Pictures. It would not suprise me to learn 
that Universal sold the film "Midnight" to Guaranteed,
who, after Bogart became a hot item, retitled it, moved 
Bogart's name to top billing, and re-distributed it.  I 
would also not be suprised to learn that the film is now 
in the Public Domain, and thus made its way to video, 
courtesy of those second-tier video plants who duplicate 
tapes in "High Quality EP Mode".
"Call It Murder" tells the story of the somewhat 
dysfunctional Wheldon family.  The  family members are 
Edward Wheldon (O.P. Heggie), his wife (Margaret Wycherly),
and three grown children all still living at home.  One 
daughter, Ada (Katherine Wilson) is married to sleazy, 
ne'er-do-well, unemployed sponger Joe Biggers (Lynne 
Overman), and the couple live at home with her parents.  
The younger daughter, Stella (Sidney Fox) is a free 
spirit who is in love with gangster Garboni (Bogart).  
And, there is playboy son Arthur (Richard Whorf).
Edward Wheldon serves as jury foreman in a murder case 
in which Ethel Saxon (Helen Flint) has been accused 
of killing her cheating husband.  The crime may or 
may not have been an accident, but Wheldon is 
instrumental in the jury's decision to convict and 
condemn Ethel.  District Attorney Plunkett (Moffat 
Johnston), who has political aspirations, regards 
Ethel's conviction as an important scalp to hang at 
his belt, and Ethel goes to the electric chair.
Wheldon would like to get the whole incident out of 
his mind, but as Ethel's execution date approaches the 
family is pestered by the Press, who want to make Ethel 
into some sort of martyr.  Slimey son-in-law Joe sells 
the family out to a newspaper reporter (Henry Hull) 
who is doing a story on how the jury foreman reacts 
to the news of the execution of his sentence.  
Then, as Ethel is being strapped into the Chair, 
daughter Stella bursts in with the news that she has 
just shot and killed her cheating lover, Garboni.  
Ambrose Bierce said there are four categories of 
homicide:  The felonious, the excusable, the 
justifiable, and the praiseworthy.  Where do Ethel's 
and Stella's crimes fit in this spectrum? Wheldon's 
belief in Due Process of Law is tested when the 
accused is close to his heart.  
Despite its limited scope, "Call It Murder" manages 
to be interesting on a couple of levels:  First, most 
of the action takes place in the claustrophobic Wheldon
home, which is a typical, middle-class suburban home 
of the early 1900's.  Director Chester Erskine captures 
the feeling of this time and place.  He also employs 
some clever camera work:  There's a shot through the hall 
mirror, and an interesting match cut: A shot of Ethel 
pacing in her cell, shot through the cell bars; cut 
to a shot of Edward Wheldon pacing in his home, shot 
through the stair rail.
Second, the film makes sophisticated and cynical comments 
about the American Judicial system, about trial by 
jury, about how one's opinions can be swayed depending
on just whose ox is being gored, about the role of the 
media, about the strange relationship between the 
Judiciary and Politics, about relationships between
parents and children, and about the institution of 
Capital Punishment.  These issues are as relevant today 
as they were 64 years ago.
The cast turn in casual performances as if no one 
believed this film was going to make or break a career.  
Bogart's Garboni seems stiff and forced, he would need a 
few more films before finding his voice.  Lynne Overman 
makes the sleazoid Joe thoroughly despicable.  Overall, 
the acting would be described as "workmanlike".
Roger Ebert claims in a recent review that America was 
more sophisticated in the 1930's, and films from that 
era reflect this sophistication.  After viewing this modest
little film from 1934, I believe it.  "Call It Murder" 
is by no means a blockbuster, but it is a tidy little 
drama with more substance than initially meets the eye.
To reply via EMail, replace "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the
above address.
