Title
Review for Waking Ned Devine (1998)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
Kevin Patterson
WAKING NED DEVINE is the kind of film that you mostly enjoy while you're
watching it, but there's nothing to leave much of an impression on the
audience. If the projector had broken in the middle of this film, I would
not have been particularly upset, and I don't know that I'd have come back
for another showing to see the rest of it. It has a lot of little amusing
moments, very little plot or character development, and absolutely no
suspense or tension.
The premise: One morning in the small Irish village of Tullymore, Jackie
O'Shea (Ian Bannen) tells his friend Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly) that
the newspaper reported that someone in their town has won the national
lottery. There are only 53 people living in the village, so it doesn't take
them too long to discover that the winner is one Ned Devine, who
unfortunately died from the shock of discovering that he'd won. The two of
them hatch a scheme to have Michael impersonate Ned Devine so that they can
claim the money, and realize that they need to enlist the other villagers'
help (and therefore share the money with them) in order to fool an
investigator from the lottery commission. "And?" you may be asking.
Well...that's about it, actually.
Writer/director Kirk Jones clearly sees the plot as nothing more than a
reason to get the eccentric villagers interacting with each other. Now,
normally I'm a sucker for movies that just let their characters talk and
behave without insisting on a new plot twist every three minutes. But I
guess I never really got the feeling that Jones really cared about his
characters or even believed in them as real people: they're just there to
spout mildly amusing lines. That's not to say that WAKING NED DEVINE isn't,
in fact, amusing, which is good, because otherwise the characters would
just seem kind of materialistic and shallow. Among the best comic scenes
are the villagers' initial sly attempts to figure out who had the winning
ticket, Jackie pretending he's won just to get his wife Annie (Fionnula
Flanagan) to bring him his dinner, and Michael on a desperate cross-country
naked motorcycle ride.
Unfortunately, Jones misses the best opportunities to create some sort of
narrative hook (the lottery inspector catches them at Ned Devine's funeral,
for example, but it's explained away in maybe two or three lines of
dialogue). As a result, he tries to contrive other forms of tension, none
of which are particularly successful. For example, a pig farmer named Finn
(James Nesbitt) wants to marry Maggie (Susan Lynch), and she says she will
if he agrees to give up pig farming. (True love right there, folks.) A
crotchety old woman threatens to blow the whistle on them, but I never
believed for a second that WAKING NED DEVINE would end with the entire
village going to jail, and Jones gives her a particularly nasty,
mean-spirited sendoff that seems way out of place in an otherwise
light-hearted film.
A lot of movies suffer from trying to do too much, but WAKING NED DEVINE
suffers from trying to do too little. Another reviewer called the film
"effortless": he meant it as praise for the film's light tone, but I think
it's true in a less positive way as well. Jones doesn't seem to have put
much effort into constructing this story, and as a result his characters
don't have to put much effort into making their way through it. The result
is occasionally charming, but ultimately forgettable.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: December 11, 1998
Starring: Ian Bannen, David Kelly, Fionnula Flanagan, Susan Lynch, James
Nesbitt, James Ryland, Eileen Dromey, Jimmy Keogh
Directed by: Kirk Jones
Distributed by: Fox Searchlight Pictures / 20th Century Fox Films Corp.
MPAA Rating: PG (nudity, language, thematic elements)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/waking.htm
Earlier this year, the movie HOLY MAN opened to a meager box office
receipt and to indifference from audiences and critics. A real charmer
of a movie, it's possible that the subject matter was too hip or trendy
to attract any real audience. Now, at the end of 1998, comes WAKING NED
DEVINE, a comedy which inspires the same vein of easygoing laughter.
There's no substantial difference between the two other than a more
refined atmosphere -- they strike all the same chords -- but still, NED
DEVINE is a movie worth seeing. 
The plot is interesting and robust: the latest lottery winner is Ned
Devine (Jimmy Keogh), of Tullymore, Ireland. Ned's prize is over six
million pounds, but the shock of winning killed the poor old man, and
the check remains unclaimed. Enter Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) and
Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly), the only two residents who are aware
the winner is in their village. The two men eventually find the ticket,
and decide that if Michael can convince the lotto authorities that he's
actually Ned, the entire town can reap the benefits; their only
adversary is an ancient old woman (Eileen Dromey) who sees more profit
in reporting the fraud. 
Ian Bannen and David Kelly truly shine as Jackie and Michael. Jackie,
stocky and large, is the brains behind the operation; Michael, scrawny
and short, is the method man. The two contrast each other delightfully,
and at the same time remain sympathetic to the audience. Every viewer is
sure to like both of them. 
There are other minor subplots included as well, such as an unlikely
romance between a local girl and the town pig farmer. This appears quite
inconsequential until the end, and even with a startling revelation it's
a tad bit unnecessary. Overall, WAKING NED DEVINE has a predictable
outcome, and plot twists are never really taken seriously. The ending, a
very hilarious and very ironic twist of fate, somehow fits with the
twisted sense of humor the movie exhibits throughout. The Kirk Jones
script is indeed off-the-cuff. 
In a way, WAKING NED DEVINE is exactly like the class of people it
presents: warm, friendly, outgoing, and jovial. It's the perfect kind of
comedy, a real gem of a tale that sets up a trivial plot outline by
which to introduce a sympathetic cast of characters and a string of
jokes. There's nothing remotely serious or grounded for more than a
moment or two, because the spirit of NED DEVINE is a lighthearted one.
Indeed, it's one of the year's best feel-good movies -- 91 minutes of
unrestrained joy that no one should miss. 

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "WAKING NED DEVINE" (Fox Searchlight Pictures)
Every now and then, a movie reviewer discovers an absolute gem
- and this is a sparkler! In the remote Irish village of Tulaigh Morh
(pronounced Tullymore), population 52, someone holds a winning lottery
ticket worth almost seven million pounds (more than $11 million) - but
who can it be? That's the question that obsesses Jackie O'Shea (Ian
Bannon), his wife Annie (Fionnula Flanagan) and their friend, Michael
O'Sullivan (David Kelly). Determined to discover and befriend the
lucky winner in order to share some of the prize money, they entice
and ingratiate themselves to their 49 neighbors, including a
malodorous pig farmer (James Nesbitt), his poetic lady love (Susan
Lynch), and nasty Lizzy Quinn (Eileen Dromey).  When they think
they've canvassed everyone, they discover one man is missing: Ned
Devine (Jimmy Keogh). And a search quickly determines he, indeed, is
the winner - only, the sweet, old geezer has dropped dead from the
shock of his good fortune. "They say money changes a man and there's
no greater change than moving a man from life to death," they
muse. So, what's a sod to do? Jackie and Michael slyly decide on a wee
tad of fraud and a crazed bit of blarney, determining that one of them
should impersonate Ned Devine and claim the winnings, which will then
be equally divided among the villagers if everyone will go along with
the crazy charade. Writer/director Kirk Jones cleverly creates quirky,
charming, genuinely touching characters who embark on a wonderfully
exuberant adventure. And some scenes - like the men's naked bicycle
ride and re-arranging the corpse's facial expression - are truly
laugh-out-loud funny. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Waking
Ned Devine" is a whimsical, mischievous 8. Enjoy the fun and you'll
feel like a winner!

Author
Homer Yen
I suppose that when my best friend and I grow to be really old, I hope
that our relationship will mimic that of Jackie's (Ian Bannen) and
Michael's (David Kelly), two affable townspeople featured in a film
called `Waking Ned Devine.'  After many years on God's good green
Earth, these elderly friends still possess a healthy appetite for fun
and an undeniable boyish charm combined with patriarchal wisdom.  But
all that wisdom is about to fly out the window when something dramatic
happens to their small rural Irish hamlet of Tullymore with a
population of 52 people.  You see, there was only one winner in the
latest lottery drawing, and one lucky block in this town holds the
winning ticket.  Jackie and Michael want very much to share in a piece
of this prize and begin a cunning little search to find out who the
winner is.  Perhaps by showering a little generosity on them first,
the winner will reward them in kind.   And after an exhausting search,
they finally figure out on who they should focus their attention. 
Unfortunately, when they find the winner (Ned Devine), they see that
he has just passed away.  And if Ned himself doesn't claim the ticket,
the prize will not be disbursed.
Now Jackie and Michael spring into action (or at least move as fast as
two 70 year-olds can possibly move).  They devise a play where Michael
will assume the identity of Ned and claim the prize.  But there are
many obstacles that they have to overcome in order to pull it off. 
Most formidably, they'll have to convince the lottery officials to
hand over the check.  To do this, they'll need to dispose of the body;
figure out a way to memorize Ned's personal information (date of
birth, identification number, etc..), which is quite difficult for a
man whose memory is ailing; and get the townsfolk to buy in on the plan.
Although this kind of premise could have easily lent itself to being
some kind of silly slasher flick, what we actually get is a
light-hearted story about two amiable fellows who try to do what they
can to get the money.  It's a buddy movie where life-long friends,
with their limited abilities, do whatever they can to achieve a dream.
 But more than that, it's a quirky village comedy complete with it's
assortment of eccentrics and crazies.  Among Tullymore's population
resides Lizzy Quinn, who is a witchy hag that likes to spread gloom; a
substitute priest that tries to spread theology to a 9-year old boy
who may be smarter than the priest can handle; and a handsome pig
farmer who can't get the girl because of the way he smells.  These are
just some of the 52 people living in Tullymore whose lives will make
you grin from beginning to end.  


Author
Walter Frith
The town of Tullymore, Ireland, population 52, yes, fifty two, has among
it, a winner in the latest lottery draw and everyone in the town is
trying to figure out who it is.  They spoil each other with kindness,
kissing up to the supposed winner but they are all wrong.  The winner of
a 6.8 million pound lottery is Ned Devine.  He fails to show up one
night for a party and his friend Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) goes to see
him.  He finds Ned deceased with a pleasant look on his face and a
lottery ticket in his hand.  It turns out to be the winner and Ned
apparently keeled over from a heart attack at the mind numbing thought
of taking in a fortune.
Jackie and his friend Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly), plot to have one
of them impersonate Ned for a lottery official who will visit and
investigate the claim.  Using Ned's birth certificate, social insurance
number and other forms of identification claimed for himself, Michael
ends up impersonating Ned and all hopes are that he can get away with
it.  The town is eventually sucked into the fraudulent claim and they
will all share in the winnings equally.  A lone hold out is a cranky,
miserable old lady, faking disability who wants a giant share or she
will turn the folks in and collect ten percent of the lottery jackpot
which is the rule if you snitch on those defrauding the system.
'Waking Ned Devine' has a major flaw that I think discredits
wrtier/director Kirk Jones to a certain degree.  In today's age of
electronic media (and the old fashioned kind as well), you simply cannot
commit lottery fraud of a large nature because you will be caught.  A
huge jackpot, and the persons who claim it, like the ones in this film,
are almost certain to be investigated by the media, and they will even
find their way into a small Irish town like the one depicted in this
film.  If you are willing to overlook this rather large flaws, like I
am, the film is a joyride of old fashioned movie making resurrected for
today.
Made with a tempo that resembles good natured poetry, 'Waking Ned
Devine' is a grand scheme of investigating everyone's desire to be rich,
no matter who they are.  Certainly an original concept in many regards,
there is even a sub plot involving two men's love for the same woman and
one of them being the father of her little boy.  Despite the flaws
mentioned earlier, Kirk Jones has created a sweet story and executed it
in a directorial fashion that reaches into the heart of its very subject
and it runs just a little more that 90 minutes and doesn't weigh the
audience down and the best part is that from start to finish, it's
unpredictable and aims to please.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WAKING NED DEVINE  (director: Kirk Jones (III); cast: Ian Bannen (Jackie
O'Shea), David Kelly (I) (Michael O'Sullivan), Fionnula  Flanagan (Annie
O'Shea), Susan Lynch ( Maggie), James Nesbitt (Pig Finn), Maura O'Malley
(Mrs. Kennedy), James Ryland (Dennis Fitzgerald), Robert Hickey
(Maurice), Jimmy Keogh (Ned Devine), Paddy Ward (Brendy), Eileen Dromey
(Lizzy Quinn), Dermot Kerrigan (Father Patrick), Kitty Fitzgerald
(Kitty), Brendan F. Dempsey (Lotto Official),  1998-Ireland)
Another feel good type foreign movie, ala THE FULL MONTY, that seems to
please the audience, drawing in enough crowds to turn a nifty profit for
its independent producers, and is good enough so that the critics are
very generous in their praises, playing down the film's bland politics.
A quaint Irish village, replete with ordinary type of folks as
eccentrics, a clever little plot with a few surprises thrown in for down
the road, a bunch of likable locals, colorful scenery, wonderful Irish
pipes heard in the background, and it all adds up to a gentle and
charming little film, with no deep messages or symbolism attached to it.
Though the name Devine is pretty close to divine, the subject of
religion is dealt with in a lighter manner, as the visiting priest
(Dermot) tells the young boy (Hickey), that he works for Jesus, and the
kid retorts, that he wouldn't work for anyone who doesn't pay him or for
someone he never met.
The only serious flaw in the film, is a contrived  phone booth scene
towards the end of the movie. That scene absolves the film from dealing
with any bigger moral questions it might have raised, by getting rid of
the fly in the ointment, the one character in the village that upset its
tranquility. The strength in the film lies in the great acting job
accomplished by the townfolks, especially Ian Bannen (Jackie O'Shea),
David Kelly (Michael O'Sullivan), and Fionnula  Flanagan (Annie O'Shea).
They gave the film a rich quality that goes beyond the story line and
the moral implications of the scam that they perpetrated.
Someone in this small village of 52 people (Tullymore) is reported as
the winner of the Irish lottery, worth close to 7 million pounds. But
when no one claims it, Jackie becomes suspicious of who that could be.
He discovers it is the elderly loner, Ned Devine, who has dropped dead
from shock, still clutching the ticket in his hand when Jackie visits
his house. So he recruits the help of his dear friend Michael to act as
the dead Ned Devine, so that they can fool the lottery people and
collect the winnings. Michael is a genuine character, who steals the
picture with a classic comical motorcycle ride in the nude, as he races
down some backroads to beat the lottery man (Brendan) to Ned Devine's
house. But they soon realize that they will have to tell the rest of the
town their plan in order for this to work. They get everyone in town in
line, but for one nasty old woman (Dromey), who is deemed the town's
witch, to agree that they will split the money equally, and they will
swear to the lottery people that Michael is Ned.
Life in the village goes on in its routine way, and we get to see some
of the jealousies that exist in town, the class differences, and how
quiet and set in its ways the townfolks really are. And, of course,
there is a wee bit of gossip in the air. Maggie (Lynch) has a young boy
and no husband. She has a few suitors, but has not told them who is the
child's father. The suitor she is most interested in, is Pig Finn
(Nesbitt), but she will not marry the hard working lad because he smells
like his pigs.
The twist in the story is interesting, and if you have not seen the film
and do not want to know this twist, please skip the following paragraph
and go directly to my grade rating of the movie.
Well, the kid's father turns out to be none other than Ned Devine. By
right, Maggie could have claimed all of the lottery winnings, but
decides it is better that the kid have someone he can call a father who
will raise him, than all the money from the lottery ticket. Besides, her
share of the winnings would suit her fine. So she agrees to marry Pig,
and he promises to give up raising pigs. Now tell me, how many films
have you seen lately that can get away with such a corny but happy
ending and still be critically well-thought of ?
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Will it be prison for Jackie and Michael, senior citizens living in a
remote Irish village? Or will it be great riches instead?
It all depends on the success of their big scam in WAKING NED DEVINE.
Honest all of their lives until a great temptation comes their way in
the form of an unclaimed lottery ticket, they are now ready to
prevaricate day and night.
Someone in their little hamlet has won over six million pounds in the
lottery, but who?  With only 52 residents they devise a scheme whereby
they will wine and dine the locals in hopes of getting in the good
graces of the winner.  Along the way they engage in a detective game to
ascertain who the lucky person is.
Veteran actors, Ian Bannen and David Kelly, play Jackie and Michael with
such great gusto that it is obvious that they are having the time of
their lives.  Fionnula Flanagan plays Jackie's wife and co-conspirator.
Eventually Jackie and Michael locate the lucky bloke, one Ned Devine.
He turns out to have suffered a fatal case of excessive luck, having
died in front of his TV when the numbers were chosen.  Jackie and
Michael find him with a big frozen smile on his face and his winning
ticket clinched firmly in his hand.
The rest of the movie has them enlisting the entire town to collude in
hiding Ned's death and convincing the lottery man from the big city that
Michael is Ned.
Will the town pull it off and share in the riches or will their plan
somehow go awry?
WAKING NED DEVINE suffers from an excess of good concept and casting and
a deficit in plot development.  The movie runs on autopilot most of the
time with the townsfolk making small talk and hanging out at the local
pub.  Scenes of naked octogenarian males on motorcycles are certainly
different, which is not the same thing as interesting.
A good-spirited film, it features lovely pictures of the Irish coastline
and countryside.  Although there is nothing wrong with the picture, it
is rarely compelling.  Without much of an ending, the film basically
just stops.  We are left with some nice characterizations but a series
of missed opportunities in the script development.  A pleasant enough
movie, it could and should have been more successful.
WAKING NED DEVINE runs about 1:30.  It is not rated but probably would
be an R for brief scenes of full-frontal male nudity and would be fine
for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark Poyser
The small-scale film, in limited release, "Waking Ned Devine"
is a pleasant excursion to a time and place which allows
the audience to absorb the full texture of a small town.  Filled
with breathtaking scenery, 'characters', and delightful music,
the movie would be interesting even without a plot.
The story contains several surprises which are best left unmentioned
in a review.
The film starts out with a sharp opening, which gives us a taste
of what is to follow: country folk with an inclination for a bit
of larceny.  What gets things going is the fact that a winner
of the lottery is apparently one of the residents in the small
town (pop 52) of Tullymore.  Who that person is, and how to
share in the good fortune is the mission of two longtime friends
Jackie (Ian Bannen) and Michael (David Kelly).  Part detectives,
part scalawags, they have to stay alert to the changing circumstances
they face as the story unfolds.
The village consists of several amusing characters.  A clueless
pig farmer, temporary priest, and a witch.  There's also the
Lotto man who must be satisfied that everything is on the
up-and-up.
There are no Hollywood touches to this film - except for the
outer space introduction [!].  Pacing is right.  Towards
the end, it runs a bit out of steam, but that's okay because
for most of the 90 minutes we've been interested in the
goings on.  A mixture of laughs and (occasional)
sentiment - all the right emotions are engaged.
In one brief dream sequence - you'll know it when you see it - a
fantastic combination of color and music transports the
characters to a place you really hope exists.  One of the
key moments in the film.
The music, available on CD (LONDON 289 460 939-2) follows
the same arc as the movie and is well worth considering.
A fine film that's for everybody except action fans.  Somewhat
like 'The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill and Came Down a Mountain,'
... but livelier.

Author
James Sanford
        In a year that has seen farces featuring foul-mouthed animals
("Doctor Dolittle") and unique uses for bodily fluids ("There's Something
About Mary") it's a relief to find a relatively wholesome,
out-of-the-mainstream farce you can watch without blushing. "Waking Ned
Devine," a whiskey-soaked slice of Irish whimsy, has already drawn
comparisons to last year's surprise hit "The Full Monty," but don't go
expecting more of the good-natured raunch of that movie. Instead "Ned" has
the gentleness and unforced humor of Scottish director Bill Forsythe's work
("Local Hero," "The Girl in the Picture") with just a sprinkling of the kind
of  black comedy so often found in movies from the Emerald Isle. There's no
particular message or great meaning to be found in writer-director Kirk
Jones' film, just some good fun and a few hearty laughs.
 You don't have to hail from the United Kingdom to relate to the
money-mad residents of Tullymore, a tiny hamlet seized by lottery mania.
Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) and his best friend Michael O' Sullivan (David
Kelly) are particularly crazed. They've learned one of Tullymore's 52
residents has won the jackpot, and Jackie and Michael are eager to buddy up
to whomever the winner turns out to be. Unfortunately, elderly Ned Devine
(Jimmy Keogh) was simultaneously lucky and unlucky: Jackie finds him
clutching the magic ticket, literally thrilled to death by the shock of it
all. What a shame, notes Jackie's long-suffering wife Annie (Fionnula
Flanagan) since "Ned carried a heart the size of his head in his chest."
 But Jackie isn't about to let a little thing like that stand in the
way of collecting a purse of over seven million pounds ($11,200,000). He
first coerces Michael into masquerading as Ned to fool a lottery
investigator from Dublin, then faces the task of convincing the entire town
to go along with the scheme. The result is a breezy mix of slapstick and
subtle character-driven humor. One subplot involves romantic neighbor Finn
(James Nesbitt) and his attempts to win back former flame Maggie (Susan
Lynch) who loves the guy but can't tolerate his smell -- Finn is a pig
farmer -- even after he bathes repeatedly with an assortment of "fruity
soaps."
 "Waking Ned Devine" doesn't always hit the mark and several scenes
seem to be missing their punchlines. But the people Jones has created are so
sweet-natured and the performances by all concerned so endearing the movie's
missteps are easy to forgive. Besides, with its lush green hills, gorgeous
seascape and formidable community spirit, Tullymore is the kind of place
many will enjoy spending time in.
James Sanford

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Film Review by Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
During our vacation to Ireland, we toured the grounds of a castle and 
had tea and brown bread in a white-washed, thatched cottage.  At one bed 
and breakfast, I discovered that the 'presence at the lake' mentioned in 
the travel book was a story trumped up for tourists.
What I'm suggesting is the Irish can be very conscious of the stereotype 
that names their country a quaint place and their culture a constant 
source of charm.  I can think of a dozen films shot in Ireland, films 
whose stories are enhanced by the natural beauty.
One might go into 'Waking Ned Devine' skeptical about another narrative 
recording the adventures of colorful townspeople outwitting a more 
powerful force.  It's been done, hasn't it now?
The thing is, "Waking Ned Devine' does it so well that I forgot clichés 
and lost myself in laughter.
Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) and Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly) have 
maps of Ireland all over their faces and aging bodies.  In one of the 
funniest touches of farce in recent film, we see them on speeding 
motorcycles - one completely naked and the other almost there.  This gag 
is only one in a series of quirky moments.  Whether the pair is involved 
with inserting a dead man's dentures or eulogizing one still among the 
living, these actors are natural and believably human.  Bannen perfects 
his expressions as a man who can be crafty or wise.  Kelly is cast well 
as the mild Michael who never tells a lie but must utter one the size of 
the Ring of Kerry.
The early episodes of the film lightheartedly follow the exploits of the 
friends as they attempt to find the winner of the Irish lottery.  From 
the newspaper they know someone in their hamlet of Tullymore has  won.  
In a few delicious and cynical sequences we observe Jackie and wife 
Annie (Fionnula Flanagan) cozying up to neighbors they think might be 
the new millionaire.  Annie bakes a meat pie, while Jackie treats the 
drinkers at Fitzgerald's to 50 pounds worth of rounds.  All this for 
nothing, as Jackie discovers it is Ned Devine who has the lucky numbers.
If we were face to face, I'd lean toward you with this detail, me finger 
in yer buttonhole:  Ned Devine is dead!
Here's the genesis of the elaborate ruse, as Jackie and Michael scheme 
to claim the money for themselves.  So we see the nude dashes on a 
motorcycle, Michael's whiskey-induced courage, Jackie's temporary exile 
from his own house, all in the name of duplicity.  The comedy becomes 
even broader when the lottery official (Brendan F. Dempsey) must verify 
Ned Devine's identity - he will return to the town and question some of 
its 52 residents.  Will it work when the old liars attempt to lure the 
entire population into collusion?
It's not only in scenes with the two old friends that director Kirk 
Jones displays solid comic timing.  It's also when he's directing what 
amounts to an ensemble cast of fine actors.  There's a boy who has 
precocious discussions with a priest.  A pub owner/appliance repairman 
who won't return a toaster to the biddy who won't pay for it.  And in 
the subplot dealing with love, Pig Finn (James Nesbitt) is continually 
pleading with raven-haired Maggie (Susan Lynch) to ignore the stench of 
pigs on him, refuse the attentions of another suitor, and marry the one 
she really loves.  
The characters and the ways they are developed enlarge the quality of 
the film.  Sketching in secondary characters - in addition to extras to 
flesh out the 52 residents - is risky by successful.  
Music accompanies many scenes appropriately.  Flutes and whistles extend 
the cultural trademark of instruments.  A scene in which a lone 
recorder-player precedes four pall bearers, their arms joined under the 
real Ned Devine's coffin, smacks of self-parody.  To tell the truth, I 
wouldn't mind adding the soundtrack of this film to the slot beside my 
Chieftains CDs.
A slight problem with tone arises at the end.  Foreshadowing frequently 
lets us know that these characters are capable of wacky behaviors.  But 
one bit of dark humor - although unchallenged in its hilarity -goes 
somewhat too far over-the-top.
If you are fond of things Irish, you'll love 'Waking Ned Devine.'  It's 
being hyped as a small, brilliant film, but its narrative devices and 
focused acting make it more than a bit of blarney and brogue.


Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4)Except that it's set in a small Irish village, WAKING
NED DEVINE could pass for GRUMPY OLD MEN 3. Instead of Walter Matthau
and Jack Lemmon, it stars two aging Irish actors, Ian Bannen and David
Kelly.
Bannen and Kelly play Jackie and Michael, two old friends who don't act
their age. (The two take motorcycle rides to the icy Atlantic to go
skinny-dipping.) When they learn someone from their village (of just 52
people) has won the lottery, they concoct some wacky schemes to befriend
the winner.
They target the 18 known lotto players from the village and invite them
all over for a nice chicken supper. One by one, they rule everyone out,
until they deduce the winner must have been the man who didn't come, Ned
Devine.  
Jackie trudges up to Devine's house in a storm, carrying a chicken
supper as a bribe... gift. He finds Devine sitting in front of the
telly, the winning ticket clutched in his dead hand. The shock of
winning the lottery must have given old Ned a heart attack.
Jackie and Michael try to claim the ticket for themselves, with Michael
taking Ned's identity. They manage to fool the lotto man on the first
visit, but he informs them he'll have to ask around - make sure Ned's
who he says he is. Now Jackie and Michael have to include the whole town
in the scheme if they want to avoid prison. They won't get their
millions, but it still leaves Ł130,000 for every person in the village -
if they can pull it off.
The movie's got a (mostly) good heart and more brain than you might
think. Jackie's wife Annie (Fionnula Flanagan) is the movie's loving
moral conscience. She makes the two heroes ponder the fraud they are
committing and the potential wishes of the deceased. If this were truly
a sitcom, such questions could be laughed off with a joke or two. But
the two heroes take the question to heart and consider how they can do
some good with the money.
The movie even remembers to tell us where the money would have gone, had
not Jackie and Michael intervened. After all, the money wouldn't have
vanished into thin air. It would have gone... well, you'll have to see
for yourself.
There is only one time that the movie is unapologetically blackhearted,
and it stands out in contrast to the rest of the film. It's a scene
that's supposed to make you cheer, but it is unnecessarily cruel, and it
calls into question the film's otherwise goodhearted nature. Many
audiences actually did cheer, so you may too. But I found myself wincing
at the films sudden wicked glee.
The film is full of colorful minor characters. There's a pig farmer in
love with the town's flirt. She loves him too but can't stand the smell.
There's a rookie minister who talks to the town's youngest boy, who has
tough and practical questions about God.
Unfortunately, none of the minor characters is developed enough to
really let you get attached. They are quirky, and at times amusing, but
they are on the whole flat and robotic. The fact that the "evil"
villager is dealt with so mercilessly is enough to tell you that Jones
didn't consider his minor characters to be fully human, but rather
offbeat icons of a small town.
WAKING NED DEVINE is no great film. The direction is adequate, if a bit
predictable. The film's timing seems to be just a bit off. The sitcom
aspect to the comedy feels a bit too contrived, as do the moments of
earnest friendship. The widescreen cinematography is good, but
disappointingly mundane given such a photogenic setting (the film was
shot on the rugged and rustic Isle of Man).
On the other hand, I don't think it was striving for greatness. It's
only supposed to be a lightweight, fun comedy. And on that level, it
succeeds pretty well. If you're interested in seeing GRUMPY OLD
IRISHMEN, don't let me stop you. It's not a bad movie, and it certainly
can be entertaining. 
Just don't say I sent you.
---
Read an interview with Kirk Jones, director of Waking Ned Devine at
http://net.indra.com/~mmapes/krkjones.htm
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Like a rock pool left by the retreating tide, "Waking Ned Devine"
is charming, full of life, and not very deep.  This year's answer to "The
Full Monty" (not that anyone asked the question), the film even includes a
scene of a couple of grown men (make that *old* grown men) stripping down
to their birthday suits.
        While that particular sight gag provokes an inevitable comparison,
"Waking Ned Devine" is closer to "The Full Monty" in its overall tone and
temperament--this is an amiable little film with a lot of big laughs.
        "Waking Ned Devine" is set in the small Irish community of
Tullymore where one of the locals, Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen), learns that
a resident of the village has just won the national lottery.  Since
Tullymore sports a grand population of 52, Jackie believes it shouldn't be
too hard tracking down the lucky sod who correctly guessed the six numbers,
all with an eye to encouraging the individual to share his or her millions.
        And so with his dear friend Michael O'Sullivan, Jackie sets out on
his quest, convincing many of the townsfolk that *he* is the one to have
come into some money in the process.  Michael is played by David Kelly,
well known to English audiences for his television roles as Albert Riddle
the one-armed chef in "Robin's Nest" and his single yet notable turn as
O'Reilly in the "Fawlty Towers" episode 'The Builders.'
        Kelly and Bannen make for a happy-go-lucky, Laurel and
Hardy-inspired twosome with an Irish twist.
        The big lotto winner, it turns out, is a lonely old man without any
heirs named, as the title would indicate, Ned Devine.  Upon realizing he's
become an overnight multi-millionaire, Ned has expired out of shock.  This
forces Jackie and Michael into conceiving a not-too-well executed plan to
impersonate their late countryman in order to get their greedy mitts on his
winnings.
        Although this sounds like a mean, exploitative reaction to
another's good fortune, "Waking Ned Devine" doesn't handle it that way.
There are those who may interpret newcomer Kirk Jones' film as a cautionary
tale of "money changeth the man" proportions but it never pretends to be
anything more than a goofy, upbeat comedy.  Why else would there be scenes
of our heroes riding around naked on a motorcycle, futile attempts to put a
smile back on Ned's aged face, and a finale in which the village's "wicked
witch" is sent packing?
        It's nice to see Scottish character actor Bannen back in the
limelight after a handful of lackluster assignments (including a leper in
"Braveheart").  I liked Fionnula Flanagan's accomplished performance as his
wife, Annie, giving the film a grounding voice (much as the wives did in
Roddy Doyle's "The Van").  I didn't like the fact that the producers went
with an overused title structure in that "Feeling Minnesota"/"Leaving
Normal"/"Raising Cain" vein, and I thought that some of the supporting
pairings--the pastor and his skeptical young apprentice, the pig farmer and
his sweetheart--could have used a little more development.
        But overall I enjoyed "Waking Ned Divine" for its lightness, its
brightness, and its infectious zest for life, as breezy as the uilleann
pipes on its soundtrack.

Author
Wil Tirion
The lottery is an absolute hot-bed of comedic possibilities and
unsurprisingly there've been a few films take advantage of this. The latest
is Waking Ned in which the golden finger of fate pokes decisively at an old
age pensioner in a small Irish village who then celebrates by promptly
dropping dead.
Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) discovers that lady luck has selected one of
Tullymore's 52 inhabitants and  sets off on a personal quest to find out
exactly who it is. His bullish investigations soon lead to the conclusion
that the winner must be Ned Devine. But Ned's unlikely to be spending any of
his windfall because Ned - no not Zed, Ned - is dead. And with Lottery rep
Jim Kelly (Brendan F. Dempsey) on the way, the claim will die with him
unless Jackie and best mate Michael played by David Kelly of Robin's Nest
fame (he was the one armed waiter) can pull enough of a fast one to convince
the lottery rep and the town that the winning ticket belongs to them.
The cast is wonderfully unstarry and quite frankly, that makes the movie.
Originally Kirk Jones received offers from Walter Mathau and Jack Lemmon to
play the parts of the Irish penny-pinching duo but Jones turned them down
and chose Dempsey and Kelly instead - both small screen heroes of his. The
decision to turn down Hollywood big bucks and big names was a brave one.
Reviewers in the states may be more than willing to bad mouth their native
city's stars but when an outsider chooses to shun those same stars a strange
patriotism emerges. As a result there are fears Waking Ned won't do as well
in the States as it most certainly will over here in the UK.
Watching the film you can't help but think of the Full Monty. Kirk Jones
saturates the story with charming subplots and quirky humour while keeping
the level of sentimentality in check throughout. There are daft moments and
hilarious moments but never unrealistic or plot-pandering moments that might
otherwise wreck the whole thing. Bannen and Kelly hurl themselves into their
parts with the vigour and enthusiasm of two British talents left out of the
picture for far too long, and whether skinny-dipping at a picturesque cove
or steaming along naked on a motorbike, they never fail to raise a laugh.
As much a testament to the two likeable old coots who've proved you don't
need to be under 30 to be an excellent British actor, this film is an
exemplification of Kirk Jones' comendable love for homegrown talent,
location and movie-making which should, at the very least, earn him a BAFTA.
More reviews at Saturn UK http://www.saturnuk.com (updates each Thursday)
Posted by Wil Tirion (Film & Cinema cor.)

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        I doubt there's a person alive who hasn't fantasized of
one day winning the lottery and retiring to their personal vision
of paradise, possessing the incredible power that only huge
stacks of cash can provide.  It's been said that winning large
amounts of money can change a person.  Ned Devine (Jimmy
Keogh), a resident of the tiny but beautiful village of Tullymore,
Ireland (population: 52), has just discovered the truth in that
statement: money can not only change you, it can actually kill you.
        It's difficult to construct a review of "Waking Ned Devine,"
the new comedy from writer/director Kirk Jones, without resorting to
phrases like "utterly charming," "quaint" and "crowd-pleasing," three
sentiments which have been used so often in film criticism that their
meanings have become basically non-existent.  And yet, "Waking Ned
Devine" *is* charming, unabashedly so, in the way it draws you into
its spell.  With its colorful (read: quaint) characters, idyllic
scenery and wonderful (read: crowd-pleasing) performances, this film
not only reveals its low-budget roots, it flaunts them proudly.
Budgetwise, Jones delivers a lot of visual punch for pennies, making
excellent use of his movie's biggest star: the village of Tullymore
itself.  This is the sort of film that Hollywood has proven itself
incapable of making: it gives us a portrait of small-town
eccentricity, without once resorting to stereotypes, or (even worse)
the typical one-dimensional characters who populate cinematic towns in
movies like "Hope Floats."
        Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) and Michael O'Sullivan (David
Kelly), two of Tullymore's quirkiest yet amiable inhabitants,
discover that a winning lottery ticket has been sold to someone in
their fair hamlet.  Realizing that one of their neighbors is now an
extraordinarily wealthy person, our two elderly friends practice their
charm on everyone in town, hoping to butter up the new lottery
winner, whoever he or she might be.  Through a series of
uproariously funny events which I will not spoil for you, they
eventually discover the winner: the aforementioned Ned Devine.
Unfortunately, poor Ned dropped dead of a heart attack mere
moments after discovering that he was the lottery winner.  This
leaves our friends with a classic moral dillema: if they report Ned's
death to the officials, the winnings will be recycled back into the
lotto for next week's drawing.  But maybe, just maybe, Michael
could pass himself off as Ned (with Jackie's help) when the lottery
man comes to verify "Ned's" claim-- then they can collect the money
themselves!  No prizes for guessing which option the pair chooses.
        The characters in this film are among the most memorable
to hit the screen in years.  Jackie and Michael are an Irish Abbot
and Costello, generating smiles and laughter with their simple
naiveity and the unexpected hardships their scheme forces them
to endure (witness Michael's hilarious nude motorcycle ride,
which I am convinced will eventually find its way into any complete
list of wonderful cinematic moments).  By far, Jackie and Michael
are the sweetest "villains" I've ever seen, partly because the film
makes it absolutely clear that this type of crazy scheme is so very
alien to them.  James Nesbitt is also wonderful as Pig Finn, the
town's sensitive pig farmer, who loves the beautiful Maggie (Susan
Lynch) with an intensity so "real" and honest that I was actually
touched.  Unfortunately, although she does love the handsome
farmer, Maggie can't abide the permanent odor that years of
working on a pig farm have given him... despite the numerous
"fruity soaps" Pig scrubs himself vigorously with each day.  Many
other equally fascinating people dot the landscape of the village,
and I will leave it up to you to discover them.  Suffice it to say,
they're the kind of people you'd love to invite over for a night of
beer drinking and rousing Irish sing-a-longs.
        In fact, "Waking Ned Devine" is so thoroughly based in its
overwhelming sense of sweetness that when that tone vanishes
(in the final ten minutes of the movie), the film nearly derails
itself.  After having spent ninety minutes with a fun, light-hearted
story and its inhabitants, we are suddenly whirled, for absolutely
no reason, into a sadistic black comedy.  It's a jarring switch,
and more than a little uncomfortable... but it passes quickly, and
we're left to end the film on another note of innocence; somehow,
though, after the "black comedy" scene, the transition back to
innocence seems unconvincing and empty.  It's rather like
spending 90 minutes with an adorable, friendly child... then
witnessing a two-minute temper tantrum right before going home.
The mood is tainted, and you tend to dwell on the few miserable
minutes rather than the good parts.
        Other than this one inappropriate tone change near the end
of the story, "Waking Ned Devine" is a spectacular blend of
comedy and characterization.  Kirk Jones and his cast have created
a special film that far exceeds the intelligence of most of the tripe
coming out of Hollywood these days.  Rest assured that if I won the
lottery tomorrow, neither Hawaii or Paris would be my destination;
instead, I'd take you all to Tullymore with me.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It's difficult to explain how 85 minutes of effortless charm could be
neutralized by one scene without giving away the ending of WAKING NED
DEVINE.  As a film critic I almost always champion films that take
narrative risks, avoiding the plague of the obvious.  WAKING NED DEVINE
takes just such a risk, but the result feels like a particularly nasty
bait-and-switch.  Where many films err with gratuitous sentimentality,
this one errs with a gratuitous lack of sentimentality.
     The most frustrating thing is that so much of it is so entertaining.
Set in the coastal Irish hamlet of Tulaigh Mhor, it centers on Jackie
O'Shea (Ian Bannen) and Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly), two elderly
friends among the town's 52 inhabitants.  One morning, Jackie makes the
connection from a newspaper headline that a winning lottery ticket was
purchased in Tulaigh Mhor, meaning one of the other 50 townspeople is now
very wealthy -- and very desirable as a friend.  After narrowing down the
field of contenders, Jackie realizes the winner must be fisherman Ned
Devine.  Unfortunately, Ned is in no position to claim his prize, having
dropped dead from shock while watching the numbers announced on 
television.
     Thus begins a sparkling bit of farce as Jackie, Michael and
eventually the entire town conspire to share in the late Ned's good
fortune.  When lottery offical Jim Kelly (Brendan F. Dempsey) arrives from
Dublin to verify the winner, Michael is forced into the unfamiliar role of
actor, posing as Ned so the $6 million pound jackpot won't go without a
claimant.  Both lead actors are splendid -- Bannen the gleeful mastermind
behind the plan, and Kelly the flustered star of his show.  The sequence
in which Jackie and Michael try to set up the deception, caught off-guard
by Mr. Kelly's early arrival, shows director Kirk Jones to have a rare
sort of comic timing.  Farce rarely works on film the way it works on a
stage, but WAKING NED DEVINE fires on every cylinder -- game actors in a
great comic situation guided by a talented director.
     There's also a major sub-plot in WAKING NED DEVINE, a romantic
triangle of sorts between single mother Maggie (Susan Lynch), gentle
but foul-smelling pig farmer Finn (James Nesbitt) and self-satisfied
ladies' man Pat Mulligan (Matthew Devitt).  Initially, the whole business
seems to be little more than a distraction, an excuse for gags about odor
and fruity soaps.  Gradually, however, it begins to take shape as the
ideal set-up for the story's lesson.  Finn loves his work as a pig farmer,
but Maggie will only marry him if he gives it up.  Will the lottery
windfall in which he'll share change Finn into a more suitable husband,
yet a less satisfied man?  How will riches change all the citizens of
Tulaigh Mhor?
     And it is here, friends, that WAKING NED DEVINE takes its left turn
into black comedy and bleak morality.  Plenty of viewers will walk away
from WAKING NED DEVINE believing they have seen a feel-good film with a
happy ending, but it is an entirely contrary reaction which blunted my
enthusiasm.  I laughed and laughed and laughed through much of the film.
Then I gasped.  Then I fumed.  WAKING NED DEVINE sheds its sympathy and
its sense of good humor for what, in retrospect, feels like a cheap shock
and a toast to situational ethics.  85 minutes of effortless charm counts
for a lot.  If only one scene didn't make it count for so much less.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Say what you want about living in a big urban center like
New York: there's something about small-town life that's
positively alluring, or at least it seems that way when you sit
back in your comfortable cosmopolitan theater or screening
room to soak in bucolic charm.  You'd have to be a hard-
hearted cynical urbanite not to relish "Waking Ned Devine,"
Kirk Jones's absolutely delightful fable about a town that's tiny
even by the standards of a rural isle like Ireland.  Few other
films have ever rendered the beneficial effects of grand
larceny like this one, and in fact we can see why the Irish
would hesitate even to use the word "lie" to describe a
falsehood.  "Blarney" would be more to their fancy.
   The frothy escapade opens in the minuscule village of
Tullymore, pop. 52, as the major daily announces that
someone in the hamlet had purchased the winning lotto ticket.
Immediately Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen), a lifelong resident
of Tullymore, and his best friend Michael O'Sullivan (David
Kelly) concoct a plan to convince the lucky sod to share the
wealth with the entire village.  Since no one has yet come
forward to claim the prize, Jackie and Michael take out a slip
of paper and, ruling out Jackie's wife and themselves decide
that there are 49 possible winners.  Narrowing the list to the
18 who actually played the national raffle, they resolve to
soften up the winner, whoever it might be, by inviting the
entire community to a chicken dinner--an object lesson in the
beauty of sharing.  When one leg of chicken is left over, they
realize that one of their number is absent from the festivities,
Ned Devine (Jimmy Keogh), who they later discover is indeed
the holder of the winning ticket and who has died from a heart
attack upon hearing the news.  Jackie, his wife Annie
(Fionnula Flanagan), and Michael go to work on a plan to
convince their fellow citizens to testify falsely that Michael is,
in fact, the unfortunate deceased, Ned Devine.
   "Waking Ned Devine" is the sort of story that Frederic
Duerrenmatt would have written if he had been infected by
the spirit of a leprechaun.  In that Swiss playwright's work,
"The Visit," a fabulously wealthy woman bent on revenge
offers to donate to the Mitteleuropan town of Gullen a tidy
sum if its citizens would agree to murder a man who had
once left her pregnant and abandoned her.  In the hands of
writer-director Kirk Jones, that basic plot becomes the
inspiration for a dandy scheme to transfer big bucks to a
lovely, isolated village rather than simply let it return to the
national treasury to be reclaimed at a later time by someone
who probably did not a great need for the punts.
   The most exuberant scene takes place in the cottage of
Ned Devine as Jackie and Michael go to work on the dead
man (who is stiffly acted by Jimmy Keogh), giving the head
the cosmetic makeover the poor man deserves for his
involuntary posthumous contribution.  When a bridge falls out
of his mouth, they replace it gingerly, but not before mistaking
the remains of a chicken led for Ned's own intestines.  We
are made privy to some of the conventions and heartaches of
the local people, including a romance between Maggie
(Susan Lynch) and the guy she loves, farmer Pig Finn (James
Nesbitt) but cannot marry because the otherwise disarming
fellow sports a perpetually porcine odor.  Though Jim Kelly
(Brendan F. Empsey), the lotto man who has driven in from
Dublin to distribute the check for over 6 million pounds once
he is convinced of the identity of the winner, insists that
money changes people quite a bit, the word is that none of
the 52 denizens are likely even to leave the village. "They'll
spend all the money at Fitzgerald's" (the local pub), according
to a young lad wise beyond his years.
   Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau aside, how many
Hollywood studios would have given over a movie to a bunch
of old geezers such as the wonderful people who have lived
their lives in the town they cherish, refusing the glitter or
Dublin and London for the finer life of their tightly-knit
community?  "Waking Ned Devine," whose one irascible
citizen, Lizzy Quinn (Eileen Dromey) threatens to subvert the
entire plan by calling in the fraud, is a superbly crafted
comedy that might just make you long to leave the antiseptic
climate of your cosmopolitan hub for the cozy intimacy of a
life in the provinces.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Ian Bannen, David Kelly, Fionnula Flanagan, Susan Lynch, James
Nesbitt, Brendan F. Dempsey, Eileen Dromey, Jimmy Keogh
Director: Kirk Jones
Screenplay: Kirk Jones
Australian theatrical release: December 26, 1998
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 and a half stars
After a clever and hilarious opening scene, it is hard to accept that
Waking Ned Devine fails to maintain a consistent comedic beat.  With the
pitch and tone of a quirky comedy but an off and on direction, Ned
Devine is often simultaneously hard to hate and hard to enjoy.  Debut
writer-director Kirk Jones seems oblivious to the idiocy of his subject
matter, and regularly struggles to bring a sense of humor to the
outrageous.  That is why he resorts to some monotonous scenarios, but
occasionally strikes gold by giving his elderly protagonists enough
flair to make whatever they do seem bearable.
Poor Ned Devine was lucky enough to win a lottery of 6.8 million pounds,
but unlucky enough not to live to spend it.  We learn that Ned was
literally shocked to death, holding his winning ticket and watching TV
at the time of the unfortunate incident.  Enter elderly friends Jackie
O'Shea (Ian Bannen) and Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly), a twisted pair
who are intent on finding the winner of the lottery and squeezing a
share of it for themselves.  They learn that the winner is a resident of
a small town named Tullymore, population 52.  Eventually discovering
that the person they are looking for is dead, Michael pretends he is Ned
Devine, and the town's residents are dragged into the task of confirming
his borrowed identity so that they can split the loot between them.
Jones' screenplay sprouts various subplots, all of which are neither as
original or entertaining as Jackie and Michael's quest to obtain the
prize money.  The various residents of Tullymore appear as pretty much
lifeless, with only Bannen and Kelly breathing life into their
characters.  Their performances are solid and memorable, and will
undoubtedly draw comparisons to the work of Walter Matthau and Jack
Lemmon.
The scenes that stage Waking Ned Devine's jokes are generally quite
entertaining.  One great thing that Jones achieves is a coherency with
the style of his comedic scenes, and he does his best to steer the film
away from gags that we have seen before.  Desperately trying to be
original, Jones goes to extreme lengths to squeeze laughs, including
placing a nude O'Sullivan on a motorcycle and making O'Shea change Ned
Devines face expression.  Some may find these moments hilarious, but I
found them irritating.  A nude old man on a bike is funny for the first
few seconds, as is somebody moving the jaw and eyes of a dead man.
Although entertaining, Waking Ned Devine does not have the comic timing
of something like The Full Monty (which it has been persistently
compared to, simply because both films were made in the United Kingdom),
or the witty black humor that can make these films so funny.
Needless to say, Waking Ned Devine is lightheaded and generally quite
enjoyable.  Thus, it is such a disappointment that Kirk Jones has not
only managed to spoil the atmosphere of his film on many occasions, but
he has ruined entire scenes with bad writing and timing.  In one of
Waking Ned Devine's most emphasized moments - when some of its
characters raise their glasses to the dead lottery winner - Jones misses
the appropriate tone entirely. Instead of being touching, it is faintly
idiotic and out of place.  That's just one example of Jones' off and
direction, although I guess one of its positive assets is that for every
bad scene he makes, there is a reasonable (if not good) scene to
counterpart.  If Jones had been able to maintain a solid comedic beat
and an effective dramatic core, Waking Ned Devine could have been much
more than what it is: a film which is simultaneously hard to hate and
hard to enjoy.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies:
http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Michael Dequina
Fox Searchlight is pushing the modest Irish comedy _Waking_Ned_Devine_  as
this year's _The_Full_Monty_, and it more than reminds of that sleeper hit:
(1) it's a shameless, effective crowdpleaser, and (2) it's likely to be as
wildly overrated as that inexplicable Best Picture nominee.
Writer-director Kirk Jones's charming film can be best described as
_Grumpy_Old_Men_ with a dash of _It_Could_Happen_to_You_, with two crafty
codgers (Ian Bannen and David Kelly) leading the population of their tiny
village (a mere 52) in an attempt to claim a lottery jackpot won by a
recently deceased resident.  The film is as cute and enjoyable as it
sounds, and every bit as slight.  Beyond the basic premise, there's a touch
of romance involving a young pig farmer (James Nesbitt) and his
stench-sensitive love (Susan Lynch), a blackly comic zinger of a final
joke, and, unfortunately, not much in the way of memorable characters.
A bit meatier is another crowdpleaser from the same part of the globe,
the sweet British comedy _Little_Voice_.  The title character (Jane
Horrocks), nicknamed "L.V.", is a soft-spoken young woman who spends her
days and nights listening to her late, beloved father's old record
collection, much to the chagrin of her boozy floozy mother Mari (Brenda
Blethyn).  Through listening to the likes of Judy Garland and Shirley
Bassey, the meek L.V. has developed quite a big singing voice of her own,
catching the ear of one of Mari's greasy lovers, Ray Say (Michael Caine).
A wildly unsuccessful talent agent, Ray sees L.V. as his long-awaited
ticket to the big time.
Writer-director Mark Herman's script, based on Jim Cartwright's play
_The_Rise_and_Fall_of_Little_Voice_, goes through predictable, pedestrian
paces, with Mari and Ray attempting to exploit L.V.'s gift without paying
attention to her needs as a person.  (The only person who pays much
attention to her is kind, pigeon-raising telephone worker Billy, played by
Ewan McGregor.)  But what makes the film consistently engaging is its lead
trio of characters.  Caine and especially Blethyn are a hoot, exuding the
right mix of sleaze, sexuality, selfishness, and even sympathy; the power
of Ray's climactic breakdown comes as a bit of a shock.  But the star of
the film is indeed Horrocks, recreating her acclaimed stage role.  She is
quite simply remarkable, equally convincing speaking in a mousy murmur and
belting "Big Spender" with the full-throttle lungs of a true diva.
Horrocks, amazingly enough, not only did her own singing, she did it all
live on the set, with no pre-recorded help.  Quiet or loud, hers is the
voice that clearly rings throughout.  (_Waking_Ned_Devine_ opens November
20; _Little_Voice_ opens December 4)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Tim Voon
Cast:  Ian Bannen, David Kelly, Fionnula Flanagan, James Nesbitt, Susan
Lynch, Brendan F. Dempsey.
Screenplay:  Kirk Jones.
Producers:  Glynis Murray and Richard Holmes.
Director:  Kirk Jones.
Who wants to be a millionaire? If you were Marilyn Monroe, the answer
would be to be to marry one. If you were Demi Moore, you would probably
sleep with one. If you were Nicholas Cage and Bridget Fonda, you would
lose it and then find it again through charity. If you were in an Agatha
Christie movie you would probably murder one. However, if you were Ned
Devine, you would win it and then cack it.
Yes, there's a dead guy in this movie, with a 7 million lottery ticket
and everyone in town is trying to steal it. Although there are moments
of tension when everyone is trying to fool the tattslotto man, or humour
when riding naked on a motorcycle, or a bit of competition when trying
to mate with the pig farmer's lay, and a bit of Irish humour which after
awhile runs dry.
I sat through this movie wandering what had transpired through 90
minutes of screening time. After awhile, I realised it was all about
stealing money and getting away with it. Where was the heart in this
movie, outside greed? Did they truly feel remorseful about stealing a
dead man's winnings? But none of these questions were left answered.
Which left me wandering is there more to life than just winning the
lottery?

Author
Jerry Saravia
Irish villages in the movies are becoming as common as actors sporting Irish
accents, such as Tom Cruise and Brad Pitt. "Waking Ned Devine" is a harmless,
pleasant black comedy that aims at the funny bone in delicate, sophisticated
ways and, oh, the actors really seem Irish, too. 
The movie begins with Jackie O'Shea (Ian Bannen) clutching a lottery ticket
and claiming that he's won millions. Truth is he just wanted to tease his wife
into bringing him dessert while watching TV. Later, it turns out that in the
cozy, rainy village of Tully More, Ireland (actually the Isle of Man, which is
not quite Ireland), somebody has won the lottery. Jackie, along with his best
friend, Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly), aims to locate the lucky winner. In a
place with a population of 51, it can't be too difficult. But who could it be?
Is it the smelly pig farmer or the single mother he pines for? The witch-like
eccentric woman? The lucky winner is actually a Ned Devine, who died while
holding the winning ticket. Jackie decides that the ticket is his, and basks in
the glory that the money will bring him. 
"Waking Ned Devine" doesn't quite end there since there are many surprises and
delights that unfold along its merry way. There is also a wicked sense of humor
throughout, particularly involving naked motorists, prying a dead man's mouth
open, a funeral for a living person, and some hysterical business involving a
telephone booth. 
The supporting characters could have used more depth (the pig farmer is a good
example), but the film is a breezy triumph of comic spirit and laughter. Ian
Bannen and David Kelley have the kindest faces I've seen at the movies in quite
some time - they linger long after the movie is over. When these two appear on
screen, "Waking Ned Devine" becomes a frolicsome dinner party that you don't
want to end.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 

Author
Murali Krishnan
Tullymore is a quiet little Irish country village. When two old friends,
Jackie and Michael, discover that the latest lottery was won by one of the
village's residents, they hatch a plan to find out who the winner is (which
should not be hard since they know everyone in town), befriend them, and
share in the winnings. Then they discover that the winner was kind old Ned
Devine, who had immediately died upon the shock of his win. Since Ned has no
family, his winning would be going back to the lottery, so Jackie and
Michael decide it would be best if someone else pretended to be Ned, claimed
the prize, and shared the winnings. It will not be easy since they will need
the cooperation of the whole village and not all may go along.
Like most of the characters in it, this film is quite cute. It presents the
Irish coastal countryside as almost a character by itself, with beauty and
charm. The rough cliffs, lush woods, and enchanting streams reflect a
simplicity and purity to the slow, rustic life. However, many of the
characters presented were not given much depth, and the subplots of the pig
farmer's romance with a single mother, and the small boy who seems wiser
than the substitute priest seemed extraneous. There is a similarity in the
narrative to A Simple Plan, but this film has an altogether different tone
than that one. The need to neatly wrap up the subplots at the close of the
main narrative felt jarring in its superfluousness. The film has a pleasant
lightness of tone and provides a good share of well-paced laughs, and the
cuteness of its main characters (particularly Michael) is quite endearing.
The storyline closes at what would appear to be the beginning point of the
more interesting story, but it goes far enough as a showcase of the charm of
rural Ireland.
Moderately Recommended. This film does not contain anything exceptional, but
is certainly charming and enjoyable. It does not strive to do very much, but
does accomplish what it sets out to do.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Joy Wyse
There is more than one definition for the word, Wake, and when you learn
that this is an Irish movie, you realize which definition it has.  This is
a truly enjoyable, funny film from the moment it begins until the final
sunset.
There are few people who haven't dreamed of winning the lottery.  All
those millions of dollars would certainly change our lives, but how? 
Would we spend it?  Invest it?  Give it away?  Share it with friends? 
When a winning lottery ticket is sold in the town of Tulaigh Mhor,
Ireland, a town of only 52 residents, the question is.who owns the ticket?
Ian Bannen and David Kelly set out to uncover the winner by being
especially nice to the one[s] they suspect hold the coveted ticket. 
First, they buy drinks for `Pig' Finn when he suddenly appears in a sports
car. Then, the lady at the post office [who sold the ticket]. But, the
real comedy begins when they discover that Ned Devine bought the winner,
and the shock of seeing the numbers was too much for him.  As Ned had no
heirs, the money will go to the state.  They are sure that Ned wouldn't
have wanted that to happen, so they concoct a scheme to claim the jackpot
for themselves.  
The humor that follows is clever and original.  There is a scene with
David Kelly on a motor scooter that will stay in my memory for years.  The
telling of the plot cannot take the place of seeing it for yourself.  In
the course of the story, you learn about most of the 52 residents of the
town.  You get to know them and you care about their lives.  And, the
question remains, what would Ned Devine have done with the money?  The
plot takes one turn after another, but they are always believable.  You
can foresee some of the things that occur, but they aren't always what you
expect.
An audience member remarked to me that she was surprised that there were
no four-letter words in an Irish movie.  It was a strange statement, I
thought.  The same could be said about American movies.  Waking Ned Devine
is an excellent example of wonderful dialogue that doesn't need to stoop
to that level for humor.
I cannot wait to see this movie again.  And, I want to take others to
see it as well.  I hope that this gets the same word of mouth that `The
Full Monty' got.  People who see it will love it, even though there are no
big name stars.  I give it an A-.

Author
Nick Amado
In these days of overlong movies (Meet Joe Black, The Thin Red Line,
The Mask Of Zorro) it is a shame that films like Waking Ned Devine
can't be longer than a paltry 90 minutes. This is just a cute movie,
even through its mildly risque subject matter.
Old friends Jackie (Bannen) and Michael (Kelley) try to find the
lottery winner (they deduce must live in their dinky town of about 60)
so that they might kiss up to him and share the winnings. Through
process of elimination, they find that it must be lovable old Ned
Devine, who they find sitting in front of his TV, clutching the
winning lottery ticket in his cold dead hand. What results is
thuroughly amusing, as Jackie tries to convince his wife that not
claiming it would be wrong, and that they could really benefit. After
all, old Ned won't miss it. Rather than divulge the later twists and
turns, I'll stop here merely pointing out that Jackie and Michael get
into all sorts of trouble in their little sleepy Irish villiage.
Bannen and Kelly are a perfect pair. One slightly stout, the other as
thin as a rail. Both getting on in years, they make such a cute pair
of old codgers. Waking Ned Devine may even be seen as a "Full Monty"
for the geriatric set, especially since Kelly gets buff-o for one
amusing scene.
Waking Ned Devine is by no means perfect, but it is so sincere and
touching that it looks so much better than most films. The
performances by everyone in the town are great, particularly the two
leads. There is one twist at the end which I find unnecessary, but it
hardly ruins the picture.
Writer/director Kirk Jones should be held up as an example to all
those Hollywood screenwriters. Scripts as creative and endearing as
this should be the norm, not the exception. Perhaps it makes us
appreciate this wonderful film even more. Had I held off on my year's
best/worst list for another day, Waking Ned Devine (officially
released in late November of 98) surely would have graced the short
group of the year's finest films. It is light, but thought provoking
and sweet. I can't think of anyone who shouldn't see (or wouldn't
enjoy) this film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the little coastal village of Tullymore, Ireland there is a
local preoccupation with the National lottery and nobody is more
involved is the old rascal Jackie O'Shea (played by veteran actor Ian
Bannen).  Then one day the newspaper says there is one lottery winner
and he is from the local county.  Tullymore is the only village in the
county so someone local must have won.  Jackie waits for the scream of
excitement, but it does not come.  Somebody has won the lottery but is
not telling or perhaps does not even know it yet. Jackie forms a team
with his wife Annie (Fionnula Flanagan) and old pal Michael O'Sullivan
(David Kelly) to search the village for the winner.  But nobody seems
to have won the lottery.  Then Jackie realizes just one man is left who
could be the winner, Ned Devine.
     In his bed they find the old man, Ned Devine.  Ned had the good
luck to win the lottery and the bad luck to die of the excitement.  But
now there is no Ned Devine to collect the winnings.  But with no Ned
Devine there will be no winnings.  This has Jackie in a dither.  Well,
why not have Michael be Ned Devine just long enough to collect the
money.  Michael is not sure it is going to be so easy.  Michael is dead
right.  The man from the lottery wants reasonable proof that he is not
giving the prize money to the wrong man.  But reasonable proof is just
what is not possible to give.  Eventually the whole village will have
to be pulled into the fraudulent scheme if it going to work.  One
subplot that could have used a little polishing is that of the village
"witch," a most disagreeable woman who threatens to blackmail the
entire town for a larger share of the proceeds.  The subplot is crudely
resolved without the sort of finesse that is characteristic of most of
the rest of the script.  Similarly the entire plot is only partially
tied off at the end.  One wonders in what the state of the village will
be in another year.  The way is wide open for a sequel.
     Top billing goes to veteran actor Ian Bannen as an infectious
schemer, and yet totally likable.  But at least as much credit should
go to David Kelly as Michael O'Sullivan.  Kelly, with the huge duckbill
nose and the scrawny body of a plucked duck hanging in the shop is a
positive treasure.  In spite of Bannen's grace in front of the camera
and his infectious smile, most of the heavy laughs are earned by Kelly.
Still, together the massive Bannen and the wiry Kelly make a great
team, each being the foil for the other.  The story, by director Kirk
Jones, is a simple and pure situation comedy.  This is Kelly's first
feature film, having previously made commercials.
     Henry Braham's photography certainly demonstrates that the scenery
of Tullymore is beautiful, though he avoids showing it in its full
glory.  A lot of his photography catches the scenery when it is gray
and raining or at night or when the sun washes out the shot.
     WAKING NED DEVINE is the kind of comedy we do not see frequently
enough any more coming from the United Kingdom and Ireland.  This film
is reminiscent of WHISKEY GALORE and LOCAL HERO. Similar American films
are usually done with too heavy a hand.  WAKING NED DEVINE is a
pleasure.  I give it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.
