Title
Review for Shining, The (1980)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
John Carroll
The Shining, starring Jack Nicholson, Shelley Duvall, Danny Lloyd and Scatman
Crothers.  Directed by Stanley Kubrick.  1980.
   In a year of the horror film, people always tend to look back at the
classics.  In a few years, people will undeniably be looking back at films such
as The Blair Witch Project and The Sixth Sense as classic horror films.  But
for now, there are other classics to look after.  The Shining, directed by the
legendary Stanley Kubrick and based on the Stephen King novel, is regarded as a
classic.  And despite being an entertaining movie, The Shining did not age
well.
   The premise for the novel is that Jack Torrance (Jack Nicholson) has become
the housekeeper for a ski lodge that is closing down for the winter.  This is
because the snow becomes to much to travel.  Right from the get-go, Kubrick
establishes the "trapped in the house" scenario that many horror films have
tried to accomplish.  The other plot involved is with Danny Torrance (Danny
Llyod).  He would be best described as a "weird" little boy, as he talks to his
imaginary friend, which turns out to be his finger.  As Kubrick later on
reveals, the boy has a sense known as "The Shining", a trait that the Overlook
Hotel chef Dick Hallorann (Scatman Crothers) also possesses.  As the film
progresses, Kubrick develops the rage and isolation in Jack Torrance.
   Jack Nicholson, as Jack Torrance, gives a wonderful performance.  In a film
that tends to drag on at certain points and become rather tedious, Nicholson
steps up and brings the film back up, despite losing it once off the screen. 
Nicholson portrays Torrance as the psychopath he truly is, and despite knowing
what will happen in the film from the start, Nicholson will have everyone
second-guessing themselves.
   The rest of the supporting cast, which basically consists of Duvall, Llyod
and Crothers, does not add many dimensions to the film.  Duvall has the role of
the nice country wife, and gives a decent performance, although has trouble
standing out, particularly when paired with Nicholson on screen.  Danny Lloyd,
the boy with "The Shining", has a particularly important role, and utterly
fails with it.  Any drama with children tends to rely on their performance for
the film's success or failure.  Films like Taxi Driver that get great
performances from their child stars, in Taxi's case, Jodie Foster, those films
tend to succeed much more than subpar child performances.  Danny Lloyd fails
miserably.  His performance is as dry as can be, with no emotion shown in any
of his lines.  He even has trouble acting like a child, when in the backseat of
the car driving up to the Overlook Hotel, he cannot even do the "Are we there
yet?" correctly.  His performance bogs the whole film down and takes away from
the great performance of Jack Nicholson and will basically bore the audience
when he makes his on-screen performance.
   Despite the terrible acting from Llyod, Kubrick still manages to piece this
film together.  As said before, Nicholson brings such a demonic presence to the
screen that you cannot help but get chills.  His good, sensible personality
goes awry right before our very eyes.  As Nicholson starts chopping down the
doors at the end of the film, the whole theatre will be on the edge of their
seats.  However, the ending goes stale.  A tedious segment develops with Jack
Torrance chasing little Danny through the garden maze and this part goes on way
too long.  I will not spoil the ending, but it is definitely not something to
write home about.  It will leave you wondering why it took an hour and a half
to get to this finale.  Nicholson works so hard to pick up the pieces left by
Llyod's atrocious acting only yo be hampered by a subpar finale.
   In the end, The Shining is an experience within itself.  While it might not
please all audiences, it is definitely a film that needs to be seen to make a
proper judgement.  The ending may not be great and Llyod may bore you to tears,
but in the end, Jack Nicholson proves why he is the best of the best and anyone
with an interest in the horror genre should pick up a copy of The Shining.
Final Verdict: B
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
James Sanford
If you think the 18-month shoot of "Eyes Wide Shut" is out of the ordinary
for perfectionist director Stanley Kubrick consider that "The Shining" also
took two years to get onscreen; the film began shooting in May of 1978 and
was released in June of 1980.
 Early reviews were decidedly mixed, with some critics wondering what
attracted Kubrick to Stephen King's tale of murder and madness in a remote,
snowbound hotel in the first place and why, if he had to make the picture at
all, Kubrick had given it such a deliberate, dreamy pace and allowed Jack
Nicholson to go so far over the top. Though "The Shining" performed fairly
well at the box office, it continued to be controversial: King panned it in
the press for the liberties Kubrick had taken with his book, and instead of
Oscar nominations, Kubrick and Shelley Duvall instead found themselves in
the running for the uncoveted Golden Raspberry Awards as Worst Director and
Worst Actress respectively. Just for the record, both lost.
 As demonstrated by an excellent website devoted to "The Shining" at
brain.mindbuilder.com/mkraft/shining/index.html, the movie's reputation has
improved substantially in the past 18 years. Nicholson fans hail his work
here as one of his landmark funny/scary performances and Kubrick admirers
who once dismissed the movie as a misstep have since learned to appreciate
its special brand of psychological terror. Few directors would dare to make
a horror movie in which the first hour is devoted almost entirely to
backstory and character development, but that's one of the reasons Kubrick
is, well, Kubrick.
 Its unconventionality makes "The Shining" one of those rare thrillers that
actually benefits from repeated viewings, although the movie is so unnerving
many viewers have never made it all the way through even once. Frustrated
writer and recovering alcoholic Jack Torrance (Nicholson), his colorless
wife Wendy (Duvall) and young son Danny (Danny Lloyd) agree to move into the
mammoth Overlook Hotel and to look after the property during the winter
season when the mountain resort is shut down. Almost immediately however,
the bad vibes begin to flow, and Danny's psychic powers go into overdrive,
conjuring up visions of blood-spattered walls, sinister-looking twin girls
and the cryptic message "REDRUM."
 Though the recent "Shining" TV mini-series was more faithful to King's
original and was perhaps more frightening in the traditional sense, few
films have ever built up and sustained an eerie atmosphere as successful as
Kubrick does here. Although The Overlook is an enormous place with multiple
floors and seemingly endless hallways (which we are forced to explore
repeatedly in one Steadicam tracking shot after another) Kubrick makes it
clear the hotel is as constraining as a prison cell -- a nicely appointed
cell, perhaps, but a cell nonetheless. By the movie's midpoint, the feeling
of claustrophobia is inescapable, and when Jack's mind finally snaps and he
begins stalking Wendy and Danny, "The Shining" becomes a true nerve-wracker.
 Of course, nobody plays madness quite like Nicholson, and you can see him
laying the groundwork in this manic performance for such later wackos as
Darryl Van Horn in "The Witches of Eastwick" and the Joker in "Batman." With
her fey Texas accent and rag-doll smile, Duvall is truly irritating, but
that actually works in the actress' favor; she daringly challenges us to
root for Wendy. Scatman Crothers is also effective as the Overlook veteran
who has something in common with Danny.
 Is "The Shining" really the masterpiece Kubrick worshippers would have you
believe it is? No. Even though the tension is sustained throughout, the
first reviews were right about the movie being overlong, and Jack flies off
the handle a bit too abruptly rather than gradually sinking into psychotic
behavior as he did in the book. The ending may initially strike you as
clever, but the more you think about it the less satisfying it seems.
 But there's never been a shocker quite like "The Shining," and it seems
likely to remain one-of-a-kind. Like all of Kubrick's films, whether you
love it or hate it, it's sure to be a conversation-starter.
James Sanford

Author
Shane Burridge
How could any movie live up to a publicity campaign that culminated with 
full-page newspaper ads in the Southern Hemisphere blaring 'The tide of 
terror that swept the world is here'?  Stanley Kubrick's only horror film, 
an adaptation of Stephen King's bestseller, was a disappointment for 
first-time audiences who were expecting to be scared out of their wits, but 
grew to be a more rewarding film for repeat viewers.  The film begins with 
caretaker Jack Torrance (Jack Nicholson), wife Wendy (Shelley Duvall) and 
son Danny (Danny Lloyd) moving into a Colorado Hotel which is closed and 
inaccessible during the Winter - Jack figures he can use the months of 
isolation to work on a novel.  The film ends with Jack running amok with an 
ax, howling for his family's blood.  What happens in between?  That's THE 
SHINING's main controversy.  The other area of controversy, at least for 
those Kubrick fans who had been weaned on the philosophical/ideological 
complexities of 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY and A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, was that THE 
SHINING was too simple - it just seemed to be a ghost story about a man who 
went nuts in a Hotel, so what was the big deal?
After initial mixed feelings about the film, King joined its critics, 
finally agreeing to say nothing further  in exchange for the rights to 
produce his own television version.  In King, the cause of Jack's switch 
from father to murderer is clear-cut: he and his son are telepathically 
sensitive to a host of evil spirits that haunt the Hotel.  In Kubrick, it's 
much murkier.  He sets up a number of horror-movie motifs and then brushes 
over them - clairvoyance, ax murders, ghosts, a pact with the devil, 
insanity, animated corpses, ghosts, and reincarnation (to cap it off, he has 
the family move into the Hotel on Halloween).  Every supernatural event can 
be explained rationally - here the telepathy becomes a conduit not for 
entities but hallucinations.   Kubrick offers many other alternatives for 
Jack's madness - the isolation, his frustration as a writer, the cabin fever 
that has him trapped in the Hotel, his alcoholic past.  Is Jack conjuring up 
his own demons?  Has the Hotel become a sort of magnifying lens that expands 
hallucinatory images and passes them on in a form of autosuggestion to 
everyone else staying there?  We can't trust any image that we see as real, 
although as viewers we are too caught up in events to give this much 
thought.  It's only afterwards when you might work out the only piece of the 
puzzle that doesn't make sense -  that if this was all happening in the 
characters' minds, then who let Jack out of the room he was locked in?
THE SHINING is a horror film to admire for its atmosphere, not its frights, 
although many fans enjoy it for Nicholson's pumped-up performance.  It's 
hard to tell what may have attracted Kubrick to a mainstream horror novel, 
but I suspect it was the setting that clinched it.  In THE SHINING the idea 
of the haunted house is turned completely inside out.  Gone are the dark 
corridors, the narrow staircases, musty attics, dank cellars and scary woods 
outside.  Instead the Hotel is immaculate, huge, and illuminated, surrounded 
by empty white wildnerness.  There is barely a shadow to be seen.  At the 
one point in the film when a character (Danny) enters darkness it is treated 
not as a place to be feared but as an area of refuge, only to have it become 
lit up with floodlights.  John Alcott's cinematography and Kubrick's precise 
camerawork make THE SHINING a visual treat - which is quite something when 
you consider that it is shot mostly indoors.  There is some great 
floor-level Steadicam tracking that follows Danny as he cycles through the 
hallways and a memorable cutaway shot of Jack staring at the Hotel maze, 
which is worth the price of admission alone.
In discussion THE SHINING is often companioned with 2001 (and not just 
because they share the same running times and a four-act structure).  It's 
an intriguing comparison - inner space versus outer space.  If the Star 
Child at the conclusion of 2001 was meant to signal an evolved consciousness 
of humanity then it's easy to see THE SHINING's clairvoyant child, Danny, as 
being its flesh and blood incarnation.  The Hotel is his new, mysterious 
universe; an arena in which he may flex his fledging powers.  Meanwhile 
Jack, who regresses to a grunting, animalistic state by the film's 
conclusion, returns full circle to 2001's apes.  In both films we see points 
of evolution represented not only by characters but also by the weapons they 
use (in THE SHINING it progresses from club to knife to ax).  There is also 
an obvious metaphysical link between both films -  Kubrick likes to show us 
that time and space are connected.  The psychological pathways of Jack's 
mind literally become a labyrinth by the film's end, in which he becomes 
hopelessly lost.
The Hotel itself is also a maze, cosmic or otherwise - the Steadicam's 
lengthy, fluid negotiations of its corridors serve not to map the layout of 
the Hotel but to disorient us.  Even Wendy, when first entering the Hotel, 
remarks that she will have to leave a trail of breadcrumbs to find her way 
around, a la Hansel and Gretel (another story which features a father 
instructed to kill his children with an ax).  In short, the Hotel is unfixed 
in space and time (the intertitles that announce the days, date and time 
don't do anything to make the experience more concrete for us).  The past 
and the present are an overlapping confusion, muddied further by Danny's 
precognitive flashes into the future.  The Hotel itself cannot be discounted 
as a major character of THE SHINING.  Even though it may be unfixed it can 
still occupy what Jung called an objective psyche, a place where biology and 
psychology might mingle with and influence each other.  The Hotel is a 
living entity (blood gushes from its elevators like burst arteries), 
thinking, imagining, creating images of humans to act out endless games for 
its amusement (the 1927 photograph at the end of the film would suggest as 
much).  The forces of creation and destruction are in constant conflict.  
Small wonder that Jack, as a character in this staged entertainment, is 
unable to write a novel himself.
I'm impressed with THE SHINING and always look forward to repeat viewings 
every five years or so(only in cinemas, mind you) that give me the chance to 
re-evaluate my prior discoveries about the film and make new ones.  The 
beauty of Kubrick's film is that despite its many layers it can still be 
enjoyed at the most basic level of a simple horror yarn.  But don't be 
surprised if something sneaks into your subconscious and stays with you for 
some time afterwards.  It may have even happened to Stephen King.


Author
Chad Polenz
1980, R, 143 minutes [2 hours, 23 minutes]
starring: Jack Nicholson (Mr. Jack Torrance), Shelly Duvall (Mrs. Wendy
Torrance), Danny Lloyd (Danny Torrance), Scatman Crothers (Dick Hallorann);
written by Stanley Kubrick, Diane Johnson;  produced and directed by Stanley
Kubrick, based on the novel by Stephen King.
I've always been fascinated by Stanley Kubrick's ability to tell deep,
thematic stories using bare essentials. Unfortunately, this is what keeps
"The Shining" from being any kind of intriguing or scary film. The film goes
out of its way to avoid becoming a generic bloodbath, but in turn alienates
itself from all plausibility.
The basic setup is quite simple, we meet our main character, Mr. Jack
Torrance (Nicholson), who is about to become the winter caretaker for the
Overlook Hotel in the Colorado mountains. He's a recovering alcoholic and
prospective writer, and he hopes the job will give him the privacy he needs
to write his masterpiece. Jack brings his feeble-minded wife Wendy (Duvall)
and his nearly schizophrenic child Danny (Lloyd) along with him. But since
this is a horror film, there must be a catch, and this element comes into
play when we learn a former caretaker went crazy and killed his family with
an axe. Jack scoffs at the notion that "cabin fever" like that could happen
to him, but the more he denies it, the more it's clear what's going to
happen.
The first act of the film is very straightforward in its establishment of
the mood and atmosphere of the hotel. Every character is so normal here they
seem stiff, except for Danny. Danny is a disturbed child who has an imaginary
friend "Tony" living inside him who often speaks through his finger. Danny
also has constant visions of dead bodies, a river of blood, and two girls so
innocent-looking they seem evil. He obviously has some kind of psychic power,
but where did it come from and how will he use it? What's so frustrating is
the fact this element is built up so much and yet it has almost no relavance
in the long run.
The mid section accounts for the majority of the film's running time, but
it's amazing so little happens. One minute Jack is normal and sane, the next
he is obviously insane - how and why this change came about so abruptly isn't
justified well (if at all). Meanwhile, Danny becomes completely possessed by
Tony and he keeps chanting "redrum." In an earlier scene, Dick Hallorann
(Crothers), the head cook of the hotel, told Danny he's not the only one with
special powers. But it's just left at that without any further explanation.
If this is supposed to be a long-term scare tactic it doesn't work. The
suspense is probably supposed to be elaborated through our fear of the
unknown, but everything's too bizarre to take seriously.
Where the script fails, the direction attempts to make up for it. Kubrick
does a fine job in establishing the gigantic size of the hotel and the
emptiness to it all. There are some great Steadicam shots of Danny riding his
Big Wheel throughout the hotel, which is nicely complimented by loud echoes
and the eerie music. We also see reality through Danny's over-active
imagination and Jack's twisted mindset. Everything seems like one big
illusion and after a while it's nearly impossible to distinguish reality from
fantasy.
I believe the film tries to provide a back story through Jack's
hallucinations, but even this efforts seem futile. He has conversations with
a bartender and an English butler (who turns out to be the original axe
murderer) who tell him to "fulfil his destiny," but this only progresses the
story a little bit.
The entire last act, and the ending, especially, are both weak and
disappointing. When Jack attacks his wife with an axe, and Wendy screams her
head off, it doesn't seem any more intelligent than any other slasher flick.
The finale itself has almost nothing to do with all the surrealistic and
supernatural devices present throughout the film, so you really have to
wonder what the point was.
It's a shame "The Shining" turned out the way it did. There was so much
potential here and somehow it was wasted. Some films are over-written, this
one was over-directed.


Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
(NOTE-This is my 4th of 5 weekly retro reviews honouring great
Jack Nicholson films. "Chinatown", "A Few Good Men", and "One
Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" are already posted on the Internet.
Also, since Stanley Kubrick died just a short time ago, why not
highlight a collabration of two great film artists?)
After winning his first Academy Award for a marvelous performance
in "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest", Jack Nicholson went through
a notable, if not particularly successful, phase of his career.
In "The Missouri Breaks" and "The Last Tycoon", Jack appeared
opposite living legends Marlon Brando, Robert De Niro, and Tony
Curtis. He also got to work with directors Arthur Penn and Elia
Kazan in those pictures while directing "Goin' South" himself.
Those three movies might be considered a "warm-up" as he prepared
for his opportunity to do something which very few great actors
ever had the chance to do--to perform in a film for director
Stanley Kubrick.
The secretive and obsessive Kubrick was in the middle of a streak
of his own. "Dr. Strangelove", "2001: A Space Odyssey", "A
Clockwork Orange", and "Barry Lyndon" represented three straight
outstanding films, then one well-made epic. Adapting Steven
King's best-selling novel, "The Shining", was Kubrick's next
project. Shot in England, it was an elaborate horror film which
didn't get the praises from critics that Kubrick's films usually
received. I must be one of the few people who A) liked the team
of Kubrick and Nicholson B) saw much more in this film than just
the ghost story and C) found it to be truly scary. After all,
that IS the point.
Kubrick and co-screenwriter Diane Johnson made drastic changes to
King's in-depth novel. The ugly, abusive family histories for
both the Jack Torrance character (Nicholson) and his wife, Wendy
(Shelley Duvall), were excluded. They also dropped the extensive
flashbacks to the family's life on the East Coast where Jack lost
his teaching job for beating up one of his students. Some
supporting characters were written out and the manager of the
Overlook Hotel, Stuart Ullman (Barry Nelson), is not the
officious jerk King portrayed him to be. Young son Danny (Danny
Lloyd) is no longer a brilliant five-year old, nor is Wendy a
strong woman. Heck, they made Danny dumb and Wendy weak.
Still, the screenwriters' adaptation was an improvement in other
ways. Dialogue isn't always this film's biggest asset, but when
the lines are good, they're REALLY good. And memorable! How about
"Here's Johnny!", "Gimme the bat, Wendy!", the ominous "Redrum",
and the written ramblings of Jack's "All work and no play makes
Jack a dull boy". And dig that elevator of blood! Sure, it's a
blatantly unsubtle image, but it's cool. A major change and a
real credit to the climax is that Kubrick shows more restraint
than King. This is a rare example of where the movie's ending is
much LESS explosive than in the book. And the biggest addition
from novel to screen--eerie music--is a classic example of how
appropriate music can greatly heighten the "fear factor".
The story is familiar. Lifelong failure and recovering alcoholic
Jack Torrance gets a last-chance job as the winter caretaker for
Colorado's elite Overlook Hotel. He's enthusiastic about the job
even though he & his family will be stranded alone for several
months when the brutal winter arrives. He's enthusiastic about
the job even though the hotel has a bloody history and one of the
previous caretakers went crazy and murdered his family. He's even
enthusiastic about the job when he hears that the hotel was built
on an Indian burial ground (hey, what ghost story DOESN'T have an
Indian burial ground!). Jack simply wants solitude to finish a
play he's writing and the chance to forget that he has a rather
horrible life. Wendy and Danny join him, of course, and
everyone's happy. 
Well, actually, Danny isn't. He knows the sordid Overlook is not
Disneyland. He has the power (through his imaginary friend, Tony)
to see the future. The hotel's cook, Dick Hallorann (Scatman
Crothers in a miscast role as a token black victim), also has
this power, this "shining", to read thoughts and warns Danny to
be careful in the ominous Overlook. The naive kid is precocious
like all youngsters and he's both fascinated by the forbidden
aspects of the hotel while being terrified of recurring images of
death and mayhem. Danny's power slowly brings the hotel's demons
to life as Jack struggles through a killer case of writer's
block. Wendy helplessly watches her delicate family fall apart as
Jack's developing insanity (not to mention his "deal" with the
hotel) becomes violent and painful.
The basic plot of this film is an old-fashioned ghost story with
slasher film overtones. The interesting part of the movie is that
the single strongest theme here is not that hotels can drive you
crazy or that experiencing a few bad days at the typewriter gives
you the right to axe your family. The strongest theme here is of
divorce. Here's a husband with no respect for his wife or son. In
one scene, he looks down at a model of the outdoor hedge-maze
while Wendy & Danny walk around inside the real maze. Obvious
metaphor--he "looks down on them". Like many dysfunctional
families, the man can seem perfectly normal & loving to the
outsider and still be quite abusive to his family. As he loses
his mind, Jack has a nightmare about killing Wendy & Danny, he
has a fantasy in the hotel's empty bar that explains the
alcoholic & abusive history, and he doesn't tell his family when
he starts to see dangerous things in the hotel. Nice guy! The man
is simply not a good father and while his wife tries her best to
hold her family together, in the end, she takes the kid and
leaves him--metaphorically divorcing him.
Jack Torrance wants to believe that he's an intelligent man, but
he's just a representation of all the selfish louts who blame
their own failures on their innocent loved ones. He feels
claustrophobic and trapped despite living in such a giant place.
Jack is a massive failure, even as the hotel's caretaker (after
all, he dies and leaves it unattended). Or does dying for the
hotel make him a devoted servant? Well, if that makes him an
accomplished man, he doesn't aspire to very much. This man is
supposed to be a literate writer, yet he becomes a hobbling
lumberjack, then a bellowing beast before the icy ending.
Ironically, Jack's demonic obsession to kill his family is rather
admirable. Geez, parents today couldn't be BOTHERED to chase a
kid in order to kill him. They'd just take away the tyke's Sony
Playstation or give him one of those "hyperactivity" pills!
What makes this film work is its genuine creepiness. Along with
the effective music, Kubrick uses some great camera angles (one
was directly below a standing Jack in the pantry). The Steadicam
shot was a particular favourite in "The Shining" in more than
just the famous scenes following Danny on his Big Wheel. Kubrick
liked the Steadicam technique and used it a lot. It's so smooth
and so appropriate on the huge sets that the technological impact
is underrated. At all times, the camera seems to be a set of eyes
watching these three people as they fritter around in an evil
place. The enormous interior sets were built on a soundstage, yet
they give off an aura that makes you want to drive a snowmobile
up there yourself and tell these people to GET OUTTA HERE RIGHT
NOW!
The glue of this film is Jack Nicholson. It takes quite an actor
to be THAT nuts considering the unending number of takes Kubrick
demands. His scenes in the bar show remarkable lunacy. The
fabulous "gimme the bat, Wendy" scene gives us Nicholson's
trademark character explosion. At times, he's pretty funny too.
Even Jack's "killer smile" has an appropriate name here. He's a
sinister ticking bomb. It's been said that he goes nuts too
quickly and maybe that's true. But the whole point of the story
is that this man felt trapped and ready to explode long before he
ever got to the Overlook. The haunting images and malevolent
results are metaphors to explain how this particular family falls
apart as they lose their collective grip on reality.
Unfortunately, Kubrick's deliberate--heck, downright
slooooow--pacing doesn't score the way it did with "2001".
Strange as this sounds, the film is too long, yet, arguably, the
craziness happens too soon! However, what nearly sunk "The
Shining" altogether was the awful performance by Shelley Duvall.
This acting hack could take some lessons from the appealing
Rebecca De Mornay (who was much better in the 1997 TV movie).
Duvall's chemistry with Danny Lloyd comes and goes. She has
almost NO chemistry with the commanding Nicholson. Sure, her
pathetic performance was probably what Kubrick wanted opposite
the whacko Jack. After all, who WOULDN'T be petrified with fear
as the horrors unfold? But her acting was incredibly weak and it
wasn't even offset by Danny Lloyd. The kid is okay at best and
he's not very lovable or intelligent.
To nitpick--there are noteworthy mistakes in "The Shining".
First, the helicopter's shadow for the overhead shot is visible
during the opening drive up to the hotel. Second, Jack tears
paper out of his typewriter, but doesn't replace it with a fresh
sheet before he starts typing again. Third, he toasts Lloyd the
bartender to "5 miserable months on the wagon", yet Wendy said in
the opening 20 minutes that he hadn't had a drink for 5 months
before they ever GOT to the hotel. Fourth, she slices his hand
during the bathroom door demolition, but in a later shot there's
no blood on the knife. And the most glaring error occurs during
that same demolition. Jack axes through only one side of the door
to do his infamous "Here's Johnny", but later the door is split
in two places. Clearly, the scene of his busting through on the
other side of the door was cut.
So, having analyzed this film to death (pun intended!), I'll
stubbornly maintain that "The Shining" succeeds in spite of its
mistakes and weaknesses. Jack's a devilish cartoon. He's so
compelling in the lead that when he's not on screen, you can't
wait until he comes back. Food for thought--Kubrick didn't hit
the bullseye with this picture and STILL created a memorable
movie. It's quotable and creepy. It makes you jump. Anyone
disappointed that this wasn't a masterpiece should remember that
very few true horror movies have ever been deemed classics,
anyway ("Psycho" is one of the few). "The Shining" showcased
Nicholson's abilities with Kubrick's meticulous direction.
Duvall, Lloyd, and overlength be-damned! This is scary and it's
pretty darn good too.
USELESS TRIVIA--Stanley Kubrick made reincarnation and an
unending cycle of life & death one of the many themes in "The
Shining". Not to compare ANY film to his masterpiece, "2001: A
Space Odyssey", but that idea was the central theme for the 1968
classic too.
This film receives an 8/10.
It also ranks #94 on My 100 Favourite Films list.
THE RYAN RATING SYSTEM SAYS...
10/10--absolutely outstanding
 9/10--excellent
 8/10--pretty darn good
 7/10--sure, go on and give it a peek
 6/10--so-so; ye ol' recommendation point
 5/10--not quite worth the dollars
 4/10--only if you have a free pass
 3/10--don't go, PLEASE don't go
 2/10--avoid even if you DO have a free pass
 1/10--"Showgirls" territory; truly crappy
 0/10--bang your head off a wall instead
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Stanley Kubrick.
Cast: Jack Nicholson, Shelley Duvall, Danny Lloyd, Scatman Crothers, Joe 
Turkel, Barry Nelson, Anne Jackson.
1980 - 144 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, and nudity).
Reviewed September 1998.
For the average person, director Stanley Kubrick is probably best known 
for his upcoming film entitled "Eyes Wide Shut," featuring Tom Cruise 
and Nicole Kidman, which had taken over two years for him to complete. 
For an avid filmgoer, Kubrick is perhaps more known for his classic 
motion pictures, such as 1964's "Dr. Strangelove" and 1971's "A 
Clockwork Orange." His step into the horror genre, however, came in 1980 
with his loose, but exquisitely told, terrifying adaptation of Stephen 
King's novel, "The Shining." At the time of its release, King 
enthusiasts were disappointed because the film version had many 
differences from the book, but I doubt anyone can deny its overall power 
to scare.
With a running time of 144 minutes, it is obvious that this is no 
ordinary horror picture, but one that aspires to be an epic, and it 
definately is for the genre. Jack Nicholson stars in a tour de force 
performance as Jack, a writer who, at the start, is a family man who 
takes a job as caretaker at the Colorado Overlook Hotel for the winter. 
He is warned early on by the hotel's manager that the winters in the 
mountains are treacherous, and often the heavy snowfall closes up the 
roads for months. Soon Jack, his wife, Wendy (Shelley Duvall), and their 
little son, Danny (Danny Lloyd) are left alone at the huge, desolate 
hotel, and as the weeks go by, the snow grows heavier, and Jack gets a 
bad case of writer's block, he slowly, but surely begins to go crazy. 
Meanwhile, it begins to get obvious that the hotel itself is indeed 
haunted, and as young Danny rides his bike through the endless 
corridors, he starts to get visions of terrible things to come, such as 
an elevator opening up to a tidal wave of blood. He also starts to see 
two mysterious twins who seem to be roaming the hotel, side-by-side. If 
you haven't seen "The Shining," then I wouldn't dare give away how 
everything develops, but it is safe to say that by the last 45 minutes, 
all hell breaks loose. 
"The Shining" is a deliberately paced, but endlessly creepy, horrifying 
motion picture. From the first shot of the camera moving overhead as a 
car drives down a road, to the shots within the hedge maze outside the 
hotel, the film has some of the most beautiful, atmospheric 
cinematography, by John Alcott, I have ever seen. Other technical 
credits are also superb, including the extremely eerie, memorable 
instrumental music score by Herbert Von Karajan, and the unforgettable 
production design by Roy Walker.
It is the overall experience of "The Shining," however, that makes it 
such a great film. The slow pace at the start is actually an asset, 
because it gradually grows momentum as Nicholson starts to grow more and 
more crazy, until the movie totally takes off in it's last hour and 
turns into a funhouse of horrors. One particular scene is especially 
disturbing. Without giving it away, it involves Duvall and a person in a 
dog costume.
Nicholson's performance in this movie is probably my favorite that he 
has given, because he has the ability to have a very menacing present. I 
think it has something to do with his voice and his eyebrows. Duvall is 
very good as his sympathetic wife, and is a very good screamer when she 
has to be. Aside from Nicholson, however, the standout of the cast is 
surely Scatman Crothers, as the cook of the hotel who tells Danny at the 
beginning that he has the "shine," which is the ability to see the 
future. In my opinion, he was sorely overlooked for an Oscar nomination 
in 1980.
"The Shining" is also very much thought-provoking, particularly the 
closing scene, and is one of the greatest horror films ever made. It is 
also a movie not easy to forget, and proves that when done well enough, 
and with a great deal of care, a horror movie can rise to a plane all 
its own.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo/
Terrifyingly, amazing achievement in filmmaking and the art of terror,
this movie classic graces us with one of director Stanley Kubrick's
sporatic directing gigs, only 5 years after his last acclaimed feature,
BARRY LYNDON, and 10 before his timely masterpiece CLOCKWORK ORANGE
(9/10). This movie is based on author Stephen King's best-selling novel
of the same name, and stars the always-interesting Jack Nicholson.
PLOT:
A nice man, his wife and young boy, take on the task of overlooking a
winter resort during its off season. The nice man is there for peace
and quiet, as his profession as a writer requires just that. The boy
has a special skill called "the shine" which allows him to hear and see
things that others cannot. As their time in the grand hotel ticks away,
the mansion begins to exude thoughts of the past and chills of the
present. In time, the nice man transforms into a "not-so-nice" man, and
begins to terrify his own flesh and blood.
CRITIQUE:
Chilling, majestic piece of cinematic fright, this film combines all
the great elements of an intellectual thriller, with the grand vision
of a director who has the instinctual capacity to pace a moody horror
flick within the realm of his filmmaking genius that includes an eye
for the original shot, an ice-cold soundtrack and an overall sense of
dehumanization. This movie cuts through all the typical horror movies
like a red-poker through a human eye, as it allows the viewer to not
only feel the violence and psychosis of its protagonist, but appreciate
the seed from which the derangement stems. One of the scariest things
for people to face is the unknown and this film presents its plotting
with just that thought in mind. The setting is perfect, in a desolate
winter hideaway. The quietness of the moment is a character in itself,
as the fermenting aggressor in Jack Torrance's mind wallows in this
idle time, and breeds the devil's new playground. I always felt like
the presence of evil was dormant in all of our minds, with only the
circumstances of the moment, and the reasons given therein, needed to
wake its violent ass and pounce over its unsuspecting victims. This
film is a perfect example of this very thought.
And it is within this film's subtle touches of the canvas, the
clackity-clacks of the young boy's big wheel riding along the empty
hallways of the hotel, the labyrinthian garden representing the mind's
fine line between sane and insane, Kubrick's purposely transfixed
editing inconsistencies, continuity errors and set mis-arrangements,
that we discover a world guided by the righteous and tangible, but
coaxed away by the powerful and unknown. I have never read the book
upon which the film is based, but without that as a comparison point, I
am proud to say that this is one of the most terrifying films that I
have ever seen. I thought that the runtime of the film could've been
cut by a little bit, but then again, I am not one of the most acclaimed
directors in the history of film, so maybe I should keep my two-cent
criticisms over a superb film, to myself. All in all, this movie
captures your attention with its grand form and vision, ropes you in
with some terror and eccentric direction, and ties you down and stabs
you in the heart with its cold-eyed view of the man's mind gone
overboard, creepy atmosphere and the loss of humanity. 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Jack Nicholson has been recorded as having really "lost it" during
several filming scenes of this movie, as Kubrick's meticulously
over-precise filming manner, apparently led to many takes (he demanded
127 takes from Shelley Duvall in one particular scene) and plenty of
mind games. Jack apparently had to be physically restrained after one
particularly famous scene, in which he was chopping into a door with an
axe. Nicholson apparently ad-libbed the now-infamous line "Here's
Johnny!" 
Jack Nicholson has also been quoted as saying about Kubrick: ""He gives
a new meaning to the word meticulous". Kubrick apparently had Nicholson
do fifty takes of a scene where he "simply" walks across the street.
Author Stephen King was known to have disliked Kubrick's version of his
novel, to the point where he himself decided to write a 6-hour
made-for-TV version of it in 1997, starring Stephen Webber, of TV's
"Wings" sitcom. King was never allowed to publicly denounce Kubrick's
interpretation of his work, due to contractual clauses, but his version
didn't fare much better with critics either.
During the making of this movie, director Kubrick was known to have
called author Stephen King up at 3am and ask him questions like "Do you
believe in God?"
Background on film: Stanley Kubrick had a large stack of books that he
was looking through to find a movie project. For a couple of hours, his
secretary could hear him pick up a book, read it for about a minute,
and then hurl it into the wall. She then noticed that this hadn't
happened in a while, so she went in to check on him, and found him
reading Stephen King's "The Shining". King says that this is really
strange, because the start of the book is very slow, and doesn't have
much to do with the rest of the story.
A fun site that some of you may want to visit, is the Ultimate Simpsons
Stanley Kubrick Reference Archive at
http://www.nh.ultranet.com/~mcollier/kubrick.html The many writers on
TV's "The Simpsons" apparently follow and admire many of Mr. Kubrick
greatest cinematic works. 
And is "The TITANIC an homage to THE SHINING?" Go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3181/titanic.html to find
out.
Timberline Lodge on Mt. Hood in Oregon, which was used for the exterior
shots of this film (but not the interiors, which were all specially
built), doesn't actually have the infamous "Room 237" from the movie,
as the lodge owners' specifically requested the number 217 used in the
book be changed to a nonexistent room number.

Author
Dan Chodos
Stanley Kubrick's adaptation of Stephen King's Shining works on some
levels, and fails on others. A family is left to take care of a
Colorado hotel for the winter. They will be completely isolated, having
only each other and the knowledge that some years ago, another
caretaker killed his family due to 'cabin fever'. Yup, you guessed it,
Jack comes down with a case of Cabin Fever and tries to murder his
family. Luckily, his isolated son has something called the 'Shining', a
sort of ESP where he can communicate and see into the future. The
premise is great, but with in a space of 10 minutes Jack completely
flips out, and we never uncover the mystery as to why. Soon afterwards
the premise is nearly a means for Jack Nicholson to go from scene to
scene shouting out catchy (and sometimes funny) phrases in a murderous
rage. The setup is never developed masking the last hour as a handful
of brilliantly directed and acted scenes that together don't add up to
much. Nicholson and Kubrick make the film scary enough to keep our
interest for the moment, but when its over you can't help feeling a
little dissapointed.  Where did the ghosts come from?  Sure we can
speculate, but what fun is that Jack?

Author
news@ix.netcom.com
STANLEY KUBRICK'S "THE SHINING"
Starring Jack Nicholson and Shelley Duvall
        "The Shining" is about the happenings at the Overlook Hotel
having to do with our main character, Jack Nicholson, and his wife,
played by Shelley Duvall, as the caretakers of the hotel over the
winter.  It is also a good chance for Jack Torrance (Nicholson's
character) to get started on his new writing career, but there is
undoubtedly something wrong with the granted isolation.  Their son,
Danny (I don't quite remember the young actor's name), possesses some
sort of clairvoyance, known in the film as "the shining".  
        Halloran (Scatman Crothers), who also has 'the shining', is
the head chef of the hotel who establishes a slight communication
between himself and Danny earlier in the film.  Therefore, if
something should go wrong in their place for the winter, Danny would
be able to telepathically message him. 
        And boy, does it go wrong.  A month passes, and we already
start to see the craziness in Nicholson's character.  Mainly, this is
found in the parts in which Jack is typing, trying to work on his new
career.  Wendy (Duvall) disturbs him, and at this point, the insanity
progressively increases.
        The hotel's past is overshadowed with evil that lingers.
Danny is able to see some of the things his family can't.  His eyes
can see memories of the dark past as if they were real, as well as
future events.  He can see the evil spirits that reside in the halls
and the rooms of the Overlook Hotel.  These scenes are nothing short
of extraordinary, portraying Kubrick's brilliance in a vivid way.
        Many of you may disagree with my rating.  But I have many
reasons to back up the ***1/2.  The atmosphere is simply dazzling,
both eerie and terror-packed at the same time.  The characters could
use some work, but that is understandable, because Kubrick obviously
didn't want to waste time in giving his message.  They are just
representations of evil, good, and fear.  But the mood more than makes
up for the problems in the film, either way.  Nicholson does an
excellent job in taking the role of an insane man, as it is both
entertaining and scary.  
        The other big reason why I gave this film my rating is that it
was intelligently meaningful.  On the surface, "The Shining" is just a
good horror film.  But on am much deeper level, it is *filled* with
discreet messages that represent Kubrick's object of the film: the
origins of evil.  You may have to watch it more than once to get all
of it, but rest assured, it is well worth it.
        "The Shining" is a film about evil and its different forms.
Some people have said it was overlong, but I couldn't care less,
because I found myself entertained and bombarded with many important
Kubrick-style messages straight through to the end.
        Ignore the negative gripes that critics have said about this
masterful work.  Instead of all that flack they gave you, I found it
to be intelligently symbolic, absolutely *amazing* in the atmosphere
department, and a good horror film on the surface either way.
        People, this is a *must-see*.  It is a masterpiece.  See "The
Shining" at any expense.   

Author
David Dalgleish
There is only one character in Stanley Kubrick's THE SHINING, and it 
is not a person.  It is the Overlook Hotel, a remote Colorado resort 
that closes during the winter, because no one can reach it through the 
snowbound mountains.  During this season, it is empty, save for the 
caretaker and his family.  An empty hotel is an eerie place; without 
the bustle of guests and bellhops and receptionists, it becomes a 
still, silent place.  Too still, too silent.  It is a place where 
something is waiting to happen--and if it doesn't happen, the hotel 
will drag ghosts out of the past to make it happen.
Jack Torrance (Jack Nicholson) is the caretaker this particular 
winter, with his wife Wendy (Shelley Duvall) and son Danny (Danny 
Lloyd) joining him.  Jack claims to be a writer, and looks forward to 
the solitude which will give him a chance to work on a new project.  
He isn't concerned that a previous caretaker, presumed to be suffering 
an extreme case of cabin fever, killed his wife and twin daughters, 
then took his own life.  We know better.
Based on what we see of him, Jack can't be a very good writer; he 
possesses no wit, no charm, no originality.  He is a void waiting for 
a personality to fill him.  Eventually, it does--giving Nicholson the 
opportunity to perform some of his most famous scenes, and he performs 
them gleefully.  He takes the menace and madness that lurk in the 
corners of the Overlook and embodies them in one man; it is a great 
performance, just as the Overlook is a triumph of production design.
Nicholson manages to take something trite and boring and make it 
skewed and unnerving--and this is what the film as a whole does.  
Stephen King famously criticized Kubrick's adaptation of his novel, 
but Kubrick at least did justice to one of King's strengths as a 
writer: his ability to take the mundane, the trivial, and make it a 
locus of terror.  The dialogue and the people in THE SHINING are 
terribly banal.  Remove the style, and all the interactions--a job 
interview, a father-son conversation, a tour of the hotel, etc.--would 
be stupefingly dull and clichéd.
But the film is never boring; it is compelling and disturbing.  
Kubrick uses formal, strikingly symmetrical visual compositions for 
even the most routine actions and conversations, and he also avoids 
close-ups as much as possible, so that what we see, we see from a 
distance, and what we see are everyday actions presented in an 
artificial, stylized manner.  This incongruity generates a sense of 
unease, an unease which pervades every shot.   We know something will 
go horribly wrong; it's just a matter of when and how.
The genius of the film is in the details.  It is in the way Kubrick 
shows Danny riding around the hotel hallways on his go-cart, shooting 
from a low angle so that the large, silent passages seem even larger, 
even more silent, and very ominous, as they loom high over Danny's 
head.  It is in the way he has Danny--using the unnatural voice of 
Tony, the "friend" who lives in his mouth--say "red rum" over and over 
again, the pitch rising at a key dramatic moment.  It is in the way we 
are shown a brief glimpse through a bedroom door, late in the film, of 
two mysterious characters, hinting at further secrets somewhere in the 
hotel's dark history.
There is never a moment when Kubrick--with help from cinematographer 
John Alcott, production designer Roy Walker, and a seriously 
unsettling score--does not seem to be utterly sure of himself.  The 
movie is a showcase for his talent; I am reluctant to attach any 
deeper significance, because none is needed.  Yes, Jack is a 
recovering alcholic; yes, there are intimations of abuse and 
dysfunction; yes, the movie insinuates that on a deeper level, it may 
be "about" those issues--but, fundamentally, I think to look for those 
meanings misses the point.
THE SHINING wants to frighten us, to induce a pleasurable frisson of 
terror, and to impress us with its craftsmanship.  If it's "about" 
anything, it's about cameras moving slowly and sinisterly down empty 
hallways; abrupt images of silent, solemn twin girls; a frantic chase 
through a snow-covered hedge maze.  It's about style, and it knows 
that subject as well as any movie ever made.

Author
Jamey Hughton
The Shining, Stanley Kubrick's 1980 film version of Stephen King's
novel, received a highly mixed reaction from audiences when originally
released. Some King fans, and the author himself, felt that Kubrick had
left out many important details and created a simplistic version that
paled in comparison to the novel. Other viewers accepted the film as
what it was: a skillful, atmospheric and effective horror masterpiece
that provided an impressive helping of white-knuckle scares.
I've never read King's novel, and perhaps that's a good thing. The movie
I saw was amazing. Kubrick gave the Overlook Hotel, the film's desolate
setting, a personality of it's own. From the sweeping hallways and
checkered interior to the mysterious hedge maze outside the front doors,
the Overlook was the place nightmares were made of. Not a structure out
of The Haunting, which went straight for a frightening, gothic appeal.
The hotel in The Shining is scary because of it's hidden evil, one that
wasn't directly expressed on screen - and this creepy atmosphere is the
primary reason why Kubrick succeeds.
Jack Nicholson coins many famous phrases here, among them the widely
used `Here's Johnny!' and the endless typed pages of `All work and no
play make Jack a dull boy'.
Nicholson plays Jack Torrence, a writer who applies for the job of fall
caretaker at the Overlook Hotel. For this six month period, along with
his wife Wendy (Shelley Duvall) and son Danny (Danny Lloyd), Torrence is
given the task of being the fall caretaker. Although warned that the
hotel could gradually give him a severe case of cabin fever, Jack sees
it as an opportunity to get some writing done.
But the real story here lies within young Danny, who has the ability to
`shine'. This is a power not unlike ESP, and it's shared by the janitor
at the Overlook (Scatman Crothers). Danny sees frightening images in his
mind of the hotel hallways filling with blood, and of two young girls
beckoning for him to come `play with them'. It's afterward that we find
out that a former caretaker at the Overlook went psychotic after many
months of desolation, killing his wife and two little girls with an axe.
Surely enough, Jack's mind begins to give in to a murderous case of
cabin fever, and he goes after Wendy and Danny with a rather unpleasant
intent.
Essentially, atmosphere is why The Shining succeeds as well as it does.
The atmospheric, goosebump-inducing surroundings of the Overlook Hotel
help to overshadow a few major fundamental flaws in the plot. One is
Duvall's character, which is often one-dimensional. Her emotions lead
her straight from a loving housewife to a woman distraught and running
in fear, when there should be a definite transition in-between.
(WARNING-Spoilers ahead). Another is the use of the Scatman Crothers'
character. The poor guy senses that something is wrong, travels hundreds
of miles via various transports, and then fights through a nasty
blizzard to get up to the Hotel. As soon as he enters, he gets an axe in
the chest. I've heard this is one of the complaints that Stephen King
fans had about Kubrick's version, noting that the character was used to
a much bigger (and more important) extent in the novel. King, in fact,
made his own mini-series in 1997 with Steven Weber in the title role.
Kubrick does many things right here, too. The use of camera angles is
stunning and effective, from the opening helicopter shot to Danny's
ventures through the winding hallways on his pedal bike. There is genius
at work behind the lighting, which is perfectly fixated with light and
dark tones in certain scenes. And Nicholson submits a chilling, eerie
portrait of a man who's lost his bearings so badly that he resorts to
stalking his own family with an axe. The final chase through the hedge
maze is absolutely thrilling, perfectly realized at every twist and
turn.
The Shining is a movie not devoid of flaws, but it's still an expertly
crafted exercise in fear.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Stanley Kubrick
Writers: Diane Johnson and Stanley Kubrick (from the book by Stephen
King)
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Shelley Duvall, Danny Lloyd, Scatman Crothers
"The Shining" is a tough film to review.  On the surface, it's a
faithless adaptation of the novel, but still tells a really creepy story
that makes almost no sense.  Cinematically, the film is deep with
meaning(s), and creates total atmosphere, creating a sense of dread in
the viewers.  Despite the very, very, very low body count in the film,
this film is one of the scariest films I've ever seen.  And I'm not
easily scared.
You probably know the story about writer Jack Torrence (Jack Nicholson)
who accepts a job of looking over a mountain top hotel called the
Overlook in its four-month down-period as the snow storms block the only
road to the hotel.  While there with his wife and son (Shelley Duvall
and Danny Lloyd, respectively and obviously), he gradually loses any
sanity he once had, and even begins talking with ghosts.  At the end, he
chases his family around the giant hotel, wielding an axe (a mallet in
the book), and screaming out one-liners.
In the both the book and the movie, the son, Danny, is a bit psychic,
possessing a little affliction called "Shining," which allows him to
perceive some of the past, and talk through brain waves with other
people who have the shining.  He meets the cook (Scatman Crothers) of
the hotel who also has it, and who warns him of some kind of old psychic
power the hotel has.  But Danny is too young to totally comprehend it,
and he watches as his father's sanity decreases.
In the book, the hotel's ghosts had power over Jack and were trying to
silence Danny throughout the story.  In the end, Jack was under the
power of the hotel, instead of really being totally insane.  Stanley
Kubrick, who is, in my humble opinion, more interesting than Stephen
King, didn't like that idea, and decided to make another film with his
theory of violence being a part of every human being.  He uses some of
the stories in the book about Jack, particularly the one where he
accidentally broke his son's arm.  And when he gets to the hotel, he
suddenly goes insane, but not totally until near the ending.  The
reason?  Well, the final frame explains that, although it really doesn't
make a whole lot of sense.
Kubrick is never a director to easily comprehend, and "The Shining" is
one confusing flick.  One viewing is not enough to make sense of all the
bizarre sequences, and one explanation cannot cover all the things that
occur.  Is Jack merely hallucinating these people (each time he's
talking to a ghost, he's facing a mirror), or are they really there?
Did Danny really bring it out of Jack, since he brought it out in him
when he accidentally broke his arm?  Is this a satire of violence, and
even TV (there are quotes from TV throughout - i.e. "Heeeeere's
JOHNNY!")?  Or is it even a film about the murders of the native
americans slain on the very site of the hotel?
I have no clue what this film means, but someday I hope to figure it
out.  But even if the film makes no real sense, there's the sense of
depth to everything that goes on.  And, of course, there's the
direction.
Stanley Kubrick has made one of the truly horrific films ever made.  I
mean, this film is actually frightening.  There are moments where I was
scared to breathe, as scared as some of the people in this film.
Kubrick paints dread over everything that goes on, even the childish bit
of Danny riding his little mini-three-wheeler around the hotel.  And
there aren't any scenes where someone just jumps out of nowhere like in
a slasher film.  When Jack is chopping down the bathroom door where
Duvall is hiding, Kubrick shoots it head on.  When Jack jumps out of
nowhere to attack someone, we see him way before it happens.
Last year's mini-series with Steven Weber and Rebecca DeMournay (!!!)
went by the book, but lacked any of the depth and creepiness this film
mastered.  It also lacked any of the fun acting that this film
posesses.  Jack Nicholson's twisted performance is, yes, more campy than
Guy Pearce in "Priscilla."  But it's one of the more darkly comic and
creepy ones in horror history.  He starts off as kind of reserved and
maybe a little twisted, but by the end is drooling and howling like a
dog.
Duvall, who I think was nominated for a highly coveted Razzie award for
her performance, is pretty annoying.  But I think it works with this
film.  I mean, he's supposed to want to kill her, right?  Okay, so I'm
kidding.  She's annoying.  Danny Lloyd, who never did another film I
think (what a shock, I mean, he was a child actor!), is pretty good as
the quiet son (much better than that annoying buck toothed kid in the
mini-series).  And Scatman Crothers...well, he's the man, and we all
know it.
The major complaint of this film, other than it just doesn't make any
sense, is that it's not faithful to the book.  Now, I've read the book,
seen this movie, and even watched all 6 hours of that horrible
mini-series (that kid was annoying as hell, wasn't he?), and this was
the best of all of them.  The book is good and all, but the ending just
didn't live up to the rest of the story.  And the mini-series didn't
help.  Playing like a basic outline of the book, it created zero
suspense, hokey scenes, and even tried to revert to cheap thrills along
the way.  I like how the movie never pulls its punches.  Jack has gone
insane, and there's no way he's going to go back just because his son
starts crying.  It's popular knowledge that the book is ALWAYS better
than the movie adaptation (not the other way around though), but this
film disproves that.  While Stephen King is a very good writer, Stanley
Kubrick's just a better director in this little analogy of mine.
Kubrick's adaption and direction might diss the book, but I think it
works better the way he did it.  It's one of the few times the film was
better than the book.  Yes, the book fills in a lot of the gaps in the
film (well, in the first half).  But it's creepier to watch it this
way.  Don't tell me you weren't shaking when he walked into the
off-limits room and that chick was in the bath tub.  Don't tell me you
weren't breathing shallow when Jack talks to the ghost of the father who
killed his family before.  This is a film that may make no sense the
first 100 viewings, but it's so well done and so absolutely scary that
it works.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jerry Saravia
There are horror films that come with expectations, namely to spook
and scare us with the unknown. And then there is Stanley Kubrick's
misguided though definitely spooky "The Shining," a horror film that
is unaware of what it wants to say or how to say it. I admire Kubrick
greatly, he is one of the finest directors in the history of cinema,
but this film is definitely on a lower standard than some of his other
works.
The problem is mainly Jack Nicholson, playing the wild-eyed, seemingly
mischievous Jack Torrance. He has been hired as the caretaker of the
Overlook Hotel, stationed in a highly remote, isolated area of
Colorado. There is definitely something wrong with Jack from the
start, he rolls his eyes and hardly flinches when hearing a past story
of a graphic murder that took place at the hotel. His wife, Wendy, (a
frail-looking Shelley Duvall) and their son, Danny (Danny Lloyd), who
talks to his finger referred to as "Tony," come to stay with Jack at
the Overlook for several months so of course, something will go
wrong. There are several hints of this at the beginning of the film,
most telling example is when Jack is driving the family to the hotel
and mentions a cannibalism that occurred in the area. Wendy looks at
him in disbelief, and Danny, seated behind them, says "it's okay
Mom. I saw it on television." Jack replies, "You see. He saw it on the
television."
"The Shining" is essentially about those long, wintry months spent at
the Overlook, and the isolation is clearly felt from frame to
frame. Most the months are broken up by titles that indicate the days
of the week. Jack's madness begins to settle in, as he screams at
Wendy for intruding while he is at work on a novel. Then he begins to
see ghosts, such as a beautiful naked woman in a tub in one of the
rooms of the hotel, and a bartender from the 1920's whom Jack tells
about his fears and insecurities with his family, casually mentioning
his wife as the "sperm bank upstairs." Then something grows wild
within him, an animal is let loose and before you know it, the ax
comes out and he is ready to kill his family.
"The Shining" could be a conventional horror film but there are enough
eerie moments to make it a cut above the rest. But from Kubrick, I
expected so much more than the conventional route it takes. There are
the expected bloodlettings, blood that runs like a geyser from an
elevator, a decomposing, laughing crone with sagging breasts, several
ghosts, and so on. All of this is what one would expect from a Hammer
horror flick but under this master's hands, it all comes off as
typical shock tactics rather than real scares.
The other problem is the over-the-top performances that undermine
credibility and cause us to lose sympathy with the characters. Jack is
typical Jack, wild and insolent, seeming like an insane madman from
the very start rather than a character study of a man slowly losing
his sanity. Shelley Duvall tries her best I suppose but her screams
and gaping looks are grating and cumbersome - she does better in her
quiet scenes, such as the first scene between her and Danny discussing
the trip to the Overlook. Danny Lloyd comes under the rule of why kids
should not be cast in horror films - he simply stares into oblivion
during his "shinings" and makes rather offputting gestures with his
finger, mimicking the voice of "Tony." I know that this is all in the
Stephen King book, but that is why adaptations exist - to change
material that is often best left to the imagination rather than making
it literal.
There are several virtues to "The Shining." The film has an ominous,
otherworldly quality that is well-suited for such a disturbing horror
tale. There are the particularly ominous opening helicopter shots of
the roadways leading to the Overlook. The colors of the hotel are
mostly gold and pink, thereby evoking the 1920's atmosphere of the
ballroom. There are the point-of-view shots of Danny riding in his
bike through the corridors and hallways, all accomplished with a
Steadicam (one of the first films to use such a camera). There is one
truly horrifying scene where Danny sees twin girl ghosts who ask him
to come and play, immediately realizing they were the girls who were
killed in the hotel by the former caretaker. There is a brilliantly
edited and shot chase through the hedge maze outside the hotel where
Jack torments poor Danny. In terms of production design, art
direction, cinematography and sheer atmosphere, "The Shining" is
triumphant in all departments.
But it is a horror film without the horror - more like a mystery with
lots of hidden meanings in every shot (the haunting final scene
justifiably asks more questions than answers). Its histrionic
performances and overdone chilling musical score negates the horror
and turns it into a freak show with occasional moments of terror.
It's passable Stephen King horror but from Kubrick, one expects
something much more challenging and thought-provoking.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com
