Title
Review for Jing cha gu shi III: Chao ji jing cha (1992)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jackie Chan, Michelle Khan, Maggie Cheung, Ken Tsang, Yuen Wah,
Bill Tung.
Screenplay:  Edward Tang, Fibe Ma, Lee Wai Yee.
Director:  Stanley Tong.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Imagine a country where few people had ever seen an Arnold
Schwarzenegger film (it's hypothetical, work with me here).  Imagine that
ERASER was the first of his films to get a wide release there, and that it
became a moderate success.  If you have the rights to COMMANDO, TRUE LIES,
the TERMINATOR films and all the rest, think of what a gold mine you would
suddenly find yourself sitting on.  That is Miramax's good fortune after
RUMBLE IN THE BRONX finally became Hong Kong action legend Jackie Chan's
American breakthrough, and RUMBLE was supposed to be one of Chan's weaker
efforts.  SUPERCOP has the same high-flying action as RUMBLE, a much
stronger story, a bit less of a sense of absurd fun, and presents the
distraction of terrible dubbing.
    In SUPERCOP, Jackie Chan plays Kevin Chan, a Hong Kong police
detective selected for a dangerous undercover assignment.  Working in
conjunction with the Chinese government, and their Chief of Security Yang
(Michelle Khan), Kevin infiltrates a drug ring by helping one of its
leaders, Panther (Yuen Wah) to escape from prison.  With Yang posing as
his sister, Kevin is brought into the cartel's inner circle, including its 
ruthless leader Chaibat (Ken Tsang).  The only potential problem:  Kevin's
girlfriend May (Maggie Cheung), who is unaware of his assignment, and
inadvertently threatens to blow his cover.
     SUPERCOP is actually the third film in the popular POLICE STORY
series, but that is almost as relevant to the story as it was when Steven
Seagal did UNDER SIEGE 2.  Jackie Chan, for the most part, is about a
persona, not a character.  His goofy grins and self-deprecating manner
make him a uniquely likeable action hero, and his ability to get out of
impossible situations often seems as much a product of resourcefulness as
sheer physical ability.  As amazing as some of his fight sequences can be,
he is just as appealing in scenes like the one in which he is taken by
Panther to the home town of his undercover identity, and forced to
improvise with the assistance of several "family members" he has never
seen before.
     Chan's sense of humor is such an asset that it is unfortunate
SUPERCOP doesn't integrate it into the story very smoothly.  In many ways,
SUPERCOP is a straightforward formula action film of the kind we tend to
see a lot of in America, with evil drug lords, can-you-top-this stunts and
a minimum of distracting characterization.  When director Stanley Tong
decides it's time for comic relief, he tends to stop SUPERCOP in its
tracks for funny business like the aforementioned visit to the phony home
town, or for a squabble between Kevin and may which results in the
ever-popular shove into a swimming pool.  RUMBLE IN THE BRONX may have
been silly, but it was silly start to finish, and Chan's fight sequences
were part of the humor.  SUPERCOP feels more divided, half Jackie Chan the
action hero and half Jackie Chan the clown.
     To give SUPERCOP its due, there are some significant ways in which it
is more than a typical American action film, and nowhere is that more
evident than in the presence of Michelle Khan (Michelle Yeoh to her Hong
Kong fans).  Capable female action stars are a non-entity in Hollywood,
but Khan packs a wallop both literally and in her screen presence.  Yang
never seems to be just a foil or a sidekick for Kevin; she is a partner,
and saves his skin as often as he saves hers.  She also gets two of
SUPERCOP's best stunts -- a leap onto a moving truck, and a motorcycle
jump onto a train -- providing just some of the thrilling action moments
typical of Chan's films.  It is also a lean and mean 85 minutes; American
action directors could take a lesson in efficient editing.
     Action has always translated well on an international level, which
makes it all the more annoying when making a film like SUPERCOP acceptable
to American viewers requires dubbing which seems to have been recorded in
a tin outhouse (although a theme song by Devo is almost as baffling).  If
Miramax is serious about making Chan's films an American staple, they
should consider investing in some decent sound mixing.  Solid efforts like
SUPERCOP will continue to build Jackie Chan's audience; now it's time to
bring on the big guns.  Anyone for POLICE STORY 1, 2 or 4?

Author
Eric Brochu
Starring: Jackie Chan, Maggie Cheung, Michelle Yeoh
Directed by: Stanley Tong
Jackie Chan has rocketed to mainstream acceptance with
Rumble in the Bronx, and Miramax and New Line have
deals lined up to distribute four more Jackie Chan
films between them.  With Jackie in the public eye so
much, many new fans are wondering about his older
films.  Unfortunatly many of the most readily available
rentals are old, dull films, made before Jackie Chan
really developed a personal style.  With this series of
reviews, I intend to cover a broad range of his better
works.  While they are not easy to find, I hope that
people who read these reviews and are interested in the
films will be inspired to seek out the specialty shops
and Chinatowns where these movies _are_ available, and
see Jackie not as he appears in his early chop-sockey
films or even as he appears in the weak Rumble in the
Bronx, but as the charming, talented, amazing
entertainer that he is.
One of Jackie Chan's most spectacular and 
enjoyable films is his 1992 hit Police Story III: 
Supercop.  While it is the third installment of this 
highly successful and entertaining series, there is no 
difficulty in understanding it if you haven't seen the 
first two.  In these films, Jackie plays a determined 
and eager Hong Kong cop named Chan Chia-chu, who finds 
himself in the midst of all manner of criminal 
mischief, which he kung fu kicks and jokes his way out 
of with a "just part of my job" stoicism.  A running 
gag which crops up in this movie is Chia-chu's 
relationship with his pretty, but jealous girlfriend 
May (Maggie Cheung).
At the beginning of Police Story III: Supercop, we 
learn that Interpol and the Royal Hong Kong Police are 
looking for a cop to do the almost impossible (and 
extremely dangerous, natch) job of doing something 
about drug smuggling in Southeast Asia.  Guess who gets 
tricked by his superiors into volunteering?  
After a classic Jackie bit in which Chia-chu makes 
arrangements with May in case he doesn't return -- 
without telling her he's doing anything dangerous -- 
he's off to China, where he is given an undercover 
identity as a small-time criminal by Director Yang, a 
Chinese police officer who just happens to be a 
beautiful woman (Michelle Yeoh).  Well, in all honesty,
I had trouble following the plot after this point; it 
has holes the size of a freight train, and I think 
there are some scenes missing in the version I saw (or 
maybe it just seems like there are).  If you can look 
beyond this, though (and even I, fussy movie watcher 
that I am, had no problem with simply ignoring the 
gaps), you're in for a real treat: the movie, 
particularly the second half, alternates between 
hilariously funny and absolutely amazing, featuring 
some of the most amazing stunts ever put on film.
Jackie is in great form here.  Sure, he doesn't 
have an amazing range as an actor, but that's not the 
point.  He's as charming, witty and charismatic as 
ever, and a real joy to watch.  And when he performs 
his stunts and fight scenes, it is easy to see why he 
is so deservedly popular an action star.  In one heart-
stopping scene, he leaps from a rooftop onto a rope 
ladder dangling from a helicopter, which then flies 
through downtown Kuala Lumpur trying to shake him off.  
The camera angles make it perfectly clear both that it 
really is Jackie on the end of that rope ladder and 
that it was shot without special effects: he really is 
flailing around thirty stories up or passing so close 
over a train that he is momentarily obscured by the 
engine's smoke!
Yeoh is also enjoyable to watch as the efficient 
Communist cop who ends up teaming with Jackie.  Not 
only is she very attractive, she is a great action 
movie star, and she gets some of the best fight scenes, 
comic situations (just watch what she does when she 
finds herself in the middle of a gunfight with a 
bullet-proof vest full of dynamite (!) ), and stunts 
(in one amazing sequence, she jumps from a hill to the 
top of a moving train on a motorcycle).  At times, she 
threatens to upstage Jackie on his home turf, certainly 
no easy feat.  
One of the few weak points of the film, though, is that 
Yeoh and Jackie don't really have any chemistry 
together.  I got the impression that nobody was really 
sure if they should have a cop-buddy relationship or 
some sort of sexual tension between them, so they 
decided to have neither, though there are a few hints 
at both.  While it doesn't really hurt the film, it 
would have been nice to see something besides general 
coolness between these two engaging entertainers,
especially since the unconventional but successful
Chia-chu and the tough, by-the-book Inspector Yang are
obviously meant to represent Hong Kong and mainland
China: it would be nice to explore that subtext in
a bit more detail.
There is, however, great chemistry between Jackie 
and Cheung, whom he runs into while undercover in 
Malaysia, and it is not at all hard to see why their 
relationship has been a thread running through the 
series.  Jackie is at his most engaging when he has 
someone equally charming and down-to-earth like Cheung 
to work off of.  The scenes where Chia-chu is torn 
between the demands of his job and his unwillingness to 
risk angering May are some of the warmest and funniest 
of the film.
Overall, this is a great action film, and features 
some of Jackie Chan's most amazing stunts, as well as a 
great supporting cast and some very funny bits.  It is 
also one of his most "western" films in terms of action 
and style, and people who think they might be turned 
off by Jackie Chan's brand of kung fu comedy but are 
still interested in the man might want to look at this 
film first.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Jackie Chan has been making action movies for almost 
twenty years, but the Western world has only recently begun to 
notice him. Earlier this year came RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, 
which made Schwarzenegger look like a blue-screen amateur. 
Chan did all his own stunts in a movie that cleverly orchestrated 
a lot of them, from the fights instituting pinball machines and 
shopping carts to jumps from bridges onto boats. It would have 
been incredibly hard to top the sheer action in RUMBLE IN THE 
BRONX, so what did the SUPERCOP people do? They went for 
comedy.
        No, really. There are three credited writers for SUPERCOP, 
each of which probably contributed one laugh to the movie for its 
comic scenes, which mostly look awkward and pathetic. I'm 
wondering if the past forty years worth of American sitcoms 
have made it over to Hong Kong yet. If so, they know about the 
age-old setup where someone is pretending to be someone else and 
has to identify relatives in pictures and make up memories about his 
fake identity. It's not that funny here but serves only as chainlinks in 
the action fence. Unfortunately, the action fence in SUPERCOP isn't 
as tall or intricate as in RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, and so has to 
stand up on its own.
        Chan plays a Hong Kong detective who is assigned to 
go undercover in China as a drug-busting supercop. First comes 
the scene where Chan meets his superior, who turns out to be an 
attractive (in an Asian sort of way) woman, then comes the scene 
in which Chan must impress a roomful of trained Chinese cops and 
army soldiers. In the predictable comic style we've seen in our forty 
years of sitcoms, he at first acts embarrassed and reluctant, then 
lets the guy kick his butt a little bit and finally just cuts loose and 
whoops some ass.
        With that out of the way, Chan gets down to business, 
posing as a prisoner. He helps a felon break out of a chain gang 
in one long, martial arts-ridden scene and earns the guy's trust while 
saving his life over and over again. Chan eventually gets taken to 
the big boss, his female superior en tow posing as his sister. She 
comes aboard after a scene in which Chan and some felons visit 
his "family," which consists of all undercover cops and actors, 
including a man dressed up as his senile, nearly-blind mother. All 
of this is supposed to be funny and some of it actually is because 
it's so unknowingly cliched.
        The last thirty minutes of the movie contains the non-stop 
action climax, involving a train, a helicopter and a lot of violent 
fights. None of this is anything new but it's rendered exciting by 
the fact that there are no stuntmen or blue screens. Like RUMBLE 
IN THE BRONX, there is a collection of outtakes during the credits 
that show some of the lesser-executed takes of some of the stunts, 
as when people fell off of moving cars onto the highway or the 
motorcycle jump missed the train entirely.
        There's nothing fake about the action scenes in a Chan 
movie. The actors really are jumping motorcycles on the top of 
trains and hanging precariously from helicopter ladders. That fact 
alone redeems the terrible dialogue, recycled comedy and techno 
versions of "Stayin' Alive" on the soundtrack. And if there had 
been more action to offset the other slow-moving scenes, it would 
have been a good movie instead of just a pretty-good one. RUMBLE 
IN THE BRONX had far more action scenes and was far better, but 
SUPERCOP is still an exciting movie at least part of the time.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Christopher Null
     The Jackie Chan franchise continues to expand in America.  Riding on
the success of last year's RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, Chan returns to U.S.
screens with the release of SUPERCOP.
     Relying on the three pillars of Chandom -- blazingly fast fights,
awesome stunts, and bad dubbing -- Chan once again turns out a crowd
pleaser full of karate chops and busted skulls.  Basically a continuation
of Chan's POLICE STORY series, fans of this genre will find themselves in
familiar territory.
     Okay, there's a bit about him infiltrating a Hong Kong heroin cartel
and, with some serious help from his associate (Michelle Khan), pretty much
kicks everyone's butt.  (How the studio justifies advertising Chan as
"single-handedly" kicking said butt is a mystery to me.)
     So on top of a watery James Bond plot are fights so fast you can't
tell whose limbs are whose, Chan's unique brand of humor, and, as I said,
lots of really, really bad dubbing.  At some level, one begins to wonder
whether this is intentional or not -- if this is just another aspect of the
comedy or if it's really the best they can do.  (About half the Asian
characters have British accents.)
     But who cares?  You don't see a Jackie Chan movie for the sound
quality any more than you watch a Pauly Shore movie for poignant and witty
observations about life.  What you see it for is some huge-ass explosions,
Chan and Khan beating the living crap out of everyone in sight, and a
helicopter-meets-train finale that makes MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE look like an
episode of "Sesame Street."  Then again, that plot gets in the way an awful
lot, slowing down the film unbearably at times... but overall, the picture
manages to keep moving along.
     Special kudos for Ms. Khan, who plays, without a doubt, the strongest
female character I've ever seen in film.  And, as always, don't forget to
stay through the final credits for Chan's twisted version of bloopers, most
of which involve a painful injury of some sort... in case you hadn't gotten
enough of that in the prior 90 minutes.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael Dequina
Jackie Chan should have no trouble keeping his new American fans--or
gaining new ones--with Miramax/Dimension's wide release of Supercop,
enormously entertaining 1992 second sequel (originally released as Police
Story III: Supercop) to his 1985 classic Police Story.
Supercop, directed by frequent Chan collaborator Stanley Tong,
boasts a sturdier story than Chan's recent American breakthrough, the
messily-written Rumble in the Bronx (which was also helmed by Tong).  Chan
once again plays Hong Kong cop "Kevin" Chan, who this time teams with tough
mainland security officer Yang (the incredible HK superstar Michelle Khan,
a.k.a. Michelle Yeoh) on an undercover mission to befriend a criminal (Yuen
Wah) to take down his drug kingpin brother (Ken Tsang).  The title is
something of a joke--the mainland forces recruit Kevin because his past
extraordinary feats make him out to be a "supercop"; however, while he's
definitely good at what he does and delivers in the pinch, he's also a cocky
goofball.  The true "supercop" is the no-nonsense Yang, who could very well
be tougher than he is.
Miramax/Dimension has altered a few things in reworking the film for
a stateside audience.  There's a sharp new opening credit sequence (which
rivals Mission: Impossible for best opening of the year) in place of the
original's brief flashing of the title, stars, and director;  and the film
now opens with Chan's entrance, which originally came about five minutes in,
after some lengthy exposition.  But not all of the changes are for the
better: there's (of course) a mostly ineffective English dialogue track
(thankfully, though, Chan and Khan do their own dubbing); a new score by
Joel McNeely, complete with some out-of-place rap tunes, that doesn't
improve on the perfectly adequate original music; and the de rigueur closing
outtake reel is scored to an excrutiating Tom Jones cover of that '70s camp
gem, "Kung Fu Fighting."
The less successful alterations, though, don't detract from the
film's existing charms, which, of course, is explosive action.  Chan doesn't
engage in as much martial arts as he did in Rumble, and the action here is
more in line with Hollywood productions (i.e. more explosions and gunplay).
But that is not to say the Supercop does not deliver some knockout
sequences, which it definitely does.  The most notable set piece is the
incredible final 20 minute chase, which involves vans, cars, motorcycles,
helicopters, a train, and some unbelievable derring-do from Chan and Khan.
Khan is perhaps the real star of the film, engaging in more of the physical
stunts than Chan, and matching his moves punch for punch, kick for kick (in
fact, Khan and the character of Yang caused such a sensation that she was
given her own spinoff starring vehicle: the disappointingly tepid, virtually
action-free Supercop 2, a.k.a. Once a Cop, a.k.a. Project S, a.k.a. Police
Story III Part 2).  She and Chan also make a formidable pair between action
scenes; their spirited verbal sparring packs as strong a kick as their
martial arts moves.
What is especially notable about Miramax/Dimension's version of
Supercop is what they _didn't_ take out--the comedy, which New Line mostly
removed from Rumble.  While the Americanized Rumble was an entertaining
action flick, it didn't really show a lot of the comedic prowess that makes
Jackie Chan so special and unique; thankfully, the revised Supercop keeps a
great comic scene in which Kevin's girlfriend (played, as in the first two
Police Story films, by the stunning Maggie Cheung) thinks he's cheating on
her with Yang.
Supercop is a double-barreled blessing for Hong Kong action fans.
Number one, it continues the long-overdue stateside success of Jackie Chan;
number two, it unleashes the mighty Michelle Khan on an unsuspecting
American public.  Now, if only John Woo muse Chow Yun-Fat could make _his_
U.S. breakthrough...

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Fresh from the success of New Line Cinema's release of RUMBLE IN
THE BRONX, Dimension Films has repackaged another Jackie Chan
action-comedy.  POLICE STORY III: SUPERCOP, a 1992 release, has been
dubbed into largely inflection-less English, re-cut with a new title
sequence, and re-scored with a hip soundtrack that includes Tom Jones
singing "Kung Fu Fighting" over the closing credits.  Groan.  The result
is a rather run-of-the-mill rouser about an affable Hong Kong police
detective and martial arts expert (Chan) who, along with his Interpol
side-kicking sidekick (Michelle Khan), infiltrates a Chinese drug ring.
     If released at any other time in the year, SUPERCOP might win some
raves.  However, when played alongside such sure-to-pleasers as
INDEPENDENCE DAY and A TIME TO KILL, the experience almost seems a waste
of adrenaline.  Chan's self-performed stunts are remarkable enough,
sure, but director Stanley Tong delivers nowhere near the amount
suggested by the ads.  The finale is a corker: an amazing helicopter and
train chase with Chan and Company kung-fu fighting on top of a moving
choo choo.  And then, when the bad guys are defeated and the Eastern
world is again safe, the customary outtake reel rolls to reveal how they
did all those scary-looking stunts.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
John Robertson
Starring: Jackie Chan, Michelle Khan, Maggie Cheung, Ken Tsang, Yuen Wah,
Bill Tung.
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for Supercop is someone in the mood 
for an action film that doesn't pull any punches (or use stuntmen!), who also 
gets a kick out of campy humour and bad overdubbing.  This film's perfect 
person would give Supercop 10 out of 10.
For those whose first experience with Jackie Chan was this year's Rumble in 
the Bronx (Cannonball Run notwithstanding), Supercop will be both a surprise 
and a delight.  Everything that there was to love about Rumble in the Bronx, 
namely the action, the incredible fight choreography and the charisma of 
Jackie Chan, are to be found in Supercop.  The surprise for people familiar 
with Rumble is that Supercop is actually a much better movie.  Where Rumble 
was something of a comedy that scored many of its laughs through the absurdity 
of the plot and setting, Supercop is a more straightforward action flick in 
the summer blockbuster vein that gives you smiles along the way.
The plot of Supercop isn't too important, but a brief summary for those who 
are interested. Chan plays Kevin, a Hong Kong cop with an impressive resume in 
the martial arts.  He volunteers for a mission infiltrating a drug ring that 
has its tendrils spread all through southeast Asia.  He suceeds, and makes his 
way to the inner circle of the gang along with his sister "Hanna" (Michelle 
Khan), the second best thing about the movie (after Chan himself).
Supercop isn't a typical action movie, and one of the ways this is most 
apparent is the character played by Khan.  Most females in action movies are 
ornaments typically, who slow up the hero, trip when being chased, and maybe 
kick someone in the groin for humour near the end of the movie. Sure I'm over 
generalizing, but compared to Khan that's what every female action movie 
sidekick seems like.  She not only keeps pace with Chan in the fighting and 
humour department, she does her own stunts as well, and at least one of hers 
is better than anything Jackie does.
If you had to find a flaw with Supercop, you don't have to look far -- or 
listen far as the case may be.  Made in Hong Kong, the movie is overdubbed 
into English, but whoa, the audio on the dubbing is REALLY bad.  It sounds 
like it was done through a couple of tin cans tied together with string, and 
that's just not what you expect for your eight bucks. 
Next movie Miramax decides to bring us from Chan's repetoire, I'll buy the 
microphones for the dubbing if they let me meet Jackie. :)
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who has less 
experience, is less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the 
Perfect Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a 
simple rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 

Author
Leong Heng Cheong
     This summer, Hollywood brought us LETHAL WEAPON 3 -- a movie about
two buddy cops out to get the villain.  Hong Kong brought us POLICE
STORY III -- a movie about two undercover cops out to get the villain.
     POLICE STORY III: SUPER COP (same Chinese title) stars Jackie Chan,
one of the hottest HK action movie actors at the moment.  It also stars
Michelle Khan, together with Maggie Cheung in a very very minor role.
It is directed by Stanley Tong.
     POLICE STORY III: SUPER COP is about a Hong-Kong police/detective
who was sent to China as an undercover cop against an international
druglord.  There, he was paired with the Chinese counterpart in the
mission.  By the end of the movie, the two had travelled back to Hong
Kong, then to Vietnam/Thailand border, and Kuala Lumpur of Malaysia with
the villain of the movie.
     For those who are looking for a tight plot, you won't find it here.
I don't think there is much of a plot anyway.  Even by the end of the
movie, I still am unsure of what exactly is the objective of the
mission.  And then, there are many various plot holes all the way from
the beginning till the end of the movie.  You really have to heavily
suspend your belief when watching this movie.  Or better still -- don't
think.
     And if you ceased to use your brain power, you will find POLICE
STORY III: SUPER COP a very fun and entertaining action movie.  The
stunts are spectacular, and the action coordinating tightly packed.
Those who are bored by the action sequences in LETHAL WEAPON 3 will find
POLICE STORY III much more energetic.  This is the strength of HK
action movies: they pack in all the wonderful stunts with almost no
regards to the plot or feasbility.
     Except for a few jokes that are linked to the previous films, this
sequel is almost an independent film.  Jackie Chan, who directed the
earlier film in the series, concentrated on the action and the acting in
this sequel.  Almost all of the stunts are performed by the actors
themselves, which is quite rare in Hollywood productions.
     So far, I've only seen two type of films that can attract (almost)
all of the audience to stay throughout the closing credits.  One of
which is from the producers/directors/writers of NAKED GUN and TOP
SECRET!  The other: Jackie Chan's movies.  As usual, after the end of
the movie, the audience are treated to outtakes of the show, and scenes
where the stunts failed.
     In short, POLICE STORY III: SUPER COP is a very entertaining piece
of action film.  Audience should never look forward to the plot nor the
acting in these kind of HK films.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jackie Chan, Michelle Khan, Yuen Wah, Bill Tung, Ken Tsang
Director: Stanley Tong
Producers: Willie Chan and Edward Tang
Screenplay: Edward Tang, Fibe Ma, and Lee Wai Yee
Cinematography: Lam Kwok Wah
Music: Joel McNeely
U.S. Distributor: Miramax/Dimension Films
Dubbed into English
      Miramax owes a debt to New Line Cinema.  In order to facilitate
Jackie Chan's long-overdue breakthrough in the American market, New Line
spent a lot of money hyping Chan's RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, taking great
pains to make sure nearly everyone who saw a print ad or a TV spot was
aware that Chan does all his own stuntwork.  The campaign worked,
because RUMBLE turned a profit.  But Miramax, who owns the rights to
several of Chan's previously-unreleased films, is now reaping the
benefits of New Line's cash layout.  Judging by the healthy opening
weekend turnout, SUPERCOP is going to be profitable for its distributor.
And, after years of frustration, Jackie Chan has finally found his
American niche.
     SUPERCOP was released internationally three years ago under the
title POLICE STORY 3, but, aside from playing a few specialized venues,
it had no U.S. exposure.  Now, with a new soundtrack, the movie has been
thrown into wide release, and, in its current state, represents one of
the summer's best opportunities for pure, undemanding entertainment.
With its infectious mix of action and comedy, SUPERCOP is vastly
different from any big budget American picture.  And the knowledge that
Chan and his co-stars are doing their own stunts only sweetens the pot.
Who can imagine Arnold Schwarzenegger dangling from a helicopter
hundreds of feet above the ground?  Or Sylvester Stallone falling off a
moving train?  Then there are the martial arts sequences (choreographed
by director Stanley Tong), which are, quite simply, amazing, and remind
the viewer that the fist is faster than the eye.
     SUPERCOP gives audiences an opportunity to appreciate the clown
aspect of Chan's personality (something we'll be getting more exposure
to in an upcoming American production where his co-star is Chris
Farley).  Although he's best known as an action star, he's also a gifted
comic.  He has an expressive face -- his features go through more
contortions than his body.  SUPERCOP is a better movie than RUMBLE IN
THE BRONX, in large part because it's funnier.  The dubbed English is
actually an asset for this kind of film -- the cheesy mis-synching of
lips adds to the goofy fun.
     Frankly, dialogue doesn't mean much in SUPERCOP, nor does the plot.
It's a framing device to get Chan into action.  All we really need to
know is which characters are the good guys and which ones are the bad
guys, and, once that has been established, little else matters.  For the
record, SUPERCOP pairs Chan's Hong Kong detective with a female Chinese
security officer (Michelle Khan).  Together, they go undercover to break
a master criminal, Panther (Yuen Wah), out of prison, so he can lead
them back to his drug lord brother (Ken Tsang).  Their goal:  infiltrate
the organization and bring it down.
     As is usual in a Chan film, the end credits (which show out-takes
of failed stunts) are one of SUPERCOP's highlights.  There are more
laughs in this hilarious three-minute sequence than in the whole of
KINGPIN.  I can't think of a better reason to stay through the entire
movie.  Ultimately, the closing montage points out one of the chief
differences between Chan's stylized, fast-paced films and those of his
American counterparts:  this is action with a smile, not a grimace.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Steve Kong
Jackie Chan does all his stunts. That's something hard to say about action
"heroes" lately who rely on stunt doubles. SuperCop is actually the third
film in the Police Story series. But, that does not make it a requirement
to see the first two before seeing SuperCop. SuperCop is a self-contained
film.
Jackie plays Kevin Chan, a supercop in Hong Kong. He is talked into a
mission to stop a large drug lord in Hong Kong. But the assignment first
takes him to China, where he meets the Chief of Security, played by
Michelle Khan. The story, though flimsy, is not what one would go to see at
a Jackie Chan film. And indeed, From here, the story slows down and the
action takes over. And it is not just action, there is comedy interleaved
in the action too, to relieve tension.
There are two hugely memorable action sequences in SuperCop. One takes
place in a drug lord's camp and the other takes place in Malaysia. The one
in Malaysia has Jackie hanging from a rope ladder, which is attached to a
helicopter flying over the city of Kuala Lumpur.
Another different sequence shows off the humor that Jackie performs. And
this is in the earlier portion of the film at a Chinese Special Forces
Training Camp.
Jackie shows that it is possible for an action hero to be brave enough to
do their own stunts, be funny, and likeable.
SuperCop is pure action and should be seen. Don't leave after the movie
finishes at the end of ever Jackie Chan movie there are outtakes and
SuperCop is no different. There are more laughs in the outtakes than there
are in a good sitcom. You can also see how dangerous the stunts get. It's
not a Jackie fikm unless there is someone being taking away in a stretcher.
And after you watch SuperCop, see First Strike, whish is Police Story 4.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: The best place to start if you're a Jackie Chan newcomer. Roars
along, never stops for breath, and frequently hilarious.
To talk about Jackie Chan as a "stuntman" is to miss a million things.
Jackie is not only one of the most accomplished and fearsomely unafraid
physical adepts on the screen today, but also a very funny guy. He reminds
me of the way Arnold Schwartzenegger *used* to make me laugh -- he's funny
just standing there, copping a look.
SUPERCOP has Jackie making us laugh, scream, duck, root, and gasp for
breath, often all in the same scene. It's actually the third in a loosely
related series of movies, each with Jackie playing Kevin Chan, a Hong Kong
policeman who has a knack for getting neck-deep into trouble and then
karate-kicking his way out of it. (The others are also worth seeing.) It's a
little slow to start, but once it gets moving, it's a field day.
The movie has a fairly sophisticated plot for movies of this kind. Kevin is
tapped for a dangerous DEA assignment to be accomplished in mainland China,
which requires him to collaborate with the attractive (and ass-kicking)
chief fo Chinese security (played here by the ever-enjoyable Michelle Yeoh).
There's a fun chemistry between the two of them, especially in an early
scene where she tries to brief him and he keeps making wondering comments
about how great she looks in that uniform.
Kevin is assigned to help spring a known gangster from jail -- all
undercover, of course -- and have him lead the two of them to a noted drug
boss. The drug boss, however, has problems of his own: his wife's on trial
for many of his own crimes, and she's got the key to an account with all of
his drug funds. This means, of course, endless trouble -- not the least of
which is that Kevin bumps into his girlfriend while he's out in the field,
and she sees him with this other woman, and... but that's one of the movie's
unique pleasures: the way it crosses from action to comedy effortlessly.
Action. There is, of course, non-stop action in this movie -- everything
from one-on-one kung fu to all-out gun battles to a sppedboat with eight
engines (!) outrunning the Hong Kong coast guard. There is also a virtuoso
climax, which features, among other things, Jackie danging from a ladder
tied to a helicopter, a wrong-way freeway chase (which requires Michelle to
do an awesomely difficult handstand stunt), a fight on top of a moving train
that also involves the 'copter as well as a motorcycle. You get the idea.
This is to action movies what a burger with everything on it is to fast
food: quick, enjoyable, filling. Watch it with friends. When they stop
making movies like this, the world will be a tad greyer.
