Title
Review for Go West (1925)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Not to be confused with a 1923 short also by
Buster Keaton having the same title, "Go West"
is a comedy, western and romance.  It is a change
of pace from the usual Keaton feature, as it
is his only 'western', and his love interest
is played by a cow named Brown Eyes.  Brown Eyes
not only received fourth billing, very unusual
for a cow even in those days, but she got better
reviews than did Keaton.
"Go West" begins much like other Keaton
comedies.  Buster plays a 'down on his luck'
fellow named Friendless.  His life in the city
has been a failure, so he decides to take the
old advice by Horace Greeley.  He hitches a ride
on a train (trains are prominent in many Keaton
silents, including his last, "The Railrodder"
from 1965) to the old west.  He somehow gets a
job at a ranch as a cowboy, where his incompetence
provides much humor.  For example, he tries to
milk a cow through persuasion, and has to use a
makeshift ladder to saddle a horse.  He learns
quickly, but never replaces his trademark porkpie
hat with western garb.  The gruff ranch owner (Howard
Truesdale) has a pretty daughter (Kathleen Myers).
But Friendless' true love is Brown Eyes, who saves
his life from a rampaging bull.
One entertaining scene has Keaton catching a bad
guy cheating at cards.  The gambler pulls a gun on
Friendless, telling him 'to smile when he says that'.
Keaton, whose nickname was The Great Stoneface,
only manages a smile by pushing up the corners of
his mouth with his fingers!
Plot contrivances result in a herd of cattle rampaging
through city streets.  These scenes are the most
spectacular of the film, with Keaton's usually dangerous
stunts kept on a modest scale here.  Keaton's father
Joe has a cameo as a barber.  Keaton mentor 'Fatty'
Arbuckle, a Hollywood pariah at the time due to acquitted
murder/rape charges, appears uncredited as a man in drag.
In keeping with silent tradition, Keaton is both the fool
responsible, and the hero that salvages the situation.
When the grateful owner asks Friendless what he wants
as a reward, Friendless points behind him and says, "Her".
The owner is visible upset, thinking Friendless is
indicating his daughter.  But no, it's Brown Eyes that
Friendless wants, and the four ride off into the sunset
together.
"Go West" is both charming and entertaining, and
deserves better than its obscure status.  It is nearly
the equal of the much lauded "Sherlock, Jr.",
although it doesn't approach the depth of Keaton's best
film, "The General". (72/100)
briankoller@usa.net
http://elvisfan.simplenet.com/movies/movies.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-briankoller
