Title
Review for Margarita Happy Hour (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
"I'm so exhausted all the time...  Can't ask my mom for help...  You
wanna split some nachos?...  So I spent my whole friggin' day at
Medicaid...  Drink up, ladies -- only 15 minutes left of happy hour!"
Five irresponsible late-twentysomething mommies meet at an El Cheapo
Mexican restaurant to splurge on $2 Margaritas.  What better way to hang
on to their last vestige of rebellious slacker spirit?  They drink to
each other's health or bitch about the state of affairs while their
two-year-old babies crawl around under the table having tea parties. 
It's pretty goddamned cute without being precious or sentimental.
Living in the artsy section of Brooklyn with seven roommates,
sharp-witted freelance illustrator Zelda (Eleanor Hutchins), sporting a
nasty scar on her cheek, is somehow just scraping by.  Even if the kid
is adorable, it's no picnic taking care of her Little Z (long-haired
Jonah Leland).  Our surly heroine is continually forced to deal with the
system without the benefit of help from her affable fuck-up of a
boyfriend, Max (Larry Fessenden, Habit).  This couple is rough around
the edges, but both care for the baby and still share feelings for each
other even if the electric spell of first love is gone.  Sure, he loves
me -- he just can't stand to look at my face.
An assured directorial debut by Ilya Chaiken, Margarita Happy Hour won
critical accolades at the 2001 Sundance Film Festival, receiving the
catchy label of "Sex in the City for the downtown crowd."  I guess
that's someone's way of saying Margarita centers on dealing with the
pressures of raising a baby in the starving artist milieu.
Comparing this authentic, lived-in low budget feature to a glossy TV
show is something of a misnomer -- Chaiken's inventive directorial
approach really harks back to 70's filmmakers like Robert Altman or Hal
Ashby.  That cinematic heyday was a time when "slice of life" actually
meant empathetic, unsentimental warts 'n' all sketches of everyday
life.  It's great to see new directors as diverse as Aiyana Elliott (The
Ballad of Ramblin' Jack), Jonathan Nossiter (Signs and Wonders), and
Chaiken reclaiming that cinematic spirit.
The casting couldn't be better.  As Zelda, Hutchins is as sharp as a
whip with charisma to spare.  Whether sparring with her boyfriend or
telling a bedtime story to Little Z, she presents a character who is
wholly authentic and believable.  She's got her good days, she's got her
bad days, she can be a real bitch sometimes (and if you went out with
Max, you would too!)  In the same way Chaiken has found lived-in urban
locations, cramped apartments and rickety stairs, she's also found an
actress who completely fits into the environment of her film.
There are strong supporting turns from Fessenden as the ne'er do well
boyfriend, investing the role with surprising warmth and complexity, and
Holly Ramos as Zelda's long suffering buddy, Natali, just out of rehab,
all sad eyes and gimlet smiles.  Her delicate, careworn performance
defies junkie stereotypes.
Zelda's flashbacks are seamlessly incorporated into the present day,
detailing happier times when she picked up Max in a bar ("I hope you
write better than you play pool,") or walked the streets of Manhattan
with Natali in search of par-tayy central.  Hedonism is fun, kids.  You
can only evade mature decisions for so long, though.  Chaiken gives her
heroine a handful of tough decisions, leading to some dramatic
contrivances that seem a bit heavy handed in this otherwise
naturalistic, perceptive scenario.
These faults are easily forgiven, even forgotten, when Chaiken unveils
her spacious, clearly motivated open ending.  Margarita Happy Hour is
that rarity in movies -- as though the narrative has begun long before
the opening reel and will continue after the closing credits end.  A
full world has been presented onscreen, not some series of carefully
structured plot points building to a pat resolution.  Let's be honest,
how many times do you watch a movie feeling like the characters actually
had lives outside of the screenplay?
It'd be a shame not to mention at least one of the character details
that Chaiken literally throws away during the 98 minute running time. 
The scene has little to do with the plot, but adds to the cohesiveness
of Margarita's world: Larry Fessenden is walking down the street with a
cuppa coffee, not a care in the world.  He stops to light a cigarette,
and one of those obnoxious bike messengers sideswipes him.  "MY FUCKIN'
COFFEE!"  It goes flying.  Not leaving well enough alone, the messenger
rides back and forth, taunting him.  Ha ha.
Fessenden eventually gets sick of it and lives out every urbanite's
fantasy: he knocks the biker's punk ass out.  Let's just chalk it up as
another classic New York moment in a movie jam-packed with them.
Director: Ilya Chaiken
Producers: Michael Ellenbogen, Susan Leber
Writer: Ilya Chaiken
Starring: Eleanor Hutchins, Larry Fessenden, Holly Ramos, Barbara
Sicuranza, Amanda Vogel, Macha Ross, Kristin Dispaltro
http://www.margaritahappyhour.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
