Title
Review for Johanna D'Arc of Mongolia (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
Seven Western women are travelling on the Trans-Siberian railroad when
their train is hijacked by (female) Mongolian warriors.  The Western
women are taken as hostages and kept in a Mongolian village.  Although
the premise of the film is interesting, it is not an adventure story.
Instead it is more of a travelogue and culture study, and is fairly 
boring.
West Germany (English subtitles), color, 1989, 165 minutes.
Director/Writer:  Ulrike Ottinger
     The plot of the film is relatively low-key.  It begins on the
Trans-Siberian railroad, where four travellers, all women, meet and get
acquainted.  Two are middle-aged -- an English anthropologist, and a
German schoolteacher.  Two are young -- an American actress, and
Johanna, a young woman who is travelling light (backpack only).  The
women meet an amusing American man, an effeminate Yiddish opera singer
who is a glutton, and describes his meals using extremely beautiful,
poetic language.  Also on board is a singing group, the Kalinka
sisters.
     While crossing Mongolia, the train is stopped by a group of female
Mongolian warriors.  The Western women (the 4 travellers, plus the 3
Kalinka sisters), are taken as hostages, and moved to an (all-female)
Mongolian village.  The story continues with the cultural confrontations
that result when the Westerners experience Mongolian culture and 
traditions.
     I saw this movie because a brief review of it (published in a film
festival program guide) described it as a "lesbian LAWRENCE OF ARABIA".
Because of this comparison, I expected the film to be an epic adventure,
with a big budget.  The reality is that the film is a very low-budget
travelogue.  The film has a very thin plot that serves as filler between
scenes of traditional Mongolian culture and the countryside.
     The primary focus of the film is cultural interaction.  A pamphlet
available in the theater lobby included an interview with the Director,
and in the interview she specifically states that the focus of the film
is not "exotica" (i.e., Mongolia as an "exotic" culture), but the
interaction of cultures that are substantially different.  (I would
prefer to quote the interview directly, but have lost the pamphlet.)
The comparison of the film to LAWRENCE OF ARABIA may be reasonable or
not, depending on what you consider LAWRENCE to be -- an adventure
film, a travelogue, or a film on cultural interaction.  (The very low
budget and low production values of JOHANNA are not even close to the
high standards of LAWRENCE).
     The film does provide a view into Mongolia, an isolated country
that is rarely visited by Westerners.  However, in order to experience
the travelogue "portion", one must endure roughly 1.5 hours of slow,
weak plot development.  (At 2 hrs 45 min, the movie is much too long.)
Because of the weak (nearly non-existent) plot I would not recommend the
film to a general audience.  Those with a strong interest in Mongolia
might find the film worthy of consideration.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
