Title
Review for Home of Our Own, A (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
     If you want big emotions, you want Steven Spielberg; if it's
understated sentimentality you're looking for, you call Tony Bill.
From 1980's MY BODYGUARD through the recent UNTAMED HEART, Bill has
demonstrated a skill with emotional stories that steer clear of maudlin
excess.  As one who enjoys feeling without feeling manipulated, I find
that a pretty neat trick.  A HOME OF OUR OWN is an extremely appealing
low-key family drama, driven by Kathy Bates' rock-solid lead
performance, which adds to Bill's growing resume of restrained
character pieces.
     Bates plays Frances Lacey, a hard-working widow trying to raise
six children alone in 1962.  After losing a job in a potato chip plant,
Frances decides to move the family from Los Angeles, much to the dismay
of oldest son Shane (Edward Furlong).  They set out with no specific
destination and virtually no money, winding up in rural Idaho.  There
she spots an unfinished house owned by Mr. Moon (Soon-Teck Oh) and
manages to barter chores for the opportunity to live in and repair it.
She takes a job at a local bowling alley, and slowly but surely begins
working towards her dream of settling her family into a life with some
kind of future in a home of their own.
     A HOME OF OUR OWN plays a lot like an impoverished "Wonder Years,"
with its 1960s setting and wry retrospective narration, but unlike that
series the voice-over is rarely intrusive and doesn't draw the focus
away from Frances.  As played by Kathy Bates, Frances is the heart and
soul of the family and the film, a woman so determined to make it on
her own terms that she occasionally loses sight of what's best for her
children.  Bates is near perfect, a presence that commands respect; one
is hard-pressed to think of another actor who would be as convincing as
a sane mother of six.  Her slightly weathered features convey years of
struggle, but she maintains an earthy good humor and a relentless
optimism borne of necessity.
     That Kathy Bates gives a great performance can't be considered
much of a surprise.  What is a pleasant surprise is A HOME OF OUR OWN's
realistic portrayal of family life in hardship.  With the exception of
Edward Furlong, the Lacey children are played by first-time actors, and
they are quite natural.  Scenes are filled with petty squabbles, but
beneath them all is a kind of solidarity which never seems
mock-heroic.  There is a level of love and mutual respect in the
interaction which frankly threw me.  It's not often that a movie does
an American family this kind of justice.
     Like most of Tony Bill's work, A HOME OF OUR OWN is best when it's
quietly observant.  There are a few "Big Confrontations," and they seem
forced, primarily due to Furlong's histrionics.  Young actors tend to
get into a lot of trouble when they're asked to yell, or to deliver
lines like, "You care more about the house than you do about us," and
this is no exception.  The film also trips when it spends too much time
away from Kathy Bates, such as a tacked-on sequence involving Furlong's
first date.  I was a bit disappointed in the inspirational finale,
which loses some of the integrity points that HOME had accrued.  It's
the small family moments, particularly the car trip to Idaho and a
visit to a church thrift store, which really won me over.
     I shouldn't forget the nice performance of Soon-Teck Oh as "Mr.
Moon" Munimura, the lonely gardener who finds a new family in the
Laceys.  I wish the filmmakers had done less with Furlong's character
and more with his, the one through whom we can see the family's
struggle with somewhat objective eyes.  "Wholesome" is a word that
usually inspires derision, but I couldn't be more complimentary when I
say that A HOME OF OUR OWN is a wholesome, subtly emotional film,
well-acted and skillfully directed.

Author
James Berardinelli
It's 1962 in Los Angeles, and Frances Lacey (Kathy Bates) has spent the 
last few years just trying to make ends meet.  Ever since the death of 
her husband, life has been nothing but drudgery as she works all hours to 
feed her children, a group that she has fondly dubbed the "Lacey tribe."  
Other than son Shane (Edward Furlong) and daughter Lynn (Clarissa 
Lassig), the kids are to young to be of much substantial help.  Finally, 
after getting fired from her job at a potato chip packing plant, Frances 
decides to move her family east, looking for a home that they can call 
their own.  They find it - a rundown old shack with no roof, electricity, 
or plumbing - in Idaho, on a plot of land owned by Mr. Moon (Soon-Teck 
Oh).  Once Frances convinces him to sell, the difficulty comes in meeting 
his price, since the Lacey tribe is flat broke.  But that's never stopped 
them before.
A HOME OF OUR OWN is supposed to be a deeply-moving emotional experience, 
showing how a fatherless family can face down any odds if they stick 
together.  You know the kind of movie that I mean - one that has women 
reaching for tissues and men clearing their throats.  Supposedly based on 
a true story, it contains all the elements of bad melodrama, and the 
overall effect is overly-sentimental, bordering on cloying.  There's even 
an ending that rivals that of SCENT OF A WOMAN for silliness.
It seems unlikely that a factual story would follow so many well-
established Hollywood formulas, but that's what happens in A HOME OF OUR 
OWN.  There aren't too many that this movie misses, the most obvious and 
disappointing of which is the mother/son conflict that has become 
obligatory in any picture that touches, however briefly, on a coming-of-
age.  At best, the resolution of this subplot is weak.
In a way, it's too bad that the movie always takes the easy way out 
because, taken individually, many of the scenes are effective.  One that 
stands out is a gem between Frances and daughter Lynn on Christmas 
morning.  With no money to spend on her mother for a present, Lynn has 
knitted Frances slippers, and here she presents them.  This is poignant 
and effective without resorting to the manipulation that is present 
throughout too much of the film.
Another thing I found annoying about A HOME OF OUR OWN is the voice-over 
- a depressingly overused tool in these sorts of retrospective films.  
Sometimes it works, but more often than not, as here, it gives the film 
makers an easy way out.  They no longer have to show emotions and events, 
they can simply relate them through the narration.  This technique leads 
to gaps in the story, and an general feeling on the part of the viewer 
that he's missing something important.
The acting is a mixed bag.  Kathy Bates is superlative as Frances, and 
has found a female character with real depth and strength.  These are 
rare enough in movies these days that when one shows up, no matter how 
dubious the film's quality is, an actress will jump at it.  Clarissa 
Lassig opened my eyes as young Lynn, managing a quality of fresh 
innocence that is enjoyable to watch.  Edward Furlong has improved since 
AMERICAN HEART, but his range is still limited.  Slowly-but-surely, his 
experience with different directors is building him to a level of 
competence.  
Perhaps the most obvious problem with A HOME OF OUR OWN is that there's 
nothing new in it.  Pieces of this film can be found in recent offerings 
from THIS BOY'S LIFE to A BRONX TALE.  Maybe the release timing is poor, 
but it seems like I've just gone through everything this movie has to 
offer in superior productions.  A HOME OF OUR OWN isn't a bad movie, but 
there's certainly no spark to make it stand out.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
