Title
Review for Golem, wie er in die Welt kam, Der (1920)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  "They don't make movies like they used to" is a common
expression from those who would like to turn back the clock
to the glorious days that featured Humphrey Bogart, Greta
Garbo and Veronica Lake.  But who among us would return
to the age of the silents--the genre that enveloped all films
until Al Jolson's voice reverberated on the screen in 1927? 
While few would be such Luddites, lovers of movies do
reserve a proper respect for the masterworks of a quarter-
century, and what better way to present a stroke of genius
than to add a brilliant new score to a restored print, using not
simply a piano but a wonderful chamber orchestra to heighten
the tension and elevate the joys?  This is exactly what the
Film Society of Lincoln Center in collaboration with the
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center has done--
splashing one of the major feats of German expressionism
onto the screen of the Walter Reade Theater on February
19th and 20th.  The saddest news is that "Der Golem" was
featured for three performances only, so that if you were not
among the fortunate folks who filled the theater at that time,
you're not be likely to catch another magic moment that
featured the Arditti String Quarter under Gunter A.
Buchwald's direction--highlighting the tones of the world-
renowed klezmer clarinet of David Krakauer executing a brand new
score by Betty Olivero.
   The film has German titles over which English supertitles
have been superimposed--word-dubbing that will not make
you strain to read as do the conventional white subtitles which
become almost invisible against a light background.  Paul
Wegener's 1920 version, just one of the half-dozen or so on
the subject of the golem, is considered the best.  We see
why. Though much of the film appears dark as though it were
a 1940s noir release rather than an expressionist tract from
two decades earlier, when the imagery is bold it is
electrifying.  You won't often find a startling opener even in a
modern work with all the technological trimmings as the one
that unlocks this story: Rabbi Loew (Albert Steinruck), the
religious leader of a community of 16th Century Jews living in
a Prague ghetto, stares through his telescope to witness a
tragic foreboding.  According to the astrological charts, the
Jews are about to be victimized by yet another pogrom from
the Christian community.  They will soon be forced to leave
their residence under the orders of Emperor Rudolph (here
known as Emperor Luhois and played by Otto Gebuhr), who
is about to play some reindeer games with another gathering
of the world's most popular scapegoats.
   Adapted from old legends, "The Golem" is the story of how
the rabbi of a Jewish ghetto threatened by Christian
persecution builds and later animates a avenging angel of
clay both to scare and to astonish the frivolous court of the
emperor.  A precursor to the Frankenstein movies, "The
Golem" shows that the creature, endowed with human
emotions, becomes a steamroller of destruction that threatens
the people who created it as well as the enemies of the Jews. 
The irony of the movie--which concludes with the image of a
large Star of David planted in triumph on a principal house of
the ghetto--could have led to a new wave of anti-Semitism:
the golem had killed a leading Christian noble, the messenger
sent by emperor with a proclamation of eviction.  After this
messenger, Florian (Lothar Muthel), had spent a night of love
with the rabbi's daughter Miriam (Lyda Salmonova) who has
sneaked him into the ghetto, he is attacked by the woman's
boy friend, the personal servant of the rabbi.  The servant
orders the golem to take care of the matter: Florian is thrown
from the roof and killed.  The one scene in the movie that
resonates for a contemporary audience involves the rabbis's
summoning of an evil spirit just when the stars are in the
proper position in order to find the magic word that would turn
his inanimate creature into claymation.  The appearance of
the evil sorceror brings to mind all the current techniques of
horror and vampire movies like the "Alien" series and "From
Dusk Till Dawn."
   This film, which would be a particular treat for those who
have never seen a silent (especially one with the live music
of a world-famous chamber orchestra), features stereotypical
characters and emotions with which we're all familiar.  The
principal source of laughter from a modern audience is the
theatrical emotions on the faces of the characters.  When
they are frightened they open their mouths real wide and tilt
their bodies back in horror.  When they are overwhelmed by
passion, they put the backs of their hands on the foreheads
and lean back as though carried away by a giant wave.  Lyda
Salmonova as the fair maiden-of-the-one-night-stand could
easily pass for an American flapper of the 1920s.  Director
Paul Wegener as the titled character is scary only in his
height.  Otherwise he is a benign character who gets angry
only when someone tries to kill him by tearing from his chest
the magic word that has animated him.
   Even if you do not go for contemporary music, you're
bound to find the tones of the Arditti string quartet apropos in
conjuring up tension and joy and alike, and David Krakauer's
klezmer clarinet would be the envy of everyone from Benny
Goodman to Woody Allen.  
   "The Golem," then, is a major work from the German
expressionist school of filmmaking, the genre described by
Matt Zoller Seitz in the 2/16/00 issue of The New York Press
as having "dead-soaked subject matter, high-contrast
imagery, skewed angles and dream logic."  The techniques
have been superseded by the gross-out horror animation of
recent times, the ones featuring aliens springing from
people's stomachs and metamorphisizing into squishy things
that couldn't scare a 5-year-old.  Wes Craven could take
some clues from Paul Wegener's concepts.  The "Scream"
trilogy would have become a work of real depth, meaning,
and fright and instead of a banal exercise in adolescent
angst.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 78 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
