Title
Review for Two Bits (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is a nostalgic film about a child, his mother, and his
grandfather.  It takes place in South Philadelphia in the summer of
1933 when two bits (25 cents) was, in the time of that depression, what
some men would beg to earn for a day's work.  On the day the film
opens, a truck with music and billboards is going through town
announcing the Grand Opening of a new Movie Palace, with the admission
price of 25 cents until 6 PM.
     Looking wistfully at the truck as it passes is twelve-year-old
Gennaro Spirito (Jerry Barone); how he would love to have had the
necessary two bits.  Gennaro lives with his mother, Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio, and his sister, and his grandfather (Al Pacino) who is
not only his best friend but also his mentor on what is happening in
the world.  Grandpa announces that this is his last day on earth, that
he will give Gennaro 25 cents when he dies.  Gennaro does not like the
idea of his grandfather dying so that he can go to the movies.
     Although Gennaro tries to pick up some change by performing in the
streets, he remains empty handed.  Grandpa offers his grandson one
other opportunity to earn the two bits.  It seems that when grandpa was
a young man, many years ago, he had hurt a young woman and he wants
Gennaro to visit the old lady and offer Grandpa's late apology.
     Jerry Barone is a handsome youngster with a sweet, kind face.  He
is well able to fit right in with the older stars, Pacino and
Mastrantonio who give their usual fine performances.
     Director James Foley keeps the film purposely at a slow pace,
reflecting the depression, the summer heat, the boy's frustration and
Grandpa's last days.  Very nicely done.

Author
James Berardinelli
     When you think of Al Pacino, the image that comes to mind is one of
energy, intensity, and violence.  Whether a cop (SEA OF LOVE, SERPICO,
HEAT) or a crook (THE GODFATHERs, SCARFACE), Pacino's characters are
almost always hard-hitting, hyperactive portraits of caged fury.  So
it's more than a minor departure for the actor to appear in James
Foley's TWO BITS as Gitano Sabatoni, a dying, regretful old man.  This
is a small, understated role--character actor material--yet Pacino
immerses himself so fully in the part that we forget about the performer
the moment we see the performance.
     Despite Pacino's presence in the cast, this isn't his movie.  Nor
does it belong to Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, who has a supporting role
as Gitano's timid daughter.  Instead, the focus is on newcomer Gerry
Barrone, who plays 12-year old Gennaro, the fictionalized childhood
counterpart of screenwriter Joseph Stefano.  This film, which Stefano
first committed to paper in 1970, is autobiographical, recounting one
crucial day in his life as a boy in South Philadelphia during the heat
of a Depression era summer.
     That day is August 26, 1933, when Gennaro first starts noticing
life for what it is.  It's a day of eye-opening experiences and tough
lessons; of awareness, magic, and sadness.  As Alec Baldwin states in
his voiceover narration, it's the day La Paloma--the newest movie
theater in the neighborhood--opens.  Until 6 pm, there's a special
rate at the cinema:  get in for only 25 cents.  So Gennaro spends his
time roaming the streets, looking for odd jobs that will pay enough for
him to afford a matinee.  This quest for two bits takes place against
the backdrop of an America where the only thing more scarce than money
is employment.
     The story is simple, and the film's message is equally as plain:
never give up wanting and striving, no matter how unattainable the dream
seems.  For Gennaro in TWO BITS, that goal is watching a movie in the
air-conditioned confines of La Paloma.  As the film progresses, this
simple theater takes on a monumental symbolic importance.  Although TWO
BITS isn't explicitly about the love of movies, a sense of affection and
admiration for the black-and-white classics of the time permeates the
production, beginning with the clips shown during the opening credits.
The film is suffused with nostalgia--at times it's almost
excessive--and the period set design is effective.  It's apparent from
the tone that this is a filmed memoir, not a fictional account.
     The greatest failing of TWO BITS is a tendency to ramble.
Individual episodes work well on their own, but some of the connecting
material is weak, and the voiceover is often more irritating than
helpful.  The film is also too self-conscious about getting across its
theme.  Subtlety would have worked fine, but, to make sure we don't miss
it, Al Pacino's character states the message explicitly.
     TWO BITS represents an undemanding form of entertainment--a
period piece that lives on nostalgia and an elemental story.  Perhaps
the most successful aspect of this film is that it encourages us to
connect events in Gennaro's life with moments in our own, thereby
enriching the emotional impact.  Credit director Foley (GLENGARRY GLEN
ROSS) for another fine, character-based piece.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
