Title
Review for Italian Job, The (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Cult favorite is best remembered for its unexpected ending and a
robbery sequence featuring three Mini Coopers.  Michael Caine is
Charlie Croker, a small-time crook who sees his chance to make the big
time by hijacking a bullion shipment in Turin.  His plan is sponsored
by English gentleman Mr Bridger (Noel Coward), a high-class criminal
who lives the high life in a London prison.  As protagonists, Caine
and Coward couldn't be more different, but between them they encompass
the spectrum of all that is essentially English.  Coward, who waves
his hand like royalty, is accompanied throughout the film by a number
of pro-British anthems (Rule Brittania, God Save the Queen, The
British Grenadiers) that eventually culminate in a football chant from
his fellow inmates; Caine is a Jack-the-lad who hasn't lost touch with
people on the street.  Picture's tongue-in-cheek patriotism
(ostensibly the `real' motive behind the robbery) paints a world where
there is co-operation between the classes, between criminals and the
law, between the common laborer and the educated professional, all
united as a matter of national pride. 
The film's images of British criminals abroad - invading foreign turf,
so to speak - is well complemented by location shooting in Italy,
particularly the crowded Turin streets and the majestic alpine roads. 
Picture's highlight, of course, is the robbery itself, in which three
patriotically-colored Minis (which always drive in order of red,
white, and blue) weave through plazas and rooftops in order to make
their getaway.  Original ending, as written, tied up loose ends with
Caine's girlfriend and the Mafia (who simply drop out of the story in
the final cut), but the substitute ending is more in keeping with the
film's cavalier attitude.  Film has humor, action, but surprisingly
little suspense.  Caine, who was enthusiastic about this project, is
curiously flat and mannered - it's almost as if a Michael Caine
impersonater dubbed his voice. Peter Collinson, who seems to enjoy
filming cars rolling down cliffs, directed from an original screenplay
by Troy Kennedy Martin.  Quincy Jones supplied the music - an odd
choice!  Worth seeing in widescreen Panavision.
