Title
Review for Siesta (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
Very similar in style to the film WILD ORCHID ( the first ), it deals with a
woman's adventures in Spain, where she basically comes to grips with her
femininity, if not her real womanhood.
However, what makes this film difficult to follow is the fact that much of
it takes place in the woman's mind, if the ending is any indication
whatsoever.  The whole thing may have not happened at all, although much of
it definitely did happen.
With an outstanding cast, and great music all over, this film moves along
exploring a woman's ability to relate physically to a world
that doesn't think about the physical part of themselves at all, in the
sense that they are not self conscious about it.  And the
American tourist is very self conscious, and many times denies herself
adventures, though her mind allows her to fantasize about
them.
All of the actors in this film look like they are on vacation and enjoying
their roles, which is very much the attitude we usually
pick up of the Spanish people.  The sex is up front, and honest, rather than
discussed in words, or in the mind.  One falls for the
feeling rather than wait for the mind to come along.  And in the end,
although it is clear that this woman's mind has learned much, it
still shows that she is partially trapped in her ideas, and is not capable
of true enjoyment.  The suggestion is that she will
return to America and continue playing games, rather than enjoy herself.
A very good film, and fun to watch, because many times we are not really
sure of what is really happening, only to find that
she was dreaming.  The cutting of the film is fast, and very suggestive, and
the dreamy music helps that mood.

Author
Craig Good
     I just love it when this happens.  I went to see SIESTA mostly because I
didn't know a thing about it, other than what the poster said (which wasn't
much).  I soon realized that I had either seen a review of it on the telly or a
trailer, but I had forgotten anything said about it.  So there I am watching
the opening titles, and names start to roll by: Martin Sheen, Ellen Barkin,
Grace Jones, Isabella Rosellini, Jody Foster.  Jody Foster?  Yup.
     A name I didn't recognize was Mary Lambert, the director.  Starting with a
strange, stunning opening sequence she starts telling a story by inter-cutting
with flashbacks.  Barkin wakes up outdoors wearing nothing but a red dress.
She finds somebody's blood all over it, and then realizes that she's lying at
the foot of a runway.  Things get rolling when she finds that she's in another
country with no money, passport, nor idea how she got there.  She gradually
starts to remember things via flashbacks which parallel what's happening to
her.  She meets some very strange people and has some very strange things
happen to her.  None of them seem as strange as the stunt she was planning--to
free-fall from an airplane into a burning net.  You see, she's the strangest
character in the film.  Barkin, who didn't do that much for me somehow in THE
BIG EASY, plays wonderfully all the way from An Eyeful down to a wretched
mess as her character gets deeper and deeper into the nightmare.
     Steamy, sardonic, slightly disorienting, SIESTA is almost impossible to
pigeonhole.  That's my favorite thing about it.  It belongs in the slightly
off-center bin with films such as TROUBLE IN MIND and AFTER HOURS, except
toward the side of the bin with THE STUNTMAN in it.  The slightly over-the-top
dialogue seems strained at the beginning of the film, but perfectly natural by
the end.  Some of the scene transitions are really brilliant.  Lambert leaves
no doubt that she knows how to direct.
     I love stumbling across a "find" like this.  SIESTA is a horse of a
different color.  It may not achieve a great commercial success, but if you
like off-the-wall, well-crafted movies as well as I do, you should check it
out.
