Title
Review for Innocent Blood (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Sean Eric Fagan
     INNOCENT BLOOD started out poorly, in my opinion, with the leading
lady parading around her apartment in the nude (usually an inauspicious
beginning for a movie.)
     But it ended up being better than I originally thought it was going
to be (from the advertisements), and better than the beginning lead me
to believe it was going to be.
     Oh, it has lots of faults.  There are some inconsistencies in it,
which really annoy me (a couple of them could have been fixed by simply
removing a couple of scenes that didn't add much to the movie at all),
but there were not enough to make me decide I didn't like the film.  The
other really cheesey thing about it was the glowing eyes; the
commercials which had those made me think it was going to be a *really*
stupid movie.
     Well, it wasn't.  It wasn't a *great* movie, but I did manage to
enjoy it.  It could easily have been better, if, for example, the lead's
conflicts with her needs and her ethics had been dealt with more.  And
the ending leaves a lot unsaid (there are going to me *lots* of problems
about a week after the movie's ending, but isn't that always the case?
8-)).

Author
Frank Maloney
     INNOCENT BLOOD is a film directed by John Landis and written by
Michael Wolk.  It stars Anne Parillaud, Robert Loggia, Anthony LaPaglia,
Don Rickles, with cameos by Sam Raimi, Frank Oz, and Alfred Hitchcock.
Rated R, for graphic vampirism, language, violence, and simulated sex.
     INNOCENT BLOOD is No. 2 in this fall's vampire cycle.  As such it
falls thematically and stylistically between the deliberately dumb BUFFY
THE VAMPIRE SLAYER and the big-budget earnestness that I am expecting
from the upcoming DRACULA from the always over-the-top Francis Ford
Coppola.  INNOCENT BLOOD is a very smart black comedy that gives us a
fresh twist on this most hackneyed of subgenres, the vampire film,
without being a spoof or send-up.  (My copy of VIDEO HOUND'S GOLDEN
MOVIE RETRIEVER 1991 lists almost 120 video titles under the rubric
"Vampires" as well as 18 under "Vampire Spoof.")  The result is a very
enjoyable film, indeed, as a black comedy, as a horror film, and as an
interesting and sexy love story.  It does fail to deliver much in the
way of suspense, however, except in the first encounter between the
vampire, Marie, and her food.  It does deliver a sense of wonder and
amazement, some interesting, well-drawn characters, an intelligent
story, and an amazing amount of fun.
     The credit for the success goes first of all to John Landis, the
director who brought us AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON and TWILIGHT
ZONE--THE MOVIE, inter alia.  I understand that Landis has a current TV
series that uses a lot of film clips ("Dream On").  INNOCENT BLOOD is
likewise populated with lots of TVs showing old horror films.  We see
Bela Lugosi and Christopher Lee clips, we see THE BEAST FROM 20,000
FATHOMS and KONGA clips, we see Dan Quayle (who gets a credit in the
final cast list).  Even security guards are watching commercial TV, not
their surveillance monitors.  Landis takes the script of first-time
screenwriter Michael Wolk to create a sense of wonder and amazed
disbelief, of curiosity, as well as a series of running gags and telling
details about a vampire with a social conscience, a vampire who
experiences post-prandial letdown, a vampire who sometimes needs sex
more than blood, a vampire who can be trusted by good guys, at least.
     Anne Parillaud, the recent star of LA FEMME NIKITA, takes to the
role of Marie with both delicacy and ferocity.  Our first sight of her
is of her totally nude, hungry, brooding in her candle-lit hideaway.
Her voice-over enunciates her three rules, with convincing
demonstrations.  Then she breaks one of her own rules and all hell
breaks lose, as it were.  Parillaud is quite wonderful as Marie, very
sexy, very tough, at times voluptuous, at times boyish, alternately the
innocent and the enthusiastic pleasure-seeker.
     Her opposite and partner is played by Anthony LaPaglia, who is
himself quite attractive in an unconventional way.  We don't get see
quite as much of his nude body as we do of Parillaud's, but he certainly
has his own charms.  He's also a pretty good actor in his role as the
undercover cop who joins up with a pretty vampire he can't trust to get
a mafioso turned vampire himself.
     Robert Loggia, as the monstrous Sally the Shark, has the best time
of all.  Loggia electrifies every scene he's in with an amazing energy
that rises to a memorable and visually dazzling climax of hubris.
     The supporting cast is a lot of fun.  Especially enjoyable is Don
Rickles, who plays Sal's mouthpiece, and has a unforgettable final
scene.  Really, any film that makes me like Don Rickles has got to be a
remarkable film.  Also appearing are Sam Raimi, the director of EVIL
DEAD, in a meat locker, and Frank Oz, the director of the musical
version of LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, as a very droll autopsist.  Alfred
Hitchcock does a cameo via the small scene as he wrestles his big fiddle
in STRANGERS ON A TRAIN.
     Some of you may find the homages clutter up the film and get in the
way of the narrative.  For me they worked as a commentary that said
this film is not entirely a mere vampire film.  There is a theme of
disease and of safe sex that is explicit in the wonderful sequence where
Marie and her revolted-attracted partner are forced to wait out the
daylight in a cheap motel.  Certainly, Marie's food found out to their
regret that encounters with her were the last word in unsafe sex.
     I recommend INNOCENT BLOOD highly.  It is well worth even a
full-price ticket.  However, it is unsuitable for children and for the
truly squeamish.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
120 min., R, Horror, 1992
Director: John Landis
Cast: Anne Parillaud, Robert Loggia, Anthony LaPaglia, Kim Coates,
      Leo Burmester, Don Rickles, Sam Raimi, Frank Oz, Alfred Hitchcock,
      Dan Quale (yes, the Vice President)
     Anne Parillaud is a vampire who is running out of food.  She always
makes sure that her victims don't turn into vampires by finishing off
the body.  Parillaud turns to Italians as her next food source.  She
feeds off mob boss Robert Loggia, but doesn't get enough time to finish
him off.  Loggia comes back from the dead and sets off to make an undead
mob force.  Parillaud joins with cop Anthony LaPaglia to stop Loggia.
     I enjoyed INNOCENT BLOOD and recommend, if you aren't sick of
vampire movies yet, that you attempt to see this film.  It has now left
all the theaters in my area (I saw it on the last night it was playing)
and will probably soon be doing the same in other cities.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give INNOCENT BLOOD a four.  INNOCENT BLOOD is rated R
for explicit language, adult situations, graphic violence, and female
nudity.
     Anne Parillaud, mostly a foreign film actress, does a good job.
Robert Loggia gives a great and evil performance.  Anthony LaPaglia does
well in his role.  Kim Coates (I seem to remember seeing him in this
year's other vampire film BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER), also does a good
job.  There are many cameo performances in this film.  Frank Oz shows up
briefly as a mortician, Alfred Hitchcock, in a clip from one of his old
films, and Dan Quale, in a television appearance.  Director John Landis,
who has brought forth such films as AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON and
NATIONAL LAMPOON'S ANIMAL HOUSE has created a great movie, which
actually made me jump once (which I normally don't do).
     The eye effects were great.  I loved how the eyes changed colors,
it created a haunting image at some points.  The special effects in
general were outstanding.  The bite wounds looked sickening and the
vampire changeover facial effects were perfect.   The film was very well
written and didn't fall into too many vampire cliches.  The film also
did a good job with not portraying all vampires as vicious freaks.  It
said that some vampires have a sense of what is bad.
