Title
Review for Deer Hunter, The (1978)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DEER HUNTER, THE (director/writer: Michael Cimino; screenwriters: Louis
Garfinkle/Deric Washburn; cinematographer:Vilmos Zsigmond; cast: Meryl
Streep (Linda), Christopher Walken (Nick), Robert De Niro (Michael),
John Savage (Steven), Shirley Stoler (Steven's mother), Rutanya Alda
(Angela), John Cazale (Stan), George Dzundza (John), Chuck Aspegren
(Axel), Pierre Segui (Julien), Amy Wright (Bridesmaid), Joe Grifasi
(Bandleader), Paul D'Amato (Sergeant), 1978)
Set in the mid-'60s, in Clairton, Pennsylvania, a small steelworker's
town steeped in hellish fire and smoke, crested by the Allegheny
Mountains, is where a saga of friendship unfolds among three guys who
work in the mill, hunt together, drink in the same bar, go bowling
together, belong to the same Russian orthodox church, and who don't want
to escape from their ordinary existence, quite content to live out their
life in such a blue-collar town. What they do, that changes their life
irrevocably, is enlist for military duty in Vietnam, joining the elite
airborne unit, out of a sense of patriotic duty, at a time when America
was beginning to question the war. But in their town, there were no
protests and their joining of the army was well-received by the locals
in this close-knit community.
Steven (John Savage), just before the boys go to Vietnam, does the
honorable thing to do and gets married to his pregnant girlfriend Angela
(Rutanya Alda), telling himself that he loves her and can't leave her in
this embarrassing predicament while he goes off to war and might never
come back. His old-fashioned Russian immigrant mother (Shirley Stoler)
is upset about this marriage, not understanding why he is marrying her
and what is happening to the world nowadays, as she complains about this
to the reticent Russian priest.
The wedding is a traditional affair, as the camera catches it in all its
glitter and ceremony inside the local Russian church, as it brings
together the life-long friends he enlisted with, the quiet but
hard-to-figure leader of the group and expert hunter, Michael (Robert De
Niro), and Nick (Christopher Walken), who will be the kingly best man at
the wedding. Nick's date is the queenly best lady, Linda (Meryl Streep),
someone Michael has his eye on and would love to go out with, but does
not go out with her because of his loyalty to his close friend, to her
dismay.
At the lengthy reception, the inner circle of friends make their
presence felt and the viewers get to know them rather intimately, as
they are so comfortable with each other that their gibes at one another
are taken with a grain of salt. There is Stan (John Cazale-he was Fredo
in The Godfather- he died of cancer after making this film), who likes
to carry a pistol around with him and act macho. John (George Dzundza)
is the bartender where they hangout, and Axel (Chuck Aspegren) works
with the boys in the mill. They all join in the merriment of the feast,
loosening up by consuming an ample supply of vodka and beer.The wedding
reception was a long drawn out affair, showing everyone in the community
pitching in and helping with the celebration. Even with a minimal amount
of conversations taking place, the characters were seen dancing and
horsing around, as their personalities were allowed to shine forth in a
natural manner. The one very pertinent conversation to occur, was when a
special forces sergeant (D'Amato) walked into the bar and Michael and
some of the boys tried to get friendly with him and ask him about
Vietnam and all he would respond with is, "F*ck it." There was one more
scene to be remembered, where the bandleader (Grifasi) offers the
wedding couple wine attached with two cups on one long stem and tells
them that the tradition is not to spill any wine and the marriage will
be a long and happy one. As an omen to come, there are a few drops,
unnoticed by the wedding party, that spill on her wedding dress, while
they are drinking.
This epic film that runs for 183 minutes, is really divided into three
parts: the friends before Vietnam, during Vietnam, and after Vietnam.
The first part closes with a metaphorical deer hunt, as all the close
friends of the three volunteers are together for the last time before
they go into the service tomorrow. For Michael, the hunt is like a
religious experience, a deer has to be taken with one shot or else he
lets it go. That he has no respect for the sniveling Stan as a hunter,
who comes to the hunt without a pair of boots, is shown, as Michael
picks a silly fight with him and refuses to lend him his extra pair of
boots. He does this in order to let Stan know, that even though they are
both go hunting together, they do not have the same attitude about
hunting. When Michael stalks a deer and takes him down with one shot,
somehow, his kill seems to be the right way to do it.
Part 2 takes place in Vietnam. It graphically shows the horrors of the
war and the torturous experience these three friends undergo after they
are captured by the Vietcong. The three friends come out of this tragic
situation different people. Being forced to play "the one shot-one kill
game" of Russian roulette by their captors, as their nerves are about to
snap. In reality, this never occurred in Vietnam; but, it is used by
Cimino as a necessary metaphor to show how insane the war is. This
one-shot theory when it is used for deer hunting, can be seen as
something sensible, as if it reflects true sportsmanship. But when the
tables are turned and the men become the prey, like in war or in Russian
roulette, the one-shot hunter's theory doesn't seem to hold up anymore
as some great humanitarian concept.
Michael emerges from his war experiences with an inner strength and
courage that makes him tough it out, not giving an inch to his
tormentors, and by his sheer will-to-survive leads an escape. He seems
to be a natural leader. On the other hand, Nicky becomes a basket case,
losing control of who he is, losing contact with everyone, remaining in
Saigon and playing Russian roulette for a living in the underground
gambling clubs there. The lesson learnt, is that the men can't escape
from Vietnam, just like they can't escape from where they were born.
Part 3 is emotionally powerful and gripping, taking place for the most
part back in Western Pennsylvania, as the deep friendship of the three
is played out against the American failures in Vietnam, as the war is by
now considered a lost cause by the public. Steven can't face himself as
a cripple and shrivels up, afraid to come home from the hospital, and is
viewed as a defeated man. Michael, the war hero, coming back to his
hometown looking sharp in his uniform and seeming to be on the surface
back to his normal self, but when he goes out hunting with the boys, he
misses with his one shot at the buck, something he never did before. So,
even, he can't hide how the war has gutted his insides and changed him.
As for Nick, he is lost somewhere in Vietnam and can't be saved by
Michael, who tried unsuccessfully to get him back from Vietnam alive.
The most eerie scene in the film is saved for last, as the friends
huddle together, all of them disappointed and devastated about how their
lives turned out, trying to hold onto the only thing that has weathered
the storm for them, the unswerving friendship they have for each other
and the sense of community that prevails, as they have breakfast
together and begin to sing with all sincerity, like it was meant to be
sung, "God Bless America," as the film tragically ends with De Niro
proposing a toast to Nick.
This film offers a very puzzling and complex moral take on the war and
on those who were directly affected by it, as Cimino makes no apology
for the volunteer soldiers fighting a bad war, he only revels in how
poignant Michael's odyssey is-for he is the hero of this story and the
most compelling one in it-but even he can't feel at home after his
adventure, his war experiences were too mind-boggling for him to even
talk about what is bothering him.
What makes this film exceptional, one of the best films of the '70s, is
not the story, which is good but not great, and not the cinematography,
which is pleasing in scope but doesn't break new ground in its camera
work. It is the performers themselves who take the story to
spell-binding heights and make this a great film, making you care
enormously about the characters they play. De Niro gives a riveting
performance as he searches for meaning to his life, making his
patriotism seem genuine and his participation in a war that made no
sense to a lot of people, something that needs no apology, just like his
deer kill is done like a true sportsman would do it; that is, if you
must kill a deer, at least, do it the right way. Streep's performance is
more subtle, as her facial expressions give way to the great
psychological strain she is under, not sure of what is happening to her,
but realizing that there is a tremendous void in her life. John Savage
is convincing as a good guy who got a few bad breaks in life and
couldn't fully recover from it. Walken won an Oscar as a supporting
actor, in a film that won a total of five Oscars, including those for
best picture, editing, sound, and director. Walken was believable,
playing a regular guy who just lost it in Vietnam and went into a shell.
The remainder of the cast added to the haunting feeling that this was a
tale of significant moral and political weight. Cazale's performance as
a weasel, staying out of the war, hiding behind a phony macho persona,
is a fitting one, in contrast to the guys who enlisted.
It is an astonishing film. A one of a kind experience. A film that in
its minute details of the friend's lives, glaringly goes about to reveal
how war shatters everybody, whether they go to war or stay home. The
stupidity of the war and all its atrocities, as it is stunningly
presented by the filmmaker, leaves one without a chance to escape the
moral implications of the war or does it give one a chance to recapture
a lost innocence. The filmmaker seems to be saying, you can run away
from Vietnam and try to avoid it, but you can't get completely away from
it, its devastation touched every part of America, and this film, whose
viewpoint is not taken from the liberal side of the political spectrum,
as anti-war films usually are, but wants to respect the opinions of
conservative working -class America, the one's who sent their sons to
fight this war. And what the film offers as a poignant reminder about
war, even as it is a testament to the soldiers of the war, is how the
war harmed even those who coolly survived it, and how it left the
American psyche scarred for life. The film also clearly showed the
transformation of character for the three (Michael emotionally, Steven
physically, and Nick psychologically), as the protagonists go from being
happy-go-lucky types, proud to be born in America, to being
disillusioned about what has has taken place and are forced to sing a
patriotic song at the film's end in order to try and regain that natural
feeling they once had, realizing that something has gone out of their
American dream forever, that even these close friends couldn't save each
other from the tragic events.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David Landers
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Robert De Niro (Michael), Christopher Walken (Nick), Meryl Streep
(Linda), John Cazale (Stan), John Savage (Steven), George Dzundza (John),
Chuck Aspegren (Axel)
DIRECTOR: Michael Cimino
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for violence, language, brief nudity, and horrific
war scenes
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1978
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Picture, Best Director (Cimino), Best Supporting
Actor (Walken), Film Editing (Peter Zinner II)
THE DEER HUNTER, directed by Michael Cimino, is truly one of the greatest
movies ever made.  A captivating drama about the lives of a group of
friends from a small Russian-American Pennsylvania community, THE DEER
HUNTER promises to be one of those movies that you will never forget.  In
this Academy Award winner for Best Picture of 1978, outstanding
performances are turned in by all actors, and Cimino's brilliant directing
provides the perfect vision into the character's lives.
The first act of the film provides us with an inside look into the lives
of a group of men from a small community who work and hang out together.
Michael, portrayed perfectly by Robert De Niro, is shown early on as the
natural leader of the group.  After a days work, the men leave their jobs
at a factory to head down to the local bar, where John (George Dzundza)
works.  Three of the men, Michael, Steven (John Savage), and Nick
(Christopher Walken) will be leaving shortly for Vietnam, but not before
Steven gets married.  After the marriage, the group, including Axel (Chuck
Aspegren), spend one last day on a hunting trip, one of their
favorite past-times.
This sequence of events enables us to view the lifestyle of a normal group
of men, who will be suddenly and permanently affected by the ravages and
separations of war.  The wedding scenes, although criticized by many as
being quite long, actually enhance even more the purpose of the first act.
The outstanding performances by De Niro, Walken, Streep, Savage, and
Cazale, who died very shortly after the filming of the movie was
completed, really begin to shine through and promise not to halt in the
near future.
The second act of the movie begins with the trio of men on the front lines
in Vietnam, stationed in a South Vietnamese village being attacked by the
Viet Cong.  The men are eventually captured and held in a floating prison
on a river.  This prison, run by the V.C., initiates the horrifying scenes
in the movie, where the prisoners are forced to play Russian roulette
against each other.  Steven, who is emotionally marred by this turn of
events, is secluded in a tiger cage with water up to his face when he
refuses to participate. Michael shows his leadership again by convincing
Nick that the only way that Steven will survive is if the two friends play
against each other, and moreover, they must play with 3 bullets in the
gun.  Personally, I felt that De Niro's absolutely gripping portrayal
really was displayed in a brilliant way in these and the following scenes.
The men are eventually able to escape, but are separated.  Michael is able
to get Steven, who ends up losing his legs, to medical care, while Nick
finds his way to Saigon and a U.S. Army hospital.  Michael returns home
and does not feel at all like a hero.  He wants to avoid the celebrations
and recognition that his friends would like to bestow upon him.  He
assumes that Nick is still lost in Vietnam.
The third act concentrates more on Walken's character, who eventually
stumbles upon a small gambling operation where the game is, again, Russian
roulette. Only in this game, you play for money.  Michael has learned that
Nick is possibly still alive and returns to Saigon to attempt to find him.
The two narrowly find each other at the Russian roulette games, but do not
link up until Michael discovers Nick participating in the games and tries
to bring him home.
A very emotional, and, for many, a very disturbing movie, THE DEER HUNTER
is a truly magnificent movie that should not be missed.  The greatest
performances possible are turned in by all actors, and Cimino's directing,
which is considered to be at his all-time best in this film, is equally
dazzling.  Do not miss this film, it will captivate and astound you.


Author
Dragan Antulov
First time I watched THE DEER HUNTER, more than a decade
ago, I was slightly disappointed. It was a great film, but I
found it to be below expectations heightened by the critical
hype and word of mouth. However, in the meantime, some very
unfortunate historical circumstances in my country forced me
to appreciate this film on quite another, more personal
level. And I found it to be more powerful, actually one of
the most powerful films ever made.
In 1978, when it was made, THE DEER HUNTER was hailed as a
true masterpiece, one of the best films ever made and
probably the most important film of its time. Such
reputation was acknowledged with four "Oscars". However,
more than two decades later, THE DEER HUNTER is one of those
masterpieces that are forgotten, ignored or underrated by
those who make Top 100 lists. There are many reasons for
that. First, its director, Michael Cimino, entered the
history with his major flop HEAVEN'S GATE and the resulting
image of loser, megalomaniac and bad filmmaker marred even
the reputation of his true masterpiece. Second, treatment of
Vietnamese in THE DEER HUNTER is hardly acceptable for those
critics who judge films based on their political
correctness. And, finally, at the end of millennium, USA, as
the only remaining superpower and most powerful and
self-confident nation of the world, doesn't like to be
reminded of Vietnam War, the most embarrassing episode in
recent national history.
The plot of the film is based on the screenplay by Cimino
and Derek Washburn. It begins some time in early 1970s in
Clayrton, small industrial town in Western Pennsylvania,
populated mostly by descendants of Russian immigrants. We
follow group of young steelworkers that spend all their free
time drinking, playing pool and hunting deer in nearby
mountains. One of them, Stephen (played by John Savage) is
about to marry pregnant Angela (played by Rutanya Alda). On
the wedding, his best man Michael (played by Robert de Niro)
finds mutual attraction to best lady Linda (played by Meryl
Streep), but refuses to pursue it out of loyalty to her
boyfriend and his best friend Nicholas (played by
Christopher Walken). Next day friends go to the hunting
trip, the last before Michael, Stephen and Nicholas get
enlisted to fight in Vietnam War. Their friendship would be
ultimately tested in Vietnam, where they witness
unimaginable horrors and atrocities and finally get captured
themselves. Led by Michael, they escape from Viet Cong
prison, but when they reach safety, they are only shadows of
their former selves. Stephen has lost his legs, Nicholas has
lost his mental health and disappeared in the streets of
Saigon and Michael, upon returning to his hometown, finds
that he too has problems connecting to people.
One of the most interesting things about THE DEER HUNTER is
the very neat and disciplined structure of the film. Number
three, that is very important in Christian, especially
Orthodox Christian, tradition, plays important role in this
film. THE DEER HUNTER has three major protagonists, lasts
for three hours and is composed of three different acts.
Cimino as director likes to stage elaborate scenes with
long, expository shots (hard to imagine in MTV-style school
of directing today), with meticulous care about details.
First act depicts everyday life of our heroes as simple,
normal human beings and portrays them as people we might
find next door. We see them working, having fun and trying
to solve their petty every day problems. First act,
especially the scenes that deal with the wedding, were often
criticised for being overlong and unnecessary. Nothing could
be farther from truth - Cimino had to make first act that
long in order to make viewers as familiar with characters as
possible. When we switch to second and third act, and we see
how those characters and people around them are permanently
changed, the emotional impact is much stronger.
Uneventful, simple and boring existence in the gloomy
industrial heartland of America suddenly becomes idyllic
when Cimino shocks us by throwing our heroes right in the
middle of Vietnam inferno. Scenes of violence and
unimaginable atrocities were shocking and disgusting for the
audience of its time, but for today's audience they might
seem tame, thanks to many imitators and film makers who
pushed the envelope even further. These scenes, although
still not suitable for the squeamish viewers, are also
necessary, because we must understand what really happened
to our heroes. And than comes the third act, when our heroes
must return home, wrecked beyond any repair. Michael, who
was best prepared for the ordeal due to his hunting skills,
personal philosophy of "one shot - one kill" and charisma of
natural leader, looks unaffected on the surface and actually
tries to bring back some normalcy to the lives of his
comrades and community. But even he is personally affected,
and things are just not going to be the same - even the most
innocent hunting in the woods brings too many painful
memories. And even his old neighbourhood isn't the same
anymore, being indirectly affected with traumatic war.
>From the day of premiere Cimino had some problems with
critics, especially those from the left wing of political
spectrum. THE DEER HUNTER, unlike most other films that
dealt with Vietnam in those times, portrays Vietnam War from
rather unusual perspective. Film ignores generational
conflicts and social turmoil of 1960s, as well as internal
American politics and endless debates caused by the war. By
giving his young protagonists blue-collar immigrant
background, Cimino portrays them as people who don't care
about rights and wrongs of the Vietnam adventure; they go to
war because they feel obliged to the country that gave new
opportunities to their impoverished ancestors. Instead of
generational conflicts, those people have problems with
their identity - they are very Russian and very American in
the same time. This background enabled Cimino to surprise
the audience with somewhat unusual twists on all Vietnam
cliches of 1970s. First we see community that actively
supports the war (even in closing years, when the majority
of the country saw the utter pointlessness of the endeavour)
and greets veterans as true heroes (quite differently from
college students that used to heckle incoming veterans as
"baby killers"). Then, we not only see something very rare
in Hollywood cinema - spectacular Orthodox Christian
ceremonies - but also we see Russians, in 1970s perceived to
be the greatest enemies of American way of life, as more
American than average Americans themselves.
Uniqueness of Cimino's perspective becomes problematic when
film focuses on Vietnam itself. Cimino takes very one-sided
approach, which later brought him accusations of racism
(Cimino would later try to silence those critics with almost
Marxist view of late 19th Century USA in HEAVEN'S GATE and
more balanced approach towards Chinese Americans in THE YEAR
OF DRAGON) . The only atrocities portrayed in this film are
those committed by NVA and Viet Cong, but even the friendly
South Vietnamese are actually shown to be unworthy of noble
American protection, since they misuse it only to deprive
young Americans of money in most rotten ways possible.
Saigon is shown as decadent moral cesspool that rightly
deserved to be cleansed by victorious Communists at the end
of the film. Cimino enhanced that reputation by being
deliberately inaccurate in some details. Russian Roulette
scenes are the most notorious example. Scene in Viet Cong
prison is one of the most powerful in the history of cinema,
but it lacks credibility in the context of realities of Viet
Cong's guerrilla warfare. Same is with the whole underground
Russian Roulette playhouses in Saigon, subplot that gives
this film the only major plot and characterisation flaw.
However, even that flaw is dwarfed by the enormous talent
invested in this film. The acting is probably best known -
THE DEER HUNTER had one of the strongest and most memorable
casts in history of cinema. Robert de Niro as the nominal
lead is at his best, portraying the Michael as simple hero,
unofficial leader of the group, quiet, reliable man, yet
affected with the atrocities and able to show strong
emotions in traumatic experiences. He is partnered with
really great actors that give touching portrayals of his
best, yet physically or mentally inferior friends. John
Savage is great as Stephen, one of the most tragic
characters in modern cinema, as well as "Oscar"- awarded
Christopher Walken who gives excellent Nicholas and his slow
slide into madness. Other acting talents were great. John
Cazale's role of false macho friend Stan is especially
moving when we take into account that the actor was actually
dying from terminal cancer in front of cameras. Meryl
Streep, one of my favourite actresses, is also grand in one
of her earlier roles; her "girl next door" charm is nicely
contrasted with the inner traumas, indirectly caused by war
and conflicting feelings towards boyfriend and his best pal.
One of the underrated performances also came from George
Dzundza as bartender John, the one who has the warmest
personality on the outside, yet suffers from guilty
conscience on the inside.
Great acting was also enhanced with great atmosphere. Always
reliable director of photography Vilmos Zsigmond used mostly
grey tones, but they are effective in all scenes - whether
they feature industrial settings of Pennsylvania, natural
paradise of Allegheny Mountains, devastated Vietnam
countryside or infernal underworld of Saigon. Simple musical
score by Stanley Myers is also great, providing romantic,
sentimental tone so much in contrast with harsh,
naturalistic events of the film. Every time I think of
romance, I always remember that theme.
Finally, the ultimate reason why people should watch THE
DEER HUNTER lies in its universal importance. I witnessed
war and saw how it could change people and communities,
sometimes irreparably. Names, locations, causes and
belligerents might be different, but the aftermath is always
the same - no matter how prepared they might be, people are
always deeply affected with violence and destruction. I saw
too many Michaels, Stephens and Nicholases first hand and
witnessed how psychological wounds, both on them personally
and on the society as a whole, could have devastating
effects. THE DEER HUNTER, in its sincerity, dwarves almost
any other film that deals with the ugly reality of war;
compared with it SAVING PRIVATE RYAN looks like simple
militaristic propaganda. Today's world, in which many wars
are fought for the sake of daytime politics and winning
elections, needs more films like THE DEER HUNTER.
