Title
Review for Days of Heaven (1978)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
The documentary "Visions of Light: The Art of Cinematography"
lavished more screen time on "Days of Heaven" than on any
other film, even going so far as to use the theme as the
final credits rolled.  It is easy to see why "Days of Heaven" 
was so honored: it is a great argument for cinematography
rather than script or story as the most important element
of a film (I still believe that the script is the most 
important element).
"Days of Heaven" has a minimalist script and relies upon
the camerawork to flesh out the plot.  There are many
distant shots of lush wheatfields, of migrant farm workers
earning their day's wages, of steam trains and thrashers.
There are also many close-ups, not just of the beautiful
cast (then unknowns) but even of grasshoppers munching.
The slow pace allows the cinematography to tell the story.
The shots become redundant only when depicting a wheatfield 
fire.
"Days of Heaven" takes place in the Texas panhandle area
during World War I.  Richard Gere stars as a hotheaded 
itinerant worker.  His lover is Brooke Adams, but for some 
reason they tell others they are brother and sister.  They 
work on the immense wheat farm of Sam Shephard, who has been
told he has but one year to live.  Shephard falls in love
with Adams.  Gere tells Adams to marry Shephard, with the 
intention of both inheriting his wealth after his impending
demise.  It would seem that all sides benefit from this
arrangement, except that Shephard isn't getting sicker,
and suspects that Gere and Adams aren't as they appear to be.
"Days of Heaven" was a project that took place over several
years.  One reason for this was the scenes included all 
four seasons, another was that most filming took place at 
dusk due to favorable lighting.
The cast, direction, cinematography and story are all
excellent and mark "Days of Heaven" as one of the most 
important American films of the 1970s.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Richard Gere, Brooke Adams, Sam Shepard, Linda Manz, 
      Robert J. Wilke, Jackie Shultis
Director: Terrence Malick
Producers: Bert Schneider and Harold Schneider
Screenplay: Terrence Malick
Cinematography: Nestor Almendros and Haskell Wexler
Music: Ennio Morricone
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     One thing that certainly can be said about Terrence Malick's DAYS 
OF HEAVEN:  it's not sentimental or manipulative.  Unfortunately, it's 
also not particularly involving.  By keeping the characters at arm's 
length, the movie is reduced to so many moving images.  The 
cinematography won an Academy Award, but just because a movie is filled 
with vibrant photography doesn't mean it has a soul.
     To his credit, Richard Gere gives a solid, believable performance 
here (one of the top two or three in his career), playing an early-20th 
century itinerant worker wandering the rural Midwest, looking for a job.  
Gere's Bill is a hot-head, though, and this is why he has never been 
able to settle down.  Bill doesn't travel alone.  He is accompanied by 
his younger sister, Linda (Linda Manz), from whose viewpoint the story 
is told, and his lover, Abby (Brooke Adams).  To eliminate the 
inevitable questions and complications resulting from their unmarried 
status, Bill and Abby pretend to be siblings.  
     Complications of a far different sort arise, however, when the trio 
stops over on a Texas wheat farm for the Fall harvest.  The landowner 
(Sam Shepard) falls for Abby.  After overhearing a conversation 
indicating that the farmer has a terminal illness, Bill encourages Abby 
to marry their host.  Once he's dead, they'll have the farm and the 
money to themselves.  After the union takes place, however, Bill is 
unable to contain his jealousy, especially when Abby shows genuine 
affection for her husband.  For his part, the farmer begins to suspect 
that something unhealthy is going on between his wife and her "brother."
     From an aesthetic point-of-view, this is a tremendous motion 
picture.  The cinematography is wonderful, from shots of swarming 
grasshoppers to images of a fire that threatens to rage out-of-control.  
The strains of Ennio Morricone's score form the perfect accompaniment to 
the lush visuals.  If movies were only about looking at a screen and 
being enraptured by photography, DAYS OF HEAVEN would be a top-notch 
production.
     Unfortunately, on a more basic level, the film isn't as successful.  
Despite quietly effective performances from the adult actors, the 
characters never click -- not with each other or with the audience.  The 
movie's tone is so austere that we find ourselves losing interest in the 
protagonists.  There are supposed to be powerful emotional forces at 
work here, bubbling just beneath the surface, but, even when they 
explode, they seem muted.  DAYS OF HEAVEN uses low-key methods to tell a 
melodramatic story, and the conflict between content and style distances 
the viewer.  From an intellectual standpoint, we're curious to see what 
happens, but we haven't made an emotional investment in the outcome.
     DAYS OF HEAVEN is inferior to Malick's previous film, the powerful 
and unsettling BADLANDS.  Despite the crisp cinematography and evocative 
score, it feels like there's something missing.  I wanted to care about 
what was happening, but DAYS OF HEAVEN left me completely unconcerned.  
The film has too much surface beauty not to earn it a recommendation, 
but DAYS OF HEAVEN satisfies only on a sensory level.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
