Title
Review for St. Ives (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In 1990s we had Steven Seagal movies. We had been prepared
to that, thanks to 1980s Chuck Norris movies. In 1970s,
often regarded as the Golden Age of cinema, we had Charles
Bronson movies. Such films, action-oriented thrillers
relying solely on the charisma of its lead, were that
period's equivalent for straight-to-video films of today.
They were low budget but made with solid craftsmanship and,
unfortunately, hardly distinguishable from each other. ST.
IVES, 1976 thriller directed by Jack Lee Thompson, is one of
the examples.
The protagonist of this movie Raymond St. Ives (played by
Charles Bronson), former crime reporter and would-be book
writer, who suffers from compulsive gambling. In order to
improve his situation he takes an offer by Abner Procane
(played by John Houseman), Beverly Hills eccentric, to use
his street knowledge and mediate the return of some
important but stolen documents. A simple exchange gets
complicated with couple of murders, and even more
complicated when St. Ives realises that Procane was actually
one of most successful criminal masterminds of Los Angeles.
Good connoisseurs of 1970s cinema would have experiences a
whole lot of deja vus watching ST. IVES. The film has a
rather complicated conspiracy plot, like many of 1970s
thrillers did (with Barry Beckerman's script somehow
managing to squeeze it into 90-minutes format). The
directing style of Jack Lee Thompson mimics other, more
successful crime thrillers with the use of shaky camera and
very dark photography. Lalo Schiffrin as composer provides
some good atmosphere with his recognisable style. Acting is,
on the other hand, sub-par, with Bronson, and almost
everyone else, sleepwalking through the role. Bronson didn't
even have many scenes that would capitalise on his charisma
of an action star. His lack of chemistry with Jacqueline
Bisset as his alleged romantic interest is almost palpable.
John Houseman and Maximillian Schell, on the other hand,
bring some fun playing their characters in very campy,
almost theatrical styles. The biggest fun, however, comes
when viewers start recognising future big stars and
important players like Jeff Goldblum, Robert Englund, Harris
Yulin or Michael Lerner, all playing minor, but interesting
roles. All in all, those who miss ST. IVES wouldn't miss a
thing, but those who watch it, won't miss hour and half of
their lives afterwards.
