Title
Review for Bedrooms & Hallways (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
BEDROOMS AND HALLWAYS (M).  
(NewVision)
Director: Rose Troche
Stars: Kevin McKidd, Tom Hollander, Hugo Weaving, James Purefoy, Jennifer 
Ehle, Julie Graham, Simon Callow, Harriet Walter, Christopher Fulford,
Paul Higgins
Running time: 96 minutes.
This sparkling and very funny romantic comedy from Rose Troche
(Go Fish) explores the issue of sexual identity and the ambiguous
sexuality of gay characters.  This has been the central theme of a
number of recent comedies, such as The Opposite Of Sex, The Object Of
My Affection and Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss, which have also
created sympathetic central characters.  While Bedrooms And Hallways
taps into the same premise, it doesn't really offer a lot that is
particularly new.  However, what this engaging and entertaining
British sex comedy lacks in originality, it more than makes up for
with a sparkling wit and style.
Leo (Trainspotting's Kevin McKidd) is gay, and on his 30th
birthday he despairs of ever finding the right man and settling into a
stable relationship.  His gay flat mate Darren (Tom Hollander,
recently seen in The Very Thought Of You) and next door neighbour
Angie (Julie Graham) offer advice.  However, Darren is busy trying to
sort out his relationship with Jeremy (Aussie actor Hugo Weaving, from
Priscilla, Queen Of The Desert, etc), a real estate agent who likes to
have kinky sex in his client's houses.
Leo's business partner takes him along to a men's therapy
group, hoping that it will help him work out his lack of self
confidence.  Instead, during one bonding session, Leo blurts out that
he is attracted to the handsome Brendan (James Purefoy, a regular with
the Royal Shakespeare Company), another member of this mixed up group.
Brendan has just ended a long relationship with Sally, and is confused
and vulnerable.  Is Leo the right man to help him over the emotional
strain of his break-up?  The question of whether or not Brendan is gay
also brings an element of comic suspense to the film.  Then Sally
(Jennifer Ehle, from Wilde, etc) enters the picture, and Leo is
surprised to realise that she is an old friend from school days.  He
is also slowly attracted to her, and finds himself questioning his own
sexual orientation.
The script from Robert Farrar, who wrote the disappointing spy
spoof The Man Who Knew Too Little, is sophisticated and crackles with
witty dialogue and some quite funny situations.  Troche directs with
flair and she keeps things moving along at a brisk pace.  Some
elements of the film are reminiscent of Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss,
and Bedrooms And Hallways has something of the same flavour and
broadly appealing humour.  However, the characters here have more
depth and seem less like clichés, and the overall quality of the
writing and production is superior.
The wonderful ensemble cast deliver solid performances that
bring these characters to life, and seem to be having a lot of fun.
It is Hollander who gets the best lines and effortlessly steals
scenes.  Simon Callow is also memorable as Keith, the therapist, while
Weaving brings a sly sense of humour to his role.
This is not a gay film, but a film in which some of the main
characters are gay.  As with many recent gay themed comedies, Bedrooms
And Hallways is non-judgmental and broadly appealing.  It's sly sense
of humour should strike a chord with audiences.
