Title
Review for 24 7: Twenty Four Seven (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Why do filmmakers feel compelled to tell us basically the same
story we've already heard?  Last year it was VOLCANO and DANTE'S PEAK,
and this year we have THE BOXER and TWENTYFOURSEVEN, which might have
been more aptly titled THE BOXER-LIGHT - very light.
     As the story opens, a completely unrecognizable Bob Hoskins is
found almost dead in an abandoned railroad car.  With a bloated face,
hair like a discarded mop, bruised skin and incoherent demeanor,
Hoskins, as the story's protagonist Alan Darcy, immediately shocks us.
And with Ashley Rowe's gritty black-and-white cinematography the movie
looks quite promising.
     We are told Darcy's story in flashback.  The picture's sporadic
voice-over by Hoskins is intelligent and insightful, something the rest
of the script by Paul Fraser and the film's director Shane Meadows
isn't.
     Darcy tells us that the kids in public housing lead a terrible
life twenty-four seven, meaning all week long.  "If you've never had
anything to believe in, you're always going to be poor," he reasons
with us.  So he sets up a boxing club for the troubled youth exactly as
Daniel Day-Lewis did in THE BOXER.
     The film lacks any coherent narrative.  Ramblingly along with
little happening - there's not even much boxing or practicing - the
teens in his club make small talk and go on hikes in the woods, in
which the director gives visual emphasis to such trivia as going to the
bathroom outdoors.
     The large supporting cast has precious little to do.  The director
makes them into a faceless slice of humanity with no one standing out.
This is somewhat complicated by the accents, except for Hoskins's,
which are so thick that subtitles might have helped - but not much.
The actors evidence little energy or compassion for the movie, and they
all play interchangeable parts.  We learn that the teens and their
parents are an angry lot, although the movie rarely goes to the trouble
of explaining their motivation, other than being poor.
     When the big boxing match finally happens, it's more like a quick
barroom brawl.  (Notice that their weight is announced in stones, which
makes for a nice metaphor.)  Only when one fight goes tragically wrong
does the story finally come alive with some much needed, genuine
poignancy.  Other than that, the lifeless picture is easily forgotten.
     TWENTYFOURSEVEN runs 1:36.  It is rated R for language, violence
and some drug content and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Christopher Null
The first thing that hit me about "TwentyFourSeven" was the starkness of the
black and white film and the bareness of the sets. That combined with the
film's slow pacing and simple plot make the first half of the film feel very
long.
     At the center of "TwentyFourSeven" is Bob Hoskins as Darcy, a
middle-aged man from a relatively rural area in England. Although not an
obvious leader, Darcy finds the motivation within himself to open a boxing
club for the local youth. It is his impression that this club, like the one
he had as a teen, will restore camaraderie and pride to the troubled lads.
     With its simple no-budget look, the film seems to have little going for
it on first glance. The often documentary-type camera movements,
intermittent jump cuts, and sometimes peculiar shooting angles could
contribute to an impression that first time feature film director Shane
Meadows is not quite ready for such a large scale project.       Around the
middle of the film though, we begin to see what Meadows is trying to show
us. His film is not an epic.  It is a character study of a small town and
how one man in that town tries to deal with its problems.
     With little plot to concern him, Meadows prefers to dwell on character
development and how the relationships between Darcy and the lads develop.
The lack of production values, the slow pacing, and the leisurely plot allow
Meadows to dwell exclusively on these relationships without distracting the
audience.
     Ironically, the film's major flaw may be that it spends too much time
chronicling the rise and fall of Hoskins' Darcy, and not enough time letting
us get to know the other characters. The plot is inconsequential. The power
of the movie comes in how it paints for us a scene of a society and a people
we have never met, yet after 100 minutes come to feel intimately familiar
with.
     "TwentyFourSeven" is a strong character picture, and could not have
succeeded without excellent performances by Hoskins, in his most complex
role yet, and a strong supporting cast of relative newcomers led by Danny
Nussbaum as Tim.
     Meadows substitutes passion and energy for his lack of experience in
making this film.  In the end, he gives us a telling view of his own youth.
Director: Shane Meadows
Producer: Imogen West
Writer: Paul Fraser, Shane Meadows
Starring: Bob Hoskins, Danny Nussbaum, James Hooton, Darren O. Campbell
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bob Hoskins, Danny Nussbaum, James Hoonton, Darren Campell, 
      Justin Brady, Jimmy Hynd, Bruce Jones, Frank Harper
Director: Shane Meadows
Producer: Imogen West
Screenplay: Shane Meadows and Paul Fraser
Cinematography: Ashley Rowe
Music: Neil Maccoll, Boo Hewerdine
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     Actor Bob Hoskins describes Shane Meadows' TWENTYFOURSEVEN (which 
is short for "twenty four hours a day, seven days a week") as "one of 
the most important films I have ever been involved with."  However, 
while Hoskins' performance is laudable, the movie as a whole is a 
letdown -- oddly paced, erratically scripted, and with a message that is 
so obvious that I felt like I was being bludgeoned to death with it.  
Who doesn't acknowledge that life is only worth living when one has 
something to believe in?
     The story behind the film's director is more interesting than the 
movie itself.  The 25 year-old Meadows grew up in the projects of 
Nottingham (where TWENTYFOURSEVEN is set, a place that Hoskins describes 
as making "Detroit look like Never-Never Land"), dropped out of school 
at the age of 15, and never received any professional film training.  
But, while his style evidences the edginess one might expect from 
someone with his background, Meadows' approach doesn't seem any more 
remarkable than that of many of today's new generation of film makers.  
Before seeing the movie, everything I had heard about TWENTYFOURSEVEN 
indicated that it is a "stunning" feature; twelve hours after the 
closing credits rolled, I'm still waiting to be stunned.
     The hero of the story is Alan Darcy (Bob Hoskins), a middle-aged 
man who decides to invigorate his dying industrial community by starting 
up a boxing club to get the local kids off drugs, off the streets, and 
into the ring.  Each of the dozen or so young men that Darcy takes under 
his wing has a different sort of problem.  One is an addict, one has a 
weight problem, one suffers the taunts of an abusive, overbearing 
father, and one has an explosive temper.  Reluctantly at first, but then 
with growing enthusiasm, they listen as Darcy preaches his mantra of 
control.  What none of them realizes is how close to the psychological 
edge their new mentor is.  
     While the final twenty minutes of TWENTYFOURSEVEN is effective (and 
even a little shocking), it doesn't erase the weakness of the 
predictable melodrama that precedes it.  For much of its running time, 
the film doesn't go anywhere -- it's a relatively uninspired look at how 
a bunch of directionless kids turn their lives around by finding the 
meaning of life in a boxing ring.  This is a standard plot, and, aside 
from the black-and-white, pseudo-documentary look of the film, Meadows 
doesn't offer anything new.  None of the characters, with the possible 
exception of Darcy, are well-developed.  In the end, it's hard to care 
about any of them -- whether they live, die, climb out of the hole dug 
for them by Thatcherism, or fall back into it.  Meadows has crafted a 
movie with a stark appearance, but one that doesn't have much of a 
heart.
     It's also worth questioning the idea that it's a good thing for 
teen boys to harness their unrest by climbing into a boxing ring and 
beating each other bloody.  TWENTYFOURSEVEN isn't the only recent movie 
to embrace this tactic -- last year's THE BOXER used the same approach.  
Apparently, film makers think the controlled violence of boxing is the 
only way to "save" a disaffected generation in economically-downtrodden 
areas.  Is this really the best solution?  How about a basketball or 
soccer clinic?  Then the spirit of competition is still alive, but it's 
tempered by a strong sense of being part of a team, and the victim is a 
ball, not someone else's face.  
     Meadows cast his friends, not professional actors (Hoskins being 
the exception), in TWENTYFOURSEVEN.  While it's occasionally evident 
that we're not watching seasoned thespians, it's never a serious 
problem, since most of the performances are credible.  Hoskins displays 
great range as Darcy -- depending on the circumstances, he can be a 
funny, tragic, heroic, or horrific figure.  It's unfortunate that the 
actor's efforts couldn't have been focused on a better-developed 
individual.  
     TWENTYFOURSEVEN is supposed to be one of those gritty, coming-of-
age stories cut from the same cloth as BOYZ 'N THE HOOD and HATE -- a 
movie that shows life in poverty-stricken, urban neighborhoods the way 
it really is.  But, while TWENTYFOURSEVEN was filmed in a crime-
infested, economically ravaged area, the power and urgency of the 
setting is not conveyed through the narrative.  Meadows clearly has 
ambition and desire, and he may have a bright future as a film maker, 
but TWENTYFOURSEVEN lacks the focus and drive necessary for a 
breakthrough feature.  The picture may be about violence inside and 
outside of the ring, but RAGING BULL this isn't.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Liberals say that if only we had more social programs, we
would need fewer prisons.  Conservatives hold that many
social programs are a waste of money and have no long-
lasting benefits.  If you look at Shane Meadows's debut
directorial effort for a full feature "TwentyFourSeven" as a
guide to her political views, you'll find indications that the
English helmer is playing both sides.  Meadows, whose
previous labors have been for the two short tilms, "Smalltime"
and "Where's the Money, Ronnie!" remains committed to the
offbeat, her current film winning awards at film festivals at
Venice, Toronto and Sundance.
   The title is British slang for working at a project around the
clock, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, a rather
generic term that could apply to almost anything but in this
case to the labor of a feisty guy who pledges himself to
working with disaffected youth.  Evoking memories of Danny
Flynn's undertaking in Jim Sheridan's "The Boxer,"
"TwentyFourSeven" features Alan Darcy (Bob Hoskins) as a
do-gooder who works in the English Midlands (Nottingham
and environs) toward bringing a sense of purpose to a gang
of teen wrecks--dopers and the like--who wander the
depressing housing projects without a single healthy
conviction.  Enlisting the financial aid of the town richnik, a
shadowy businessman named Ronnie Marsh (Frank Harper),
Alan signs up his reluctant targets by winning a bet with them
on the soccer field. He soon has a colorful group in his
charge including the most self-destructive Gadget (Justin
Brady), the overweight son of the financier who becomes
Alan's assistant manager, and others who are as
undisciplined as they are, in their way, charming.  To bond
the group further, he takes (again despite their reluctance) on
a trip car trip to Wales, where they fish, enjoy the spartan
scenery, and have a jolly old time.
   Back home, the boys get into their training with lust,
punching the bags, showing up regularly and on time, and
looking forward to their first competition against a team known
as the Stafforshire Terriers.  What happens in the ring when
one of Alan's disciples gets pummeled is both comical and
sad.  The result of some local mayhem results in permanent
changes in the lives of the boys and Alan as well.  In fact,
Meadows opens the picture with a view of Darcy many years
after his project, where he appears with a shaggy beard,
dazed and confused, until he is taken in by one of the old
gang.
   Meadows is so intent on conveying the atmosphere of the
dismal Midlands scene that he has had cinematographer
Ashley Rowe photograph the movie in black and white, a
good deal of the drama suffering from an overdose of
darkness.  At times it has the look of a 1920s silent film,
cracking at the edges, put together with krazy glue to save it
from disintegration.  All of this is meant to mirror the decay of
the neighborhood, of course, but the viewer cannot be blamed
for becoming weary watching these visuals and, to boot,
listening to occasionally indecipherable accents from 
Midlands to Cockney.  
   The principal merit of "TwentyFourSeven" is not in its
examination of a social program gone awry but in its
showcasing the talent of Bob Hoskins whose role embodies
both intensely personal moments and vigorous rah-rah
coaching.  His clumsiness and sentimentality are brought out
in the best scenes, his attempt to court an irresolute
shopkeeper (Jo Bell) and his turns around a ballroom floor
with his Auntie Iris (the noted character actress, Pamela
Cundell).
