Title
Review for Too Much Sleep (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Laura Clifford
Security guard Jack (Marc Palmieri) loses his gun as the victim of a scam 
one morning while admiring a pretty girl (Nicol Zanzarella) on the bus.
Distraught, Jack turns to his buddy Andrew (Philip Galinsky), who puts him
in touch with his Uncle Eddie (Pasquale Gaeta), a non-stop talker and
apparent authority on just about everything in "Too Much Sleep."
Writer/Director David Maquiling has created a terrific character in Eddie,
who gets Jack into some humorous situtions - for about the first thirty
minutes of "Too Much Sleep."  Once Jack's been given the tip to go to 145
Withers, a house party peopled with one forced wacky weirdo after another,
Maquiling's film derails and can barely sustain interest for it's remaining
hour.
Pasquale Gaeta is the film's saving grace.  A self important little man who
begins every ramble with 'But let me tell you something,' Uncle Eddie is
a unique screen character who's advice runs from the actually useful to
the seriously demented.  In the film's funniest scene, Eddie manages to
bring Jack right to the older woman half of the team who scammed him.  As 
Eddie chases the woman through her neighborhood, she apprehends him, spraying
him in the face.  'That's Jovan Musk at $15.99 a bottle, so you can see I
mean business!' she tells him, before directing him to that address.
Downhill from here, Jack meets assorted weirdos and spends an inconsequential
night with the younger con artist that leads to a meeting with a man carrying
a paper bag, presumably containing his gun, in a bus station.  After a 
chase that ends with Jack beating the man senseless with a pink plastic bat,
that bag's no where to be seen and the gun's not mentioned again.  A final
scene on Eddie's front lawn allows for one more bout of comedic philosophizing
from Gaeta.
Maquiling's writing, while offering some truly pleasurable bits of business,
can't sustain itself for a feature length film.  While his leads, especially
Gaeta, are good, much of his supporting cast are amateurish.  Overall,
"Too Much Sleep" tries too hard to be whimsical.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Jack Crawford (Marc Palmieri) is a 24-year old night security guard who
lives at home with his mother. One morning, while heading home on the bus,
he's checking out a pretty young woman when his handgun is stolen.
Desperate, Jack enlists the help of a local can-do guy named Eddie
(Pasquale Gaeta) whose advice sends the slacker into a weirdly populated
underworld in "Too Much Sleep."
First-time feature helmer David Maquiling directs his own script in homage
to Martin Scorsese's own nightmare journey, "After Hours." The hapless
schmuck that the story hangs upon, Jack, has one ambition in life - to
sleep. His night watchman job allows him that, but does not prepare him for
the world he is about to enter after his revolver, unregistered, is stolen.
The neighborhood BMOC, Eddie, was deputy county clerk for 19 years and
knows the right people to ask about such things as stolen guns.
Eddie's advice and directions lead Jack into an increasingly bizarre world.
He gets "maced" with Jovan Musk by his principle subject, Judy (Judy Sabo
Podinker), when he confronts her over the gun. Eddie tells him to "go to
145 Wicker?but, I ain't promising anything." Jack does and meets a variety
of weirdoes from a bartender who comes on to him to a psycho male nurse and
a loony philosopher - but, no gun. His continued journey through life's
underbelly bears him nothing more than a string of more strange characters.
It is all about Jack finding himself, in the end, and not the gun.
"Too Much Sleep" starts off amiably enough with its main character, Jack,
looking only to catch the maximum Z's out of life. Marc Palmieri is deadpan
in his delivery of his slacker  Jack persona and it works out for a short
while. As he encounters an increasing number of oddball characters while
searching for the gun, the film loses its quirkiness and just dabbles in
weird behavior. As interest in the revolver is supplanted by other things
in Jack's life, our interest is the film wanes, too.
The cast is made up with a good-natured collection of dedicated amateurs
and semi-pros but none, with one exception, stand out. Pasquale Gaeta cuts
a funny path as the Joe Pesci-like Eddie, spouting his knowing advice and
guiding Jack through the maze of illicit weapons and sleazy people. He is
uniformly amusing as Jack's muse.
The screenplay, by the director, pushes hard to get a rise out of the quirk
meter and succeeds for the first half, but slowly loses its steam in the
second. It's a decent calling card to get the young filmmaker his foot in
the door of bigger budget mainstream film. "Too Much Sleep" is amiable, but
not enough. I give it a C.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
Indie filmmakers who want to make their own version of After Hours
better damn well know what they're doing.  In his first feature, David
Maquiling appears to have a grasp of the basics, but his film falls
short of its goal.
At its heart, Too Much Sleep is an extremely simple story about a young
man named Jack (Marc Palmieri), a lazy security guard who finds his
father's handgun stolen during a bus ride daydream.  His quest to
retrieve the gun sends him on the kind of wacky misadventures seen only
in the movies.  With his friend's uncle Eddie (Pasquale Gaeta,
apparently channeling Bruno Kirby in The Freshman here), Jack visits
male strip clubs, foreign parties, and even a Chinese restaurant in
order to track down the mysterious Kate (Nicol Zanzarella), whom he
suspects of conspiring to steal the weapon.  Naturally, we expect Jack
will also find himself along the way.
Sure enough, Jack falls for Kate en route to a whiffle bat beating of
the ultimate crook, but unfortunately, writer/director Maquiling muddles
his metaphors to the point where the audience becomes ambivalent toward
all his characters.  Palmieri's Jack is such a sorry deadpan fool we
hardly care whether he'll retrieve his (illegally owned) gun.  Kate has
so little screen time we don't really feel their relationship is a wise
choice for either character.  Only Gaeta's Eddie comes across as likable
(despite the fact that he's a dishonest lech); his Mafioso-wannabe is
simply too deliriously acted to be seen as anything but innocuous.
Sure enough, Too Much Sleep comes across as exactly that: innocuous and
sleepy, an overly dry shot at creating something quirky that misfires as
often as it hits due to a misconfigured sense of comic timing. 
Filipino-American Maquiling describes his film as an homage to the
timeless "folk story," presumably something passed down orally from
generations to generations.  My kids will have to be content with
digging up the videotape somewhere decades from know.
Director: David Maquiling
Producer: Jason Kliot, Joana Vicente
Writer: David Maquiling
Starring: Marc Palmieri, Pasquale Gaeta, Nicol Zanzarella, Philip
Galinsky, Judy Sabo Podinker, Mary Ann Riel
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some 30 years ago a couple of colleagues of mine, high
school teachers like me, bought homes in Matawan, New
Jersey where writer-director David Maquiling last year filmed
"Too Much Sleep."  They encouraged me to do likewise
since, after all, for $19,000 they were getting spanking new
digs built by Levitt complete with refrigerators and washing
machines.  I was young and naive and spouted the usual
urban nonsense about the suburbs as homogenized,
uninteresting, sterile places where all your associates are just
like you, but one of my pals took issue with me with the
argument, "My next-door neighbor is Japanese!"  So much for
my theories about homogeneity.  What Mr. Maquiling is trying
to bring out in "Too Much Sleep" is, well, it could be just
about anything.  He might want to tell us that within those
prettily manicured, conventional, uniform blades of grass lie
some of the most biazarre people, folks you might even find
in the heart of Manhattan.  He could be putting his original
touch on the folk tales of his native Philippine Islands, as he
tells us in the press notes.  But mostly I'd guess that he's
displaying a young man's fast odyssey from naivete and sloth
to activity and concern just like the David Hemmings
character in Antonioni's "Blowup."
   He doesn't really succeed, though, in part because there's
no way that his key figure could possibly grow up in such a
short time.  His experiences are shallow.  What's more the
gun is falsely utilized to symbolize manhood--a maturity that
its 24-year-old owner does not really have but has to earn.  If
that's what Mr. Maquiling is attempting here, he's pushing
the envelope quite a bit past its comfortable margins.
  Let's take the weight from Mr. Maquiling's shoulders and
presume that he's simply writing a shaggy-dog story about
his own youth in a bland American suburban neighborhood. 
He tells of Jack Crawford (Marc Palmieri), a night security
guard who carries an unlicensed gun which he inherited from
his father.  Riding a bus one day, he is scammed into losing
the piece and suspects two women riding next to him; the
older Judy (Judo Sabo Podinker) and the youthful Kate (Nicol
Zanzarella).  Rather than go to the police, he consults with
the town know-it-all, Eddie (Pasquale Gaeta), a motormouth
who brags endlessly about his affairs, his political standing
(he was deputy county clerk for 19 years), and his contacts
with both the police and the local criminal faction.  Eddie,
who prefaces a good many of his statements with "Let me tell
you something, Jack," advises him where to go and what to
do in his search for the revolver, an exploration which
supposedly leads Jack from a detached dude who lives with
his mother and sleeps in a childhood bed too small for his
over 6' body, to a committed, more manly character: a
mensch.  
   Critics have compared the movie thematically to the far
better David O. Russell "Spanking the Monkey," Stacey
Cochran's "My New Gun," also "Coldblooded" and "In the
Soup" and even David Lynch's "Blue Velvet," but the director
seems influenced most by Martin Scorsese's "After Hours"
which features an ordinary guy who goes through a series of
bizarre experiences during one night in New York City.  Like
the Griffin Dunne character in the film, Jack is the about the
only normal person in "Too Much Sleep."  The others are like
those we try to avoid like the plague.  Who wants to spend
15 minutes with a blabber like Eddie or listen to the jabbering
of a woman who runs into Jack at the bus terminal and
lectures him about how much he looks like his father--while
not recognizing that Jack's looking all around the room
signifies his lack of interest?  What kind of woman would ask
the bouncer in a gay bar featuring untalented dancers to beat
the crap out of Jack just because he's asking her some
questions in her back-room office?  
   Marc Palmieri's Jack, though, can gain audience
involvement if only because he's normal--which is a switch
from the usual concept that outlandish people are the most
absorbing.  At least Nicol Zanzarella is cute but she too is
without a personality and has not a thing of interest to say. 
Robert Mowen's camera has little to work with in a film that
could easily fit on your 13-inch TV screen.
Not Rated.  Running time: 88 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
The most striking revelation about the indie comedy-drama "Too Much Sleep"
is just how much it highlights the schizophrenic tendencies of its
fledgling director, David Maquiling.
Now Maquiling, a graduate of NYU's Tisch School of the Arts, can set up a
shot well enough, from the sleepy suburban opener of a young boy playing
with his Tonka trucks in the grass, to a Deli-ful of old duffers who sit
around waxing idiotic.  But often the scenarios that play out within
Maquiling's excellent frame are scattershot and self-consciously told.
Likewise Maquiling has a perceptive eye for character; his film is
populated with colorful brethren indeed.  There's our hero, Jack Crawford
(Marc Palmieri), the security guard who's distracted by a beautiful woman
on a bus, loses his gun, and spends the rest of the movie trying to find it
in the heat and the hostility of northern New Jersey.  There's the
beautiful woman herself (Nicol Zanzarella), a slight, diaphanous creature
who appears as if from out of nowhere, haloed by the blazing midday sun.
There's a funny guy with "connections" who helps Jack retrieve his missing
piece (as played by Pasquale Gaeta, Eddie's a character with a capital C).
And then there's Jack's mother, just a voice off-screen.
These are all finely written roles, all shapely individuals in one way or
another.
But the director's ability to create unique characterizations is undone by
his failure to cast competent performers in the roles; there's amateurism
run rampant here I'm afraid.  A lot is asked of Palmieri and frankly he
doesn't have the presence to be on-screen as long as he is (and this is a
short movie, relatively speaking: 86 minute's worth).  Kate (Zanzarella) is
really only asked to look good and with that she complies.  Gaeta is
amusing though.  He's no De Niro (although a lot of the time he sounds like
him) and his constant profanity--"if you pardon my profanity"--soon
develops a comforting, lyrical quality.  He's clearly the best of the bunch
and well utilized by the director.  Think Joe Pesci's funny uncle.
Maquiling, too, has an ear for dialogue.  Unfortunately it's a tone-deaf
one for the most part.  He can create manic, "After Hours"-styled
pandemoniums populated by complex and witty individuals but he has the
hardest time coming up with a line of dialogue that doesn't sound forced or
just plain awkward.  At times he seems to be trying too hard.  Some
improvisation might have helped the film considerably rather than having
the actors constantly forced to reel off the director's stilted conversations.
You would think that this schizophrenic style--everything coming together
at one point, everything falling apart the next--would tend to even itself
out after a while but it doesn't.  Both scenarios are frustrating because
they speak to what might have been.  "Too Much Sleep" has potential written
all over it; Maquiling knows what he's about and, with a little maturation
in the writing and casting departments, he's going to impress soon enough.
Not this time though.  "Too Much Sleep" is an unsatisfying mix that just
leaves one feeling overtired.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb
