Title
Review for Zamani barayé masti asbha (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Iranian movies are often about children, given the regime's
preference for G-rated fare, but while "A Time for Drunken
Horses" centers on youngsters, Bahman Ghobadi's film is no
"White Balloon."  This is no fairy tale despite its mystical
setting in a rugged, snow-covered area on the Iran-Iraq
border but rather a tale about children that could make Oliver
Twist look like the prince in Mark Twain's "The Prince and the
Pauper."  These children who live in a large area that
embraces Iran, Iraq and Turkey known as Kurdistan have a
hardscrabble life, one that robs them of their childhood,
turning many into petty smugglers who face the constant
threat of Iraqis ambushes, land mines, and abysmal
exploitation of their labor.  What makes this Shooting Gallery
offering a bit of breakthrough cinema is that this is one of the
first movies made in the Kurdish language--which is 
comprehensible via white subtitles which often are blurred out
by the snowy background encompassing many of the scenes.
   Credit must be given to a man (who is to our knowledge
the only known Kurdish filmmaker) to create a story amid
difficult weather conditions about people whom he has known
all his life--peoples familiar to Americans only as the objects
of oppression by the Iraqi government of Saddam Hassan
and who are partially protected by an U.N. sponsored no-fly
zone which forbids the Iraqi Air Force from flying over
Kurdistan.  The participants in the film are from the village of
Baneh, they are non-actors mostly from the same family, and
though they lack the very basics that virtually all westerners
possess--electricity and TV for example--they are in the film
maker's opinion happy people.
   One can understand that this film has been received
enthusiastically in the Kurdish regions of Iran and Iraq but for
a western audience and even for a non-Kurdish Iranian
audience, the reception may not be as sanguine.  Limited in
plot and repetitious despite its brief seventy-seven minutes'
running time, "A Time for Drunken Horses" does evoke the
suffering, poverty and boredom of people who as members of
a minority group living in remote regions are doubtless the
poorest of Iranians.  However I found myself unable to feel
the heartbreak that Ghobadi would hope for in his non-
Kurdish audience because the mostly plotless road movie is
loosely structured, fastening almost exclusively on the trek
through vast reaches of snow by groups carrying contraband
(auto tires and the like, not illegal drugs) over the border to
their fellow Kurds living in Iraq where the goods can
command a better price.  
   The principal element of the story is the struggle,
sometimes narrated by the twelve-year-old girl Amaneh
(Ameneh Ekhtiar-Dini) whose brother Ayoub (Ayoub Ahmadi)
has become the young leader of the orphaned family.  Ayoub
is responsible not only for Amaneh for also for his sister
Rojine and for a crippled, deformed and perhaps retarded 15-
year-old, Madi (Mehdi Ekhtiar-Dini).  Ayoub and his clan are
hoping to be paid enough by the heads of the smuggling
operation to get his crippled brother an operation that he
needs to have within the year to save his life, but the adults
who lead the force of mules not only make excuses to avoid
payment but feed their animals vodka-laced water to
encourage the "horses" to walk in the sub-freezing weather. 
Predictably enough, the mules get intoxicated and at one
point simply lie down on the job, at which point their are
futilely whipped by their cruel and desperate masters.
   "A Time for Drunken Horses" played at Cannes where it
was named co-winner of the Camera d'Or prize and was
featured as well at the Toronto Film Festival where Toronto
National Post critic Noah Richler found the film "gut-
punching" and "heartbreaking."  My own reaction, unlike that
of the story's mules, is more sober.  While Ghobadi's heart is
in the right place and the acting perfectly fine considering its
non-professional nature, the film simply lacks the punch
needed to give the poverty and desperation piercing.
Not Rated.  Running time: 77 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Five Kurdish children struggle to survive by picking up odd jobs in a distant
town while their widower father is away earning a living smuggling over
the Iran/Iraqi border.  Madi (Mehdi Ekhtiar-Dini) is the eldest son, but he's 
severely handicapped so twelve year old Ayoub (Ayoub Ahmadi) bears the brunt 
of this responsibility while Rojin (Rojin Younessi), the eldest sister, acts 
as mother to the brood.  Ameneh (Ameneh Ekhtiar-Dini), the middle child,
helps both elder siblings, but mostly takes care of Madi.  Then their father
is returned home, dead from the landmines which pepper the landscape in 
first time director Bahman Ghobadi's Cannes Camera d'Or winner, "A Time
for Drunken Horses."
The biggest, freshest surge in international cinema has been coming from
Iran in recent years via the works of Abbas Kiarostami ("A Taste of Cherry"),
Majid Majidi ("The Color of Paradise") and father/daughter directors Mohsen
and Samira Makhmalbaf ("Gabbeh," "Blackboards").  Many of these films
focus on children.  Ghobadi's "A Time for Drunken Horses" is like a more
harshly realistic counterpart to Majidi's lush and fable-like "The Color of 
Paradise."  They have in common children of a widowed father who care for a 
handicapped sibling who proves to be a hindrance to a marriage.  
Ghobadi's film is distinct in that his characters are Kurds, an ethnic 
minority of twenty million who live in Iran, Iraq, Turkey and Syria.  
When their father dies, their uncle declares Ayoub head of household because
he's already burdened with eight children of his own.  Madi's doctor
tells Ayoub he needs an operation within four weeks to keep him alive for
another 8 months.  Ayoub begins the risky smuggling work that killed their
father, where mules, laden with tires, are given alcohol so they won't feel the
blistering cold crossing the snowy mountains over the Iraqi border.  Ayoub's
struggles maintain his family, but he's unsuccessful earning enough money
for Madi's operation.  (He does bring Madi the present of a picture.  Ghobadi
captures a brilliant image of the dwarfish Madi gazing upon a photograph of
a body builder.)
Ayoub returns from one trip to find that Rajin has been betrothed by his
uncle.  Rajin explains to the distraught Ayoub, frustrated by his
uncle's convenient return to head-of-household, that she's agreed to this 
because her new family will pay for Madi's operation, but on the wedding day, 
her new mother-in-law refuses to take Madi and offers a mule as recompense.  
Ayoub strikes out in a blizzard with Madi to sell the mule in Iraq to get his 
brother medical care.
Ghobadi returned to his Kurdistani village home, utilizing non-actors (and 
many relatives) to make this striking film.  The four eldest children are all 
extremely natural in front of the camera, possessing strikingly expressive 
faces (Ameneh, in particular, has the face of an angel).  These people have 
bleak lives with hardships unimaginable to western audiences.  Something as
basic as the procurement of an 'exercise book' (blank school notebook) is a 
treat to be savorred (we see this innocent merchandise and the truck which 
carried it impounded at a border patrol early in the film).  However, the love
among the siblings, which Ghobadi makes palpable, may seem rare to jaded
western auds.
The film is shot in a realistic documentary style, yet contains images of
stunning beauty, particularly when showing the harsh, wintery landscape.
(When Ayoub and Madi are caught between two ambushes, they witness the
other smugglers and their mules run down a snow covered hill into a valley,
with the mules' former tire loads rolling willy-nilly alongside them.)
"A Time for Drunken Horses" projects love, spirit and hope. The ending, 
in particular, is simplicity itself in projecting triumph over extreme 
adversity.  
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
If movies about slapping inebriated mules is something that gets you
off, then have I got a film for you.  I don't think the
drunk-mule-abusing demographic is too hot on films from Iran, which is a
shame because A Time for Drunken Horses is really a great film.
Horses is set in an Iranian village near the Iraqi border.  Because of
the ongoing conflicts between the two countries, the snowy area is
littered with landmines, making passage extremely difficult.  This is
bad news for the Iranians who make their living smuggling goods to Iraq
via pack mule.  These smugglers give their mule alcohol, based on how
low the temperature is supposed to be.
Horses focuses on a family of five orphaned Kurdish children who have
lost their mother during childbirth and their father in a landmine
explosion.  The oldest children, Ayoub (Ayoub Ahmadi) and Rojin (Rojin
Younessi), have quickly assumed the roles of mother and father and
feverishly try to keep the younger kids healthy and happy.  They do a
good job, but 15-year-old Madi (Madi Ekhtiar-dini) is crippled and
requires pills and injections on a regular basis.  Madi also needs an
operation or he'll die.
Horses is partially narrated by Madi's younger sister, Amaneh (Amaneh
Ekhtiar-dini), who helps out however she can – whether it's wrapping
glasses in newspaper for strangers or helping brother Ayoub load their
mule with supplies to smuggle over the border.  The film has a great
opening scene, where Amaneh is asked a series of questions that help to
develop all of Horses' characters.
The film follows the struggles of the family to keep Madi in good
spirits while they try to find money for his surgery.  The children in
the film, who are all non-professional actors from the village Horses
was filmed in, all do an amazing job at making your heart break when you
watch their futile efforts bear little fruit.  Horses goes out of its
way to show that people and horses are in pretty much the same boat.
Actually, the horses get liquor, so they actually might be better off.
Horses is the directorial debut of Bahman Ghobadi, and the film won him
the Golden Camera Award (for best first feature) at the Cannes Film
Festival.  Those of you familiar with Iranian cinema may recognize
Ghobadi as the ditch-digger (and second unit director) in Abbas
Kiarostami's The Wind Will Carry Us.  Those of you really familiar with
Iranian cinema won't recognize him because the ditch-digger was never
actually seen in The Wind.
1:20 – Not Rated but contains men slapping drunken horses

Author
Robin Clifford
Ayoub is a hard-working young boy who is responsible for the care and
feeding of his brothers and sisters in a remote town near the Iran-Iraq
border. Their mother is dead and their father, a smuggler, is away most of
the time. When the local doctor tells them that their handicapped brother,
Madi, will die without an operation, Ayoub, without much hope but with a
lot of perseverance, tries to raise the money. His sister, Rojin, agrees to
marry an Iraqi Kurd to get the needed operation, but this, too, fails,
forcing Ayoub to even more desperate measures in the starkly beautiful
film, "A Time for Drunken Horses."
Over the past several years Iranian films have been seeping out of that
small country in a trickle that is, in reality, an emotional flood of
beautiful, thought provoking films that rival the best of western films. A
key element of many Iranian films, at least those we are fortunate to see
here, is the role of children in those films. Internationally prominent
Iranian filmmaker Abbas Kiarostami ("Where Is the Friend's Home?"), for
years, had created films based on the growing child population in his
country. This laid the path for others to follow in Iran's film community.
In 1995, Jafar Panahi created the wonderful "White Balloon" about a little
girl's quest to buy a lucky goldfish. Majid Majidi, in 1997, brought us
"Children of Heaven," a story about a brother and sister who concoct an
elaborate plan to hide the loss of a pair of shoes. He followed this up
with this year's "The Color of Paradise," a simple but multi-layered story
about a little blind boy and his father - this, in my mind, is one of the
best, most visually stunning and emotionally satisfying films this year.
Newcomer writer/director Bahman Ghobadi continues exploring the plight of
children in his rugged country with "A Time for Drunken Horses." The helmer
delves into the darker side of childhood with his tale of Ayoub and his
struggling, little family in the mountainous region of Kurdish Iran. Ayoub
becomes the head of his family after they learn of the death of their
smuggler father. On the heals of this shock comes word from the local
doctor that Madi, Ayoub's ailing dwarf brother, will die without a crucial
operation. Even with the surgery, little Madi may only live for 7 or 8
months. This matters not for the orphaned family and earning the money for
the operation becomes the priority of them all. In the hard, desolate land
of the border between Iran and Iraq, this is a near impossibility for the
hard-pressed little boy. An arranged marriage for Ayoub's sister Rojin also
fails to bring hope as her groom's mother reneges on the agreement to take
care of Madi, too. Ayoub then faces his greatest challenge as he fights
harsh conditions and the threat of ambush as he smuggles tires to earn the
money for Madi. The film ends with this quest unfulfilled, but with an
understanding of Ayoub and the rest.
Ghobadi treads on neo-realistic territory that filmmakers like Vittorio De
Sica ("The Bicycle Thief") first explored in films coming out of the
ravages of post-WW2 Europe. The Iranian filmmaker makes no effort to gloss
over the hard life of the folks populating his story who accept their
plight and privation. The poverty of his characters, according to the
helmer, is not a condition; it is a way of life. The wonderful thing about
"A Time of Drunken Horses" is that it doesn't just show the subjects' lives
to the viewer, it involves us in them. One scene has Ayoub, Madi and little
sister Ameneh, while running away from Iraqi border guards, stopping to
give Madi his medicine. There is no water to take the pills, so the
siblings show little Madi how to make spit to swallow them. I found myself
unconsciously trying to make spit, too. This is involving filmmaking.
Though the story is simple and the film's budget minuscule, there is no
lacking in artistry. The screenplay, by the helmer, grabs you early on and
carries you through, emotionally, right to the end. Coupled with this
involving story is the masterful cinematography by Sa'ed Nikzat who
captures the stark beauty of the rugged Iranian countryside in lovingly
composed shots that could second as a photo montage in a gallery. The utter
simplicity of the filmmaking evinces an elegance that we do not see in
American films, regardless of the budget. In "A Time for Drunken Horses,"
images and expressions speak volumes to the viewer.
Another remarkable thing in the films from Iran, at least the ones I've
seen, is the capable use of non-actors and the marvelous performances the
directors are able to garner from them all. Ayoub Ahmadi breaks your heart
and impresses you with his resilience and love for his family. Watching the
boy, it's hard to believe he's not a professional actor. Little Ameneh
Ekhitar, as the younger sister, is yet another in the line of adorable
little sisters that seems to be a staple of Iran's films. Most heart
wrenching, though, is Mehdi Ekhitar as the diminutive little brother, Madi.
The helplessness and need of the little boy is countered with the touching
warmth and caring devotion of his siblings. You fear, while watching the
film, that something bad will happen to him. The tension over Madi's fate
is palpable.
It's hard to really describe a film like "A Time for Drunken Horses" to an
audience used to the rapid-fire action and dialogue of Western film. The
pleasure is in watching the story, and its strife, slowly and quietly
unfolds as it draws you into the emotional complexity of the seemingly
simple story. The best way, for the film buff, to experience this is to go
see it.
The film is part of the Shooting Gallery's release schedule and will only
be at the art houses for a couple of weeks, so catch it if you can.
Oh, yeah. The title refers to the horses and mules used by the smugglers to
move contraband over the rugged mountains between Iran and Iraq. It's so
cold for the poor animals, the smugglers mix alcohol with their water to
make them docile while carrying the onerous loads in the dead of winter.
It's a subtle, off-hand indictment of the cruelty these creatures must
endure.
I give "A Time for Drunken Horses" an A-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     On the Iranian side of the Kurdish border with Iraq, a young boy
names Ayoub (Ayoub Ahmadi) -- along with three brothers and two sisters
-- toil away as day-laboring book smugglers while their father (also a
smuggler) is gone at work.  Tragedy strikes when they learn that
littlest brother, three-year old Madi (Mehdi Ekhtiar-Dini) will die in a
month from an unknown illness, and that only an immediate operation will
extend his life, a few extra months, at that.
     Ayoub's sister Ameneh (Ameneh Ekhtiar-Dini) agrees to marry an
Iraqi if the groom's family pays for Madi's operation.  A deal is
struck, but the mother-in-law backs out as she wants nothing to do with
the dying kid, so she gives the family a mule instead.  It's up to Ayoub
to get Madi and the mule over the frozen mountains to Iraq, where he can
sell the animal to raise money for the operation.
     I'm sure life really is like this for the Kurds, but I'm really not
sure I care to watch a movie about it.  In case you haven't figured it
out from the rather morose plot summary, A Time for Drunken Horses is
one of the most boring and utterly uninspired films ever put to
celluloid, redeemed only by its zippy 77-minute running time and the few
scenes where the smugglers' horses are getting drunk -- hence the title
-- in order to be coerced into walking through the snow.  Seriously,
there is not even an ending to rally around.  There's not even an ending
at all.  The movie just stops, like they ran out of money.
     As for Bahman Ghobadi's filmmaking, there's a lot left to be
desired, too.  While no one in front of or behind the camera has much
obvious talent (though Ghobadi's direction is at least competent), the
biggest razz is earned by the subtitles, which give you the distinct
impression you're missing an awful lot.  Worse than a dubbed Kung Fu
movie, we probably get to read a subtitle for one line out of every four
spoken.  Then again, maybe additional titles weren't required since
nothing much was happening.  Or maybe the translator just didn't
understand Kurdish.
     Now, I'm sure if my life were pathetic enough that I had to
inebriate a horse to raise money for my kid brother's operation or I had
to hear other kids shrug and say things like, "No, my dad and his mule
were blown up by a mine," this movie might have contained some appeal. 
But as it stands, very few viewers are going to be inspired to wake up
long enough to feel empathy for these poor characters, brave though they
might be.
     Maybe Ghobadi could go back to the drawing board and make a movie
just about drunken horses.  Now that would be something to sit up for.
http://film.sgfilmseries.com/drunken.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Bahman Ghobadi's A TIME FOR DRUNKEN HORSES (ZAMANI BARAYÉ MASTI 
ASBHA), two poor kids, Ayoub (Ayoub Ahmadi) and Ameneh (Amaneh 
Ekhtiar-dini), care for their older, 17-year-old brother Madi (Madi 
Ekhtiar-dini), who is a sad looking dwarf.  They need to find money for 
Madi's life-saving operation and get him across the border into Iraq 
where the operation will be performed.  Although this might sound 
dramatic, which it is briefly in a tear-jerking ending, most of the 
movie is a hardscrabble, slice-of-life story in which nothing much 
happens other than slogging through deep snow.  
Living the life of smugglers, the children are part of the homeless 
Kurdish minority in Iran, Iraq and Turkey.  Their plight is made clear 
by the story.  The ragamuffins work a life straight out of Dickens as 
they just barely scrape by in jobs helping the smugglers.  Large, 
tractor-sized tires are apparently one of the most popular items on the 
black market, and one mule can carry two tires -- just barely.  The 
film's name comes from the spiking of the horses' water as a way to help 
them cope with the intense cold.  (This is a picture that does appear to 
violate the strict American rules against actual violence against 
animals during the filming of a motion picture.  The horses are clearly 
beaten and kicked in the head when they get too drunk to walk.)
Among the film's most memorable moments are the sounds of rolling 
thunder rippling across the mountain tops as the Kurdish smugglers try 
to avoid another ambush.  What you are left with when you leave the 
theater are a few nice images but little more.  
A TIME FOR DRUNKEN HORSES runs 1:17.  The film is in Kurdish and Farsi 
with English subtitles.  It is not rated but might be PG-13 for mature 
themes and animal violence and would be acceptable for kids around 10 
and up.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Bahman Ghobadi's stunning debut film strips away the protective 
layer that separates an audience from the world that unfolds on the 
screen.  We're transported almost bodily into the hardscrabble landscape 
of a Kurdish mountain village near Iran's border with Iraq.
This is a story of deprivation, a story of survival, but most of 
all it's a love story.  It focuses on three children: Ayoub, his sister 
Ameneh, and their older brother Madi, who is a crippled dwarf.  Their 
mother is dead, their father is a smuggler, and when he is killed the 
kids are pretty much on their own.  Madi, with his doll-sized body and 
hunched back and eyes both childlike and inexpressibly old, needs 
regular injections and will require an operation to stay alive.
The two healthy children do what they can for Madi.  The teenage 
Ameneh agrees to a marriage for a promise of help from the bridegroom's 
family.  12-year-old Ayoub shoulders a man's burden as a smuggler, 
hauling contraband over harsh snowy mountains through cold so bitter the 
pack mules are fed booze to keep them warm.  The operation will buy Madi 
at most another year of life, but they never stop to weigh the cost.  At 
that age, and through those uncompromisingly loving eyes, a year seems 
like a lot, and the alternative is unimaginable.
Ghobadi, who won the Camera d'Or at Cannes for best first film, 
tells his story from his heart and experience.  He's from a Kurdish 
village much like this one.  Ghobadi's style is simple and direct, and 
images such as little Madi riding like a solemn-eyed puppy in a mule's 
saddlebag are pictures you'll carry with you a long time. 
