Title
Review for Madeline (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Matt Williams
This adaptation of Ludwig Bemelmans' classic children's book, Madeline,
is mostly faithful to the original.  Unfortunately, the alterations are
the film's weakest link.
Hatty Jones stars as the title character, an orphaned girl adopted by
the church, and attending a girl's school in Paris.  The headmistress is
the kindly Miss Clavel (Frances McDormand), who has a sixth sense when
something isn't quite right.
And something often isn't right, whether the independent-minded Madeline
is getting into some sort of trouble, or the school's chief benefactor
(Stephanie Audran) is on her deathbed and her cruel husband, Lord
Covington (Nigel Hawthorne) plots to sell the house.
At times, the film threatens to devolve into Home Alonesque nonsense.
But, luckily, the film stays above that level and comes up with more
creative ways to solve its dilemmas.
Nearly all the familiar scenes from the book are stuffed in the movie at
one point or another.  For only being 90 minutes long, the filmmakers
did a good job of putting everything in, without the end result feeling
overstuffed.
Performances throughout are pleasant, but no one really stands out from
the work.  Hatty Jones is neither annoying nor endearing in the title
role.
Those expecting a thrill ride of a movie are apt to be disappointed by
this comparatavely bland film.  Still, Madeline offers a nice
alternative to the standard summer fare.
Fans of the book will be adequately pleased by this interpretation.
However, besides being a nice movie, the film has little to offer those
toward the book series.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 TriStar Pictures
 Director:  Daisy Mayer
 Writer:  Mark Levin & Jennifer Flackett, Chris Weitz & Paul
Weitz, book by Ludwig Bemelmans
 Cast: Hatty Jones, Frances McDormand, Nigel Hawthorne,
Ben Daniels, Stephane Audran, Arturo Venegas, Katia
Caballero, Chantal Neuwirth
   An eminent film critic recently said to me that a picture that
uses the word "princess" in the title is writing half of its
potential audience.  "Boys will simply not go to a movie that's
about a princess," he said, and judging by the number of
years he's been in the business he's probably right. 
"Madeline" is not about princesses, though the title character
is just adorable enough to be the stuff of fairy-tale monarchs. 
But the male of the species must have heard about the
subject matter and stayed away in droves.  No matter.  At a
recent screening of "Madeline" which I attended in a theater in
New York's Greenwich Village, the picture was already into its
third week and it was still packing 'em in--all girls, that is, and
the parents who accompanied them, perhaps reluctantly,
thinking it would be a patronizing show with caricatured
subjects.  if the boys don't go for this sort of film, more's the
pity.  Granted: it doesn't have any of the noisy histrionics of
blockbuster films like "Armageddon," but it's got just the sort
of formula that sensitive little females would cherish.
"Madeline," which uses some actual plot lines from the
famous book by the great children's author Ludwig
Bemelmans, pays reverential attention to small details as it
relates the sundry adventures of a responsive orphan of
about nine years who attends a school with eleven of her
peers--all of whom are taught by a nun who spares the rod
and gain the affection of her charges.
   Capturing the grandeur of Paris with an illustration from
Bemelmans's book that converts to a lush setting, "Madeline"
opens with the famous assembly of rhymed couplets such as
"In an old house in Paris that was covered with vines,/ Lives
twelve little girls in two straight lines."  The round-faced
Madeline (Hatty Jones in a congenial debut) is the favorite of
her teacher, Miss Clavel (Frances McDormand) and the
natural leader of the dozen girls her age at the boarding
school.  Her parents long dead, she has the unfortunate
experience of having to have her appendix removed shortly
after the opening of the movie and later proudly shows off her
large scar to her classmates.  (Pierre Aim's camera discreetly
trains his lens on her face.)  We are introduced as well to the
next-door neighbors of the school, the Spanish ambassador,
his wife, and his mischievous ten-year-old boy, Pepito. 
Conflict arises when Lord Covington (Nigel Hawthorne), who
takes over ownership of the school after the death of his
charity-conscious wife, determines to sell the school and
introduces interested parties to its virtues.  When the kids
hear of his hard-hearted plans, they take action under
Madeline's leadership to subvert the sale.  In yet another
clash, Pepito's tutor conspires to kidnap the young Pepito and
hold him for ransom, arousing Madeline's creative energies in
an effort to thwart the plan.
   Madeline's leadership is strongly felt in an episode
concerning the Fred the chicken, whom Helene the cook
(Chantal Neuwirth) is determined to kill and broil despite
Madeline's desire to adopt the bird as a pet.  When Fred is
served as "Chicken Helene," Madeline refuses to eat it and
the entire assemblage save one turn vegetarian. 
(Unfortunately this ethical conversion is later reversed as the
girls decide that Chicken Helene is their favorite dish.)  In yet
another slice of sentiment, Genevieve, a stray Golden
Retriever who therefore is to dogdom what Madeline is to
humankind, plunges into the Seine to save the girl who has
fallen in during one of her risky walks on the banks.
   Frances McDormand, in a role far different from the one
she portrayed in "Fargo," proves her versatility once again in
a strong role as the loving and charming teacher while Hatty
Jones who, under Daisy von Scherler Mayer's direction,
wisely underplays her key role, is appealing if not the cutest
member of the ensemble.  The one unfavorable artificiality of
the film is with language. Though the school is Parisian and
the students French, virtually everyone speaks English, and
with a British accent--even the Spanish ambassador and his
family.  The film is, granted, not for boys, but it has apparently
found a niche with girls from the ages of five to thirteen and
will likely please quite a few of the adults they have in tow.

Author
David Sunga
Directed by: Daisy von Scherler Mayer
Written by: Mark Levin and Jennifer Flackett, from the book by Ludwig
Bemelmans. 
Starring: Hatty Jones and Frances McDormand
Ingredients: 
Paris boarding school for 12 young girls, adventures of little girl
Synopsis:
MADELINE begins with the opening of a storybook, and it should,
considering that it's a storybook movie for children. MADELINE doesn't
follow the normal stereotypical formats for action movies, comedies, et
cetera. Instead, MADELINE kind of wanders around, allowing the audience
to hear the tale, and experience spunky little Madeline's various
adventures, including discovering a kidnapping plot by goofy circus
clowns, and saving her boarding school.
Madeline (Hatty Jones) is an little British orphan girl who lives with
twelve other young girls in a charitable boarding school in Paris. The
school is run by the intuitive nun, Miss Clavel (Frances McDormand), who
can often smell when "something is not right." In this case, something
is often not right, since Madeline is always getting into one form of
mischief or another.
Madeline's adventures include having an operation at the hospital,
falling into a river, looking for a lost dog, befriending a neighborhood
boy, trying to figure out why the boarding school's owner Lord Covington
wants to close down the school, and foiling a kidnapping attempt on the
Spanish ambassador's son. 
Opinion: 
Summer movies always seem to be geared towards adolescent males (or as
my girlfriend would say, the adolescent in all males). Main characters?
Male cop, male detective, male kid, male oil driller, male doctor, male
cowboy, male secret agent, male pig, male scientist, male plastic toy,
male dog. And the hero always has to save things on a really grand
scale. He fights off 100 thugs single-handedly, saves the town, saves
the free world, saves his city, saves America, saves his female partner
and the Earth, et cetera et cetera. Movies for adults demand that heroes
do fantasy on a big scale.
On the other hand, elementary school-aged kids have a different
mentality. To a kid, spending a night in the hospital getting your
tonsils taken out is suspenseful. Looking for your lost dog is dramatic.
Saving a baby bird is simply monumental. Adults swallow movies with
formula plots. But to a kid, walking around meeting new friends and
escaping trouble suffices for plot. As a result, kid movies are way
different from adult movies. 
The problem is, these days hardly anyone knows how to make kid movies.
Typical of most attempts are kiddie-aged heroes who are supposed to
speak like real kids, but end up sounding like hipper-than-thou
thirty-something script writers. And it's especially rare to find a
movie where the protagonist is a spunky elementary school-aged girl who
actually thinks and acts like an elementary school-aged girl. How many
can you think of, off the top of your head?
Rare, indeed. That's what makes MADELINE is somewhat of a gem, despite
arguably anglo-centric overtones (in the movie, Africans and Indians are
exoticized and tricked). MADELINE is done from a small girl's point of
view, and it's done well. It's simply a story about a little girl who
has a few neat little adventures. No emotional baggage, weighty
cynicism,  fancy tricks, world-banging drama, no violence, no sex, no
gore. Just the simple wonder of being young and wondrous and meeting
interesting folks and having occasional excitement. Throw in scenes
involving a loyal doggy, a caring old woman, adventure at the circus,
and an exciting kidnapping, and your kids have themselves a quality
movie.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Never has the value of school uniforms been better demonstrated
than in MADELINE.  Dressed in bright blue jumpers, starched white
shirts with red and blue striped ties, straw hats with fire-engine red
ribbons - all set off nicely with banana-colored umbrellas, these
9-year-old girls are the pictures of innocence.  It is almost
impossible to envision these sweet-looking little darlings being
involved in drugs or any of today's modern problems.
     Director Daisy von Scherler Mayer, whose last movie was the
atrocious WOO, captures perfectly the wholesome Madeline series of
children's picture books by Ludwig Bemelmans.  While rarely rising to
the captivating level, the movie stays firmly in the cute range.
Little of consequence happens, but the story provides some nice little
adventures.
     In the lead role of Madeline, cinematic newcomer Hatty Jones is
precious.  With her intense dark brown eyes and her cherubic, round
face, the camera loves her.  Her mildly rebellious Madeline leads the
rest of her girl's school in such escapades as forbidden raids on the
refrigerator.  In one of the funniest scenes, she refuses to eat Fred,
the once-live chicken with whom she had shared a car seat earlier in
the day.  She soon has almost the entire student body converted to
vegetarianism.
     As the worrywart nun, Miss Clavel, FARGO's Frances McDormand seems
made for the role.  Popping up in the middle of the night and other
times, she proclaims with dead-on premonition, "Something is not
right!"  She quickly scurries around amongst her girls searching for
the predicament of the moment.
     The plot concerns the selling of the school by its crotchety owner
Lord Covington, played by Nigel Hawthorne.  The girls, who refer to him
as Lord Cuckooface, scheme to thwart the sale of the school.  They
enlist the help of the devilish son of the Spanish Ambassador, Pepito
(Kristian de la Osa), who lives next door to their school in Paris.  A
subplot, and probably the reason the show got a PG rather than a G
rating, concerns a kidnapping plan by Pepito's teacher.  It is handled
so delicately that the picture is effectively a G nevertheless.
     Filmed in dark, serious tones by Pierre Aim, best known for the
morose film HATE, the movie is set mainly to overcast Parisian skies.
Only the happy colors of the girls' clothes, designed by Michael
Clancy, keep the movie from having an inappropriately somber look.
     Nothing can stop Madeline.  Even the guillotine - which Pepito
claims he will use to execute a poor mouse to provide food for his
monstrous snake - doesn't faze her.  Madeline's ingenuity saves the day
more than once, and actress Hatty Jones saves the movie with her
likeable spunk.
     My son Jeffrey and his friends Kerry and Emma, all 9, liked the
movie.  Jeffrey gave it ** ˝, Kerry ***, and Emma *** ˝.  Kerry said
her favorites were the dog and the circus truck.  Emma liked the dog
and the mean girl the best.
