Title
Review for Most Wanted (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Keenen Ivory Wayans, Jon Voight, Jill Hennessy, Paul Sorvino,
and Robert Culp
Synopsis:
Sergeant James Dunn (Keenen Ivory Wayans) has killed an officer in self
defense. On the way to death row, he is rescued by a secret government
assassination team headed by General Woodward (Jon Voight) and invited
to join. But it's all a setup, and when the First Lady is assassinated,
Dunn finds himself holding a gun, and chased by the police, the army,
and the public out for the reward money. Apparently Dunn's being framed
by the corrupt General Woodward, and must find enough evidence to put
Woodward away while evading the forces of law and order. He gets help
from the head of the CIA (Paul Sorvino) as well as from a lady doctor
(Jill Hennessy) who has accidentally videotaped the real killer.
Opinion:
Nothing new or original here. This is a sometimes hammy B grade action
yarn, with some one liners minus the laugh track.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Keenan Ivory Wayans, Jon Voight, Jill Hennessy, Paul Sorvino, 
      Robert Culp, Wolfgang Bodison, Eric Roberts
Director: David Glenn Hogan
Producer: Eric L. Gold
Screenplay: Keenan Ivory Wayans
Cinematography: Marc Reshovsky
Music: Paul Buckmaster
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     Sad to say, MOST WANTED is yet another poorly-executed government 
conspiracy thriller, joining the lackluster ranks of SHADOW CONSPIRACY, 
MURDER AT 1600, and CONSPIRACY THEORY.  MOST WANTED is intended as a 
vehicle for Keenan Ivory Wayans, action hero (as opposed to Keenan Ivory 
Wayans, talented comic).  But, while Wayans the actor has an undeniable 
screen presence, Wayans the writer lets him down.  Not only is the 
screenplay for MOST WANTED laughably absurd, but it contains line after 
line of the worst dialogue available in any film currently on a 
multiplex screen.  Yet the film makers still expect us to take MOST 
WANTED seriously.
     In general, action films are not known for their intelligence, but 
this one takes assumptions of the audience's stupidity a little too far.  
For a movie this dimwitted to succeed, it has to keep viewers under a 
constant barrage of pyrotechnics, gunfire, chases, and other assorted 
thrills.  It can't allow them a moment's pause to actually think.  
Inexplicably, this is not first time director David Glenn Hogan's 
approach.  So, although the action sequences are all well-choreographed, 
there are significant pauses between them.  The film makers have 
foolishly inserted exposition into those dead zones, and the more we 
learn about the conspiracy underlying MOST WANTED, the more we realize 
it would be better left unexplained.
     The movie opens with an offer.  General Adam Woodward (Jon Voight), 
the tough-talking head of a government-sponsored, covert assassination 
group, visits Sgt. James Dunn (Wayans) in a military prison where he is 
serving a life term for killing a superior officer.  Woodward gives Dunn 
a chance at freedom if he joins his team for "Operation Wrath" -- an 
officially-sanctioned hit of industrialist Donald Bickhart (Robert 
Culp), whose company specializes in the manufacture of biological 
weapons.  Dunn, a sharpshooter, is to be placed on a rooftop in downtown 
L.A. when Bickhart arrives in the company of the First Lady for the 
dedication of a hospital wing he financed.  It's supposed to be a clean, 
quick operation, but it doesn't go that way.
     Someone fires before Dunn gets a shot off, and the First Lady is 
killed.  Suddenly, Dunn is on the run, the fall guy for the 
assassination.  Joined by Dr. Victoria Constantini (Jill Hennessy), an 
eyewitness whose videotape can prove his innocence, Dunn finds himself 
pursued by mobs eager for the $10 million reward posted for his arrest.  
Meanwhile, Woodward, who is heading the official investigation into the 
incident, wants Dunn dead before he can talk, and the deputy director of 
the CIA (Paul Sorvino) suspects a setup.
     Where MOST WANTED gets into trouble is using a worn-out cliche 
(high-level government corruption) as the fulcrum of a totally 
implausible, unnecessarily convoluted story.  The conspiracy here has 
many levels, and the more diligently you try to figure out exactly 
what's going on, the more apparent it becomes how ludicrous the entire 
scheme is.  MOST WANTED features some adequate action sequences, but 
nothing that can suitably camouflage the weakness of the plot.  Plus, 
all the action film standbys are on hand:  a scene in an elevator shaft, 
a car fleeing from a fireball, and an LED countdown readout (Roger Ebert 
will be glad to know that this time it's green, not red).
     Wayans does the best he can with the role, but he only has himself 
to blame for its limitations.  Jon Voight, who lately seems to be 
choosing roles that allow him to chew the scenery (check out ANACONDA 
and U-TURN for other examples), goes at it full-throttle here, recalling 
images of James Woods and Donald Sutherland at their most over-the-top.  
Jill Hennessy (A SMILE LIKE YOURS) is bland but attractive as Dunn's 
hostage-turned-sidekick.  And Paul Sorvino's quietly dignified 
performance is completely wasted.  The supporting cast includes Robert 
Culp, Wolfgang Bodison as the real assassin, and Eric Roberts as 
Sorvino's assistant.
     I'm getting bored of dumb action movies, and there have been far 
too many of them this year.  When I go into a theater to see explosions 
and shootouts, I don't look for a script that resembles Shakespeare, but 
I expect it to make sense and keep my attention.  MOST WANTED does 
neither.  It's a poor excuse for entertainment, and, in the wake of THE 
GLIMMER MAN, this has me seriously wondering about Keenan Ivory Wayans' 
choice of motion picture material.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Steve Kong
Keenen Ivory Wayans is a man of many talents.  He is known mostly for his
comedic talents though, remember In Living Color?  With Most Wanted Wayans
tries his hands at writing an action film and at becoming an action hero.
After seeing Most Wanted I would suggest that Wayans stick with what he
does best, and that is comedy.
Most Wanted follows Sgt. James Dunn (Wayans).  Dunn, a Marine, was
imprisoned because he killed his superior.  A covert operations group led
by General Adam Woodward (Jon Voight) takes Dunn from prison and he is
enlisted as part of an operation to kill a prominent businessman.  The
First Lady is killed instead and it seems that Dunn is the patsy for this
operation.  The only evidence that can save Dunn is a video taken by a Dr.
Victoria Constantini (Jillian Hennessy).  Dunn finds Constantini, through a
rather ludicrous way, and together they run from the conspiracy that worked
to kill the First Lady.
As the film goes on and Dunn continues to escape the grips of both
authorities and the conspiracy the more ludicrous the movie becomes.  The
problem with Most Wanted is that it tries to build a large conspiracy
behind what happened to the First Lady.  If built right it could have been
a very interesting addition to the film.  As it stands the story behind the
conspiracy is better left untold.  Along with the ludicrous story line come
really bad lines.  The script is definitely not the strong point of the
film, but in Most Wanted just about everything is not the strong point of
the film.
My suggestion for the filmmakers would have been less exposition and more
action.  When a script as unbelievable as this needs lots of action to keep
the audience from stopping to think about how unbelievable the script is.
The filmmakers of Most Wanted didn't do this and the lulls between action
sequences leave a lot of time for the audience to regain their disbelief.
Most Wanted is a ludicrously bad film all around.  The action sequences are
mediocre but not worth the movie ticket price, even during matinee.  Most
Wanted is definitely a movie to skip.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Trashy, insanely stupid Keenan Ivory Wayans vehicle. The title is
exactly the obverse of what it should be.
MOST WANTED is a stupid and incompetent movie that ineptly mixes-and-matches
several other genres, and come up with cold porridge. We get political
conspiracy, the Death Row Secret Team, a journalist looking for a hot story,
and God knows what else. Jon Voight in a general's outfit, too, but the
movie is inept on so many levels that I was snickering at the sight of him
by the twenty-minute mark.
The movie makes its foolishness plain right away. Sgt. James Dunn (Wayans),
court-martialed for a bit of Gulf War righteousness that would not have even
made it to court-martial in any other movie, is sentenced to die. He's
yanked off death row at the behest of Lt. Col. Grant Casey (Voight), who
wants to assemble a top-secret special ops squad. Since Dunn is legally
dead, he makes a perfect candidate. Unfortunately, the first mission he's on
turns out to be a covert assassination of the First Lady, and he's framed
for the murder. However, there's a videotape of the whole thing, and so off
he goes after it. All of this is over- and under-scored by a conspiracy plot
that's both implausible and painfully convoluted. We also get yet another
confirmation of the character-economy law -- the one person who just seems
to be standing around with his thumb in his ear, isn't.
I shy at having to discuss a film this painfully bad in detail, but I'll
try. Let's see. Among the ridiculous scenes: a moment where Dunn confronts
the woman with the tape, then moves closer to her, murmuring, "Man, I
haven't had a piece of *that* in years..." and then reaches for a pizza box
behind her. Groan, groan. Even worse is a chase scene -- is that the right
word? -- where everyone and his brother recognizes Dunn on the street and
starts following him (much to the dismay of traffic all across the city). I
wondered if we were looking at an outtake from IT'S A MAD, MAD, MAD, MAD
WORLD.
There is *one* good thing in the movie. Exactly one -- no more, no less. It
is Paul Sorvino's performance as a CIA man (although they give him an
opening scene where he's feeding the ducks, and they have him mouth dialogue
that's an utter embarrasement to an actor as good as him). Sorvino has a
scene which so far outshines the rest of the movie, in fact, they could have
built a whole new story around it. It turns out one of his men is a traitor,
and when he learns this, he gives the man a talking-to that has real truth
in it, and which almost makes the movie worth sticking it out for to hear.
Almost.
