Title
Review for Erleuchtung garantiert (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Sometimes movies transcend their descriptions.  Who would want to see a 
German film about a couple of brothers heading for Japan to visit a Zen 
monastery?  Surely there can't be much of interest in that, you might 
think as I certainly did.  
Well, there's a lot, as it turns out.  Writer/director Doris Dörrie's 
ENLIGHTENMENT GUARANTEED (ERLEUCHTUNG GARANTIERT) is a sweet, funny and 
absolutely delightful film about brotherly love, the meaning of life and 
the importance of a sense of humor in the face of adversity.  Think of 
it as a low-key version of PLANES, TRAINS & AUTOMOBILES in which the 
humorous and touching journey is the reward.  The story has a pervasive 
but subtle spirituality to it as the destination for these brothers 
turns out to be more than just a place on a map.  (Actually, the lack of 
a good map is but one of many of their problems.)
Two gifted, charming actors, Uwe Ochsenknecht and Gustav-Peter Wöhler 
play brothers Uwe and Gustav in warm and sympathetic performances.  Uwe 
designs kitchens, and Gustav, practicing the art of Feng Shui, teaches 
people how to orient their houses and their furniture so as achieve 
maximum harmony with the spiritual forces.  Both of the guys are anal 
retentives.  Uwe keeps a tape measure to make spur of the moment 
measurements and a camcorder to record his every thought.  Gustav uses 
his trusty compass to check the Feng Shui arrangements of rooms he 
visits and keeps his Buddhist book of wisdom always at his side in order 
to provide for instant motivational lessons, such as "The melon knows 
not the cold wind of morning."
Gustav, who has been planning his big visit to the monastery, is joined 
at the last minute by his non-believing brother when Uwe's wife leaves 
him, taking the kids.  The ever jovial Gustav is non-plused by his 
whining brother.  They haven't been together much since they were kids, 
so both look forward, albeit with some amount of trepidation, to their 
time abroad on their big adventure.
Once in Tokyo, the movie pulls back to let us witness the hubbub of city 
life and the sea of people going about their fast-paced daily lives.  
Through a hilarious series of misadventures from voracious ATMs to a 
taxi driver who has trouble understanding their English with German 
accents and confuses the word "hotel" with "hospital," they end up lost 
and destitute, living briefly on the street.  The script does quite a 
credible job of making this both plausible and humorous.  You'll be 
rooting for them as they get into more and more difficulties.  And 
you'll be touched by their reactions to their trials and tribulations.
Along the way, the two brothers mock each other with gentle jabs.  Uwe 
particularly likes to ridicule Gustav with Zen quotes like, "Have 
patience with every day of your life."  But they also nurture each 
other.  "Never give up, you wimp," they tell one another.  This long 
middle section of the movie is the best part, but the two leads are so 
strong that the entire film is mesmerizing.
When, in the last act, these foreigners in a foreign land finally arrive 
at the monastery, they find a highly ritualized life.  The monastery's 
rubrics are at first awkward and strange for Uwe.  But it is the hard 
manual labor of cleaning already clean floors in order to clean one's 
heart that proves the most troublesome for the rotund Gustav.  
When we first met the brothers, their respective wives were cleaning up 
spills on the floor with no offer of help from the husbands.  Once at 
the monastery, these opening scenes prove both prophetic and ironic as 
they spend much of their day cleaning.  This gentle, good-spirited 
comedy does much more than make you laugh.  It makes you think as well 
about what really is important in life.  And it makes you realize that 
life's journeys are fraught with difficulties and opportunities.  You'll 
leave the theater with a smile on your face and perhaps a bit more 
optimistic view of life.
ENLIGHTENMENT GUARANTEED runs 1:49.  The film is in German with English 
subtitles.  It is not rated but might be an R for brief nudity and 
language.  It would be acceptable for teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
All right.  It's a lot better than it sounds.  Veteran director 
Doris Dorrie, who made her reputation in 1985 with Men., matches up her 
frequent collaborator Uwe Ochsenknecht with newcomer Gustav Peter Wohler 
as a pair of bumbling German brothers who travel to Japan for a retreat 
in a Buddhist monastery.  Both actors do a wonderful job. 
The story divides into three parts.  The first, and funniest, 
introduces us to the brothers at home in Munich, where Uwe is a salesman 
in a kitchen showroom, and Gustav is a Feng Shui consultant.  Uwe has a 
wife and four screaming children, and comes home one day to find his 
wife fed up and gone, taking the kids and the furniture with her.  He 
cries drunkenly on Gustav's shoulder, and begs his brother to take him 
along on his long-planned trip to the Monzen Monastery outside of Tokyo. 
 When he sobers up the next day and realizes the folly of his request, 
it's too late - Gustav has bought him a ticket, and there's no getting 
out of it.
Part two chronicles the misadventures of the brothers in the neon 
jungle of Tokyo, and while the humor holds up fairly well, it begins to 
show its age and effort as it dips into territory covered many times in 
movies like The Out-of-Towners.  In material that is more gag-based than 
reality-based, they get lost, lose their money and credit cards, and 
wind up sleeping in cartons and working in a German beer hall on the 
Ginza Strip to hustle the train fare to the monastery.
Part three is at the monastery, and this is where you'll need all 
your reserves of enlightenment to keep laughing.  Life in a monastery is 
made up of a lot of repetitive routines, and they are repeated and 
repeated here.  While this makes for good enlightenment, it makes for 
slow comedy.  But the opportunity for a look at life inside a Zen 
monastery is some recompense.  Interestingly, Uwe - the loutish salesman 
with no background or interest in Eastern philosophy - takes to the life 
better than his brother.  There's a sort of Zen Murphy's Law at work in 
the monastery, and what can go wrong for them does go wrong.  But by 
degrees they both learn to let go and accept the peace and beauty of the 
here and now, and emerge from Monzen very different from the men who 
went in. 
Dorrie teaches graduate film students in Munich, and she was 
inspired to make this when her students balked at her challenge to them 
to make a movie using the new Digital technology.  "Okay, if you won't 
do it," she thought, "I will."  The medium fit the meditative message 
perfectly: she was able to "leave everything behind," and make her movie 
using a single cameraman and a crew that fit into one car.  But the look 
of the movie reads much richer than such simplicity would lead one to 
expect.  Cameraman Hans Karl Hu has captured some wonderful shots, 
including a classic overhead shot of pedestrians crossing a busy 
downtown Tokyo intersection.  And Dorrie reminds us of what she's up to 
technically by having Uwe record their adventures with his own hand-held 
digital video camera. 
As the Abbot of Monzen explains, enlightenment is not the 
achievement of something, but the absence of something.  As the movie 
moves along, it discards its laughs along with the other worldly 
baggage, but a lot of quiet smiles remain.  And Santa Fe, a veritable 
hotbed of enlightenment, should provide the ideal audience for this 
story.      
