Title
Review for Star Trek V: The Final Frontier (1989)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Okay, what can I say?  I have heard a lot negative about STAR TREK V.
Maybe my expectations were lower for this film than for others in the
series.  And there is a lot that *is* wrong with STAR TREK V.  There is a lot
that it does not deliver that others in the series did.  The special
effects--which are rumored not to have been done by Industrial Light and
Magic because Shatner's and Nimoy's salaries--are not as perfect as in the
other films.  Well, fine.  The effects are not jarringly bad and did not get
in the way of the story.  There are a lot of silly and even stupid scenes.
There is a rescue at the beginning like something out of SUPERMAN that
irritated me.  If you have seen the coming attractions you have seen Jimmy
Doohan doing a silly pratfall.  There are serious style problems.  This is
not going to be one of the more popular Star Trek movies.
     But when it is all over, STAR TREK V has said something about the
nature of religious inspiration and the need to question it.  It did not use
its science fiction merely to give us an interesting backdrop for a
swashbuckler.  STAR TREK V is more subversive than LIFE OF BRIAN, and I
suspect move subversive  than THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST.  (I say I
suspect because I have not had an opportunity to see THE LAST TEMPTATION OF
CHRIST.  It seems somebody thought the ideas in it were too dangerous.
Luckily there are some relatively safe havens for free thought and science
fiction is one of them.)
     On a remote desert planet a messianic figure, a Vulcan named Sybok,
comes out of the wilderness with a religious mission, a mission that
requires a starship.  It is not difficult to guess what starship he is going
to get.  His plan , though convoluted, is perfectly logical.  Meanwhile, we
are treated to some very sappy scenes of the Enterprise's merry men on shore
leave at Yosemite National Park.  These would have been well left on the
cutting room floor.  Rest assured the plot will soon have Klingons, ship
capturings, a mission to where no anything has gone before.
     There is a lot in this film that the filmmakers will have a hard time
living down.  Nichelle Nichols, who by now looks like a grandmother,
attempts an absurd erotic dance against what looks like an astronomically
impossible backdrop.  There are slapstick scenes in elevator shafts.  There
is a sort of encounter group session in space that is pitifully cliched.
There is bad camerawork at times.  Then there is the puzzling question of
David Warner's role.  It was too big to be a cameo and too small to be
considered a major part.  An actor of his stature is unlikely to have signed
up for such a small role, so one wonders if there was more that was cut.
And the music is entirely retreaded from previous films.  For much of the
film, I was seriously disliking it.  But when it was all over, I liked what
it seemed to me the film had said.  It did for me what I want science
fiction to do for me.  So I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     [SPOILERS FOLLOW]  I am certain I will be asked by someone what I
consider to be the subversive message of STAR TREK V.  If I have to put it
in a few sentences, it would be this: Religious inspiration is not to be
trusted.  You can feel what you think is the light of your god filling your
life and it can be a delusion.  It is possible that all religious fervor is
self-delusion that feels good but has not one iota of truth.  You cannot
trust your feelings, however powerful they are.  God, if He exists, must be
amenable to logic.  You have the right and the responsibility to question
politely what seems to be the word of God.  If it does not make sense to
you, you have the responsibility to deny it.
     Certainly the "god" in STAR TREK V is a false god and the believers in
this god are wrong, but who has more reason to believe in their own god than
the believers in the film?  What makes it more reason?  What is sufficient
reason?  The film is ultimately saying that reason is more important than
faith.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I don't consider myself someone who's hung up on Star Trek continuity;
given a clever story device in a Star Trek film that contradicts some element
of Trek continuity, I'll usually swallow the plot device with nary a rumbling.
However, I do think that the characters of the Enterprise crew, and to a lesser
extent, the "Star Trek Universe," are important elements of these films.  Plots
and dialog that compromise these characters and elements degrade the picture's
quality; after all, if you've got a good enough story, but the Enterprise
characters just don't fit it, then do it as a non-Trek story.  
     So, what's there to say about STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER?  As a
story, it's lackluster -- below average by even the STAR TREK: THE NEXT
GENERATION series quality average.  On the flip side, as a showcase for the
Trek characters, it's (generally) awful; there are scenes that literally made
me grind my teeth.  Certainly some of this might be laid at the door of aging
actors, but the vast majority seem to be due to an over-all attempt to inject
humor into the story at every point.  Previous Trek stories have either tried
for more dramatic stories, with comedy relief being just that, well-timed
relief; or STAR TREK IV, which was a lighter story, handled with a lighter
touch -- Leonard Nimoy's.  In THE FINAL FRONTIER, it seems that director
William Shatner was trying for an Indy Jones humor/action mixture.  Instead it
tends to look like Kirk, Spock and McCoy look more like the Ghostbusters -- or
more accurately, the Three Stooges.  Pratfalls, malfunctioning gadgets (Don
Adams would have felt right at home on the new Enterprise), and the packing off
of the Trek second-level characters to either walk-on spear-carrying roles (or,
in the case of Uhura, much worse), all combined to make a film that was below
the waterline throughout.  I saw STAR TREK II: The Wrath of Khan the other
night on the tube, and while that's arguably the best of the series, it shows
how a good script can add to a character without giving them a lot of screen
time.
     Before the spoiler comments, one point:  I've heard, of course, how much
money was spent to pay the regular's salaries this time around.  From the looks
of this film, the budget on the film must have been tight in the first place,
because the cheapness of the sets and the paucity of many of the special
effects gave me the impression that Peter was borrowed from to pay Paul, not to
mention Bill, De and Leonard.  There are scenes when several of the characters
are climbing through parts of the Enterprise, and their weight on the ladders
cause the bulkheads to come off the side of the walls!  God only knows how far
23rd Century aluminum siding has come...
     In summary, if you're a Trek person, you'll probably want to see it
anyway; my advice -- wait until you can watch it for one or two dollars.  For
those of you who only liked the last film, or perhaps WRATH OF KHAN -- skip it.
There are better films out there.  (Not many, but some.)
     Did Spock's brother remind anyone of Leo Buscaglia with ears?  "Everybody
hug!"
     I have to agree with the question posed by others -- what happened to
David Warner's part?  Was the role any larger in the novelization?  The budget
crunch seemed to hit the casting department, as well; there were a lot of
extras, but not many other actors, and those that were there seemed almost a
homage to some of the stars.  No, not Harve Bennett as the Supreme Starfleet
Guy-Behind-The-Desk, but Shatner's daughter -- and I must assume that whoever
played the Romulan ambassador was sleeping with someone influential, because
she wasn't picked to play a Romulan.  1/2 :-)  My guess: Shatner, for the way
she goes cries out "Oooh!" when she sees him threatened on the viewscreen.
Must be one of those sheltered Romulans....  :-)
     Again, the state of the sets.  The scene I referred to above was the climb
up the shaft.  If you see this film again (God forbid), check out the scene
where Shatner climbs up and the walls bend inwards.  Kirk apparently has an
abnormal specific gravity...
     In the acting department, Kelley bothers me the most, as he seems to be
hamming it up for the back rows of the theater; subtlety is escaping him more
and more in his performances as McCoy.  As a character, I thought Kirk suffers
the most here.  Anyone notice the Imperial motif that Kirk carries around him?
First there was Kirk's nautical quarters; and I couldn't decide whether the two
crewmen who carry the stairs that go up to Kirk's shuttlecraft were due to a)
bad writing, b) the Enterprise malfunctioning motif, c) more problems with
budgets, or d) "All Hail Flash Kirk, Savior of the Universe!"  Other
complaints: Sulu and Chekov playing the Hardy Boys for laughs, poor writing
for Scotty, and of course, Uhura's fan dance.  (The single worst part of the
entire film.)
     Good points: I did like a few of the more mythic moments, such as Kirk's
"I'll die alone," and his comment about losing his brother (I thought he meant
Sam), and then getting him back.  (Nice double-play.)  Also, most of the Spock
or Spock/Kirk lines jokes worked well.  ("Please, Captain... not in front of
the Klingons.")  But a good time was not had by all, not by a long shot.
     All I can say is, "This looks like a job for... Leonard Nimoy!"  (Or
maybe Nicholas Meyer.)

Author
Randy Parker
        Before I say anything about STAR TREK V, you should know that "Star
Trek" is my favorite TV series and that I love the Star Trek movies,
especially THE WRATH OF KHAN and THE VOYAGE HOME.  So with that in mind
perhaps you can appreciate just how much it pains my heart to report that
STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER sucks Dilithium crystals!  THE FINAL
FRONTIER is not only a shockingly poor follow-up to the enormous critical
and popular success of STAR TREK IV, it's also the worst film of the
series.
        As part five begins, the Enterprise is docked for repairs, and its
beloved crew is vacationing in Yosemite, no doubt recovering from their
adventures in the previous film.  But the camping trip abruptly comes to an
end when Star Fleet orders Captain Kirk and company to Paradise City on
Nimbus III, a planet in the neutral zone where a renegade Vulcan has taken
hostages.  Laurence Luckinbill plays Sybok, a Vulcan outcast who has
forsaken logic in favor of base emotions and instincts.  He possesses a
mysterious, spiritual power to relieve people of their emotional anguish,
and he uses this power to assemble a devoted following of worshippers.
With their help, he high-jacks the Enterprise.  Sybok intends to use the
starship to reach Sha Ka Ri, a mythical planet at the center of the galaxy
(beyond the Great Barrier) where no man has gone before.  There he expects
to find enlightenment from God almighty himself.
        During THE FINAL FRONTIER, we learn something new about Captain
Kirk, a.k.a. William Shatner; while his command of a Federation starship is
indeed impressive, he's not so adept at writing and directing movies.
Shatner's hackneyed story and heavy-handed direction make the film far too
self-serious and pretentious.  THE FINAL FRONTIER is as subtle as a sledge
hammer; it hits us over the head with its melodramatic plot and syrupy,
overbearing score.  The movie captures neither the good-natured,
light-hearted whimsy of VOYAGE HOME nor the suspenseful, nerve-wracking
excitement of WRATH OF KHAN.
        The story line in THE FINAL FRONTIER is astonishingly unbelievable.
Sybok's quest for God is so ludicrous it's almost funny--almost so bad
it's good.  Almost, but not quite: I groaned more than I laughed.  Not once
during the movie did I accept the premise or suspend my disbelief.  And how
could I with these embarrassingly cheesy special effects?
        After striking it rich at the box office with STAR TREK IV,
Paramount somehow decided it could no longer afford the services of
Industrial Light and Magic.  I.L.M. (the special effects division of
Lucasfilm) produced the special effects for the last three Trek films, and
it also creates the fine effects in "Star Trek: The Next Generation."
Giving I.L.M. its walking papers was a fatal mistake; the special effects
in THE FINAL FRONTIER are simply atrocious.  They barely look better than
those in the original TV series, which were good for their day but which
look shabby, laughable, and campy on the big screen.  The Enterprise and
the Shuttle Craft look plastic and artificial, almost as if they were
straight out of 2001.  Gone is the high-tech STARS WARS look of WRATH OF
KHAN, SEARCH FOR SPOCK, and VOYAGE HOME.
        STAR TREK V is far too often derivative of other films.  The bar in
Paradise City, for example, immediately brings to mind the Catina Bar in
STAR WARS.  Paradise City itself, with its grungy inhabitants, looks
suspiciously like the city of Bartertown in MAD MAX BEYOND THUNDERDOME.  To
make matters worse, the movie's spiritual, mystical overtones conjure
images of 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.  THE FINAL FRONTIER tries to cover so much
ground that it fails even to capture the heart, soul, and flavor of Star
Trek.  The movie tastes too much like a potluck dinner of science fiction
leftovers.
        STAR TREK V also suffers from a nagging problem that has plagued
the entire film series; it lies in the way in which the movies have
depicted the Klingons.  In the original TV series, humans and Klingons
differed not in appearance nor in intelligence but in cultural philosophy
and ideology.  Whereas the Federation preached peace and cooperation,
Klingon society was based on warfare, competition, and hatred.  In the
movies, on the other hand, the Klingons have become ugly, gruesome-looking
barbarians devoid of intellect.  They are so crude and one-dimensional that
they fail to make credible adversaries.  We can't take them seriously
because we are too busy laughing at their stupidity.  This problem, which
nearly sunk STAR TREK III, once again rears its ugly head in THE FINAL
FRONTIER.  The idiocy of the Klingon commander in STAR TREK V makes the
movie's already silly plot even harder to swallow.
        The sole salvation of STAR TREK V is the humorous banter and
rapport between the characters, especially between Kirk, Spock, and
McCoy--who else?  In the tradition of the TV series, THE FINAL FRONTIER
contains some vintage Star Trek dialogue.  The characters in Star Trek are
so familiar and so dear to our hearts that it's fun spending time with them
even in the worst of circumstances, such as a disappointingly mediocre
movie.  Even so, unless you're a true die-hard Trekkie, I'd suggest you
skip this one and wait for STAR TREK VI; I hear Checkov and Sulu are
co-directing.
