Title
Review for Shadow Conspiracy (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Walter Frith
What can you say about the director of 'Rambo: First Blood Part II'
(1985) and 'Cobra' (1986) making a movie about a major U.S. government
conspiracy?  Well, not much.  'Shadow Conspiracy' is a laughably bad
and totally far fetched piece of wretched garbage which is an insult to
those who believe in on going conspiracies in government world wide.
Charlie Sheen stars as a White House advisor to the President who
becomes gains knowledge of a massive government plot to commit
treason.  The movie has absolutely no depth of focus and instead of
building the story slowly in a fascinating manner piece by piece, it
instead dives right in and is nothing more than a tedious chase
picture.  Sheen is suspicious of the White House chief of staff (Donald
Sutherland) who may or may not be the bad guy.  Linda Hamilton rounds
out the major members of the cast as a reporter who aids Sheen in the
run for his life.  Even sillier than this, there is a nasty hitman for
hire who parades himself throughout the movie in a nameless and
speechless manner picking off people like insects and a scene near the
beginning of 'Shadow Conspiracy' is straight out of 'Three Days of the
Condor' (1975).  Director George P.  Cosmatos is not a filmmaker suited
for this type of material.  The unbelievable twists and turns in this
movie have no credibility and one scene involving a toy plane rigged
with a murdering machine gun mechanism had me almost walking out on the
film.  Sam Waterston ('The Killing Fields') gives a career worst
performance as the President and Ben Gazzara is equally stiff and dull
as the Vice President.  There isn't one single redeeming thing about
this movie and for all those people who complained that Oliver Stone's
'JFK' (1991) was an indictment of the system blown out of proportion,
'Shadow Conspiracy' will only serve to double that movie's stature as a
great film.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     For the record, I don't tend to put much stock in conspiracy
theories.  I don't believe the CIA had Kennedy killed, I don't believe
there is a flying saucer hidden somewhere near Roswell, New Mexico and I
don't believe that polio vaccinations are part of a secret plot to place
tracking devices in our bodies.  Call me a starry-eyed optimist if you
must, but I think people are capable of quite enough selfish nastiness on
an individual basis, and that that very same selfishness makes cooperative
nastiness an endeavor riddled with problems.  When it comes to Hollywood,
however, I might be willing to make an exception.  Studios just may be
conspiring to sap from our brains the ability to recognize clumsy stories
which make only the faintest sense.  By comparison to the crimes SHADOW
CONSPIRACY perpetrates on an unsuspecting audience, the crimes in its
so-called plot seem positively benign.
     Charlie Sheen stars as Bobby Bishop, a Presidential speech writer and
advisor on his way up the Washington power chain through his deft ability
to doctor a spin.  It is just another day in the capital when a former
professor of Bobby's (Theodore Bikel) meets Bobby on the street to warn
him of a secret government cabal called Shadow -- just before the
professor is shot in the head by a brutal agent (Stephen Lang).  Suddenly
Bobby finds himself running for his life, able to trust only two people:
Jake Conrad (Donald Sutherland), Bobby's mentor and the White House
Chief-of-Staff, and Amanda Givens (Linda Hamilton), a reporter and Bobby's
former girlfriend.  Together, they must find out who is behind Shadow and
what their diabolical plans are.
     Sheen appears to be basing his film career on playing the dupe (he
was also a patsy sniffing out dirty doings in TERMINAL VELOCITY and THE
ARRIVAL), but if he could be suckered into taking on a script like this,
perhaps he's not doing all that much acting.  SHADOW CONSPIRACY, credited
to the writing tandem of Adi Hasak and Ric Gibbs, appears to be the
product of screenplay software, introducing hackneyed situations and
characters without enough energy to make the cliches tolerable.  The hero
is established as a cocky smooth-talker, but instead of giving him chances
to talk himself out of difficult situations the script keeps him
perpetually running away from the Terminator-like Lang (Linda Hamilton
must have been experiencing serious deja-vu).  Hamilton acts as the
obligatory romantic sparring partner, except that Bobby and Amanda grumble
at each other only briefly before settling into a dreary camaraderie.  The
betrayal, the chase scene, the narrow escape...all the ingredients are
there, but they sit there flatly without the benefit of a single moment of
imagination
     If the basic material is bad, then the execution is even worse.  The
direction (by RAMBO's George P. Cosmatos) and editing (by Robert A.
Ferretti) in SHADOW CONSPIRACY are inept to a degree that seems almost
(conspiratorially?) designed.  One chase flashes from a luxury hotel to a
homeless encampment to a sewer out of LES MISERABLES with a blissful
disregard for continuity; scenes designed for tension become
inconsequential blurs, and characters wander through the narrative for an
hour before you have a clue what they are supposed to be doing.  Cosmatos
doesn't even understand basic principles of drama, making a point of
showing us a tricky-to-unlatch seat-belt which then plays no further part
in the story, an un-fired gun which probably sent Chekhov to spinning in
his grave.  SHADOW CONSPIRACY is the kind of incomprehensible mess where a
highly trained agent is willing to run through a hotel and a city street
firing a gun in full view of hundreds of witnesses, then decides to get
secretive by building a remote-controlled toy helicopter to assassinate
the President.
     That climactic scene at least provides a moment of absurdist fun, the
only one SHADOW CONSPIRACY has to offer unless you count the floppy hats
Hamilton favors which are sure to gain a White House correspondent
professional respect.  Mostly, it is just a plodding and somber piece of
nonsense which seems to expect brownie points for showing us all the ways
the government can keep an eye on us, and ends with an ominous tracking
shot to the perspective of a spy satellite.  Personally, I feel more
threatened by the prospect of lazy, pre-fabricated thrillers foisted off 
on the American viewing public as entertainment.  If the people who
brought us SHADOW CONSPIRACY are supposed to be the ones to shine the
light on sinister conspiracies which threaten our freedoms, all I have to
say is:  who's watching the watchmen?

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Charlie Sheen, Linda Hamilton, Donald Sutherland, Stephen Lang,=20
      Ben Gazzara, Nicholas Turturro, Theodore Bikel, Sam Waterston,=20
      Gore Vidal
Director: George P. Cosmatos
Producer: Terry Collis
Screenplay: Adi Hasak & Ric Gibbs=20
Cinematography: Buzz Feitshans
Music: Bruce Broughton
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     SHADOW CONSPIRACY marks Charlie Sheen's second consecutive=20
conspiracy thriller.  Of course, there are several notable differences=20
between this and THE ARRIVAL, the most obvious of which has to do with=20
basic quality.  For, while last summer's alien invasion film used a=20
reasonably smart script to frame its action sequences, director George=20
P. Cosmatos' SHADOW CONSPIRACY doesn't seem remotely concerned with the=20
concept of "intelligence".  This movie, which was originally slated for=20
an October 1996 release, got thrown in the "wait until January" dumper=20
with the likes of TURBULENCE and IN LOVE AND WAR.  Anyone who wastes=20
their time seeing the movie won't have to wonder why.
     For an action flick to work on any level, it's necessary to get the=20
audience's adrenaline pumping.  Routine, workmanlike sequences featuring=20
characters we don't care about in situations that aren't interesting are=20
more likely to produce boredom than excitement, and that's exactly what=20
happens with SHADOW CONSPIRACY.  Here, we have stereotyped villains=20
involved in a generic, high-level conspiracy, and a couple of equally-
bland heroes on the run.  Even although there's supposed to have once=20
been a love affair between the two protagonists, Bobby Bishop (Charlie=20
Sheen) and Amanda Givens (Linda Hamilton), they exhibit absolutely no=20
chemistry. =20
     The story starts out with an extended sequence demonstrating how=20
adept Presidential aid Bishop is at diffusing politically dangerous=20
situations.  Soon, however, he has the great misfortune of being in the=20
wrong place at the wrong time.  He's a witness to the murder of=20
Professor Yuri Pochenko (Theodore Bikel), and, as a result, becomes a=20
target himself.  To stay alive, he's forced to go into hiding. =20
Meanwhile, the Vice President (Ben Gazzara), the President (Sam=20
Waterston), and the Chief of Staff (Donald Sutherland) want him found=20
and brought in.  Eventually, Bishop goes to his old flame, WASHINGTON=20
HERALD reporter Givens, and the two of them end up on the run together,=20
with a crack hit man (Stephen Lang) never far behind.
     As always seems to be the case in conspiracy films, the identity of=20
the real villain is kept hidden.  By the time this mastermind in=20
unveiled -- and it's not a revelation that should shock anyone -- we=20
simply don't care.  This dismal motion picture never manages to engage=20
us with its meandering plot and moronic dialogue, and the longer it=20
runs, the less interested we become in anything except the arrival of=20
the end credits.
     Charlie Sheen is completely wrong for the role of Bishop.  We don't=20
believe him as the savvy spin doctor at the White House, nor do we=20
accept him as an action hero.  Linda Hamilton isn't any better.  Her=20
character's chief purpose consists of finding different ways to ask=20
Bishop, "What are we going to do now?"  It's something of a comedown for=20
the heroine of two TERMINATOR movies.  As for Donald Sutherland=85 this is=
=20
just another mail-in performance from an actor who has done this part=20
far too often in recent years.
     SHADOW CONSPIRACY even manages to disappoint once you get beyond=20
the regurgitated action sequences, limp acting, and dumb dialogue. =20
Despite being projected with a 2.35:1 aspect ratio, the film has a=20
cheap, low-budget appearance.  The camera work is flat and dull, and the=20
sets are uniformly unconvincing.  Everything about this movie looks=20
cheesy, and it hurts our ability to take even the smallest details=20
seriously.  At one point, Donald Sutherland's character makes the=20
following statement: "In reality, it's nothing but shallow, superficial,=20
pompous manipulation."  And, while that line isn't supposed to be a=20
commentary about the movie, it might as well be.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael Dequina
Shadow Conspiracy (R) no stars (out of ****)
Movies released in January typically come in three types: (1) wide
releases of year-end limited engagements (Evita); (2) unpretentious
crowdpleasers (Metro); and (3) long-delayed movies that are finally cleared
from the studio shelves.  Falling under the latter category (along with The
Relic) is Shadow Conspiracy, and after sitting through this Charlie Sheen
thriller, it's no mystery why it has collected dust for nearly a year--it
stinks.
Sheen stars as presidential assistant Bobby Bishop, whose brilliant
speechwriting skills won the nameless Chief Executive (Sam Waterston) a
second term.  After a prominent professor is mysteriously murdered, Bishop,
with the help of reporter--and, natch, former flame--Amanda Givens (Linda
Hamilton) uncovers a deadly conspiracy lurking within the shadows of the
government (hence the film's title).
It would be easy to dismiss Shadow Conspiracy on the terms of its
writing and directing, which is abysmal.  Adi Hasak and Ric Gibbs's script
is not only predictable and hackneyed, but cornball as well.  It's quite
telling when the film's most original moment is also its most ludicrous--the
unintentionally hilarious climax where an armed, remote-controlled toy
helicopter mows down a room full of people.  For all the chases director
George P. Cosmatos packs into the film (which is pretty much one long
chase), there's no excitement, no energy.
Cosmatos's biggest mistake, however, comes in the film's most
glaring flaw--the casting.  No offense to Mr. Sheen, but it's quite hard to
buy him as a brilliant presidential assistant whose skill with words is held
solely responsible for the President's reelection.  Not helping matters is
the fact that we get virtually no scenes where he's doing his job; the
casting wouldn't be so hard to swallow if we saw the guy at work.  Hamilton
is a talented actress, but after the indelible impression of her machisma in
T2, she just can no longer be bought as "the girl" in an action film,
regardless of how hard she tries.  But it's not like she tries hard, or at
all, here anyway.  Aside from miscasting, there's typecasting.  Donald
Sutherland plays Sheen's enigmatic mentor at the White House.  Do you think
_he_ could have something to with the conspiracy?  Sutherland as a bad guy?
You think?
After what is sure to be the poor box office performance of Shadow
Conspiracy, folks at Hollywood Pictures will probably wish they had left
this wretched excuse for a thriller collecting dust in the shadows of the
Disney vault.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Do you like massive conspiracy thrillers?  Well, what better place
to center it than right within the White House compound?  THE SHADOW
CONSPIRACY, which has all the canonical thriller elements, plays like a
typical television movie.  If you can't figure out all of the bad guys
within the first ten minutes of the film, then you have not been
getting your daily adult requirement of mysteries.
     As the story opens, a big guy (Stephen Lang) with a silencer on
his gun goes through a think tank killing everyone.  Well not exactly
everyone, since Professor Yuri Pochenko (Theodore Bikel) escapes out
the back door.
     Meanwhile, at the White House the president (Sam Waterston) is in
the beginning of his second term.  He did not rock the boat in the
first term, relying on the latest opinion polls to form his every
decision.  He now has a speech he is about to deliver that will slash
military spending and will propose other radical actions that he thinks
are good for the country.  He figures that, since he is a lame duck, he
can launch any initiative he likes.  Most of his advisers think the
speech will sink the stock market and have dramatic, negative
repercussions.
     Charlie Sheen, who was so good last year in THE ARRIVAL, plays
Bobby Bishop, a special assistant to the president.  Bobby says his
theory of governance is, "He who gets the first sound bite wins."
Although he assisted the president with the preparation of the
controversial speech, he will help the president's cabinet by getting
the speech delayed and in the process will outfox ace reporter Amanda
Givens (Linda Hamilton).  In the cabinet are Ben Gazzara as the Vice
President, Charles Cioffi as the Chairmen of the Joints Chiefs, and
Donald Sutherland as Conrad, who is Bishop's boss.
     The two stories quickly intertwine when the professor meets Bobby
in Georgetown to tell him, "Something terrible is happening within the
government at the highest level.  There's an enemy within, a traitor."
     This setup for the plot happens in the first ten minutes.  Want to
go out on a limb and guess what the "Shadow Conspiracy" is, and who are
the nefarious fellows behind it?
     Right after his conversation with the professor, Bobby is shot at
and then chased for the entire rest of the picture.  The "good" guys
want Bobby to come in, but Bobby smells a rat, or rather a mole, or
moles.  The film consists of chase scene after chase scene with Bobby
and, of course, the lovely ace reporter by his side.  You've seen all
of this before and better.  If you come to the film expecting nothing
and have your brain switched off, the film does provide enjoyable,
mental pabulum.
     A show with never a subtle moment has the requisite thunder and
lighting.  The music by Bruce Broughton has variations on the mystery
music you've heard a hundred times before.
     Sheen and Hamilton try hard but cannot save the show.  Sutherland
is awful.  In one scene, where the tension is mounting, he rests his
head on his shoulder as if out of boredom.  You may be sympathetic with
his gesture.  The worse performance is given by Nicolas Turturro as
Grasso, the NSA intelligence expert.  Turturro's Grasso is someone you
would not trust to have the brains to park your car.  In a show full of
implausibilities one of my favorites is that Grasso is able within
seconds to redirect spy satellites positioned on the other side of the
globe to begin looking down on Washington.
     Most of the problems with THE SHADOW CONSPIRACY relate to the
weakness of the script by Adi Hasak and Ric Gibbs.  These first time
writers have set up "numerous projects" according to the press kit, and
this is just the first of many to be released.  I sincerely hope the
others are better.  Director George P. Cosmatos (TOMBSTONE) adds
nothing to the picture, which runs on autopilot.
     Providing all the ingredients of a thriller is not the same as
making a thriller.  Nor will hiring a talented cast guarantee
compelling performances.  The show reminded me of my mother's fudge
when I was a kid.  She would put in what she thought were the right
ingredients, but it always ended up being a thick, brown soupy
concoction.  She never did find the right recipe.  Neither did these
filmmakers.
     THE SHADOW CONSPIRACY runs 1:43.  It is rated R for violence and
some profanity.  The show is a soft R and would be fine for any
teenager.  There is not much to the movie so I can not recommend it.
Better to stay home and watch mediocre television than pay seven bucks
to see an unconvincing movie.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
