Title
Review for Barney's Great Adventure (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael Dequina
"I hate you/You hate me/Let's hang Barney from a tree." Count me among
the many who simply cannot stand the Jesus Christ of kids'
contemporary pop culture icons, Barney the dinosaur. As I walked into
the child-packed auditorium for a matinee showing of the dino's
big-screen splash, Barney's Great Adventure--The Movie, I took a deep
breath in preparation for what I knew would be a descent into
cinematic hell.  And that it was--at least for someone my age.
The ostensible story involves two young siblings, Cody (Trevor Morgan)
and Abby (Diana Rice), who are sent to their grandparents' farm home
for a week. Abby and her (token African-American) friend Marcella
(Kyla Pratt) are big Barney fans and devout followers of his gospel of
imagination; stick-in-the-mud Cody hates doing "child-like" things and
despises the dino. Before you can say "PBS," Abby and Marcella's
stuffed Barney has come to full-size life, trying to instill some good
ol' child-like imagination in Cody, who then wishes upon a star for a
great adventure--which he gets, courtesy of a large, psychedelic egg
of extraterrestrial origin that just won't stay in one place.
Of course, Barney can't go long without singing a song. His first
appearance comes with a tune called "Imagine," and moments before Cody
makes his wish, he leads the two girls in a rendition of "Twinkle
Twinkle Little Star." It is during this number that he encourages the
audience to join in, at which point my already-cringing self was
reaching for a vomit bag.  The torture continued to escalate with an
"Old McDonald" set piece (complete with the Barnmeister decked out in
overalls) and, most excrutiatingly, a visit with bird expert Miss
Goldfinch, which results in a full-blown production number whose
appallingly inept choreography had me yearning for the halcyon days
where Debbie Allen lent the Oscars her ever-innovative dance moves,
such as having dancers hold up hula hoops during the 1995 "Circle of
Life" number.
That should have been enough to send me bolting to the exit, but then
I started to look at Barney's Great Adventure from a more academic
perspective, at which point the film began to queasily fascinate.  As
we see the jolly dino and his friends visit a parade, a circus, and
snooty French restaurant in pursuit of that elusive egg, I was oddly
mesmerized by this creepy alternate universe where no one finds the
sight of a plush, purple dinosaur (or for that matter, his
lighter-shaded but equally plush sidekicks Baby Bop and B.J.) followed
intently by a group of children the slightest bit unusual.  When
Barney takes to the restaurant stage and rocks the house with a jazzy
little ditty, the snobby patrons are less taken aback (if at all) by
his big, cuddly presence than they are by his less-than-formal
behavior.
But I suppose films like Barney's Great Adventure rightfully demand
some amount of suspension of disbelief, which will come rather easily
for the film's target audience, preschool and pre-preschool aged
children.  And in terms of that audience, Barney's Great Adventure is
completely harmless, if banal.  Barney doesn't really teach anything
to kids, but he does reinforce positive ideas--look both ways before
crossing the street, believe in your dreams, keep a healthy
imagination.  Granted, the latter point is more thoroughly and
entertainingly explored in any given episode of the delightful 1980s
animated series Jim Henson's Muppet Babies, but the accomplishment of
an entertainment that is magically able to keep the tykes in the
audience virtually still and silent for a full 75 minutes cannot be
discounted.
So, yes, Barney's Great Adventure--The Movie was a predictably
mind-numbing experience for me; one would have to shell out some big
bucks to get me to sit through it again.  But even though I am at the
younger end of the age spectrum for film critics, I am far older than
the movie's intended audience, and that audience will likely eat up
every last second of it.  Although its entertainment value to adults
is negligible, it is a safe, harmless bet for families, one parents
will neither regret nor fondly remember after it's over.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Barney, that heartthrob of the preschool set, finally has his own
movie.  Entitled BARNEY'S GREAT ADVENTURE, the picture, about following
a magical egg, keeps its plot to a minimum.  Marketed sometimes as
BARNEY'S GREAT ADVENTURE: THE MOVIE, it would more aptly have been
labeled BARNEY'S GREAT ADVENTURE: THE SING-ALONG.  The little ones, who
would be happy to watch Barney sing the phone book, will probably like
the movie, which delivers large doses of their favorite overstuffed
dinosaur.  Those hoping for more than just a long, outdoor version of
Barney's TV show, they will likely be disappointed.
     The story opens with a cynical youngster named Cody (Trevor
Morgan) going to visit his grandparents, played by George Hearn and
Shirley Douglas, on their farm.  Along with Cody are his sister Abby
(Diana Rice) and her friend Marcella (Kyla Pratt).  For a film aimed at
the 2-7 year old set, the decision to cast child actors all around
10-years-old seems surprising and inappropriate.  There is a
one-year-old who has a few scenes, but most of the movie features these
three older kids and Barney.
     "You don't need cable TV to look at on a farm," Cody tells himself
sarcastically as he looks out from his window onto a group of pigs.
"You'll have scenery to look at."
     Thanks to a little water, the girls' toy Barney turns into a
real-life one, who sings and dances various short numbers.  Cody thinks
he's way too cool for Barney, but - surprise - by the end of the movie,
he will be hugging him and singing-along too.
     Even allowing for the lack of a real script, the actors
demonstrate very little acting talent.  With the humans getting more
screen time than Barney, their weakness drags down the movie
considerably.  And then there's the overall look of the picture.  As
filmed by Sandi Sissel, normally a television cinematographer, the
multicolored sets look flat and dull.  Only in the magical scene of the
host of hot-air balloons does Sissel rise above the drab.
     The movie does have its silly, little delights.  Baby Bop keeps
appearing out of nowhere to search for her missing yellow "blankee."
She asks the audience where it is, and sure enough, someone moves it
just before Baby Bop can find it.
     BARNEY'S GREAT ADVENTURE runs just 1:15.  It is rated G and is
appropriate for all ages.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, said that at his age he "kind of liked"
the movie, but that he suspected younger kids would like it.  Jeffrey's
biggest complaint was that there were way too many songs.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Barney, that big purple dinosaur everybody loves to hate, is finally
stampeding off your local PBS station and into movie theaters everywhere. Some
are laughing, some are vomiting, and some are just plain baffled that such an
occurrence has indeed taken place. But let's get one thing straight - Barney
is not and never was intended for adults, so, keeping that in mind, grab your
imagination caps and head into the wonderful world of BARNEY'S GREAT
ADVENTURE: THE MOVIE.
Over the river and thru the woods, Cody (Trevor Morgan), his little sister
Abby (Diana Rice), and her best friend Marcella (Kyla Pratt), are heading to
Grandma and Grandpa's house for a summer vacation. Cody, who's getting to that
mature age of 12 or so, is having doubts about the trip . . . there won't be
any cable TV to entertain him, just a farm complete with smelly, noisy pigs.
On the other hand, Abby and Marcella couldn't be happier it seems, running
around, playing hide-and-go-seek and tag, and basically using the most archaic
toy of all - their imaginations. It doesn't take long for Cody to find
something to do - he steals Abby's precious Barney doll and taunts her
relentless efforts to retrieve it. That is until, lo and behold, the 14" plush
replica of the big purple dinosaur magically transforms into the life-size,
walking and talking, singing and dancing, genuine article.
Always a skeptic, the first little bit of the film follows Cody as he tries to
shrug Barney off as an oversized, grape colored hallucination. But the more
Barney dances and prances around the barn, singing rounds with Abby and
Marcella, the harder this is for Cody to do. Eventually, the four of them
unite when a mysterious, color-changing egg is found and, thru the help of
neighbor Mildred Goldfinch (Renee Madeline Le Guerrier) and her extensive
library, they discover it is a magical wishmaker, able to grant everyone's
wish once all the colors have changed. The trouble is, the egg is constantly
being misplaced, and if it isn't returned to the exact spot it was found by
the time all the changes have taken place, it will never work. This leaves the
group on an city-wide, hour-long expedition to recover the magical egg,
allowing for plenty of sing alongs and guest appearances by Barney's humble
friends, Baby Bop and BJ.
Surprisingly, and luckily, there are very few moments that will actually make
even the most sophisticated of adults want to cringe. The only time I was
highly agitated was when Baby Bop came onscreen with her whiny, piercing
squeal of a voice. Like the television series, Barney happens to be the least
annoying character there is, and thankfully, none of those nauseatingly over-
zealous kids from the show appear in this movie. Morgan, Pratt, and newcomer
Rice all handle their roles as well as can be expected, although Pratt is
given very little to do besides tag along. Their performances are a bit corny,
but for a kids' film, not much more can realistically be anticipated, and any
hokeyness can be attributed as much to director Steve Gomer as the actors. But
once again, these are details that nobody extremely interested in seeing this
film is going to care about. The target audience of preschoolers isn't likely
to scoff at the low-budget special effects or mock the amateurish acting
abilities, and since this film is for them, and not us, why should we be so
quick to trespass on their innocent wonderment with our magicless, adult
cynicism?
All I can say is, thank heavens there's not a "Bananas in Pajamas" movie . . .
at least not yet. I know most people out there are ready to lynch Barney, but
it's those oversized Aussie fruits that scare the heck out of me. They're
creepy! So, however much you may despise Barney, there are plenty of TV shows
we should be rejoicing haven't been adapted into big screen versions,
especially when nearly every TV show seems to wind up there eventually. Did we
ever have to suffer a "Hee Haw" movie? Alas, from many of the right
perspectives, BARNEY'S GREAT ADVENTURE: THE MOVIE is quite tolerable, and if
you're under five years old, it's probably wonderful.
