Title
Review for Bridge on the River Kwai, The (1957)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Karl Rackwitz
Directed by David Lean; Written by Michael Wilson and Carl Foreman,
based on Pierre Boulle's novel; Cinematography by Jack Hildyard; Music
by Malcolm Arnold; Edited by Peter Taylor; Produced by Sam Spiegel; With
Alec Guinness, William Holden, Jack Hawkins, Sessue Hayakawa, James
Donald, Geoffrey Horne
In this year's July the American Film Institute (AFI) chose David Lean's
war picture "The Bridge on the River Kwai" as number 13 on its list of
the 100 greatest American movies. Not to mention that "The Bridge on the
River Kwai" is a British picture, the AFI's decision expresses in the
first place the same lapse of taste that the Academy of Motion Picture
Arts and Sciences showed in 1958 by giving Lean's film seven Oscars.
Much better movies came away empty-handed in those days, among them
Lumet's "12 Angry Men", Wilder's "Witness for the Prosecution" and
Kubrick's "Paths of Glory" (the latter wasn't nominated in any
category).
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" is set in Burma in 1943. A batallion of
British soldiers in Japanese war captivity is forced by the Japanese to
build a strategically momentous railway bridge over the River Kwai. But
the British commanding officer, Colonel Nicholson (Alec Guinness),
insists - corresponding to the Geneva Conventions - that his officers
needn't work as simple workmen. Struggling toughly, Colonel Nicholson
forces the Japanese commandant, Col. Saito (Sessue Hayakawa), to give
way in this respect. Afterwards Colonel Nicholson assiduously commits
himself for the building of the bridge. He considers it an opportunity
to raise his men's morale, and he wants to prove superior British
capabilities to the Japanese. But the British High Command sends a few
soldiers who shall destroy the bridge, among them the American Shears
(William Holden) - an escapee from the Japanese prison camp - and the
British Major Warden (Jack Hawkins).
The film is racist in a certain sense because the Japanese people are
presented as intellectually inferior to the British. For example, in the
filmmakers' opinion the Japanese seem to be incapable of building a
bridge.
Lean's picture partly succeeds in showing the madness of war. But the
movie opportunistically avoids a really consistent and clear treatment
of this theme. This is probably one of the reasons for the picture's
popularity. But unfortunately it also hinders "The Bridge on the River
Kwai" from being a real anti-war film. Much helped by Alec Guinness'
superior performance, there's at least the interesting study of Col.
Nicholson, a man possessed by the idea of being a hero. Although you can
find some ironic dialogue concerning the military spirit in the film,
David Lean doesn't really question the military "logic" as Stanley
Kubrick does in "Paths of Glory". Lean seems rather fascinated by the
military hierarchies. This is also perceptible in the conversations
between Col. Nicholson and Col. Saito. It is symptomatic of the film's
attitude that Shears, who doubts the military logic, is such a cynical
an unpleasant person. The audience is supposed to applaud Col.
Nicholson's perseverance concerning the question if his officers shall
work on the bridge or not. The spectators are supposed to neglect the
risks Nicholson takes for his men. (The plot systematically by-passes
these risks.)
Lean's direction is quite effective, but didn't deserve the Academy
Award it earned. (Compare the direction in "The Bridge on the River
Kwai" with Sidney Lumet's amazing and more subtle work in "12 Angry Men"
and Wilder's achievement in "Witness for the Prosecution".) The film is
well-photographed too and has an apt score. There is also no denying
that the picture is suspenseful. But the characters often seem little
more than a plot device.
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" is cynical, especially in the both
dramatic and implausible showdown. The filmmakers are obviously more
interested in clichés than in the characters of the film.
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" could have become an important
anti-militarist motion picture and an interesting study of complex
characters with clashing interests. But it hasn't. The formal cleverness
of Lean's film and its suspense can't obscure the fact that it is
questionable in its contents. There are, of course, worse films, but I
also know far better ones.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1998)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Once upon a time, there were movies called "larger than
life". They appeared in 1950s, in order to help Hollywood
survive the challenge issued by the new medium of
television. Such films featured stuff small screen could
not: cinemascope, bright colours, exotic locations, truly
epic stories and spectacles with thousands of extras. Some
of those films slid into obscurity, others got their Academy
Awards and became the most precious part of cinema legacy,
often causing filmophiles to lament good old times.
Undisputed master of that genre was David Lean, one of the
greatest British directors who ever lived. In the latter
part of his career he made five such great films, and two of
them are regarded as masterpieces. The first one was THE
BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI, 1957 war spectacle than won seven
Academy awards and later became praised as one of the best
anti-war films ever made.
The plot of this film is based on the novel by French author
Pierre Boulle (whose work would later inspire another great
film, PLANET OF THE APES). However, the novel, as well and
the film, found its basis in one often forgotten but ghastly
episode of World War Two. In 1942, following Pearl Harbor,
Japanese forces overcame weak British defences and conquered
Malaya and Burma. However, the Jewel of the Crown - India -
remained out of their reach, not because of weakened British
defences, but because of their own logistical problems. For
the supply of their troops on Burmese front, Japanese
couldn't rely on their navy, already over-stretched with
surprisingly successful Pacific conquests. So, the land
supply route had to be made, and Japanese began to build the
railway that would connect Japanese-controlled Burma with
the supply bases in Thailand. Such task was hard, because
the railroad had to be built through the hundred kilometres
of thick, wild jungle. The least of all problems was the
workforce - Japanese used tens of thousands of captured
Allied soldiers and hundreds of thousands of natives as
slave labour. After sixteen months of hard labour the
railroad was finished, but the death toll among the
captives, exhausted by heat, disease and Japanese
mistreatment was horrible, and the railroad deserved its
nickname Railway of Death.
The film begins in February 1943, in the Prison Camp No. 16,
commanded by Colonel Saito (played by Sessue Hayakawa), who
is faced with a problem. He is ordered to finish the bridge
over the river Kwai before May 12th, but the task is almost
impossible, since the almost all camp prisoners succumbed to
the harsh conditions of prison life. Their replacement comes
in the form of battalion of British prisoners, commanded by
Colonel Nicholson (played by Alec Guiness). Nicholson is
obsessed with order and military discipline and wants to
maintain it, even as prisoner; so he refuses Saito's orders
to take part in manual labour, which is, according to Geneva
Convention, forbidden for officers. Of course, that leads to
dramatic confrontation and Saito wants to make Nicholson
change his mind through torture. While those two Colonels
are obsessed with desire to save face, US Navy Commander
Shears (played by William Holden) is more concerned with his
own survival; knowing that his chances in the jungle are
better than in the camp, he escapes. Few weeks later, Saito,
pressed with mounting deadline and frustrated with the lack
of progress, concedes defeat and allows Nicholson and other
officers to be spared from manual labour. Instead of
gloating, Nicholson decides to actually co-operate with
Saito and help him build the bridge; in his mind, this
successful completion of such task would regain dignity,
moral and discipline of his men. In the meantime, Shears has
miraculously survived the jungle and reached the safety of
British- controlled Ceylon. There he is shown to be
impostor, enlisted man who had took the false identity of an
officer in order to get privileges. In order to evade court
martial, he accepts the deal that brings him back to the
last place he would want to go - to the bridge on the river
Kwai, this time as a member of commando team, led by Major
Warden (played by Jack Hawkins), determined to blow up still
unfinished bridge.
Usually, when we are talking about anti-war films, wars
depicted in them are those that have gained reputation of
senseless slaughter, like WW1 and Vietnam. WW2, as much
clearer example of Good vs. Evil, seemed like unsuitable
example for anti-war message. But not for David Lean,
dedicated pacifist, who probably had rough time reconciling
his own beliefs with ugly reality of Britain being
threatened by Hitler. That author was probably the most
suitable for this film that very explicitly equals war with
madness. Lean wasn't the only one who had troubles because
of his beliefs - screenwriters Carl Foreman and Michael
Wilson were branded as alleged Communists and blacklisted by
Hollywood studios, which erased their names from movie
credits (restored many years later, together with "Oscars",
originally given only to non-English-speaking novel author
Boulle).
War as madness in this film is shown through four memorable
characters, each of them displaying different levels of
sanity, as well as different ways such madness manifests
itself. The main and most complex and tragic character is,
of course, Colonel Nicholson. This role by Alec Guiness, who
would get "Oscar" for it, is one of the best in the history
of cinema and much better than Guiness' latter and better
known incarnation as Obi Wan Kenoby in STAR WARS. Here he
portrays heroic, but deeply flawed individual, obsessed with
the idea to maintain order and civilisation even in the
situations when such things clearly don't exist anymore. One
illusion follows another and he slowly and gradually slides
into madness, often deceiving the audience. In the
beginning, his stubborn refusal to bend to his captor could
be viewed as an act of heroic defiance; but, later,
following the same logic, he becomes a traitor instead of a
hero.
His prime antagonist is portrayed by excellent and often
neglected Asian actor Sessue Hayakawa. Colonel Saito is on
the surface looks like nothing more than generic sadistic
villain, but later he is revealed to be as psychologically
troubled as his prisoners are troubled physically. His
previous failure as artist, and failure as engineer could
only lead to his ultimate failure as soldier, already hinted
with the post of prison camp commander - most humiliating
task for the military built on ancient tradition of no
surrender. Desperate desire to save face makes him as
stubborn and mad as Nicholson, and that madness would
express itself with suicidal intentions that are unimpeded
even with the apparent success of his project.
Another military madman in this Siamese jungle comes in the
form of Major Warden, played by excellent Jack Hawkins.
While Saito and Nicholson became obsessed with duty and
order, Warden sees war as an adventure, opportunity to have
some fun by blowing up bridges and buildings. He couldn't
care less about discipline and formal rules of war, but,
unfortunately, he doesn't care about the fatal consequences
his adventurous approach to war could have on men under his
command.
Voices of reason seem few in this lunatic asylum. One of
them is Shears, character often cited by some critics as
unbelievable and unnecessary, written only to bring American
crowds to theatres. William Holden plays him as cynic,
flawed man, but someone most of us could relate to. His
course of actions might seem cowardly or unethical (enjoying
undeserved privileges of rank or frolicking with beautiful
nurses while his fellow men bleed on the battlegrounds), but
they are quite understandable in the context of his
experiences. The opposite thing - lack of experience - is
something that bothers Lieutenant Joyce, played by Geoffrey
Horne, who suffers from fatal inability to kill another
human being, even when such course of action is mandated by
circumstances. But only the character of Major Clipton
happens to be the true voice of reason and his final
comments at the end are the words that belong to the author
of this film.
Strong acting talent in this film was accompanied by superb
directing. David Lean spent a great deal of time making this
film and it shows on the screen. The shots are long, but
they allow the viewers to concentrate on the characters and
their subtle gestures, as well as many interesting details.
Photography by Jack Hildyard was superb, with the great use
of Sri Lankan jungle locations that provide claustrophobic
and depressive atmosphere for the film. Musical score by
Malcolm Arnold is also very suggestive, but only the
"Colonel Bogey March" remains in memory as one of the most
catching and popular tunes in the history of film music.
THE BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI is almost perfect film,
brilliantly written, acted and directed and one of the rare
examples of "Oscar" winners that actually passed the test of
time. Of course, there are some flaws, but they are minor.
Some may argue that the life of Allied soldiers in Japanese
POWs, although still very grim according to this film, was
actually much harder in real life. Conflict between Saito
and Nicholson was simply unimaginable under such brutal
conditions; this film was often criticised by surviving POWs
for portraying Japanese guards as kinder and gentler than
they actually were. Also, the final showdown, although
powerful, in the film seems a little bit melodramatic.
However, despite those flaws, THE BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI
still remains undisputed masterpiece, an excellent example
of one great film-making talent and thought-provoking
cinema. All those with intention to educate themselves about
war through movies must see this one.

Author
Matthias Rackwitz
Directed by David Lean; Written by Michael Wilson, Carl Foreman, based
on Pierre Boulle's novel; Cinematography by Jack Hildyard; Music by
Malcolm Arnold; Edited by Peter Taylor; Produced by Sam Spiegel;
With Alec Guinness, William Holden, Jack Hawkins, Sessue Hayakawa, James
Donald, Geoffrey Horne
I want to correct what I wrote in a former retrospective of David Lean's
war picture. I still think that it doesn't deserve being the number 13
in the American Film Institute's list of the 100 greatest American
movies. And I think that Lumet's "12 Angry Men", Wilder's "Witness for
the Prosecution" and Kubrick's "Paths of Glory" would have been better
choices for the Best Picture Oscar in 1958. But I can't deny the
importance of "The Bridge on the River Kwai" - cinematically and in its
contents.
The film is set in Burma in 1943. A bataillon of British soldiers in
Japanese war captivity is forced by the Japanese to build a
strategically momentous railway bridge over the River Kwai. But the
British commanding officer, Colonel Nicholson (Alec Guinness), insists -
corresponding to the Geneva Conventions - that his officers needn't work
as simple workmen. Struggling toughly, Col. Nicholson forces the
Japanese commandant, Col. Saito (Sessue Hayakawa), to give way in this
respect. Afterwards Col. Nicholson assiduously commits himself for the
building of the bridge. He considers it an opportunity to raise his
men's morale, and he wants to prove superior British capabilities to the
Japanese. But the British High Command sends a few soldiers who shall
destroy the bridge, among them the American Shears (William Holden) - an
escapee from the Japanese prison camp - and the British Major Warden
(Jack Hawkins) ...
A flaw of the picture is the clichéd characterization of the Japanese
people. They are presented as if they were intellectually inferior to
the British - as if the Japanese were incapable of building a bridge.
And the film doesn't consistently question the military spirit as
Kubrick does in "Paths of Glory". Lean seems rather fascinated by the
military hierarchies. This is also perceptible in the conversations
between Col. Nicholson and Col. Saito. In this regard it is symptomatic
that Shears, who doubts the military logic, is a somehow unpleasant
person in the film. The audience is supposed to applaud Col. Nicholson's
perseverance concerning the question if his officers shall work on the
bridge or not. The spectators are supposed to neglect the risks Col.
Nicholson takes for his men. (The plot by-passes these risks.)
That means, the picture isn't perfect. But it has a lot of virtues as
well. It shows the "madness" of war and what war can produce in people's
minds. It shows how Col. Nicholson becomes possessed by the idea of
being a hero and that others (like Shears) get cynics. And "The Bridge
on the River Kwai" is an interesting study of characters with clashing
interests. These points and the sometimes ironic dialogue make this film
an anti-war film (despite the inconsistencies in the treatment of this
theme). David Lean's effective and atmospherically perfect direction
creates a high suspense, especially in the dramatic (though not wholly
plausible) showdown. 
Alec Guinness does a magnificent job of bringing Col. Nicholson to life
and making him such an interesting character. The other actors deliver
very good performances as well. Jack Hildyard's fine color
cinematography and the apt score are also helpful.
I like this extraordinary film despite its weaknesses.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)

Author
Karl Rackwitz
Directed by David Lean; Written by Michael Wilson, Carl Foreman, based
on Pierre Boulle's novel; Cinematography by Jack Hildyard; Music by
Malcolm Arnold; Edited by Peter Taylor; Produced by Sam Spiegel; With
Alec Guinness, William Holden, Jack Hawkins, Sessue Hayakawa, James
Donald, Geoffrey Horne
I want to correct what I wrote last year in my retrospective of David
Lean's war picture.
I still think that "The Bridge on the River Kwai" doesn't deserve being
the number 13 in the American Film Institute's list of the 100 greatest
American movies. And I think that "12 Angry Men", "Witness for the
Prosecution" and "Paths of Glory" would have been better choices for the
Oscar for the Best Picture of 1957.
But I can't deny the importance of "The Bridge on the River Kwai" -
cinematically and in its contents.
The film is set in Burma in 1943. A batallion of British soldiers in
Japanese war captivity is forced by the Japanese to build a
strategically momentous railway bridge over the River Kwai. But the
British commanding officer, Colonel Nicholson (Alec Guinness), insists -
corresponding to the Geneva Conventions - that his officers needn't work
as simple workmen. Struggling toughly, Col. Nicholson forces the
Japanese commandant, Col. Saito (Sessue Hayakawa), to give way in this
respect. Afterwards Col. Nicholson assiduously commits himself for the
building of the bridge. He considers it an opportunity to raise his
men's morale, and he wants to prove superior British capabilities to the
Japanese. But the British High Command sends a few soldiers who shall
destroy the bridge, among them the American Shears (William Holden) - an
escapee from the Japanese prison camp - and the British Major Warden
(Jack Hawkins) ...
A flaw of the picture is the clichéd characterization of the Japanese
people. They are presented as if they were intellectually inferior to
the British - as if the Japanese were incapable of building a bridge.
And the film doesn't consistently question the military spirit as
Kubrick does in "Paths of Glory". Lean seems rather fascinated by the
military hierarchies. This is also perceptible in the conversations
between Col. Nicholson and Col. Saito. In this regard it is symptomatic
that Shears, who doubts the military logic, is presented as a somehow
unpleasant person. The audience is supposed to applaud Col. Nicholson's
perseverance concerning the question if his officers shall work on the
bridge or not. The spectators are supposed to neglect the risks Col.
Nicholson takes for his men. (The plot by-passes these risks.)
That means, the picture isn't perfect. But it has a lot of virtues as
well.
"The Bridge on the River Kwai" shows the "madness" of war and what it
can produce in people's minds. It shows how Colonel Nicholson becomes
possessed by the idea of being a hero and that others (like Shears) get
cynics. And Lean's film is an interesting study of characters with
clashing interests. These points and the sometimes ironic dialogue make
this film an anti-war film (despite inconsistencies in the treatment of
this theme).
David Lean's direction is really effective and atmospherically perfect.
His film is highly suspenseful, especially in its dramatic (if not
wholly plausible) showdown. The film is also well-photographed and has
an apt score.
Alec Guinness does a magnificent job of bringing Col. Nicholson to life
and making him such an interesting character.  The other actors deliver
fine performances as well.
I like this extraordinary film despite its weaknesses.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)
