Title
Review for Rosetta (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ROSETTA (directors/writers: Luc & Jean-Pierre Dardenne; cinematographer:
Alain Marcoen; editor: Marie-Helene Dozo; cast: Emilie Dequenne
(Rosetta); Anne Yernaux (The Mother), Fabrizio Rongione (Riquet),
Olivier Gourmet (The Boss); Runtime: 94; 1999-Belgium)
One of the really haunting films of the 1990s. A film about a life
hitting a wall and taking the starch out of a young person's sense of
being. It is so painful to see what existence means and doesn't mean to
a teenage girl, that it is hard to look at this film without thinking of
it as a documentary. Its underlying theme is about the impossibility of
leading a moral life and being moral, that no matter what one does,
existence supercedes everything else. This unusually bleak look at the
desperation of a young girl's life won top prize, the Palme d'or, at the
prestigious Cannes Film Festival. Emilie Dequenne, the 18-year-old star,
shared the best-actress award. She played the role with conviction and
gave a truly unforgettable performance.
The Dardenne brothers have made an urgent film about today's job market
that hits home on its universal pathos and how those on the bottom are
taken advantage of by unfair employment practices. The film tells of how
a young girl can't manuever out of the poverty she was born into. It's a
theme that forces you to look at the young girl in an introspective way
and at her poverty as something that is real and not something that can
be dismissed by other distractions in the story. Rosetta's life is more
reflective of how ordinary Americans manage to scrape by and actually
exist, than in all the ludicrous themes of the escape films most
Americans flock to see. This film is rich in all the things about life
that Hollywood chooses to gloss over in its need to get a blockbuster
film. Its star does not exude beauty and is not faced with episodic
adventures. It is the triviality of her life, watching her everyday
movements, as she changes her shoes, cuts her French toast, sells her
old clothes to get money, skirts the traffic as she crosses a highway,
which gives this film its realistic flavor.
Rosetta (Emilie Dequenne) lives in a trailer park with her alcoholic
mother (Anne Yernaux). She angrily comes home after being fired from her
job at a factory, even though she considers herself to be a good worker.
No reason is given why she is laid off, but it upsets her so much that
she lashes out at her boss and has to be restrained by the police. We
follow her strident movements as she takes a bus home and then crosses a
highway to a wooded area where she removes a rock from a hole in the
ground and takes off her work shoes and replaces them with boots she
keeps in the hole. Her trailer is just outside some unnamed small town.
At home, she accuses her mother of getting drinks from another trailer
park resident, saying that he only gets her drunk to fuck her. A
hand-held camera is steadily focused on the young heroine and follows
her around as she goes fishing in a muddy creek near-by and uses a
hair-dryer blower over her belly to relieve her hunger pains before
going to sleep. Her life is an unusually lonely one for a teen-ager, and
she has no adult to help her shape her life.
A young man, probably the same age she is, Riquet (Fabrizio Rongione),
with romantic designs on her, who works at a Belgian waffle wagon stand,
comes by her trailer park by motorcycle, as her first reaction upon
seeing him, is to angrily knock him off the bike. But as they wrestle in
the ground, he tells her, "There's a job available, my boss fired
someone."
Her way of seeing things has become so chilling, that she never allows
herself to loosen up and welcome the young man's attention, regarding
him only as a rival for a job she wants. She goes to Riquet's place for
French toast and a beer, and cracks a smile for the first and only time
during the film, as he tries to show off doing some gymnastics and
clumsily falls. After she is fired from this job of making waffles
because the boss's idiot son returns to work, Riquet visits her and
falls in the muddy creek trying to retrieve her fishing line and is
sinking in the mud, and she thinks of letting him drown in order to get
his job, but reluctantly saves him. When he offers her a job
moonlighting, a scam he is working on the boss (Gourmet), selling
waffles he makes on his own, she turns him down, telling him she wants
only a regular job. Then she does something that many would consider
reprehensible though morally correct, she drops a dime on him and tells
the boss of his swindle. The boss immediately fires him and hires her.
The Dardennes (La Promesse) are veteran documentary filmmakers of
leftist leanings, with a penchant for making films about social
problems. They have created a masterfully perfect visceral film, that is
unflinching in its realism and unsentimental in its study of her. What
makes this film so uncompromising and ironical, is that we are not asked
to like or even accept Rosetta, we are only allowed to understand that
she does what she has to in order to exist. Isn't that the way life
really is, anyway?
It is difficult to remove from one's memory Rosetta's prayers for
normalcy, uttered to the invisible person she pictures herself sleeping
next to, as she goes to sleep, telling herself
"Your name is Rosetta, my name is Rosetta. I found a job, you got a job.
I got a friend, you got a friend. I will not fall in a rut, you will not
fall in a rut. I will lead a normal life, you will lead a normal life.
Good night, good night." This is the study of someone desperately trying
to become the somebody she pictures for herself. In many ways, her story
is ours, there are no national borders to separate us from such agony.
This film seems to give up on everyone but the struggle of Rosetta,
fully focusing on her point of view, of her life and death struggle, one
that must strike at the heart of society that allows such employment
injustices to exist without doing something to correct things (as a
result of this film, the Belgian government did pass a more favorable
labor law, which it called "Rosetta's Law"). There is nothing more
important for most people in the world than in securing a job, and there
are very few films that take the pains to show that getting a job is so
serious a matter. I think that the film critics who downplayed this film
into the minor category because of its lack of action and tedium, missed
a chance to see a film that had much more to offer than the usual type
of escapist entertainment fare. This film has the distinction of being
troublingly unique, it is devoid of any philosophy, it is even different
from Bresson's "Mouchette," a masterful film it is most closely akin to.
Bresson had too many religious and Catholic agendas in his film to
achieve the starkness this film does. This is a film made for purists of
the cinema, those who don't want to see another disposable film, but who
wish to see a film that is unmistakably direct, a film that they can see
themselves in if they are not too calloused and frightened of life to
look at the dark side. It is society's mistake if they make someone like
Rosetta invisible, and it is our mistake as filmgoers and critics if we
ignore films just because they bring up unpleasant subjects and we don't
feel entertained by them. To be so prosaic in our viewing habits as
that, we would be on the same slippery footing as Rosetta, striving for
the same kind of ridiculous normalcy she was after.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/61f96490ec8ab69c88256849001f1c32?OpenDocument
A film Review by Athan Bezaitis  Copyright Filmcritic.com
Fair warning!!!  Don't eat a big meal before you watch ROSETTA.  If you
thought the hand held camera motion from THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT was
bad, you'll be stumbling out of this one with a splitting headache and
nausea that only Dramamine can prevent or projectile vomiting can cure.
At least in BLAIR WITCH the technique served a purpose that added an
element of mystery to the film.  ROSETTA, on the other hand, was so dull
and convoluted that the hand held style fails miserably in its attempt
to create a `realistic atmosphere.'  Directors Luc and Jean-Pierre
Dardenne should issue a warning for theaters to block off the first
eight rows of every location that this movie opens so that nobody gets
too close to the screen, plus they ought to provide those handy little
barf bags, just in case you have a weak stomach like me.
Rosetta, played by newcomer Emilie Dequenne, is a seventeen year-old
adolescent suffering through a miserable life in Seraing, Belgium.  She
lives in a trailer park with an alcoholic mother who prostitutes herself
for booze and food.  Her home barely has running water and cannot even
provide shelter from the cold wind.  Despite her horrid circumstances,
the film chronicles her incredible perseverance and strength as she
attempts to get a job that will provide food and rent money for her
desolate family to survive.
The film's production is primarily at fault for its failure.  Subtitled
in English, several key scenes have white backgrounds, which make the
writing on the screen illegible.  Unless you speak French, you'll have
no clue as to what is being said.  Also, the film never explains the
significance of Rosetta's perplexing stomach ailment, which plagues her
whenever she expresses any strong emotions.  These crucial blunders,
coupled with the poor handheld photography, spoil Emilie Dequenne's
performance, which resonates as the only bright spot of the whole film.
This is one that should be avoided if you're a movie hound looking for
kicks this holiday season.  But if you insist on seeing it, I don't
recommend eating cheese-filled pastries right before, like I did.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Meaningless minutia.  In the place of anything approaching a compelling
narrative, ROSETTA's co-writers and co-directors Luc and Jean-Pierre
Dardenne, ladle on the trivial like sugar on cereal.
Rosetta, played with the emotive power of a stone by Emilie Dequenne,
lives a hardscrabble life in a Belgium trailer park with her alcoholic
mother (Anne Yernaux).  A homely young woman with stringy brown hair and
empty eyes, Rosetta is an angst-filled youth who leads a near vacuous
life.
The directors, using artsy handheld cameras with lots of close-ups and
fast blurry pans, show Rosetta's miserable life with pseudo-realism.
And do they ever show it in repetitive detail.
We know, for example, precisely how Rosetta cuts her toast.  She uses
long, slow vertical slices.  The resulting rectangle is then cut on the
diagonal until she produces five bite-sized pieces from each slice.
This long and laborious toast-eating episode manages to be the highlight
of her evening with her boyfriend, Riquet (Fabrizio Rongione).
We also get to see Rosetta drink and then refill her sports bottle again
and again.  We watch her unlace her shoes, time and time again, in order
to put on her boots.  Most home videos are much more eventful and
exciting.
The story is so devoid of tension that you sit there hoping against hope
that some horrible tragedy will befall Rosetta so that the story will
finally get in gear.  (In order to pass the time, one can reflect on how
this movie has managed to show up on best and worst of the year lists
from major critics.  Okay, so the reflection is more on how a critic
could have stayed awake long enough to put it on a best list since the
movie commits the cardinal cinematic sin -- it is excruciatingly
boring.)
One of the film's themes explores the idea that job creation is a
zero-sum game.  In order for you to get a job, someone else must lose
theirs.  "There's a job available," Riquet tells Rosetta after she
knocks him off of his bike for unexplained reasons.  "My boss fired
someone."  This theme that the only way to get a job is to steal someone
else's will repeat itself later in the story.  The naiveté of this whole
economic argument is stunning.
In a season in which movies are all trying to outdo each other in
longevity, Rosetta is a standard length film.  But so little transpires,
it feels longer than a three-hour epic.
ROSETTA runs 1:35.  It is rated R for language and would be acceptable
for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
