Title
Review for Nine 1/2 Weeks (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Adrian Lyne follows his tremendous hit FLASHDANCE with a movie that
garnered the most sexual attention for a film since LAST TANGO IN PARIS
(6.5/10). Lyne went on to direct many other perverted films such as
FATAL ATTRACTION (8/10), INDECENT PROPOSAL (7/10) and 1998's LOLITA.
PLOT:
Man sees woman. Woman sees man. Instant sexual attraction. Man likes to
play head games and control the woman. Woman likes it to a point. Woman
loves man? Man loves woman? Find out.
CRITIQUE:
Dated, redundant, yet still somewhat interesting sexual drama that pits
the young, good looking Mickey Rourke against the young and even
prettier Kim Basinger. The film rolls by without much emotion, tension
or resolution, but does feature a solid performance by Mickey and some
of the most graphic sex scenes between two stars in a Hollywood
picture. The shock and outrage that people expressed when this movie
was first released was now replaced with a "been there, seen that" kind
of feeling for me. 
The soundtrack sucks (except for Brian Ferry's "Slave to Love" and the
sex with food song), the direction is standard, and the story line
blows chunks, but still, the nostalgia factor and Mickey Rourke acting,
well, like Mickey Rourke, still managed to keep this film afloat the
recommendable area. Also, if you're into Kim Basinger in any which way,
shape or form, check this piece of tape out, 'cause God knows there are
plenty of "provocative" shots in there to keep you busy during those
long and lonely winter nights.
Overall, the film's plot is jammed with sex, some small talk about sex,
kinky sex, some sadomasochistic undertones with a touch of control and
misogyny, and even kinkier sex. If you're into any of that stuff,
cheezy '80's soundtracks, Mickey Rourke's younger days, or even Kim
Basinger's rack, I suggest you walk into your local video store and
lease this Johnson for an evening. If not, your life will not change,
and you could still catch an even greater acting coup by Mickey Rourke
in the under-appreciated BARFLY (8/10) co-starring the lovely Faye
Dunaway. Either way, Adrian Lyne's still a perv.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Note that Kim Basinger's character Elizabeth wears white or colorful
clothing except when she is with John (Mickey Rourke), when she wears
black or grey. 
A few years after this film, Mickey Rourke tossed in his acting gloves
and replaced them with some real boxing mitts as per his new career as
a professional boxer. After an unsuccessful foray into that field, and
several face-altering operations, Rourke is now attempting to re-ignite
his Hollywood movie career. 
Mickey Rourke wrote the screenplay for the film HOMEBOY under the
pseudonym Eddie Cook.
Mickey is in an on-again, off-again marriage to model/actress Carré
Otis, with whom he co-starred in WILD ORCHID. He's also been arrested
on several occasions, for busting up hotel rooms, smoking up in a
plane, and charges of spousal battery. 
Writer Zalman King also co-wrote and directed the Mickey Rourke vehicle
WILD ORCHID.
Kim Basinger is married to hairy actor Alec Baldwin, with whom she has
mothered a child named Ireland. Alec once cracked a photographer in the
head for attempting to take a picture of his baby daughter. He was let
go with a simple slap on the wrist, with the jury ordering him to cough
up a mere $4,500 in damages for being negligent.
