Title
Review for Hannibal (2001)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Ridley Scott. Screenplay by David Mamet and Steven Zaillian,
based on the novel by Thomas Harris. Starring Anthony Hopkins, Julianne
Moore, Giancarlo Giannini. Running time: 134 minutes. Rated AA for blood 
letting by the MFCB. Reviewed on February 19th, 2001.
I admit, I had some concerns about "Hannibal" heading into the theatre. 
Thomas Harris' novel of the same name (unread by me) was hardly a critical 
darling, and neither "Silence Of The Lambs" director Jonathan Demme nor 
Clarice Starling originator Jodie Foster -- in many ways the lynchpin of 
the earlier movie -- were returning for the new installment. Sequels are 
often a mixed bag, anyway: for every successful follow-up such as "The 
Godfather Part II", there have been dozens of odious imitators like "The 
Lost World".
As a sequel to "Silence" and as a movie in its own right, "Hannibal" falls 
somewhere around the upper middle of the pack. Certainly, it is very 
different from its predecessor -- whereas that film was a taught, 
atmospheric thriller, "Hannibal" tends toward dark comedy. "Silence" 
boasted a superb, absorbing plot; "Hannibal" is almost entirely a 
character piece, with a patchwork story which primarily exists as a 
showcase for the title cannibal. And make no mistake, this movie is 
entirely owned by the murderous Hannibal Lecter, played once again by 
Anthony Hopkins.
When last we saw him at the end of "Silence", Lecter had escaped custody 
and fled to Europe. "Hannibal" picks up the story a decade on, with Lecter 
masquerading as the interim head of a Florence art museum. Investigating 
the disappearance of the museum's previous director is the 
unfortunately-named Inspector Pazzi (Giancarlo Giannini), who soon 
uncovers the truth about Lecter's identity. Rather than bring his 
suspicions to his police superiors, however, Pazzi keeps the knowledge to 
himself, hoping to capture Lecter and win the substantial reward offered 
by American millionaire Mason Verger (Gary Oldman).
Verger, it transpires, was the only survivor of Hannibal's original 
killing spree. A paedophile, Verger had been placed in Lecter's 
psychiatric care, only to suffer abhorrent tortures at the murderer's 
hands, resulting in his gruesome disfigurement. Verger wants revenge on 
Lecter, and has secretly engaged the services of FBI lawyer Paul Krendler 
(Ray Liotta), who puts him in touch with Agent Clarice Starling (now 
played by Julianne Moore). Starling has problems all her own: a drug bust 
gone wrong has threatened her entire career. As Verger draws the threads 
of his plan together, it is only a matter of time before Hannibal and 
Clarice meet once more.
As good as Foster was in "Silence", few people will dispute that it was 
Hopkins' portrayal of Lecter that was the most memorable aspect of that 
much-laurelled film -- despite the fact that he was on-screen for less 
than one-fifth of the running time. In "Hannibal", Hopkins takes centre 
stage, and his performance is more than up to the challenge. Lecter is 
truly a quintessential movie villain, up there with Darth Vader and Bela 
Lugosi's Dracula. Despite his atrocities, no matter how inherently 
reprehensible his bloody lifestyle, Lecter is charming and captivating. If 
you had to be eaten by a fellow human being, is there anyone you'd rather 
have devour your kidneys than Hannibal the Cannibal?
Much of the attraction of the character comes from the deep conviction 
Hopkins brings to the role. Yes, by traditional human morality, Lecter is 
a monster. But, in Hopkins' hands, Hannibal is lifted beyond such 
pedestrian mores: he is a law unto himself, adhering to his own beliefs in 
spite of society. Even his murders have their own perverse logic and 
nobility. In some ways, then, he is a classic anti-hero (albeit as warped 
an anti-hero as they come), a man who refuses to let petty strictures 
deter him from how he wants to live his life. Consequently, it is 
difficult not to admire Lecter's clarity of self; add to this his 
gentlemanly demeanour and you have a perfect role model (well, if only he
didn't kill and devour people).
So engrossing is Hopkins' performance that all else pales in comparison. 
Particularly ill-served is Clarice, who is even more of a secondary 
character here than Hannibal was in "Silence". It is not surprising that 
Foster turned down the picture, which barely develops the character beyond 
her earlier appearance. Moore's version of the role is at best 
serviceable, but it seems clear that this is the fault of the script and 
not the actress.
Oldman does what he can with Verger, but his madman is doomed to toil in 
the shadow of Hannibal. So firmly ensconced is Hopkins in his role that 
Oldman simply cannot compete. Similarly, Giannini is never entirely 
satisfying as Pazzi -- the character lacks substance and motivation, and 
his ultimate fate is so clearly telegraphed that it is difficult to feel 
much connection with him.
But maybe that's entirely intentional. Rather appropriate to the European 
setting which dominates its first half, "Hannibal" is a rare Hollywood 
example of Grand Guignol, the late-nineteenth century French theatrical 
tradition of comedies thick with rape, murder and deeds equally heinous. 
Given how firmly established Hannibal's culinary preferences are in the 
minds of the audience, director Ridley Scott and scriptwriter Steven 
Zaillian (David Mamet authored an earlier, discarded draft) mine them for 
a number of creepy laughs. This builds up to a truly revolting -- yet 
somehow uncomfortably funny -- climax which will, I expect, cause the
cancellation of any number of dinner parties in the next few weeks.
But, for all the Grand Guignol trappings of "Hannibal", Zaillian and Scott 
have otherwise forgotten to give the movie a real sense of story. There is 
a disjointed, episodic feel to events: even the aforementioned dinner 
scene feels like a tacked-on coda rather than a natural development of the 
plot. As a result, "Hannibal" possesses none of the atmosphere of 
"Silence", and for all its gross-out moments is nowhere near as scary.
Were the movie theatre a circus, "The Silence Of The Lambs" would be the 
centre ring. "Hannibal", on the other hand, would be the freak show just 
outside the main tent -- watchable and even mesmerising in its own right, 
but not something that will have stayed with its audience ten years later.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/Hannibal.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Steve Rhodes
I know Jodie Foster's acting.  And Julianne Moore is no Jodie Foster.  
Moore, who may be right for some parts, is completely wrong for the 
intelligent but vulnerable FBI Agent Clarice Starling in HANNIBAL, the 
much anticipated sequel to THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.  And without the 
right casting for Agent Starling, the movie degenerates into little more 
than a borefest, I mean gorefest.  (Foster reportedly passed on the part 
because she didn't think the high blood level of the screenplay was 
worth her time.  She was so right.) 
Action director Ridley Scott (G.I. JANE) replaces the more thoughtful 
Jonathan Demme, who besides THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS is also known for 
such pictures as PHILADELPHIA.  You might expect Scott to be more 
dramatic, which he is in sections.  More often, however, HANNIBAL is 
paced so ploddingly that viewers will spend more time bored than grossed 
out.  They will rarely be engrossed by the movie, which is quite 
tedious.
The basic plot this time has Dr. Hannibal Lecter abroad in Florence.  
Anthony Hopkins has a high old time collecting a large paycheck to 
repeat his role as a cannibal.  Of course, without him the sequel 
probably would have never been made.  Too bad he didn't hold out for 
more money.
Those going in for blood and gore will not be disappointed, even if they 
do have to endure long, dull periods between slicing and dicing.  
Intestines fly, and worse, much worse.
Filthy rich Mason Verger (Gary Oldman), Hannibal's only living victim, 
wants to find and kill him.  (Agent Starling wants to find Hannibal, 
too, but she's equally interested in protecting the butcher from Mason.)  
The camera dwells on Mason's horribly disfigured face.  Agent Starling 
doesn't mind looking at it, but does look away when he mentions God, 
Mason notes.  This God angle turns out to be a cinematic dead end.  
The script, based on Thomas Harris's novel, was worked on by the 
talented David Mamet (THE WINSLOW BOY) and Steven Zaillian (SCHINDLER'S 
LIST), but without much luck.  Besides many logical problems, the dialog 
lacks almost any comedic punch.  About the only memorable line is that 
Hannibal likes to "eat the rude."
"Everyone's going to be happy," Paul Krendler (Ray Liotta) tells Agent 
Starling about her working again on the Hannibal Lecter case.  "I'm not 
happy!" she retorts.  And neither will most viewers be, based on the 
disgusted comments I heard going out of my packed screening.  Finally, a 
word of caution.  If you've barely been able to stomach most of the 
movie, leave before the last act, which becomes a bigger barfola than a 
ride on an upside-down roller coaster after a greasy hamburger.  
HANNIBAL runs a very long 2:11.  It is rated R for strong gruesome 
violence, some nudity and language and would be acceptable for high 
school seniors and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 HANNIBAL (director: Ridley Scott; screenwriter: David Mamet/Steven
 Zaillian/based on the novel by Thomas Harris; cinematographer: John
 Mathieson; editor: Pietro Scalia; cast: Anthony Hopkins (Hannibal
 Lecter), Julianne Moore (Clarice Starling), Ray Liotta (Paul
 Krendler), Giancarlo Giannini (Rinaldo Pazzi), Frankie R. Faison
 (Barney), Francesca Neri (Allegra Pazzi), Gary Oldman (Mason Verger),
 Zeljko Ivanek (Dr. Cordell Doemling), Hazelle Goodman (Evelda Drumgo),
 David Andrews (FBI Agent Pearsall); Runtime: 131; MGM; 2001)
The long awaited sequel to "The Silence of the Lambs" has arrived with a
new director
for Jonathan Demme -- Ridley Scott ("Gladiator"), and a new star actress
for Clarice Starling, as Jodi Foster bowed out and Julianne Moore came
in. The production also changed screenwriters, as David Mamet's script
was rejected and his script was replaced by Steven Zaillian's. What
remains constant, is that Anthony Hopkins is still up to his old eating
habits while playing Hannibal Lecter.
The film is stylistically pleasing to the eye. Its serial killer scenes
are excessive, but they do allow for comedy to soften the blows and,
also, since all the victims were not particularly nice people, watching
them being mutilated was made more bearable.
The film can be divided into three parts and all with different results.
The film's opening is meticulously choreographed, showing in detail how
a police bust can go sour. The film's second part taking place in Italy,
is brilliantly conceived and acted, it is the heart of the film, with
its visual effects matching its dialogue and storytelling. Though, even
this part of the film has its faults, as some scenes will drag on for
far too long, allowing a tedium to creep into the story. The last part,
when back in the Washington, DC area, is a total gross-out, that brings
the film down to a mundane campy level, as bad taste takes over, making
for a very sloppy and exploitive surprise ending.
Overall, this sequel didn't live up to the high-pulp-art standards of
the original, but it was still successful in being a technically
superior cinematic happening and the quality of the acting was always
first-rate. Hopkins's riveting performance is interlaced with wit and a
sense of the genteel, though it also comes with some over-the-top moves
(though there are no slurping tongue sounds when he goes into his
cannibalistic mode as in the original). The nervous, icy but vulnerable
persona that Moore ably brought to her role, much like Foster played it,
keyed in on her fight with male authority figures who can't accept her
because she's different than they are, more than with her mental chess
game with Lecter as in the original. But the most underrated performance
in the film, is by Giancarlo Giannini as Italian detective Pazzi, whose
greedy character is clearly drawn out through Italian actor Giannini's
superbly nuanced performance, of a man who is desperately trying to
achieve redemption for his failure to achieve what he wanted out of
life, so much so that he will sell his soul to the Devil to hold onto
his trophy wife (Neri) and also to show his superiors that he is capable
of more than what they think.
The film opens with FBI Special Agent Clarice Starling working with
local Washington, DC police to apprehend a dangerous female felon
(Goodman), who is wanted on drug charges. Clarice's career, since her
initial success with the Hannibal case, has been spiraling downwards of
late, and because this arrest results in a bloody shootout, she is
unfairly blamed for it and called on the carpet by her male FBI bosses.
Leading the charge against her, is a self-serving U.S. justice official,
someone who was once an agent in her department and made sexual advances
which she rejected, Paul Krendler (Ray Liotta). He has now been assigned
to team up with her to find the whereabouts of the escaped serial killer
Hannibal Lecter. Clarice has just received a letter from Lecter, which
she traces to Florence, Italy. A wealthy, homosexual victim of
Hannibal's, Mason Verger (an unbilled Gary Oldman), who had his face
ripped apart by him and is now disfigured and has the distinction of
being the only one of Lecter's victims to have survived, learns of this
letter and meets with Clarice. And since he has enough money to buy
influence in Washington,   he gets the FBI to put her on the case, as he
intends to use her as a lure so that his own hired men can bring
Hannibal to him, as he plans to get his vengeance.
In Florence, an Italian detective, Rinaldo Pazzi has uncovered that the
person posing as the newly-appointed art curator, is Lecter and that
he's on the FBI's Ten Most Wanted list
and that Mason Verger is offering a $3 million reward. He forgets his
policeman's oath and greedily tries to bring Hannibal to Verger, with
the help of Verger's men. But, he underestimates Hannibal's cunning
ability and pays dearly for his poor judgment.
In the climactic scenes, Hannibal comes back to the States, and his
long-anticipated meeting with Clarice takes place -- which turns out to
be a fizzle, or a real lame-brained idea on how to put a twist in the
plot that becomes unnecessarily twisted. The film, that was faithful to
Thomas Harris' novel until this point, now goes off on Ridley Scott's
own direction and it becomes an absurd mess, with nothing working right,
and all its good work is nearly eaten away by the director's bad
instincts. What can you say, but sometimes you try something new and it
just doesn't taste right.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Susan Granger
  Terrifying, tantalizing Hannibal Lechter is ba-a-a-ck! In
this long-awaited sequel to "The Silence of the Lambs" (1991), Anthony
Hopkins reprises his Oscar-winning role of Hannibal the Cannibal. "I
have been in a state of hibernation for some time," he explains. His
portrayal is brilliant, capturing the diabolical doctor's subversive
charm and baroque wit, particularly as he's about to dissect another
victim. In this alibi-ridden world, perhaps what makes this
sociopathic serial killer so appealing is that he never makes excuses
for his evil behavior or his gruesome gourmet palate with a decided
preference for "free-range rude." Instead, he exudes a scary
integrity, augmented by director Ridley Scott's penchant for grisly,
highly stylized pieces of violence that reach operatic extremes, even
though the plot is a bit confusing.
   Julianne Moore replaces Jodie Foster as the courageous,
incorruptible FBI agent Clarice Starling with whom Hannibal is
infatuated. An unrecognizable Gary Oldman plays the hideously
deformed, malevolent pedophile, Mason Verger, whose face was devoured
by dogs. Plus, there's Ray Liotta as a slimy, corrupt Justice
Department official and Giancarlo Giannini as the avaricious Italian
detective on Lechter's trail in Florence with beautiful Francesca Neri
as his wife. Frankie R. Faison reprises Lechter's former hospital
orderly, Barney. At the request of the film-makers, I will not reveal
the conclusion to this disturbing, often sadistic, thriller except to
say that screenwriters David Mamet and Steve Zaillian contribute their
own cinematic twist which may surprise even those who have read Thomas
Harris's novel. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hannibal" is a
scary, suspenseful 7 - and this scalpel slicing is definitely not for
the squeamish.
   BACKGROUND INFORMATION: "The Silence of the Lambs" won five
Oscars, one of only three films to sweep Best Picture, Director,
Actress, Actor and Screenplay - and made more than $130 million at the
box-office. And "Hannibal" is actually Thomas Harris's third novel
featuring the fearsome Lechter, who made his first appearance in "Red
Dragon" (1981), which became the movie "Manhunter" (1986). For those
who are curious how an Orion Pictures release wound up as a
MGM/Universal release, it's because, when Orion folded, MGM bought it
s library which included "Silence." Meanwhile, Universal had made a
deal with Dino De Laurentis for the rights to "Hannibal" and, when
former Universal executive Chris McGurk took over the reins at MGM,
the two studios opted to share the financial risks - with De Laurentis
producing. Also included in this complicated deal were Universal's
theme-park rights to MGM's James Bond and Pink Panther characters.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
"Tense, dark, gothic and poetic in its visual wizardry"
This film is certainly pleasant news for every horror
enthusiast. "Hannibal" is probably the most awaited film of this
decade, standing proudly in the same line with "Star Wars: Episode 1"
and "Lord of the Rings". Its financial success is therefore
assured. When it comes to its artistic values, it is very
speculative. You never know how the audiences are going to react, and
this film has already suffered from a discouraging abscesses of Jodie
Foster and basically all crew from its predecessor - the legendary
"Silence of the Lambs". I say legendary, because it has been elevated
to a cult-status, proclaimed a masterpiece by every critic (even by
those who did not approve it when it first aired in 1991). I always
believed that "Lambs" was slightly overrated. It was a great film, a
virtually perfect detective story, but absolutely no masterpiece. It
was simply a good film, nothing more and without Hopkins' legendary
performance, it would have been much less. With this hype blinding
your vision, it is hard to concentrate. Thomas Harris took his time
and when his book was finished, it was received not too well.
Jonathan Demme (the director), Ted Tally (screenwriter), Jodie Foster,
and Scott Glenn - all rejected the book, labeling it too violent and
grotesque.  Finally a new cast and crew were assembled, with Anthony
Hopkins in the lead.
10 years have passed and Clarice Starling is not what she used to be.
Crawford, her guiding mentor is gone and so is her purpose. After a
rather unsuccessful operation, she is humiliated and unfairly blamed
by the media and her colleagues. Meanwhile, Hannibal Lecter peacefully
lives his cultivated life as a respected art scholar in his beloved
Florence, very much aware of the awkward situation that Starling is
in. However his peaceful life is broken when Inspector Rinaldo Pazzi
(Giancarlo Giannini) discovers him and the reward, provided by one of
his old patients and his nemesis, the paralyzed Mason Verger (an
uncredited and unrecognizable Gary Oldman). Mason is an insanely rich
pedophile sadist, who lost his lips and one eye, when Dr. Lecter made
him peal off his own face and feed it to his dogs ("It seemed like a
good idea at the time", he chuckles). While Clarice inverstigates,
Mason is preparing his ultimate revenge, a feast where Lecter will be
eaten by giant man-eating hogs. Now everyone race against time and
each other, in order to capture the famous doctor first. But when
Hannibal finally appears in America, Clarice is split by her duty and
her strange affections for her evil opponent, who is likewise drawn
towards her..
Marquee screenwriters David Mamet (State and Main) and Steven Zailian
(Schindler's List) are faithful to the source, but avoiding the very
problems that made the book unsatisfying. Hannibal (as the most
interesting character) is moved into the center, while a harder, more
bitter Starling stands in the shadows. In fact, every positive element
of "Lambs" is elevated here. The "supporting villain" is far more
interesting and colorful than Buffolo-Bill, all the memorable
characters (including Barney) reappear and the political intrigues in
the FBI intensify.
Hopkins seems more at ease now, moving with a grace of a panther. He
doesn't speak - he purrs in a seductive, devilish voice. His Hannibal
is more interesting and edgy than ever before, a more complicated and
less sympathetic character than in "Lambs", revealing himself in all
his demonic monstrousity. Part of the films corrosive effect is the
incredible sympathy that we develop for him in the beginning, and that
so quickly turns agianst us, when we witness him enduldging to his
darker side.  Julianne Moore makes us forget about Jodie Foster
completely, playing in a tougher vein with her interpretation as solid
and honest as one could expect from an actress of her
caliber. Giannini's inspector has the right aura of tarnished dignity
and Gary Oldman is likewise spectacular and incredibly entertaining as
Mason. Ray Liolita is sleazy as always and the rest of the cast do a
decent job. Basically the acting is flawless.
"Hannibal"'s biggest problem is dealing with expectations, with people
who have already created a picture in their heads about how the film
should be - people who expect to see "Silence of the Lambs 2". These
people will be very disappointed, because "Hannibal" is luckily not
that. A new director is steering, with a new crew behind him. Since
Lector has now moved into the center of events, the atmosphere had to
be adjusted - in other words it had not to offend Lector's taste. That
is why Ridley Scott (Alien, Blade Runner, Gladiator) could not be a
better choice, and with director of photography John Mathison (Blade
Runner, Gladiator), the talented editor Pietro Scalia (Gladiator) and
sensational composer Hans Zimmer (The Thin Red Line, Gladiator) you
simply can not loose. The result is something completely
different. From the opening credits, when the word "Hannibal" is
written elegantly in blood across the black screen, you sense a change
of atmosphere. It's fresh, beautiful, dreamy -- all the things that
"Lambs" wasn't. And while its predecessor was very gritty, shot in a
naturalistic, almost photographic way, "Hannibal" sparkles with visual
splendor, looking like a beautifully decorated christmas tree. The
claustrophobic atmosphere of "Lambs" is replaced with a free,
unconstrained sense of freshness, like a morning breeze. The sense of
uneasiness is captured alternately by deep, sustained notes and the
rapid attack of a full-throttle orchestra, whose intent to horrify
never waivers. Scott has always been a wizard of visual imagery and he
employs his talents here, creating a world of Lecter's morbid
mind. Every frame is a painting, composed from rich contrasts of
shadows and light. He intoxicates us with this visual poetry and dark
symbolism, creating a creepy, gothic feeling around the whole
picture. And it is this style that is the very element that makes
"Hannibal" terrifying. We see Lecter lecturing the arts in the
library, swapped into the beauty of the night, we see him in perfume
shops, we watch him enjoying the opera. And then we see him killing
his pray, spilling out the intestates and cooking them at home, using
Dumas' recipes. Here lies the incredible horror of "Hannibal" - the
taste, culture, intellect and the morbid violence shown in the same
beautiful style, in the very same person. Scott succeeds where most
have failed -- in creating this extreme polarity of the human soul,
which is shown incredibly elegantly and without any sense of
effort. The violence is shown in a different key than we are usually
used to. It is as if we are looking with Lecter's eyes on the world
around us, and everthing is therefore wrapped into a magical veil of
taste and style, even the bodies.  This violence is more grotesque
than in "Lambs", but it is also more motivated, because it underlines
the movie's theme.
Several critics have pointed out that the first installment was more
clever and sophisticated. I slightly disagree with that statement. The
story development in "Lambs" was its clever part, with the many
bizarre events and characters, following one after another, but here
its cleverness stopped.  "Hannibal" is more clever in its theme,
rather than in the twists and turns of the story (which by the way are
quite remarkable as well). It is therefore darker, deeper and creepier
than "Lambs", going under the skin of the two main characters,
portraying their previously unknown sides.  "Hannibal" should
therefore not be viewed as a sequel, but instead accepted as a unique
and completely different movie, acting on its own terms. Clarise is
not the same honest, hard working idealist that she was in "Lambs". In
the very beginning we see her being betrayed by her fellow agents,
stabbed in the back, so to speak. These disappointments in her work,
and her life in general, lead her onto a different path. In the end it
is her fall from grace that is one of the central stories of the
movie. Lecter is likewise different - more relaxed, calmer and in his
natural environment. He no longer pushes for the extravagant, like in
"Lambs". His evil is hidden behind the mask of charm and taste, making
him more dangerous, unpredictable and calculating than ever
before. And this also underlines one major difference between the two
(now competing films) - while "Lambs" was completely straight,
"Hannibal" is more dreamy, elegant and symbolic in its every element,
in every scene. While Demme constructed a great story about nothing,
Scott is actually painting a picture about the duality of human
nature. This duality exists everywhere in his world, it can be found
in the beauty of Florence, in the darkness of the woods, in Lecter and
Starling.  The connection between them is magical and creepy, as well
as poetic. It is like beauty and the beast - the attraction of the
poles, the fascination of the opposite. Scott has thus successfully
created one of the most interesting psychological thrillers to
date. In a way, it is a beautiful walz about the ways of evil, with
its illusions, seductions and the incredible horror that lies
beneath. To me this is far more interesting than a carefully woven
detective story. This does not mean that "Hannibal" is entirely
flawless. It is episodic in the end, as if the director was rushing
towards the finish line. Forgetting that, it is a perfect
psychological thriller. However I do not intend to make the same
mistake as many did with "Lambs". I am not saying that this is a
masterpiece, but in my opinion, this is certainly a more interesting
and refreshing picture than its predecessor.  It is richer, creepier
and far more tasteful.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Ridley Scott's "Hannibal" has been criticized for its over-the-top gross out
scenes and little else. There is a reason for this - there is little else to
discuss and that is unfortunate. For all the character development that "The
Silence of the Lambs" provided for Hannibal Lecter and Clarice Starling,
"Hannibal" focuses on cartoonish types in a freak show designed to titillate, a
far cry from what "Silence" accomplished. 
"Hannibal" begins effectively as we observe Clarice (Julianne Moore, replacing
Jodie Foster) on a drug raid with the help of several FBI agents. She kills a
drug czar (Hazelle Goodman) by firing a bullet at her chest as she clutches her
baby. The incident puts Clarice in a difficult position with the FBI as she has
to turn over her gun and badge. She is on the Guiness Book of World Records for
being the only FBI female agent to have the most kills. This Clarice, ten years
after dealing with Hannibal Lecter face-to-face, is a changed woman, colder and
less emotional. Probably a dose of good old Hannibal is just what she needs to
get out of her slump. Still, another agent named Krendler (Ray Liotta) has it in
for Clarice, and desires her sexually. As always, Clarice's interests in life
exclude anything sexual. One funny scene shows Krendler looking at photos of
Lecter unaware Clarice is watching him. She alerts him and he asks, "What are
you doing in the dark?" Her response: "Thinking of cannibalism." 
So far, so good. "Hannibal" then switches to Florence, Italy where the good
doctor Lecter resides and is trying to find a job as a museum curator! A
detective named Pazzi (Giancarlo Giannini) is investigating the disappearance of
the former curator and discovers that the doctor is Hannibal and is on the FBI
ten most wanted list (which also includes the terrorist Bin Laden)! 
The film's pacing slackens, spending far too much time on the Italian detective
and so little on Clarice who is still looking for Hannibal. Keeping the two most
memorable characters in the history of movies apart amounts to awkwardly
patched-together situations that have little to do with anything. In fact, as
written by David Mamet and Steven Zaillian, the story is almost nonexistent.
There is no tension, no surprise and a general lack of credibility. How can
someone like Hannibal, who never wears a disguise, be able to move about Italy
in a flowing cape and a hat and not be noticed? How can you not notice someone
wiping the glasses of wine they drink from at a restaurant? Well, the detective
notices but surely there must have some way of him communicating this
information to the FBI if he wanted to. 
Of course, Pazzi chooses not to as his primary motive is financial. You see a
certain billionaire by the name of Mason Verger (Gary Oldman) wants Hannibal fed
to his killer boars. It turns out that Verger was forced to slice off his own
face and feed it to his dogs thanks to Hannibal. Now he is a faceless cipher
with no eyelids and a horrifying expression that is sure to creep out the most
jaded viewer. He is about as loony as Hannibal himself and provides a handsome
reward to anyone who knows of  Hannibal's whereabouts. Enter the desperate
Pazzi, yet he doesn't realize he is being hounded by Hannibal.  
But none of this matters in the least. There is no sense of urgency since
Hannibal can escape and elude authorities so easily. The crux of the film is the
Florence investigation but I missed the central relationship between Hannibal
and Clarice - they so embodied "Silence of the Lambs" that here, they are mostly
left on the sidelines. No character shadings or depth to either one of them
leaves us out in the cold. A real shame since Julianne Moore is an excellent
replacement for Jodie Foster, and a brief meeting between her and Hannibal sheds
little light on either one of them. 
Another factor is that Hannibal was imprisoned in "Silence" thus leaving plenty
of time to understand his motives and desires, and his developing interest in
Clarice. Letting him loose like a wild animal does little to raise our
expectations - he is simply a madman with an insatiable appetite for flesh who
has a host of sardonic comments to make about cannibalism. Where is the charm
and elegance Hopkins brought to the original? 
Moore is well-cast and strong and empathetic but she still remains as one-note
as Hopkins does. It is not her fault, the script needed plenty of fine-tuning
but what can you say about two top-of-the-class screenwriters hired to provide
such a mediocre, rambling screenplay? 
"Hannibal" looks and sounds terrific thanks to director Ridley Scott. It is
glossy filmmaking but with no soul or human interest. A climactic dinner
sequence remains as loathsome and gory a sequence as anything Hollywood has ever
produced before (though Scott has directed it tastefully). But mean-spiritedness
and gore are central to "Hannibal" - it is a bloodless freak show where the
characters are all cartoons. "Silence of the Lambs" defied genre expectations by
never quite fitting into a thriller mode or a horror movie scenario - it was, at
its best, a psychological character study with a gripping hold on the audience
through its sheer intensity and surefire direction by Jonathan Demme. This film
is a pure slasher flick, unengaging and uneven. And all poor old Hannibal has
left to say are such flat one-liners like "Goody-goody" and "Ta-da." How rude!
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
HANNIBAL (2001) ** 1/4 . Directed by Ridley Scott. Script byDavid 
Mamet, Steven Zaillian, based on the novel by Thomas Harris. 
Photography, John Mathieson. Editing, Pietro Scalia.  Production 
design, Norris Spencer. Music, Hans Zimmer. Cast: Antony Hopkins (Dr. 
Hannibal Lecter), Juliane Moore (Agent Clarice Starling), Ray Liotta 
(Paul Krendler), Gary Oldman (Mason Verger), Giancarlo Giannini 
(Police "comissario" Rinaldo Pazzi), Francesca Neri (Allegra Pazzi), 
et al.  Produced by Mr. and Mrs. Dino Di Laurentiis and Mr. Scott. An 
MGM/Universal release. 131 minutes. R (for horrendous horror)
It's been ten years since "The Silence of the Lambs" attracted and/or 
pleased sadists, masochists, and many "normal" viewers.
It was the second Hannibal Lecter film, the first one being the good 
"Manhunter" (1986)  directed by Michael Mann, with Brian Cox as 
Hannibal.  "Silence" (1991) was directed by Jonathan Demme, with 
Anthony Hopkins as HL. In "Hannibal," made a decade later --but is 
set seven years after "Silence" -- Sir Anthony resurfaces.
He is older but not markedly so. He has not lost any of his suave 
madness, his canniness, and his vigor. But he did lose Jodie Foster, 
whose FBI agent is now played by Julianne Moore. Although JM, when 
not at work, is somewhat sexier than JF, her role is shorter and 
partly lost within the meanderings of the new movie. She is also more 
chic, with Gucci shoes, elegant dresses and a peekaboo outfit which, 
no doubt result from Lecter's sneering putdowns of her cheap 
outfits-- long ago, in "Silence."
All three films came from novels by Thomas Harris, all had major, 
talented directors. The current movie is bound to make a lot of money 
while raising a lot of critical eyebrows.
The plot, simply and simplistically sketched out. FBI agent Clarice 
has led a raid which left five dead. Newspaper headlines shout that 
she holds an FBI record for corpses (shades of Waco.)  She gets 
unfairly reprimanded by her superiors led by a slimy, arrivistic 
Department of Justice apparachik (Liotta). The man also has it in for 
her because she refused his sexual advances. "Your badge and your 
gun" follows as she is temporarily suspended.
In a mansion to end all mansions (actually the Biltmore Estate in 
Asheville, North Carolina) zillionaire Mason Verger (an unbilled Gary 
Oldman), horribly-plus (and then some) disfigured because of Lecter 
(don't ask), now wants to get the doctor, cook and eat him. He has an 
astronomic price on Lecter's head, alive but not dead, since he wants 
to cook and eat him. We later learn that he is employing some native 
thugs in Italy.
In Florence (Italy) Hannibal, in baroque splendor, lives the peculiar 
life of a scholar who badly wants the curatorship of a superb museum. 
He'll do anything to get the post and his other desires, from 
academic to extra-curricular. Lecter lectures (sic) impressively on 
literary, artistic and other germane subjects.  How he got all that 
scholarship is a mystery. But then, the word "lector" meant, at least 
in Church Latin, "reader." We must assume that Hannibal practiced 
reading voraciously, that he was a polymath, that his I.Q. rose to 
stratospheric heights. Even so, in stretching our credulity this 
beats Tarzan's command of English.
When a high-ranking Florentine cop with an insufficient salary and a 
gorgeous young wife --always a dangerous combination-- gets wind of a 
mysterious source (but we know it is Mason) will pay three million 
dollars for the delivery of Lecter, Inspector Pazzi gets going.
The movie diversely canters, trots or gallops non-stop from one 
situation to another but is always on the move. A huge number of 
energetically timed setups and scenes, fast cuts and nick-of-time 
interventions amount to filmic shorthand in direction and editing.  .
The best thing in the film is, for me, the splendid sights, sites and 
photography, notably of Florence exteriors and interiors which are 
genuine yet nothing like the city that locals and visitors know. It's 
often  dank, forbidding, crepuscular, always splendid and arresting. 
Production designer Norris Spencer, save for his work on Scott's 
"Thelma and Louise," was unknown to most of us, as was cinematogapher 
John Mathieson until he shot Scott's "Gladiator, "   Director Scott's 
own style is  also obvious here, especially as "Hannibal"'s look has 
much in common with that of the nearly twenty-years old "Blade 
Runner."
Why Hannibal chose Florence puzzled me until I realized that the 
infernal doctor had chosen the city of Dante. Not only is "The Divine 
Comedy" lurking around, but Dante's "La Vita Nuova" shows up in a 
nice bit of opera composed by Patrick Cassidy.  The excellent Hans 
Zimmer wrote the rest of the score.
Italian culture set aside, or better yet, woven into the film, the 
results are still pop pulp that tries to spook us. Fine. Lecter's old 
slurp-slurps and much of his anthropophagy have given way to a 
suspense thriller and detective story. Fine again, except that the 
story is so muddled and full of holes, so ambitious and bloated with 
obscurities, improbabilities, impossibilities. ludicrous  and useless 
twists, that the desired shock effects are neutralized.
A pity. And there's nothing to replace the "The Silence of the Lambs" 
terrifying (but not physically violent) scenes of Jodie Foster 
conversing in prison with Lecter through a bullet-proof glass 
partition, and the growing ways in which those two affect  each other.
Nothing exceeds like excess.  "Less is more" was the revolutionary 
slogan of the Bauhaus school which introduced so much modernism to 
art and design in the 1920s, from buildings to kitchen tools.
Ridley Scott -- in the wake of his senior compatriot  filmmaker Ken 
Russell -- must believe that "more is more." (Not an unexpected 
stance given Scott's background in advertising and commercials) 
Excess can be positive, as it was in Scott's "Alien" -- but with a 
non-sci-fi thriller Hitchcock's "sancta simplicitas" is a must.
Some attempts of humor are well hidden. We guess right away what will 
happen to Inspector Rinaldo Pazzi, but few will realize that Pazzi 
means "crazy" in Italian. And in the film's penultimate, gory and 
entirely unbelievable sequence of human cooking (in the Hannibalian 
sense) the camera briefly pans to the spine of a book --  "Vegetarian 
Times."
The movie's end is so ghoulish, extreme and scientifically phony that 
it is giggle-making rather than scream-inducing. It can't hold a 
candle to the increasing, real fears about mad cow disease. And
the awkward, unsatisfactory final scene is so open-ended that it 
screams "another sequel is coming."
For a relative antidote to Ridley Scott's extremism, may I suggest 
that you watch his first feature, "The Duellists" (UK, 1977) a very 
good, visually stunning adaptation of Joseph Conrad's story set in 
Napoleonic and post-Napoleonic times.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Chad Polenz@aol.com
Author: ChadPolenz@aol.com
Subject: Review: Hannibal (2001)
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Organization: None
X-Questions-to: graham@jetcity.com
X-Submissions-to: graham@ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #28094
Keywords: author=polenz
Anthony Hopkins reprises his Oscar-winning role as Hannibal "The Cannibal" 
Lector in this sequel to "Silence of The Lambs" (which itself was a sequel to 
1986's "Manhunter"). This time Hannibal is living free as an art historian in 
Italy while back in the U.S. one of his former patients and his 
sole-surviving victim is offering a large bounty for the capture of Hannibal. 
Julianne Moore plays FBI Special Agent Clarice Starling who has become 
extremely hard-edged and unemotional and follows the case while at the same 
time trying not to become a patsy to some of her superiors. 
The film has a strong first half setting up all the details of the complex 
story and interdependent plots and subplots. With four major characters with 
their own motivations and conflicts there's a lot to balance and director 
Ridley Scott manages to juggle the complicated screenplay rather well.... at 
first. 
Anthony Hopkins is again superb as the frightening psychopath, totally 
overshadowing and upstaging everything and everyone else. 
Moore is waaaaaaay too stiff in her portrayal of Starling, who is so rigid 
she makes Dana Scully look like Krusty the Clown. And what's with the accent? 
It's a shame Jodie Foster turned down this role, she could have held her own, 
Moore is at the mercy of poorly-written dialogue and little characterization. 
The story drops off sharply after the midway point so what was at first 
intense and intriguing becomes cliche and confusing. Having Hannibal on the 
loose is a good way to induce suspense, but he's actually too likable to be 
as menacing as he could and should be. In fact, throughout the last act when 
the tables turn he's practically the hero! The victim who's out to get him is 
just a bit too cliche to be taken seriously. 
And the biggest flaw is this movie is just disgusting! The victim with no 
face is freaky, but the scene showing how he lost his face is pretty noxious. 
The notion of having man-eating boars as your killing device is pretty creepy 
and a bit unbelievable too (the second time this year this technique has been 
used - "Snatch" made it work a little better). The scene at the end will 
certainly go down in film history as one of the grossest scenes ever in a 
mainstream film (it involves amateur brain surgery). 
As a thriller, "Hannibal" gets a passing grade, but I think this might 
actually be a horror movie. What made "Silence of the Lambs" so great was its 
balance of detective work and the psychological fear Hannibal Lector induced 
simply by looking at you and the fact he was incarcerated and could escape. 
Now that he's free he's almost rehabilitated himself until the bounty hunters 
come after him. It's quite clear what's going to happen to said hunters. 
Bringing the story back to a Starling versus Lector conflict probably would 
have helped, throwing in this third storyline of the victim out for revenge 
is an interesting storyline but the screenplay doesn't make it work. I mean, 
how many times has the character of an eccentric rich guy been used before? 
I'd compared him to Mr. Burns on "The Simpsons," and could HE really frighten 
you? 
Another draft of the screenplay and tighter direction would have made this a 
great movie, this is too mediocre for its own good. 


Author
Laura Clifford
Ten years ago, director Jonathan Demme gave us a serial killer movie that
was a masterpiece of its genre in "The Silence of the Lambs."  Taking over
the reins, director Ridley Scott ("Gladiator") brings Thomas Harris' third
novel to feature Hannibal Lecter to the screen.  Julianne Moore ("The End of
the Affair") takes over the role of Clarice Starling, Gary Oldman joins
the cast as the series' ever-present, yet changing, second villain Mason 
Verger, and Oscar winner Anthony Hopkins returns as the titular "Hannibal."
In the thirty odd minutes of screen time it takes for Hannibal to make an
appearance, we discover that prison orderly Barney (Frankie R. Faijon, "The
Silence of the Lambs") has been making a buck or two selling Hannibal Lecter
items to a lucrative underground market.  The unfathomably wealthy (home is
the Biltmore Estate, which served as Melvyn Douglas and Shirley Maclaine's
mansion in "Being There") and hideously disfigured Verger is a client of 
Barney's, being the only surviving victim of Lecter's.  Verger is obsessed 
with exacting revenge and is offering a private, three million dollar reward 
for Lecter.
Meanwhile, Clarice Starling has become the whipping girl of the FBI after
her high profile drug ring bust results in five deaths, raining bad publicity
upon the Bureau.  Starling's woes have practically been engineered by Justice 
Department official Paul Krendler (Ray Liotta, "Goodfellas"), a corrupt man
in 
cahoots with Verger who puts Starling back on the Lecter case to lure him out 
of the shadows.
Across the Atlantic, Inspector Rinaldo Pazzi (Giancarlo Giannini, "Swept
Away") meets Dr. Fell, a new library curator, while investigating the
disappearance of his predecessor.  Clarice's work in DC causes a request
to go through Pazzi's offices and he comes to realize the charming Fell is 
the notorious Lecter.  Rather than cooperate with the FBI in his official
capacity, Pazzi, the husband of a much younger, beautiful wife, makes a fatal 
mistake by attempting to reap the monetary reward.
Screenwriters David Mamet ("State and Main") and Steven Zaillian
("Schindler's 
List") have pretty faithfully adapted the Thomas Harris novel for the screen.
Yes, the notorious ending of the novel has been modified somewhat, but the
spirit is essentially the same and Starling's actions are better justified.
Unlike the first film, this Hannibal is presented as a thinner of the herd,
a killer of the rude and greedy.
Hopkins, an actor who can serve up ham (see Coppola's "Dracula"), is once
again note perfect as Dr. Lecter.  The performance accounts for ten years
of laying low while enjoying life's beauty and pleasures.  There's humor in 
this performance (listen to his delivery of 'Okee dokey') as well as menace
(watch him approach Inspector Pazzi, barefoot).
Moore is in a difficult spot reprising Foster's role.  "Silence" was about
Clarice and "Hannibal" is not.  Moore is OK, playing career disillusionment
by seeming tired and washed out, although she does show spark with the 
backbone she presents to male colleagues looking to mow her down.
The uncreditted Oldman is unrecogniable beneath the work of a special effects
makeup team which presents him with a reconstructed face resembling
a Leatherface mask from "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre."  Oldman does his
job well, making Verger a more despicable character than Lecter, yet his
diction is too clear for a man with no lips.
The best support comes from Italian mainstay Giannini, who gains sympathy
for his actions and fear for his character as he treads too close, too often 
to a danger he does not comprehend.  Liotta does his best work when he 
gets brainy.
The production is first rate across the board, if not at the masterpiece
level of "Silence."  Where that film used Hannibal's cells as descents into
hell, this film uses motifs of pigeons, boars, and yes, even a lamb.
Location work in Florence is notable, including an original outdoor opera of 
Dante's death.
As a sequel, "Hannibal" may not be up to "The Godfather: Part II" level,
but director Ridley Scott and lead Hopkins have presented us with a buffet
worth lingering over.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Hannibal (2001)
Anthony Hopkins, Julianne Moore, Gary Oldman (uncredited), Ray Liotta,
Frankie R. Faison, Giancarlo Giannini, Francesca Neri, Zeljko Ivanek,
Hazelle Goodman, David Andrews, Francis Guinan, James Opher, Enrico Lo
Verso, Ivano Marescotti, Fabrizio Gifuni, Ennio Coltorti. Screenplay by
David Mamet and Steven Zaillian, based on the novel by Thomas Harris.
Directed by Ridley Scott. 130 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
TV ads for "Hannibal," the follow-up to "The Silence of the Lambs,"
begin with the statement, "For 10 years you've been waiting for him to
return." I don't know about you, but I wasn't. "Silence" is a terrific
movie and Anthony Hopkins' Dr. Hannibal Lecter remains one of the most
chilling villains ever to appear on the big screen. In his 30 scant
minutes of screen time, the erudite cannibal with the feral eyes and
spring-coiled calm demeanor left an unforgettable impression, from his
crackling "quid pro quo" exchanges with FBI agent Clarice Starling to
the horrific moment when the beast finally pounced.
The film ended perfectly, with the escaped doctor phoning Clarice and
delivering the classic line, "I do wish we could chat longer, but I'm
having an old friend for dinner." And that was that. The story was over,
with a thoroughly satisfying resolution. Not once during the next decade
did I wonder what happened to Hannibal or Clarice later.
Clearly, somebody did. Jodie Foster, who was so remarkable as Clarice,
and "Silence" director Jonathan Demme both passed on the adaptation of
Thomas Harris' controversial novel, but Anthony Hopkins signed on the
dotted line and Hannibal "the Cannibal" Lecter was reborn. Incidentally,
plans for yet another film are already underway. Who knows where it all
will end? Perhaps with a TV series. I can hear the promos now: "When
college student Jack McGee became the live-in caretaker at a mansion
owned by a reclusive art historian, little did he know that his new
roomie would be a cultured serial killer with a taste for human flesh!
Take a bite of comic mayhem with 'My Dinners with Hannibal,' starring
Jimmy Fallon as Jack and Eddie Izzard as the dreadful Dr. H! Coming this
fall to the WB!"
"Hannibal" is an extremely disappointing movie that dilutes the impact
of Hannibal Lecter while turning Clarice Starling (now played by
Julianne Moore) into a marginal character. Dense and dull, it plods
along, enlivened by periodic displays of gore-porn. Viewers get to see a
man's face sliced off (the flesh is fed to dogs), a police officer
gutted and several people eaten alive by wild boars. The most disgusting
visual is saved for the end. I won't reveal it here. Suffice to say it
manages to be repellent and idiotic at the same time.
That scene, by the way, is a textbook example of how to destroy viewer
tension. Director Ridley Scott starts it stylishly, teasing the audience
with glimpses of the victim as the villain hovers nearby. The suspense
and sense of creepiness builds slowly and steadily, only to be blown by
one long, disastrous full-head image of something happening to an actor
that would be lethal in real life. By lingering on a shot of the
impossible, Scott shatters the illusion. Up until that moment, I watched
with horror as the villain prepared to perform an unspeakable act on a
helpless victim. But when the filmmaker cut to the full head image, I
was jerked out of the fantasy. Instead of being caught up in the
fiction, I found myself studying the FX. A director as talented as
Ridley Scott should know that the image dictated by the script could
only be effectively presented with brief looks from a variety of angles.
The mentality behind the shot is just one of many bad ideas connected
with "Hannibal." Taking a character as rich as Clarice Starling and
making her a flat supporting player is another. Perhaps the worst idea
is trying to turn Hannibal Lecter from the bogeyman into an antihero.
The screenplay stresses that Dr. Lecter prefers to only kill rude
people, as if that is a positive character trait. Producer Dino De
Laurentiis echoed this dumb-ass mindset, claiming that audiences have
conferred hero status on the character, then adding "When he's forced to
kill, he kills somebody the audience wants to kill too."
Bear in mind, this is from the same guy who thought his remake of "King
Kong" was better than the original. But Julianne Moore, who has always
seemed well-balanced, apparently agrees. "He is the monster everyone
wishes they could be," she told Entertainment Weekly.
What the hell is wrong with these people?
I haven't said much about the plot of "Hannibal" because there isn't
much to it. Despite being one of the most notorious serial killers on
Earth, Lecter strolls casually around upper crust Florence, Italy. In
the book, he had plastic surgery done, but the filmmakers obviously
decided, "Aw, screw it." Back in America, his one surviving victim (Gary
Oldman, uncredited and unrecognizable beneath heavy makeup) plots to
capture and kill Lecter. Clarice gets involved, yadda yadda yadda. The
photography is lush and the music florid. Moore does what she can with
her stunted character, while Hopkins rolls his vowels excessively. None
of which matters, of course. All the flourishes in the world can't
disguise the fact that "Hannibal" is just a geek show with delusions of
grandeur. If you're in the mood for gore, rent "Night of the Living
Dead," a far more frightening, entertaining and honest movie than this
pretentious drivel.

Author
Chad Polenz@aol.com
Anthony Hopkins reprises his Oscar-winning role as Hannibal "The Cannibal" 
Lector in this sequel to "Silence of The Lambs" (which itself was a sequel to 
1986's "Manhunter"). This time Hannibal is living free as an art historian in 
Italy while back in the U.S. one of his former patients and his 
sole-surviving victim is offering a large bounty for the capture of Hannibal. 
Julianne Moore plays FBI Special Agent Clarice Starling who has become 
extremely hard-edged and unemotional and follows the case while at the same 
time trying not to become a patsy to some of her superiors. 
The film has a strong first half setting up all the details of the complex 
story and interdependent plots and subplots. With four major characters with 
their own motivations and conflicts there's a lot to balance and director 
Ridley Scott manages to juggle the complicated screenplay rather well.... at 
first. 
Anthony Hopkins is again superb as the frightening psychopath, totally 
overshadowing and upstaging everything and everyone else. 
Moore is waaaaaaay too stiff in her portrayal of Starling, who is so rigid 
she makes Dana Scully look like Krusty the Clown. And what's with the accent? 
It's a shame Jodie Foster turned down this role, she could have held her own, 
Moore is at the mercy of poorly-written dialogue and little characterization. 
The story drops off sharply after the midway point so what was at first 
intense and intriguing becomes cliche and confusing. Having Hannibal on the 
loose is a good way to induce suspense, but he's actually too likable to be 
as menacing as he could and should be. In fact, throughout the last act when 
the tables turn he's practically the hero! The victim who's out to get him is 
just a bit too cliche to be taken seriously. 
And the biggest flaw is this movie is just disgusting! The victim with no 
face is freaky, but the scene showing how he lost his face is pretty noxious. 
The notion of having man-eating boars as your killing device is pretty creepy 
and a bit unbelievable too (the second time this year this technique has been 
used - "Snatch" made it work a little better). The scene at the end will 
certainly go down in film history as one of the grossest scenes ever in a 
mainstream film (it involves amateur brain surgery). 
As a thriller, "Hannibal" gets a passing grade, but I think this might 
actually be a horror movie. What made "Silence of the Lambs" so great was its 
balance of detective work and the psychological fear Hannibal Lector induced 
simply by looking at you and the fact he was incarcerated and could escape. 
Now that he's free he's almost rehabilitated himself until the bounty hunters 
come after him. It's quite clear what's going to happen to said hunters. 
Bringing the story back to a Starling versus Lector conflict probably would 
have helped, throwing in this third storyline of the victim out for revenge 
is an interesting storyline but the screenplay doesn't make it work. I mean, 
how many times has the character of an eccentric rich guy been used before? 
I'd compared him to Mr. Burns on "The Simpsons," and could HE really frighten 
you?
Another draft of the screenplay and tighter direction would have made this a 
great movie, this is too mediocre for its own good. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/content_10142518916 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: 
http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Bob Bloom

Hannibal (2001) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Anthony Hopkins, Julianne
Moore, Ray Liotta, Giancarlo Giannini and Gary Oldman. Written by David
Mamet and Steven Zaillian. Based on the book by Thomas Harris. Directed
by Ridley Scott. Rated R.
 Hannibal is a very engrossing, thriller with strong performances,
clever writing and first-rate cinematography. It also is a stomach
turner.
 This definitely is not a ědinner-and-a-dateî movie. Dine at your own
risk before viewing this feature.
I
 f I had to choose one word to describe the difference between Jonathan
Demmeís Silence of the Lambs and this sequel by Ridley Scott, it would
be restraint.
 For all the suspense and terror dredged up by Demmeís Oscar-winner, it
is difficult to recall any scenes of graphic violence. Most of the
horror was either spoken about or occurred off screen.
 Not in Scottís Hannibal. He shows it all and seems to relish it.
 Basically what it highlights is a divergence in style and technique.
For Demme, less was more. He was satisfied with leaving many of the
filmís gruesome details to the imagination of the viewer.
 Scott, not wanting to trust the audience of force it to think,
spotlights every depravity. I prefer Demmeís approach, but Iíve always
felt ó like the master filmmakers of years past ó that what is most
terrifying is what the viewer conjures in his or herís mindís eye.
 Another difference between the two films is in the presentation of
Hannibal Lecter. In Silence of the Lambs, you were fascinated and
appalled by his actions and while ěrootî may not be the exact emotion,
you probably admitted to yourself that you were glad to see him roaming
free at the finale.
 In Hannibal, Lecter  again portrayed by Oscar-winner Anthony Hopkins,
is the nominal hero of the piece. While in Silence, your sympathies and
emotional ties centered on FBI trainee Clarice Starling (Oscar-winner
Jodie Foster), in this sequel your investment is with the good, bad
doctor.
 And thatís because screenwriters David Mamet and Steven Zaillian,
working from Thomas Harrisí best-selling novel, give us people seemingly
more morally corrupt than Lecter.
 How can that be since Lecter not only kills his victims, but eats them?
 Simple. Itís because those seeking Lecter are doing so ó not for
justice ó but for revenge and out of avarice.
 The revenge is orchestrated by Mason Verger, a billionaire who once was
a patient of Lecter. Lecter convinced Verger, a pedophile, to peel the
skin from his face, leaving him horribly disfigured. Verger (played by
an unrecognizable and unbilled Gary Oldman) has bred a pack of wild
boars for the specific purpose of chomping on Lecter.
 The avarice comes in the guise of a Florentine police detective, Pazzi
(a scruffy Giancarlo Giannini), who plots with Verger ó for a price ó to
capture Lecter and deliver him for his retribution.
 And finally there is Justice Department official Paul Krendler (Ray
Liotta) who also plots with Verger to use Starling (now played by
Julianne Moore) as bait to lure in Lecter.
 As Lecter, Hopkins remains the quintessential human cobra, ready to
uncoil and spring in a second.  What is lacking in his performance is
that element of surprise that was so captivating in the original. He is
a more flamboyant Lecter and thus his sense of menace is diminished.
 Moore, as the more mature and cynical Starling, nearly makes you forget
Foster. Nearly, being the operative word. Mooreís Starling remains the
moral heart of the story, unbending, single-minded, dogged and
dedicated.
 Yet in Mooreís eyes you can see the doubts, the questioning that has
helped to erode Starlingís youthful idealism.
 Hannibal, at two hours and 10 minutes, is a bit uneven. The suspense
fails to build as in the original. Here, Scott gives you a series of set
pieces aimed more to shock than create tension.
 The movie is very stylish, very colorful, as is Scottís trademark. It
also is very bloody and gross, almost gratuitous.
 Where as Demme would pull back, Scott charges in at full speed, making
sure the audience has the time to savor every sickening act.
 It is difficult for any sequel to live up to its predecessor,
especially one as anticipated as Hannibal. That it succeeds most of the
time is a tribute to the collaborative efforts of the filmmakers and
stars.
 Yet, you walk out of Hannibal a bit shocked and dazed, but ultimately
unsatisfied. Itís as if Scott served you an appetizer and a dessert, but
forgot the entree.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
It would be difficult to walk into Hannibal without any preconceived
notions. To begin with, it's only the fourth sequel to a film that won the
Academy Award for Best Picture (even though all but The Godfather, Part II
sucked eggs). Even more rare is the fact that The Silence of the Lambs swept
the five major Oscar categories (Picture, Director, Actor, Actress,
[Adapted] Screenplay) - a feat achieved but twice (1975's One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest and 1934's It Happened One Night).
As if that wasn't enough, Hannibal has generated enough dish to be the
leading story on Entertainment Tonight since Thomas Harris' sequel abruptly
surfaced on bookstore shelves in the summer of 1999. The novel was too
gruesome for Lambs' director (Jonathan Demme) and screenwriter (Ted Tally).
Then, producer Dino De Laurentiis (U-571) paid an ungodly amount of money
for the screen rights to the book. Jodie Foster was in, but wanted to be
paid almost as much as Lambs cost to make. Then she was scared off by the
material as well. Her equally important counterpart, Anthony Hopkins, had
recently announced his retirement from film (What's up with that? He was in,
like, four movies last year). The casting nightmares, along with the
critically poor reception of Harris' novel, seemed to doom the project
before it could even begin.
What you can't deny is that Hannibal's assemblage of acting talent is pretty
amazing. Two-time Oscar nominee Julianne Moore (Magnolia) replaces Foster as
Clarice Starling, while Hopkins reprises the role that won him a Best Actor
trophy. Gary Oldman, who could see Oscar action for his recent turn in The
Contender, appears here, but is uncredited (and even more unrecognizable).
Even some of the smaller roles, played by folks like Giancarlo Giannini,
have been to Oscar's big dance (for Seven Beauties).
As impressive as that collection of talent is, the technical players are
even more extraordinary. Director Ridley Scott and his Gladiator gang
(cinematographer John Mathieson, editor Pietro Scalia, costume designer
Janty Yates and scoremeister Hans Zimmer) are all likely to receive Oscar
nominations for their action epic just days after Hannibal opens. Ditto
David Mamet (State and Main), who shares a screenwriting credit with
Schindler's List's Oscar winner Steven Zaillian (although, reportedly, Mamet
's draft was scrapped).
So is it any good? It'll depend on what your expectations are. Hannibal is a
really good film, but it's nowhere near as earth-shattering as Lambs. It' s
pretty faithful to the book, although that's not saying much, since the
story seemed to be curiously cobbled together. They're both set 10 years
after Lambs concluded. Hannibal "The Cannibal" Lecter is on the loose in
Tuscany, while Starling is still holding down her gig as an FBI agent.
Hannibal opens with Starling heading a botched raid of a D.C. drug dealer's
hideout. She loses a friend and her credibility, and finds her face splashed
all over the news for the first time since she used Lecter's help to catch
the serial killer knows as Buffalo Bob. She gets busted down to a desk job,
where she obsesses about catching Lecter and takes flack from ex-lover and
Justice Department stuffed shirt Paul Krendler (Ray Liotta).
In the meantime, one Mason Verger (Oldman) is close to flushing Lecter out
of his Italian hiding spot. Verger was Lecter's fourth victim, and the only
one who survived his encounter, but had his face sliced apart for good
measure (think The Grinch sans green fur). He's as rich as they come, and
has been trying to track down Lecter for years, hoping to bring him back to
his Virginia estate for a particularly gruesome farewell. The first half of
the film involves Verger bribing an Italian cop (Giannini) to lead his men
to Lecter. His plan, of course, goes horribly awry, and Lecter heads for the
States to have a showdown with both Verger and Starling. The ending is
excruciating and as gruesome as you've likely heard, but after the gore is
over, its conclusion is different and more pleasing than the one found in
the novel.
Some people may have a problem with the pacing of the film. It's 30 minutes
before you see Lecter properly (not in a flashback, or on video), and the
whole section in Italy takes a while to get moving. But when it does, it's a
thing of beauty. Particularly well done is a scene where Starling tries to
locate Lecter in a crowded area of D.C. while he talks to her on a cell
phone. It's a great cat-and-mouse chase with a surprising ending to those
that haven't read the book. Moore does a capable job as Starling, but Foster
left some pretty big shoes to fill. If they were size 8, Moore is around a
7.
Hannibal was shot in Tuscany, Sardinia, and in and around the D.C. area,
including stops at properties owned by James Madison and the Vanderbilt
family. Like Gladiator, it's a technically slick little film, with
razor-sharp editing and a string-and-opera-heavy score that uses
over-the-top classical music standards to underscore the almost comedic
violence, like Kubrick did with A Clockwork Orange. Complaints are minor,
like the Italians who don't speak Italian (which really makes you appreciate
the authenticity in Traffic), but all of that will be wiped from your memory
after the finale, where Liotta does his best impression of George W. Bush.
2:10 - R for strong gruesome violence, some nudity and language

Author
Christian Pyle
Some sequels rush into theaters before the end credits are through rolling on 
their predecessors.  Others take a decade.  But "Hannibal: The Phantom 
Menace" is finally here.  Anthony Hopkins reprises his role from "Silence of 
the Lambs" as Dr. Hannibal "the Cannibal" Lecter.  The doc is still on the 
loose following his magnificent jailbreak in "Silence."  We find him in 
Florence, Italy, posing as a scholar.  
Hopkins' co-star in "Silence," Jodie Foster, opted out of "Hannibal," so 
Julianne Moore takes over the role of feisty FBI agent Clarice Starling.  
Clarice's career has hit the skids after a controversial shooting of a drug 
dealer (Hazelle Goodman), and the Justice Department has sent dickhead Paul 
Krendler (Ray Liotta) to hassle her.  The Bureau reassigns Clarice to the 
Lecter case and sends her to interview Mason Verger (Gary Oldman), a 
hideously deformed but filthy rich former victim of Lecter.  (Lecter 
convinced a drugged Verger to cut off his own face and feed it to dogs; 
Verger explains, "It seemed like a good idear at the time.")  Verger has been 
trolling a $3 million reward for information leading to Lecter.  He finally 
gets a nibble from cynical Florentine cop Rinaldo Pazzi (Giancarlo Giannini), 
who is suspicious of the new scholar in town and is in need of a few million 
in ready cash.  However, ol' Hannibal might have a trick or two in store for 
these fellas . . . 
Knowing that "Silence" would be a hard act to follow, producer Dino De 
Laurentiis recruited a respected trio of talents to adapt Thomas Harris' 
latest thriller for the screen:  director Ridley Scott, playwright David 
Mamet, and "Schindler's List" screenwriter Steven Zaillian.  I read the novel 
when it came out last summer, and Mamet and Zaillian showed excellent taste 
in their choices.  They trimmed the part of the book that dwells on Clarice's 
career problems in favor of the much stronger cat-and-mouse game between 
Lecter and Pazzi in Florence.  (This is lots of fun in both book and movie 
because Pazzi thinks he's the cat, but we know he's the mouse.)  The 
screenwriters also judiciously dumped the ridiculous ending of Harris' novel. 
 However, the ending they chose instead seems so much of an anti-climax that 
the film might as well close with "To Be Continued . . ."  Scott serves up a 
beautiful picture painted with somber but rich tones.
The centerpiece of "Hannibal" is, of course, Hopkin's performance.  More than 
any other element, his personification of evil made "Silence" the critical 
and popular success that it was.  (No other thriller, not even the 
masterpieces of Hitchcock, has ever swept the Academy Awards; no other 
thriller even won Best Picture.)  However, Hopkin's take on Lecter has lost 
its edge.  Ironically, Lecter radiated much more menace standing completely 
still in a glass cage in "Silence" than he does on the loose in "Hannibal."  
Hopkins seems to have forgotten some of the subtle touches he brought to the 
character ten years ago, such as the slight hiss on his S's.
The fatal flaw of "Hannibal," though, is the absence of Jodie Foster.  She 
pulled out after the script had been revised to her specifications.  It 
attempts to build on the psychosexual undertones in the exchanges between 
Foster and Hopkins in "Silence."  However, all these efforts fall flat 
because of the recasting.  Julianne Moore is an exceptional actress who has 
proven her talent in numerous films over the past few years.  However, 
despite her best efforts to adopt the West Virginia accent and tough 
willfulness of Clarice Starling, Moore can only hope to echo Foster.  When 
Foster left the project, the filmmakers should have delayed production and 
rewritten the script to eliminate Starling.  The character is unimportant to 
the scenes in Florence and only tangential to the conflict between Lecter and 
Verger.  That's the only Foster-less option that would have allowed 
"Hannibal" to fulfill its potential.
A bit of trivia:  Besides Hopkins, the only cast member from "Silence" to 
return is Frankie Faison, who reprises his role as Barney, the orderly who 
tended to Lecter at the asylum.  (What else could Scott Glenn possibly have 
had to do?)  Faison also had a small role in 1986's "Manhunter," making him 
the only actor to appear in all three segments of the "Hannibal Lecter 
Trilogy."
Bottom Line:  Beautifully rendered but doomed to fail
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Ridley Scott
Written by: Thomas Harris (novel), David Mamet, Steven Zaillian
It's been some time since Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins) escaped from 
prison and FBI Agent Clarice Starling (Jodie Foster then, Julianne Moore 
now) made a name for herself by catching a dangerous psychopath. Now Agent 
Starling is under attack from the FBI and from the media because she shot a 
drug dealer who was carrying a child. Leading the attack is Justice Agent 
Paul Krendler (Ray Liotta). Meanwhile, Lecter is living the good life in 
Italy, but he's drawn the attention of local law enforcement officer Pazzi 
(Giancarlo Giannini), who plans on turning Lecter in to the FBI for the two 
hundred thousand dollar reward. Also working against our wayward cannibal is 
billionaire Mason Verger; a crippled, hateful man whose face Dr. Lecter 
convinced him to remove some years back. Verger is helping Agent Starling 
determine Lecter's whereabouts in an effort to bring him into his own 
clutches to exact revenge. Despite the multitude of enemies working against 
him, Lecter holds all the cards and seems unstoppable. In fact, his only 
weakness might be a growing affection for Clarice, which might lead him 
right into her hands.
I've made it clear on several occasions that I don't think The Silence of 
the Lambs is all it's cracked up to be. That said, I walked into Ridley 
Scott's (Gladiator) film with certain preconceived notions about what 
I'd think of it. Now, I don't care what other critics tell you about being 
able to walk into a movie without any bias one way or the other. The moment 
you see a preview, or read one review, or even read the cast list, you form 
an opinion about the movie. It might be an unconscious decision, but it's 
human nature to form impressions about something before we've experienced 
it. Alright, enough with the shallow philosophical musings, and on to why I 
don't think Hannibal was much of a film. What surprised me about 
halfway through the proceedings was the absence of any real suspense. It 
became quite obvious what was going to happen to each character who appeared 
on screen, so when that character found himself in a desperate situation, 
the tension was killed. Of course, that wasn't the only thing that set the 
film back, but it's one of the larger problems to be found.
I might not have cared for The Silence of the Lambs, but it was hard 
to deny that the acting was superb. Anthony Hopkins went a long way in 
defining creepy in terms of movie serial killers; and Jodie Foster was an 
outstanding choice for a young, naive FBI agent. Things are a little 
different this time around. Hopkins is still fun to watch as Lecter, and 
it's obvious he's having a good time, but the character's menace is gone. In 
its place we get a few chuckles (pitch black though the humor may be), one 
or two startles, and a touch of gore. As for Julianne Moore, marvelous in 
some endeavors (The Big Lebowski), useless in others 
(Magnolia, not that that's her fault), she falls somewhere in the 
middle this time around. This isn't exactly her fault for two reasons: one, 
the character of Clarice Starling is woefully underwritten this time around 
(strange, since she was somehow overwritten last time); two, Julianne Moore 
may be a fairly talented actress, but she's no Jodie Foster, and 
comparisons, unfair or not, are going to be drawn. The only other actors 
with any screen time are the excellent Giancarlo Giannini (A Walk in the 
Clouds), who leaves quite an impression with a small role; and the 
sleepwalking Ray Liotta (Goodfellas), who is given a hideous role, 
and it's obvious he knows it. Tempted as I am to tell you who the actor 
playing Mason Verger is, I won't since his name isn't mentioned in the 
credits. Let's just say this actor does an outstanding job, as always.
What is it that made The Silence of the Lambs work for so many 
people? Since I'm not a member of that group I can only venture a guess, but 
I'm willing to bet a lot of the film's appeal is due to the interaction 
between Lecter and Starling. People would sit there, fascinated at this game 
of cat and mouse; watching the brilliant Lecter at first toy with Starling 
from behind his glass prison, and then slowly begin to regard her as an 
equal. Obviously, I didn't find any of this too fascinating, but I can 
understand why many people did. These same people will probably be 
disappointed to find that this interaction between Lecter and Starling is 
absent from Hannibal. In fact, the two don't speak to each other till 
about halfway through the film. Otherwise the focus of the film is generally 
split between the vaguely interesting story of Pazzi's attempts to capture 
Lecter, and the exceedingly uninteresting story of Starling being hung out 
to dry by her colleagues. Unfortunately, the film's trailers pretty well 
give away what will happen in Pazzi's story, and Starling's story contains 
nothing even resembling tension. I wish I could say things improved once 
Starling and Lecter meet up, but their game of cat and mouse has been turned 
into a cutesy (if moderately disturbing) string of flirtations.
With a director like Ridley Scott behind the wheel, some things are bound to 
work. The shots of Italy and the cinematography in general by John Mathieson 
(Gladiator) are quite nice. Despite what you may have heard about 
this being the goriest film of all time, Scott shows remarkable restraint 
with the gore, and I can only think of three scenes which might really 
disturb audiences. Otherwise Scott wisely chooses to shoot what could be the 
goriest scenes in a hazy, obscured way so as not to turn too many stomachs. 
On the whole, Scott's direction is efficient and suitable to the film. He 
only gives in to Oliver Stone syndrome once or twice, jumping suddenly to 
slow motion, fast motion, or something similarly juvenile. He also makes 
excellent use of yet another brilliant score by Hans Zimmer 
(Gladiator, noticing a trend here?). Zimmer's score is low and 
remarkably creepy, perfectly highlighting the film's darkened mood. 
Hannibal runs a touch too long at 131 minutes. I'd recommend anyone 
who enjoyed the first film, and doesn't mind some stomach turning gore, see 
the film. Just don't go in with your expectations too high. I give the movie 
three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
