Title
Review for Heaven & Earth (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Film critics seem to be asking themselves what went wrong with the
third film in Oliver Stone's Vietnam trilogy.  After two films they loved he
has failed in his third.  Frankly, I do not understand their reaction.  For
my money the other two films have much greater flaws than HEAVEN AND EARTH.
Perhaps because this film is told from the point of view of a Vietnamese, I
think it gives a much better view of what the war was all about.  For once
in a film that this was not a war in which just Americans were to blame,
there is plenty of blame to go around to all involved.  It is a powerful
view of the dilemmas faced by the Vietnamese people.  This true story has
the sweep of forty years of turbulent history filled with tragedy and
horror.
     When Le Ly (Hiep Thi Le) remembers her home when she was a little girl
she remembers it as the most beautiful village in the world.  And it
certainly appears to be.  We see an almost idyllic life of hard work and
spiritual joy.  Then the French come to Vietnam to fight a war, but it still
seems to affect the village little until some Vietcong come to recruit
soldiers.  Their simple appeal for national unity wins the sympathy of
village for Vietcong.  Against her father's wishes, Le Ly's mother sends her
two sons to fight with the Vietcong.  That sets into motion a course of
events that will shape the next forty years of Le Ly's life.  The South
Vietnamese army suspect Le Ly's family of sympathies with the North and
arrest and torture Le Ly in some extremely harrowing scenes.  Le Ly's mother
bribes the South Vietnamese officials to release Le Ly only to see her
arrested by the Vietcong for suspected complicity with the South.  The
Vietcong, she finds, are little if any better than the South Vietnamese
government.  A short stint as a servant in a rich household leaves her
pregnant and penniless, and she must turn to the streets of Da Nang to earn
her living.  Eventually she will fall in love with an American soldier who
will marry her and take her to California where her life's tragedies will
continue.  Perhaps there is where the critics are disliking the film since
the American household melodrama falls into cliche, but even there it is the
tragedy of the war that pursues her.
     HEAVEN AND EARTH is based on Le Ly Hayslip's two autobiographies WHEN
HEAVEN AND EARTH CHANGED PLACES and CHILD OF WAR, WOMAN OF PEACE.  It is
ironic that in this story of how a Vietnamese woman is exploited and abused,
Hiep Thi Le, who plays Le Ly and who must be on-screen for more than 90% of
the film gets only fourth billing.  Top billing goes to Tommy Lee Jones who
certainly does a fine job as Le Ly's disturbed husband, but it really is
Hiep Thi Le's film.  Second and third billing go to Joan Chen and Haing S.
Ngor as Le Ly's parents.
     The photography of the Vietnamese countryside is just spectacular
making Le Ly's claim of the most beautiful village believable.  Creative, if
gimmicky, camerawork is also used to show Le Ly's first reactions to her new
American home with its pandemonium from the family dogs and its huge
refrigerator stocked from a grocery aisle that looks like a fjord.  The
score by the Japanese composer Kitaro is a little overpowering at times, but
the music by itself is actually quite good.
     There are definitely unexpected touches in the script.  Late in the
film Le Ly herself gives in to a Buddhist belief in not challenging fate but
just going with it, yet clearly the film shows her agony at being buffeted
by fate without fighting it.  Each time she does take a step to fight her
apparent fate she gains a new set of problems but each time they seems less
painful than the situation she is escaping.  When she returns to the village
at the end of the film, she is deciding it may have been better to submit to
fate, but it is clear that she has improved her state a great deal in some
ways over what it would have been had she stayed in the village.  It is
almost as if Stone--who wrote the screenplay as well as directed--is subtly
arguing with the real Le Ly.  It is clear also that Stone does not care so
much for the Buddhist priests that Le Ly goes to for advice casting at least
one as a charlatan.
     Overall I found this story moving and at times wrenching.  In spite of
some negative reactions by some of the critics I think that Oliver Stone has
made his best film about Vietnam.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Richard Montanari
     It is a well known fact that, when testosterone seeps into the
brain, a host of aberrant behaviors are possible.  This condition seems
to be most virulent in the middle-aged macho radical who, when faced
with the grown-up notion that he really *isn't* going to change the
world, begin to mutate into a sort of heavily-armed Amway salesman from
Berkeley who won't get off your porch.
     For Oliver Stone, who has always fancied himself the keeper of
conspiracies in America, the Vietnam war has obviously been a very
difficult thing to expiate.  On the other hand, the Vietnam war has
also been very, very good to Oliver Stone.
     In his films, Stone has shown us the war through the eyes of a
naive young infantryman (PLATOON, 1986), an embittered, disabled veteran
(BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1989), and now, with HEAVEN AND EARTH, he
tells us the same story once again, this time through the eyes of a
Vietnamese woman.
     Based on the books WHEN HEAVEN AND EARTH CHANGED PLACES and CHILD
OF WAR, WOMAN OF PEACE by Le Ly Hayslip, HEAVEN AND EARTH chronicles
the war for Le Ly (Hiep Thi Le) a farm girl from a primeval village
near Da Nang.
     The story opens in 1953 with Le Ly's mother, played by Joan Chen,
teaching her daughter the ancient ways of the rice paddy.  But soon,
colonialism arrives in the guise of *the French*.
     Sure, the Vietnamese people had been enslaved and butchered by a
number of masters--including the Chinese--but, as Stone is quick to
remind us, this, like the Americans to come, is occidental occupation,
which makes it more insidious somehow.
     Under French occupation, we are witness to numerous scenes of Le
Ly's degradation.  She is raped by a local Viet Cong leader and
subjected to electroshock therapy at the hands of the South Vietnamese
army.
     Le Ly and her mother then head to Saigon, where they find employ
as maids to a local businessman and his socialite wife.  But the
businessman seduces and impregnates Le Ly, and she is banished.
     A few years later Le Ly meets army lifer Steve Butler (Tommy Lee
Jones).  Although it is clear to us early on that the war has unhinged
Butler, Le Ly takes pity on him, a feeling that eventually turns to
love.  After the war, they try to lead a normal life in San Diego but,
as Le Ly discovers, the jungle still rages within them both, and the
war, at least in their hearts and minds, is far from over.
     Oliver Stone's mandatory, fourth-quarter "duality of nature"
speech is, of course, intact here, this time covering heaven and
earth, good and evil, night and day, hot and cold, young and old, man
and wife, Vietnam and America--it's almost longer than Costner's
interminable wail at the end of JFK.
     But is not only subject matter that has stagnated Stone's work.
His metaphorical resources have run so dry that, for instance, every
time life confronts Le Ly in HEAVEN AND EARTH, Stone supports the
moment with a quick stare into space and some flashbacks to either
Buddha, Mom and Dad, an ox, a flame thrower or a straw hat blowing
across a rice paddy.  In fact, when Le Ly visits an American grocery
store for the first time, you half-expect her to call upon Lord Buddha
to shed spiritual light on her dilemma:  Frozen or Canned?
Batter-dipped or Lightly Breaded?  Paper or Plastic?
     As the seething Butler, Tommy Lee Jones brings an indefinable rage
to the under-written role, a character-type that was far better served
in ROLLING THUNDER (1977).  Joan Chen is superb as Le Ly's aging
mother, as is Hiep Thi Le as the fragile, resourceful Le Ly.
     But for those of us who remember him as the man who wrote MIDNIGHT
EXPRESS and YEAR OF THE DRAGON, Oliver Stone is rapidly becoming that
cigar-smoking, boozy uncle who always has to be carried out of the
party.  You want to like him, he occasionally gets off a good one, but
the act, like the smoke, is getting awfully stale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Writer, director Oliver Stone (PLATOON, BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY,
        grassy knoll picnicker :-) )
Based on the books WHEN HEAVEN AND EARTH CHANGED PLACES by Le Ly
        Hayslip with Jay Wurts and CHILD OF WAR, WOMAN OF PEACE
        by Le Ly Hayslip with James Hayslip
Cast: Tommy Lee Jones (THE FUGITIVE, UNDER SIEGE)
      Joan Chen (THE LAST EMPEROR, TV's "Twin Peaks")
      Haing S. Ngor (MY LIFE, THE KILLING FIELDS)
      Hiep Thi Le
MPAA Rating: "R" (Presumably for rape, war, and related atrocities)
Running Time: 140 Minutes
     Director Oliver Stone completes his "Vietnam Trilogy" with HEAVEN
AND EARTH, a story that's told, for a change, from the perspective of
"the other side."  Based upon the real life story of Vietnamese peasant
Le Ly, Stone delivers another satisfying, but, this time, heavy-handed
lesson in war and peace.
     The story introduces the simple rice-farming community of Ky La.
It's a lush paradise in Central Vietnam, relatively unscathed until the
arrival of the Viet Cong in '63.  Young Le Ly (Hiep Thi Le) watches her
brothers join the Communists, who return one night to torture and rape
her.  (The 'Cong, that is.)  She escapes the bedlam by fleeing to Saigon
at age 18.  There, she works for a wealthy, married master who, promptly,
gets her pregnant.
     Later on, Le Ly meets a nice American soldier (Jones).  They get
married, he's nuts, and her life takes another terrible turn when she
moves to America.  All, so she can return to her homeland, many years
later, and deliver a touching message about the value of strife and
suffering....
     Taken at face value, most of HEAVEN AND EARTH is an interesting
and, ultimately, satisfying examination of war.  But the director lays
it too thick this time--hammering every point across at least a dozen
times too many.
     His most annoying technique is how he punctuates every Important
Moment with a short, slow-motion montage of Important Images.  This bit
works well for, about, five times, then grows grating.
     Of course, after the first hour, the viewer is already pretty numb
from the raw drama.  Happily, at the ninety-minute mark--when Tommy
Lee Jones shows up--Stone takes a breather and lets some levity into
his film.  Granted, it lasts for all of twenty minutes, but, oh, how
sweet it is!
     Stone mines some surprising humor out of Le Ly's arrival in
America.  Classic bits include her first encounter with a full
refrigerator and a wide-eyed visit to her first supermarket.
     As the supremely oppressed Le Ly, newcomer Hiep Thi Le is quite a
find.  She displays a good range of emotions and some surprising signs
of subtly.  Tommy Lee Jones is equally watchable.  He's at his most
menacing, though, in his later scenes.  Both Joan Chen and Haing S.
Ngor barely register playing Le Ly's parents.  Go figure.
     Look for Debbie Reynolds, who makes her first screen appearance in
over twenty years.
     Technical credits are all very fine, with the exception of a bit
too much filtered lighting.  What's the haze for, Ollie?

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Hiep Thi Le, Tommy Lee Jones, Joan Chen, Haing S. Ngor.
Screenplay/Director:  Oliver Stone.
     The problem with Oliver Stone, in my humble opinion, has always
been that he just doesn't know when to shut up.  I have long been a
detractor of Stone's, but that opinion hasn't been a result of his
visual style; each of his films can boast at least one moment of real
flair.  Unfortunately, Stone's tendency towards the pedantic often
obscures those elements of his films which do work.  HEAVEN AND EARTH,
Stone's third foray into the Vietnam War, is much the same.  Every once
in a while, when he lets his camera do the talking, you can see the
potential for greatness, but the talky, over-narrated script blunts the
film's power.
     HEAVEN AND EARTH spans thirty years in the life of Le Ly (Hiep Thi
Le), a Vietnamese farm girl from the small village of Ky La.  She grows
up during the French occupation, then watches as the Viet Cong begins
to win the support of the people, including two of her brothers.  The
fighting is encouraged by Le Ly's fiery Mama (Joan Chen), but meets
with the disapproval of introspective Papa (Haing S. Ngor).  Conflicts
with both the V.C. and the South Vietnamese government soon force Le Ly
and her mother into Saigon, where different hardships await.  She
finally seems to find happiness with an American Marine (Tommy Lee
Jones), but as she begins life in America she discovers that for
herself and many others, the war is still not over.
     Visually, there are several sequences worthy of an Oliver Stone
highlight reel.  Cinematographer Robert Richardson's opening shots of
Ky La are rich and beautiful, including a particularly striking image
of an orange-robed Buddhist monk walking through tall green grass.
There is an intense sequence involving Le Ly's torture at the hands of
the Southern government which had the entire audience gasping and
squirming.  Perhaps most notable is the whimsical portrayal of Le Ly's
first encounters with American consumer culture, including a
slow-motion walk to an overstuffed refrigerator and the preparation of
a dinner entirely from frozen and canned foods.  Stone has a keen
directorial eye, and HEAVEN AND EARTH is usually interesting to watch.
     Would that Stone's ear were so keen.  HEAVEN AND EARTH's primary
responsibility is to pull the viewer into Le Ly's suffering, but that
never really happened for me.  The main reason for this failure is
Stone's decision to use--and over-use--narration by Le Ly.  There is
very little in the narration which could not have been demonstrated
visually, and it acts as a distancing mechanism, providing a
retrospective voice which doesn't allow the trials of a teenage girl to
seem like they're happening to a teenage girl.  It's sloppy
screenwriting on Stone's part, and all the more disappointing because
he's so much better at showing than he is at telling.  Where we should
be focusing on harrowing images, instead we get speeches.
     Newcomer Hiep Thi Le has to carry the two and a half hour film,
and essentially she's up to the task.  As with most novices, her
biggest problems are with scenes requiring big emotions, but those
problems are not distracting.  Le displays Le Ly's strength and
determination admirably, as well as her conviction that karma from a
past life is responsible for her current troubles.  Joan Chen is
extremely effective as Le Ly's mother, and Haing S. Ngor turns in his
second strong performance of the year (after MY LIFE) as Papa.
Conchata Ferrell is also notable in a scene-stealing turn as Le Ly's
gabby American sister-in-law.  However, the one disappointing
supporting performance is turned in by Tommy Lee Jones.  His Sgt.
Butler is only sketchily developed, appearing late in the film and
never developing fully enough to make his later actions
understandable.  Still, Stone is a fine director of actors, and his
cast is basically strong.
     Stone's intention with HEAVEN AND EARTH was clearly to show us
that as much as we in America think we suffered as a result of the
Vietnam War, Vietnam suffered more.  There are glimpses of that
suffering, but it should have been a much easier point to bring
across.  Le Ly experiences more suffering than most lifetimes, but it
never seemed quite real.  Elements of HEAVEN AND EARTH carry undeniable
impact, but when it was money time he should have descended from his
soapbox and let his camera do the talking.

Author
Piaw Na
A review of HEAVEN AND EARTH from a crazy perspective
     "Have you heard of HEAVEN AND EARTH?" said my Vietnamese friend
(I'll call her "Jane")
     "It's a story about Vietnam, told from the perspective of a
Vietnamese woman.  I've yet to see an American film about Vietnam told
from the point of view of a Vietnamese woman, so I want to see it."
     "Yeah.  The actress isn't a professional actress--I met her once.
She's from UC Davies and she dropped out of school for a year to do
it."
     "Hmm ....  It says here that Oliver Stone made the movie--he also
made PLATOON, didn't he?"
     And so I went and saw the movie with "Jane."  I won't describe the
movie for you, since others have and will do so.  I won't dissect the
plot, or talk about the symbolism.
     The first thing we agreed on as we left the movie theatre was that
the film should have been in Vietnamese with English subtitles.  I'm
not Vietnamese, and in spite of having a close Vietnamese friend, am
not about to learn Vietnamese, but even though I'm used to listening to
English being spoken with a Vietnamese accent, much of the impact of
the film was lost as I had to decipher the Vietnamese/English.  (I
speak English with an accent, too, so this is not and should not be
taken as an indictment of the Vietnamese accent.)  The inconsistency of
the language spoken by the lead actress, for instance, varied according
to whether the director wanted her to be "authentic", or
"understandable."  (As she got angrier, her English got better.)  This
made it tough, since I missed enough dialog in the film for me to get
irritated.
     The main problem with the film was that it was telling Le Ly's
story.  As a memoir, it is well done.  But as a story, it felt quite
raw, since there was too much to handle.  You can't tell a life's story
in 3 hours and do it justice.  "Jane" said, "it feels raw for you
because you don't connect it with reality.  You want to see it as a
movie--but it's somebody's life story, and it's a pretty common story
for Vietnamese.  If I were to meet her outside a supermarket, I would
have to assume that that was her background, but Americans are too
detached from the Vietnamese experience to deal with this as anything
other than a movie."  I replied, claiming that the movie didn't do her
memoir justice, and should have been cut perhaps just before she left
Vietnam to lend the story more power.  "But that wouldn't tell you the
point of the story, which was that she truly was in-between, like the
Vietnamese.  We didn't know, even after the war, whether siding with
the Americans was right or siding with the Viet-Cong was right.  We
were just fighting for our lives."  It would have been just another
"lived happily ever after" movie instead, I guess, so it wasn't a good
thing, either.
     We agreed that because of the format, the narration varied between
lyrical and prosaic, and that lent an unreal feeling to the movie.
     And so we came to the conclusion that the movie couldn't have been
improved except by extending it to maybe five hours or making a
mini-series on TV instead.  But it's still worth seeing on the big
screen, as many of the shots would lose their impact on videotape.  We
paid matinee prices for it, but that wasn't a deliberate act, and I
would have gotten my money's worth even at full price.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  12/25/93
Running Length:  2:18
Rated:  R (Violence, language, rape, nudity, mature themes)
     With HEAVEN AND EARTH, Oliver Stone has completed his so-called
"Vietnam Trilogy"--three films that examine different aspect of the
war that, to this point, has provided the centerpiece of Stone's
filmmaking career.
     The story begins in the village of Ky La in central Vietnam during
the 1950s, where Phung Le Ly (Hiep Thi Le) is a peasant girl tending
the rice paddies with her mother (Joan Chen), while being lectured on
various aspects of life by her father (Haing Ngor).  As Le Ly grows,
she and her village are put through various torments as they become
caught between American-backed South Vietnamese government troops and
the Viet Cong.  Le Ly is tortured by one side and raped by the other
before leaving Ky La for Saigon and a life as a prostitute.  There she
meets Sgt. Steve Butler (Tommy Lee Jones), a lonely and kindly American
GI who's looking for someone to settle down with.  The pair marry and
leave Vietnam for San Diego.
     HEAVEN AND EARTH has the epic scope one would expect from a film
of this magnitude, but it lacks much of the narrative strength of
Stone's first two Vietnamese tales.  This film possesses only flashes
of the power of PLATOON and BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY.  It is a good
motion picture, and its story is certainly worth committing to film,
but HEAVEN AND EARTH is no masterpiece.
     The strongest segment of the movie is its first half, which takes
place in Vietnam.  The pace is less frenzied, and events are
better-motivated and more clearly-connected.  Watching the helpless
victimization of Le Ly is an emotionally-draining experience, but it
illustrates one of Stone's favorite themes--that in war, there are no
winners, and the innocent always suffer the worst.  The Viet Cong and
South Vietnamese government both engage in innumerable horrifying
acts.  There is a torture scene involving honey, ants, and snakes, that
is more disturbing to watch than some of the bloodiest sequences.
     Once Steve Butler enters the film, the direction of the narrative
begins to waver.  His romance with Le Ly happens too quickly and is
sketchily developed.  Large portions of Le Ly's adaptation to life in
California are glossed over in favor of an unnecessarily-long
epilogue.  This portion of HEAVEN AND EARTH could have been stronger
had the same care been lavished upon it as was devoted to the first
half.  The missteps are not fatal, but they're noticeable.
     Several interlocking themes are examined.  The first, and most
obvious, deals with the parallel sufferings of Le Ly and Butler.  Her
words, "Different skin, same suffering," elucidate a point that Stone's
trilogy has repeatedly returned to.  The protagonists in these films
are always those whose souls pay a terrible price in service to
violence.
     As Le Ly is brutalized by the war, so too is her country, and the
healing process is no easier on the land than on the people.
"Rebuilding after a war is like starting a family by being raped," says
Le Ly's brother, and the writer/director makes sure that the audience
is aware of all the implications of that phrase.
     Karma, as well as other metaphysical aspects of Buddhism are
skimmed over, with Stone occasionally managing to weave them seamlessly
into the overall story.  However, elements of one scene near the end
are jarring, especially considering a comment by Le Ly.
     Oliver Stone's directorial flair is in full evidence here, with a
number of memorable camera shots, perhaps the most impressive of which
occurs during the first landing in Ky La of a South Vietnamese
government helicopter.  The use of flashbacks, whether in
black-and-white or color, is overdone, as are the voiceovers, which at
times fall into the trap of telling the audience things that would have
been better off shown.
     The choice of newcomer Hiep Thi Le as Le Ly may become a source of
debate.  She is adequate, but not peerless, and the limits of her
acting ability are highlighted in several emotionally-charged scenes
opposite Haing Ngor and Tommy Lee Jones, both of whom give credible,
wrenching performances.
     Those who disliked Stone's previous entries of the trilogy will
find little to celebrate in HEAVEN AND EARTH.  Although the weakest of
the films, it is easily recognizable as the director's work by its
stylistic, thematic, and narrative content.  The story itself is
ambitious, and only partially-realized, but what there is on screen is
potent enough to warrant a viewing for those who admire the film maker
and aren't dissuaded by grim subjects.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1993) *** - C:Tommy Lee Jones, Hiep Thi Le, Joan Chen, Haing S. Ngor,
Debbie Reynolds, Dustin Nguyen, Jeffrey Jones.
To enjoy the work of director Oliver Stone you must put aside any personal
opinions about him. It's true that he takes himself and his work much too
seriously. However, if you are able to just concentrate on his films and
treat them as works of fiction based on actual events, then you'll see that
he's a great filmmaker. Not counting the awful "Natural Born Killers", he
has given us some great films such as "Platoon", "Talk Radio" and one of my
favorite films of all time, "JFK". I had huge expectations for this film,
some of which were met, but for the most part they were not.
"Heaven and Earth" is based on the writings of Le Ly Hayslip, who grew up in
a small village in Vietnam only to see it ripped apart by the ravages of
war. In the film's first act, we see her life in the village before the war.
The people there are peaceful and content with life. When the war begins we
see the horrors brought about by both the Viet Cong and the South
Vietnamese. Both groups try to coerce the villagers to join their side. Many
of the villagers are accused by each side of being traitors and are punished
and tortured for information. This part of the film, showing the
heartwrenching anguish of what these people went through, especially Le Ly,
packs quite an emotional punch and ranks among Stone's best work. To my
knowledge, this is the first mainstream American film to show this side of
the war.
Having said that, it's hard to understand why the film becomes such a
simplistic, easily predictable soap opera. Le Ly and her mother leave the
village and head to Saigon where the two of them become housekeepers for a
wealthy couple. The husband seduces Le Ly and she becomes pregnant. The wife
then finds out about the affair and banishes Le Ly and her mother from the
house. Her mother then returns to the village while Le Ly finds work selling
cigarettes, liquor, and eventually herself to American GI's. There's nothing
interesting as far as plot here, and this part of the film could have easily
been done without.
Just as the film reaches it's lowest point, Sgt. Steve Butler (Jones) shows
up. At first he appears to be a nice guy just looking for someone to talk
to. It's obvious to the audience, however, that he's too good to be true. He
marries Le Ly and takes her back with him to America. It's back in the
states when we start to learn that the war has destroyed Steve's soul as his
character becomes a cliched, drunken maniac who staggers around, beats up on
Le Ly, and spouts out theories about Black Ops and the Special Forces
(typical Stone dialogue). She eventually gets away from him and she returns
to her homeland to visit her family. At this point, the film tries to end on
more highly charged emotional scenes. However, the first act was so powerful
and moving that by this point you have nothing left to give to these
characters.
So is "Heaven and Earth" a good movie? Yes and no. It's a very well acted
and directed film. The story however, started out original and then sank
into easy predictability. Also, it's not the kind of film that is made for
entertainment or enjoyment. You can't leave the film saying to yourself,
"Wow, I enjoyed the things that happened in that movie." Would I ever watch
the film again or recommend it to anyone? Probably not. Although, the first
act was good enough to give the film a better than average rating.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Ralf Benner
     Perhaps somewhere in the annals of forgotten intentions, director
Oliver Stone might have said to some hack reporter that he had always
had in mind a trilogy of movies about the Vietnam War.  The first,
PLATOON, about the actual war itself from a G.I.'s perspective; the
second, BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY, about a war hero who returns to
America to discover he's more despised than hailed; and a
third--WHEAVEN & EARTH bring this up because one of Stone's problems
has always been his inability to one-on-one sell his own product
because he's constantly shifting positions: he seems to say one thing
one day about his movies, and yet in another interview on another day
say something else entirely, often contradicting himself.  This was
most obvious and disturbing when conservatives jumped all over him
about JFK; Stone wouldn't admit that, as a refuter, he rigged his grand
mal of invective against the Warren Report.  Instead he fulminated
against his critics for perpetuating the grander lie.  Fair minded
viewers quickly perceived that JFK was a composite of theories, not
really meant to be at all definitive but exploratory--spasms of
conjecture to tantalize and reel us with possibilities and at the same
time admonish us for acquiescing to the volumes of purported facts.
JFK was dazzling, work-me-over movie making in the worst traditions of
yellow press muckraking: when we left the theatre, we conjured up the
worst scenarios for just about everybody, and this kind of cynicism was
and remains the movie's clarion attraction.  With an eye on the box
office, Stone elicited his detractors' often meaningless barrages--I'm
thinking of some of George Will's pomposity in defending status
quo--and never truer than when, on 60 Minutes, Andy Rooney made an ass
of himself (and unwittingly confirmed Stone's legitimate deploring of a
lazy press before the National Press Club in Washington) by trying to
joke that Stone was this era's Orson Welles looking for his Rosebud.
JFK is not Stone's CITIZEN KANE.  Far from it.  Had the movies'
preeminent contrarian shown class instead of boxing himself in, he
might have said that he made his own and much more exciting, horrifying
and brutal MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE.
     It is of course the quicksand that Stone, equal parts product and
producer of media splurge, can't resist: he likes to go the edges of
the pits he creates, and even if he tumbles into some of them, as he
did as writer for the exploiting MIDNIGHT EXPRESS and as director for
BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY, somehow he rescues himself by sheer gall and
temerity, which, as Americans, we often cheer more than we do those who
show respect for history or nations other than our own.  These are
movies that Stone owes us an apology for; these two false, pitched
melodramas, reeking with fabricated scenes and utterances and ultra-bad
casting (Tom Cruise as a paraplegic vet?), received the kind of
attention that later embarrasses the rational-minded--we realize that
all the hysteria comes from vengeful emotionality, in order to subvert
and controvert facts and humiliations.  There's not a god damn thing
that's admirable about Billy Hayes's story in MIDNIGHT EXPRESS; and
there's only pitiful contempt for those who continue to fight the
Vietnam War until they somehow win what they deserved to lose.
     Stone's frenzied method of reportage is undeniably what makes him
suspicious to many of us--he takes "true stories" and propagandizes not
the factual incidents themselves but the circumstances surrounding
them.  It's defensible with JFK because Stone was using thirty years
worth of everyone else's conspiracies and suppositions.  It's
indefensible regarding the overwrought BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY: as
pointed out by others, reel-life Ron Kovic evaded the major question:
"Why did the government tell lies about what the Vietnam War was
about?"  Because PLATOON was based, more or less, on Stone's own
experiences during the Vietnam War, questioning his veracity would be
dangerous, and I didn't when I first saw the movie, and, despite my
strong misgivings about HEAVEN & EARTH, I don't now.  PLATOON had the
feel of truth, of real experience in it, and I think the reactions of
our nation's Vietnam Vets was--and remains--the more significant
testimonial.  They responded to it as if it were a catharsis; they left
theatres shaken, or crying, or sobbing, their pain of waste &
dissolution given a salve.  When Jane Fonda attacked THE DEER HUNTER as
racist, she was once more pounced on as a traitor, but this time she
was absolutely right: Michael Cimino made a political tract that only
temporarily gave us the excuse we sought to feel smug and superior to a
tiny country that, short of nuking, we attempted to bomb into oblivion
and in the process helped kill more than two million of its citizens
and injured another three million.  This is why few can watch that
movie anymore--it being so egregiously slanted to protect ourselves
from our own crimes.  And this is most likely why PLATOON had such an
incredible impact only nine years later: despite all the amateurish
literary flourishes spoken by Charlie Sheen, despite the appallingly
effective misuse of Barber's "Adagio for Strings" during some of the
movie's most horrific moments, PLATOON was an "everyman's" epiphany of
our government's nearly intractable dumbheadedness.  And it did
something more:  it intimated how frequently our military's hierarchy
left our men in the lurch, to defend themselves and die as their
commanders, in the relative safety of Saigon or Washington, were lying
to an American press.  One of the quietly satisfying aspects about the
success of PLATOON is that while some movie critics, National Guard
right-wingers and draft-dodgers were proclaiming that they "didn't like
it," the fact is, this is categorically not a movie to like or dislike,
to love or hate; based on one's own experiences, you're either moved by
what it's saying and suggesting or you're not.  I knew this movie was
and would stay on the right track when, during its opening, we watched
the new G.I.s getting off their transports as others--in body
bags--were being loaded onto those transports.  I've still got in my
memory banks many images of the war, but none more evoking of stronger
emotions than this.  I'm a Vietnam-era vet who unaccountably spent his
term of service in the Baroque whimsy of Wurzburg, Germany and whose
cushy job it was to administratively process servicemen to and from
other military posts and during interviews with those who had been to
Vietnam, the reactions were almost always the same:  the initial shock
and sudden realization of possible death when they saw the rows of
corpses.  Those images were never discussed in basic and individual
training, those images hadn't yet appeared in Stars & Stripes, they
were rarely spoken of on Armed Forces Radio, but they were the subject
of endless conversations in the barracks, in the mess halls.  We didn't
know what post traumatic stress syndrome was in those days--it probably
hadn't even been coined yet--but we could tell who served in Vietnam
when we heard the screams from hellish nightmares during the night.
     HEAVEN & EARTH, based on two non-fiction books that are accounts
of Vietnamese surviving their country's war years, opens with
paradisical shots of agricultural lands and jutting mountains with low
clouds passing through them--the kind of setting one might imagine
would be the end result of the Genesis Device in STAR TREK: THE WRATH
OF KHAN.  The beauty of it all is Stone saying, "This is what it was
like before we got there." Soon after, when the American helicopters
and napalm arrive, we get the burnt out fields and villages, with Stone
lecturing, "This is what it was like after we got there."  Stone has
said repeatedly that HEAVEN & EARTH is a glimpse of what the Vietnamese
went through during the time the French and most specifically the
Americans descended upon them.  But HEAVEN & EARTH is not about the
Vietnamese proles--it's about an American movie maker's view of what a
Vietnamese woman, lucky enough to escape, endures through
Americanization.  This is not a minor quibble, it's a major beef.  This
is no more a movie about how the Vietnamese people lived through the
inferno mostly created by other nations--China, France, Japan, France
again, America, and China once more--than BORN ON THE 4TH OF JULY is
about a disillusioned war hero returning to a jaded homeland.  HEAVEN &
EARTH is not overtly fraudulent--there probably isn't a major scene
that didn't happen to either the principals or others--but it feels
very fraudulent.  Except for a few terrorist threats by (we assume) the
Viet Cong, who warn the peasant farmers against betraying the
motherland, there's no believability that these Vietnamese have any
defining politics or even pride in nationality.  Worse, the bits and
pieces of their struggles to maintain a crazy kind of normalcy in daily
living amidst the incursions are, if not rehash from all the other
Vietnam War movies, then cursory.  Were there no schools for the kids?
Did no teens or young adults date and fall in love? There's a flimsy,
slow-motion reach towards Conrad's HEART OF DARKNESS a la APOCALYPSE
NOW to remind us of war's inherent insanity but eventually the movie
tires itself out and becomes a rather mild, less affecting KILLING
FIELDS--we even get Haing S.  Nor as a loving father searching for his
pregnant daughter, reminiscent of Sam Waterston's pursuit of Nor
himself.
     During the opening, we get a very truncated narration by the
movie's heroine--played by newcomer Hiep Thi Le--that attempts to
establish perfunctory facts.  The facts are misleading: while I
couldn't swear to what Stone has her saying exactly, because it's
soft-spoken enough to miss parts, there is a major reference to the
defeat of the French (at Dien Bien Phu) in 1954, which, by Stone's
account, precipitated American intervention.  Not quite right: though
the French did depart in 1954, and though there was a brief diplomatic
solution known as the Geneva Accord which separated Vietnam into North
and South, providing a lull in major fighting until 1959 when Ho Chi
Minh stepped up gorilla warfare to further weaken the South's already
precarious government, and though the U.S. was sending "advisors"
steadily until 1965 when President Johnson ordered large numbers of
troops to intervene to save the South, the American government, under
Truman, was already and very directly involved in the re-colonization
of Indochina by France in 1946.
     While FDR adamantly and Truman less so opposed France's return
there, because it defied the American principle of independence for all
nations, and though both presidents were suspicious of France in that
it had cruelly exploited Vietnam in the past and despite France's
promise to grant autonomy to the Vietnamese probably wouldn't (and
didn't), the American position became one of acquiescence to France,
most likely because Charles de Gaulle, humiliated by the quick,
humiliating subjugation of his people to the Nazis, blackmailed
Truman:  If not permitted its undeserved spoils of the war, then
France, already haughty with demands in the rebuilding of Europe, would
resist cooperation in that reconstruction.  France's return to
Vietnam--facilitated by over 2 billion American 1940-50 dollars worth
of transport ships and materials--enraged Ho Chi Minh rather
understandably: America, a nation he had admired enormously, was
betraying its principles, especially since Ho believed that, with the
American pledge to grant independence to the Philippines, America
indeed "was for the free popular governments all over the world and
that it opposed colonialism in all its forms." (Ho had been appealing
for his nation's independence since 1919, when he went to the
Versailles Peace Conference to plead his case, but he had been turned
away without so much as a single hearing.) By late 1945, Ho had sent at
least eight appeals to Truman and the American Secretary of State, but
they were ignored.  War between the French and the Vietnamese started
in late 1946 and would continue until the French were surrounded and
nearly annihilated at Dien Bien Phu.  The ominous but ignored cost to
the French: over 50,000 lives, 100,000 injuries.  Part of Ho's brief
triumph when the French departed was the knowledge that he also
defeated America the betrayer.  Though Ho died before his countrymen
would defeat America a second time, there must be among Vietnamese an
additional yet savory satisfaction in the victory: that we did not
learn from history, even failing to learn from yesterday's failed
military tactics.  In a communique written in 1945 to de Gaulle by Bao
Dai, the last Emperor of Indochina, this was prophesied: "Even if you
come to re-establish a French administration here, it will no longer be
obeyed: each village will be a nest of resistance, each former
collaborator an enemy, and your officials and colonists will themselves
ask to leave this atmosphere which they will unable to breathe."
     Technically, none of this is what the movie is all about, but
remember, it's Stone who's telling us that he's made a
people-of-Vietnam movie from their perspective, which, reiterating, he
most certainly is not.  What HEAVEN & EARTH seems to be about is karma,
and rather tragi-yellow karma to boot: it suggests that the sum and
consequences of the heroine's life determined her fate--that she might
have deserved to be raped, that she was destined to meet and marry
psycho Sad Sack Tommy Lee Jones, that despite her capitalist success in
America she would return home to hear her brother scold her and America
for its continual punishment of her motherland that never deserved to
be the pawn it became in global power strategies.  As such, Hiep Thi
Le, a pre-med student in California, is surprisingly competent.  Like
the abused, neglected heroines proverbially carrying coals to New
Castle in American period-piece literature, Hiep Thi Le is required to
be weighted down and become the embodiment of the rice-fed Vietnamese
constitution; despite the upholstery-like coifs that make her look
stereotypically China Doll trampy, she sticks to you. (She's also got
the movie's only honest bit: when she jumps off a helicopter, with
child in tow, her purse falls to her knees, then feet.  She's also in a
scene that puts the fact checkers on the spot: there's a banner
advertising "double coupons" at the California grocery chain Ralphs.)
     The last time I saw Joan Chen, who plays Hiep's mother, was in
Bertolucci's snoozer THE LAST EMPEROR.  So fancily pictorial she seemed
a poster; there was more drama in the lobby stills of her than in the
movie itself.  And there was something unconvincing about her makeup:
she didn't age "naturally," she looked comically fakey.  This doesn't
happen to her here: while it takes time to get passed her mouth full of
rotten dentistry (or a lack of it, I could never tell for sure), she's
stunningly cosmeticized, you really believe what you see.  Her voice and
face now have a nobility you can't stop absorbing--she's a hybrid of
Glenn Close and Jessica Lange, with a slight amount of Olivia Cole as a
finishing touch.  In her last scenes, you realize it is her story that
you want to see, that she is the salt of Vietnam's earth Stone has
tried to turn Hiep Thi Le into.  This odd reversal happened in THE LAST
EMPEROR: at the beginning, when the dying empress, sounding like Meryl
Streep doing her OUT OF AFRICA routine, informed the young emperor
he'll inherit the throne, we're mesmerized: she's so debauched,
evil-eyed and practically levitating in the splendiferous surroundings
of the imperial palace--not unlike Jabba the Hut in THE RETURN OF THE
JEDI--that when the movie concluded, I flashed back to her, regretting
that I didn't see THE LAST EMPRESS.  When Hiep delivers the earth
mother bromides--the kind of platitudes all mothers want to hear, and,
in fact, HEAVEN & EARTH is dedicated to Stone's own mother--it's Joan
Chen who should be speaking.
     Someday a director will pick up THE TUNNELS OF CU CHI by Tom
Mangold and John Penycate and realize it's the book that America needs
as a movie.  (Anyone who's read it never forgets the snake.) With Mel
Gibson, whose frame and Stoogy risk-taking are perfect for traversing
those tunnels which terrorized Americans and are, in any variety of
ways, the real metaphor of Vietnam.  Without them, without the tenacity
involved in building and maintaining them, it might have been possible
for the American military killing experts to defeat the spirit of the
Vietnamese.  The only movie that has come close to showing the terror
of those tunnels--but too briefly--is Brian De Palma's over-praised
and rightly rebuffed CASUALTIES OF WAR.  Though CASUALTIES OF WAR is
based on fact, it loses its indictable punch in that rape and the death
of the raped aren't exclusive to the horror of war; movies using rape to
pontificate become cliches because, in a measure of our desensitized
times, rape is no longer as horrible as it is anticipatory symptom, and
it never explains the political machinations that result in war.
According to a blurb Pauline Kael gave to De Palma to use in the ads--a
blurb that did not show up in her lengthy review--CASUALTIES OF WAR is
the "greatest of the Vietnam War movies."  Similar to Larry King's
fourteen word blurb about HEAVEN & EARTH, hyperbolic nonsense has a way
of biting back, like bad karma.  The ultimate Vietnam War movie would
be the one that shows us that the enemy who never had to be knew us and
our weaknesses better than we did.  The more self-incriminating
anti-war movie will be the one that reveals American
immaturity--exposing our national inability to accept the harsher
reality of having lost a war we never had any business getting involved
in.  Vietnam vets have a right to rage against Robert McNamara and his
IN RETROSPECT.  One of the principal architects of youth in Asia,
McNamara acknowledges the war's meaninglessness, but, having learned
from the right wing crybabies, he blames everyone else.
