Title
Review for Mirror Has Two Faces, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Barbra Streisand, Jeff Bridges, Lauren Bacall, Pierce Brosnan,
Mimi Rogers, George Segal, Brenda Vaccaro, Austin Pendleton Director:
Barbra Streisand Screenplay: Richard LaGravenese
The mirror has two faces, the reflection that you see, and the person
who you are behind that reflection.
I had a friend who once told me that it was better to be happily single,
than to settle for second best. I couldn't agree more. Don't settle for
second best. To find someone who loves you so much that it aches, well
that's worth waiting for.
This, in part, is one of the many themes in this movie. A single,
middle-aged professor of literature (Streisand), is always the
bridesmaid and never the bride. A single, middle-aged professor of
mathematics (Bridges), has unusual theories about the universe and sex -
that a lasting relationship with a woman, only requires friendship and
common interests. They get married, become best friends, but the
marriage is never consummated. It is then that Streisand's character
realises that she wants more; she wants it all, the flowers, the
romance, the passion and fireworks -- and not second best.
Great subject material for a movie. Well chosen by Streisand, who I am
sure directs from personal experience; and a cast well suited to their
roles.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Barbra Streisand, Jeff Bridges, Lauren Bacall, Pierce Brosnan, 
      Mimi Rogers, George Segal, Brenda Vaccaro, Austin Pendleton
Director: Barbra Streisand
Producers: Barbra Streisand and Arnon Milchan
Screenplay: Richard LaGravenese
Cinematography: Dante Spinotti and Andrzej Bartkowiak
Music: Marvin Hamlisch
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     The most notable thing about THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES, director 
Barbra Streisand's third effort behind the camera, is its long and 
strife-filled production history.  The actual film that resulted is, at 
best, decent, and doesn't add anything new or interesting to the 
romantic comedy genre.  In fact, what THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES is in 
desperate need of is an editor.  At over two hours, this film drags on 
for far too long.  There comes a point in any romance when the 
characters must either be broken apart or brought together once and for 
all.  By delaying that moment for about twenty unnecessary minutes, 
Streisand risks losing her audience to disinterest.
     The basic storyline isn't all that complicated.  Streisand plays 
Rose Morgan, a professor at Columbia University who teaches a course in 
Romantic Literature.  Jeff Bridges is Gregory Larkin, a math professor.  
Neither has a particularly satisfying love life.  Frumpy Rose, the 
proverbial ugly duckling in search of romance, is constantly 
disappointed by her dates.  Gregory, who becomes inept around attractive 
women, can have all the sex he wants, but craves something deeper -- a 
"union of souls" that "takes sex out of the equation".  So, when Rose's 
sister, Claire (Mimi Rogers), reads a companionship ad that Gregory 
places in the paper, she contrives a meeting between the two.  Gregory 
and Rose strike up a fast friendship that leads to an unconventional 
marriage.  However, even after the wedding, their relationship remains 
platonic, and when Rose expresses a desire to have sex, Gregory flees.
     Roughly the first hour of THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES is enjoyable.  
We are introduced to the characters, see them interact, investigate 
their hopes, dreams, and fantasies, and watch them slowly, tentatively, 
test their feelings for each other.  There are some wonderful discourses 
on the nature of love that pose intriguing questions, a few of which the 
film goes on to explore at greater length.  
     Unfortunately, the second half of the movie isn't as strong.  
Gregory, who struggles mightily to attain believability early, devolves 
into a caricature struggling with an implausible problem (he's afraid to 
have sex with his wife).  The film's delightful, romantic mood deflates 
quickly as Streisand starts to explore issues of insecurity and 
empowerment.  Two dimensional figures like Rose's "dream man", Alex 
(Pierce Brosnan), and her best friend (Brenda Vaccaro) make brief, 
unsatisfactory appearances to illustrate different aspects of Rose's 
personality after a makeover gives her self-confidence.  
     In some ways, THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES treads in similar territory 
to that which was explored earlier this year by the more successful THE 
TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS.  Janeane Garafolo's character there, like 
Streisand's here, is insecure about her appearance and becomes convinced 
that because she's "unattractive", she can never have a romantic 
relationship.  The principal difference between the two films is one of 
tone.  CATS AND DOGS maintains a light-hearted, occasionally goofy air, 
while THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES combines uneven comedy with the 
pretentiousness of trying to say something serious.  
     The cast is populated with good actors, which makes the lack of 
standout performances disappointing.  Streisand is by far the best, 
doing an excellent job of mixing wry humor, pathos, and longing.  Rose 
is the only character we ever really care about.  Jeff Bridges plays 
Gregory a little too broadly.  While his mingling of perkiness and 
naivete elicits a few laughs, it erodes Gregory's credibility as a 
living, breathing human being.  Lauren Bacall puts enough bite into her 
performance as Rose's neurotic, unsupportive mother that there are times 
when she's downright irritating.  There are also moments, however, when 
she's in top form.  In fact, Bacall and Streisand combine for one of the 
film's rare gems -- a scene where Rose asks her mother, "What did it 
feel like to be beautiful?"  Supporting roles are filled by Pierce 
Brosnan, George Segal, Mimi Rogers, Brenda Vaccaro, and Austin 
Pendleton.
     Streisand's direction is more sure here than it was in the 
overrated PRINCE OF TIDES, but the rambling script (based on that of a 
1958 French film) ultimately lets her down.  THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES 
has a certain charm, but most of the enchantment wears off before the 
climax.  Streisand has a reputation as a perfectionist who will drive 
people hard to attain the best results possible.  (A number of cast and 
crew members, including Dudley Moore and cinematographer Dante Spinotti, 
left in mid-production, because of "creative differences" with her.)  
Nevertheless, if the director truly is satisfied with the final cut, 
then her idea of perfection differs somewhat from mine.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Tri-Star)
Starring:  Barbra Streisand, Jeff Bridges, Lauren Bacall, Mimi Rogers,
Pierce Brosnan, George Segal, Brenda Vaccaro.
Screenplay:  Richard LaGravenese.
Producers:  Barbra Streisand, Arnon Milchan.
Director:  Barbra Streisand.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Mock Barbra Streisand if you will for her insistence upon being
photographed with the kind of back-lighting we haven't seen since Stevie
Nicks was making music videos; after all, you'll be in good company if you
do.  Cinematographer Dante Spinotti and many of his technicians were fired
from the production of THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES, supposedly for not
shooting her in the most flattering manner possible, leading to insider
jabs like "The Mirror Has Two Chins."  Whatever the reasons for the rosy,
soft-focus look of MIRROR, it is a style which works for this decidedly
old-fashioned romantic comedy.  It is only when the film strays from the
traditions of 1940s screwball that it loses its opportunity to be a real
comic treat.
     Streisand plays Rose Morgan, a Columbia University literature
professor resigned to the role of ugly duckling, living in the shadow of a
glamour-obsessed mother (Lauren Bacall) and losing lovers to her more
beautiful sister Claire (Mimi Rogers).  A well-meaning Claire tries to
help Rose by responding for her to a personal ad placed by Gregory Larkin
(Jeff Bridges), a math professor whose inability to deal rationally with
sexual relationships has led him to seek celibate, intellectual
companionship.  When the two meet, they become fast friends, exactly the
kind of non-romantic partners Gregory has in mind, inspiring him to
propose a marriage which will be of minds only.  Rose accepts, but
complications arise when she finds herself violating their arrangement by
making the mistake of falling in love with her husband.
    THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES draws most of its charm from the appealing
pairing of Streisand and Bridges.  Bridges has long been one of our most
under-appreciated actors, but his versatility is on full display in the
quirky role of Gregory.  There is a certain stock quality to the "hapless
intellectual" part, but Bridges gives it more warmth and self-awareness;
it is because he _knows_ that he is hapless that he resorts to such
unconventional methods in the first place.  Streisand also does nice work
making Rose's growing frustration both funny and touching, and she has a
wonderfully natural scene giving a lecture on love in romantic literature.
Together Bridges and Streisand share a goofy chemistry in their very lack
of chemistry, supported admirably by Rogers, Bacall, Pierce Brosnan (as
Rogers' husband), George Segal (in the "his confidante" role) and Brenda
Vaccaro (in the "her confidante" role).
     In many ways, THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES is the perfect set-up for a
throwback romantic farce, but along the way to the "happily ever after" it
keeps stumbling over some fairly fundamental points.  The script by
Richard LaGravenese has its share of tart one-liners, but it is awfully
talky.  MIRROR's one entertaining scene of physical comedy, in which Rose
tries gamely to seduce Gregory, comes quite late in the game, by which
time it has become clear that its two hour plus running time was doing the
story no favors.  Streisand may have wanted a lush romantic fairy tale
full of Marvin Hamlisch strings and doe-eyed conversations, but she
sacrificed a lean, sharp comedy in the process.  She also doesn't use that
extra time to establish how much alike Rose and Gregory are in their
romanticism; if Bridges makes one big mistake in his performance, it is
making Gregory's rationalizations for his behavior sound too pat.  It
should be clear that both parties are struggling against the same
feelings, if struggling unequally, rather than appearing that Streisand is
the desperate woman pursuing the reluctant man.
     There is, of course, also the matter of how convinced you are that
Rose is the homely closet case she is supposed to be.  Streisand may be
nobody's idea of a conventional beauty, but her boudoir-photograph style
close-ups throughout the film tend to work against the baggy sweaters and
frumpy demeanor; when she finally goes for full-on glamour late in the
film, it is less a metamorphosis than a relief.  Many viewers may find her
character too far-fetched to swallow, much as they had problems with
Janeane Garofolo as the "ugly one" in THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS, but I'm
not convinced that is the problem.  THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES is
reminiscent of Hollywood film-making when the star was always filmed, like
Claudette Colbert, with only her best side to the camera, and it is
pleasant enough in its retro sort of way.  The smiles rarely turn into
laughs, however, and Streisand's notorious attention to detail has somehow
caused her to miss the big picture:  at some point, this romance needed to
set off a spark.  THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES doesn't quite have that fire,
substituting a warm, soft lamp placed strategically behind Streisand's
hair.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Barbra Streisand
Writer: Richard LaGravenese (based on the script "La Mirror a Deux
Faces" by André Cayatte and Gérard Oury)
Starring: Barbra Streisand, Jeff Bridges, Lauren Bacall, Mimi Rogers,
Pierce Brosnan, George Segal, Brenda Vacaro, Austin Pendleton, Elle
MacPherson, Amber Smith
Barbara Streisand's "The Mirror Has Two Faces" is fluff, but at least
it's good fluff.  It's the kind of film you aren't intellecutally
challenged by, not blown away by, but are entertained for it's full
lenght because of it's wit and the likability of the characters, and
come away from with a smile on your face, even if that is fleeting.  Of
course, it is surprising, what with all the bad press surrounding it,
that it isn't some masterpiece, but oh well.
Even before seeing it, "The Mirror Has Two Faces" is possible of scaring
you off, simply because it is another American remake of a French film,
this time "La Mirror a Deux Faces," which I've never even heard of,
which is a relief.  Many remakes of French films, especially farces, can
be awful, as their source can be even worse.  Take last year's "Jungle 2
Jungle," a remake of the (I hear) putrid "Un Indien Dans La Ville"
(renamed "Little Indian, Big City"), which was only slightly better than
the original (I hear).  But there are times when this works, most
recently with "The Birdcage," a successful remake of a good French
farce, "La Cage Aux Folles" (I personally found the remake funnier than
the original, but that's just me).
Like many french comedies, this film has a pretty unique gimmick: a man
and woman marry not out of lust or even love, but out of respect for one
another.  I mean, it certainly sounds francais.  Of course, this was
directed by Babs herself (who also stars in it), and written by the cool
Richard LaGravenese ("The Fisher King"), which means that it's not just
your regular french remake.  Babs actually gives this film some depth,
even if it does reflect her own insecurities about her looks, which
she's been doing since the 60s (a Premiere magazine that came out around
the release of this film noted that in most of her films there are
scenes where the actors talk about how beautiful she is - these guys
were acting, of course).
Babs plays Rose Morgan, a single college professor who lives with her
still radiant mom (Lauren Bacall, in her best role in like a decade or
probably more), and pines to be beautiful and have a passionate
marriage.  She wants someone to be bowled over by eveything about her,
to adore every foible and all that good stuff.  Of course, then there's
reality.
But into her life comes another professor, Gregory Larkin (Jeff
Bridges), who is kinda dull (he's a math professor) and dorky (again,
he's a math professor), but when he meets her via a dating service, she
and he get along in a friendly kind of way, and become quite
affectionate of eachother, but not in a passionate way.  Gregory has
suffered a lot from pervious relationships (he was once married to a
woman played by Elle MacPherson - we can all understand that), and after
hearing one of her lectures (which sounds more like stand-up than actual
teaching) in class where she discussed how sex brings nothing but
disaster, has decided he's not at all interested in sex.  And he's
interested in Babs.
She and Gregory marry in a civil service, and go along in seperate beds,
living out a pretty dull marriage (they take turns changing in the
bathroom), but sometimes having hints of sexual tension.  Gregory
doesn't want to "spoil" the marriage with sex, since he thinks that by
eliminating sex from the marriage, they can go to the next plateau which
is celebacy (which is what we all know happens to married couples after
a couple decades anyway).  But Babs just gotta have it, and soon the
film goes in different directions, such as the obligatory "Babs gets a
makeover" sequence and tries to look all hot and sexy, but to be blunt,
really doesn't.
Right away, you know this isn't a brilliant masterpiece.  I did not see
Babs' "The Prince of Tides," but I hear it's a genius piece of
filmmaking.  This is not.  But that doesn't mean it's not good.  The
film is, as I said, fluff, and it plays out exactly as fluff.  It
presents lots of interesting characters, such as the protagonists, and
several interesting but brief supporting characters, like Rose's sister
Claire (the buxom Mimi Rogers) and her newly-wedded husband, Alex
(Pierce Brosnan), who aren't exactly happily married, some friends from
each side (George Segal for Gregory, and Brenda Vaccaro for Rose), and,
of course, Rose's hilarious mother.
The film has its share of problems, as all fluff films do, but still
holds itself together, and is a very enjoyable little film.  The acting
is great from all, especially from Babs, who gets to show she's still a
good comical actress; Bridges, who nails his performance; Rogers and
Brosnan, who are hysterically unhappy; and Bacall, who steals every
scene she's in, even from the fast-talking Streisand.  She's always been
a great actress, and it's wonderful to see her in such top form.
In reference to Bacall's Oscar "snub," I don't think she deserved it. 
She was amazing and all, but both Juliette Binoche (who won) and -- (who
didn't) were better than her.  Still, they gave John Wayne the Best
Actor Oscar for his performance in "True Grit," which was about as
standard as the rest of his, so they could have given it to her for the
good old reason that she's been around awhile and has never won.
Streisand's direction is pretty good here, holding the film up well(even
if she did put a song of hers on the end - a duo with Bryan Adams -
*shudder*).  Though it's a tad long (at 126 minutes), it breezes by, and
provides enough entertainment to give me a small but distinct smile on
my face after it was over.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Ben Hoffman
How does it feel to be very bright, to yearn for a man's love and
passion and still regard yourself as pretty close to being an ugly
duckling?  That is what Rose Morgan (Barbra Streisand), a professor of
Romantic Literature at Columbia University,  has to confront.  Has not
her mother, Hannah, (Lauren Bacall) told her, in not those exact
words, that she is a plain-looking woman?  Mother Hannah, despite her
getting along in years still has traces of her beauty and makes the
most of it.
On the other side of the coin there is handsome Gregory Larkin, a
Columbia U. mathematics professor  who has to ward off the advances of
a host of beautiful women only too eager to get him into the sack.
(We should all have that problem.)  Gregory yearns to meet a woman
whom he can love because they have things in common, because she is
bright, rather than because she is beautiful.   In desperation he
places a Personal Ad that reads "Columbia University professor (male)
seeks a woman interested in common goals and companionship.  Must have
a Ph.D. and be over thirty-five. Physical appearance not important."
With a little chicanery by her sister, Rose and Gregory meet.
Almost immediately there is that chemistry of admiration and respect
and love and Gregory asks her, to her great surprise and happiness, to
marry him.   Of course, Gregory has not so much as kissed her yet,
His love is that of the aforementioned admiration and respect variety.
Rose, for her part, agrees but she also looks forward to making
passionate love with her husband.  What happens when she discovers
that is not at all what he had in mind.  Had he not told her that
stuff about admiration and respect?  Why is she obviously angry and
frustrated?  What is wrong with women?  Cannot a husband and wife have
love without sex?  Apparently not in their case.
Based on the French film, LE MIROIR A DEUX FACES, Streisand's version
is a delightful romp as we witness the metamorphosis of a plain-Jane
into a svelte, glamorous, sexy-looking woman.  Let Gregory handle that
when he comes home from Paris after a three-month's lecture gig during
which Rose has not returned any of his many pleading phone calls.
Bridges is charmingly terrific as is Streisand.   Aided by such
experienced actors as Lauren Bacall at her best, Georges Segal, Mimi
Rogers, Pierce Brosnan, Brenda Vaccaro, the stunning Elle MacPherson,
the film is most entertaining.   This is one you will not want to
miss.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Celibacy as the true path to romantic love - now there is the
basis for a high concept movie.  Think about the possibilities.  Get
some expensive stars and make a comedy about abstinence before and
during marriage.  A film about the conscious abandonment of sex as a
lifestyle is not your typical Hollywood fair.
     Well, thanks to an hilarious script by normally serious
screenwriter Richard LaGravenese (THE FISHER KING, A LITTLE PRINCESS,
and THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY) and to careful direction by Barbra
Streisand (YENTL and THE PRINCE OF TIDES), Streisand's new film, THE
MIRROR HAS TWO FACES, is a delightful comedy.  Since there is a French
film by the same name, perhaps this is a remake of it, but it plays
like the remake of one of the romantic, American comedies of the 30s
and 40s.
     The show has the look and sound of a film made by a typical big
budget producer.  The film opens to loud French horns and there is
rarely a quiet moment as the music by Marvin Hamlisch (SOPHIE'S CHOICE)
dominates and overpowers much of the action.  Like a laugh track in a
TV sitcom, the overly perky music keeps chiming in to remind us when we
should feel romantic and when amused.  The script is quite strong on
its own and does not need this heavy reinforcement.
     Columbia University Math Professor Gregory Larkin (Jeff Bridges)
has a problem with good looking females.  They make his brain go to
sleep and his intelligence drop to double digits.  All a pretty woman
has to do is walk into his classroom, and he starts falling all over
himself.  As his friend and fellow professor Henry (George Segal)
chides him, "You're the only guy I know who can't have sex and chew
gum."
     According to the press kit, this is George Segal's 50th film.
>From THE YOUNG DOCTORS (1961) on, he has been the reliable other man in
many a film.  Here his performance is OK, but nothing special, which is
pretty typical for most of his pictures.
     After a bout of channel surfing where Gregory finds even ladybugs
doing it with great fervor, he decides that the world is obsessed with
sex.  He uses an ad to find a woman whose looks do not matter.
Answering the ad, Claire (Mimi Rogers from SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME),
tells him to ask out her sister, Romantic Literature Professor Rose
Morgan (Barbra Streisand).  After hearing Rose's lecture about the
value that the twelfth century put on abstinence as a way to romantic
love and after seeing her looks, he decides he has found his soul mate,
roommate, and wife.  He reasons that "the mathematical world is
completely rational, uncomplicated by sex," and therefore his plan to
skip sex forever makes eminent good sense.  Rose thinks his theories
are nuts, but falls for him anyway.
     The clothes in the show are straightforward but funny.  When
Rose's sister marries airhead hunk and skirt chaser Alex (Pierce
Brosnan from GOLDENEYE), Rose has to wear a pink dress that looks like
a teenager's prom dress.  She tells her mother, Hannah (Lauren Bacall),
"I look like an over the hill Barbie Doll."  Lauren Bacall is terrific
in the film as the domineering and acerbic mom who knows best for her
middle aged daughter.  Hannah's lines are wryer than the others, but
well delivered with precise timing.
     The film isn't just a comedy.  The scenes of Rose in class
interacting with her students could be textbook examples of how to
enliven a class with energetic teaching.  As the story advances, the
pathos of middle age takes center stage as does homeliness.  Rose has
no self-confidence and cancels her dates.  She tells her mom of her
first meeting with Gregory that, "It's not a date.  We're just agreeing
to eat at the same place."  When he peppers her with mathematical
trivia on their date, she confides, "First date where I feel like I'm
winning on a game show."  Streisand, the actress, plays her part
convincingly with absolute control and wit.
     Bridges approaches his role too reserved, and he never made me
believe that Gregory ever cared for Rose.  He did get some great lines
including the one when he told her, he was serious about her, "I want
to be upfront.  I am not interested in sex with you."  Rose gives him a
pained you've-got-to-be-kidding look.
     Gregory is pleased that Rose holds no physical attraction for him.
One time, he happens to gaze upon her appearance and remarks, "You
don't use make-up."  To which she retorts, "What's the point?  It'd
still be me - only in color."  Later she confesses to her mother,
"Let's face it.  They're not standing in line for me."
     The best line in the whole show is the one, also seen in the
trailers, where Rose finally demands her conjugal rights.  At breakfast
she announces, "By the way, would telling you now that I want sex
tonight be enough of a warning?"
     The way the story is wrapped up works comedically, and yet it
feels false to the spirit of the movie.  The last scene, however, is
terrific and my favorite of the whole picture.
     For a film where the dialog is crisp and funny, and where the
female lead is near perfect, I found the movie surprisingly
uninvolving.  I think the mistake was in the casting of Jeff Bridges.
He was not believable, and worse than that, I never cared about him.  A
one way chemistry in a love story is not enough.  I had a good time and
I laughed a lot, but I left unrequited.  The film wanted me to love it,
but I was only able to laugh at it.
     THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES runs way too long at over two hours.
Comedies have no business going much past 1:40 since the jokes start
getting repetitive and stale.  The film is rated PG-13 for lots of
conversation about sex, but no actual sex, nudity or violence.  There
are a few cuss words, but mainly the language is quite mild.  The film
would be fine for any kid who knows about sex and likes romantic
comedies.  I recommend the film to your for its humor and for
Streisand's lovely performance, and I give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES  *** Directed by Barbra Streisand.Written by
Richard LaGravenese. Based on the 1958 French film "Le Miroir a deux
faces," written by Andre Cayatte & Gerard Oury, directed by Cayatte.
Photography,Dante Spinotti & Andrzej Bartkowiak. Editing,Jeff Werner.
Production design, Tom John. Music, Marvin Hamlisch ("Love Theme"
composed by Barbra Streisand. Produced by Barbra Streisand  & Arnon
Milchan. Cast: Barbra Streisand (Rose Morgan), Jeff Bridges (Gregory
Larkin), Mimi Rogers (Claire), Lauren Bacall (Hannah Morgan), Pierce
Brosnan (Alex), Elle MacPherson (Candy). A Tristar release. 126 minutes.
PG-13.
The remake of French movies is a major Hollywood sub-industry. The
results are  invariably inferior to the originals.Some remakes are OK
now and then, but the great majority are bad. The latest case was
"Diabolique" The surprising news is that the new opus by and with Barbra
Streisand is better than the 1958 French movie.
Surprise Number Two for me is that for once I enjoyed watching a movie
with a large audience. I normally go to earliest possible shows on the
least trafficky days. No odious smells, no sticky goo on the floor, no
crinkling cellophane and loud chomping, no running commentaries, no
laughter at the wrong places. For "The Mirror," however, the theater
though packed was odorless, noiseless and the audience laughed
unboisterously at the right times.
The film is most enjoyable, well paced and without dull  moments. Its
improbabilities or exaggerations vanish behind the qualities of script,
acting and Miss Streisand's direction, her third after "Yentl" and "The
Prince of Tides."
It starts as Jeff Bridges's picture, then is shared by him  and
Streisand before the focus  moves on her --an interesting progression. A
mathematician at Columbia University, Greg is addressed as Professor
Larkin. He should really be called Professor Dullski or, if he taught
literature, Professor Yawnesco. He knows and loves his stuff, even has a
new book out, but he bores his students to perdition. I have never seen
such a somnolescent or indifferent group outside some Hollywood high
school pictures. 
Bachelor Gregory is also a basket case in his private life. At 46 (I
give him the age of Bridges), he still gets terribly distracted by sex
-- and sex is everywhere, from a gorgeous redhead in his classroom's
front row to television where insects mate in educational programs and
so many products are sold through sex. (I waited in vain for the sound
track to come up with that vigorous old song "Everybody's Doing It.") 
Larkin is influencable with a vengeance. At a book-signing gathering, he
opens his address  with some flat academic humor. A beauty  (model Elle
MacPherson) walks in, sits down, silently but blatantly provokes him a
la Sharon Stone with her sex appeal. Gregory's talk becomes gibberish.
Very funny.
We learn that she is his latest ex-paramour and that he is unhappy with
the fact that all his relations with women fail because they revolve
around sex. His conclusion is that he ought to be looking for a kindred
soul and mind, minus the sex. 
Like the famous revue  "No Sex Please, We're British," the
mathematician's new slogan  could be "No Sex Please, I'm  Gregory." He
places an ad  ad in which he seeks only companionship and specifies
"Must have a Ph.D. and be over thirty-five. Physical appearance not
important."
The other thread of the plot deaks with two sisters, Claire (Rogers,"the
pretty one") and Rose (Streisand,"the smart one") .Claire spots the ad
and sneakily mails Greg the picture of Rose. She looks just right to
Greg.
Rose, by coincidence (well, it's only a movie) is also a Columbia
professor, of literature. As she readies herself in an awful dress for
Claire's wedding. Always a bridesmaid and never a bride, brainy,
lively,witty but without lasting relationships with men, she is a
perfect match for Gregory.
They and their minds meet, hit it off, develop an odd, platonic rapport
. They eventually marry, but always under the no sex strictures imposed
by Gregory and accepted by Rose, reluctantly as we shall see soon
enough, when Rose wants romance and what comes naturally. This leads to
complications and a transformation... 
The acting, broad but not too, with a huge assist from direction and
script keeps hitting the bull's eye. Jeff Bridges, never a looker, has
been a major, versatile talent. Think of "Bad Company,"" Fat
City,""Thunderbolt and Lightfoot,"" Hearts of The West,"" Starman," "
Nadine,"" Tucker,"
"The Fabulous Baker Boys,""Fearless." Streisand's great one-woman band
abilities are a given. Here, in odd ways, she may remind you  at times
of the still-moving "The Way We Were."
Mimi Rogers, who possesses the most interesting crooked mouth in
pictures, and her new husband Pierce Brosnan (of whom she gets quickly
tired), are pallid, superficial characters.This makes a contrast with
the personalities of the Gregory-Rose duo, lets Bridges and especially
Streisand bask in the spotlight. They deserve it.   
Lauren Bacall plays the mother of the two women with a combination of
chic, fading glamour, sure-of-herself presence and egotism, and motherly
limitations, notably her non-understanding of Rose. This incomprehensio
comes to an end in a long-delayed, moving scene that flirts dangerously
with maudliness but survives it.  Mother and daughter stop snipping and
sniping. They open their hearts as Rose comes out squarely with  her
complexes about her appearance. Here Streisand seems to be exorcising
her own demons.
With her refrain  "I raised two daughters, buried a husband,"  Bacall is
a Jewish mother, but one pushed neither into a cartoon or a caricature.
Overall, Jewishness in the film is not insisted upon. Sometimes it comes
through gently in details, like Rose's "Talk to me already."
Gags are in good supply and nicely timed, like Rose's showing Greg how
to capture his students' interest. There also humorous rather than
outright comic parts, such as Rose's astounding of Greg with her
comprehension of math. Better yet, the audience is rewarded with an even
larger number of subtle bits of business. Examples: the early sequence
about Claire's wedding is used for character portrayals and spares us
the actual ceremony; the talkative meanderings of Rose and Gregory in
which the discussions are amusing, novel and attention-grabbing but
always cut before they become cumbersome; the first semi-kiss of the
couple and Rose's wary reaction -- she pats Greg's back. There is much
more along those lines, with excellent details.  
Some weak areas do exist in the film, most of them papered over. When
Gregory drops in on Rose's huge, lively class, she is in the process of
charming and too manipulating her students with a discussion of love and
sex which rings phony. She gets far too personal in her "confessions,"
uses  medieval courtly love (adoration of the lady but no sex) in
sketchy ways, knows the name of every student in that crowded
amphitheater (!!!). The well over 50 prof fishes for the sympathy of
students in their 20s with hip language. About complete love she
exclaims: "When it does last, it feels fucking great!" The young
scholars applaud.
She also tells them that when you fall in love you hear Puccini. At
film's end Rose and Gregory, previously separated, are reunited in a
sequence out of old screwball comedies. We hear Puccini 's "Nessun'
dorma" but then, with the filmmakers clearly worried about this
cultural-musical reference becoming lost on most audiences, the finale
and end credits switch over to the couple's endless gyrations in the
street and the old cliche of a pop song pops up. Otherwise, the movie is
truly fresh.  Whether or not it is read closely as a throwback to
romantic comedies, as a part-feminist tract or whatever, it holds many
pleasures for any mature audience.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(TriStar)
Directed by     Barbra Streisand
Written by      Richard LaGravenese   
Cast            Barbra Streisand, Jeff Bridges, Lauren Bacall, Pierce
                Brosnan, Mimi Rogers, George Segal, Brenda Vaccaro
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    125 minutes
Reviewed at     Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (09NOV96)
     THE MIRROR HAS TWO FACES is a mess.  Babs' new movie is a tedious
exploration of a woman's appearance and her self-opinion therein,
disguised as an old-fashioned romantic comedy about two college
professors (Babs and Jeff Bridges) who enter into a chaste marriage
because "sex ruins everything," set in an indulgent fantasy world
populated by beautiful people like Elle Macpherson (as Bridges' ex-
girlfriend!) and Pierce Brosnan (as Babs' old beau!), and shot through
an endless series of hazy filters, or, perhaps, a year's worth of old
pantyhose.  The laughs are there, sometimes intended and sometimes not.
I howled as an over-pronounced saxophone (on the soundtrack) circled the
two during an intimate moment.  And how about that busy Marvin Hamlisch
score, that you half-expect Babs to break into song with?
     Mr. Bridges is great fun to watch as the button-downed, bow-tied
intellectual whose idea of a good time is bringing a spectral analyzer
to a Christmas concert.  (How much are those, anyway?) His character is
perfectly serious (and perfectly believable) when he says "I'm sure if
sex is something that interests you, I would provide that on occasion."
Also very funny are Lauren Bacall and Mimi Rogers, as Barbra's mother
and sister, respectively.  (George Segal and Brenda Vaccaro, in
supporting roles, are largely wasted.) As for Babs herself, well, it's
quite a stretch to believe her as an ugly duckling spinster.  Especially
given the care that she's taken to look good in every.  single.  frame.
Maybe if she had a fat suit, a la Eddie Murphy in THE NUTTY PROFESSOR?
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A nerdy College professor believes that the perfect relationship between a
man and a woman should be based entirely on matters other than physical
attraction and sex. He decides to prove this theory to himself by choosing a
physically unattractive woman as his companion. She also seems to agree with
his theory but ultimately falls into the traps of the human heart.
CRITIQUE:
Pleasant film with an interesting premise managed to keep me entertained
through all of its lengthy runtime, which is a little over two hours, with
some funny lines, original points of view on relationships, and a simple but
applicable musical score. One of the only problems that I had with this film
was the casting of Barbra Streisand as the "ugly ducking" woman.  I would have rather seen an actress that would really have been able
to alter herself much more for the ending, since I didn't find Barbra's
changes to be more than just cosmetic. And to show her exercising in padded
clothes, and then svelte in a tight black dress, is not a terribly
convincing way to fool us into believing that she'd lost weight. Other than
that, the film is fun to watch if you're interested in seeing this theory
put into practice (This exercise was quite frustrating to Mrs. JoBlo), some
fluffy romance, and an overly nerdy professor performance put forth by Jeff
Bridges. Pierce Brosnan also has a throwaway role in this movie, and Lauren
Bacall, despite her decent performance, showed me nothing worthy of all
those Oscar calls back in 1996.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Dudley Moore was originally cast in the role that went to George Segal.
"Creative differences" were cited for his reason for leaving.
This film is a remake of the 1958 French film LE MIROIR A DEUX FACES.

