Title
Review for Love & Human Remains (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Denys Arcand.
Cast: Thomas Gibson, Ruth Marshall, Matthew Ferguson, Cameron Bancroft, 
Joanne Vannicola, Mia Kirshner, Rick Roberts.
1995 - 99 minutes
Rated R (for violence, sexual situations, nudity, profanity, and drug use).
Reviewed June 15, 1999.
On the surface, director Denys Arcand's "Love and Human Remains" may appear 
to be yet another cliched, boring Gen-X comedy, but it is far from that. 
Taking a more noticable cue from someone such as Robert Altman ("Nashville," 
"Short Cuts"), the film chronicles the empty lives of seven young adults 
living in an unnamed Canadian city, all loosely connected in some way. But to 
spice things up even more, Arcand has also seemed to include a David 
Lynch-ian subplot that, no doubt, stands as a clever metaphor for AIDS. 
Based on the play, "Unidentified Human Remains and the True Nature of Love," 
by Brad Fraser, the film's roots center in on two roommates and ex-lovers, 
David (Thomas Gibson), a cynical, 30-year-old gay man who used to be an actor 
but has turned to being a waiter, and who firmly believes that there is no 
such thing as "love," opting instead for one night stands; and Candy (Ruth 
Marshall), a lonely book reviewer who hates almost everything she reads and 
desperately wants to find a lover, even though deep down she is in love with 
David. Back at the restaurant David works at, his 17-year-old busboy, Kane 
(Matthew Ferguson), begins to hang around him, clearly interested, attracted 
to, and cautious of, David's gay lifestyle. David's two best friends include 
the womanizing Bernie (Cameron Bancroft), who sleeps with practically a 
different woman each night, and Benita (Mia Kirshner), a friendly S&M 
dominatrix who gets people off by telling them urban legends, and who happens 
to be psychic. Meanwhile, Candy finds herself gaining, and experimenting 
with, two partners, a bartender (Rick Robert) and an admiring, caring 
lesbian, Jerri (Joanne Vannicola). Among all of these interwining character 
threads is a serial killer, who may or may not be one of these seven people, 
that has much of the city in a panic, murdering beautiful, vulnerable women 
and then stealing their earring by gruesomely tearing them off their earlobes.
"Love and Human Remains" is a largely effective, relevant motion picture, 
due, in part, because of the way director Arcand and screenwriter Brad 
Fraser, listen to each one of the characters. At first glance, any one of 
these people could be dismissed as unlikable, cruel, or weird, but very few 
of them actually are, as we are allowed to observe and learn about them, and 
the inner workings of their minds. Sure, David may seem hard-edged on the 
outside, constantly stating that "love" doesn't exist, but that facade is 
relatively easy to uncover to find a man who, just like Candy, longs to love 
and be loved by someone who really cares for him. He finds a glimmer of hope 
in Kane, but David is probably just a little too old for him, and Kane 
clearly has a lot of internal issues to work out with himself before they 
could even hope to start a relationship. The love Candy wants, however, comes 
to her relatively easily when, after having sex with Jerri, Jerri tells her 
that she passionately and deeply loves her. Too bad for Candy, then, since 
she realizes at this point that the whole thing was an awful mistake, since 
she now knows she isn't gay.
The dangers of getting AIDS is one of the major undercurrents flowing through 
the film, with both David and Candy very cautious about getting it. Even they 
aren't safe all of the time, as is proven by the serial killer (AIDS, get 
it?) who might be closer to these two characters than they think. Also, 
symbolizing their closed-up feelings on life and love, an unidentified cat is 
constantly standing outside of their apartment window, trying to get in and 
shield itself from the cold. The symbolism in the film could easily have come 
off heavy-handed, but they are not, fortunately, shoved down the viewers' 
throats, and are admittedly creative ideas that wholeheartedly work in spite 
of themselves. Without giving too much away, even when the climax becomes 
more or less a violent thriller, I was able to buy it because I had never 
seen a relatively serious and intelligent look at human relationships 
intercut with a serial killer subplot.
If all of the roles are mostly well-handled, the performances are mostly 
top-notch, headed by Thomas Gibson (currently starring on the TV series, 
"Dharma and Greg"), who is the epidome of perfect casting, both handsome and 
dark, savvy and brooding. Ruth Marshall is in every way his match on-screen, 
as a frustrated, weight-concious woman who realizes it is difficult to find 
love, and even when you do, it might turn out to be the wrong kind. Matthew 
Ferguson is striking as a teenager confused with his own sexuality, adding an 
appropriate mixture of curiosity and reluctancy to his unsure character. Mia 
Kirshner ("Exotica," "The Crow: City of Angels"), now a rising star, in one 
of her first film roles, somehow brings a touching quality to her memorable 
role, even though it is probably the most underwritten in the piece. Just 
from Kirshner's own acting assurance and facial expressions do we discover 
all about her, as a woman who works for a living as a dominatrix, but like 
everyone else, is very lonesome in her own life, finding a friend in only 
David. Cameron Bancroft and Rick Roberts, respectively, are fine in their not 
dissimilar roles as two lecherous slimeballs (who do not come in contact with 
each other once during the film). Last but certainly not least, Joanne 
Vannicola gives perhaps the most purely humane, understandable, and genuinely 
moving performance in the whole movie, mirroring that of Candy and David, as 
a schoolteacher who wants more than anything to be with Candy, but whose love 
is not returned. 
"Love and Human Remains" might have spent a little more time with the less 
fully-realized characters of Benita, Bernie, and the bartender, but on the 
whole, it is a one-of-a-kind film that takes a lot of courageous chances, 
story and character-wise, and also marked the impressive english-language 
directing debut of Arcand ("Jesus of Montreal"). The Canadian landscapes are 
painted with a grim forebodement, adding to the overall atmosphere of not 
only the murders, but the struggling relationships of the characters. In 
spite of the many positive critical reviews it garnered, "Love and Human 
Remains" did not gain the sort of notices it deserved upon U.S. release in 
1995, and is very much a worthwhile rental choice. If anything, you're sure 
to never see a Gen-X "comedy" like this one ever again.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Canada, 1993 
U.S. Availability: widely variable (1995) 
Running Length: 1:39 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Nudity, sex, profanity, violence) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Thomas Gibson, Ruth Marshall, Cameron Bancroft, Mia Kirshner, 
      Rick Roberts, Joanne Vannicola, Matthew Ferguson 
Director: Denys Arcand 
Producer: Roger Frappier 
Screenplay: Brad Fraser based on his play "Unidentified Human Remains 
            and the True Nature of Love" 
Cinematography: Paul Sarossy 
Music: John McCarthy 
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics 
     LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS, the first English-language feature from 
Canadian director Denys Arcand (JESUS OF MONTREAL), is a curious 
hodgepodge of drama, comedy, and murder mystery.  Its success is 
sporadic at best, but, too often, the film completely misses the mark.  
We are presented with seven characters, all interesting as individuals, 
who are jumbled together in a series of relationships which seem 
contrived and plotted.  Then there's a serial killer subplot that 
continuously undermines those things that LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS gets 
right. 
     At the center of this movie is David (Thomas Gibson), an ex-actor 
turned waiter who has contact, one way or another, with the six other 
characters.  David is a thirtyish gay man with an almost-religious 
disbelief in the existence of love.  "There's no such thing as love" 
might be his mantra -- he repeats it often enough.  David's roommate and 
ex-lover (he used to be straight) is Candy (Ruth Marshall), an emotional 
cripple desperately in search for any sort of love.  To that end, she's 
willing to try dating a bartender with a secret (Rick Roberts) and a 
lesbian schoolteacher she meets at a local gym (Joanne Vannicola).  One 
of David's closest male friends is Bernie (Cameron Bancroft), a hard-
worker who has sex with a different woman just about every night.  
Another mate is seventeen-year old Kane (Matthew Ferguson), a busboy who 
works with David, and is beginning to have fantasies about the older 
man.  Then there's Benita (Mia Kirshner), a psychic dominatrix who 
specializes in all sorts of kinky stuff -- like reading a client's mind 
before deciding how to please him.  Meanwhile, the entire unnamed 
Canadian city is being terrorized by a serial killer who, more than 
likely, is one of these people. 
     The acting in LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS is uniformly good, and results 
in several compelling characters.  Even Benita, the strangest of the 
bunch, attains a level of believability as a result of a fine 
performance by Mia Kirshner (this part is not unlike the one she took on 
in EXOTICA).  Nevertheless, this film illustrates that more than 
interesting people are needed to formulate a solid motion picture.  Brad 
Fraser's script (which he adapted from his off-Broadway play) is 
completely unconvincing when it comes to developing love or sex-based 
relationships (the platonic friendships are just fine).  Characters are 
forced into unnatural roles and emotions come to the surface too 
quickly.  In real life, relationships take time to build, but not in 
LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS.  Here, they sort of spring into existence in 
full blossom, and ring false as a result. 
     The story is further hampered by the need to incorporate a murder 
mystery.  Numerous red herrings highlight amateurish attempts to keep 
the audience guessing at the killer's identity.  The truth is actually 
pretty obvious despite the misdirection -- there are really only two 
legitimate suspects, and it's not hard to eliminate one of them.  Of all 
the things that don't work in the movie, this element strikes the most 
discordant note. 
     Although LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS is billed as a drama, it's real 
strength is its comedy.  With snappy one-liners and perfectly-timed 
longer sequences, the film is ripe with hilarious moments.  The humor 
functions as Arcand's lighter counterpoint to the dreary isolation 
suffered by his characters.  Now, if only the dramatic foundations had 
been better established...  The characters are there, as is the insight, 
but the situations aren't right, and that makes for a film that, while 
watchable, leaves the impression it should have been a whole lot better.  
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Christopher Null
     There's a little bit for everybody in LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS, but as
a whole, most people are likely to find this film somewhat daunting.  This
study of modern relationships is billed as a "dark comedy"--and I'm still
trying to determine whether the designation fits.
     Following the interactions of seven side-wardly mobile Canadians,
LOVE AND HUMAN REMAINS explores questions of love, misery, loneliness,
confusion, and the strange truth that all seem to be inexplicably present
at the same time.  The reality of this has been the subject of numerous
romantic comedies and the like, but I'm not sure I've ever seen the topic
handled quite this way.
     For one thing, these aren't your garden-variety characters.  David
(Thomas Gibson) is an ex-child actor turned waiter, recently accepting
that he's gay.  Candy (Ruth Marshall) is his roommate and ex-girlfriend, a
book reviewer struggling with her own emotional needs.  Benita (Mia
Kirshner) is a psychic dominatrix friend of David's who earns a living by
acting out the twisted fantasies of others.  And it gets stranger than
that--a lot stranger, in fact--to the point of tying in a subplot (the
"human remains" part) about a serial killer who takes an earring from each
of his victims.
     The fragmented storytelling style used in the film make for some
difficult to follow transitions, often a series of broken images which are
hard to relate to on a deeper level than the surface.  It ends up feeling
more like an underground theatrical piece than a movie (the film is
actually based on the screenwriter's (Brad Fraser) own play called
"Unidentified Human Remains and the True Nature of Love").  Fraser says
the film is based on actual events from his mid-20's.  Scary.
     Most of the acting is fair, and some of the comedy is good.  Thomas
Gibson has all the best lines, dryly expressing his cynicism better than I
could ever hope to do.  I'm still working on figuring out "the moral of
the story" in the film, a question to which I may never find an answer. 
Then again, maybe that's the moral.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Pedro Sena
"Showdown at Boot Hill" presents Charles Bronson doing what he does best: 
kicking ass.  Ever since I first became aware of Bronson, through the
"Death Wish" series, I'm always on the look-out for his films.  He has a
great screen presence, and you're always rooting for him.
In "Showdown at Boot Hill", Bronson plays a bounty hunter in the old West
who shows up at a small town to pick up a criminal.  The criminal refuses
to go, and draws his gun.  Of course, this being a Bronson movie, ol'
Chuck shoots him dead.  The only problem is this particular criminal had a
lot of friends, and nobody will admit it was actually him, thus preventing
Bronson from collecting his bounty.  So, he hangs around the town, waiting
for someone to come forward, while falling in love with the local spinster
in the process.
While there's nothing terribly original about the story, the Bronson's
performance more than makes up for it.  He plays a man who knows that he's
doing the right thing, but also knows that people around him mistrust his
motives.  Bounty hunters were not thought too highly of back then, but
somebody had to do it, I suppose.  
>From the instant he comes on screen, the audience is always on Bronson's
side.  We want him to succeed in his "mission", as it were, and we also
want him to find love with the lonely waitress at the local bar.  That's
what makes Bronson one of the true icons of American cinema.  He has that
rare quality that allows him to appear tough when he needs to, but also
sensitive around his friends and lovers.
Like Clint Eastwood, he's a true "man's man".  I only hope that he has not
given up on acting.  It would be a real shame if this legend were to die
without having won an Oscar.
