Title
Review for Playing by Heart (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Sean Connery, Gena Rowlands, Gillian Anderson, Angelina Jolie,
Ryan Phillippe, Dennis Quaid, Jon Stewart, Madeleine Stowe, Anthony
Edwards and Jay Mohr
Director-Willard Carroll
Rated PG
Miramax
Playing By Heart is ensemble romance at it's best. The story cuts
between numerous love stories; some surprising, some touching, and all
thoroughly engaging. The entire cast is in top form, as they all submit
memorable performances that each account for a significant piece of this
irresistible puzzle.
It's a real surprise to see how well director Willard Carroll juggles so
many sub-plots with entertaining ease. A large portion of the screen
time is dedicated to Paul (Sean Connery) and Hannah (Gena Rowlands), a
wealthy couple who have been together for 40 years, but have recently
been experiencing problems evoked by unpleasant memories. Secondly,
there is play director Meredith (Gillian Anderson), who is hesitant to
enter a relationship because of various reasons. She bumps into a
friendly architect (Jon Stewart) after she is crushed by a falling
bookcase, and the complications ensue from there. Then, there is the
story of Joan (Angelina Jolie) a young, street-wise girl who bumps into
the seemingly shy and reserved Keenan (Ryan Phillippe) at a night club.
The final romance centers around Gracie (Madeleine Stowe) and Roger
(Anthony Edwards), two lost souls looking for some escape from their
regular spouses.
But, not everything in Playing By Heart revolves around a love story. We
also follow Hugh (Dennis Quaid) through various social activities which
seem to prove he's a pathological liar. There is also the story of a man
dying from AIDS complications (Jay Mohr), and his supportive mother
(Ellen Burstyn) standing by his hospital bed. It is interesting in the
end when we find out that some of these stories are linked in some way
or another. But, we're so caught up in how every relationship develops
that we just accept everything in stride.
While every sub-plot has a few fundamental flaws, all are worthy of
sharing equal screen time. The romance that I found the most interesting
was the one shared by Jolie and Phillippe. The two are talented young
actors, and while they are handed the most challenging subject matter in
the movie, both handle it with a capable maturity. Connery and Rowlands
have the most amusing confrontations - brought on by her regrets of the
past and his tendency to blurt out a movie's entire plot and ruin any
surprises. All of the actors are marvelous. Connery (as always) manages
to captivate the viewer with every piece of dialogue, Anderson is highly
convincing even at such a stretch from her X-Files character, and Mohr
brings a tragic dilemma to believable life.
If there is one stand-out in the cast, however, it's Angelina Jolie.
Father Jon Voight appears to have passed down his acting talents,
because Jolie is a gifted and highly competent performer in every
detail. It's amazing how well the actress can make us feel for her
character, and even of other actors in the same scene. But, as I say,
everyone does a respectable job - especially with the limited screen
time they're given to prove themselves.
Playing By Heart moves swiftly, rarely stopping to examine the
relationships from a different perspective. This is a very good thing.
Any hopeless romantics are sure to be caught up in the antics from
minute one, but everyone should appreciate the all-star cast juggling
the brisk and enjoyable material. The script and dialogue are light as a
feather, but Carroll knows how to stage a scene to the most appealing
effect.
This is definitely a group effort if there ever was one. I am certainly
no sucker for romance (I have been known to object to a movie in which
nothing gets blown up), but Playing By Heart is a treat. For anyone
looking for a light, fluffy little way to spend a few hours, this
charmingly entertaining comedy will hit the spot. It certainly did for
me...and nothing even got blown up.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
         MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton
         http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
http://MovieThing.com/members/movies/MovieViews
Comments Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Jon Popick
In the opening scene of Playing By Heart (**), one character tells the
story of a musician friend that once profoundly said, `Talking about
love is like dancing about architecture.'  The next two hours, which are
totally devoted to talking about love, are more like having an Acme safe
repeatedly dropped on your head.
Like a Robert Altman film, Heart's story is compromised of several
vignettes about seemingly unrelated people that all end up being
connected in some way as the picture ends.  The trouble is that
writer/director Willard Carroll is not Robert Altman.  Instead, he has
created some of the most annoying characters this side of Hurlyburly.
Everyone is a whiny, shallow mope, which, despite the fantastic cast,
makes it hard to sympathize with even one of them.
Here's a quick breakdown of the losers:
Paul (Sean Connery) – an annoying old codger with a brain tumor who is
about to celebrate his 40th wedding anniversary to…
Hannah (Gena Rowlands) – Paul's annoying wife who still can't shake the
idea that her husband had an affair 25 years ago.
Gracie (Madeline Stowe) – an annoying hussy that cheats on her husband
with…
Roger (Anthony Edwards) – an annoying guy who feels guilty about
cheating on his wife.
Trent (Jon Stewart) – an annoying but successful architect that falls
for…
Meredith (Gillian Anderson) – an annoying divorcee who lost her husband
to another man.
Keenan (Ryan Phillippe) – an annoying blue-headed shy club-hopper that
finds himself inexplicably pursued by…
Joan (Angelina Jolie) – an annoying aspiring actress that can't seem to
shut up.
Hugh (Dennis Quaid) – an annoying drunk that tries to seduce Patricia
Clarkson, Nastassja Kinski and a drag queen with three different lies.
Mildred (Ellen Burstyn) – an annoying mother that has just traveled
across the country to see her son…
Mark (Jay Mohr) – an annoying bedridden guy that is dying of AIDS.
Okay, they aren't all that annoying, but I'm not too far off.  Jolie is
actually very good as the peppy Joan (she was honored by the National
Society of Film Critics for this role) and Phillippe shows some actual
depth and range after his summer debacle 54 (which I thought may have
been his I.Q. before seeing him in this film).
I don't know if this applies to everyone, but I found myself able to
relate only to characters that were close to my age (somewhere between
Keenan/Joan and Trent/Meredith, but closer to the former than the
latter).  But once the focus shifted to the older folks, my focus
shifted to the insides of my eyelids.

Author
Fontaine Lien
"Talking about love is like dancing about architecture."
"Playing by Heart" is movie with a very cute and promising premise: four
couples, seemingly unrelated, each deal with their relationship problems. 
In the end, it is discovered that they're all connected in some way.  Here's
a plot that's refreshing, somewhat original, and has a potential for
greatness.  For once, a movie has more *dialogue* than it has special
effects and gratuitous nudity.  But "Playing" is a few olives short of a
vodka martini.  
The least they could have done was keep us interested in the characters
long enough for the big "surprise" at the end, which the preview for the
movie all but gave away, so I was probably at a disadvantage.  Being
mysterious is fine, but you've got to have enough punch to keep the movie
running at a fair pace.  A damn shame, because aside from a few subtle
hints like "angerball," there really wasn't anything that gave the ending
away.
Of all the couples, only Angelina Jolie and Ryan Philippe's Joan and Keenan
have really grabbed my attention.  Even though Philippe was stiff as a
stick and Jolie didn't really "grow into" her character until the movie was
well underway.  And even then it felt like they were reciting their lines. 
But at any rate, the characters were the most developed: Here's a guy who
seems to have a lot of emotional baggage hidden inside, and a girl who's
very unabashed about expressing her feelings. I found myself wondering
whatever happened to Keenan, and whether this odd couple would ever get
together (whether I thought they were right for each other, on the other
hand, is an entirely different matter).  In contrast, I didn't really care for
the other couples.  Jon Stewart's Trent was played and written as a slick,
unlikable sleazebag, and Gillian Anderson's Meredith was a character who
developed solely out of her past (her unhappy marriage with Jay Mohr's
Mark, which we will deal with later).  Throughout the whole courtship the
problem was that Meredith supposedly had too many walls around her;
well, those walls came tumbling down a little too soon, too conveniently. 
Gillian Anderson's mellow, stoic performance as Meredith once again
confirmed my suspicion that she's most cut out for the role of Dana
Scully.   Or was it because Meredith was too similar to Scully?  I hope it
is the latter.  I never really understood Madeline Stowe / Anthony Edwards
/ Dennis Quaid triangle, partly because the film didn't take enough time to
explain their relationship.  The same with Sean Connery and Gena
Rowlands.  I'm not saying that the explanation was incomplete, or the
characters any less deserving of sympathy--but that we were given too
little to go on.  We've just gotten to know these characters at a certain
turning point in their lives, and it's just too bad that we aren't given the
chance to get more acquainted with them.  The whole other sideline with
Jay Mohr and Ellen Burstyn seemed unnecessary; sure, it made for a great
story, contributed a few good scenes, gave a few surprises at the end, but
it had nothing to do with the theme of the movie (dancing about
architecture, so to speak).  All in all, it was disappointing that only two
of the eight main characters succeeded in "being"; the rest in comparison
seemed like mere paper dolls cut out to serve the story's purpose.  Part of
the reason is because they were played with so little conviction: a well-
developed character needs good lines, good scenarios, and a good actor;
here the dialogue seemed to shoulder too much of the burden.  We were
constantly being hit over-the-head with monologues about the character's
problems, without a lot of acting to back it up.  The big obstacle: making
the characters three-dimensional before the big revelation deadline.  It
doesn't matter if a particular stage of the development was too hasty, we
have to move on because they all need to be happily together by the end of
two hours.  It's a shame to see how often an assembly of great actors go
to waste.
It might be confusing if I said that what could have made this story more
interesting is where the movie failed.  The premise was great: brief
glimpses into the lives of couples that we run into almost everyday,
gradually getting to know these couples, then reaching some sort of a
conclusion.  However, everything seemed to work against it. The snippets
started to become annoying when after each one we felt confused and
apathetic rather than interested.  There were a few scenes that were
noteworthy, but the movie as a whole seemed disjointed.  I don't want to
discourage the obviously very talented writer of this story by saying
(*snort*, like he'll ever read this) this, but I think the movie could have
been better with a few fix-ups.  As much as I rant about my disappoint,
the movie was satisfying in its attempt at deciphering the world of love
and make us sigh with contentment with its sappy-sweet ending.
"You can't treat people like you treat people and then say something
adorable like that."
*Highlight: Gillian Anderson giving Sean Connery a kiss.  Wasn't that
wonderful?
*The disgusting toothpaste kiss.  Ugh.
*"My mind has an endless capacity for useless information." -- Dude,
sounds like me.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Playing by Heart (1998)
Gillian Anderson, Ellen Burstyn, Sean Connery, Anthony Edwards, Angelina 
Jolie, Jay Mohr, Ryan Phillippe, Dennis Quaid, Gena Rowlands, Jon Stewart,
 Madeleine Stowe, Patricia Clarkson, Nastassja Kinski, Alec Mapa. Written 
and directed by Willard Carroll. 121 minutes.
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Playing by Heart" examines the relationships between 11 people, hopping 
back and forth between their lives until the end, when an event draws all 
of the characters to the same place at the same time. Writer/director 
Willard Carroll deserves points for ambition - - how many other artists 
making their second film would dare to try and synthesize Robert Altman 
and Neil Simon? Unfortunately, Carroll's reach far exceeds his grasp and, 
despite its first rate cast and some very well-crafted segments, "Playing 
by Heart" too often comes off like an ungainly, land-locked "Love Boat" 
episode with a glandular disorder.
Set in L.A., the sprawling production interweaves a half dozen storylines.
 An antisocial theater director (Gillian Anderson) is wary of an open-
hearted architect (Jon Stewart) who seems too good to be true. A brash, 
talkative club-hopper (Angelina Jolie) attempts to draw out a sullen 
cipher (Ryan Phillippe). An older couple (Gena Rowlands, Sean Connery) 
examines their lives together while trying to cope with past mistakes and 
the ravages of age. A man with a terribly sad expression (Dennis Quaid) 
travels from bar to bar, telling outrageous lies to a couple of women 
(Nastassja Kinski, Patricia Clarkson) and a drag queen (Alec Mapa) for no 
apparent reason. Two unhappy souls (Madeline Stowe, Anthony Edwards) 
carry on an affair in an anonymous hotel room. A mother (Ellen Burstyn) 
fusses over her son (Jay Mohr) as he lies in a hospital bed, enduring the 
final stages of AIDS.
That's a whole lot of story and Carroll doesn't manage it well. The film 
is choppy and, more often than not, matters feel merely bleak or mawkish 
rather than insightful. Stowe and Edwards' cheating hearts receive scant 
attention and, while Ellen Burstyn and Jay Mohr try very hard, their 
mother/son deathbed exchanges contain nothing we haven't seen in 
countless TV movies. 
As a couple who have been together long enough to weather any storm, Gena 
Rowlands and Sean Connery project a comforting air, despite being handed 
some of the film's worst dialogue. Connery, playing a gruff, but lovable 
Lou Grant type, fumbles badly when trying to present the character's 
playful side. One brief scene, showing the grand actor prancing about the 
house while imitating a puppy, is one of the more embarrassing images 
I've witnessed in a long time. 
Jon Stewart and Gillian Anderson fare much better in their tale of wary 
courtship. Anderson makes her naturally brittle nature work to her 
advantage, while Stewart thankfully keeps his character from becoming 
overly cute. Their sweet and sour relationship works nicely, due to the 
actors' deft handling of the material. Dennis Quaid is also compelling as 
the tortured liar. His vignettes with Nastassja Kinski, Patricia Clarkson 
and Alec Mapa are among the film's best.
But the real scene-stealers are Angelina Jolie and Ryan Phillippe, a 
genuinely engaging odd couple. Jolie, who resembles Geena Davis in looks 
and spirit, has a wonderfully blithe quality. She consistently brightens 
the screen in a confident, star-making performance. And Phillippe, a very 
serious young actor whose intensity often works against him, hits just 
the right notes here, effectively balancing the borderline surliness of 
his character with a welcome sense of vulnerability. 
Willard Carroll should have picked one or two storylines and focused 
predominately on them. By trying to give equal time to so many melodramas,
 he leaps around excessively, diluting the impact of even the strongest 
plots. When the film finally reaches its grand finale, which ties things 
up a bit too neatly, the pay-off feels merely clever, rather than 
revelatory. After two hours of zigzagging stories and an overabundance of 
maudlin dialogue, just reaching the conclusion is a relief. Still, for 
all of its awkwardness and excess, "Playing by Heart" has enough good 
moments to excuse most of its failings. Except, of course, for Sean 
Connery's puppy impression.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Willard Carroll.
Cast: Angelina Jolie, Gena Rowlands, Sean Connery, Gillian Anderson, 
Ryan Phillippe, Dennis Quaid, Jon Stewart, Madeleine Stowe, Ellen 
Burstyn, Anthony Edwards, Jay Mohr, Patricia Clarkson, Natassja Kinski.
1998 - 121 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed February 8, 1999.
"Playing by Heart" is an always-entertaining and fairly thoughtful film 
on the subject of love, and how everyone hopes for it in one way or 
another. Obviously borrowing the structure of a Robert Altman film, such 
as 1975's incomparable classic "Nashville" and 1993's "Short Cuts," 
"Playing by Heart" does not reach the overall ambitiousness of those two 
pictures, but is nicely done all the same.
In Altmanesque fashion, "Playing by Heart" introduces us to various 
people one at a time living in L.A. and, switching back and forth 
between them, their personal stories begin to play out. Inevitably, 
these seemingly unconnected characters will somehow come together during 
the climax, and also not surprising is that the several stories vary in 
quality.
By far the most effective and involving, and thankfully the one that is 
given the most screen time, involves Joan (Angelina Jolie), a talkative, 
witty college student who, one night, meets Keenan (Ryan Phillippe), a 
good-looking and quiet clubhopper. Although she strikes up a 
conversation with him, and thus begins to pursue him, he blatantly 
states to her that he doesn't date, even though he obviously likes her 
very much as well. Heartfelt and realistic, this section of the picture 
is also helped considerably by the wonderful performances from the 
effervescent Jolie, who definately has "rising star" written across her 
forehead, and Phillippe, who gives his best performance to date. 
Whenever these two wholly original characters appeared on the screen, 
things would suddenly brighten up a notch, and I always looked forward 
to seeing them in their next scene.
Also highly moving, if not given quite as much time as I would have 
liked, concerns Mildred (Ellen Burstyn), who opts to stay with her son, 
Mark (Jay Mohr), in the hospital where he is dying from AIDS. Gradually, 
several truths are let out in the open between mother and son, and the 
sequences between them were handled very well by the performers, 
particularly Burstyn, who has a heartbreaking scene towards the end 
where she holds her ailing grown child for the last time. 
Third on the success meter, and also intelligently written and often 
funny, deals with lonely, but scared, thirtysomething Meredith (Gillian 
Anderson), a theatrical director who is afraid to get involved in a 
romantic relationship, even when she meets the "too-good-to-be-true" 
Trent (Jon Stewart). With this film, Anderson was so affirmed and 
believable in her character that I did not think of "The X-Files," in 
which she stars, once. Stewart also proves he is definately someone to 
watch, a comedian who in the last two months has had two dramatic 
feature roles, the other being as a threatening science teacher in "The 
Faculty." Adding a great deal of comedic support to this story, as well, 
must go to Meredith's huge dog who, in one amusing sequence, jumps up on 
Trent revealing that he is as big as a grown man. "Suddenly, I am 
feeling a bit inadequate," Trent slyly quips.
In the fourth plotline, Dennis Quaid stars as Hugh, a man who, night 
after night, drifts from bar to bar making up elaborate fictional 
stories about his wife and children to tell to women (including Patricia 
Clarkson and Natassja Kinski). Although slight, a few interesting 
moments arise, including one scene where, at the end of his ropes, he 
goes to a gay bar posing as a homosexual and lets out his feelings to an 
understanding transsexual. 
Out of all of the characters, the two matriarchs are Hannah (Gena 
Rowlands) and Paul (Sean Connery), a married couple about to celebrate 
their 40th wedding anniversary, coming to terms with Paul's recently 
discovered brain tumor and questions of his fidelity twenty-five years 
before. I was never really able to get involved in this particular 
story, even though, once again, many brightly written moments were able 
to seap through now and again, including an on-going joke about how Paul 
is always foolishly giving away the endings of movies Hannah happens to 
be watching on television. Rowlands is one of the biggest talents among 
her elder peers, and she is able to bring a great deal of humanity to 
her underwritten role. Likewise for Connery, who has made his first 
serious film in a long time (I'm sure he would like to forget that "The 
Avengers" ever happened).
Among all of these alternating characters, the only story that is a 
total waste, has to do with Gracie (Madeleine Stowe), a 40-ish woman who 
constantly is meeting a man (Anthony Edwards) at a hotel and indulging 
in a strictly sexual relationship, despite both of them being married. 
Luckily, this story only very sporadically appears, so it doesn't really 
affect the film as a whole even though I am not quite sure why it wasn't 
just completely scrapped. Stowe can be a wonderful actress, and is saved 
from being all-in-all wasted due to an earnest, somewhat-redeeming scene 
during the epilogue, in which all eleven main characters are revealed to 
be somehow interconnected (although I will not dare give away the exact 
details).
Even with its occasionally uneven structure, "Playing by Heart" 
ultimately turned out to in no way be a disappointment because when the 
film was good, it absolutely sparkled, thanks to the fast and quirky 
dialogue and the mature way in which the characters were handled. The 
Joan and Keenan story, especially, was good enough that an entire film 
could have easily just been about those two. In the first scene, Joan 
reminisces about a man she once knew who told her, "talking about love 
is like dancing about architecture." Tellingly, "Dancing about 
Architecture" was the original title of "Playing by Heart," but the line 
remains to stand for a lot about the way we, as human beings, all 
naturally yearn to love and be loved, even during its unavoidable ups 
and downs. 

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "PLAYING BY HEART" (Miramax Films)
Someone once said that "writing about music is like dancing
about architecture" - meaning it cannot be done - and film-maker
Willard Carroll was so taken with that sentiment that he called this
funny, poignant drama "Dancing About Architecture" until the MPAA
decreed that the title might be confused with "Dancing at Lughnasa."
"Playing by Heart" follows multiple characters from various
generations and lifestyles as they search for love in contemporary Los
Angeles during an eight day-and-night span.  Gena Rowlands and Sean
Connery head the cast as a mature couple approaching their 40th
wedding anniversary, and they're so superb together that it's a wonder
no one ever thought of teaming them before. Their story is intercut
with several others that are less interesting. Gillian Anderson is an
insecure stage director who has been so unlucky in love that she's
terrified of taking another chance.  Madeline Stowe and Anthony
Edwards are embroiled in a steamy extra-marital affair. Ellen Burstyn
coming to terms with her son, Jay Mohr, who is dying of AIDS.  Dennis
Quaid is a drunk, telling sob stories to Nastassja Kinski, Patricia
Clarkson, and even a compassionate drag queen, Alec Mapa. And sassy,
spunky Angelina Jolie of Generation X finds herself flirting with a
surly bystander, Ryan Phillippe, as she splits up with her boyfriend
by phone in a nightclub.  Reminiscent in structure of Alan Rudolph's
"Welcome to L.A." and Robert Altman's "Short Cuts," it has the benefit
of intelligent dialogue, Vilos Zsigmond's superb camerawork and John
Barry's evocative score; predictably, some storylines work better than
others. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Playing by Heart" is
an engaging ensemble 6, offering sentimental entertainment based on
the many faces of love.

Author
Greg King
PLAYING BY HEART (M).  
(Miramax/Village Roadshow)
Director: Willard Carroll
Stars: Gillian Anderson, Ellen Burstyn, Sean Connery, Anthony Edwards, 
Angelina Jolie, Jay Mohr, Ryan Phillippe, Dennis Quaid, Gena Rowlands,
Jon Stewart, Madeleine Stowe, Patricia Clarkson
Running time: 121 minutes.
"Talking about love is like dancing about architecture," says
one of the characters of this enjoyable romantic comedy.  This remark
captures the elusive nature of love, and is the driving force behind
this wonderful comedy/drama from writer/director Willard Carroll (the
little seen Tom's Midnight Garden, The Runestone).  In love there are
few rules, and it's probably better to trust the heart rather than the
head.
Playing By Heart follows several characters as they blunder
their way through life, looking for love and happiness in modern day
Los Angeles.  Some of the couples are re-exploring and testing the
boundaries of long term relationships, while others, who have been
hurt and scarred by previous unhappy experiences, are tentatively
entering new relationships.
Married couple Hannah (Gena Rowlands) and Paul (Sean Connery)
are having their differences over a past infidelity which painfully
resurfaces.  Somehow this brings them closer together and reaffirms
the love they have shared for the past forty years.  Mildred (Ellen
Burstyn) is reunited with her estranged son Mark (Jay Mohr), who is
dying of AIDS.  Theatre director Meredith (X Files' Gillian Anderson)
has been burned too often in previous relationships and is unsure of
how to handle the attention of handsome architect Trent (Jon Stewart).
Bored housewife Gracie (Madeleine Stowe) finds her affair with Roger
(ER's Anthony Edwards) is losing its attraction and decides to end it.
Compulsive liar Hugh (Dennis Quaid) does the rounds of singles bars
and night clubs, approaching numerous women with fascinating and heart
breaking stories.  Joan (Angelina Jolie, recently seen in Pushing Tin)
is attracted to the solitary and distant Keenan (Ryan Phillippe), whom
she meets in a disco while on the rebound from a previous
relationship.
The film's structure resembles that of maverick director
Robert Altman (Nashville, Short Cuts, etc), as the various characters
and disparate narrative threads are eventually brought together in
surprising but rewarding fashion.  Carroll's assured direction guides
the film as it weaves its way through the various strands, balancing
heartbreak and pain with joy and optimism.  Some of the story threads
work better than others, which ultimately gives the film a slightly
unbalanced feel.  The most satisfactory and involving story centres on
Joan and Keenan, and has an aching quality and an emotional honesty.
Despite some cliched treatment, the Meredith and Trent story line also
works well.
The writing is strong, intelligent and insightful, and Carroll
provides his players with some wonderfully witty lines.  In his most
ambitious film to date, Carroll has assembled a superb ensemble cast
to bring the characters to life.  Connery plays a role closer to his
own age for a change and gives a gruff but surprisingly touching and
comic performance.  Anderson brings touching vulnerability and pain to
her solid performance.  Jolie brings plenty of spark, spunk and sex
appeal to her flamboyant performance.
Most of the film takes place at night, but, as the characters
overcome their fears and reservations, Carroll moves the action into
the brightness of day, which somehow adds warmth.  Playing By Heart is
an affecting and touching evocation of the power of love, and seems
remarkably devoid of the usual cynicism.  It will make the heart thump
a bit faster, the spirits soar, and, yes, for the more romantic and
sentimental among us, the tear ducts well.

Author
Joy Wyse
Playing by Heart has something for everyone.  There's a love story for
just about every age of viewer.   Unfortunately, that's also its main
drawback.  If you identify with one couple, you'll probably be bored or
upset by another one of the stories.  It does show how much the problems
facing lovers have changed.  The oldest couple, played by Sean Connery and
Gena Rowlands, fell in love and grew older without the issues facing the
younger lovers.   Their main concern centers on a possible affair that he
may have had numerous years before.    Most of the younger couples must
face AIDS or homosexuality, all too prevalent in today's society.  
Remarks have been made that the dialogue wasn't real; that no one really
speaks that way.   Strange because Connery and Rowlands spoke just like my
husband and I speak.  In fact, there is at least one `joke' that we
created over 40 years ago and have used often every since.  It is when
Sean says that "he never knew what true happiness was until he got
married….then it was too late!'
As to the younger couples, I couldn't help wonder what some of them saw
in each other.  Angelina Jolie (Jon Voight's daughter) stands out as a
free spirited, fun-loving club-goer.  Her initial attraction to Ryan
Phillippe seems odd.  He seems like such a loser that I questioned whether
she would have given him a second glance.  As she got to know him, he does
become more loveable.
The most desirable of the guys has to be Jon Stewart.  Again, I wonder
what he saw in Gillian Anderson enough to endure the pangs of the courting
process.  Randy Quaid's role is bizarre and seems a strange choice for
him.  Anthony Edwards' scenes are mostly in bed or the bedroom, and he
isn't all that likeable.  There's not enough nudity or sex scenes to
disturb anyone.
A different type of love story is the one between Ellen Burstyn and Jay
Mohr as a mother and son.  It is filled with memorable moments.  The
`game' that they play might be beneficial to a lot of people who are
hiding deep dark secrets in their lives.
It's not a great movie.  It's not a bad movie.  I wouldn't mind seeing it
again, but I'll probably wait until it's on free TV.  I give it a B-.

Author
Christopher Null
     Every year like clockwork there's a film that tries to intertwine a
dozen characters into one monster story: SHORT CUTS (1993), TWENTY BUCKS
(1993), PULP FICTION (1994), 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY (1996), to name but a
few.  1998's entry crept in under the wire: PLAYING BY HEART... and it's
finally in wide release.
     Now on its third (and worst) title in as many months, HEART follows
about a dozen Los Angelenos en route to love and/or misery.  Among them
are Anderson and Stewart as a couple of silly/wacky would-be lovers;
club kids Jolie and Phillippe; ice queen Stowe (having an affair with
Edwards); and wedded veterans Rowlands and Connery.
     The script relies on two things: making you think hard about how
all these people fit together (it's actually quite obvious after 30
minutes, though most of the half-wits in my audience were vocalizing
"Hmmmm..." and "OH!" frequently).  Second, of course, is MAKING YOU
CRY.  Trying to, anyway.  If you're like my wife, the touching poetry
read by Burstyn to dying son Mohr will have you all aflutter.  If you're
like me, you'll think it's cute but overbearingly manipulative.  Perhaps
that's why 85 percent of our audience was female....
     None of this is meant to say that PLAYING BY HEART is a bad film. 
It's actually pretty funny, and while some actors (Anderson, Jolie,
Stewart) are better than others (Mohr--beyond over the top), and some
are just plain bizarre (Quaid), the film works well as a whole and is
lively from start to finish.  Hell, I can't imagine any other director
getting Connery to do an impression of a slobbering lap dog (really).
     While most other intricate follow-the-plot movies do it better,
HEART is one that's worth a look, especially if you're into that weepy
sorta thing.
Director: Willard Carroll
Producer: Willard Carroll, Meg Liberman, Thomas L. Wilhite
Writer: Willard Carroll
Starring: Gillian Anderson, Ellen Burstyn, Sean Connery, Anthony
Edwards, Angelina Jolie, Jay Mohr, Ryan Phillippe, Dennis Quaid, Gena
Rowlands, Jon Stewart, Madeleine Stowe
http://www.miramax.com:8888/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=1&midStr=969
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Kong
With thousands, perhaps millions, of scripts flying around Hollywood for a
script to be produced there needs to be an ingenious twist. Playing By
Heart has one of these ingenious twist to it. If I reveal it, it'll spoil
the film.
Playing By Heart starts off spinning threads of stories with many different
characters. Unlike the film I saw last week, The Thin Red Line, where too
many characters killed the film, Playing By Heart uses the abundant amount
of characters to draw us in. At its heart, the movie is a series of
blossoming relationships. The film focuses on the stories of four women
known only by their first names. Meredith (Gillian Anderson), Joan
(Angelina Jolie), Gracie (Madeleine Stowe), and Hannah (Gena Rowlands) are
the women that the story focuses on.
Meredith is being pursued by an architect, Trent (Jon Stewart). Joan is
pursuing a man that she met at a dance club, Keenan (Ryan Phillippe).
Gracie is having an affair with a man (Anthony Edwards). And Hannah is
trying to straighten up a marriage with her husband of 40 years, Paul (Sean
Connery). There is also a story line about a dying man (Jay Mohr) and his
reconciling with his mother.
What I like about the script by Willard Carroll is that it is able to keep
us interested in almost all of these stories and he does it in such a way
that we are rewarded at the end of the film. Sure, a bit of it is quite
predictable, but that was part of the fun of watching this film. There is
one story line that didn't really fit well, or was not as interesting as it
could have been, and that was Gracie's story line. But, that is a small
complaint about a well-written script. Kudos to Carroll for putting
together a fun script. Carroll also takes up the directing duties with
Playing By Heart and does well at it also.
The performances to look for, and there are lots because of the ensemble
cast, are Gillian Anderson, Angelina Jolie, Gena Rowlands, and Sean
Connery. It was nice to see Anderson do something substantial that has
nothing to do with aliens or government conspiracies. I love her as Agent
Scully, but it is great to see Anderson expanding her horizons and taking
other roles. Jolie does well, she has almost the same role as she did in
Hackers, but this time around the role is softer and requires more emotion.
Jolie handles it well. Rowlands who was the standout performance in Hope
Floats turns in a wonderful performance in Playing By Heart. And Connery,
who seems to be doing a lot more low profile roles, is marvelous in this
film. It was disappointing to see him in the awful Avengers and this role
is more than enough to help me forget about his performance in Avengers.
Playing By Heart is one of those low profile films that get released
without a lot of push from the studios and may get lost in the shuffle.
But, I enjoyed the film immensely and left the theatre with a smile. Don't
Miss Playing By Heart in the theatres. And let me know if by the end of the
film you have all the threads connected. I was able to guess most of them,
but missed on big one.
[Rated R for some sexuality and language. Running Time: 121 Minutes]
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
Originally entitled DANCING ABOUT ARCHITECTURE (i.e. "Talking about love is
like dancing about architecture"), but changed because it sounded too much
like the recent box-office dud DANCING AT LUGHNASA, this film slaps together
a stunning cast of Hollywood names, playing interesting and well-written
characters, within a vignettes-styled plot arrangement a la Robert Altman.
PLOT:
Follow the lives of several couples falling in and out of love, finding
themselves, regaining a clearer understanding of the people that they are,
and who they want, and appreciating the fine emotional art of love.
CRITIQUE:
Charmingly effective romantic drama, this film offers insight into various
types of relationships, presents us with interesting characters and
excellent performances from the cast, and scratches beneath the surface of
love and its many complex subtleties. How do people fall in love? Why do
people fall out of love? How do people fall back into love, once they've
been hurt and left to join the Lonely Hearts Club? All of these questions
and more, are touched upon in this film, within several types of variant
relationships.
Meet a hip, young couple going through their first date. A divorcee
attempting to date again after her many failed relationships. A married
woman "finding herself" while cheating on her husband. A husband letting go
of his inhibitions. An older couple dealing with a past "love" of the man, a
secret recently uncovered. A son dying from AIDS, joined by his mother at
the hospital. There are many nuances to this picture, and many ideas and
quotes to which we could all relate, but more importantly, there is
diversity. Diversity of relationships helped me and my gang of friends enjoy
this film on many levels. Some related to the younger couples' issues.
Others with the married. There's a little bit of everything for everyone in
here. And I would bet dollars to donuts that if I were to watch this film
again in a year, I would relate myself to yet another predicament. Just like
love itself, this movie is distinct and appreciated by all on many different
levels.
The actors in this film are all also very, very good. Sean Connery is solid
as the older man with some issues to resolve, as is Gena Rowlands, as the
aging wife with trepidations. Jolie comes out of this film a star with a
great performance, while Philippe is as pretty-boy as ever. Anderson leaves
Scully far behind with her wonderful portrayal of a damaged woman trying to
re-ignite her love life, opposite a surprisingly admirable performance by
former talk-show host, Jon Stewart. Even Dennis Quaid manages to step
outside of his overacting shoes in this film, and offers a convincing show
of a man lost within his own imagination. The only piece of this puzzle
which left me somewhat detached, was the part surrounding Jay Mohr, the man
dying from AIDS, and his mother, Ellen Burstyn. The actors were fine, but
somehow, the piece seemed out of place within the realm of everything else.
The ending of this film was also a little too saccharine for me, but I guess
that's just Hollywood. This film is actually a lot like YOUR FRIENDS AND
NEIGBORS (5.5/10) and HAPPINESS (4.5/10) in concept and style, but its
complete anthesis in regards to character relatibility and likeness. The
characters in those films were too unique and inhuman for anyone to care, as
opposed to this film, which offers rich and believable characters, living
real lives and talking about real issues in today's relationships.
All in all, this movie offers many interesting characters, talking and
living genuine and engaging love lives, wonderful performances by its solid
cast, too sweet of an ending, but an enjoyable and rewatchable movie
nonetheless.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
According to a story in the London Sunday Mirror, Sean Connery asked for
only $60,000 for his role in this movie, as compared to his usual fee of $14
million, because he liked the script so much. On top of that, he convinced
his co-stars (including Gena Rowlands, Gillian Anderson, Ellen Burstyn, et
al.) to do the same.
This is director/writer Willard Carroll second real foray into the world of
"adult films". Before this, he had written and produced many children's
movies.
Gillian Anderson stands 5'2.
Angelina Jolie's full name is Angelina Jolie Voight. She is actor Jon
Voight's daughter. She has trained and performed at the Lee Strasberg
Theatre Institute. She divorced actor Jonny Lee Miller of TRAINSPOTTING
(8.5/10) fame in 1997. They were married in 1995.
Actor Ryan Phillippe's full name is Matthew Ryan Phillippe. He stands 5'9,
and spent his childhood in New Castle, Delaware. His acting career started
on TV's "One Life to Live". He portrayed daytime television's first gay
teenager.
Jon Stewart's full name is Jonathan Stewart Leibowitz.
This film was originally entitled IF THEY ONLY KNEW and DANCING ABOUT
ARCHITECTURE.
Watch for movie posters from SWINGERS (8.5/10), CHASING AMY (7/10) and THE
TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE (8/10) at the movie theatre where the characters of
Joan and Keenan go on their first date.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"You can't talk about love," Joan (Angelina Jolie) tells us in the
opening to PLAYING BY HEART.  "Talking about love is like dancing about
architecture."  (The film's original title was DANCING ABOUT
ARCHITECTURE, but they were forced into changing it before its release
since the title was deemed too close in name to DANCING AT LUGHNASA.)
The characters, who appear on a virtual revolving stage, do exactly that
-- talk incessantly, in excessively "clever" monologues, about love.
Pairs of actors deliver most of the speeches, but the actors frequently
sound like they are addressing the audience and not each other.
PLAYING BY HEART has a star-studded cast (Gillian Anderson, Madeleine
Stowe, Anthony Edwards, Ryan Phillippe, Gena Rowlands, Sean Connery,
Dennis Quaid, Ellen Burstyn, Jay Mohr, Jon Stewart, Patricia Clarkson
and Nastassja Kinski), but it would give too much away to describe even
their relationships.  Some of them are sleeping with others, some are
related by marriage, and some are acquaintances that meet in bars.  The
story tries to keep their interrelationships hidden as long as possible.
The story switches every few minutes between the seemingly disjoint
stories in the same way that the old Carousel of Progress at Disneyland
kept rotating the audience to a new stage.  Eventually and predictably,
the movie, written and directed by Willard Carroll, brings all of the
disparate pieces together like a jigsaw puzzle that is solved,
miraculously, by dropping all of the pieces on the floor.  There is only
one true surprise in the story's resolution, which does provide some
much-needed humor in an otherwise sappy script.
This same basic plot format worked successfully in Robert Altman's SHORT
CUTS, but PLAYING BY HEART doesn't have the same intelligent level of
writing as SHORT CUTS.
Looking handsomer every year, Sean Connery plays the male half of the
older couple in the play -- oops, I mean movie, although it certainly
feels like a play.  Gena Rowlands plays his wife.  They have agreeable
little arguments in which he says things like, "There isn't anything to
talk about; of course there is, but I don't want to talk about it."
As a husband named Hugh, Dennis Quaid plays the strangest character.  He
goes around bars making up horrible stories as a way to hit on women by
gaining their sympathy.  One time he claims that, while drunk, he killed
his wife and child in a car accident, which is certainly one of the
strangest come-ons ever.  If a drunk came to your table claiming to have
recently killed his family while drinking, would you invite him to stay?
Like most of the movie, things are transparently not what they appear to
be on the surface.  And by Hugh's second fake story, you can begin to
see what is going on.  Whether you care or not, given the cloying level
of the pseudo-sophisticated dialog, is questionable.
"I'm better at all the lies I've manufactured than the lies I'm living,"
Hugh confesses.  The cynical and melancholy movie wants to be romantic
and message-rich, but comes across instead as stilted and dishonest as
Hugh's barroom prevarications.
PLAYING BY HEART runs 2:01.  It is rated R for profanity, sexual
situations and mature themes and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films/Intermedia Films
 Director:  Willard Carroll
 Writer:  Willard Carroll
 Cast: Gillian Anderson, Angelina Jolie, Madeleine Stowe,
Anthony Edwards, Ryan Phillippe, Gena Rowlands, Sean
Connery, Dennis Quaid, Ellen Burstyn, Jay Mohr, Jon
Stewart, Patricia Clarkson, Nastassja Kinski
   Life must be easier in cultures with extended families and
arranged marriages.  In the U.S., which is overrun with
freedom of selection, couples can't get their love lives
together.  The very overchoice available here tempts some
women and men to gather up partners who they feel will
complete them while it invites others to do what they can to
avoid the hunters.  Willard Carroll, whose only other directing
credit is, logically enough, for a horror film ("The Runestone"-
-about an unearthed stone buried in North America by
Norsemen), assembles a group of people with shaky
relationship histories, mixes 'em up for eight days of
fireworks, and then allows us to sit back and watch the
sparks fly.  
   "Playing By Heart" has quite a bit going for it.  Foremost is
the crackerjack cast, headed by Sean Connery and Gena
Rowlands--who have never before worked together and give
you the impression that they have indeed been married for
forty years.  It's a handsome production, displaying a Los
Angeles that's free from dregs, drugs and decadence, a
picturebook-pretty town whose characters live in homes that
seem to spring to life from the pages of Architectural Digest. 
Finally the film evokes some suspense in its audience, who
will wonder throughout how these disparate people are
related and will be astonished at how well director Carroll
brings them together in his final scenes.
  Its principal flaw is its disjointedness. Until Carroll shows the
affiliation of the eleven people in various stages of
connection, he imparts the impression that he's telling six
wholly separate stories.  The narrative is not helped by Pietro
Scalia's disjointed editing.  You could swear that Scalia is
cutting away from scenes in mid-sentence even if he is not
quite that intrusive.  His transitions are so abrupt that
"Playing By Heart" resembles a collage of six different films
cemented together to demonstrate different takes on the
subject of love to a Cinematography 101 class at NYU.
   Although Robert Altman, the premiere director for movies
of this nature, is not credited as Carroll's mentor, "Playing By
Heart" looks as though it were cloned from Altman's mosaic
"Short Cuts."  That picture takes place as well in southern
California, making good use of a similarly sublime cast,
benefitting as "Heart" does not from an adaptation of the
great Raymond Chandler's short stories.  Altman's people are
a more entertaining lot, featuring one phone-sex purveyor
who feeds her baby while playing her trade.  Carroll's people
seem to have no larger-than-life problems but are rather
afflicted with some routine dilemmas, and in the case of the
eldest couple a particularly silly one blown up to divorce-sized
proportions but a most undiplomatic fellow.
   The film had a working title "Dancing About Architecture,"
taken from a quote by one of its participants that "talking
about love is like dancing about architecture."  That may be
so, but Carroll's people are out to prove otherwise. 
Examining the plight of the sixty-something Paul (Sean
Connery) and his wife of forty years Hannah (Gena
Rowlands), Carroll lays out a marriage of a couple who are
doing quite well, living in a lavish, capacious home in which
Hannah regularly tapes her TV cooking show.  Their union is
on the verge of a rupture by a vivid discussion of a link that
Paul had a quarter century ago.  Rather than laugh off the
near-affair, Paul insists on dredging up the passionate feeling
which his brief liaison evoked in him, causing unnecessary
harm to his lengthy union.  By contrast, the youngest couple--
party girl Joan (Angelina Jolie) and her new discovery
Keenan (Ryan Phillippe)--are almost defeated before they
start because the mysterious young man, a frequent guest at
the local disco, insists "I don't date."  Dennis Quaid has his
moments as a flagrant liar, Hugh, who visits bars to tell
women the most egregiously far-fetched stories about the
wife he "lost."  Only one of his listeners, a transvestite
(played winningly by the cast's relatively unknown Alec
Mapa), sees right through him.  Add a dreary affair between
a married man, Roger (Anthony Edwards) and a woman who
wants to keep the relationship free of baggage, Gracie
(Madeleine Stowe); and perhaps the most complex attempt at
connecting--between a resisting theater director, Meredith
(Gillian Anderson) and a pursuing Trent (Jon Stewart)--and
you have your pot pourri of romantic possibilities.  In a
seemingly unrelated story, one which deals with maternal,
rather than romantic, love, a tearful mother, Mildred (Ellen
Burstyn) is confronted by her son who is dying of AIDS, Mark
(Jay Mohr) and who insists that his mom tell him the truth
about her marriage before he dies.
   The film is occasionally witty, with mismatched characters
going about their lives as though their strings are being pulled
by Neil Simon.  If you're willing to go with the warmed-over
sentimentality and unoriginal situations, you'll be grandly
entertained by some of Hollywood's accomplished
performers.  The movie would have worked better if it were
structured more like Arthur Schnitzler's classic tale of love,
"La Ronde," which is enjoying an adaptation currently on
Broadway.  In that theater piece, the scenes interlock with
one another: two characters appear in each and one of these
moves into the next to afford a link.  Nor did Schnitzler need
to rely on five large dogs and a one-eyed cat to show how
human lives are, by contrast, all too complicated.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:   Willard Carroll
Cast:  Gillian Anderson, Angelina Jolie, Madeleine Stowe, Anthony
Edwards, Ryan Phillippe, Gena Rowlands, Sean Connery, Dennis Quaid,
Ellen Burstyn, Jay Mohr, Jon Stewart, Patricia Clarkson, Nastassja
Kinski
Screenplay:  Willard Carroll
Producers:  Willard Carroll, Meg Liberman, Thomas L. Wilhite
Runtime:   121 min.
US Distribution: Miramax
Rated R:  language
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Angelina Jolie plays the most interesting character in Playing by
Heart, a young woman named Joan.  In the first scene of the film, she
says, "Talking about love is like dancing about architecture."  The
title of this film was, in fact, Dancing about Architecture.  I can't
imagine why anyone wanted to change it, for the previous title is far
more interesting and memorable than the current one.  In addition, the
first and last scenes require the original title to make sense.  But the
quote still sums up the film effectively:  Playing by Heart is a story
about a bunch of people who really aren't good at talking about love.  
Writer/director Willard Carroll has created a nice romantic comedy
here; he uses the standard Robert Altman approach, which consists of
attacking the audience with as many scenarios as it can handle, until
the very end, at which point he tells us how they're all related and why
any of it is relevant.  As with most films of numerous narratives, not
every story in Playing by Heart is successful.  But the film as a whole
is frequently both funny and moving; it's also an insightful look into
the dreaded world of dating.
The film focuses on a few romantic relationships, and a couple of
non-romantic relationships.  Joan -- the character I mentioned above --
is a talkative club-hopper who becomes interested in a reclusive,
blue-haired lad named Keenan (Ryan Phillippe).  Meredith (Gillian
Anderson) is a timid stage director who has turned herself off to dating
altogether, until she meets Trent (Jon Stewart), who is hell-bent on
getting her to like him.  Then there's Gracie (Madeline Stowe), a
married woman who retreats to a hotel with Roger (Anthony Edwards) a few
times a week, obsessed with the idea of having a purely sexual
relationship without any of the baggage that a normal relationship
entails.  
Other subplots involve an older woman, Mildred (Ellen Burstyn), who
goes to visit her dying son, Mark (Jay Mohr).  There's also Hugh (Dennis
Quaid), who is seen in various bars, picking up on both men and women,
telling them all kinds of stories about his wife and children.  The
central relationship of Playing by Heart has Sean Connery and Gena
Rowlands playing Paul and Hannah, an older couple approaching their 40th
anniversary.  Hannah discovers a picture of a woman Paul knew
twenty-five years prior, and many arguments ensue.  
I have a common problem with all films like this:  I tend to prefer
focused stories, and just when I'm getting drawn into a scenario, the
narrative shifts to another one and I have to recalibrate my attention. 
There is certainly enough material in each individual story to warrant
separate films, but Carroll is clearly interested in the way they
complement one another.  At first I was skeptical -- the stories didn't
seem like they needed each other.  By the end, though, I understood why
Carroll chose the stories he did.  And while no film can truly explicate
the ludicrous complications that love brings upon us, Playing by Heart
does an admirable job trying.  
Playing by Heart is an atmospheric film; Carroll and cinematographer
Vilmos Zsigmond did a great job filling the picture with lush moods and
velvet tones.  Trent's postmodern house -- which looks to be composed
almost entirely of 90-degree angles and black wood -- is a fascinating
location.  Thanks to production designer Missy Stewart, all the sets are
fascinatingly attractive, and well-photographed by Zsigmond.  John
Barry's musical score is also appropriate, though it does tend to get a
little heavy-handed in the later scenes.
What really makes Playing by Heart a memorable film are the
performances.  Angelina Jolie steals every scene she has, injecting such
indefatigable spunk and intelligence that I was electrified whenever she
appeared on screen.  Ryan Phillippe, with his unimpeachable monotony, is
appropriately dry here, and is surprisingly not buried by Jolie's work. 
Connery and Rowlands are both pros, and handle their roles accordingly. 
Also notable is the Anderson/Stewart pairing; Anderson is an immensely
likable actress, and has proven that she has range beyond her stoic
"X-Files" iciness.  Jay Mohr is affecting as the dying AIDS patient, and
Burstyn is very good as the mother.
Even though I often felt jostled with the transitions between stories
(Carroll really doesn't try to make the transitions smooth), I can't say
I wasn't involved in most of the stories.  There are a couple that
didn't quite work for me, though.  Even though I liked Connery and
Rowlands, I didn't always believe what they were saying -- I had trouble
believing that they loved each other.  I was also confounded by the Hugh
scenario -- Quaid doesn't seem to know exactly what he's doing, and the
situation is just too complicated for this kind of movie.  But perhaps
even these elements are intentional.  The one thing Playing by Heart
does extremely well is to show us how love is always both disastrously
complicated and inexplicably wonderful.  It sounds like a trite and
overplayed theme, but there's still some life to be found in it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     "Talking about love is like dancing about architecture."  That one
line is probably the cleverest thing about PLAYING BY HEART and will
probably be remembered as a trivia question long after the rest of the
film is forgotten.  (Actually the quote is a variation on the aphorism
that talking about music is like dancing about architecture which has
been variously attributed to Frank Zappa, Laurie Anderson, Thelonious
Monk, and Steve Martin.)  Yet, knowing the futility of talking about
love, yet knowing that futility the film still attempts to tell a
series of stories about love, all cut together.
     In PLAYING BY HEART we have the story of Joan (Angelina Jolie)
whose intended new lover Keenan (Ryan Phillippe) is totally
uninterested in relating to another person.  Gillian Anderson of THE
Stewart) who would like to start a relationship with her.  Gracie
(Madeleine Stowe) and Roger (Anthony Edwards) have a great time
together and are married, but not to each other.  Mildred (Ellen
Burstyn) and Mark (Jay Mohr) are mother and son talking one last time
before Mark dies of AIDS.  Hugh (Dennis Quaid) is looking to form a
relationship with anybody, female or male, as long as he can build the
relationship on a lie.  Finally and perhaps best, there are Hannah
(Gina Rowlands) and fatally ill Paul (Sean Connery) who after a long
marriage want to reaffirm their vows, and just now Hannah has
discovered that early in their marriage, Paul loved another woman. Six
stories about six relationships, working and failing.
     As he tells these stories Willard Carroll is doing something
behind the curtain that the viewer comes to suspect early on, but is
not actually confirmed until late in the film.  By the time it becomes
clear what the script has done, it is probably too late to pick up all
the details, at least on the first viewing.  Like THE USUAL SUSPECTS,
one probably has to see the film twice to pick up on some of the
subtleties.
     Sean Connery's character Paul is dying yet even he does not have
the vulnerability of Ellen Burstyn's Mildred who has to cope with the
death of her son.  It may be that having to deal with the death of a
loved one is harder than dying oneself or it may be just that Burstyn
is an actor who can reach from the screen and tear at a viewer's
heartstrings.  Paul Newman was approached for the part of Paul.  In
fact, he seems to fit the role better than Connery.  It was probably
written with Newman in mind.  It may say something about acting styles,
but ten hours after having seen this film one still cares about the
Burstyn, Connery, and Rowlands characters.  Speaking for myself I can
picture the younger characters, but I do not really care a whole lot
for what happens to them and their relationships.  Burstyn can whimper
more powerfully than Angelina Jolie can shout.  Perhaps the problem is
that there are too many characters to cover the material more than
superficially.  Carroll is satisfied to just give us a feel for the
personality of the characters.  The veteran actors know how to make the
most of their time.
     In 1998 Willard Carroll wrote and directed PLAYING BY HEART as
well as TOM'S MIDNIGHT GARDEN.  Before this year Carroll has not has
not directed since his debut in 1990 with a somewhat under-appreciated
horror film, THE RUNESTONE.  If PLAYING BY HEART is no worse then THE
RUNESTONE, it is really little more accomplished.  I would give it a 6
on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Of some
tangential interest is the fact that the MPAA in a bizarre ruling
rejected the shooting title of this film DANCING ABOUT ARCHITECTURE as
being too similar to the current DANCING AT LUGHNASA.  It is hard to
imagine the two being confused.

Author
Scott Renshaw
PLAYING BY HEART
(Miramax)
Starring:  Gillian Anderson, Ellen Burstyn, Sean Connery, Anthony Edwards,
Angelina Jolie, Jay Mohr, Ryan Phillippe, Dennis Quaid, Gena Rowlands, Jon
Stewart, Madeline Stowe.
Screenplay:  Willard Carrol.
Producers:  Meg Liberman, Willard Carrol and Tom Wilhite.
Director:  Willard Carrol.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  118 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     PLAYING BY HEART inspires the question, "how many stories do you need
to tell in one film in order to cover the entire spectrum of human
relationship dynamics?"  Is three sufficient?  Five?  Ten?  The answer, of
course, is that it's actually a trick question; you can't possibly cover
the subject of love in toto over the course of one two-hour feature.  The
best you can do is make the stories you _do_ choose to tell compelling
enough and insightful enough that they feel somehow more universal.
     Writer/director Willard Carrol, apparently unhip to the tricky nature
of the aforementioned question, has answered it "six."  And that's at
_least_ two too many.  Carrol's line-up of romantically lost souls,
centered primarily in Los Angeles, includes:  elderly married couple Paul
(Sean Connery) and Hannah (Gena Rowlands), struggling with the shadow of a
long-ago infidelity; emotionally defensive Meredith (Gillian Anderson),
struggling with whether to pursue a relationship with Trent (Jon Stewart);
party girl Joan (Angelina Jolie), struggling to dent the armor of surly
party boy Keenan (Ryan Phillippe); unhappily married Gracie (Madeline
Stowe), struggling to keep her affair with a married man (Anthony Edwards)
meaningless; and Hugh (Dennis Quaid), struggling to come up with a new sob
story every night to win the sympathy of women in bars.  Added for good
measure is the reconciliation of a mother (Ellen Burstyn) with her
terminally ill son (Jay Mohr), each struggling to understand the other.
     There's an inherent danger in films that include several intertwining
stories, namely that some will be much more interesting than others, and
that the interesting stories will be less effective because we keep
dashing away from them.  At least one of the stories is extremely
effective -- Anderson and Stewart's tentative sparring -- thanks largely
to the charismatic intelligence of the two actors.  Two others are
consistently diverting -- Jolie and Phillippe, and Connery and Rowlands --
again thanks largely to the performers, which is a particular surprise in
the former case.  But with three other stories vying for time, including
the utterly tedious trysts between Stowe and Edwards, there's never enough
time for the good ones to build any momentum.  Carrol and usually reliable
editor Pietro Scalia (an Oscar-winner for JFK) chop PLAYING BY HEART into
bite-sized three minute chunklets, giving the film all the emotional
resonance of a wittier-than-usual episode of "The Love Boat."
     That wittiness is what Carrol is counting on to carry us through
PLAYING BY HEART, a film with more than its share of effective verbal
sparring and clever quips.  The dialogue makes the episodes diverting a
fair amount of the time; it also disguises a script that has virtually
nothing interesting or new to say about relationships.  It often feels
like Carrol is engaged in a decade-late scramble for a "modern" take on
love and sex -- incorporating HIV into not one but two of the storylines
-- but essentially every one of the stories is about people trying to
understand and be understood.  It's not a particularly revelatory take on
why love is complicated, which makes it even more unclear why Carrol had
to tell so many stories to say one thing.
     Perhaps it's the sense that Carrol is trying _so_ hard that makes
PLAYING BY HEART frustrating in spite of its occasional sparks of life.
John Barry's score drapes a curtain of strings heavily over too many
scenes, Vilmos Zsigmond's cinematography paints an unbelievably
romanticized L. A. nightscape, and the conversations sometimes turn into
exchanges that in real life would end with someone getting smacked across
the face.  Yet for all its flaws, PLAYING BY HEART probably would have
worked if it had given us the time to build a familiarity with only one or
two couples, allowing us to understand their hopes and fears about love in
more depth than a quick character capsule could provide.  The moments just
don't add up in this epic of the heart that proves the law of diminishing
returns.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
PLAYING BY HEART by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: A-
Going into this movie, I didn't know anything about it except for the cast
members, and that it was about couples and what they go through.  The only
reason I went to see this movie was because of the large cast, and I am very
glad I did go.  The cast consists of Gena Rowlands, Gillian Anderson, Sean
Connery, Angelina Jolie, Ryan Phillippe, Jon Stewart, Jay Mohr, Anthony
Edwards, Madeline Stowe, Dennis Quaid, and Ellen Burnstyn.  Playing By Heart is
about many couples, and what life is like in the real world.
Gena Rowlands and Sean Connery play Hannah and Paul, a couple that has been
married for forty years.  Paul and Hannah are constantly fighting, and things
aren't really working out between them.  Hannah finds out some secrets that
Paul has kept from her all his life and becomes extremely angered with him. 
Gena Rowlands and Sean Connery do excellent as their characters.  Although they
are extremely undeveloped, you could still get a good feel of how the
characters were.
Angelina Jolie and Ryan Phillippe play Joan and Kennan, two wild and crazy kids
who have been through a lot.  Joan and Kennan both go to dance clubs in their
spare time, and that is where the two first meet.  Ryan and Angelina click on
the big screen.  Keenan has been through a lot through his life, including the
death of the only woman he has ever loved.  Joan also has been through a lot of
heartache in her life as well.  Angelina Jolie gives the best performance of
the large cast, stealing every scene she is in.  With her wild outfits and her
one-eyed cat, and Kennan's blue hair and unique habits, this couple becomes the
most fun to watch.  The two characters get the most screen time, and their
characters are well developed. 
Gillian Anderson and Jon Stewart play another couple.  Gillian Anderson plays
Meredith, a play director, and Jon Stewart plays Trent, an architect.  Meredith
is the type who isn't into dating or anything like it.  She is still upset
about her previous marriage, when she found out her husband was gay.  Trent is
there to try to help her, but she becomes angered even more.  It was
interesting to watch Gillian Anderson on the screen outside of the X-Files
series.  She did a good job of acting, and she should have a successful movie
career.  Jon Stewart does a good job as well, but the performance was somewhat
disappointing.  I think that he was miscast in the role of Trent.
The other two couples are involved in the film are Mildred (Ellen Bunstyn), and
her son, Mark, (Jay Mohr) who has AIDS, and the other couple is Gracie,
(Madeline Stowe) and Roger. (Anthony Edwards) These two couples didn't get much
screen time, and weren't developed very much at all.  The other character in
the film hanging around is Hugh, played by Dennis Quaid.  Quaid gives a funny,
outstanding performance.  Hugh doesn't accomplish much throughout the film,
except for going from bar to bar lying to everyone he can.
Playing By Heart is a realistic movie, not a love fairy tale that couldn't
exist in real life.  The movie was very true to life, and I admired that.  The
ending was also extremely well done.  Endings can be one of the most important
parts of the film, because it is the last impression of the movie you get, and
Playing By Heart's ending certainly was great.  I don't know what it was about
Playing By Heart that got me, but it worked.  It is a very touching story of
what you can go through in life.  It wasn't pure drama though, in fact, there
were many very funny scenes throughout the film.  Willard Carroll, director of
this film, hasn't had many motion picture credits as of yet, but hopefully he
will deliver some more wonderful pieces of work.
The Bottom Line- Playing By Heart has a little something for every age, even
teenagers.        

Author
Michael Dequina
_Playing_by_Heart_ (R) *** (out of ****)
Thanks to a strange MPAA ruling--and much to the delight, I'm sure, of
Miramax's marketing department--writer-director Willard Carroll was
forced to change the title of his _Dancing_About_Architecture_ to
_Playing_by_Heart_.  Never in recent memory has a forced title change
thrown a film more off-kilter.  A pre-title prologue has the character of
Joan (Angelina Jolie) explain what the original title means: "Talking
about love is like dancing about architecture"--meaning that it can't be
done.  After the explanation, the title comes up... reading
_Playing_by_Heart_.  If this bit of incongruity weren't enough, Joan's
explanation is directly culled from a scene that takes place later in the
movie--making its inclusion at the beginning completely unnecessary.
After that confused opening, Carroll's film (which I will henceforth
refer to by its original, better, title), quickly finds its footing,
following a series of engaging if slight storylines that detail the
romantic travails of a cross-section of Los Angeles residents.  There's
the aforementioned Joan, a young clubhopper who develops an interest in
another, Keenan (Ryan Phillippe), who constantly rejects her. 
No-nonsense divorcee Meredith (Gillian Anderson) doesn't have the time,
energy, nor interest for romance, but that doesn't stop the
too-good-to-be-true Trent (Jon Stewart) from aggressively wooing her. 
Longtime marrieds Hannah (Gena Rowlands) and Paul (Sean Connery) argue
over an extramarital tryst he may or may not have have had many years
ago.  Lovers Gracie (Madeleine Stowe) and Roger (Anthony Edwards) are
also married--but not to each other.  Lying sad sack Hugh (Dennis Quaid)
cruises bars and restaurants telling wild stories to anyone who will give
a listen.
As with any multi-character/multi-storyline piece, some threads work
better than others.  The weakest of these is the Gracie/Roger story,
which consists of little more than the two trysting in different hotel
rooms, squandering the considerable acting talents of Stowe and Edwards. 
The most effective storylines are buoyed by terrific performances and/or
chemistry: the appealing Anderson and Stewart work surprisingly well
together in the Meredith/Trent strand, and the luminous Jolie compensates
for Phillippe's adequate but fairly colorless work in the Joan/Keenan
story.  Jolie's spunky, heartfelt, Oscar-nod-worthy performance is easily
the film's best--which is no small feat, considering the caliber of the
actors surrounding her.
While Carroll's focus is largely on romantic love, he doesn't isolate it
there; he sets his sights a bit wider, shoehorning in a storyline about
the reconnection of a mother (Ellen Burstyn) with her son (Jay Mohr, in
his dramatic debut), who is dying of AIDS.  The attempt to also cover
maternal love is admirable, and the story is beautifully acted and
quietly affecting.  But it never fits in with the rest of the other,
bouncier stories; the fact that the story takes place in Chicago and not
L.A. like others makes it feel more out of place.
An attempt to tie together this and all the other storylines comes at
the film's conclusion, yet while they're designed to be a surprise, the
ways in which everything is linked is rather predictable and a bit too
tidy.  The same can be said about the totality of
_Dancing_About_Architecture_, which isn't as distinctive as that title
(in essence, it's _Short_Cuts_ lite), but it's an agreeable, low-key
entertainment that gets the crowdpleasing job done.  (reopens January 22)
Michael Dequina
Chat Forum Host, The Official Michael Jordan Web Site
http://jordan.sportsline.com
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown


Author
David N. Butterworth
It will come as no surprise to fans of Elvis Costello that his 
beautifully expressed observation that "writing about music is like 
dancing about architecture" has served as inspiration for a motion 
picture.
In writer/director Willard Carroll's articulate "Playing by Heart" (a 
film that was originally titled "Dancing About Architecture"), talking 
about love is said to be as foolish a pastime.  Yet this early assertion 
paves the way for an examination of how people find love, how others 
hang onto it, and how some are forced to let it go.
The city of Los Angeles forms the backdrop for an ensemble piece that 
in many ways resembles Alan Rudolph's "Welcome to L.A."  While "Playing 
by Heart" doesn't quite capture the mood and seductive atmosphere of 
Rudolph's film, it makes for an interesting companion piece in its 
observations about human interactions.
In "Welcome to L.A.," Richard Baskin's songs were woven conspicuously 
into the framework of the film; here, John Barry's soft and fragmented 
score is pretty much relegated to the background, providing a delicate 
dotting of the I's and crossing of the T's after the actors have spoken 
their often-wordy piece.  The writing isn't always there--either Carroll 
has too many characters, or too many points he wants to make--but for 
every interchange of languid dialogue there's a scene that's 
surprisingly potent.
Billed as a romantic comedy with a twist, the film actually serves up a 
number of twists along the way, including the print ads' tip-off that 
"these three couples are about to come together in an unexpected way..."
Joan and Keenan meet at a rave.  Joan is vivacious and relentless in 
her pursuits; Keenan is restrained and consistent in his brush-offs.  
This makes Joan crazy for him.  The couple are played by Angelina Jolie 
(Jon Voight's daughter) and Ryan Phillippe, last seen clubbing in "54."  
Although Keenan "doesn't date," they wind up at a midnight screening of 
"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" and that alone is almost reason enough to 
recommend "Playing by Heart."
After 40 years of marriage, Hannah (played by Gena Rowlands) discovers 
her husband Paul (Sean Connery) with a souvenir of a 25-year-old love 
affair.  These veteran performers are typically solid, but it's a pity 
they're given some of the film's weakest lines.
And then there's Meredith (Gillian Anderson of "The X-Files") and Trent 
(Jon Stewart).  A divorced theater director, Meredith is better at 
orchestrating other people's lives than she is her own.  Divorced 
himself, Trent simply wants to buy her dinner, but Meredith deplores the 
"contrived artificiality" of the dating scene.  Unfortunately Anderson's 
strongest characteristic is an annoying forelock which she's constantly 
pushing out of her face.
Padding out the film (not that it needed any padding) are an adulterous 
couple played by Madeleine Stowe and "E.R."'s Anthony Edwards; a 
self-absorbed alcoholic (Dennis Quaid) who drifts from cocktail bar to 
cocktail bar; and a mother tending to her dying son (Ellen Burstyn and 
Jay Mohr).
Pets, martinis, and a common jargon help tie the knotty relationships 
together.
Strangely enough, Jolie and Phillippe fair far better than "Playing by 
Heart"'s more seasoned professionals.  Jolie oozes a brash confidence 
and Phillippe is every bit her match in a moodier, more introspective 
performance.  It's difficult to develop a relationship to a convincing 
"I love you" climax in under two hours, even in a VW bug in the rain, 
but it's a tribute to Jolie and Phillippe that when they share that 
conviction, you believe it.


Author
Matt Williams
Playing by Heart is a film that would like to think of itself as an
intricate puzzle, whose pieces smoothly slide into place as the film
progresses. However, as a puzzle, Playing By Heart is fairly simple.
Luckily, observing the artwork of the individual pieces is more than
enough reward.
Playing by Heart interweaves six distinct storylines.  At first, there
seems to be no connection between them, except for involving people,
love, and relationships.  Yet, as the film progresses, it is obvious
that all six storylines are going to intertwine by the end.  The matter
of how becomes relatively obvious well before the final act.
Hugh (Dennis Quaid) has a penchant for wandering forlornly into bars and
unraveling his depressing life story to a complete stranger. Gracie
(Madeleine Stowe) and Roger (Anthony Edwards) have a fulfilling sex
life.  Too bad they're both married to other people. Paul (Sean Connery)
and Hannah (Gena Rowlands) are a long-married couple facing a
troublesome future, and an even more troublesome past. Joan (Angelina
Jolie) is on the relationship rebound, and is determined to win the
affections of Keenan (Ryan Phillippe), a self-obsessed boy who doesn't
date. Mark (Jay Mohr) is dying of AIDS, and has only his mother Mildred
(Ellen Burstyn) for comfort.  And finally, Meredith (Gillian Anderson)
has been burned before, and wants nothing more to do with men.  However,
that doesn't stop the friendly Trent (Jon Stewart) from trying.
Even with six plotlines in the air, Playing By Heart never lets one
drop.  Whenever one plotline starts to sag, another deftly steps in to
take its place.  And yet, even with all the switching and swapping, the
film is never confusing.  And, somehow, Playing By Heart avoids the
pitfall of other films with ensemble storylines:  making a few of the
plots much more interesting than the others. Even the film's weakest
plot (the languid affair between Madeleine Stowe and Anthony Edwards)
never gets completely boring.
The movie is not as skillful, however, when trying to be spontaneous.
Every move of Playing By Heart seems carefully calculated, and when it
tries to surprise the audience, the effort just falls flat.  Nowhere is
this more true than at the film's finale, when everything just happens
to neatly fall together.
The pair with the best chemistry in the film is easily Connery and
Rowlands.  They settle so deeply in their roles, that it truly seems
they've been together for a long time. Anjelina Jolie and Ryan Phillippe
are a close second, and certainly have the plotline with the most
energy.  Throughout the whole film, there's nary a poor performance to
be seen.
Though at times it borders on being contrived, on the whole, Playing By
Heart is a  touching rumination on the various flavors of love.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases
