Title
Review for Killing, The (1956)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jerry Saravia
Stanley Kubrick's heist drama "The Killing" is one of the finest noir films of the 1950's, a film so deliberately wire-tight that it will leave exhausted and exhilarated. Its one of the most tense thrillers of all time, and likely to leave you gasping for air after it is all over. 
The film introduces us immediately to a host of characters, all involved in a big-time upcoming heist of a racetrack. Kubrick introduces the device of the omniscient narrator, a sort of "Dragnet"-like voice-over that is essential in understanding and following the structure of the story, particularly the time shifts in "Rashomon" style, atypical for that time. The narrator also comments on the actions of the characters, their timed schedules and documentary-like shot scenes of their initial preparations and confrontations with others while planning and partaking in this heist. 
Johnny Clay (Sterling Hayden) is the leader of this heist, a witless though direct and thorough professional thief and ex-con. He is ready to rob San Francisco's Bay Meadows Race Track of a cool two million dollars. This prodigious amount of money is to be split up between Clay and a crew that includes a former Greek wrestler and chess player, Maurice (Kola Kwarian); a psychopathic sharpshooter with a thick accent of some kind, Nikki (Tim Carey); a patrolman deep in debt (Ted de Corsia); a wimpy track cashier, George (Elisha Cook, Jr.); a track bartender, Mike O'Reilly (Joe Sawyer); and a wise old drunk, Unger (J.C. Flippen) - the latter has a touchingly real scene where Unger admits to Clay that he sees him as his own son. It is a motley crew to be sure, and the narrator makes it clear from the outset that this will be a botched, messy robbery, which they often are in the movies anyway. 
Kubrick was already beginning to show a smooth handling with his actors. Hayden says his lines with such dexterity and a fast-paced alertness that you must listen closely to keep up with him, as was the case later with Hayden's similar role in Kubrick's "Dr. Strangelove." He is tall, commanding, and takes no prisoners. 
Elisha Cook, Jr. has many great scenes, a handful of them are with his conniving wife, Sherry (played by the fabulous Marie Windsor). Their relationship shows a genuine love-hate bond where money is the driving issue, and there are the customary put-downs of her husband's behavior by Sherry (You've got a hole in your head.") 
I also enjoyed the scenes between the track bartender, Mike, and his invalid wife whom he promises to take better care of. All these scenes indicate not only the level of financial desperation in these men but also how far they are willing to go to protect their families. In the case of the stocky cop, his needs are to pay off a loan shark. The cashier George simply wants to give his wife a better life, and is thus dismayed to learn that money is all she cares about. 
"The Killing" has many twists and turns, and slowly the machinations of the plot become tighter and unfold faster once they approach the climactic robbery itself. We know the planned robbery will go wrong, but the steadfast pacing and controlled tension makes it amazingly tense to watch. The narrator knows what will happen and so do we, and part of the pleasure of the film is seeing the racetrack robbery from different perspectives. This was all unusual for its time, and led the way to Tarantino's own pulp stories, particularly "Reservoir Dogs," its most direct influence. 
There are so many great scenes and dialogue of such color and distinction that this film bears close relation with the classic noir "Double Indemnity" (Example: "You've got a big dollar sign where others have a heart.") "The Killing" is simply a huge improvement over Kubrick's former noir tale "Killer's Kiss." The music by Gerald Fried tightens the narrative screws and keeps us in suspense. The performances are extraordinary (including Vince Edwards as another small-time hood). The camerawork is astoundingly good (shot by Lucien Ballard, who used the widest camera lens at the time, a 25mm, for heightened reality). "The Killing" is high on my list of the most fatalistic of all noir tales, guaranteed to keep your stomach in knots from start to finish. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

KILLING, THE (director: Stanley Kubrick; writers: Kubrick/Jim Thompson,
from the novel "The Clean Break" by Lionel White; cinematographer:
Lucien Ballard; cast: Sterling Hayden (Johnny Clay), Elisha Cook Jr.
(George Peatty), Marie Windsor (Sherry Peatty), Vince Edwards (Val),
Ted de Corsia (Randy), Timothy Carey (Nikki Arane), Jay C. Flippen
(Marvin Unger), Coleen Gray (Fay), Kola Kwariani (Maurice), Joe Sawyer
(Mike O'Reilly), 1956)
Simply put, this is one of the best crime films ever made. Especially
considering that it was made on a budget of only $230,000. It most
closely resembles in style and scope the work of the great French
directors Jean-Pierre Melville and Jacques Becker, as a classic noir
tale depicting man's foibles of greed and betrayal.The killing here
refers to a heist of the racetrack for a sum of 2 million dollars, as
planned by ex-con Johnny Clay (Sterling), who rounds up a crew of
nonprofessional criminals for this caper. He wants to make one big score
before retiring. The robbery itself is told in multiple flashback style,
as each character gets a chance to tell his version of the story, which
is done in parts, so that each character's story is not only told but
the film is able to jump back and forth in time, allowing for several
events to happen together.
The cuckolded George Peatty (Elisha) is a race track betting window
cashier, Mike O'Reilly (Joe Sawyer) is a racetrack bartender with a sick
wife, Randy (Corsia) is a corrupt cop, Marvin Unger (Flippen) is the one
bankrolling the job, Nikki Arane (Carey) is the memorable psychotic
marksman hired for $2,500 to kill a racehorse, Maurice (Kola) is a
chessplaying strongman who for $5,000 will cause a fight at the track
and thereby create a necessary disturbance, calling for lots of police.
Each one's job is a key one in helping Johnny gain entry to the office
where the money is kept. If they don't work in coordination with each
other, the plan wouldn't work.
The complications to this well-planned scheme come through George's sexy
wife Sherry, the femme fatale, who is seeing a petty gangster behind
George's back, Val (Vince). She is shrewdly able to sneak the details of
the robbery out of her dim husband, whom she detests as much as he
worships her. She also clearly had the two best lines in the film: If
people didn't have headaches, what would happen to the aspiren industry?
When George kills her after she betrays him, she is able to say right
before keeling over, "This is a bad joke without a punch line."
When Nikki kills the racehorse, he is immediately shot.The rest of the
robbery goes smoothly, but when Johnny returns to pay off the boys,
Sherry's two henchmen, who got there first, kill every one except for
George, who kills them and then goes back to his place to get Sherry; he
will subsequently die from his wounds. Meanwhile, Johnny and his
girlfriend get unlucky at the airport, as their suitcase full of money
opens up and scatters all over the airport. As Johnny is taken into
custody at the airport terminal by a pair of detectives, he is too weary
to make a run for it.
What makes this film so tense and gripping, is the exacting details that
went into making this caper work, as it is seen through the eyes of the
odd mixture of characters who commit the robbery. Each one drooling for
their share of the easy money, unconcerned that they have become blind
about the criminal act they are doing. The point made, is a theme that
Kubrick will return to many times in his long career in films, that
their perfect robbery fails because of the human condition they couldn't
control and not because the robbery wasn't perfectly executed.
The main protaganist shows that he is capable of loyalty and love, and
of possibly leading a virtuous life, but whose downfall comes about when
he can't stop being a criminal to gain the something he can't find
inside his true nature. It fits in with Kubrick's notion of life: that
it is vital for one to see how the pieces are played out on the chess
board and how the player who does not always have the best strategy or
execution can still win by learning how to persevere and change as the
game does. As one of Kubrick's early features, it remains one of his
greatest films, even without the added visual dimensions he was to pour
into his later high-budget, more complex movies. The outstanding cast
made everything look natural, and the gritty realism of the story was
only enhanced by the glorious b/w cinematography.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
