Title
Review for True Grit (1969)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark O'Hara
I first saw 'True Grit' at the Westmont Theater in Westmont, New Jersey 
in the summer of 1969.  I was ten years old.  My father got caught in 
traffic on the way there, and we entered the theater ten minutes late, a 
situation the both of us hated.  This was before ushers ejected you if 
you tried to sit through more than one showing, so we stayed for the 
down time and for the cartoon and finally for the first part of the 
film, finding out that Tom Chaney (Jeff Corey), the man who killed 
Mattie's father Frank, worked for the family.  We left during the 
rooming house dinner, just when La Boeuf (Glen Campbell) meets Mattie 
Ross (Kim Darby) and commences to flirt with her.
That's how big an impression this film left on me.  I've carried the 
story around for nearly 30 years.  Of course I have a talent for 
recalling rather unimportant details, such as some of the finer points 
of the viewing experience.  Heck, the old Westmont Theater on Haddon 
Avenue was still much more impressive than any of the multiplexes that 
were beginning to pop up in the nearest malls, which were then all the 
way in Cherry Hill and up in Moorestown.
But now 'True Grit.'  Based on a novel by a very solid American 
novelist, Charles Portis (also author of 'Norwood' and 'Gringoes'), the 
movie is a close and successful adaptation.  The screenplay is by 
Marguerite Roberts.
La Boeuf is a Texas Ranger who, just like Mattie, has set out to catch 
the murderer Tom Chaney - one of several apparent aliases adopted by the 
powder-burned, shifty-eyed man who gunned down his boss, Frank Ross, 
outside a saloon.  The gutsy Mattie comes into the town a few days later 
with another ranch hand, and they claim the body.  But Mattie inquires 
about lawmen who might do some bounty hunting for her, and ends up 
walking into the life of one Federal Marshall Reuben J. Cogburn, 
"Rooster" (John Wayne).  Even though no one in the town can say a kind 
word about Rooster, Mattie has heard he has 'true grit,' and pays him 
$25 retainer to plan the hunting down of the scoundrel Tom Chaney.  
Meanwhile, Mattie runs up against La Boeuf, a Ranger paid to bring 
Chaney back to Texas for the killing of a state senator and his dog.  
The Ranger doesn't care for Mattie's honest but "saucy" tongue, just 
like she doesn't care for his bragging and intended waylaying of her 
father's killer.  After various complications, the unlikely trio sets 
out to find Chaney, who has allegedly joined up with a gang led by Ned 
Pepper (Robert Duvall).  They enter a lawless part of the territory, 
where Rooster's toughness and several weapons take hold of the plot.
One strength the film has is its range of conflicts.  Portis knows how 
to structure a conflict so that his readers don't want any part of 
putting down the book.  In fact he builds many conflicts within the main 
one.  Wherever Mattie goes she raises people's hackles, especially those 
of Gen. G. Stonehill (Strother Martin, the quintessential character 
actor who immortalized the line, "What we have here is a failure to 
communicate," in 'Cool Hand Luke').  Stonehill is the horse dealer, and 
he is clearly hornswaggled by the waif-like Mattie.  She not only gets 
from him the money for the ponies purchased by her father just before 
his death, but she threatens him into paying restitution for her 
father's horse, which was stolen by Chaney out of Stonehill's very 
stable.  Needless to say, the teenager Mattie Ross leaves many 
characters nonplused when she walks out of a scene, their brows knit in 
consternation.  
So the film is driven as much by character as it is by action and 
conflict.  We see sonething of Cogburn's personal life, his home the 
back room of a Chinaman's store, his companion an orange tabby named 
General Sterling Price.  Cogburn lost an eye in a Civil War skirmish, 
and he is a heavy drinker.  Indeed he falls from his horse once and, 
unable to climb to his feet, orders Mattie and La Boeuf to camp right on 
the spot for the night.  The 60-ish Wayne plays Cogburn naturally;  no 
one else could own the part.  (He did a reprise in "Rooster Cogburn,' in 
which the character meets his match in an irascible female played by 
Katherine Hepburn.)  Because of his long experience, Wayne has no 
trouble commanding our attention in any scene he's in.  Wayne is also a 
master of the subtle glance, as when he furtively looks at Mattie as he 
tends her snakebite, to see if the incision bothered her.  Always larger 
than life, Wayne shows here that his acting transcends Westerns and 
would qualify him in any genre.
I'm not sure where the casting director conceived the idea of a country 
singer for the part of the ornery Texan, but Glen Campbell works well in 
the part.  His youth and attitude make him a good foil for Wayne, sort 
of in the same way as David Bowie was a good foil for Bing Crosby in 
their duet of "The Little Drummer Boy."  Kim Darby looks much younger 
than her age, a fact that makes her perfect for Portis' strong-willed 
teenager.  She delivers most of her lines with a flavor that mixes 
old-fashioned formalism with Quaker plainness.  Not many contractions 
appear in her conversation.  She occasionally comes across as very 
stiff, though, making it seem as if the characters around her are not 
reacting quite properly to her lines.  In a small but key role, Robert 
Duvall plays a straight-talking outlaw, the gang leader Ned Pepper.  "I 
call that bold talk for a one-eyed fat man," is a line of dialogue I 
remember every time I see characters facing off in a movie.  Who hasn't 
Duvall worked with during his illustrious career?
A quarrel I have with the film is the soundtrack.  OK - the song playing 
over the opening credits is sung by Campbell (who is the seventh son of 
a seventh son, but that's only part of my trivial memory!) and it's 
fine, though no Frankie Laine.  Much of the background music 
accompanying the scenes smacks of 1960's and 1970's television schmaltz, 
stuff rejected by 'Gunsmoke' or 'Bonanza.'  And a lot of dialogue has no 
doubt been cut from the novel, causing the film to seem in some places 
minimalistic.  The ending scene, for instance, could be more fleshed out 
before getting anywhere near the danger line for wordiness.
If you are a John Wayne fan, you need to watch this movie again.  It's 
not as strong as 'The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance' or 'Stagecoach' 
perhaps, but I believe it better than his last film, the strong 'The 
Shootist.'  If you are not a Wayne buff, you should still watch it and 
give the old man a second chance.  He has aged well.  As with great 
writers like Hemingway, actors are often regarded differently by 
different decades of viewers.  I hope John Wayne does not go unwatched 
by us and our children.


Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
The life and career of John Wayne (born in Winterset Iowa on May 26, 1907 and
given the name Marion Michael Morrison) came to a glorious peak of sorts when
he received the Best Actor Academy Award for his portrayal of a crusty, hard
drinking and at times, no nonsense federal marshal named Rooster Cogburn in
the old American west in 'True Grit'.  Having beat out both Jon Voight and
Dustin Hoffman for that prize for their work in 'Midnight Cowboy', Wayne's
deserving win came as a surprise to some and as an expectation by most.
  Wayne's career began in 1928 in a bit part in a film entitled 'Hangman's
House' that was directed by John Ford who would work with Wayne on a much
larger scale in some other classic films such as 'Stagecoach' (1939) and 'The
Quiet Man' (1952).  Ford's talent as a director would earn him a record four
Oscars for Best Director and it is a record which holds to this day.  Ford
died in 1973 and is truly one of the most influential filmmakers of the 20th
century.  Wayne was made a much better actor than he realized he could ever
be through the teachings of Ford.
John Wayne's last film was in 1976 entitled 'The Shootist' in which he played
a legendary gunfighter dying of cancer.  While making that film, Wayne was
dying of cancer himself and Wayne sadly passed away in 1979  and he is a
monument to film history which generations to come will learn to appreciate.
 One of Wayne's last public appearances was in 1979 at the 51st Academy
Awards in which he presented the Best Picture Oscar to 'The Deer Hunter'.  
'True Grit' which also starred Kim Darby, Glen Campbell (yes, that
'Rhinestone Cowboy' Glen Campbell), Strother Martin, Dennis Hopper and Robert
Duvall was the story of revenge enacted with the help of the law which
further testified to the lawlessness within the law tolerated by men with
badges in the old west.  Darby starred as a young woman tracking the murderer
of her beloved father and her personality was that of a strong willed, hard
headed lady with determination and justice on her mind.  She enlists the help
of Wayne and reluctantly that of a Texas ranger (Campbell).
Hokey at times but pleasantly entertaining for the most part, especially in
the last half hour, 'True Grit' featured rousing scenes of frontier
excitement in glorious cinematic fashion with elaborate cinematography of
western skies, mountains and landscape perfect for a western classic. 
