Title
Review for Five Easy Pieces (1970)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
I guess Jack Nicholson must be good friends with director Bob Rafelson.
As a director, Rafelson has made only 12 movies in 31 years and six of
them have been with Jack and with the exception of 1997's 'Blood and
Wine', I never really liked anything made by Rafelson and his films with
Jack, aside from 'Blood and Wine' are 'Head' (1968), 'The King of Marvin
Gardens' (1972), the remake of 'The Postman Always Rings Twice' (1981),
'Man Trouble' (1992) and, alas, 'Five Easy Pieces'.
I know this film has been hailed by people everywhere since it came out
but the film just flat out did not draw me in.  I didn't care about the
people involved.  It's clearly the type of film that needs a good music
score and hardly has any score at all and no one in the cast seems to
stand out besides Nicholson.  What is remarkably disappointing about
'Five Easy Pieces' is the fact that the film is alarmingly flat.  It has
no zest and its only good point, as mentioned, is the commendable
performance by Nicholson.  As a confused young man with the gift of
musical genius bottled up inside him, Nicholson gives a commanding
performance that brought him his first Best Actor Oscar nomination.  He
lost the award to George C. Scott in 'Patton' but it remains the film
that launched Nicholson's career and he would receive two other Oscar
nominations ('The Last Detail', and 'Chinatown') before winning the
prize in 1975 for 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'.
'Five Easy Pieces' is an enigma in the way it displays Nicholson's
character and I did enjoy, somewhat, the way the film built itself up by
revealing many traits of Nicholson's genius before we discover the
family from hell that he left behind a long time ago.  A recent survey
of people across America in 1998 revealed that 71 per cent of them had
started a new job within the last three years.  The average person will
change careers 10 times in their life and that number will probably grow
as the faster the world will continue to turn faster and faster.
Nicholson's character is one with no focus.  He resides with his live-in
girlfriend (Karen Black), and their relationship is rather rocky and
Nicholson wants to abandon the responsibility of marrying her like many
of the other responsibilities he ran away from in his life.  We discover
that Nicholson had a gift for being a great pianist but gave it all up
to work on an oil rig where he hates his boss and spars with his friend
who is later dragged off by the authorities on suspicion of robbery.
One scene has Nicholson hopping out of his friend's car and jumping on
to the back of a moving truck where a piano is tied down and as the
traffic begins to move, Nicholson stays on it, playing the instrument as
it pulls onto a collector lane, leaving his friend behind.  The most
powerful scene in the film is the one where Nicholson explains to his
father, who is confined to a wheelchair and can't speak, that he
regretted abandoning the family after seeing how his father ended up.
In many ways 'Five Easy Pieces' reminded me more of a television movie
than a big screen motion picture.  This is the film that made Jack
famous with his infamous "chicken salad sandwich speech" where he puts a
waitress in her place when she refuses to bring him what he wants as she
quips that it isn't on the menu.  I think this is another example of a
potentially great film made only average by an average director and
while I feel it is only average, I can understand why others hail it as
great---especially those fond of character studies.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
For browsers without java enhancement or if you experience problems with
the above link, go to:
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/mainpage.htm

Author
Brian Koller
"Five Easy Pieces" was one of three films starring
Jack Nicholson that were directed, co-written, and
co-produced by Bob Rafelson (the other films were
the weird Monkees flop "Head" and the more
successful "The King of Marvin Gardens").  The film's
lead character, an intelligent but angry drifter,
was ideally suited for Nicholson.
Nicholson plays Robert Dupea, who comes from an
upper-class family of classical musicians.  Nicholson
is a former pianist (the film's title refers to a
beginner's guide to the piano), but he currently
works as an oilman.  He again has the urge to run,
because he does not want to commit to his stupid,
clinging, pregnant girlfriend Rayette (Karen Black).
Robert learns that his father (William Challee)
has had an incapacitating stroke.  He returns home
to visit his family, which includes sister Partita
(Lois Smith) and brother Carl (Ralph Waite).
Robert soon finds something to do at home: start
a heated affair with Carl's fiancee Catherine
(Susan Anspach).
While Nicholson gives a fine performance, the
female supporting cast steals the show.  Black,
Smith, and Anspach are excellent. Helena Kallianiotes
and Toni "Oh Mickey, you're so fine" Basil have
terrific supporting roles as a pair of dike
hitchhikers.  Sally Struthers plays one of
Nicholson's 'girlfriends', and has a topless scene
(No, it isn't frightening).  There is also a score
featuring some of Tammy Wynette's best songs.
The film's most famous scene involves a confrontation
between Nicholson and a no-nonsense waitress.
He wants to order a simple breakfast that isn't
on the menu, but she'll have none of it.  If you
haven't seen the scene, it is certainly worth the
trip to the video store.  But the film's real
strength isn't the comic relief provided by Nicholson,
Black and Kallianiotes, but in the character study
of Robert Dupea.  He is a rebellious, philandering,
wandering bastard, but he is also ashamed of his
weaknesses, which are clearly out of control.
"Five Easy Pieces" received Oscar nominations for
Best Picture and Best Original Screenplay (Rafelson
and Carol Eastman).  Nicholson was nominated for Best
Actor, while Black was nominated for Best Supporting
Actress.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Brandon Stahl
Written by Carole Eastman (as Adrien Joyce) and Bob Rafelson
The calling card of Five Easy Pieces is Jack Nicholson's line "I want you to
hold it between your knees." And indeed, nearly 30 years after it was
released, this is what is ultimately remembered about the film: Jack
Nicholson demanding from a waitress that he wants two slices of wheat toast
and his explanation on how she should get it. A chicken salad sandwich, with
wheat toast, hold the chicken. "You want me to hold the chicken?"
I can't tell you how many times I've heard that line imitated by people
trying to do a Jack impersonation. Most times, people get it wrong, saying
"stick it" rather than "hold it". It's famous, I guess, because it deals
with our frustrations of never getting what we want. Nicholson has to go out
of his way simply to get two slices of wheat toast. Imagine how challenging
it must be when there are far greater possessions for him to obtain: love,
respect, dignity, reliable transportation, etc...
However, it's unfortunate that the film is left standing by the side of the
road with only that scene. People don't recognize it as a moment of
frustration, only Nicholson saying something really Jack-like. Surrounding
the famous line is a truly great and completely intelligent character study.
Here, we see so many real people go in and out of this movie, providing
layer upon layer of wonderful dialogue, moments and life. Now it's a chicken
salad sandwich without the chicken salad. 
Nicholson plays a drifter, who at the start of the film works on an oil rig.
He soon quits, I think, because he realizes he's too good for this kind of
work? Why? Because he used to be a talented musician, raised in a musical
family. Instead of using those talents, he lives the life of someone who
always wants something more, mistreating and hurting the things that he has.
He mentally abuses and degrades his girlfriend, the only person in the film
that seems to be able to love somebody unconditionally. But he's not
interested in unconditional love, instead he does whatever he can to get her
to run from him. 
This is slow paced film, and I imagine that's a reason that this movie isn't
mentioned in the same breath with other great films made in the seventies.
Current movies must move incredibly quickly, with sharp editing, fast
dialogue and speeches that can never be said. Even recent character studies
won't allow characters to elaborate because it would take up too much screen
time and make for slow pacing. Five Easy Pieces gives the audience a chance
to savor its speeches and long moments of silence and reflection.  Consider
Nicholson's speech to his father, admitting his failures to man who cannot
speak back, only sit in a wheelchair with condemning. It is moment that is
as moving and powerful as the closing speech to "Death of a Salesman", full
of agony and regret. 
This is one of Nicholson's best performances, a variation on his character
studies of men in search for purpose in an age when their role was
dramatically shifting after 200 years of static.  It reminds me, in a way,
of Dostoyesky's Crime and Punishment, about a character who believed himself
as a superman - so intellectually above the society he lives in that he feel
he can do whatever he wants, regardless of consequence. Nicholson acts in a
similar manner, wandering through people's lives and hurting them, mostly
because he's too selfish to understand how not to.
