Title
Review for Vanina Vanini (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Seth Bookey
(1961, Italy/France; Italian with gigantic English subtitles in the middle
of the screen; also known as The Betrayer)
Seen on 22 October 1997 at Symphony Space (second of a double feature)
Set in pre-Unification Italy, Vanina Vanini is the story of the love of a
young princess (Vanina Vanini) for a young revolutionary freemason
(Pietro). It is important to remember two things about this period. First,
this is an era when the Pope still owned large portions of land and led
considerable armies. Second, a freemason was seen as a heretic and was
considered persona non grata. 
The action begins in Rome, where Vanina and her maid Clelia discover that
her father Asdrubale has hidden a wounded Pietro from the authorities.
Pietro is full of revolutionary fervor and Vanina is a good Catholic.
Their love is *surely doomed*, especially since the Pope has declared it
open season on all freemasons -- and their little friends, too!
As a lavish costume drama, it works best when the movie is set in Rome.
There is a ball featuring the forbidden dance--not the lambada but the
waltz--and a lot of lubricious characters with witty dialogue.
Unfortunately, we do not stay in Rome for most of the time. The story
shifts north to Vanina's homeland, Romagna, which is quite spartan by
comparison. The dialogue goes from sparkling to rancid once they head
north. Their love story goes from touching to overbearing almost
instantly. Vanina is tortured with premarital sex-guilt. Pietro goes from
loving her to wanting to thrash her--you will want to join him. At best,
it is a B-level melodrama. Douglas Sirk did this sort of thing much
better. 
Since I was seeing an old print, it was unfortunate that the colors seemed
faded and many of the outdoor scenes washed out. Of course, since it was
filmed in 1961, my pet peeve, the poorly used zoom lens, is abused
throughout. All the outdoor shots are shabby and it's easy to see how
Italy wound up making Westerns. You half expect to see a tumbleweed roll
by. 
Asbrubale Vanini--the heroine's father--is not on screen nearly enough,
and he has the best lines. His friend the Contessa also would have been a
welcome addition, if only we had seen more of her.
It is hard to believe ths was directed by film great Roberto Rossellini. 
It also starred Jean-Claude Brialy, Martine Carol, Sandra Milo, Paolo
Stoppa, Laurent Terzieff
Based on the story Vanina Vanini by Stendhal.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
