Title
Review for Charulata (1964)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CHARULATA (director: Satyajit Ray; cast: Madhabi Mukherjee (Charulata),
Soumitr Chatterjee (Amal), Shailen Mukherjee (Bhupati Dutta), Shyamal
Ghoshal (Umapada), Gitali Roy (Manda), Bholanath Koyal (Braja), Suku
Mukherjee (Nishikanta), 1964-India)
Reportedly, Satyajit Ray said, of all the films he directed, that this
was his favorite. It is based on Rabindranath Tagore's controversial
novella, depicting a lonely wife's flirtation with her husband's younger
cousin, Amal (Soumitr), that takes place during the Victorian era, when
India was under British rule, as the story unfolds in an opulent
Calcutta household, in 1879, giving it a spicy Bengali flavor.
Though the plot is simple, the human emotions are not, and the chance
for observing how one feels is maximized in the very perfect structure
that Ray has created for the film, as Charulata (Madhabi), called Charu,
is the neglected and sensitive wife of a newspaper man, Bhupati
(Shailen), who is consumed with the politics of the day, with his
paper's logo being, "The Truth Is What Survives," as he takes pride in
his Anglican witticisms and the fact that he is not one of those idle
rich, but is working hard and doing something that is important. At one
point of the film, his face turns to glee as he is in his newspaper's
press room and he exclaims that he just loves the smell of the ink
press, there is nothing better in the world than that smell.
There is a certain feeling to this b/w illustriously cinematographed
film, that reflects the belief Ray has, that life is a continual rhythm
of birth and death, one is complete because of the other.What breaks out
in streams of genius (love) are what volcanically erupts in this
rhythmic living flow, and what gives sustenance to new beginnings, is
the force of nature that wells up, as reflected in Charu, as the flighty
and playful, 23-year-old Amal, the opposite of his practical 35-year-old
cousin, who is encouraged by him to keep the lonely Charu company and
tutor her, which Amal does by reading her poetry that awakens her hidden
nature, as it allows Charu a chance to realize for the first time in her
life what love for someone else feels like as it churns inside her,
quite unexpectedly, while being with Amal.
Amal is too self-absorbed and loyal to his cousin to notice or, to even,
contemplate what is happening, until later on in the story, and at that
time, he reacts by leaving the house and not acting on his true desires.
The huge house is Charu's domain, as she prates around it with her
hand-made embroidered slippers and her opera glasses, which she
coquettishly uses to spy on people, as she is bored- silly, talking
prattle with Manda (Gitali), the wife of the newspaper's manager, whose
main pleasure in life seems to be when she is having ice cream. From her
second floor bedroom window, Charu will view her kindly but preoccupied
husband from this distance with the same equilibrium she reserves for
the glances she imparts on the strangers passing by.
Amal writes his literary piece and gets it published in a prestigious
magazine called "The Lotus," which inspires Charu to let go of her
inhibitions, as an inventive bit of photography is used by Ray,
undoubtedly influenced by the French New Wave cinema, where we see
Charu's mind in a vortex of activity, recalling her past experiences in
the village she was brought up in.
This turns into her literary piece, published in the other prestigious
magazine "The Philanthrope," which surprises her husband when his friend
Nishikanta (Suku) tells him this as he is celebrating with his newspaper
friends the victory of Gladstone and the Liberals in England, elated
about this because the new government will benefit India more than the
former ruling party, the Tories, did.
The pivotal point of the film is reached by the betrayal of Bhupati by
someone he completely trusted and made the manager of the newspaper and
keeper of the money, Umapada (Ghoshal), who fails to make payments to
keep the paper going and absconds with the stolen money, bankrupting the
paper and breaking the heart of Bhupati, who feels that by losing the
paper he has lost his co-wife.
This is a film that is visually poetic, stunning in its apperceptive
recognitions of life in the raw, without any wasted movement exerted,
with expressive gestures counting for unsaid dialogue and untold
physical encounters replaced by a nuance, such as, by a romantic notion,
as Charu has on a swing, just by a toss of her head upwards and she is
seen in a swoon, and a deliberate word from her will slowly be turning
into a potion that is magically brewing, as it is taking charge of all
her pent-up emotions, as we imagine that we actually can see what is
taking place inside the heads of the would-be lovers, even if nothing
explicit materializes.
The final thrust of emotions erupts inside the already broken-hearted
Bhupati, as he recoups his senses and composure by vacationing at a
beach, where his wife plucks the first gray hair from him, and he
returns to the house, satisfied that he has worked out a plan with his
wife, that he run the political part of the paper they will attempt to
resuscitate, while she will run the literary part.
Once home, opening the letter from Amal, learning that his cousin is
living in Madras and will accept the arranged marriage that Bhupati
worked out, only brings uncontrollable tears to Charu, as Bhupati
awakens for the first time, recognizing what is happening between him
and his neglected wife, and what Amal means to her, as the camera just
stays with him and her, in a final fade out freeze-frame shot, as they
join hands like Michelangelo joined Adam's hand with God, and a perfect
picture is forged in our memory, its feeling so deeply evocative, its
expressive mood so longingly embraced, that we can only be stunned by
its sheer exquisiteness, for we have come across a chaste romance that
is so subtle and delicate that we find it hard to compare it to those in
other films, knowing we have struck pay dirt with this one, for we have
seen how a great filmmaker can bring life out into the light, like only
a master artist can; and, we have seen a film that is timeless, that
will never be outdated, as it has already proven by passing the test of
time, appearing just as modern in 1999 when I saw it, as it did in 1879
when the story took place, and as it did in 1964 when the film was made.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Murali Krishnan
(Dialog in Bengali, English subtitles)
This film is also known by the English title "The Lonely Wife".
Ambition can be blinding.  Bhupati Dutta (Shailen Mukherjee) is a
wealthy man who pours all his efforts into running his political
newspaper in colonial India of the 1870's. He is an intelligent,
trusting, and gentle man, but the total immersion in his work has
isolated him from his beloved wife, Charulata (Madhabi Mukherjee).
Charulata loves Bhupati, so she does not attempt to pry him away
from his newspaper. As a result, she endures a lonely existence
in their large Calcutta house. When Bhupathi finds that his young
cousin Amal (Soumitra Chatterjee) is floundering in his studies,
Bhupathi invites him to join them, and perhaps help with the paper
and gain some focus. Amal arrives (symbolically, along with a storm),
and it is immediately apparent that the two men are very different.
Bhupathi is serious and dismisses sentimental literature for the
stolid political discussion of his paper. The mercurial Amal cannot
be tied down with responsibility. Bhupathi asks Amal to pay
Charulata the attention that he himself has been neglecting to give
her, perhaps even encouraging her to write. Bhupathi is unaware of
the potential danger of mixing a new dynamic into a strained
relationship. Inevitably, Charulata will be drawn to the attention
she craves.
Satyajit Ray takes this simple, straight-forward story and makes
it a rich, complete film by interweaving many layers of symbolism.
>From the initial scene, where we see the cloistered Charulata
embroidering a handkerchief for her absentee husband and observing
the outside world through viewing glasses, it is apparent that
every component of the film is telling a story. When Charulata
tellingly peers at Bhupati, who is pacing and lost in thought,
that single action immediately gives a snapshot of their
relationship with not a word spoken.
This story, by Rabindranath Tagore, is simple and familiar, but
because of its many nuances, it becomes fresh and engaging. It is
no surprise that Charulata becomes attached to Amal. What is
engrossing is how the relationships are represented on multiple
levels. Bhupati is not a bad person. His failing is that he is
living in a sphere that cannot be shared with his wife. He feels
that the only meaningful writings are the sober political opinions
that he espouses in his newspaper, in English. Charulata is also
educated, but does not have any interest in the serious writing of
her husband. Her interests lay in Bengali literature, in emotional
writing which is dismissed by Bhupati. When Amal writes a poetic
story that he shares with Charulata, it is a deep meaningful
gesture. It is an act of sharing and inclusion that the emotionally
hungry Charulata is longing for.
Class plays an interesting role in the nature of the characters.
Bhupati comes from a wealthy family, so he is free to spend his
time in pursuit of his avocation. As a man of high standing, he
is able to take a daring political stand and speak out on issues
in Britain that affect colonial India. Charulata, on the other
hand, is almost a prisoner. Although they live in a large
comfortable house with a beautiful garden, it is her whole world
because she never goes outside. It is actually very lonely for her
and the only company she has is her younger, immature sister-in-law.
All these factors escape Bhupati, and he is not aware that Charulata
only needs a small piece of him. He is so self-absorbed that he does
not even try to construct a world in which both he and his wife can
live.
The story is neither sentimental nor cathartic. It simply attempts
to put a relationship under a microscope to view it in full depth.
The explored themes are universal.
Highly recommended. Satyajit Ray is a the height of his talent in
crafting this film. It is a complex, multilayered story, but the
presentation is kept simple and compelling.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
