Title
Review for Home Page (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Copacetic Pictures/Home Box Office
 Director: Doug Block
 Writer: Doug Block, Deborah Rosenberg
 Cast: Doug Block, Joey Anuff, Justin Hall, Jaime Levy, Julie
Peterson, Howard Rheingold, Louis Rossetto, John Seabrook,
Aliza Sherman, Carl Steadman, Stefanie Syman
   At base, the question that documentarian Doug Block asks
in filming "Home Pages" is this: When we sit alone at our
computers tap-tap-tapping out our responses in chat rooms,
scanning web sites, and contributing autobiographical details
on our own pages, are we demonstrating our sociability?  Are
we reaching out to people the world over, or are we
immersed in ourselves, hiding from actual contact with other
human beings?  The common-sense answer is, of course,
both, depending on the individual who is doing the
tap-tap-tapping.  Since Americans change venues
frequently--the typical resident of the U.S. exchanging one
home for another every five years--perhaps we have lost the
sense of community that we had before the Third Industrial
Revolution cast us adrift.  In that case, the people we relate
to on the Internet are the denizens of our real
neighborhoods--which is all to the good.  Nonetheless
the image that many people have of cyberpunks is of albino-
like creatures who are living in a kind of Platonic cave,
shielded against the burning rays of the sun, devoid of
genuine contact with our fellows and hence appropriately
labeled misfits.
   The computer-addicted people caught by the 43-year-old
Doug Block's cameras in his 1999 Sundance Film Festival
"Home Page" are, in my humble estimation, oddballs and
outcasts almost without exception.  Block could have treated
them as a director like Fellini might, with smiling
condescension, but opts instead to take them as seriously as
they take themselves, like a modern Frederick Wiseman,
thereby eliciting, perhaps, a greater authenticity from his cast
of characters.  
   While the millions of us who are already addicted to the
Internet and those of us who are curiously considering the
habit might be drawn to the movie, many will find Block's
treatment of the early stages of web traffic quite
disappointing.  The film has two major weaknesses.  One is
that with two or three exceptions, the performers are not
likeable people, not folks around whom the more rational
among us would want to spend ten minutes.  The second is
that while this, like all other documentaries, is edited (in fact
"Variety" reviewer Dennis Harvey reporting from Sundance,
holds that "editor Deborah Rosenberg does an outstanding
job weaving numerous threads into an affecting narrative
shape"), I find no such evidence exists.  "Home Page" looks
like a story that shifts from person to person like a kid
scanning TV channels, then slapped together with no more
than a modicum of revision to give it cohesion.
   The motivation for the film comes when its creator, Doug
Block, appears to undergo a mid-life crisis and decides to
follow Swarthmore College student Justin Block around the
country. Justin, like a cyberspace Billy Graham, is meeting
with people of all ages an backgrounds to extol the benefits
of personal pages on the Internet.  Hall, who took a brief
leave of absence from his college to make his odyssey,
sports a unique, knotted hairstyle (which he inexplicably
shaves off when he reaches the age of 21, to make himself
even more unattractive).  Having built one of the Web's first
links three or four years ago, he writes intimate details of his
life into his journal to form a kind of erotic autobiography--
allegedly accessed by 7,000 regular patrons.  One can only
reflect that his dates must have been as exhibitionistic as Hall
to allow intimate details of their relationships with this pioneer
to be on view in much the style of the women in Myles
Berkowitz's documentary feature "Twenty Dates."  One of his
pages features the author in the nude, prompting a plethora
of notes on the walls of a women's bathroom at Swarthmore
which ask the users their opinions of the man who craves so
much attention.
   When he is not focussing on Hall, filmmaker Block
introduces us to his wife, a law professor, and to his mother,
both of whom resist the web.  His gray-haired, lively mom is
one of the few down-to-earth people in the film, insisting that
she'd rather talk with people on the phone to get immediate
responses, insisting that she wants nothing to do with e-mail. 
(One of the final shots in the movie belies her statement:
both she and her husband are seen tapping away late at
night.)  
   Perhaps this movie targets a college audience, but more
likely even the 20-somethings would be turned off by Justin,
who rambles through the movie usually half-nude, an
abysmally inarticulate person whose speech is permeated
with "you-know"'s, "like," "I mean," "what-not," and other such
fillers that have become a trademark of the Monica Lewinsky
generation.  Undoubtedly he is a better writer than he is a
speaker, but Block spends surprisingly little time on the
dynamics of the Internet, casting only an occasional look at
what transpires on the screen.  One can only wonder how a
frightful fellow like Justin ever passed the interview that got
him into Swarthmore, one of the nation's top colleges, but if
he represents the typical student at that and other elite
institutions, standards have indeed plummeted since I went to
college back in the Jurassic Age.
   The film becomes increasingly annoying as we are
familiarized with one pretentious maverick after another,
virtually none able to put together a sentence without a surfeit
of empty verbiage and a clutter of hollow, unnecessary fillers.
Editor Deborah Rosenberg must have the cleanest work room
on the block, as apparently not a frame of this movie ended
up on the cutting-room floor. 

Author
Eugene Novikov
Featuring Justin Hall, Harold Rheingold, Jaime Levy, Julie Petersen,
Carl Steadman, Marjorie Silver, Denise Tenorio, Doug Block. Not Rated
(the equivalent of a mild R for profanity, brief nudity and general
weirdness).
Trying to decipher the true nature and purpose of the internet is akin
to trying to figure out the meaning of life, in that it is an
impossible endeavor. Even in 1996, when this movie was shot, the world
wide web was so many different things to so many different people; now,
it has become an institution comparable to television. Everyone's got
it, some can't live without it. While it may be exceedingly difficult
to "figure out" the net, it would be nice if we could make some sense
out of it and that is exactly what the new documentary Home Page, in
its mature, thoughtful manner, tries to do.
Filmmaker Doug Block started out with the honorable intention of making
a film diary of his adorable little toddler daughter. That was until he
met Justin Hall. A college student at the time, Hall is what we
commonly call a "nerd." He dresses bizarrely, spends an exorbitant
amount of time staring at the computer screen and, most interestingly,
posts every detail of his life on his webpage (http://www.links.net).
Block follows Justin through the next few years of his eccentric
existance and is inspired to make his own webpage, a journal of his
documentary travails (The D-Word). Justin, meanwhile, goes on a country-
spanning trip promoting the internet. His Odyssey finally lands him in
San Francisco, where he moves in with famed internet author and guru
Howard Rheingold, whom he greatly admires. They work on the development
of "Electric Minds," an ambitious web magazine that went "out of
business" some seven months after its launch.
The film's focus isn't just on Justin; indeed, we become intimately
familiar with some other interesting people such as Rheingold himself,
Julie (http://www.awaken.org), Justin's former honcho at HotWired (a
web magazine where he was an intern), as well as the people behind
Suck, a popular, satirical internet publication. These folks all offer
their theories on the web; some are funny, some are weird, all are
interesting.
Home Page begins by abandoning all skepticism. Block acknowledges the
fact that the internet is indeed the future and goes from there. His
subjects' musing comes off as intelligent speculation from people who
know what they are talking about, rather than disjointed ramblings of
web weirdoes, which he easily could have given us. The film works
because it isn't gimmicky or pretentious, rather, it's sincere. Here is
a film with an affection for its subject.
Block finally comes up with the obvious: the internet is a place where
a person of any race, religious affiliation, personality and generation
can communicate and find people with similar interests. For some it is
a way of life, for others it's but a mild diversion, but it has
something for everyone. Granted, this is fairly simple stuff but Block
finds creative, personal ways of presenting it, until we begin to get a
more thorough understanding of the web's significance and its meaning
in all of our lives. Home Page doesn't serve as an instigator of new
and radical ideas, rather, it pushes an already realized and still
valid thought up a notch.
The movie ends with a shot that is at once chilling and promising: a
girl stares, transfixed, at a computer monitor while the notorious
internet logon phone sound plays in the background. There is a child
with an advantage, gazing at the future with those wide, endlessly
curious eyes.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Let's see, you're a filmmaker looking for a documentary subject that can
have a catchy title about something that everyone is curious about but
that only a minority fully understands.  You should choose the World
Wide Web, of course.  There must be a cornucopia of fascinating people
hanging out there in cyberspace whom you could interview.
Having a topical idea for a movie, however, is not necessarily the same
as having a good one or having one that you know how to turn
successfully into a motion picture.  Doug Block's HOME PAGE chronicles
the life of one the Web's more bizarre inhabitants, Justin Hall, a
21-year-old student with foot high hair, who likes to display full
frontal nude images of himself on his web page.  Having him be the star
of one of the first documentaries about the Web is like having the first
documentary on American politics be about David Duke.  Both represent
the fringes of their worlds, but the danger is that non-savvy viewers
will not realize this.  Many parents, for example, already fear that the
Web world is populated with perverts and scam artists lurking around
every corner.
This criticism would be less relevant if HOME PAGE were a
better-constructed documentary or if Justin proved an interesting person
to interview.  But neither is the case.  The documentary is so poorly
lit that the images are frequently indecipherable and background sounds
sometimes drown out the speakers.  The average home movie is of better
quality.  Justin, an extrovert, likes to chronicle details of his sex
life on the Web, which his girlfriend just laughs about.  She does wish
he would describe her with "richer" language, however.
The filmmaker interviews his own very bored wife several times.  In one
of these interviews, he asks her opinion of his project.  "What do you
think of what I'm shooting?" he inquires of his disinterested spouse.
"I'm not looking for intense melodrama."  And he certainly doesn't find
it.
The fatal blow in HOME PAGE comes when you realize that the title is
only a pretext to interview the people in the movie, and they just
aren't compelling characters.  About the only connection to the Web,
other than random quotes from so-called experts, is watching people
enter raw HTML code into computers -- easily, one of the most boring
endeavors in modern life and one that has been rendered unnecessary by
modern software anyway.
HOME PAGE goes on way too long at 1:43.  It is not rated but would be an
R for nudity, profanity and drug usage and would be acceptable for older
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Doug Block.
Featuring: Justin Hall, Doug Block, Lucy Block, Patrick Farley, Denise 
Tenorio, Julie Petersen, Jim Petersen, Howard Rheingold, Judi Rose, John 
Seabrook, Marjorie Silver, Josh Silver, Carl Steadman, J. Carew Kraft.
1999 - 102 minutes
Not Rated (equivalent of an R rating for profanity and brief nudity).
Reviewed November 23, 1999.
Documentarian Doug Block won raves in 1995 (and I was one of them) for his 
quietly poignant "Jupiter's Wife," about a homeless woman living in NYC's 
Central Park. His latest film, made in 1996 and premiering at the 1999 
Sundance Film Festival, is "Home Page," an alternately fascinating and 
disappointing look at the way the Internet has changed peoples' lives since 
1996, the first year it officially caught on with growing popularity. The 
documentary is fascinating because its subject is about something that I, 
myself, am intrigued with. Ever since getting AOL in the summer of 1997, my 
life has been altered in many way, and all for the better. Not only is it an 
enormous outlet in which you can do almost anything on, but it also has paved 
the way for what I am doing right now--writing film reviews and attempting to 
get my voice heard in the profession. 
What makes "Home Page" unsatisfying on many levels, however, is its shaky, 
flawed storytelling. Centering, in large part, on Justin Hall, a fellow 
student at his son's school, Swarthmore College, what starts as a film on 
Block's own daughter quickly turns as he is overtaken by Justin's obsession 
with the net and his own home page (www.links.net). Justin, an alternatively 
dressed and groomed 21-year-old, is a self-proclaimed "physical embodiment of 
the Internet," a young man who has no qualms about revealing the most 
personal things about himself and the people around him on his site. 
Temporarily moving from New York City to San Francisco to stay with Howard 
Rheingold, his mentor, Justin becomes involved in launching Howard's aspiring 
"virtual community" website, called Electric Minds. 
>From here on, the film branches off on several different paths, as we meet 
other web site fanatics, including a few of the employees at Justin's former 
intern job at HotWired, such Julie Petersen and Carl Steadman. Of note, Julie 
reminisces about leaving her husband for Patrick Farley, a fellow web 
designer. 
Through everything, "Home Page" always leads right back to the life of 
Justin. While an eccentric, interesting individual, and the only person whose 
life and website is really delved satisfactorily into, filmmaker Doug Block's 
misstep is in relegating the other people virtually into the background. 
Also, Block disregards quite a lot of other aspects of the Internet and that 
of home pages, and so the film always seems one-sided, as we never are given 
a glimpse into others' relationships with this great, recent technological 
advancement.
In discussing the titled subject, its details remain sketchy, at best. Rarely 
are we ever shown the content on the people's pages, with Block seemingly 
leaving it up to the viewers to go see for themselves when he pops up each of 
the characters' home page addresses at the film's conclusion. Why make a film 
about something, and then not even attempt an effort in exploring that topic? 
As Doug Block follows Justin around more and more, he is inspired to create 
his own site. One scene in which he is trying to learn how to set his page 
up, and is shown to be absolutely delighted when he begins to catch on to 
webmaking, may have been an ultra-realistic portrait of human nature. Block 
botches the effect, however, by not pointing the camera at the computer 
screen to show us what he is looking at or doing.
"Home Page," which is currently in limited theatrical release and is then 
expected to go to cable and home video, is filmed in a very matter-of-fact 
way, with not enough insight into the World Wide Web or home pages to be 
fully recommended. One of Block's goals is to show how a portion of the world 
population has been so romanced by the Internet that they are at a point 
where they can function far better through a computer, rather than in real 
life. The Internet, you see, is sort of like an alternate-reality reality, in 
which many people can speak their mind more honestly through a screen because 
it is a more protected environment. If you don't like something, you can just 
close it and not look at it, but in life, it isn't as simple as that. Block 
is successful in relaying this message, but the target audience (Internet 
fans), I suspect, already knows this. "Home Page" is a documentary not nearly 
intimate enough in its portrait of the people the film inhabits. For 
webaholics, at least its never boring, even at a prolonged 102 minutes.
Special Note: If "Home Page" is not worth the trip to the movie theater or, 
later on, the video store, the film is currently available to download--for 
free--at the IFILM web site. Anyone 
interested in the topic is urged to at least seek the film out here. 
