Title
Review for Carrie (1976)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
DeWyNGaLe
The other night, I made one of the biggest mistakes I have made relating to
movies ever.  I viewed The Rage: Carrie 2, without even seeing the original. 
My original rating for The Rage: Carrie 2 was an A-, but now after seeing this
smart masterpiece, I give it a C+.  The plot lines between the two films are
very similar, but in Carrie, I felt for the character a lot more.  Sissy Spacek
plays Carrie, the high school outcast.  Throughout the film, she is tortured
because she is shy and not with the in crowd.  Carrie has a very unique talent.
 She can move things with her mind.  She researches the subject to see what is
happening, and she learns she has telekinesis, the power to move things with
your mind.  Her mother, played by Piper Laurie, is convinced that the devil is
in her, but Carrie knows the truth.  Some of her tormentors include Sue Snell,
played by Amy Irving, Billy Nolan, played by John Travolta, and Chris
Hargenson, played by Nancy Allen.  They feel no sympathy for Carrie at all. 
The teachers do not like Carrie either.  They also make fun of her.  There is
one teacher though who does care about Carrie.  Her name is Miss Collins, and
she is played by Betty Buckley.  She punishes those who torment Carrie, but in
the end, even Miss Collins turns her back on Carrie.
Tommy Ross, played by William Katt, is one of the most popular boys in the
school.  He is asked by Sue to ask Carrie to the prom, to make Carrie feel
better about herself.  He asks, and Carrie declines.  He keeps on asking Carrie
though, and she finally gives in.  Now, Carrie must go through her mother,
Margaret, played by Piper Laurie, who thinks of going to the prom as a sin. 
Her mother thinks of almost everything as a sin.  She is a very religious
person, and therefore Carrie is not allowed to do much outside the house.  When
Margaret believes Carrie is acting up, she will put her in the closet and lock
her in there.  Her mother is just one more person who torments her.  After
demanding she is going to the prom, Carrie goes.
At the prom, no one can believe that Tommy Ross and Carrie are together. 
Carrie is actually enjoying herself for once in her life.  After winning prom
queen, Carrie thinks she has it made.  Then, something terrible happens which
destroys her night.  The in-crowd has setup Carrie in an awful prank to make
her feel horrible about herself.  Nobody knows that Carrie has the power to
shut them up from laughing at her withing seconds.  They certainly do after she
uses her telekinetic powers to get revenge on everyone at the prom, resulting
in many deaths.  The prom sequence was very effective and moving.  Watching
Carrie watch her other classmates die was very difficult.  You could tell that
she was very mad, but she was also upset with what she was doing to all of her
fellow classmates.  That night, she killed many innocent people, people who
didn't even make fun of her.  She did get her long awaited revenge though.  
Sissy Spacek was so exquisite as the role of Carrie.  She played the part where
you felt feelings for Carrie, and almost just wanted to break down and cry when
seeing her upset face.  It is beyond me why Spacek did not win the Oscar for
Best Actress in 1976, considering she gave one of the best performances I have
ever witnessed in my movie-going.  Piper Laurie, as Carrie's mother, was a very
interesting role to watch.  She played the part almost perfectly, creating the
feel of a strong, religious person very well. 
The in-crowd was played almost to perfection by the large cast, and although
the characters were extremely repugnant, they were played very proficiently. 
Amy Irving as Sue Snell perhaps gave the best performance out of the crowd. 
The entire in-crowd were quite possibly some of the most frustrating characters
I have ever come across in a movie.  Carrie was such a nice, sweet girl, and
they tortured her with all of their might.
The Bottom Line- Without a doubt, Carrie is one of the best horror films of our
time.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I'm convinced CARRIE has become regarded as a classic 
merely because it depicts what everyone would like to do -- go to the 
prom with the best-looking person in high school, then kill all the 
students and teachers with your mind. Well, I wouldn't have minded it 
at MY senior prom...
        CARRIE set the stage for most future adaptations of Stephen 
King books -- cut most of the plot out, melodramatize the rest and fill 
it with B-grade actors. This isn't always the case; for every "Starsky 
and Hutch" star in a vampire flick, there's a Nicholson yelling, "Here's 
Johnny" or, here, John Travolta slaughtering a pig. Usually, though, 
King's novels don't translate well to screen, as in this threadbare tale 
of a misunderstood teenager who just happens to be telepathic.
        The title character is played by Sissy Spacek, who is probably 
one of the strangest looking actresses in movie history. In the famous 
opening sequence, she's in the locker room shower after gym class, 
scrubbing away at her pert breasts, when she gets her period. It scares 
the crap out of her, this unwarranted blood flow (those last three words 
would be a good name for a punk band, by the way), so she goes 
running through the locker room. Naked and screaming, blood on her 
hands. I'd say that's a good way to never, ever be popular again.
        We soon find out why young Carrie is so shocked. The 
principal and gym coach send her home, where she encounters her 
Crazy Christian mom (Piper Laurie). There are a lot of religious 
whackos in Stephen King movies, but Laurie creates one of the most 
memorable, house full of candles and decked out with a prayer closet 
that has a giant cross-bound Christ. Mom tells Carrie her period is 
surely a sign of sexual sin ("First comes the blood, then the men") and 
locks her in the closet.
        It's no wonder she's ostracized at school, but it gets worse 
after the gym coach punishes the other girls for pelting her with 
tampons. The tampon pelting (another good name for a punk group) 
earns them a special after-school gym practice, where they have to 
jiggle their way through jumping jacks and push-ups. Revenge is the 
first thing on the minds of the popular crowd; one of them orders her 
Frampton-looking boyfriend to ask Carrie to the prom.
        No surprise, the boyfriend ends up with an appreciation for 
Carrie after she makes herself up for the first time, damning her 
mother's advice through a little telepathy. Without her mental abilities, 
there would have been no chance for retaliation after the horrific prank 
pulled on her at the prom. It may seem an overreaction to eliminate 
your entire school, but then again, there's really no proper etiquette for 
what to do when someone dumps pigs' blood on you at your prom. 
Someone should write Miss Manners about that, I guess.
        CARRIE is certainly one of the more memorable Stephen King 
adaptations and, as the first, worth watching. Still, there's not much to 
the movie. The "creepy girl gets humiliated, peers laugh, get in trouble 
and decide to get revenge, after which creepy girl gets better revenge" 
plot could be told in a "Tales From the Crypt" episode. The climax, 
filmed through a blood-red filter and split-screen, is more hokey than 
scary viewed 21 years later. We don't see much motivation behind the 
people who ally themselves with Carrie -- the boyfriend and the gym 
coach -- only capsulizations. I haven't read the book, but there has to 
be more to the story than that.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...
