Title
Review for Sweet Smell of Success (1957)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Sweet Smell of Success" was a commercial and critical
failure when first released.  It wasn't nominated for any
Academy Awards.  It nearly ruined the career of director
Alexander MacKendrick.  But over time, the film has acquired
a reputation.  With its dark and squalid themes of men
exchanging their integrity for money and power, it never
compromises in its pessimistic attitude towards human nature.
Tony Curtis plays a detestable press agent, who earns
his fees by getting plugs for clients in newspaper columns.
Lancaster is a self-important gossip columnist who knows
just how important it is to Curtis's career to place his
plugs.  Lancaster lives with his sister Susan Harrison,
and is pathologically determined to remain living with her.
Lancaster is "freezing" Curtis from his column until Curtis
can break up a romance between Harrison and jazz musician
Steve Dallas (Marty Milner).  Lancaster and Curtis go to
unbelievable depths, even willing to commit serious crimes,
to achieve this.
While Curtis feels an occasional twinge of remorse, this
cannot be said for Lancaster's character.  People have been
fawning over him for so long that he has come to believe in
his own omnipotence.
Burt Lancaster somehow got top billing over Tony Curtis,
although the latter gets much more screen time.  This may
be because Lancaster co-produced the film.
The major handicap to "Sweet Smell of Success" is that the
two leads are so rotten to the core that their actions are
less interesting than repugnant.  Their characters are
contrasted against dismally earnest Milner and meek Harrison,
who aren't interesting at all.  Also, dated slang and petty
bickering sometimes hampers the script.
Still, one has to admire the producers for disdaining
box office success in pursuit of their goals.  The film's
condemnation of gossip sheets and the people behind them
could not be made more clear.  And if the dialogue is
occasionally overdone, the writing is still much better
than you can find in an Audie Murphy western.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
