Title
Review for M. Butterfly (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A strange, off-center treatment of a very odd footnote to history
that works about half the time.
David Cronenberg is capable of making a bad movie, but never quite capable
of making a boring one. M. BUTTERFLY is a good substantiation of that
theory, a consistently interesting, watchable and tasteful, but not quite
successful, movie about one of the oddest love affairs ever recorded. Read
no further if you would rather discover more on your own.
Rene (Jeremy Irons) is a French diplomat assigned to China in the mid-60s.
He is unsure of himself and his position, and doesn't consider his ignorance
of the culture a handicap. Then he meets Song Liling, a Chinese opera singer
-- they have a great bit of dialogue over her choice of "Madame Butterfly"
as her aria of choice at a government function -- and an erotic fascination
he didn't even know exist is stirred up for this woman. Except that she's
not a woman, but ... a man. She is, however, a very good caricature of a
woman -- a contrivance created by a man, designed to work as a spy.
The movie makes a great deal about the fact that even the two of them in a
room, pouring tea for each other, is dangerous. "Everything I do has
implications," Song whispers. In fact, the movie makes everything they do so
top-heavy with implications that it often forgets there's a story to tell.
It gives us many of the more explicit details of how Song concealed her
biology from her lover, but they only make Rene's self-delusion seem even
odder. For instance, based on what we see, Song only allows Rene to have
anal sex with him -- but then announces that she's pregnant. Rene is
overjoyed instead of perplexed. Surely he can't be that ignorant? No, but
maybe he can be that self-deluded. But...
Well, if the movie's intention is to show how deeply Rene's self-delusion
runs, it doesn't quite manage it. It shows him being promoted at his job and
using many of Song's own half-baked aphorisms as some kind of insight into
the "Eastern mind", or something -- and then when he loses his job and goes
back to Paris, continuing his self-deception when Song manages to secure a
visa to Paris as a cultural exchange student (a development I found strange
in the light of the fact that the last time we saw her, she was in a
re-education camp). And when he denounces the man over the illusion at the
end, it's stilted and unconvincing.
Jeremy Irons is the perfect actor for the role of Rene, but he has been
mishandled somehow. He's only really proper in the beginning, as the meek
accountant who doesn't know what he's getting into, but when he swoons over
Song, he becomes strangely hammy. There's no real sense that he's got a
passion for this woman; he looks like he's acting, even as an actor.
John Lone as Song gives us a very credible woman for most of the movie, but
she's got a weird acerbicness, a self-deprecation at the core of the
character that we have to ascribe to self-hatred of some kind, because the
movie never gives us any other real explanation.
M. BUTTERFLY, as I said before, is not a bad movie. But there are too many
ways it fails to make it a good one. We get lots of background information
about China at the time, including a few functional details about the
Cultural Revolution, but not enough real insight into how a man like Rene
could deceive himself. There's a couple of canned speeches at the end of the
movie about how Rene loved the illusion more than any reality, but they
stand out like broken fingers, not attached to anything.
In the end we're left with a technically excellent, and watchable, but not
very satisfying curiosity. Cronenberg has always specialized in a kind of
clinical detachment in his movies, even when the most ghastly subject matter
is in focus. Sometimes this works (DEAD RINGERS, CRASH), and sometimes, like
in M. BUTTERFLY, it keeps us from getting any real subjective insight. Okay,
he loved the fantasy more than the reality -- but why? I guess the answer
will require a more daring movie.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Date Released:  10/8/93 (selected cities); 10/15/93 (everywhere)
     Running Length:  1:41
     Rated:  R (Sexual situations, nudity)
     Starring:  Jeremy Irons, John Lone, Barbara Sukowa, Ian Richardson
     Director:  David Cronenberg
     Producer:  Gabriella Martinelli
     Screenplay:  David Henry Hwang, based on his play
     Music:  Howard Shore
     Released by Geffen Films through Warner Brothers
The place and time are Beijing, 1964.  Rene Gallimard, an accountant 
working for the French Embassy, has just arrived in China.  Early in his 
tenure, he attends a performance of Puccini's MADAME BUTTERFLY performed 
by the outspoken and exotic singer Song Liling (John Lone), who is 
actually a man masquerading as a woman.  Not recognizing this, Gallimard 
proceeds to pursue an affair with Liling, never once recognizing that he 
is being duped.  However, the deception goes even deeper, for Liling is 
working for the Communist government and using the relationship with 
Gallimard to procure important French intelligence.
The main problem with M. BUTTERFLY is one of credibility.  All other 
issues momentarily aside, there is a huge question that needs to be 
answered:  How can Gallimard have lived with, and made love to, this 
person for eighteen years, yet not recognized that Liling is actually a 
man?  No firm solution is given, and the subject is only tackled in the 
most oblique and unsatisfactory manner.
The first half of M. BUTTERFLY, which takes place in China, is far better 
than the disastrously-constructed final portion (in France).  While the 
romance between Gallimard and Liling isn't particularly effective (Jeremy 
Irons generates about as much heat as an ice cube), there are at least 
some interesting ideas presented here which, if nothing else, provide 
fodder for the intellect.  Liling has some uncompromising opinions about 
the roles of men and women in society.  In answer to the question of why 
men are frequently used to take on the roles of women in Chinese operas, 
his response is: "Because only men know how women are supposed to act."
As a whole, the plot doesn't pay much attention to reality, despite 
having been based on a true-to-life scandal.  There are a lot of little 
things that simply don't ring true.  
Yet, despite all the problems, M. BUTTERFLY remains strangely compelling 
through most of the first hour, and a great deal of the credit for this 
must go to actor John Lone, who does an excellent job in a challenging 
role.  However, when the scene shifts to Paris, the story gets so 
disjointed and confused that it's impossible to know what to think.  
The final confrontation between Gallimard and Liling as a man, is a dud.  
There's no connection between these two, and it's difficult to accept 
that they've lived together as husband and wife for so many years.  The 
emotions released are obviously not heartfelt, and the lack of any 
genuine catharsis leaves the audience detached and frustrated.  With his 
shedding of female garb, Lone loses the bulk of his charisma.
The final scene is artsy, symbolic, pretentious, and empty.  Rarely have 
I been more disgusted by a supposedly-intelligent film's choice of 
"resolutions".  I had thought Cronenberg a better craftperson than this.
Needless to say, there are similarities between M. BUTTERFLY and THE 
CRYING GAME, but beyond the switched-gender portrayals, there isn't much 
substance to the comparisons.  The bulk of THE CRYING GAME makes sense; 
the same cannot be said about this movie.  There are also a few issues 
touched on here that are presented far more effectively in FAREWELL MY 
CONCUBINE.  
Jeremy Irons has done some excellent work in the past, but he is badly 
miscast here (as he was in Louis Malle's DAMAGE).  The role of Gallimard 
demands an actor who can effectively convey deeply-felt passions and a 
driving obsession, tasks that Irons appears incapable of.  He is flat, so 
the movie, which is told almost exclusively from his perspective, 
sputters and fizzles helplessly.
M. BUTTERFLY disappoints in almost every area, which is a shame 
considering the high regard with which the play has been received.  The 
movie, however, seems to make the wrong decision at almost every 
opportunity, trying for the kind of melodramatic tragedy that only works 
in opera.  Motion pictures like this need a firm grounding in reality 
which, sadly, Cronenberg has failed to provide.  As a result, M. 
BUTTERFLY never gets out of the cocoon.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jeremy Irons, John Lone.
Screenplay:  David Henry Hwang, based on his play.
Director:  David Cronenberg.
     I approached the film version of M. BUTTERFLY with something of a
"show me" attitude.  I'd had the good fortune to see a sensational
production of the play by Northern California's TheatreWorks company,
with an amazing lead performance by Mark Capri as Gallimard, and I felt
that any other version would have to be pretty good to impress me.  I
also questioned the choice of David Cronenberg, whose previous efforts
had all been horror films, as director.  It therefore comes as a
pleasant surprise that Cronenberg's M. BUTTERFLY maintains a real
faithfulness to the basic themes of David Henry Hwang's Tony
Award-winning play, although it loses a great deal from the absence of
the stage version's Brechtian devices.
     M. BUTTERFLY is based on the true story of French diplomat Bernard
Boursicot, here called Rene Gallimard.  Stationed in Beijing in 1964,
Gallimard (Jeremy Irons) is a petty bureaucrat responsible for
reviewing expense reports.  One evening, he attends an embassy function
for a performance of selections from Puccini's opera "Madama
Butterfly."  The featured vocalist is Song Liling, a mysterious figure
who intrigues Gallimard.  That intrigue soon leads to an affair,
despite a small detail of which Gallimard is apparently unaware:  Song
(John Lone) is a man.  Gaining confidence from his new love, Gallimard
is promoted to a position of importance in French intelligence.  He and
Song carry on their relationship for several years, until an
investigation forces him to know all there is to know about the spying
game.
     It's useless to argue that the story is implausible, based as it
is on a real event; M. BUTTERFLY is itself an attempt to explain how it
could have happened.  Hwang's conclusion is that the
Boursicot/Gallimard story is inextricably tied to the perception
Westerners hold of the East, that of a culture of subservience.
Consequently, they think of all Asians as feminized, making Gallimard's
assumption of Song's gender purely cultural.  Hwang and Cronenberg
convey that sense of Western sexual/political arrogance in lines which
draw knowing chuckles, such as Gallimard's assurance to his superior
that the Vietnamese would "submit to any show of strength" by the
Americans.  It's an interesting theme well-explored.
     Where I felt M. BUTTERFLY was less successful was in portraying
the complexities of Gallimard's character.  In the play, he speaks
directly to the audience, a device which allows for some ironic
observations of his state of mind.  The film's more conventional
narrative approach makes Gallimard less pathetic than he should be.
Lost also is the impression that before meeting Song, Gallimard is
timid and sexually inept; it is only after asserting dominance over his
"Butterfly" that he becomes a "real man."  Without this aspect of his
personality evident, his vulnerability to the deception doesn't make as
much sense.  There should be a clear sense that psychologically, he
*needs* Song to be a woman, and it's not quite there.
     Such an emphasis on Gallimard's psychology would also have gone
far toward making John Lone a credible choice as Song.  B. D. Wong, the
head biotechnician in JURASSIC PARK and the originator of Song on
Broadway, was once attached to the film, but was passed over when Lone
became available.  The choice was a mistake.  Lone's voice has an
eerie, detached quality which I liked for its mysterious allure, but
the fact is that he just looks too masculine, and an eight foot high
close-up doesn't exactly promote illusion.  Irons is a much better
choice as Gallimard.  He's great at showing Gallimard's cocky
Eurocentrist side, and I loved his oddly amused expression when he
first sees Song dressed as a man.  Once again, however, it was the
impotent Gallimard who disappeared, particularly in the too-brief look
at his other extra-marital affair, where what should have been disgust
instead becomes mere surprise.
     M. BUTTERFLY is a fascinating story, and its screen telling is
more than fair to the stage spirit.  I only wish Hwang had been allowed
to keep the focus on the internal.  It's a good film that could have
been a very good one.
