Title
Review for Mimic (1997)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Like its closest ancestor, the ALIEN series, the new film MIMIC by
writer and director Guillermo Del Toro is as stunning visually as it is
frightening.  The film even has a heroine, Dr. Susan Tyler who, like
Ripley, comes face-to-face with the lead monster in the end, but this
time the key to the survival of the monster species is a male.
     In her first major non-comedic role, Academy Award winning actress
Mira Sorvino, last seen in the delightful comedy ROMY AND MICHELE'S
HIGH SCHOOL REUNION, plays Dr. Susan Tyler, "the bug lady."  Sorvino,
who seemed incapable of playing anyone with an IQ above 80, proves that
her talent is much broader than expected.  Her Susan, while not near as
tough as Sigourney Weaver's Ripley, is quite strong even though she is
vulnerable and scared.  Susan is also embarrassed because it is her
scientific miscalculation that unleashed a plague of giant cockroach
mutants on the world.  (This is one of those good shows -- SLING BLADE
was another -- which will immediately be written off by many people as
soon as the plot is described.  Afterall, not many moviegoers go to the
entertainment section looking for a good cockroach film.)
     Cinematographer Dan Laustsen is a master at the art of the shadow.
The shadowy mood combined with the script's proper sense of timing --
the best monster movies delay our first complete view of the monster as
long as possible -- yields a film that builds its terror properly.
Just as some of the sexiest films are those in which the people stay
fully dressed but seem always on the verge of taking off their clothes,
so it is with monster movies, the tease is the key.  In the entire
first hour of MIMIC, the monster, in the form of a shadowy figure of a
man in a cloak, is seen only in glimpses.  Marco Beltrami's eerie and
foreboding music adds to the ever-present feeling that death is right
around the corner.
     "Strickland's Disease came to our town like a thief in the night,
threatening a generation of our children," Dr. Peter Mann (Jeremy
Northam) tells a large assembly of reporters.  Peter, a C.D.C. (Center
for Disease Control) researcher and Susan's live-in lover, gives this
speech praising Susan.  Two years earlier a disease, transmitted by
cockroaches was killing kids even more than polio did in the 1950s.
Her DNA-based solution was to create a vicious "Judas Breed" of
cockroach that would kill out the disease carrying cockroaches, but
being infertile, the Judas Breed would themselves die within six
months.  Since the kids stopped perishing, the program was thus
declared a huge and complete success.
     Almost all of the story happens three years later, and -- you
guessed it -- the Judas Breed did not die out, but instead mutated into
something dastardly and human-sized.  Of course, at first we don't know
that for sure.  But, when the C.D.C. researchers find excrement stuck
to the ceiling where people died and when they break the mess open to
find large buttons in it, this is a definite hint that all is not right
in The Big Apple.
     As in all horror films, people do stupid things.  Even when
fearsome creatures may be lurking, they work in darkened rooms lit by
only a single bulb.  In fact the light of flickering bad florescent
lights and low-wattage incandescent bulbs adds dramatically to the
horrific ambiance.  Figures in the background are seen, but escape just
before being noticed as the audience whispers a collective "look out!"
under their breath.
     F. Murray Abraham appears in an inconsequential role as an expert
named Dr. Gates.  He reflects, rather philosophically, on an insect's
inner motivation.  "Can I eat it or will it eat me?" it turns out is
what those little critters are always thinking.  And do our big bugs
ever eat: children, pets, big beefy men, you name it.  The fright,
however, does not come from visual gore since most meals are savored
off-screen.  The fear comes in knowing what happens.
     Charles Dutton appears as the street-wise -- actually subway-wise
since most of the film happens in and below the New York City subway --
cop named Leonard.  He is great as the tough and disbelieving officer
who wants to play everything by the book.  There is even a boy with a
heightened sense of hearing who calls the big bug, "Mr. Funny Shoes"
for the sounds he makes.
     While the picture is certainly frightening, it is even more
fascinating.  MIMIC has just enough scientific underpinnings to make
the story interesting and not seem too ridiculous.  The ending,
although predictable in its outcome, has several surprises that use
almost plausible scientific theories.  MIMIC is an ALIENS set in our
time and with a terrific look that begs to be seen even though the
potential for fright is ever-present.  One thing is certain.  After
seeing it, you will look at street grates in a totally different way.
     MIMIC runs 1:44.  It is rated R for terror and a little profanity.
The show would be fine for teenagers who can handle horror flicks.  I
recommend the picture to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Steve Kong
Mimic has a title that describes what it does. Mimic imitates and copies
other movies. But, like the predators portrayed in Mimic, Mimic is a bad
copy of other movies.
Mimic stars Mira Sorvino as an entomologist who creates a cure for a deadly
disease that infects children.  Because the disease is spread via
cockroaches, Sorvino's character Susan creates, via genetic engineering, an
insect, Judas Breed, that kills the roaches.  These genetically engineered
insects have a six-month life span and are sterile.  This interesting story
is just the back-story of Mimic.  It has so much potential.  But, Mimic
picks up only after the explanation of the back-story.  Like the dinosaurs
from Jurassic Park, nature takes its way with the insects of Mimic and they
breed into a whole colony.  And it is here where the movie picks up, the
human battle for survival against these insects.
So, you may ask, where does the movie get its title?  The insects have
mutated to resemble their predators, and they mimic us, the humans.  The
insects are quite interesting actually, the movie producers chose not to
use the easy way to have the insects mimic us.  This easy way would be by
giving the insects the ability to morph into humans.  Instead the producers
chose to have the insects "wrap" themselves tight with their wings to form
a humanlike shape.
Mimic does not really work as a horror film because it is hardly scary.
But, there are times where the director, Guillermo Del Toro, builds some
heavy tension.  But, this tension is lost because the payoff for the
tension just does not get where it should.  Del Toro does have the eye for
mood though, he does a good job at setting a dark mood for the film, and
continuing it throughout the film.
Academy Award winner Sorvino shows some limitations as an actress in Mimic,
her two real feelings shown in the film are scared and angry.  The other
Academy Award winner F. Murray Abraham has a small role in Mimic and does
not get too much screen time.  The real star of Mimic is the highly
likeable, and entertaining Charles Dutton as the cop Leonard.
The one thing that comes early on in Mimic that makes it almost apparent
that it is trying to imitate and copy from other films is the credits.  The
opening credits are presented in the flashy, carved fashion that are
reminiscent of the credits of Se7en.
Mimic is a B-grade movie with A-list actors.  It is a horror film, and
although it does better than this summers other horror film, Event Horizon,
it does not reach any new heights.  Like Event Horizon, there was so much
potential for Mimic, but it was all lost.

Author
David Wilcock
Everyone knows that old rule, 'Never work with children and animals.' In
this latest horror flick Mimic case, it's 'Never work with children and
genetically enhanced killer animals' instead, as Mimic features both of
these and succeeds in doing nothing except mildly engaging the audience. The
film begins in New York, where we see children dying from a mysterious
disease, which is being carried by cockroaches. Dr. Susan Tyler (Sorvino)
creates a genetically enhanced bug (the 'Judas' breed) , however, which is
designed to kill all cockroaches. The bug does it's job, the cockroaches all
die, and the terror is gone. 'Three years later' appears on the screen, and
we discover that the Judas breed is back, bigger than ever, and ready to
kill. The spin on this bug, however, is that it can mimic it's predator, and
in this case....it's humans. That should teach us for squishing all those
bugs.
What should be a roller coaster ride with bugs everywhere, tons of gory
deaths and some massive set pieces instead turns out to be a rather subdued,
almost boring movie which plods along at a very slow pace. Perhaps the movie
was trying to be thought provoking, and trying to avoid the 'Predator' type
movie it could easily have become. If it is, then the director and writers
have made the wrong move, because this is perfectly suited to be an all out
action fest. The director, who bought us Cronos, a far superior film,
directs the film in a calm, and frankly dull movie. There are few exciting
sequences, instead just a lot of people talking. If the dialogue was
intelligent, then it would be all right, but it's sadly babbling nonsense.
In fact, the script is embarrsingly weak, and the characterizations not much
better .Sorvino and company are as 2D as characters come, with the script
not bothering to develop them.  There is some action in this film, but it's
directed in such an annoying way, it's just infuriating to watch. The camera
cuts all over the place, disoreitating the audience, and instead of
involving the audience in the action, it merely alienates them.
The peformances are O.K, if slightly below average. Sorvino is O.K, although
she's not very good at conveying terror, or anything emotion really. The
supporting cast are all sterotypes, with characters such as a big black
security guard with a foul mouth, a geeky scientist with spectacles, and
what could be the most stereotypical mexican 'old timer' ever. Their
reasonable good fun, however. Mimic, then, may fail with it's story, pacing
and characters, but the film does look good. Like Dark City, Mimic is a
definite case of style of content. It may be a bit too gloomy for it's own
good, but the sets look nice, and parts of the film are directed well. But
looks aren't good enough to save Mimic from the depths of mediocre,
somewhere where it shouldn't really belong. A good opportunity, then,
wasted. A shame.
OVERALL RATING=**  OUT OF  *****
REVIEW BY DAVID WILCOCK Š1998
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!

Author
Ben Hoffman
It is a given that when you mess with nature you can expect
trouble. That is what happens when a contagious illness is spread
by a cockroach-like insect in NYC where in some neighborhoods
cockroaches are not exactly unknown. To the rescue comes Dr.
Susan Tyler (Mira Sorvino), a top-notch scientist, and her
husband, Dr. Peter Mann (Jeremy Northam).    They successfully
combine the DNA from other species thus creating a counter agent
to the disease-carrying insect.    This new creation is let loose
in NYC and the plague ceases . . . until three years later when
it emerges in a newer and more horrible form: giant cockroaches
with wings and with one king roach fathering a mass of winged
roaches.
Many science fiction film, as in MIMIC, keep the screen dark for its
eeriness.  Here, much of the movie takes place under the city, in
abandoned subways and sewers . . . and always dark green or darker
hues. That manipulative oppressiveness soon becomes trying; when
almost the whole film is gloomy it is annoying.   In fact the whole
idea of using cockroaches strikes me as being tasteless.
Mira Sorvino's talent is utterly wasted. Dr. Gates, an entomologist
to whom Susan turns to for advice is in nothing more than a cameo
and another waste of a fine actor. Josh Brolin plays an
investigator, Charles S Dutton is a cop, Chuy, the autistic child
who plays "music" by clicking spoons, is played by Alexander
Goodwin.   I found that whole bit about the spoons annoying.
Mimic is based on a short story by Donald A Wolheim and should
have remained just that.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 4 September 1997 with Andrea for $8.75 at the East 86th Street Theatre
*Mimic*, for me, is a case of really wanting to like a movie and really
looking forward to it and eventually realizing how idiotic that sort of
optimism can be. 
I was given ample warning way back when I saw Batman & Robin, when a young
man, clipboard in hand, outside the theatre was giving away preview
screening passes for Mimic. You had to be 17-34 years old to enter. By the
time I called the RSVP number, they only wanted 17-24 years. So, I was
washed up at 33... 
*Mimic* starts off very strong; the opening credits were marvellous. An
entomologist's dream and a creepy sequence for the rest of us, with sharp
crisp images and slightly blurry, inky American Typewriter font. The mood
continued with dark set design and evocative sets that showed New York
City in crisis; children were falling prey to Strickler's Disease, which
brings Susan Tyler (Mira Sorvino) to NYC. 
To kill the Strickler's Disease, which is borne by cockroaches, Susan and
Peter (Jeremy Northam) genetically engineer a new insect, the "Judas
breed." It is supposed to kill the cockroaches that kill the children, and
then die out within a generation. Unf ortunately, that does not happen,
and three years later, some perplexing, frightening evidence shows up that
points to the Judas breed's survival. 
Up to this point, the movie is sufficiently creepy, and engaging. The CDC
workers are being shadowed by a dark figure who is able to hang
upside-down from ceilings, jump off buildings, etc. But there is some
mysterious moviemaking law that states that hal fway through a decent
creature feature all sense and writing goes out the window and it turns
into a Die Hard film. 
Once the CDC investigators (including Josh Brolin) actually get close to
their prey, the whole film converts itself from smart thriller to splatter
fest. Some people are killed instantly, some are "saved for later"--that
is one of many facets that make no sense. A lot of the peripheral
characters who could be interesting get lost in the shuffle--F. Murray
Abraham as a fellow entomologist, Giancarlo Giannini as the immigrant
shoeshiner, Alexander Goodwin as the strange "special" Chuy (Retarded?
Autistic? We never quite find out what his problem is). Charles Dutton is
completely wasted as Leonard, the ornery subway cop, who, by the way,
should have a police radio on him, but doesn't. That alone is a major
gaffe. They spend a good part of the film "seven sto ries underground" but
there is ample sunlight. I could go on, but why bother?
In the end, what happens in Mimic makes little or no sense, the audience
seemed to agree with my unspoken "enough already." Perhaps even
17-year-olds are not so easily fooled.
Pet Peeve: A lot of kids are harmed here, in a gratuitous way. Very
unappealing.  
Copyright (c) 1997, Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com.
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Jamie Peck
Dimension / 1:40 / 1997 / R 
Cast: Mira Sorvino; Jeremy Northam; Charles Dutton; Giancarlo Giannini;
F. Murray Abraham; Josh Brolin; Alexander Goodwin 
Director: Guillermo Del Toro 
Screenplay: Matthew Robbins; John Sayles; Steven Soderbergh 
        Okay, check this out -- you know those craggy, mysterious,
trenchcoat-clad figures that skulk around the alleys and transit systems
of New York City? As it turns out, they're really genetically-evolved
mutant bug-like monsters. Who'd have thought? 
        Well, there's actually an answer to that second question, and it's John
Sayles, Steven Soderbergh and Matthew Robbins, who use the strange
premise to a solid effect in the new horror flick "Mimic." Credit
Dimension Films (a subdivision of Miramax) with single-handedly reviving
the genre -- they're the movie company behind this, last winter's hit
"Scream" and the looks-like-a-winner "Nightwatch," to be released this
fall. "Mimic" has its flaws, but its a nonetheless a strong entry in an
until-recently dead film category, boasting a sturdy dramatic turn by
Mira Sorvino and some of the frightening special effects of the year. 
        Sorvino plays expert entomologist Susan Tyler. When New York City is
seized by an unusual plague that effects only children, Tyler targets
the source -- cockroaches. She engineers the creation of the Judas
Breed, a ferocious DNA-spliced insect to be released in the city's
sewers; their purpose is to secrete a substance that will attract and
destroy the disease carriers and then keel over themselves when their
six-month life expectancy has been exhausted. Everything is pulled off
... or so it seems, until three years later when bizarre murders begin
in the area. 
        It seems as though the Judas Breed didn't die out as thought. One
scientist says, "Evolution has a way of keeping things alive," and in
the Judas Breed's case, it has also caused maturity in physical stature,
as they can "mimic" their prey in order to infiltrate them. And since we
are
the game and they are the hunters, they are able to take on human
appearance -- albeit a tall, pale, bald human who wears a long, black
trenchcoat. Together with disease researcher husband Peter (Jeremy
Northam of "Emma" and "The Net") and a quirky secondary cast that
includes a tough cop (Charles Dutton) and a sarcastic investigator (Josh
Brolin), Tyler takes to the sewers to uncover the nest and find a way to
exterminate the Judas Breed once and for all. 
        I could carp about certain problematic areas of "Mimic" (and I will
momentarily), but the movie provides such a high level of
gnaw-off-your-fingers fun that it's somewhat useless to even bother. The
story background is both interesting and creative, but "Mimic" doesn't
spend more time than it should on it. In fact, "Mimic" moves incredibly
fast, with dazzling opening credits a la "Seven," a first half that's
engrossing, exciting setup and a second part that satisfies with much
creepy-crawly impact. Director Guillermo Del Toro toys well with
audience expectation,
and waits until exactly the right moment to unleash the first full-view
of the monster. From then on, the shocks are plenty, the scares are
amusing and the terror is palpable. 
        Sorvino has fashioned a career -- and a great one -- by dazzlingly 
portraying vacuous airheads in "Mighty Aphrodite" and "Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion." The surprise here is that Sorvino is as
good playing the brain as she is the bimbo. The dashing Northam offers
solid support, as does Dutton in the small but heroic role he normally
plays. Giancarlo Giannini, as a local shoeshiner whose seemingly
autistic grandson has disappeared after encountering the Judas Breed, is
properly eccentric even if the subplot devoted to him is Mimic's most
uninteresting one. Brolin ("Flirting With Disaster"), a little-known but
appealing actor, is not given much to do but compensates with an
engaging performance. 
        Del Toro, the man behind the Mexican vampire film "Cronos," doesn't
skimp when it comes to shocking in the first hour (basically, he's not
afraid to kill off children), but my main gripe about "Mimic" is that
its concluding 50 minutes isn't so daring, relying more on slick
convention than daring innovation to tell its story. At no time was I
not entertained, but "Mimic" ends up being a patchwork rip-off of the
"Alien" trilogy, "Jurassic Park" and other sci-fi landmarks. Still,
that's not something that you don't exactly think about going in, and
besides, if "Mimic" mimics other movies, it smartly mimics the best. 

Author
Walter Frith
'Mimic' is a grade 'a' idea given the 'b' movie treatment.  It has all the
trappings of that genre.  People not knowing what to make of a strange
phenomenon at first.  People trapped in a desperate situation confronting the
deadly menace and finally how to kill the intruder and is that intruder
killed off convincingly?  
A bug scientist (Mira Sorvino) has invented a species of insect that will
help prevent the spread of a deadly disease affecting children when they are
bitten by a cockroach.  The pests are primarily found in the New York City
subway tunnels and make their way forward and the new insects created are
supposed to counter their efforts.  They are turned loose in the location
mentioned but three years after the incident there is a new problem.  The
experimental bugs follow the theory of evolution and spawn a new form of
species, one that is part insect and part human!  Ooh, how hidious!!  Yes, it
is.  Unfortunately what the film does is take an inventive situation and it's
given the old clandestine treatment with only a few people knowing about it
and finding out what to do about it.
One of the best clandestine stories of terror in recent years was 1995's '12
Monkeys' in which one man traveled back in time to find a way to stop a
deadly virus from spreading across the globe and killing 99% of the world's
population.  That film focused on a re-occurring nightmare by its leading
character and had a sense of unpredictability.  'Mimic' can't escape that.
 It is predictable.
However, for all the flaws it contains, it is still a biting (no pun
intended) and potentially scary movie which flows like gasoline about to hit
the fire.  The cast is admirable and Charles S. Dutton has some good moments
as one of the trapped people fighting off the monsters.  Large insects
creations have been pain stakingly created to look exactly what they're
intended to be and every attention to detail has been attended to. 
'Mimic' suffers from the same problem as Peter Hyams' 'The Relic' did earlier
this year and that is reflecting a story by constantly filming in dreary,
dark and unsavory places where the audience is forced to return every once in
awhile and the need for a breath of fresh air is denied.  This is what killed
'Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom' (1984) where the primary setting was
in the cave of a deadly cult and the film eventually became trivial.  'Mimic'
is done with a slight dose of originality but it is forgettable.

Author
Alex Fung
MIMIC (Dimension - 1997)
Starring Mira Sorvino, Jeremy Northam, Josh Brolin, Giancarlo Giannini,
  Charles S. Dutton, Alexander Goodwin
Screenplay by Matthew Robbins, Guillermo Del Toro
Produced by Bob Weinstein, B.J. Rack, Ole Bornedal
Directed by Guillermo Del Toro
Running time: 105 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
There was no reason not to have tremendously high expectations for the
new science-fiction horror film MIMIC, the most costly venture of
Dimension Films since its inception, given the pedigree of talent
associated with the project.  Behind the camera was Guillermo Del Toro,
whose debut feature film was the terrifically stylish and richly
atmospheric vampire film CRONOS, which was astonishingly original and
finely well-crafted -- it easily ranks among the very best horror films
of this decade, and heralded a bright future ahead for this talented
director.  Meanwhile, in front of the camera for MIMIC was Mira Sorvino,
an extremely gifted and versatile young actress of uncommon intelligence
and poise.  To complete the triad of talent, the names bandied about as
writers on the film's screenplay was astonishingly impressive: Mr.
Del Toro, and among those performing rewrites, both John Sayles(!) and
Steven Soderbergh(!).  With a creative team such as this, one can't help
but go into MIMIC with a certain degree of anticipation.
Consequently, one can't help but leave MIMIC with an incredible degree of
disappointment.  There is virtually nothing in the film's storyline which
is at all fresh or inventive; it is a straightforward, by-the-books
generic creature film with very little resonance.  An immediate tip-off
of the impending dreariness which awaits should have been the
screenwriter credits in the striking title sequence for the film
(designed by Kyle Cooper, who also designed the title credits for SE7EN,
THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT -- quite a talented
guy); the glaring omission of Mr. Sayles and Mr. Soderbergh as credited
co-screenwriters should have been a clue.  (My understanding is that
although both Mr. Sayles and Mr. Soderbergh wrote rewrites, the
filmmakers ultimately returned to an earlier version of the screenplay.)
MIMIC is set in Manhattan, where the outbreak of a terrible epidemic is
depicted in suitably apocalyptic fashion. Hospital wards are filled
beyond capacity with the afflicted, with young children appearing to be
the most susceptible to the plague.  While science is unable to find a
cure, scientists Susan Tyler (Ms. Sorvino) and Peter Mann (Jeremy
Northam) have developed an indirect method of curbing the disease's
spread -- they have genetically engineered a breed of insect, deemed the
"Judas breed", which destroys the cockroaches carrying the plague.  (This
is depicted in a sequence where the duo stomp out into a testing
laboratory, dressed in gigantic oversized bio-containment suits -- you
can tell the one with the cute button noise is Ms. Sorvino -- to unleash
their creation on a bevy of cockroaches.)  With the understanding that
their Judas breed will die out after one generation -- long enough to
kill enough cockroaches to stifle the epidemic -- Susan and Peter release
their insects into the environment, and sure enough, soon all appears
well.  Three years later, though, signs appear which seem to indicate --
surprise, surprise -- that the Judas breed *did not* die out as expected,
but instead has evolved and survived.  And people are starting to go
missing ...
The film unfolds fairly predictably from this point, and while some
sequences generate moderate interest, as a whole MIMIC is less than
riveting.  The problem is that there is no human connection created
between the film's characters and the audience; MIMIC introduces a series
of characters without giving them any depth, and as a result it becomes
difficult to truly care about their plight as they battle giant insects
in the bowels of the New York subway system.  This is particularly true
for the film's bland leading characters; save for one solitary
characterization scene near the beginning of MIMIC, there is nothing that
distinguishes Susan and Peter from genre archetypes, and no particular
reason for the audience to have any vested interest in their ordeal.
As it is easy to have one's mind begin to wander during the film as
little is particularly fresh or interesting, one can spend a lot of time
during the movie playing "Count the ALIENS parallel".  While the initial
concept of having one's biological creation turn against its creator --
the familiar "Don't mess with Mother Nature" theme -- clearly harkens to
films like James Whale's FRANKENSTEIN, it is obvious that MIMIC was
greatly influenced by Ridley Scott's ALIEN and James Cameron's ALIENS
both in terms of story and atmosphere, and one can clearly see a huge
number of parallels between ALIENS, the blatant antecedent, and MIMIC.
Both eventually boil down to a group of hardy survivors struggling to
survive and destroy a hideous swarm of giant insectoid monsters in a
murky, damp labyrinth-like setting. Each has a strong, smart female lead
who understands the nature of the predators, and a noble male
counterpart.  ALIENS and MIMIC both have a wisecracking secondary male
character who bite it.  (Sadly, Josh Brolin is not nearly as entertaining
as Bill Paxton was.)  There is a strict, authority figure who initially
causes difficulties but redeems himself by bravely paying the ultimate
sacrifice on behalf of the group in both films.  The rescue of a young
child figures prominently in both films.  At a pivotal moment in ALIENS,
Ripley screams "Get away from her, you *bitch*!" at the final marauder;
likewise, in MIMIC, Susan calls out "No! You don't touch him!" (Not quite
as catchy, but whatever.)  ALIENS starred an actress named *Sigourney*;
MIMIC's star is named *Sorvino* ... 
Okay, that last point is pushing it, but surely the point is clear that
MIMIC is a direct descendent from the ALIEN trilogy (soon to become a
quadripartite). This is not necessarily a knock on it -- James Cameron's
ALIENS is one of the best pulse-pounding films I've ever seen -- but
unfortunately in every respect, MIMIC falls well short of its predecessor
in terms of generating excitement or shock, and the result is a rather
lacklustre product.
Special mention should be made of the child-in-peril in MIMIC, Chuy
(Alexander Goodwin), the autistic grandson of a subway shoeshine man,
Manny (Giancarlo Giannini), who may be one of the most annoying child
characters in recent years.  Given an inexplicable amount of screentime
to depict Chuy, a blank, expressionless look frozen on his face,
mindlessly rattle two spoons together to create an irritating
*clik-clik-clik-clik* sound and to demonstrate that he, well, knows
shoes, he constantly tests the audience's patience by indiscriminantly
inserting himself into hazardous scenarios.  At least ALIENS' Newt
(Carrie Henn) had a personality.  Watching all of the film's characters
repeatedly risk and sacrifice their lives for this kid, I kept hoping one
of the monsters would scoop him up and carry him away, never to be seen
again.  Susan and Peter were shown earlier in MIMIC to be desperate for
a child of their own, but even that fails to cover the inexplicable
attachment they have for Chuy and the lengths they extend themselves to
rescue him.  Only a saint would be able to restrain themselves from
throwing this child to the beasts.
MIMIC finally concludes with a series of scenes which comply to hokey
genre conventions (I was barely able to keep from groaning aloud at a
shot late in the film of a person diving into water).  While the visual
effects in the film are generally well done, this is not enough to
salvage the film from mediocrity.  With the talent involved with MIMIC,
it had the potential of being a superior science-fiction horror film;
what it sadly is instead is a generic giant insect movie.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Let's hurt somebody." - Aaron Eckhart, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Mira Sorvino; Jeremy Northam; Alexander Goodwin; Giancarlo Giannini
& Charles Dutton
Mira Sorvino stars as a bug expert in this science fiction horror film. A
deadly plague, spread by cockroaches, breaks out and is wiping out the
children of New York City. Bug-friendly Mira develops a new strain of bug
using genetic engineering to wipe out the roaches and stop the spread of the
deadly disease. When the killer bugs have done their job they are supposed
to die out, and apparently that is just what happens. Except, a few years
later it seems as though they hadn't all died, and those that survived have
evolved into something big and nasty and have multiplied quite rapidly. Now
they are living down in the sewers and old subway tunnels under New York,
and emerging when they get hungry to prey on the human population above
ground. To make matters worse, these overgrown insects have developed a
unique kind of camouflage which enables them to pass themselves off as
humans long enough to easily lure their prey into being a human happy meal.
It then is left up to Mira, her boyfriend and a New York transit cop to stop
the insects.
Nothing about Mimic really makes it any different from any other monster
film that I have ever seen. The special effects are pretty good in terms of
the big bugs, but they certainly don't reach out and grab you (pardon the
pun). They are nowhere near the groundbreaking quality of the original
Alien. I will give the film points for the nifty concept of the bugs
developing the camouflage to pass for human. That alone is one of the more
original ideas that I have seen in a film of this nature. It makes it stand
out just a bit more in a genre that sadly lacks a whole lot of original
ideas. I'll also give Mimic points for a showdown between Sorvino and
friends against the bugs, which takes place in abandoned subway tunnels
under the city. It is one of the better sequences that I have seen in a
while in a horror flick.
Sorvino also deserves some praise as the heroine of this movie. While she
doesn't quite compare to Sigorney Weaver in the Alien films, she does manage
to hold her own while doing battle with her mutated creations. And, on a
purely sexist male note, she looks damn good doing it. The rest of the cast
is competent, but no one really distinguishes himself or herself. With the
possible exception of Charles Dutton, playing the subway cop who becomes a
less than eager tour guide to the bug busters as they make their way through
the subways.
Mimic is the type of movie that you rent on a Saturday night for some light
entertainment. Just don't rent it with real high expectations. It's far
better than most of what you are likely to find on the shelves of the horror
section of your local video store, just don't expect it to become a classic
any time in the near future.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Mira Sorvino, Jeremy Northam, Alexander Goodwin, Giancarlo
Giannini, Charles S. Dutton, Josh Brolin
Synopsis: 
The main character - - scientist Susan Tyler (Mira Sorvino) - -  has
genetically engineered a new species of insect and let them loose in
Manhattan, confident that the bug colonies will die out because she has
programmed the insects to all die off after a few months. Three years
later, however, some kids bring Susan a sample of bugs they found in the
subway tunnels. You guessed it! The bad news is, some of  Susan's bugs
are still alive; they have mutated and are living beneath Manhattan in
some old abandoned subway tunnels. After going down to investigate,
Susan, her husband Peter from the Centers for Disease Control (Jeremy
Northam), and some bystanders get trapped in the dark tunnels where they
are chased by a colony of man-sized man-eating mantis mutations. Can the
humans defeat the hungry bugs?
Opinion: This movie was pretty enjoyable, and not bad for a Saturday
afternoon creature feature with good special effects. The first half of
the movie paces itself like a normal movie. The scientific jargon sets
us up to believe that monsters could theoretically exist, while an
ominous human-looking insect (hence the name 'mimic') lurks in the
shadows and spies on main characters to build suspense. The second half
feels like a 50s teen horror flick, only instead of teens lost in the
forest while being stalked, it's Mira and friends lost in subway
tunnels, stalked by giant bug creatures. Not bad entertainment.
Possible complaints: On the downside, the movie's plot focus was a
little off. For example, the main character and big hero is supposed to
be Mira Sorvino, so in a regular movie, you would expect her to blow up
all the bugs or at least be a good leader for the human team. Not so.
She only gets to kill one bug, mostly by luck, while others characters
kill off the colony on their own.  The movie spends a good chunk of time
focusing on a mysterious young autistic boy names Chuy (Alexander
Goodwin), who has the uncanny ability to mimic the language of the
killer bugs. But all this skill is for nothing, since the plot never
makes use of the kid's ability. Finally during the first half of the
movie there's a female scientific investigator on Mira's team, who goes
everywhere taking pictures of evidence yet we never see her in the
second half. These unfinished threads disappoint but don't ruin the main
formula: scientific jargon and suspense in the first half, heroes lost
and chased by monsters in the second half, plus explosions.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Yet another sucky sci-fi spook-fest, this one stars Mira Sorvino,
bless her heart, as a Big Apple entomologist who creates a hybrid insect
to combat a cockroach-borne epidemic-in-the-making.  Her supposedly
sterile solution works wonders until, three years later, the bugs
return, having mutated into human-sized, human-mimicking monsters.  For
the first hour, while we wait for a good glimpse of the creatures, the
various characters (Sorvino's, her character's husband, her character's
husband's partner, a couple of kids, a shoe shine man, the shoe shine
man's autistic son, and a feisty transit worker) poke around the city's
subway tunnels, unafraid of any dark, damp, obviously creature-infested
corners.  (Don't these people watch horror movies?) When the bugs
finally *do* appear, believability gets zapped-- rewiring decades-old
subway circuitry on the fly?-- but we finally get some action and a
little blood and an adorably grimy Sorvino, whose deadpan reaction to
the appearance of a particular creature may be the single best howler of
the summer:  "Ohmigod, it's the male."  Stylishly directed by Guillermo
Del Toro (CRONOS).

Author
John Eung Soo Kim
Director: Guillermo Del Toro
Star Players: Mira Sorvino, Jeremy Northam, Charles Dutton
Something about this movie really bugs me (pun intended).  New York has
been infected by a new disease which kills children.  The carriers of
this disease have been identified as the always misunderstood
cockaroach.  Etomologist Susan Tyler (Sorvino) was brought in to kill
ALL the NYC roaches using a genetically engineered bug which secretes
enzymes that kills the roaches after they injest it.  BTW the bugs known
as the Judas Breed have also been engineered to die after a few months. 
Sound familiar?  How about this, "Life will find a way!"
Three years have passed since the roach genocide and strange murders
have been turning up in the streets.  Coincidence?  Not likely.  The
bugs have found a way to reproduce and grow to amazing size.  They have
evolved and mutated into a functional hive complete with soldiers,
workers, queen and king.  It only took three years for this macro
evolution due to the life span of the creatures and their relatively
short generational gap.  Now it's up to two scientists (scientists never
seem to know when they're in way over their heads), a NYC transit cop, a
shoe shiner and his autistic boy to save the world.  Any questions?
The story and premise was a good idea.  The sub-plots, however, just
dragged the whole movie and added extraneous characters.  Even the
autistic child, Chuy proved to be a nuiscance and tried the patience of
the audience.  One event that truely bothered me was the unnaturally
strong emotions Sorvino's character had with the child.  There were
indications that she loved children and longed to have one but to be so
attached to someone who she hardly had any contact with seemed contrived
and pushed the audiences ability to believe the authenticity of her
feelings.  The bugs were well done.  The creature effects were superb
along with the special effects.  The acting was also surprising. 
Sorvino played her character well as did (unsurprisingly) Dutton. 
However,  a good idea, good special effects and good acting doesn't
necessarily make a good movie.  Mimic lacked a good script and although
it had well developed secondary characters, they didn't prove to be very
useful or very likeable.  The editing was as good as it could have been
but I was just one "Funny shoes" away from walking out.  Less is more
and in Mimic's case, they should have taken out shoe shine man and shoe
shine boy.  They weren't necessary at all for the progression on the
story and just added 20 minutes and unbelievability to an otherwise good
idea.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Mira Sorvino, Jeremy Northam, Charles Dutton, Giancarlo Giannini,
F. Murray Abraham, Josh Brolin, Alexander Goodwin Director: Guillermo
Del Toro Screenplay: John Sayles, Steven Soderbergh, Matthew Robbins
Ever thumped a fat bug with a book, and then watch it's insides splatter
on the wallpaper? It's the kind of sight that generally grosses people
out so I personally prefer spraying the bug to death. It's hands free,
hygienic and compact. Why swat the fly when you can fry it with
chemicals. This brings me to my point on the big, bad ugly bugs known as
the Judas breed. Once the salvation of mankind but now it's demise.
Mutated and evolved in a period of three years into horrific flying
creatures breeding in the murky depths of a city sewer and feeding
silently on fleshy prey. So if you're a fly swatter and not a bug
sprayer - this movie is for you. Imagine the juicy remains on wall or
book. Imagine a lot of it. Then imagine wiping the bug insides over
yourself over and over again. In "Mimic" the key to survival is the
perfume of bug slime, and the aroma of death is none other than human
blood.
Now imaging a spider in a feeding frenzy, or a preying mantis cleverly
dissecting its prey with razor sharp jaws. Now magnify this picture by a
hundred times and watch this enormous bug rip apart several children,
several cops, several homeless people, somebody's father and a homeless
Reverend. My query - was it really necessary to slaughter the boys - it
rather defeats the purpose of an innocent bug hunt. AND is it ethical to
murder a father in front of his son's eyes?  It isn't everyday that we
are made to see a child watch his father pierced with scissor-like fangs
and have his blood splatter over him.  It's a rather sloppy and
insensitive scene if you ask me. The father reaches out for his child
and before you know it - splat - lots of holes through the torso and
blood foaming at the mouth. How does a child respond to this?
So despite this movie's wanton thirst for blood, bug poop and
fascination with bug insides, it does create a confused and fascinating
story about the web of life. This time we are the prey and the insect
are the predator. It gives as a different perspective on life when the
giants are insects, and it's their turn to wreak revenge on humans who
wouldn't give two hoots to another bug gone under the boot. The heroine
(Mira Sorvino) does a good job faking terror, as she is privileged
enough to face the male drone in hand to hand combat and win -
politically correct. As for the our Hero (Jeremy Northam), who was the
dashing Mr Knightley in Emma, is present dashing about this movie
blowing up the female bugs which is not so politically correct. Also our
Hero and Heroine are trying to reproduce and are having great difficulty
conceiving a child despite repeated attempts. The writer's solution to
this problem is kill the autistic kid's father, make him an orphan,
place him in the middle of the hive and somebody will just have to adopt
him - I wonder who?
So I really should have hated this movie more for all the above reasons,
but somehow, I didn't and I don't know why. For some unexplained reason
my fascination with the big bad insect kept me interested throughout.
Personally I would have liked to spray the six legged vermin from a
distance, being a "Mortein" kind of a guy; but I guess on occasion I
won't mind getting my hands dirty, and slapping a bug or two around for
recreational purposes.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mira Sorvino, Jeremy Northam, Charles Dutton, Giancarlo Giannini, 
      F. Murray Abraham, Josh Brolin, Alexander Goodwin
Director: Guillermo Del Toro
Producers: B.J. Rack
Screenplay: John Sayles, Steven Soderbergh, Matthew Robbins
Cinematography: Dan Lausten
Music: Marco Beltrami
U.S. Distributor: Dimension Films
     It's dark, dank, and gloomy.  The human survivors are trapped, 
prisoners in a structure from which all the escape routes have been cut 
off.  The enemy, nightmarish creations of some special effects creature 
workshop, are closing in slowly but inexorably.  One-by-one, the valiant 
heroes are picked off, several of them giving their lives so that their 
compatriots will have a better opportunity to survive. 
     What I have just described is the premise of James Cameron's 
action/science fiction classic, ALIENS.  Without much alteration, it is 
also the premise of MIMIC, the newest release from Miramax's horror 
label, Dimension Films.  In fact, the title of this motion picture is 
quite apt -- MIMIC does an excellent job of imitating not only ALIENS, 
but several other science fiction and horror features, including such 
odd choices as LEVIATHAN and THE THING.  The derivative result is, as 
one might expect, moderately entertaining, but far from groundbreaking 
in its approach or execution.
     What's perhaps surprising about this film is the quantity and 
quality of ability involved.  On the acting side, two Academy Awards are 
represented (F. Murray Abraham and Mira Sorvino), in addition to the 
recognized talents of Charles Dutton, Jeremy Northam, and Giancarlo 
Giannini.  The director is Guillermo Del Toro, who reinvented the 
vampire legend with his critically-acclaimed Mexican horror film, 
CRONOS.  The script includes contributions from two indie giants, John 
Sayles and Stephen Soderbergh.  With so many luminaries involved, 
therefore, it's a bit of a disappointment that MIMIC is so... ordinary.
     The most interesting aspect of the film is probably the backstory 
that sets up the "bug hunt."  This postulates that a devastating disease 
has stricken New York City.  One by one, children are dying, and there's 
no end in sight.  An etymologist by the name of Susan Tyler (Mira 
Sorvino) determines that the disease is being spread by cockroaches.  In 
order to save thousands of lives, she heads a team of experts to 
genetically engineer a vicious-looking insect called the "Judas Breed" 
that is designed to kill the roaches.  As developed in the lab, it is 
infertile and has a six-month life cycle.  Tyler's team releases their 
creations onto the streets, the cockroaches are killed, and the disease 
is eradicated.  All is calm, but only for three years.  Then Tyler 
learns John Hammond's lesson from JURASSIC PARK -- supposed sterility 
isn't the definitive way of stopping procreation.  The entire species of 
Judas Breed did not die out when it was supposed to.  Mutated and 
evolved, the creatures now haunt the subways of New York city, awaiting 
an opportunity to swarm.  Along with her husband, Peter (Jeremy 
Northam), a cop (Charles Dutton), and a concerned grandfather (Giancarlo 
Giannini), Tyler must venture into the dark, dangerous depths of New 
York's underground world to confront what her Judas Breed has become.
     All of this is background, however.  MIMIC's centerpiece is the 
survival game played out between humans and giant insects, and, while 
it's marked with moments of tension, the film is a little too familiar 
to get the adrenaline flowing.  Del Toro is masterful at creating 
atmosphere, but there's only so far that can take a film, and the plot 
isn't strong enough to elevate the proceedings to a higher level.  Most 
of MIMIC's true scares are of the obvious variety -- those that are 
enhanced by sudden surges of music.  In fact, it has been a while since 
a movie has really given me the creeps, and this one doesn't change 
that.
     Mira Sorvino seems miscast as the brainy, no-nonsense Dr. Tyler.  
Maybe the problem is that she's so good at playing bimbos (as in MIGHTY 
APHRODITE and ROMY AND MICHELLE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION) that it's hard to 
accept her as an egghead.  More successful is Jeremy Northam as Susan's 
husband, the deputy director of the Center for Disease Control.  
Giancarlo Giannini is a pleasant addition to the cast, even if an early 
subplot involving his relationship with his grandson (Alexander Goodwin) 
is dragged out.  F. Murray Abraham is on hand in a small role as "the 
voice of wisdom."  The real star of MIMIC, however, is Charles Dutton, 
who plays a NYC cop with the kind of gusto that makes him the most real 
and likable member of the group.
     With MIMIC, Miramax is probably hoping to reproduce the success of 
last year's SCREAM, the highest-grossing horror movie of all time.  
However, while this atmosphere-drenched film offers a few shocks, it 
lacks the knowing wit and genuine scariness of Wes Craven's 1996 
offering.  In essence, MIMIC is a B movie with an A-grade cast and 
production team.  And that may be all you need to know to determine 
whether or not this is your kind of flick.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Phil Brady
Mira Sorvino has been busy since she won her Oscar last year, so
it's excusable if she takes a small detour to pick up an easy check in
movie exploiting her name. It looked like she was doing that earlier in
Romy and Michele, but oops, that was a good movie. Well, here's a late
summer not-so-high-budget sci-fi thriller.. this must be the throwaway
movie. Mutant insects, mimicking humans and breeding beneath the city
sounds sorta tired, but to my complete surprise, Mimic is actually a
pretty good flick.
In the opening scenes, Manhattan is devastated by a disease which is
killing large numbers of children. The city's roach population is the
carrier, but they prove too hardy for normal measures. Mira plays Susan,
an geneticist working with Atlanta's Center for Disease Control (CDC).
She has engineered a Judas roach to do the job. It gives off a secretion
that kills the civilian roaches, and it is also engineered to die
without propagating. Remember how well the bio-engineered failsafe
worked in Jurassic Park?
Three years after she's hailed as a hero for saving NY's kids, she
is shown a live specimen that looks familiar. It's her roach, but it's
large, and it's a baby at that. Susan's husband Peter (Jeremy Northam,
forgettable) also works for the CDC, and together they investigate the
subway station where it was found. An MTA cop with an attitude stops
their snooping, but since he's played by Charles Dutton, you know he'll
be an important part of the search. Eventually, several cast members end
up very deep in the underground of Gotham. Ominously, the homeless who
lived down there have moved on..Lots of predictable stuff ensues down
there, as the insects meet the cast members that don't have a percentage
of the gross.
The genre dictates a certain amount of pro forma wandering in the
dark passages, close calls, and a complex master escape plan. Special
effects are okay. Strangely, the producers actually spent some money on
a script. The underlying science isn't too insulting, and there are a
couple nice touches. The tip-off specimen is bought from a couple kids
who think they are hustling Susan, but she is really just humoring them
because she likes their spirit and interest. The requisite threatened
child taps out mimicry of people's gaits. The story takes the time to
develop a relationship with his father, who shines shoes in that subway
station. Later, under siege, Susan reaches into the body of a dead
roach, using `scent glands' to smear roach scent on themselves to buy
time. `If they can mimic us, we can mimic them.' Such echoes are not
profound, but it looks like someone made an effort.
Director Guillermo Del Toro did a fine job of opening up the
underground, by staging many scenes in spacious areas. A few old subway
stations are used, and one has a old train car which serves as a refuge,
and maybe an escape. This means we're spared endless claustrophobic
scenes with no reference point. Nobody dies from stupidity, either. That
right there makes this an uncommon summer thriller. If you don't check
this one out, be sure to remember Guillermo Del Toro's name. We'll be
seeing more from him.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
Also Known As: Judus (1997) (USA: working title)
DIRECTED BY: Guillermo del Toro
WRITTEN BY: Donald A. Wollheim (story) and Matthew Robbins (I)
CAST: Mira Sorvino, Jeremy Northam, Charles Dutton, Alexander Goodwin, Giancarlo Giannini, F. Murray Abraham
"For thousands of years, man has been evolution's greatest creation. Until now.." 
Amidst the brainless production of the summer season, a film with half
a brain will be noticed and praised as an epic. 'Mimic' happens to be
a fairly intelligent science fiction, wisely released along side with
the action and adventure cliches of this season.
In a brilliantly chilling title sequence, where behind the photographs
of the dead children and frightening insects sounds, a child is
counting to the infinite, symbolizing the dead. Slowly the story takes
shape. 'Strickler's Disease, in the face of the common cockroach, came
to New York like a thief in the night, threatening to steal an entire
generation of our children from before our eyes. Since it has proven
to be virtually immune to chemical control, a new avenue of attack had
to be discovered. A team of brilliant scientists recombined ant- and
mantis DNA to create a biological counter agent. They called it the
'Judas Breed'. These creatures are the most successful creations, that
are fit to adapt to any situation. Their breeding rate is
approximately 40 000 a year. They were designed to survive. And they
were released into the streets with one single mission: eliminate the
deadly carrier and die...Three years have passed. Susan and Peter are
now a happy couple, praying for a baby. The epidemic is completely
forgotten. Things are not so swell, however, in the dark caverns
beneath the city. A mysterious killer, called "Long John" terrorizes
the homeless in the subway system of New York. People are
disappearing. The police are unable to find him, and yet, during the
night, he can be seen, standing silently -- observing, waiting to
strike. Susan's happy existence is suddenly interrupted by two
homeless boys that collect insects for money. They offer her a new
kind of "bug" that has never previously been seen. What she discovers
is a gigantic speciment of the Judas breed. The shock comes when she
realizes that it is only an infant. You see, sometimes an insect will
evolve to mimic its predator. A fly can look like a spider. A
caterpillar can look like a snake. The Judas breed evolved to mimic
its predators -- us. These creatures can imitate us. They can
infiltrate us and they migrate. There is no telling how far they will
spread...May the the strongest survive...
This film is the first pleasant surprise of the season. It is
intelligent enough to be called science fiction and frightening enough
to be called a horror film. Faithful to Ridley Scott's classic
'Alien', Guillermo del Toro directs his film in the same fashion. This
is a darker and less 'family appealing' version of 'Jurassic Park'. It
tells the story about science out of control, about the cruel nature
and its ways. At the same time it's very interesting to see how nature
looks at the human species and in what way it tries to imitate it.
Mira Sorvino and Jeremy Northam make a fine, believable pair. And,
though a bizarre choice, Sorvino is surprisingly effective as the
brilliant scientist. The rest of the actors do their job honestly and
professionally, though not quite memorably.
'Mimic's centerpiece is the survival game played out between humans
and giant insects, and for its most part you'll certainly get the
adrenaline in your body flowing. The first hour is nearly
flawless. Del Toro is a true master at creating a chilling,
frightening atmosphere, that works because of the combining efforts of
an incredible team: brilliantly chilling cinematography by Dan
Laustsen, beautifully controlled, fast paced editing by Patrick
Lussier, and a magnificently sensual and yet frighteningly spooky
musical score by Marco Beltrami. Del Toro knows that what is left
unseen is more terrifying than what the camera reveals, no matter what
it is. But even when he unravels his mystery and the shadows disappear
on by one, we still are amazed because it's done so brilliantly. From
the very beginning the brilliant Del Toro captures you in his world of
pure artistic symbolism and dark poetry. The hand reaching into
darkness had me sliding down in my seat. The script features some
incredibly strange, but incredible human characters, that are anything
else but stereotypes from previous horror flicks. I liked the two
little kids who are bug collectors and know their way around the
subway system. And there's a shoeshine man's kid who clicks spoons
together in such a way that he mimics the clicking sounds of the Judas
Breed. Things appear and disappear. Mysterious entities look like one
thing and suddenly reveals itself as something else. Laustsen has done
a great job with lighting and camera placement, creating a dark,
depressive atmosphere, where the characters slowly emerge from the
shadows. Every shot and scene is filled with mystery and a sense of
indescribable danger lurking beneath. There are moments that are
frightening and interesting through the first hour of the film, the
mystery and suspense slowly builds up and is all released in the last
half hour. Although I didn't find the ending very satisfying, I still
think that this film has a lot to offer. Under Del Toro's incredible
atmosphere, there are not ver y ``Event Horizon', "The Relic", and
other films descended from 'Alien', but manages to rise above most of
its predecessors. Believe me, it will provide an intelligent horror
that is well worth your money and time. And since it is a summer
movie, it hardly needs anything else.
"Evolution has a way of keeping things alive" 

Author
Marty Mapes
** (out of 4) I went to MIMIC because it seemed like a good idea for a
thriller. During a deadly epidemic spread by cockroaches, a well-meaning
entomologist introduces a genetically engineered suicide-bomber
cockroach called the Judas breed. The Judas infiltrates the cockroach
nest, then releases a poison, killing all the disease-ridden bugs. The
process works and the epidemic is stopped, but the Judas turns out not
to have been sterile after all, and they have now been breeding and
mutating for thousands of generations. . . . 
It IS a good idea for a thriller, maybe along the lines of THE ANDROMEDA
STRAIN or OUTBREAK. But scratch the surface, and you'll see that MIMIC
is not as good as its shell would have you believe. 
The movie is advertised as a "sci-fi thriller." It is not. It is a
horror movie. The distinction is, as film historian Bruce Kawin points
out, that in a science fiction movie, science is the good guy, and
victory comes through intelligence and technology. In horror movies,
like MIMIC, science is the bad guy and victory comes through violence. 
But because the movie was conceived of as a science fiction story, ideas
that could have made it a good horror film were not played up, and round
ideas that could have made it good science fiction were forced into
square, horror-film holes. 
For example, there is a lot of entomology jargon in the movie. Susan
Tyler (Mira Sorvino), our scientist, explains how the Judas breed works.
Later she explains insect behavior to a couple of kids. Both scenes tell
us that knowledge of insects will be relevant to the final outcome of
the movie. Then the movie proceeds to show us a creature that is
entomologically and evolutionarily impossible. Are we supposed to pay
attention to the science, or are we supposed to suspend our disbelief?
The movie asks us to do both, which is distracting and keeps us from
getting into the movie. 
Specifically, the movie asserts that the monstrous Judas breed somehow
evolved from its laboratory forefathers. But only one generation was
released onto the world, and that generation was genetically sterile.
Evolution happens at reproduction; mutations are passed to the NEXT
generation. A genetically sterile generation could never reproduce to
pass the incredible mutations to its offspring. 
But let's say that God steps in and reverses the genetic sterility. The
monsters infesting the subways of New York are very large (man-sized).
The movie says that the only reason insects are usually small is their
lack of lungs. Actually, there's much more to it than that. Gigantic
insects need more than "lungs" to account for all the surface
area-to-volume ratio problems that would arise (exoskeleton weight,
metabolic rate, flight capability, etc.). 
So Mimic should have either ditched the science altogether (like ALIENS,
where the heroes don't care about the science, they just want to nuke
the buggers), or it should have made the monsters some other sort of
super-cockroaches. Lord knows hordes of cockroaches are scary enough,
even without being man-sized. 
This may all sound like nitpicking, but the movie has other flaws, too.
Two of its characters were of cardboard depth. The shoe shiner
(Giancarlo Giannini) is a kindly old immigrant. His kid (Alexander
Goodwin) is autistic, with a talent for identifying shoes that proves
useful against the insect monsters (puh-leeze). 
Then there's the movie's moral climax. Usually in this type of movie,
the scientist who unleashed the monster pays the ultimate price (read
FRANKENSTEIN, or look at Paul Reiser's character in ALIENS). But in
MIMIC, the scientist is a woman, and with several valiant (chauvinistic)
men to sacrifice themselves, she never even comes close to taking the
ultimate metaphoric responsibility for unleashing the monster on the
world. Are the filmmakers saying that women should have a lower standard
than men? That men are good for cleaning up after a woman's mistakes? 
Though they weren't enough to save the movie, there were some good
performances and some interesting ideas in MIMIC. Mira Sorvino is
believably good as a determined scientist; (compare her performance to
that of Elisabeth Shue in THE SAINT). Charles S. Dutton is a character
actor, but his shtick is likeable enough, and his role suited his
persona pretty well. 
There is an enjoyably gross scene where the heroes have to rub insect
glands all over their bodies. It's interesting that as the characters
get used to the idea, so does the audience. The first time someone
squeezes goop from the bug, the characters and audience wince in
disgust. Later on, reapplying the goop is no more disgusting than
putting on lotion. The character's desperation and will to survive has
acclimated both them and us to the awful necessity. 
A little bit of research on Bryant Frazer's part reveals that Graphic
Designer Kyle Cooper is responsible for the credits of both MIMIC and of
SEVEN; both are very cool. (He also created the extreme credit sequence
forSPAWN). 
But even these highlights show that the movie is inconsistent and
unfocused, which means that Mimic is unrewarding.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Guillermo del Toro was an unknown new director in 1994 when his
CRONOS played the arthouse circuit.  It turned out to be a fresh and
arresting take on the vampire film.  Mexican horror film to that point
had a reputation for shoddy production values.  Del Toro brought a
fascinating no-holds-barred morbidity to his work that made the film
rich and memorable.  He is back with his second film and he proves to
be just about the only filmmaker in the world who could have pulled off
a giant insects in the subway plot and turn it into a film worth
watching.
     Three years ago a deadly disease carried by cockroaches was
killing and crippling children.  The approach to kill all the
cockroaches was to create a sterile cross between a praying mantis, a
termite, and a cockroach that would kill off cockroaches and then die
off itself.  Dr. Susan Kyle (Mira Sorvino) was the entomologist who
created the new insect.  The approach seemed to work perfectly, but now
Kyle is seeing signs of a new insect in the subway tunnels that could
be more dangerous than the original disease.  But there is something
else going on.  Strangers seem to be running around the city furthering
the ends of the insects. They are shady characters who seem to inhabit
the dark corners of the city.  And they have a special interest in
Dr. Kyle.
     This is an odd role for Academy Award winning Sorvino.  At base
this is an overly familiar story.  Science has created a monster and
now a few people have to fight it.  Sorvino could certainly have chosen
a film with a more original and less cable-fare-like plot had she
wanted.  But in this second film del Toro shows us exactly what his
strengths and weaknesses as a filmmaker will be.  He does not have
really original plot ideas.  Here he takes a short story by classic
science fiction writer Donald A. Wollheim, but still turns it into a
familiar plot.  But the only film with a comparable style is his
CRONOS.  He has a marvelous way of keeping secret that this will be a
story that has been done before.  His telling is atmospheric and not
quite linear.  He creates perhaps too many characters, certainly at the
beginning, but the major characters are fairly unique.  Most
interesting is a small boy who may be a genius and who may be retarded,
but we are never sure which.  Del Toro has carefully distorted color to
heighten the ominous atmosphere.  He plays with light and darkness
preferring the latter.  If the obvious is inevitable, at least del Toro
keeps it at bay for a good long time.
     If del Toro's work is to be compared to any other filmmaker, I
would choose film producer Val Lewton.  He makes terrific atmospheric
B-pictures that are better than most of the A-pictures around.  Both
take the familiar and imbue it with a sense of real dread.  I would
give this second effort a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     The who premise behind the title sounds like one that would come
from Donald A. Wollheim, but it is faulty.  It is true that insects and
other creatures with a short generation time mimic their predators.
But this is only with frequent contact with the predators.  It is not a
mystical process, but natural selection, a form of evolution.  We would
have had to been killing off a lot of six-foot insects in the subways
before by chance some would look like humans and that would render them
some protection.  There is a lake in Japan where the crabs have backs
that look like masks of humans.  After a great battle was fought on the
lake fishermen who pulled crabs from the lake would throw back the ones
whose back look vaguely like human faces, thinking them to contain the
souls of those killed in the battle.  Over hundreds of years the only
crabs that were safe were those that had really good renderings of
masks.  A species whose predator did not constantly select for
resembling itself would not come to resemble its predator.

Author
Brandon Stahl
"Mimic":  *1/2 out of four. Directed by Guillermo Del Toro. Starring Mira
Sorvino, Josh Brolin, and Charles S. Dutton.
        As bad as "Mimic" was, it definitly scared me.  "Mimic" continued the
frightening Hollywood trend of taking a foreign director who shows a lot of
creative ingenuity and style, and completely flushing it when he comes to
America to make a movie. 
Director Guillermo Del Toro was recently imported from Mexico after he
made the award winning and inventive horror film "Cronos."  That movie
worked because it took an unconventional story, unique characters and well
written plot and dialogue to create a truly scary movie.  In "Mimic", Del
Toro doesn't bother to give us anything original.  The plot is a stupid
combination of "Aliens" meets "Species" meets "Jurassic Park."  The characters
have been recycled from a few hundred other movies.  There's nothing new
in "Mimic".  It's just a bunch of old tricks that rarely work.  At the end
of the movie, you're stuck wanting your money back.
Maybe the worst thing about the movie is that Del Toro followed another
annoying trend of recent movies: he forgot to turn the lights on.  I don't
understand why suspense movies lately have to follow the "Seven" trend
and be set in dark, dank areas.  Watching "Mimic" I was tempted several
times to yell at the screen "Turn the lights on! The switch is to your right!
Use common sense! Just do it! You'll be able to see the monster in the
corner!"  There's a scene where Mira Sorvino is standing in subway station
while the lights are flickering on and off.  It looked like the light
operator was having a seizure, and Sorvino didn't even notice - she just stood
there looking like she was having deep thoughts.  "Hmmm.... I think bean
soup would be good for dinner tonight."  
"Mimic" has a lot of incidental shock tactics (Boo! Just kidding!) and
follows them up with the real scare, but nothing in this movie scares you. 
The audience in the theater never jumped during suspenseful moments; I
think they were bored, too.
I shouldn't blame Del Toro.  He isn't the first successful foreign
director to come to Hollywood and make a bad movie.  Hong Kong director John
Woo made two of the best action films of all time, "The Killer" and "Hard
Boiled" then came to America to make the stupid "Broken Arrow."  French
directors Luc Besson ("La Femme Nikita") and George Sluizer ("The Vanishing")
followed Woo's lead and made dumbed down versions of those movies.  Robert
Rodriguez, who directed the terrific low budget "El Mariachi" came to
Hollywood and directed the horrible, high-budget "Desperado." 
I don't know why a foreign director who shows such talent in his country
can't make a good American movie.  Woo finally broke through and made
"Face/Off", but it still isn't up to par with his earlier films.  
I get the feeling a Hollywood producer sits in his office, chews on a
big smelly cigar and says to the director, "Welcome to America!  I bet you
must be tired after being on that boat for so long.  Do you speak English?
Now, I know you think you've made good movies in the past, but now you're
in America, so things are a little different here.  Just remember what the
American audience always wants, and you'll be fine. They want to see at
least one big breasted woman, characters that they've seen a thousand times
before (because change scares Americans), and you always  need a cheesy
feel-good ending to wrap things up.  If you don't make that kind of movie,
you'll be shining my shoes in no time." 

Author
Hanson Yoo
Frankly, I can't say that I saw all of Mimic firsthand.  About the point Charles
Dutton's character guides two chaps from the CDC through some closed off subway
tunnels and utters, "How long does this go on?" I thought to myself, "How long
indeed?" and left the theater. 
My friends who stayed for the credits tell me the ending was nothing original
nor interesting, which is exactly what I thought of the first half.  Although I
didn't actually see the entire film, I didn't see the point in sitting through
another 50 minutes of chase scenes in dark tunnels when I've seen it all before.
Mimic is as rote a film as you can get  it's the kind of film that goes
straight to video starring William Katt and Tanya Roberts or Andrew Stevens and
Shannon Tweed with lots of nudity.  Instead, we get Mira Sorvino and Jeremy
Northam, but without the attendant nude scenes.  So there's basically nothing
interesting to watch.
The threadbare plot  a scientist tries to play God and unleashes a predatory
species of giant cockroach.  People die, there's a cat and mouse chase, and an
explosion at the end.  Talk about the dregs of the summer movies.  
Beyond the dialog and clumsy set-up, Mimic is one of those films that is so
unsuccessful in its execution that you notice little things to pick apart like
the editing, which is the worst I've seen since Crocodile Dundee II.  But
instead of lingering on nothing for two seconds (in Crocodile Dundee II, the
characters would leave the scenes and the camera would stay fixed on a hallway
for no reason), the scenes are edited so harshly that the last words of their
dialog are practically cut-off (which in retrospect may have been a good thing).
I was also uncomfortable with the filmmakers resorting to both children being
killed on-screen by the bugs and the child in peril plotline.  Considering the
film starts out with an epidemic killing off children in Manhattan, I wonder
what director and co-screenwriter Guillermo Del Toro has against youngsters.    
The performances are nothing short of unremarkable.  What in the world is an
Academy Award winning actress like Mira Sorvino doing in crap like this (and why
is she doing it so poorly)?  Getting films of this low caliber green-lighted is
simply an abuse of privilege, and a sure way of get bumped off the Hot List.
Although Jeremy Northam pulls off a flawless American accent, the role is so
stultifyingly boring that he disappears into the background.  And Charles Dutton
tries to add some spice to his crusty transit cop role, but between this
annoyingly colorful cop role and his annoyingly colorful shoeshine attendant
role in the terrible Nick Of Time, it might be suggested that Dutton turn down a
role every now and then (and the volume down a notch or two).    
Mimic is the kind of film that has no character development, no good dialog, and
has "no-brainer" tattooed all over it.  It's not offensively stupid like Batman
And Robin, but it's close.
