Title
Review for Gohatto (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jonathan Curiel
It's been 25 years since Japanese director Nagisa Oshima shocked
international audiences with In the Realm of the Senses, his lurid look
at a sadomasochistic couple that loses all abandon and commits a carnal
act never before captured on the big screen: one lover cuts off the
other's penis.
New Yorker Films is hyping the similarity between Senses and Oshima's
latest work, Taboo, saying the new film, "like... Senses, deals with the
anti-authoritarian sway of sexuality, a nearly taboo subject in Japan."
Don't believe the hype.  In many ways, Taboo is the antithesis of Senses
-- from its lack of sexual explicitness to its historic setting in 19th
century Kyoto.  Where Senses captures the hedonistic life of a
heterosexual couple, Taboo showers us with androgyny, same-sex
yearnings, and macho sword fights, all in a samurai setting that tests
the characters' moral and physical strength.
In the enclave of an all-male militia designed to protect the Shogun,
does it matter that some of the men sleep with each other?  "Don't ask,
don't tell" takes on new meaning with Taboo, a movie that works so well
because it's filled with characters like Toshizo Hijikata, an agonized
samurai captain played with aplomb by Beat Takeshi.  Takeshi, a director
in his own right and a comedic TV star in Japan, is the heart and soul
of Taboo (and gets top billing).  Takeshi's aging captain struggles to
accept the fact that a newly recruited teenage samurai is fooling around
with a fellow recruit, and that many of the other samurai are in love
with the teen.
>From the opening scene, that teen withstands his new profession's
vicissitudes, which require him to execute dishonored militia and kill
those who would kill him.  The young samurai (newcomer Ryuhei Matsuda)
has banged hair, pale skin, feminine lips -- and biceps big enough to
handle the swords and knives he needs to defend himself in bed and on
the streets of Kyoto, where dangerous thugs walk around.  His reason for
joining the samurai is clear: "To have the right to kill," he tells an
inquisitor in the samurai headquarters.
Phalli are never shown in Taboo, and why should they be? Taboo isn't a
film about sex -- it's a film about Japan's last samurai and the way one
person can have a dramatic effect on those around him.  With a film
score by Ryuichi Sakamoto (best known for his Oscar-winning work on The
Last Emperor), and outfits and backdrops that show off the beauty of
pre-modern Japan, Taboo is another new film from Asia that deserves
considerable attention.  It may not feature the stunning martial arts
scenes or operatic storyline of Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, and it
may not have the happy ending of Chunhyang, but like those two period
pieces, Taboo is a visual marvel from start to finish.
Moviegoers are lucky that the 68-year-old Oshima is still around to make
films like Taboo, which was honored at last year's Cannes Film Festival
and is now being released theatrically.  Oshima suffered a serious
stroke in 1996, forcing him to take a three-year sabbatical.  But he has
re-emerged with new vigor to complete Taboo, his 26th film, telling one
interviewer, "I've spent all my life breaking taboos."
Director: Nagisa Oshima
Producers: Nobuyoshi Otani, Jean Labadie, Jeremy Thomas
Writers: Nagisa Oshima
Starring: Beat Takeshi, Ryuhei Matsuda, Shinji Takeda, Tadanobu Asano,
Yoichi Sai, Koji Matoba, Jiro Sakagami
http://www.newyorkerfilms.com/t_elements/taboo/taboo1_t.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
TABOO (Gohatto) (director/writer: Nagisa Oshima; screenwriter: based on two
short stories by Ryotaro Shiba; cinematographer: Toyomichi Kurita; editor:
Tomoyo Oshima; cast: Beat Takeshi Kitano (Lt. Commander Toshizo Hijikata),
Tadanobu Asano (Samurai Hyozo Tashiro), Koji Matoba (Samurai Heibei Sugano),
Ryuhei Matsuda (Kano), Yoichi Sai (Commander Isami Kondo), Jiro Sakagami (Lt.
Genzaburo), Shinji Takeda (Lt. Okita), Kei Sato (Narrator), Tomorowo Taguchi
(Samurai Tojiro Yuzawa); Runtime: 101; New Yorker Release; 2000-Japan/France/UK)
A brilliantly stylized period piece set in Kyoto in 1865, during the final days
of the samurais. It's written and directed by the great Japanese filmmaker,
Nagisa Oshima (In the Realm of the Senses/Empire of Passion/Merry Christmas, Mr.
Lawrence). This is the 69-year-old filmmaker's first feature in 14 years and the
first since the 1995 minor stroke which left him part-paralysed on his right
side. He directed this powerful film, which explores homosexuality in the ranks
of the military, from a wheelchair. It also relates to the affects of
uncontrollable passion with death, as it explores how jealousy among men lovers
can be deadly. 
Taboo has a dreamlike quality to it that is spellbinding as it creates an eerie
blue mood and makes the characters glow with a haunting feeling that this tale
is taking place in the afterworld. Its tale is focused on a new recruit to the
Shinsen militia, who seeks to become a samurai warrior. He's an effeminate and
beautiful 18-year-old, a rich merchant's son named Sozaburo Kano (Ryuhei
Matsuda). The militia he joins puts down insurrections, maintains order among
the clans, and protects the shogun. At the same time he joins, another recruit
-- Hyozo Tashiro (Tadanobu Asano), a commoner, also becomes a samurai. They are
selected by Commander Isami Kondo (Yoichi Sai) and his Lieutenant Commander,
Captain Toshizo Hijikata (Takeshi Kitano). Kano is very appealing because of his
boyish locks of hair and sensual and regal mannerisms, and his great ability as
a warrior; his stunning looks attracts everyone's attention. In history, the
Shinsen militia was renown for its ruthless code of conduct, its violent use of
force, and its open homosexuality. 
The plot revolves around the lust among the men for him, as he joins them in the
barracks. The first to have a whack at him is Tashiro, who cuddles up to him in
their sleeping quarters and gets him from behind as Kano passively says nothing
but appears to not be stimulated by the rape. But he rebuffs his advances to be
lovers, even as he says that he never has known a woman's caresses. His
superiors, Kondo and Hijikata, take an obsessive interest in him and act
concerned that there is a jealousy among the men over him, thinking this will
spoil the militia's unity (the U.S. Army might have the same homosexual dilemma
in mind when they initiated their policy of: don't ask, don't tell). 
To test his courage, the new recruit is ordered to carry out a beheading of a
fellow sumarai who broke the strict rules of conduct. Kano executes him without
any hesitation and with an efficiency that greatly pleases his superiors. Later,
he is ordered to kill Tashiro, whom his superiors suspect of being his lover and
of being overly jealous that Kano is seeing other men. He does that assignment
without one peep of protest. The superiors further connive to find ways to deal
with this situation, as Hijikata orders a sergeant to get him a geisha girl. But
Kano refuses to sleep with her, saying he prefers the sergeant. The commanders
discuss between them all the rumors surrounding Kano and his lovers, as the film
concocts a bitter story about a possessed young man who joined the militia so he
can kill freely. He's an individual who is now faced with resolving what he
narcissistically has attracted. 
The film is an ambiguous one. Its look at homosexuality is also a look at how
others look at it, and what we know about that is seen in the expressions made.
It examines the violence that goes with a sex that is against the law. The most
mysterious scene comes at the end, when we look into Takeshi Kitano's face (his
is the most expressive one and perhaps, even though he's a heterosexual, the one
who is most jealous of Kano) -- and follow his emotional thrusts as he cuts down
a cherry tree in bloom with his sword at his anger over what he believes he sees
in Kano and in himself. The film ends without a clarity to what Kano or the
commanders were going through internally. It works best as poetry, as it seems
to connect the beauty of Kano with an inherent evil he possesses to draw those
to him who are willing to die for their desires. It's the closest we might come
to decifering what all the ambiguity meant, as each one's perception might
differ as to what beauty is and what price they are willing to pay for it. A
thoroughly maddening work from arguably Japan's best living director. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
