Title
Review for Mother Night (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some authors are easily transferable to the medium of film.  From
William Shakespeare (ROMEO AND JULIET) to John Grisham (THE FIRM) and
Tom Clancy (THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER), screenwriters and directors have
been able to capture the essence of most writer's work and move it to
the big screen.  But for some novelists, the adaptations have all
resulted in varying degrees of failure.  Kurt Vonnegut Jr.
(SLAUGHTERHOUSE FIVE) is one such author.  The latest attempt is
director Keith Gordon's MOTHER NIGHT.  Although it has some appeal and
charm, it also ends up on the debit side of his ledger.
     First time screenwriter Robert Weide tries hard to make a film out
of Vonnegut's book, but I suspect the book's style make such efforts
almost hopeless. Vonnegut's books have a cult following, especially on
campuses, but their appeal lies in their strange syntax and structure
as much as in their characters.
     The film opens in 1961 in Israel where Howard W. Campbell Jr.
(Nick Nolte) is about to be tried for war crimes.  In the cell above
his is Adolf Eichmann.  Campbell is given three weeks to write his
memoirs, and then his trial will commence.  This part of the film is
shot by Tom Richmond in a grainy black and white.  Most of the show is
told in flashback where the images are full of lush colors that are,
for reasons I'll discuss later, too pretty.
     Howard is an American whose father has worked most of his life in
Berlin.  Howard has become a playwright and is married to a German
woman, Helga Noth (Sheryl Lee who played Astrid in BACKBEAT).  Just
before the war starts a "Blue Fairy Godmother" named Frank Wirtanen
(John Goodman) comes to Howard with a proposition.  Frank works for the
American War Department and wants Howard to broadcast Nazi propaganda
during the war which will include coded messages past to him by another
spy whom he will never meet.
     After Frank tells him that the US will disown him after the war,
Howard asks why Frank thinks he will take the job.  Howard says, "You
love good, you hate evil, and you'd do anything for the sake of
romance."  Yes, suspending disbelief is mandatory in MOTHER NIGHT.
     "I guess the moral here is: you must be careful what you pretend
to be because in the end you are who you're pretending to be," reasons
Howard about his moral dilemma.
     Nolte is an actor with a proclivity for overacting.  MULHOLLAND
FALLS is one such film, but hopefully you missed it.  In others, like
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, he stays in control.  Here he gives the first
performance where he manages to underact.  His acting is disengaged and
borders on being boring.  Even when Nolte's acting is awful, it has
rarely been boring.  In Nolte's defense, the whole show exists on a
plane disjoint from that of the audience.  Gordon's direction is never
involving, and the viewers become little more than voyeurs.
     At the end of the first act, the war ends and as promised, his
fairy godmother shows up to disown him with, "Your role will remain
classified, and Uncle Sam's official position is you're the scum of the
earth."
     "Yes, I've changed.  People should be changed by World Wars or
what are World Wars for," reasons Howard in the second act.  This part
is set in New York City where Howard forms a friendship with George
Kraft (Alan Arkin).  Howard is officially dead, but George encourages
him to tell the world his story and besides, "all the best writers are
dead."  During this act, one bizarre character after another shows up
with most being white supremacists including one who is actually black
and is known as the Black Fuhrer.  This act is even less effective than
the first.
     In the end, there are only two reasons to see MOTHER NIGHT.  One
makes sense, and the other doesn't.  First, the script includes some
excellent dialog, bitingly funny and insightful.  Second, the show has
a lovely serenity to it.
     Since this is a tragedy about Nazis and about innocent people
being trapped, why we should have this tranquillity makes little sense.
Outwardly the situations are tragic, but the lush cinematography, the
overly dreamy music by Michael Convertino and the peaceful composure of
most of the participants give the film an inappropriate peacefulness.
     As just a few examples of this, when the war is about to end, two
of the Nazi decide to let the Russian take them and probably kill them,
but they are completely at peace with this.  The scenes of wartime
Germany are picture postcard perfect.  Rich people in Tuxedos live in a
Norman Rockwell setting.  Finally, the audience is lulled with the
constant sounds of Bing Crosby's melodious voice singing "White
Christmas."
     I hope that movie producers will not again waste our time with
Vonnegut.  Savor him in print if you will, but don't try to force his
work where it doesn't fit.
     MOTHER NIGHT runs 1:50.  It is rated R.  There is brief nudity, a
little violence, and some bad language.  The show is all pretty mild
and would be fine for any teenager.  I enjoyed parts of it, especially
the script, but there is not enough there to recommend it.  I give the
picture **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
          This has been a bad week for me as far as screenings go.
MOTHER NIGHT was one of two films which made me leave the theater
before the film was over.
          MOTHER NIGHT is from a book by Kurt Vonnegut.  As a film, it
was extremely unreal and slow-moving to the point where my patience
was put to the test and failed.  I left.
          Howard W Campbell, Jr. (Nick Nolte) is in an Israeli prison,
accused of being a kind of Tokyo Rose for the Hitler regime.  Campbell
is given a typewriter and he writes the story of how the Americans
asked him to pretend to be an admirer of the Nazis so he can spy for
the U.S.   His radio broadcasts around the world from Germany are full
of vitriol for the Jews and Americans in general.
          Campbell throws himself into the spy business with such
force that we never really know whose side he was really on.  Of
course, he has been told that if he is found out, our government will
deny any complicity. (Why?  Were we not allowed to have spies in
Germany with whom we were at war?)
          When the war is over and Campbell comes back to the U.S., he
assumes another identity but after a while he feels it is safe and
goes back to using his real name, a name the whole world reviles, that
of Howard W Campbell, jr.  Why would he be so stupid?
         Others wasted in the cast include Sheryl Lee, (Twin Peaks),
Alan Arkin, David Strathairn, Kirsten Dunst, Frankie Faisan and Arye
Gross.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Nick Nolte, Sheryl Lee, Alan Arkin, John Goodman, Kirsten Dunst, 
      Arye Gross, Frankie Faison, David Strathairn, Bernard Behrens 
Director: Keith Gordon
Producers: Keith Gordon and Robert W. Weide
Screenplay: Robert W. Weide based on the novel by Kurt Vonnegut
Cinematography: Tom Richmond
Music: Michael Convertino
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
"A man, the microcosmic fool, down in his soul
Is wont to think himself a whole,
But I'm part of the Part which at the first was all,
Part of the Darkness that gave birth to Light,
The haughty Light that now with Mother Night
Disputes her ancient rank and space withal,
And yet 'twill not succeed, since, strive as strive it may,
Fettered to bodies will Light stay."
     -- Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, "Faust"
     No one is likely to question the inherent greatness of Kurt 
Vonnegut's work, whether the novel in question is SLAUGHTERHOUSE FIVE, 
MOTHER NIGHT, BREAKFAST OF CHAMPIONS, or something else.  Even an 
incomplete survey of his books makes it clear why Graham Greene called 
him "one of the best living American writers" and why the NEW YORK TIMES 
labeled him "a true artist."  Nevertheless, the writings of top authors 
don't always translate effectively to the motion picture medium, as 
MOTHER NIGHT illustrates.  The material dealt with in the novel -- 
guilt, perception, and identity -- is heavy, powerful stuff.  Director 
Keith Gordon's (A MIDNIGHT CLEAR) handling of it, however, is uncertain, 
and, on at least one occasion, seriously flawed.
     Nevertheless, because the premise and storyline are so compelling, 
it's impossible not to be drawn in, at least on some level, by MOTHER 
NIGHT.  In fact, for the first forty-five minutes, it's an example of 
solid, albeit stylistically unconventional, film making.  Then comes 
Gordon's serious miscalculation, and, in a matter of minutes, all of the 
carefully-developed characters and situations collapse in a jumble of 
poorly-realized, surreal satire.  MOTHER NIGHT eventually recovers from 
this misstep for a thought-provoking ending, but the bad taste lingers.
     MOTHER NIGHT takes place in two different time periods -- World War 
II Germany and early '60s Israel.  Borrowing a page from MRS. PARKER AND 
THE VICIOUS CIRCLE, the "present-day" scenes are in black-and-white, 
while the flashbacks (which make up more than two-thirds of the 
material) are in color.  Nick Nolte plays Howard W. Campbell Jr., an 
American transplanted to Germany during his youth.  Years later, 
Campbell, a successful playwright, is recruited by a mysterious United 
States government operative (John Goodman) to go under cover as a secret 
agent.  Seduced by the romance of the idea, Campbell allows himself to 
be swept along by the surging tide of Nazi propaganda, and, in the guise 
of a pro-Hitler radio commentator, he provides encoded information to 
the Allies.  His anti-Semitic speeches are so inflammatory, however, 
that everyone views Campbell as an upper-echelon Nazi.  Members of the 
party congratulate him on his great work, and his social circle includes 
the likes of Goebels and Hoess.  When the war ends, he faces trial -- 
and possibly execution -- for war crimes, because those elements of the 
U.S. government that recruited him refuse to acknowledge his status.
     Questions of identity lie at the heart of MOTHER NIGHT.  As 
Campbell warns in his voice-over narrative, "We are what we pretend to 
be, so we must be careful about what we pretend to be."  His appearance 
as an anti-Semite does at least as much to forward the Nazi cause as it 
does to help the United States.  Eventually, Campbell has to face the 
issue of whether the gains from his time under cover justify all the 
damage he does.  As Adolf Eichmann informs him in a critical scene, 
"About those 6 million [dead Jews] -- I don't need credit for all of 
them.  I can spare a few for you."  In Goethe's "Faust", from which 
Vonnegut took the title, MOTHER NIGHT, Mephistopheles asserts that there 
can be no light without darkness.  Here, Campbell must ponder how 
inextricably the good in his actions is dependent upon the evil.  After 
all, had he not stirred up the hatred against Jews, he wouldn't have 
been trusted enough to possess the sensitive information that he passed 
on to the U.S. government.
     In developing Campbell's story, Gordon sets a staid, somber tone 
that remains in effect until the story skips ahead to the early 1960s, 
where Campbell is eking out an anonymous existence in New York City.  A 
group of white supremacists learns his identity and comes to pay 
tribute.  Suddenly, instead of real characters, we're given ill-defined 
caricatures.  Indeed, the film's entire tone becomes satirical and 
falsely comic.  It's a jarring, off-putting transition.  The intention 
of this approach is to avoid glamorizing neo-Nazis, but the result lends 
an aura of artificiality to portions of MOTHER NIGHT.  For a parallel, 
consider how much weaker SCHINDLER'S LIST would have been had Ralph 
Fiennes' character not been so horrifyingly three-dimensional.  
Trivializing evil doesn't make it less appealing -- it just makes it 
less believable.
     Following in the wake of his work for MULHOLLAND FALLS, Nolte's 
performance here can only be considered a step up.  For the most part, 
he finds the right tone, although Campbell is typically kept at an arm's 
distance from the audience.  Early in the film, Nolte gives us a cocky, 
passionate man.  Later, as the scene shifts from Germany to America and 
Israel, he shows us a world-weary, morally uncertain person who views 
life as an aimless journey through purgatory.
     Sheryl Lee, forever doomed to be known as TWIN PEAKS' Laura Palmer, 
has a pivotal role as Campbell's lovely German wife, Helga.  Her 
importance to his rise and fall cannot be underestimated.  As one Nazi 
official says of their relationship, "If that woman walked off a cliff, 
I swear Howard would follow her."  Lee's performance, however, is 
variable.  She's very good at the beginning, but her effectiveness 
diminishes as questions arise about who Helga really is.
     Another character with more than one face is George Kraft, a lonely 
painter played by veteran actor Alan Arkin.  Other supporting performers 
include Kirsten Dunst (INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE) as Helga's younger 
sister, Arye Gross (A MIDNIGHT CLEAR) as a Jewish doctor, David 
Strathairn (DOLORES CLAIBORNE) as the American soldier who captures 
Campbell after the war, and Frankie Faison (THE STUPIDS) as a black neo-
Nazi.  LAUGH-IN regular Henry Gibson supplies the disembodied voice of 
Eichmann.
     Gordon gives us a number of scenes laced with irony, such as Bing 
Crosby's rendition of "White Christmas" playing while the screen holds 
an image of the Israeli flag, or a romantic interlude between Campbell 
and his wife while Hitler's voice can be heard ranting in the 
background.  However, these, and other, notable stylistic moments can't 
eclipse the central flaw.  Ultimately, MOTHER NIGHT is one of those 
films that it's more rewarding to talk about than see.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
James Brundage
Written by Robert Weide (Lenny Bruce: Swear to tell the Truth)
Starring Nick Nolte, Sheryl Lee, Alan Arkin, John Goodman, Kristen Dunst
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 As a critic, I try to do justice to a film.  If the film is bad, this is
incredibly easy.  It is much easier to destroy than to create, to rip than
to extol.  As I have often mentioned, it is the good reviews that are
difficult to write.  I have a conflict between the desire to write a review
worthy of the movie as well as to write a review different than the ones
that I see every day.
 You see, bad reviews vary endlessly.  When faced with the raw anger one
feels towards a bad movie it is easy to channel this rage into a sort of
maligned creativity and to bring forth a new, humorous, and often refreshing
movie review.  When a movie is good, however, the critic is faced with the
difficulty of coming up with something good to say about it.  Put in
layman's terms, we are often faced with writer's block.
 At least a dozen times I have watched Mother Night.  At least a dozen times
I have been blown away by its lyricism, by its dark humor and by its raw
dramatic power.  At least a dozen times I have had absolutely no clue how to
word my praises.
 My undying desire to be somewhat original in my critique has led me to the
conclusion that what I do so often is not a critique per se, but instead a
column.  A pondering on the nature of things where I try to offer a new and
interesting perspective on an old debate.
 With this self-revelation, the subject of the debate brought forth by
Mother Night is why people are so threatened by touchy subjects that they
ignore perfectly great films.
 Mother Night, the story of American spy Howard W. Campbell, Jr., a man who
has worked his way up to the top of the Nazi propaganda ministry, lost his
wife (the only thing that made his life worth living in his eyes), and now,
15 years later, is being forced to confront the question "did I do more harm
than good?" is one of those films that is perfectly inoffensive to all who
watch it yet pissed everyone who didn't see it off on principle.  It deals
highly with moral questions, coming to the point early on in the quote "be
careful what you pretend to be, because, in the end, you are what you
pretend to be."  Yet the chief complaint that I have heard about the film is
that it is too offensive, too anti-Semitic to watch.
 On pure cinematic grounds, the film is excellent.  It has perfect story
structure, humor at the right parts, seriousness when necessary.  It has
mystery, it has tension.  It has a believable set of characters (although
the group of Nazis living in New York including the Reverend Doctor Lionel
Jones "D.D.S., D.D." are perhaps the funniest charicature of the stupidity
and hypocrisy of prejudicial behavior.).  It has a plot that is not too far
out there considering the numerous other true stories involving spies in the
propaganda ministry.
Nick Nolte (although this sounds the very cliché I wish to avoid) plays his
part to such steely perfection that you cannot help but identify with him
and his plight, but understand his actions.  Sheryl Lee takes a break from
her idiosyncratic routine of being the weirdo ("Twin Peaks", Twin Peaks:
Fire Walk with Me, John Carpenter's Vampires) and shines in what translates
to a very large supporting role and John Goodman does a lot better in Mother
Night than he has in any film in the past twenty years.
 Yet something about this film annoys so many people that it was overlooked.
 It came out in 1996, the year where The English Patient made its sweep at
the Academy Awards.  Mother Night is much better than Secrets & Lies, the
shoo-in nomination, and at least as good as The English Patient, if not
slightly better.  I realize I have spoken treason at this point in time but
am beyond caring.
 The fact it is that Mother Night is one of a cadre of films that is swept
under the rug due to the fact that it hits some cultural hot button to the
average (slightly prejudicial) person.  These films are so great that they
deserve to be nominated if not win awards but instead become just your
general word-of-mouth only films.  In 1996, it was Mother Night, a film
which dealt candidly with Nazism and poked fun (in a satirical way) at the
ideals of that completely idiotic belief system.  In 1997, it was Chasing
Amy, which spoke openly about lesbianism, and modern sexuality and was fond
of using profanity (but no more fond than half the films by Oliver Stone or
other A-list directors.)  In 1998, Lolita and Smoke Signals were swept under
the rug.  Smoke Signals was allowed to be shown in this country and dealt
with father-son relationships and Indians without particular axes to grind.
Lolita, closely based on the novel by Vladmir Nabaknov, was one of the few
films that admits that not only are teens having sex, but that all people,
no matter what their ages, are capable of understanding the power that it
can hold over someone and capable of abusing it.  The film was not allowed
to be shown in the United States, and can only be found now on Showtime or
in your local video store.  It showed little nudity and contained no
profanity.
 Similarly, going back to Mother Night, this film uses no profanity that our
society considers "serious", nor is it excessively violent or sexual.  With
the editing of a few frames, it would be suitable for network broadcast with
no further complications.
 All of these films deserved Best Picture nods (come on, did we really need
to nominate The Full Monty, The Thin Red Line, or Elizabeth).  All of these
films did less than 20 million in the box office.  All of these films are
excellent.
 The thing which all of these films share is that the general public trusted
what they heard as spoken by a few conservatives who did not give these
films a chance.  Anyone who has seen any of the aforementioned movies knows
that, although they hit on subjects that are touchy, they are careful not to
 tread on toes.  They know that Mother Night is not, as some people have
claimed, anti-Semitic, but instead anti-anti-Semitic.  They know that
Chasing Amy and Lolita are both films that, in the end, contain heavy
morals.  They know that Smoke Signals is not a political statement but not
saying anything but instead a simple story about forgiving one's father.
 I make a call to all movie patrons.  To all people reading my message.  It
was said in Mother Night that National Socialism will exist as long as
people are thinking with their guts and not with their minds.  Although the
Nazis in the film cheer at this, this is a backhanded insult towards them
and a joke at their hypocrisy and stupidity.  This same hypocrisy is shown
when people prejudge a film based on profanity, or violence, or a political
or sexual message that they do not yet know of.  Stop following the people
telling you that this film or that film is offensive.  Stop following the
politicians that say that movies and violence on television corrupts your
mind.  The true moral in Mother Night, in addition to not pretending to be
something you're not, is that you have a mind, and that you should exercise
it instead of going on the propaganda life spoon feeds you.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Nick Nolte, Sheryl Lee, Alan Arkin, John Goodman, Bernard
Behrens, Kirstin Dunst.
Screenplay:  Robert B. Weide, based on the novel by Kurt Vonnegut.
Producers: Keith Gordon, Robert B. Weide.
Director:  Keith Gordon.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, profanity, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  113 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Having read most of Kurt Vonnegut's novels before viewing MOTHER
NIGHT, I predicted to myself that it was the most likely of Vonnegut's
works to make a successful transition to the screen.  Much of the Vonnegut
canon has struck me as singularly unfilmable -- including one which _was_
filmed, SLAUGHTERHOUSE-FIVE -- but MOTHER NIGHT's narrative was a
relatively straightforward one, and its themes equally direct.  In a
sense, director Keith Gordon's MOTHER NIGHT has proved me correct; in
another sense, it has proved me dreadfully wrong.  Thought well-crafted
and moderately compelling in its own right, MOTHER NIGHT loses a lot with
the absence of Vonnegut's ironic voice.  Where the novel was a sly social
comedy, the film strives almost for Greek tragedy.
     Nick Nolte stars as Howard W. Campbell Jr., an American-born
playwright living in Berlin in the 1930s with his actress-wife Helga Noth
(Sheryl Lee).  Campbell's way with words brings him to the attention of
Third Reich officials, who recruit him to create a weekly radio program of
Nazi propaganda.  He is also recruited by Frank Wirtanen (John Goodman),
an American agent who asks Campbell to act as a double-agent and broadcast
coded Nazi secrets during his program.  Campbell agrees, even though the
Americans insist they will never acknowledge him, a circumstance which
places him in an uncomfortable situation when the Nazis lose the war.
Campbell begins an anonymous life in New York City, but even his
friendship with neighbor George Kraft (Alan Arkin) makes it difficult for
him to live without Helga and with the growing realization that he may
have been more villain than hero.
     The title of MOTHER NIGHT comes from a line in Goethe's "Faust" about
the interdependence of Good and Evil, and it is that gray area which the
film explores in the character of Howard W. Campbell Jr.  Gordon frames
the film, like the novel, as a flashback, with black-and-white segments of
Campbell awaiting trial in Israel and preparing his memoirs, so there is a
built-in sense of impending justice.  Nick Nolte contributes to that
feeling with one of his best performances in years as a man whose history
begins to weigh him down, and who learns the hard way that it is
impossible to remain apolitical when politics turns to war.  It is a
finely constructed narrative which holds the focus on one of Vonnegut's
key lines:  "We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful what we
pretend to be."
     There is a difference, however, between retaining lines and retaining
the tone of those lines, and that is where Robert B. Weide's script
becomes a disappointment.  Though MOTHER NIGHT deals with heavy subject
matter -- conscience, personal identity, the Holocaust -- Vonnegut never
resorted to heaviness to tell the story.  The kind of detached irony which
is Vonnegut's stock in trade is tough to convey cinematically, and Gordon
steers instead into the twin extremes of overly straight drama (as in the
scene where Campbell watches an old newsreel of himself with growing
horror) or broad comedy (the portrayal of a collection of hate-mongers who
idolize Campbell).  There are certainly moments where Gordon hits just the
right note, like the opening shot of an Israeli flag underscored by Bing
Crosby's rendition of "White Christmas," or the off-handed comment by
fellow prisoner Adolph Eichmann (the disembodied voice of Henry Gibson)
when Campbell accuses him of the murder of of six million Jews -- "I can
spare a few of them for you."  Too often, however, the earnestness becomes
burdensome.
     It is an example of Gordon and Weide's traditional filmic
story-telling that they try to turn certain twists of identity or plot
developments into grand surprises, when Vonnegut reveals them casually
through Campbell's narration long before the events occur chronologically.
MOTHER NIGHT may be one of his most traditionally plotted novels, but it
still isn't about the plot...it's about a perspective and an idea.  Gordon
has not made a bad film; it is well-acted and keeps you interested from
moment to moment.  He simply wants Campbell's moment of truth to come like
a thunderbolt, rather than the way Vonnegut prefers to deliver it:  as a
single finger tapping you ever so lightly on the shoulder.
