Title
Review for Nothing Sacred (1937)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Nothing Sacred" is one of those long-ago
films that remind you just how little has
really changed over the years.  Pro
wrestling is as fake now as it was then,
some reporters are still as willing to
not let the truth interfere with a great
story, and sharp, sarcastic comedies can
be just as funny.
"Nothing Sacred" falls into the latter
category.  The script was co-written by
Ben Hecht, who is best known for the
similar comedy "The Front Page".  The
story has an elderly, drunken doctor
(Charles Winninger) misdiagnosing Hazel
Flagg (Carole Lombard) as having a
terminal illness.  Gullible reporter
Wally Cook (Fredric March) learns of and
promotes the story, unaware that the
diagnosis was wrong and Hazel is actually
in good health.
Hazel is taken from her small town to New
York City, where she lives in luxury,
feted by Wally and praised by all for her
courage in facing death.  Romance
inevitably blooms between Hazel and Wally.
But what will happen when Wally's editor
boss (Walter Connolly) learns that she is
healthy, and the newspaper has been conned?
The script was based upon the story
"Letter to the Editor" by James Street.
It was later adapted to become the
Broadway musical "Hazel Flagg", and
the plot was again used for the Jerry
Lewis/-Dean Martin vehicle "Living It Up".
To show just how little has changed,
many story elements also show up in the
currently playing "Runaway Bride", a comedy
which also has a newspaperman trying to
salvage his career by using a small-town
woman for a scoop, but ending up falling
in love with her.
Connolly's character is named Oliver Stone.
This leads to much unintented humor, since
the Stone character keeps referring to himself
in the third person (e.g. "She'll know one
thing, that Oliver Stone is worse than
radium poisoning!").  Any similar to the
Academy Award-winning director, who was born
nine years later, is purely coincidental!
While Lombard was a gifted comedienne,
in "Nothing Sacred" her voice does get
whiny on occasion.  March is best known for
his dramatic roles, but displays good comic
timing here.  Winninger is perfectly cast
as the incomepetent doctor, and Connolly
does well as the blustery, despairing editor.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
