Title
Review for Brother's Keeper (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring:  Delbert, Roscoe, and Lyman Ward, and the townsfolk of
            Munnsville, NY
Directors:  Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
Producers:  Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
Screenplay:  Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky
Music:  Jay Ungar and Molly Mason
Released by Creative Thinking International
     BROTHER'S KEEPER is a documentary that chronicles the death of 64
year old Bill Ward, the arrest of his 59-year-old brother Delbert for
the killing, and the subsequent murder trial (and verdict).
Producers/Directors/Writers Berlinger and Sinofsky are careful to
present both sides of the story, although their bias for the "Ward boys"
is evident.
     Joe Berlinger was present at the screening of BROTHER'S KEEPER
which I attended.  After the film was over, he spent approximately
twenty minutes talking to the audience about the making of the film and
his relationship with the Ward boys.  One element that he highlighted
was how he and his partner, Bruce Sinofsky, made an effort to get to
know the picture's subjects--and earn their trust--before ever
shooting a frame of film.  The rapport they established comes across.
     BROTHER'S KEEPER is a remarkable film, and a tremendous feat of
documentary film-making.  Put together on a minuscule budget, it has all
of the power, drama, and tension of a big-budget Hollywood thriller.
That it is real gives the story that much more punch.
     This is not a "talking heads" movie, with an omniscient announcer's
voice-over chronicling events.  Instead, the story is presented as it
unfolds.  When the film makers began their project, they had no idea how
the movie would turn out, or whether Delbert would be found innocent or
guilty.  The film evolves exactly as the real-life tale did, complete
with a twist or two, and genuine suspense as the jury deliberates the
verdict.
     Ultimately, however, BROTHER'S KEEPER is less about the guilt or
innocence of Delbert Ward as it is an indictment of police procedure, a
look at the role of the media in criminal proceedings, and an
examination of a people and culture that most mainstream Americans never
encounter.  Delbert and his brothers are throw-backs in time--indigent
farmers who live together in a house without central heating, sleep
together for warmth, can barely read or write, and bathe perhaps once
every six months.  At times, their speech is so slurred that it's
difficult to understand what they're saying.
     At first look, Delbert and his brothers seem unlikely candidates to
base a documentary on.  My initial reaction was that it would be
impossible to create the necessary rapport between them and the
audience.  I was wrong.  What Berlinger and Sinofsky have accomplished
in BROTHER'S KEEPER is astounding.  I left the theater feeling as if I
knew these people, and, more than simply knowing them, I cared about
them.
     BROTHER'S KEEPER is anything but a traditional documentary; it's
more engaging and less dry than other films in the category.  Since the
movie is getting extremely-limited distribution (Berlinger and Sinofsky
are handling this themselves since all the major distributors turned
them down), it may be hard to find.  But, if it comes to a theater in
your neck of the woods, my advice is to go see it.  If not, there will
still be an opportunity when it shows up on American Playhouse for the
1993-94 season.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
