Title
Review for Black Robe (1991)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Pedro Sena
I liked THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, and couldn't resist checking out this
film, since I am a bit of a history buff, in film anyway.
The BLACK ROBE is about the first Christian soul drivers to hit Canada in
the 16th and 17th Centuries.  Some of them made it, because they were honest
and cared, but others suffered because they were more forceful and were not
used to the way of the Indians in the area.
The main character comes to the new continent and is going to be assigned a
tribe that his predecessor could not succeed, and lost an ear because of it.
In the process, as he travels to the area where he must go, he makes friends
with a thief, who becomes his helper many times.  And this thief also gains
an affection from an Indian girl, which doesn't sit too well with a few
Indians, but she goes her way because she is intelligent, and makes her own
decisions.  And here the first fault of the Indian is shown, in that he
tends to OWN, and dominate the women, and this girl has become westernized
in that  she has changed.
Through out the film, a few Indians tease the black robed Jesuit priest, who
has secretly fallen in love with the same Indian girl, only to find out he
has no chance, for which he flogs himself.  Another sore point with him is
the diminutive medicine man who keeps making fun of the black robed man's
beliefs and his moods, only to prove true in the end.  The medicine man is
harping all the time, and gets out voted once, about the Indians coming to
believe another god, or set of beliefs, which will destroy him.  In the end,
the tribe that wished to be baptized by the black robe, believed that it
would absolve them of their 'sins'.....and the film's final caption states
that they lived ten more years and were annihilated by their enemies after
that, without a fight.  This was the point of the little man.  He said that
the new beliefs would make them lesser men, and that they would lose sight
of themselves........and they did.
The film is odd, in that it sticks by the western man's thinking, until it
knows that the cause is almost lost, and that the only chance for survival
is to join forces as a stronger force.  But belief in the westernized God
did not make the Indians stronger men, or women, it made them weak, and
less of a 'hunter' and 'survivor' in an area where the terrain, the weather,
and the opportunities are few to survive by one self.
Aside from being a sad film about the fall of the Indian folklore, belief
system, and the rise of the western man in Canada, it is a very well
directed, and faithfully represented film, that does not say where the fault
lies.  A bit on both sides, I guess.  The Indians could have learned a few
new tricks, but didn't need to change their very own beliefs in life and
living, whereas the European counter part accepted nothing but total
acceptance,  which may have been the real problem.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
101 min., R, Drama, 1991
Director: Bruce Beresford
Cast: Lothaire Bluteau, Aden Young, Sandrine Holt, August Schellenburg,
      Tantoo Cardinal, Frank Wilson, Lawrence Bayne
     Lothaire Bluteau is a French Jesuit missionary.  His job is to
transport a group of Indians from Quebec, Canada to a mission in the
Huron Indian area in the fall/winter time.  On the trip he is supposed
to convert the Indians to Christianity.  Aden Young is a French man in
his twenties who wishes to go along on the trip.  As the perilous trip
starts out the Indians think Bluteau is a demon out to take away their
spirits.  After the trip starts Young falls in love with a young Indian
girl, Sandrine Holt.
     BLACK ROBE is a must-see for anyone who wants a thought-provoking
film.  The film makes you think about religion and the culture of the
people depicted in it.  I enjoyed watching this film very much.  On a
zero to five scale, I give BLACK ROBE a four.  BLACK ROBE is rated R for
female nudity, graphic violence, and adult situations.
     The story is well-written.  It is about a group of Indians who are
being taken away from their homes and moved to a location that they
don't even know about.  On the journey a man who they have never seen
before tries to change them from believing that the dreams that they
have always believed in are false and that only his God is true.  The
journey is a hard one for it is mostly in the winter and the Indians
have little faith in the missionary.
     BLACK ROBE was filmed in breathtaking locations in Canada and
France.  Along with the story, the locations picked for the filming
were perfect.  There are some wonderful displays of nature's wonders.
The filming was done in the late fall and winter so the woods have snow
fall making them all the more beautiful.  And then there is the water
with the reflections of the trees in it as the Indian canoes go by.
     Aden Young's role is a hard one.  If he survives the mission,
Bluteau wants him to travel to France and to go through a mission so he
can become a man of God.  Young falls in love with Sandrine Holt, an
Indian.  Under the Christianity that Bluteau is teaching, Young can't
fall in love with an Indian and have sex with her.
     The Indians in the film speak in their native language to make the
film more realistic.  The dialogue is subtitled on the bottom of the
screen so the audiences will understand what the Indians are speaking.
The French speak in English, except when speaking to the Indians, when
they speak in the Indian's native tongue.
     So, a perfectly wonderful film.  You must go out and see it in the
theaters if it visits your area.  If it has already gone through your
area, or doesn't visit your area, you must check this film out on video
because it is one not to miss.  It is worth full ticket price.

Author
John Schuurman
     THE BLACK ROBE, a disturbingly brutal movie, marks for Australian
Bruce Beresford a move from realism into the darker realm of
naturalism.  His movies have always been noted for their honest,
matter-of-fact approach.  He also has consistently dealt withmatters of
ultimate value, never being shy of probing the vulnerable spots of the
human condition, but this film marks for him a significant and
courageous move towards something really dark, and, as I hope to show,
amazingly light.  In his other fine films, "Driving MissDaisy",
"Tender Mercies", "Breaker Morant", and "Crimes of the Heart" to name
but a few, Beresford pokes around tender spots but does so with some
tenderness of his own.  Here -- no more.  This is a move from innocuous
realism to brute naturalism.
     In this film, nature is primitive and savage.  Even the
"beautiful" scenery in truth is foreboding and full of threat.  There
is no romanticizing of nature as in "Dances with Wolves" or so many
American films.  No wispy clouds or sunlit days.  As I think back on
the film, I can not recall anything other than low, grey, forbidding
skies.  Perhaps there was some sunshine.  I doubt it.
     The most stark contrast between "Dances with Wolves" and this
movie is of course the portrayal of the Native Americans.  "Dances" was
politically correct of course but ridden with cliches and wholly
dishonest to anyone who has even a passing awareness of NativeAmerican
cultures.  Red men were not nearly so noble nor white men nearly such
blackguards.  Conversely, "Black Robe" is perhaps excessive in making
its point of the brutality of unredeemed natural man.  But the indians,
for all the barbarism are fully human. We see many moments of their
tenderness and humor.  Even the most savage of them areshown not to
engage in cruelty for its own sake but rather for the sake of their
gods. (Witness the Iroquois chiefs in the sweat lodge debating the fate
of their prisoners.)  For them, the way of the war club was their faith
and the sacrifice of flesh a sacrament, (a profound pa rallel to that
"other" faith).
     The whites too were shown "warts and all".  Beresford's point,
"There, but for the grace of God, go I" is shown in the opening scenes
in Champlain's New France.  The French too are filthy and vulgar -- one
can easily suppose that they would be as brutal as the indians given a
different set of accidents of time and place and birth.  The priest's
interactions with the fur trader who gives whiskey to the natives and
the rude builders are cases in point.  This cultural relativism is most
meaningfully shown in the dance and processional scenes near the
beginning of the film.  In this striking juxtaposition of cultures it
seems that both are equally superstitious, equally impressed with a
show, and equally silly about how the spiritual interacts with the
physical.
     This point is made constantly throughout the film: The delight of
the indians and the revulsion of the priest as he moves his bowels over
the side of the canoe; the unearthly view of "paradise" that the priest
has, (no food, no tobbacco, no sexuality, only God); and
thebelievability given to the whole cult of dreams.
     In sum, the movie would fall sloppily into the long stream of
pluralism movies and be little more than an exercise in the relativity
of cultures -- up to a crucial point, and that is where this film parts
company with the others and becomes something quite remarkable.  

Like "Chariots of Fire", this movie takes two world views and compares
them. Whether it be two reasons for running competitively, or two views
of man's religious motives, the two movies facilitate an exchange
between the two world views and finds them equallyHUMAN.  In the case
of Chariots they are found equally sympathetic.   In Robe equally
vulgar and superstitious.  But then having done that, deftly and
without blinking both films show that one is darkness and the other
light.
     The evidence for this is seen first of all in the priest, who
though very much the arrogant Jesuit, (a remarkably accurate portrayal
of that "Society of Jesus,"); and though he is possessed of all the
medieval tom-foolery about a mystical paradise, yet truly is moved by
acompassion that is not human, (in truth it is divine).  His motive
comes from somewhere else. Like Eric Liddle in Chariots of Fire, his
*modus operandi* is the Biblically informed, Holy Spirit enlightened
world view of the Christian.  At the end when the Huron chief moved
bysuperstition to request baptism, asks, "Do you love us?" we see a
quick parade of the faces we have come to know, fear, and respect in
the film; primarily we see people, -- neither straw men nor beasts --
whom the priest really does love, with a love that transcends cultural
andethnic barriers -- a love that is Christianity's unique innovation
in the world.
     The other evidence for the "Christian=light/ aboriginal=dark"
theme in this work is the eyes of the young Frenchman who travels with
the priest.  Most of the movie is seen through his eyes.  He goes
through all of the enchantment with the primitive that we would expect
of idealistic youth.  He struggles with all of the questions as to
"what makes us think we have a better answer than they do?"  And then
in the torture chamber of the Iroquois after all the savagery, hears a
terrible truth from his friend the magnificent Algonquian chief:
Chief:  "Now what do you think?  Do you still want to be one of us?"
Youth:  "They are Iroquois They are animals."    Chief: "Don't be a
fool.  We would have done the same thing." At the end, the youth, (our
eyes), finally a believer, wants to continue on with the priest to the
Huron village.  The priest sends him back with the girl.  "We have
taken everything she has," a statement filled with the sadness that
such conquests of pagan culture are necessary.
     The epilogue states that the Hurons having accepted Christianity
were massacred 15 years later.  That sort of thing has indeed happened
to many Indian tribes that gave up the religion of the war club for
that of the cross.  Those "failures" might well be seen as
thedefinitive proof that the white man's religion was a curse upon
everyone it touched.  But the death of the martyr has always been a
part of the Christian story.  "The blood of the martyrs is the seed of
the church," and all of that.
for more reviews by John Schuurman see
http://www.mcs.com/&7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2
1991, R, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Lothaire Bluteau (Father Laforgue - "Blackrobe"), Aden Young
(Daniel), Sandrine Holt (Annuka), August Schellenberg (Chomina), produced by
Robert Lantos, Stephanie Reichel, Sue Milken, written by Brian Moore (based
on his novel), directed by Bruce Beresford.
"Black Robe" is one of those "period piece" movies that is so blatant in its
efforts to be a powerful, symbolic drama you feel bad if you don't like it.
The themes to this film are quite evident, but then again, so are the flaws.
Lothaire Bluteau stars as a Father Laforgue, a 17th century French priest
who wants to travel to the Americas to witness to the "poor savages." It's
difficult to understand his motivation because the manner in which he carries
out his mission is not very productive, positive, nor sympathetic. 
He takes with him a young apprentice named Daniel (Young), and the two
travel with a small tribe of Algonquin Indians from Quebec to a mission in
Huron. Not much happens in terms of plot development, so essentially what
Beresford is trying for is characterization and themes as he shows the impact
the Indians and the white men have on each other.
The Indians refer to Father Laforgue simply as "Blackrobe." This is symbolic
of the role of his character, with black being an absolute negative color,
and robe as in "of the cloth." Blackrobe repeatedly tries to witness to the
natives but with little success. They are just as close-minded as he is when
it comes to theology and who is actually "right." 
The film doesn't do a good job in justifying its existence - is it supposed
to be a historically accurate portrayal of the events, or is it a story of
tolerance? At one point it almost becomes a sappy love story and at another
point it borders on the adventure genre. We get a story with a lot of
apparent truth and accuracy to it, but what is it building up to?
The only time the film becomes somewhat interesting is during a battle scene
in which Blackrobe's clan is attacked by another tribe and many are brutally
killed (except for the main characters of course). One guaranteed method of
bringing people of differences together is a common enemy, and that cliche
comes into play here. Chomina (Schellenberg), one of the Algonquin leaders
that had been guiding Blackrobe, is captured and tortured along with our
heroes. There's that moment of "Lets put our differences aside and work
together to kick their ass!" But it's too late, the characters aren't
interesting enough to really care about  what happens to them.
Blackrobe does make it to the Huron mission, and the Indians there beg him
to baptize them, only because they think by doing so it will stop the illness
that is plaguing them. When the leader of the tribe asks Blackrobe if he
loves them, he thinks about all the Indians he has encountered, both good and
bad, and replies "yes" but not enthusiastically. 
There's many smaller themes and conclusions that can be drawn from "Black
Robe," but as a whole it seems empty. It just needed work on its
characterization and actual storytelling style.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BLACK ROBE (Australia-Canada,1991) Directed by Bruce 
Beresford. Written by Brian Moore from his novel " Black 
Robe."  Photography,  Peter James. Editing, Tim Wellburn. 
Production design, Herbert Pinter. Art direction, Gavin 
Mitchell. Set design, Real Proulx.  Costumes, Renee April, 
John Hay. Music, Georges Delerue. Cast:  Lothaire Bluteau  
(Father Laforgue), Aden Young (Daniel), Sandrine Holt 
(Annuka), August Schellenberg (Chomina), Tantoo Cardinal 
(Chomina's Wife), Billy Two Rivers (Ougebmat), Lawrence Bayne 
(Neehatin), Harrison Liu (Awondoie), Wesley Cote (Oujita),
Frank Wilson (Father Jerome), and many others. A 
Canadian-Australian production. Released by Samuel Goldwyn Co. 
100 mins. Rated R (graphic violence). 
Australian Bruce Beresford is an "auteur" filmmaker, less for 
his style than for the consistency of his world-view . He is a 
master of ethnic characterizations: rambunctious Aussies 
(DON'S PARTY); an independent Australian girl (THE GETTING OF 
WISDOM); American country folk (TENDER MERCIES); 
U.S.Southerners (CRIMES OF THE HEART), a colonial African 
infatuated with things British (MISTER JOHNSON).Beresford is 
also preoccupied with ethnic or racial groups in the process 
of clashing, evolving or coming to terms: THE FRINGE DWELLERS 
(aborigines), MISTER JOHNSON, DRIVING MISS DAISY.
BLACK ROBE fits those schemes perfectly. In 1634 New France 
(Quebec),  Jesuit Father Laforgue (Bluteau)  a young French 
missionary, is assigned by the famous geographer/statesman 
Champlain to trek some 1500 miles to the mission in a Huron 
settlement. Blackrobe, as the Indians call him, is accompanied 
by eight canoefuls of Algonquins and young French translator 
Daniel (Young). 
The trip through the wintry wilderness is a physical adventure 
for all, a sentimental journey for Daniel who falls in love 
with chief Chomina's (Schellenberg) daughter Annuka (Holt), 
and a spiritual voyage for Father Laforgue. 
Nature is alien to the Frenchmen but not beyond their grasp. 
The cultures however are mutually uncomprehending. The Indians 
see the Europeans as ugly, stupid and speaking in riddles, 
even as demons.  Father Laforgue suffers from carnal 
temptation (he mortifies his flesh after seeing Daniel and 
Annuka making love) and from Christian doubts about his 
mission to "bring about the salvation of these poor 
barbarians." 
The journey takes the party through gorgeously wild 
landscapes. The  Algonquins abandon the devil Blackrobe, but 
return, for mixed reasons: to keep their word to protect the 
priest and from fear of reprisals by Champlain. The party is 
attacked by the Iroquois, the survivors are tortured, in 
harrowing scenes considerably toned down from the novel. 
Annuka, Chomina and the two Frenchmen escape.   Blackrobe 
reaches his destination alone and with renewed faith. 
We were really never in doubt about the solidity of his  
beliefs. Among the clues: the Father visualized a cathedral's 
pillars while looking at a canopy of trees -- a risky old 
romantic metaphor, but  in this context not a cliche.   
The movie inevitably brings to mind THE MISSION and DANCES 
WITH WOLVES. Yet it is infinitely more metaphysical, authentic 
and un-Hollywoodish than DANCES. Like that picture, it 
subtitles the native languages. Its critical reception was 
even better than for the Costner film, but unlike the latter, 
BLACK ROBE seems to have had no budget for promotion, media 
exposure and hype. Since it was a severe affair without any 
feelgood fireworks or aspects, it was seen by few people.
BLACK ROBE raises a not-entertaining moral question: why 
proselytize?  It offers no facile answers and though made in 
our revisionist times of comparative ethnography, neither 
prettifies, romanticizes, analyzes or "un-savages" the North 
American Natives. Nor does it elevate or deride the 
spirituality of Father Laforgue. Blackrobe is totally a true 
believer of his period, sustained by a faith which stipulates 
that salvation is conceivable only within the Catholic Church. 
This is a 1634 movie, not a 1991 one. It comes close to an 
audiovisual version of diaries or memoirs by explorers of the 
time. There are minimal concessions: Algonquins twice --and 
surprisingly-- utter good English; Annuka is played by an 
exotic but not Algonquinish fashion model.(The other actors 
too are unknown to U.S. audiences, except for Bluteau, the 
lead in JESUS OF MONTREAL.)  
Ideologies aside, BLACK ROBE is an esthetic triumph. The 
natural settings are extraordinary. Production design, 
costumes, as well as the performances make everything look 
genuine. Rhythm and editing are superior. The photography by 
Peter James (DRIVING MISS DAISY) is exquisite. Georges 
Delerue's romantic score is perfectly dosed.  With the demise 
of Film Societies, whatever audiences exist for this work will 
see it on video. How sad. BLAK ROBE needs a large theater 
screen. 

Author
Frank Maloney
     BLACK ROBE is movie directed by Bruce Beresford from a script by
Brian Moore and based Moore's 1985 novel of the same name.  The film
stars Lothaire Bluteau, Aden Young, Sandrine Holt, August Schellenberg,
and Tantoo Cardinal.  Rated R due to violence, sex.
     BLACK ROBE is the story of an odyssey, both physical and spiritual,
of a French Jesuit missionary who in 1634 sets out from the Quebec of
Champlain 1500 miles with a band of Algonquins by canoe to a mission
which may or may not exist.  The priest, Father Laforgue, is played by
Lothaire Bluteau.  (Bluteau played the title role in JESUS OF MONTREAL.)
Laforgue begins as a rigid European dedicated to saving the savages,
ends as someone else.
     Brian (pronounced Bree-an) Moore, the author of THE LONELINESS OF
JUDITH HEARNE and THE LUCK OF GINGER COFFEY (which both became movies),
was quick, in an interview with The Seattle Times' John Hartl this week,
to dismiss comparisons of BLACK ROBE with DANCES WITH WOLVES.  Both
films are revisionist historical dramas about the doomed cultures of
Native Americans in their early contacts with whites.  Both use the
white character as the narrative focus.  Both use Native American actors
in appropriate roles and depict them speaking their own languages.  Both
use subtitles for the non-English dialogue.  Moore said, "[DWW] is an
old-fashioned, main-stream movie, except that the whites are the bad
guys.  And the Indians are all absolute saints, just like they were in
THE MISSION.  We tried not to do that."
     "The only thing that shocked us when we saw DANCES WITH WOLVES was
the use of subtitles for the Indians.  We thought our film would be the
first to do that."
     One obvious difference is that BLACK ROBE exposes its audience to a
different cultural group than the more commonly used Plains Indians,
namely Northern Woodlands culture.  Three native groups appear in the
film: Algonquins, Iroquois, and Hurons.  They are distinctively depicted
and even the Iroquois are presented as humans, albeit with their own
standards and expectations.  This difference by itself makes the film
fascinating and novel.
     The Native Americans by speaking their own languages and commenting
on the actions and ideas of the whites, especially Laforgue, give us a
Rashomon-esque effect -- multiple perceptions creating multiple truths
-- give the audience new insights into their own culture.  The culture
clashes, the culture shocks are often amusing, the only comic relief
often in what is mostly a very serious, tense and sober film, full of an
air of impending disaster, like the fall moving toward winter.
     Another cinematic quality that recommends BLACK ROBE is the use of
landscape photography.  Every outdoor shot frames scenery that is often
literally breath-taking; by that I mean that I gasped frequently at the
backgrounds of the human drama transpiring in the foreground.
Beresford's cinematographer is Peter James, who worked on DRIVING MISS
DAISY and MISTER JOHNSON, too.  Because of budgetary limitations the
film was pretty much shot in narrative order to capture the changing
seasons.  Beresford added flashbacks to Laforgue's earlier life in
France as well as black-and-white dream sequences.  These try to do the
job of the internal monologues that dominate Moore's novel.  One of the
Seattle critics thought the film needed a voice-over narration.  I'm
just as glad they avoided that since voice-overs are so problematical.
I think the photography and Bluteau's skills as an actor are sufficient
to fill us on what and why people are thinking and doing as they do.
     Bluteau is an impressive screen presence.  His role is physically
demanding and his character's impassivity and surpressed emotions make
his job all the harder.  He was hardly recognizable as the same actor
who played JESUS OF MONTREAL, a credit to his skills.
     The other actors are uniformly convincing.  Aden Young is plays a
young French who gets permission to travel and assist Black Robe,
ostensibly "for the greater glory of God," but in reality because he's
bored with building huts for Champlain and wants to go adventuring.
August Schellenberg plays the Algonquin chief who becomes a spiritual
teacher for Laforgue, Tantoo Cardinal his wife, and Sandrine Holt his
daughter who shocks Laforgue into a new way of thinking.
     I have one nit to pick, however.  The film makes a point of having
Native Americans speaking their own languages, but the French characters
all speak English.  Father Laforgue's "Indian" name is Black Robe and
when the Native Americans are speaking in their own languages about
Black Robe, they literally say "Black Robe", not even "Robe noir" or
whatever the phrase is in French.  Why don't the French speak French?
Film-making conventions permit us to pretend they are speaking French
instead of English, but given the subtitling of some of the non-English,
this inconsistency and convention becomes all the more illogical and
distracting.
     The film is a joint Canadian-Australian production.  A Canadian
director was originally set to film BLACK ROBE but Moore didn't like the
script and resisted pressure to create a violent hook to open the film.
Fortunately, Beresford came along with the $107 million dollars of clout
from DRIVING MISS DAISY behind him.  There is no U. S. (Hollywood) money
in the production -- although Samuel Goldwyn is distributing the film in
the U.S., as they did HENRY V and LONGTIME COMPANION, two other
hard-to-sell movies -- and it shows both negatively and positively.  The
negatives include a certain lack of visual richness or depth, the kind
of budget shortcuts that one sees in TV movies; one can seldom forget
that one is watching modern people wearing funny clothes.  The positives
include a spiritual depth that makes DANCES WITH WOLVES seem all the
more a shallow star-vehicle that it may have originally.
     Laforgue changes, softens and humanizes his European, Christian
"superiority."  The natives change in various ways that will lead to
their cultural (and physical) extinction.  Laforgue's intentions are
sincere, even when he's being a bigot; his love for the natives at the
end is real.  But he and the rest that will follow are the agents of one
of the great cultural tragedies of history.  BLACK ROBE does the best
job of any similar film I've seen of presenting the Native Americans as
they were.  It neither embraces (or patronizes) them or the stereotypes
built up about them.  They are people, who deserved better than they
got.
     The next step is a film without a white lead on whom to hang the
narrative.  There have been a few over the years, such as the estimable
POWWOW HIGHWAY, but they were mostly independent films with limited
exposure.
     BLACK ROBE cannot, I think, ever find a mass audience a la DANCES
WITH WOLVES.  The main drawback to achieving mass success is that BLACK
ROBE requires an audience that knows something, that can think, that
doesn't require cinematic hand-holding or unambiguous narrative.
     BLACK ROBE is a powerful, beautiful film that is sure to have an
effect on the audiences that do see it, an effect that will be hard to
dismiss or forget.
     I recommend BLACK ROBE at full prices, but do be forewarned that
there is some gruesome violence in the middle of the film.  I closed my
eyes and told Lyndol to tell me when it was over.
