Title
Review for Eye for an Eye (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
     This movie kinda sneaked up on us, huh?  You've probably never even
heard of EYE FOR AN EYE.  (I hadn't until the screening pass arrived in
the mailbox last week.)  But you'd think with a cast of Sally Field,
Kiefer Sutherland, Ed Harris, Beverly D'Angelo, and Joe Mantegna, the
studio would be pushing it a little harder.
     As well they should, because, put simply, this isn't your typical
Sally Field movie.  A long way from "Gidget," EYE FOR AN EYE is the very
aptly titled story of Karen McCann (Field), a white bread mother whose
daughter is raped and murdered (in an exceedingly disturbing opening
scene) by a nutcase killer (Sutherland).  Ed Harris plays Mack, Karen's
second (and very understanding) husband, and Mantegna is the investigator
on the case.
     The killer is apprehended, but a legal technicality sets him free. 
Frustrated with the legal system and obsessed with vengeance, Karen
decides to take the law into her own hands, with some interesting
consequences.
     What makes this a really creepy film is not so much the plot and
Karen's morbid fascination with the killer, but it's the fact that it's
*Sally Field* with a streak of retribution running through her.  Adding to
the chilly mood is a perfectly cast Sutherland, looking and acting like
he's straight out of ten years in Attica.
     The movie itself could have been a lot more than it ended up being. 
The plot turns out to be pretty much open and shut, as not much in the way
of a classic "thriller" ever starts you guessing or even makes you jump in
your seat.  Instead, the slow pace gets the film to evolve into more of an
in-depth character study than anything else, which probably isn't the
direction this picture needed to take.  Put simply, the movie just never
*grabs* you.
     In the end, EYE FOR AN EYE turns out some good performances in ho-hum
roles.  And while the tension slowly builds up over the course of the
film, it never quite makes it to where it desperately needed to go.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     EYE FOR AN EYE is a thriller about vigilantism.  Depending on your
point of view, it is either a disturbing real drama about a mother
trying to avenge her daughter's killer or is a poorly acted,
manipulative, and ridiculous soap opera.  Although I am firmly in the
latter camp, I should point out my wife was very upset by the movie but
thought it was excellent.
     As the story begins, Karen McCann (Sally Field) is at a standstill
in heavy traffic.  She is talking on her cell phone to her 17 year old
daughter Julie who is at home working on the fourth birthday party for
her sister Megan (Alexandra Kyle).  While Karen listens, Julie is
brutally raped and murdered.  Although the audience is forced to see it
all, Karen can only listen.
     Soon Karen and her husband Mack (Ed Harris) are speaking with
Sergeant DeNello (Joe Mantegna) who is the investigator in charge of
the case.  Although he gives the appearance of being an incompetent
cop, he quickly finds the killer, Robert Doob (Keifer Sutherland).  The
new prosecutor assures the McCanns that the killer's conviction is
certain.  In the great tradition of recent American justice, the killer
is set free because the evidence, although conclusive, is not large
enough to divide in two so the defense have part.
     In a scene straight out of the recent movie THE CROSSING GUARD,
Karen and Mack joint a support group for relatives whose children have
been killed.  Soon Karen hooks up with a vigilante group and is off to
kill Doob before he kills again.  Of course, Doob in turn threatens the
whole family, especially little Megan.  Most of the movie then is a cat
and mouse game where Karen is stalking Doob.  Will she kill him or
won't she?  That is what the movie is purportedly all about.  Actually,
it rarely rising about the level of cheap thrills, and thanks to a
ridiculous and poorly written script (Amanda Silver and Rick Jaffa),
its believability quotient is quite low.  Although the rape and murder
part is realistic, the vigilante portion, which occupies most of the
movie, feels highly contrived.
     Director John Schlesinger takes four brilliant and accomplished
actors and, somehow, manages to get little out of them.  I can think of
many movies each one of them has made where they were great.  Take for
example, Sally Field's somewhat similar role in NOT WITHOUT MY
DAUGHTER.  There her emotion was intense and believable.  She is too
reserved and just not convincing in EYE FOR AN EYE.  Ed Harris is not
given much of a part and is unable to take what lines he is given and
do much with them.
     Poor Joe Mantegna is stuck as a cop in a show where the police are
cartoon characters.  He gets to explain his interrogation secrets with
such lines as "Poor man's truth serum - caffeine and sugar".  He beats
up suspects and tells them to "get out of my city".  Although the
writers reserve the worst blather for the cops, the rest of the script
is not much better.  When Karen feels Sergeant DeNello is not trying
hard enough to get Doob, she ridicules him with, "why don't you offer
him a candy bar and maybe he will confess?"  The script is simplistic
and predictable.  I found the ending, which it is telegraphed way in
advance to the audience, to be too abrupt.
     In the only almost decent piece of acting, Keifer Sutherland does
a passing job as a twenty-six year old delivery man for Catalina
Liquors.  His performance is one dimensional, but at least he is
suitably creepy.  To show how mean he is, the writers have him pour hot
coffee on a stray dog.
     The minor characters are even weaker than the four leads.  Beverly
D'Angelo plays Karen's friend and coworker.  She demonstrates little
visible talent which, to be honest, is consistent with many other
movies I have seen her in.
     There is a single funny scene in the show.  Suffice it to say that
learning self-defense does have its downsides.  There is one other good
part, the sets by Stephen Hendrickson provide a strikingly gritty view
of a poor section of the city.
     EYE FOR AN EYE runs 1:43 but thanks to the slow pacing by editor
Peter Honess, it dragged a lot.  Certainly, not the fast pace you would
expect in a thriller.  It is rated R for graphic violence including
rape and murder.  Very bloody and potentially, extremely disturbing.  I
would not let teenagers go unless they were quite mature.  I would be
especially careful of letting teenagers girls go, lest they end up with
nightmares for a long time.  I can not recommend this show to anyone,
and I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sally Field, Kiefer Sutherland, Ed Harris, Beverly D'Angelo, 
      Joe Mantegna, Alexandra Kyle, Charlayne Woodard
Director: John Schlesinger
Producers: Michael I. Levy
Screenplay: Amanda Silver and Rick Jaffa based on the novel by 
      Erika Holzer
Cinematography: Amir M. Mokri
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     EYE FOR AN EYE, the latest from director John Schlesinger (MIDNIGHT 
COWBOY, SUNDAY, BLOODY SUNDAY), opens with a promising, if disturbing, 
premise:  a woman stuck in traffic hears the rape and murder of her 
teenage daughter over a cellular phone.  This is the kind of incident 
that can cause a complete psychological collapse, but the script isn't 
interested in real drama.  And, when the killer gets off on a contrived 
technicality, EYE FOR AN EYE doesn't ask many tough moral questions, and 
those few it does pose, it has no intention of really addressing.  This 
is a misfired attempt to create a new THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE-
type thriller, not an examination of psychological and emotional trauma.  
The result is as fundamentally distasteful as last year's THE TIE THAT 
BINDS.
     The McCanns are a happy, middle-class American family:  parents 
Karen (Sally Field) and Mack (Ed Harris), 15-year old daughter Julie 
(Olivia Burnette), and little girl Megan (Alexandra Kyle).  One morning, 
everything is perfect, but by nightfall, it has turned to a nightmare.  
A psycho-sicko deliveryman named Doob (Kiefer Sutherland) rapes and 
murders Julie while her mother listens helplessly on a car phone.  After 
being arrested, the killer is let go because of an improper procedure on 
the part of the DA.  Doob promptly begins stalking another woman and 
making threatening advances towards Megan.  Karen, convinced that 
justice is impotent, takes measures of her own, including obtaining a 
gun and learning how to use it.  Then, with the aid of two vigilantes, 
she plans her retribution, Old Testament style.
     A solid cast doesn't always equate to a good movie, as EYE FOR AN 
EYE demonstrates.  Sally Field, Ed Harris, Kiefer Sutherland, and Ed 
Harris are all accomplished actors, but their performances here are 
adequate at best.  (And who can blame them, given the low quality of the 
material?)  Sutherland is especially shortchanged by his character, a 
lunatic nasty with no redeemable or human qualities whose sole purpose 
is to be hated by the audience.  For EYE TO AN EYE to work on its own 
least-common-denominator terms, this is necessary.
     The longer the film runs, the more preposterous the story becomes, 
abandoning any sort of semblance of reality in favor of the ultimate 
revenge scenario.  EYE FOR AN EYE forces its way towards an inevitable 
conclusion.  It's not believable, but it is predictable, and that's 
exactly what a thoroughly manipulated audience will want at that point.  
Does it take much savvy to guess which character is going to get their 
just desserts in the movie's final reel?
     EYE FOR AN EYE is one of three pictures currently in theaters about 
parents coping with the deaths of children.  Both of the others, THE 
CROSSING GUARD and DEAD MEN WALKING, are vastly superior, and the 
latter, a thoughtful examination of some of the same issues that drive 
this film, makes EYE FOR AN EYE look like puerile rubbish.  Despite 
paying lip service to high ideals, Schlesinger's movie has no moral 
compass, and is only interested in delivering cheap thrills.  And, while 
there's a place for that in movies, appropriating this particular 
storyline for such a base intention feels uncomfortably like a 
defilement.

Author
Ben Hoffman
        Who has not at some period in one's life yearned for revenge?
Picture the parents of the two people who were killed in the case of O
J Simpson.  Surely, despite the jury's finding of "Not Guilty," how
difficult it must be for the parents to restrain themselves from doing
him harm?
        In EYE FOR AN EYE, the older daughter of Karen McCann (Sally
Field) is raped and murdered.  On a technicality, despite evidence that
Robert Doob (Kiefer Sutherland), the accused, is set free by the judge.
Everyone is angry but only Karen decides to take matters into her own
hands.   If her husband (2nd marriage) Mack (Ed Harris) will not take
her seriously; if the detective (Joe Mantegna) says he is helpless, 
then
who but Karen can track down the whereabouts of the free murderer and
revenge her daughter's death?
        Despite the fine cast, the movie has a tendency to slow down
frequently.  The story is hardly original.  Whatever reason there is
for seeing the film lies mostly in the acting; Fields, as always, does
a magnificent characterization as the distraught, angry parent.  Others
in the cast do well by their smaller roles.
