Title
Review for Queen of Hearts (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
QUEEN OF HEARTS (UK, 1989) ***  Directed by Jon Amiel. Written 
by Tony Grisoni. Photography, Mike Southon. Editing, Peter 
Boyle. Production design, Jim Clay. Costumes, Lindy Hemming. 
Music, Michael Convertino. Cast: Vittorio Duse, Joseph Long, 
Anita Zagaria, Eileen Way, Vittorio Amandola, et al.  A 
Cinecom release. 103 min.  Not rated but in the PG area.   
A mini-saga of a family of  Italian immigrants in London, 
"Queen of Hearts" opens with a wonderful, dialogue-less 
sequence, like something recollected from an old-fashioned 
silent drama. In an Italian village,  Rosa, promised to the 
butcher's son Barbariccia , runs away with her true love 
Danilo in a scene worthy of "The Perils of Pauline." 
We next meet the couple in England, with several kids and 
Rosa's mother. Ten-year old Eddie narrates the movie, from his 
point of view, a perception which mixes fantasy and  fact.  
The Luccas start out small but become  modestly prosperous 
when, one Christmas,  a talking pig head on a platter advises 
ineffectual Danilo, a waiter, to gamble. Danilo parlays five 
pounds into enough to buy The Lucky Cafe.
The film follows with obvious affection the life of the Luccas 
within an Italian enclave in London. Beyond small  character 
skits nothing major happens,until spurned ex-fiance 
Barbariccia shows up, with loads of money and shady 
connections. Bygones are bygones, says he, but he's  really on 
a vendetta and tries to ruin Danilo. Not to worry: Eddie is 
watching and he devises a complex scheme to save the day.
The movie is low key, played with reserve, a more British than 
Italian trait. It has improbabilities, anachronistic clothes 
and artifacts -- but one must remember that nearly everything 
is filtered through the boy's imaginative memory. 
This is  the first theatrical feature by Jon Amiel who  has 
been much praised for his British TV movies and series , 
notably "The Singing Detective." "Queen Of Hearts" feels like  
a transition  between the small and the big screen.  Possibly,  
Amiel tried to do for Italians in Britain  a little of what 
"My Beautiful Laundrette" did for immigrant Pakistanis.  
The film has pleasantly original aspects, yet also has 
connections to earlier movies: it is like a glimpse at the 
sunny side of "The Godfather,"  uses  comedy in the spirit of 
the Ealing Studios movies of the late 40s and 50s, and ends 
like  "The Sting."
These factors come together nicely though not flawlessly.  
There are some gratuitous or padded passages, especially after 
Danilo's father joins the family. Past the early parts and 
noticeably in the mid-section, there is slackness and gauche 
connections. The camera work is lively, with flourishes and 
spirals like those of a brilliant cinematography student let 
loose with professional equipment, but more probably this may 
be the influence of stylists like Ken Russell, with whom 
director of photography Mike Southon has worked .
In spite of some imperfections the movie spins its story with 
charm, uses a lovely  score --a hybrid of Fellini movie-music 
and  Verdi operas -- and  has  soberly appealing, unfamiliar  
actors from Italy and England.  
After "Queen," John Amiel made the quirkily original "Tune in 
Tomorrow" and "Sommersby" --the Hollywood remake of "The 
Return of Martin Guerre." 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
QUEEN OF HEARTS (UK, 1989) ***  Directed by Jon Amiel. Written by Tony
Grisoni. Photography, Mike Southon. Editing, Peter Boyle. Production
design, Jim Clay. Costumes, Lindy Hemming. Music, Michael Convertino. Cast:
Vittorio Duse, Joseph Long, Anita Zagaria, Eileen Way, Vittorio Amandola,
et al.  A Cinecom release. 103 min.  Not rated but in the PG area.  At the
New Art Theatre.
A mini-saga of a family of  Italian immigrants in London, "Queen of Hearts"
opens with a wonderful, dialogue-less sequence, like something recollected
from an old-fashioned silent drama. In an Italian village,  Rosa, promised
to the butcher's son Barbariccia , runs away with her true love Danilo in a
scene worthy of "The Perils of Pauline."
We next meet the couple in England, with several kids and Rosa's mother.
Ten-year old Eddie narrates the movie, from his point of view, a perception
which mixes fantasy and  fact.
The Luccas start out small but become  modestly prosperous when, one
Christmas,  a talking pig head on a platter advises ineffectual Danilo, a
waiter, to gamble. Danilo parlays five pounds into enough to buy The Lucky
Cafe.
The film follows with obvious affection the life of the Luccas within an
Italian enclave in London.  Beyond small  character skits nothing major
happens , until  spurned ex-fiance Barbariccia shows up, with loads of
money and shady connections. Bygones are bygones, says he, but  he's
really on a vendetta and tries to ruin Danilo.  Not to worry:  Eddie is
watching and he   devises a complex scheme to save the day.
The movie is low key, played with reserve, a more British than Italian
trait. It has improbabilities, anachronistic clothes and artifacts -- but
one must remember that nearly everything is filtered through the boy's
imaginative memory.
This is  the first theatrical feature by Jon Amiel., who  has been much
praised for his British TV movies and series , notably "The Singing
Detective."   "Queen Of Hearts" feels like  a transition  between the small
and the big screen.  Possibly,  Amiel tried to do for Italians in Britain
a little of what "My Beautiful Laundrette" did for immigrant Pakistanis.
The film has pleasantly original aspects, yet also has connections to
earlier movies: it is like a glimpse at the sunny side of "The Godfather,"
uses  comedy in the spirit of the Ealing Studios movies of the late 40s and
50s, and ends like  "The Sting."
These factors  come together  nicely , though not   flawlessly.  There are
some gratuitous or padded passages ,  especially after Danilo's father
joins the family. Past the early parts and noticeably in the mid-section,
there is slackness and gauche connections. The camera work is lively, with
flourishes and spirals like those of a brilliant cinematography student let
loose with professional equipment, but more probably this may be the
influence of stylists like Ken Russell,  with whom director of photography
Mike Southon has worked .
In spite of some imperfections  the movie spins its story with charm, uses
a lovely  score --a hybrid of Fellini movie-music and  Verdi operas ,-- and
has  soberly appealing , unfamiliar  actors from Italy and England.
After "Queen," John Amiel made, all in the USA, the nicely off-the wall
"Tune in Tomorrow,"then two so-so pics: "Sommersby" (the Hollywoodian
remake of "The Return of Martin Guerre") and "Copycat,"  followed by two
fizzles "The Man Who Knew Too Little" and "Entrapment"(1999)
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel
