Title
Review for Devil in a Blue Dress (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, R, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[mystery/crime]
starring: Denzel Washington (Easy Rawlins), Tom Sizemore (Dewitt Albright),
Jennifer Beals (Daphne Monet), Dan Cheadle (Mouse), produced by Jesse Beaton,
Gary Goetzman, written and directed by Carl Franklin, based on the book by
Walter Mosley.
>From the title alone, "Devil In A Blue Dress" sounds like it is another
retread to the mystery and crime movies of the 1930s and 40s "film noir," and
it is. Anyone can make a film that looks and acts like film noir with Gothic
stories of deception, intrigue, and organized crime, but this film doesn't
offer anything new. 
Denzel Washington stars as Easy Rawlins, a young black man living in Los
Angeles in the late 1940s, who isn't poor but manages to get by with bare
essentials. When he is laid off from his job he suddenly finds himself
playing the role of a detective and informant for some type of mob boss, but
neither he, nor the viewer really understands what he is doing, for whom, and
why. 
Easy is hired by a Albright (Sizemore), a typical goon, to find a mayoral
candidate's fiancee, but for what purpose? We never get much of an answer,
and by the time we do, the story becomes so confusing it doesn't seem
relevant. As soon as we meet Easy he becomes a P.I. of sorts, but how do we
know he can do it? And why would these people hire him to do this? Again,
many questions like these are never answered, because we aren't supposed to
think about them.
As if the search for the woman wasn't already enough, Easy has a passionate
affair with a woman who later ends up dead and of course the police suspect
him. So it becomes a "prove your innocence" story while still trying to solve
the case of the missing dame. But the film doesn't tell this story in any
kind of unique or creative manner, all we get is a rather "novel" story of
the young man on the run from the mob while trying to clear his name. There
is a lot of narration and cliche dialogue, but it doesn't add up to anything.
The standard formula for any mystery story is to make it as complex as
possible between as few characters as possible, that way when the killer is
finally caught we realize they were under our nose all along. This film takes
that principal and rides it all the way, bringing in cops, mobsters,
politicians, and close friends and family. This wouldn't be so bad if the
story didn't have a generic mystery tone to it. Just in the way the
characters speak (like Bogey), their costumes, and the basic premise is so
formulated it almost seems like a satire film of sorts. 
The story is confusing, the actual scenes themselves are somewhat
interesting, and certainly watchable. "Devil In A Blue Dress" is not a bad
movie, but  it's not very good either. We don't have enough information about
the characters to make us care. It's difficult to make a good mystery movie
anymore, maybe they just shouldn't try so hard. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Sarah Elkins
DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS:  Detective thriller in 1948 LA, based on a
book I haven't read.
Plot Kickoff:  Easy Rollins takes a job to find a white woman who's
gone missing.
Characters/Acting:  Denzel Washington is convincing as Easy; his
transition from a mild-mannered guy through anger and frustration make
his later actions convincing.  He also does a great job playing the
humor, and there is a lot of humor in this movie, straight so it shines
through.  Jennifer Beals (FLASHDANCE, THE BRIDE (opposite Sting as
Victor Frankenstein)) is fine as the woman on the run.  Mouse, Easy's
dangerous friend, is played by whoever plays the district attorney on
PICKET FENCES.  If they make a sequel I hope he's in it too.
Cinematography:  I liked the title sequence a lot, shot against a
painting (moving over the different scenes of the neighborhood in the
painting).  Still, as far as the picture goes, I think the big screen
isn't a must, if you want to wait to rent.
Sound/Score:  On the other hand, the great jazz soundtrack would lose
out unless you have a really good sound system attached to your TV.
Skin/situations:  Actually not that much skin per se, but there is an
earthy (and funny) sex scene.
Violence:  Yep.  Certainly not the most violent or gory I've seen in
the past few months, though.
Language:  Racial slurs, other profanity.
Analysis:  I really liked this movie.  The main character was smart
enough to put the puzzle pieces together (most of 'em, anyway), and I
liked the themes of loyalty, friendship, and community that kept coming
up.  There was more to this thriller than just the surface plot, and
yet it wasn't burdened by a lot of heavy-handed social commentary
either.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Denzel Washington, Jennifer Beals, Tom Sizemore, Don Cheadle,
      Maury Chaykin, Terry Kinney, Lisa Nicole Carson
Director: Carl Franklin
Producers: Gary Goetzman and Jesse Beaton
Screenplay: Carl Franklin based on the novel by Walter Mosley
Cinematography: Tak Fujimoto
Music: Elmer Bernstein
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     It seems that in a period detective story, it's a prerequisite for
the the main character to narrate the proceedings.  In DEVIL IN A BLUE
DRESS, writer/director Carl Franklin apparently intended this conceit
as a tribute to the Dashiell Hammett/Raymond Chandler school of
cinematic potboilers.  Denzel Washington's running commentary is
peppered with genre-specific cliches, and this voiceover aids
atmosphere-building as much as story advancement.
     Yet beneath all the trappings--a sultry woman in blue, dead
bodies, smoky back rooms, shoot-outs, and blackmail--DEVIL IN A BLUE
DRESS addresses the kind of subject matter that most crime thrillers,
in their quest for pure (often prurient) entertainment, avoid.  Easy
Rawlins (Washington), the lead character, is black, and this is 1948
Los Angeles, where segregation and racism are the accepted way of
life.  As the film progresses, it becomes evident that skin color is
more than a background issue--it's the first thing anyone notices, and
can break careers, shatter marriages, and end lives.
     Easy's not a typical private investigator--he's a bit naive and
doesn't own a gun.  He's not a detective by trade, but he's out of work
and has a mortgage to pay (he's one of the few property-owning blacks
in this time and place), so when a man of dubious connections named
DeWitt Albright (Tom Sizemore) offers him $100 to locate Daphne Monet
(Jennifer Beals), Easy agrees.  He doesn't realize what he's gotten
himself into.  Daphne is the girlfriend of the richest man in LA (Terry
Kinney), and there are a lot of people--including one talented
knife-wielding gangster--looking for her.  In a short time, Easy has
become implicated in two murders, has been offered money by just about
everyone involved, and has become a key player in a political contest
where the path to victory is paved with dirty tricks and smoking guns.
     If the resolution of DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS is a little flat, the
lack of startling revelations or unexpected twists can be forgiven
considering the material's depth.  Capable of being viewed on more than
one level, this picture has narrative texture.  While DEVIL IN A BLUE
DRESS never develops the taut momentum of Franklin's previous effort,
ONE FALSE MOVE, it maintains audience involvement, especially after the
first, somewhat slow, half-hour.  And, to keep the noir elements from
becoming too pervasive, the movie is sprinkled with humor.
     After portraying a one-dimensional action hero in VIRTUOSITY,
Denzel Washington is back to a character with some versatility.  Easy
isn't much of an acting challenge, but Washington's mix of charm and
intensity creates an appealing personae.  Vulnerable and mysterious,
Jennifer Beals (still best known for FLASHDANCE) is effective in the
unlikely role of a femme fatale.  The supporting performances,
including a brilliant turn by Don Cheadle as Easy's violent friend, are
strong.
     The most interesting element of DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS is not the
whodunit, but the "whydunit."  Finding the guilty parties isn't as
involving as learning their motivation, which is buried in society's
perception of racial interaction.  By uncovering the truth behind this
mystery, Franklin illustrates that some attitudes have indeed changed
for the better over the last forty years.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ralph Benner
     About an hour into Carl Franklin's black noir DEVIL IN A BLUE
DRESS, costume designer Sharen Davis appears to have discovered for
Denzel Washington a style that's not new but is rejuvenated and
welcomed:  in suspenders over a white sleeveless T-shirt, Washington
brings to what is usually a slob dress code a genuine smolder. His
beefy contours and conscious swagger feed the burn, as does his skin,
which viewed through Tak Fujimoto's sandy-colored photography sometimes
looks burnt-orange. In the late 60s and early 70s, there was great hope
in Billy Dee Williams to break through the barriers, and in a few
quarters he has -- if you accept the STAR WARS stuff -- but he never
really got to the promised land. Bad scripts and personal demons
notwithstanding, I think it's the superfly hair that prevented larger
contact: it was often too greasy or greasy-curly or cut so
exaggeratedly that his charisma took a nose dive; his slimy overdose
made you feel unclean. For some black beauties, ethnicity can be
stunning -- Lena Horne and Iman, for example, or when not reeking of
camp, Whitney Houston. But for bl concession is required, and it hasn't
hurt Denzel one bit. After all, thanks to his predominantly white
audience, he's a bona fide super star. It's worth noting that, in
looking over receipts, it's also the white breaders who kept turning
out for WAITING TO EXHALE long after blacks deserted the box office.
One of the discomforting ironies of this may be that whites are more
receptive than black men to the argument the movie was invecting.
     The majority of the black audience didn't show up for DEVIL IN A
BLUE DRESS, and not many others showed up, either. Despite good
reviews, the box office fizzle is both understandable -- it was
released during the Simpson fiasco -- and regrettable. The movie seems
tailored for Washington's comely appeal, and while it's there, it isn't
used to the extent most probably wish it had. As you're watching, you
flash on Lawrence Kasdan's BODY HEAT, a movie it doesn't take after
except in potential for sexuality; you prepare yourself for sizzle.
It's definitely set up for it: opening in the L.A. summer of 1948,
Washington's Easy, a W.W.II vet-unemployed machinist, needs some quick
cash to save his house from being foreclosed and he's asked by a
typical hood to hunt down Jennifer Beals' Daphne Monet, who has a
"predilection for jazz, pigs feet and black meat." When Easy first
meets Daphne, a chat about weapons commences and he asks her, "What do
you prefer to use as your weapon?" and she invites, "Why don't you
search me and find out?" Need I say more? I'm going to have to: finally
recovering from the imbecilic FLASHDANCE, Beals's handicap isn't only
that she doesn't bounce the mattress with Washington, she's also a
repellent mixture of Liza Minnelli out of NEW YORK, NEW YORK and Dixie
Carter; you start thinking maybe it's a blessing Washington doesn't bag
her. Her performance above complaint, yet she's not enough of a charge
for Washington; in a blue bath robe, holding a cigarette, her shoulders
drooping inward (is it the pads?), she's a great granddaughter to the
40s dames of the damned but the generational distance allows for a
different noirish tack: there's nothing hateful about her to love. (In
this movie, it's the whites you hate.)
     In most critics' estimation, Denzel Washington still seems to take
second place to Morgan Freeman as America's best black actor.  Where
Freeman's insistently subtle, a giant of modulation and technique,
Washington's a 5th of vigor -- a passionate dynamo. Since STREET SMART
and DRIVING MISS DAISY, Freeman's learned enormously that the camera
detects his notorious cool and he's re-channelled it so that it emits
its power in a subterranean way that sneaks up on you and before you
know it you're overwhelmed -- like in THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.
Washington has this knowledge about the camera almost instinctually --
he's virtually born to be unleashed on the screen. Without overdoing
it, Washington spills over the brim; he shakes things up because he's
excited about his love of acting, his love of the territory that is
movie acting. He's not sloppy or egotistical in commanding his realm,
as is the great bad Al Pacino; though he isn't the center of
PHILADELPHIA, his egalitarian brio makes him its real champion -- its
Black Knight. In DEVIL, he's hero, but not solely:  Easy would be an
obit without gold-toothed Mouse, played with warpy morals by Don
Cheadle. Washington's the matinee idol director Franklin wants him to
be -- and a generous one: Easy gives Coretta (Lisa Nicole Carson, a
double for TV's Jackee) what she's hankering for. Right now, no other
American actor -- black, white or any other color from the rainbow --
has all the ingredients to produce a new kind of alchemy on screen.
When he gets to act opposite a woman with equal star magnitude, someone
like Michelle Pfeiffer, the explosion should be magical -- a close
encounter of the most erotic kind.
     To keep the budget down, Franklin's economized on the atmospherics
-- though Gary Frutkoff's design is more than adequate. What isn't
satisfactory is the score by Elmer Bernstein, who's snoozing in the
orchestra pit, and the classic recordings -- including T-Bone Walker's
"Westside Baby," Jimmy Witherspoon's "Ain't Nobody's Business,"
Ellington's "HY-AH-SU" and "Maybe I Should Change My Ways," Lucienne
Boyer's "Parlez Moi D'Amour," Frank Loesser's "On a Slow Boat to
China," Thelonious Monk's "Round Midnight" -- don't quite get us deep
into the Zapata-smoked, jazzy, illegal club ambiance. Had the
selections been more carnal and rhythmic, they might have done a lot to
shore up the missing heat between Washington and Beals. Doing his own
adaptation from the Walter Mosley novel, Franklin keeps things moving
along rapidly. As the story and secrets unfold, he sticks to the plot
details, wasting little time in extracurriculars or in efforts to
outfox us, and just as we're wondering what's to become of Easy, who
has blood on his hands, the noiry summation is explicitly conveyed.
What's a little unsettling about the movie is the question raised at
the end about ratting on your friends.  Coincidental, what ricochets in
the mind are that recent infamous L.A.  trial and the brother of the
Unabomber. DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS -- a misnomer of a title -- is caught
in a time trap: it may not find its larger appreciating audience until
one of those murderers, who like Easy probably "laughed a long time"
about the verdict of events, finds his phantom killers. Let's hope
Washington maintains his self-respect by continuing to reject offers of
millions to play him. Being Easy, he can; being susceptible to
temptation, it won't be.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "It was the summer of 1948, and I needed money," begins Easy
Rawlins (Denzel Washington) in DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS.  In a loving and
lush recreation of black Los Angles of that era by set designer Gary
Frutkoff, this film noir starts.  Think of any of the Raymond Chandler
mysteries.  Now switch the characters so that most are black, and
voila, DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS.
     The sets and the sepia toned images by famous cinematographer Tak
Fujimoto (PHILADELPHIA, SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, and SOMETHING WILD) form
a picture that is a delight to your eyes.  Easy owns a home in a black
middle class suburb of LA that Frutkoff has created with wide streets,
tall cool palm trees, and green lawns.  Although Easy has a nice house
and a long, new Pontiac, all is not easy for him as he has just lost
the lucrative job in the aircraft industry that he migrated years ago
from Texas to get.  He was fired because of the color of his skin.
Racism interlaces the story as a subtext, but it is a mystery more than
a morality play.
     While he is down on his luck and two mortgage payments behind, a
strange white figure called DeWitt Albright (Tom Sizemore) makes him an
offer too good to pass up.  It seems that in the midst of the LA
mayoral campaign, mayor Todd Carter (Terry Kinney from that great old
TV series "thirysomething") has dropped out of the race claiming he is
despondent over the mysteriously disappearance of his girlfriend Daphne
Monet (Jennifer Beals).  DeWitt says that the mayor has hire him to
find her.
     The complication is that Daphne is white, but likes to hang around
with black men so DeWitt wants to pay Easy $100 upfront to locate her.
He says that Easy could be more inconspicuous in black nightclubs than
he would be.  Easy has no idea why he is picked but needs the money so
he takes the job.  Along the way he runs into Coretta James (Lisa
Nicole Carson) who claims to know Daphne.  Soon however people start
getting killed and the police want to pin the murders on Easy.  The
mystery is who is doing it and why.  Is it Todd Carter?  Is it Daphne
Monet?  How about the other mayoral candidate Matthew Terrell (Maury
Chaykin from UNSTRUNG HEROES)?  Perhaps it is Easy after all?  Or could
it be DeWitt?  A police frame-up?  A mysterious stranger?  Who?
     I thought the script by the director Carl Franklin, based on the
novel of the same name by Walter Mosely, was too much of a period and
mood piece and too little of a mystery.  Although I did not guess the
outcome, I did not try nor care much.  I liked the show because of
Denzel Washington's acting and not the totally forgettable mystery.
There were several memorable lines.  One of my favorites was Easy's
philosophy: "A man once told me that you step out of your door in the
morning, and you are already in trouble.  The only question is 'are you
on top of that trouble or not?'"  The dialog as delivered, on the other
hand, was frequently so thick that you almost needed subtitles to
understand it.
     As much as I liked Easy, there is a minor character named Mouse
(Don Cheadle) that I liked even more.  Mouse is a smalltime gangster
that likes to kill people whenever possible.  He is a firecracker with
a short fuse that may explode at any moment, and yet he is extremely
funny.  One of my favorite lines of his is: "You said don't shot him,
right?  Well I didn't; I strangled him.  If you didn't want me to kill
him, why did you leave me alone with him?"
     The director Carl Franklin also did ONE FALSE MOVE which was much
more innovative and daring.  In comparison, DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS is a
nice little formula picture.  It has some excellent performances in it
by Cheadle and Washington, but the script rarely draws in the audience
and the less said about the pathetic non-acting by Jennifer Beals, the
better.  Perhaps Beals should just sign up to do remakes of FLASHDANCE
for the rest of her life since that is the only decent movie she ever
made.  Oh yes, the music by that old movie music master Elmer Berstein
is effective as always. Of the over one hundred and fifty movies he has
scored, my favorite of his remains THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
     DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS runs 1:42 and is in need of better editing
by Carol Kravetz.  Kravetz seems to have fallen asleep at the cutting
board as she lets too many scenes drag on.  The movie is rated R for
violence, profanity, and sex, but no nudity.  All of these are handled
quite tastefully, and I would have no problem in letting teenagers see
the film.  I give the movie a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 20, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It's a hot summer night in L.A.  Somewhere across town Philip
Marlowe is getting too close to the truth.  And he is also getting a
mouthful of knuckles for his trouble.  But that doesn't matter here
because this story is about Easy Rawlins.  And Easy isn't even a
private dick.  Not yet anyway.  Right now Rawlins is just another
factory worker from Texas who likes to go around in a sleeveless
undershirt.  In fact, he is not even that.  He's had a little hard luck
so Douglas Air is building their airplanes without his help, and he is
trying to get by without their paycheck.  With a bank account that's
crawling under a duck, perhaps Easy is getting a little careless about
whom he lets pay him and what he has to do for the money.  In 1948
L.A. that just isn't Einstein-caliber thinking.  So maybe his job
tonight does smell like yesterday's fish, but at least it is easy
enough and pays enough.  Too much, in fact.  Easy is looking for the
mayor's missing girlfriend.  Losing her is making the mayor feel so bad
he's not even going to run for reelection.  That's what the newspaper
says.  But somebody thinks she has a taste for black men and is hanging
out in Easy's part of town.  Easy is getting a C-note just for the
looking for her.  But the next few days are going to get tough as a
one-dollar steak for Easy.  He is going to be involved in murder and
gunplay and crooked politicians.  And he isn't even a private dick.
Yet.
     Holding the megaphone was Carl Franklin of ONE FALSE MOVE.  That
film showed Franklin had a taste for the rough stuff.  But this job
didn't call for quite so much.  Maybe some gunplay.  What it called for
was late '40s atmosphere.  For that he got Tak Fujimoto, a good man
with a camera.  And Fujimoto lathered the '40s feel on like he had to
use it up.  He had shot Denzel Washington before on the PHILADELPHIA
job.  Washington slipped into the role of Easy like it was a suit cut
just for him.  But muscling in on his scenes is Tom Sizemore, whose
creepy panache grabs the eye like a zoot suit at a monastery.  Lagging
behind is Jennifer Beals as a femme fatale, playing it stiff as a rusty
gate hinge.
     DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS was the first of Walter Mosley's Easy
Rawlins novels, and Franklin wrote the script as if the series was a
meal ticket he was expecting to punch again.  While Franklin's telling
of the story gives it some twists, they seemed not so much after seeing
THE USUAL SUSPECTS with a plot that's tangled like a five-year-old's
first fishing line.  But Franklin is playing the first Easy Rawlins
story with just some easy-to-take twists and some openings like he is
hoping to be invited back.  Easy is not just a black Philip Marlowe.
Mosely and Franklin give him a simple charm and the sly smarts to make
him a character worth seeing again.  Not so welcome is Rawlin's
sidekick Mouse, played by Don Cheadle.  Mouse is a loose cannon with a
looser gun and has all the appeal of green mold on a stick of butter.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     "Film noir" (literally "black film") is a genre indigenous to
American cinema, along with musicals and westerns, all genres present
in foreign films but on a reduced scale.  The French, in their passion
for American movies and in their vindication of their artistic values,
(when most Americans saw those films as mere entertainment) also
identified "noir" as something special.
     The term was no doubt inspired by the collections of hard-boiled
and (mostly) detective fiction that went under names like "Serie
Noire," and, with more stress on detection and less on violence, in
series like "Le Masque" and others.  The "noir" books were
predominantly by American writers, like Dashiell Hammett, James M.
Cain, Raymond Chandler, Philip MacDonald, Cornell Woolrich, etc.  Many
of their novels made an impressive transition to the screen.
     A glossary definition of noir is "a film with a gritty, urban
setting that deals mainly with dark or violent passions in a downbeat
way.  Especially common in American cinema during the late forties and
early fifties, its themes of existential alienation and paranoia have
often been read as signs of postwar malaise and Cold War anxiety."
     But it's not that simple.  Here are some random examples:
FAREWELL MY LOVELY (a.k.a. MURDER MY SWEET) (1944), DOUBLE INDEMNITY
(1944), DETOUR (1945), THE POSTMAN ALWAYS RINGS TWICE (1946), THE BIG
SLEEP (1946), OUT OF THE PAST (1947), THE ASPHALT JUNGLE (1950), THE
BIG HEAT (1952), KILLER'S KISS (1955), TOUCH OF EVIL (1958).
     It is clear that "noir" spills over narrow definitions and into
other genres, with one main constant, crime.  On the other hand, the
first reaction of connoisseurs of "noir" evokes a lone investigator,
night, rain or fog, and terse dialogue.
     In DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS, writer-director and ex-actor Carl
Franklin has literally a quadruple whammy film noir.  It is not
neo-noir but classic noir, going back to the sources and the
conventions of the genre (though without fog or rain).  Franklin is
African-American; so are novelist Walter Mosley; so are the principal
characters.  The story, adapted with the right changes by Franklin,
comes from the first of four Mosley books about Ezekiel (Easy) Rawlins
     Easy is played by the irresistible Denzel Washington.  The year is
1948 and the place is Los Angeles, a location that, for a change, is
fully justified and not used simply because it's handy, as in thousands
of other films.
     Fired from his air plant job, decorated World War II veteran Easy
is close to a down and out status.  Touchingly, he finds a "raison
d'etre" in his new cottage, but he needs to make payments.  This
leads to his acceptance of a sleazy type's offer.
     He pays Easy $100 for a job.  (I waited in vain for the old slang
"ten sawbucks" or "one hundred fish").  The task, unexplained, is to
locate a white woman who frequents black circles.  She is called Daphne
Monet, a bucolic, peaceful name that contrasts ironically with the
troubles she is causing.
     Easy, moving mostly within packed, lively black neighborhoods,
enters the world of black nightclubs and of streets that are not mean.
It's the white streets that are mean, and some of the whites who come
to the black areas.
     An early lead is a man whose woman, Coretta (Lisa Nicole Carson)
is a friend of Daphne's.  Accompanying the couple to their home, while
the man sleeps off his liquor, Easy has an easy time of bedding down
Coretta.  That's a smart touch about Easy's easy morals, in keeping
with the thin line that often divides gumshoes from upright citizens.
     The new sleuth gets plopped into one damn thing after another, a
morass of violence, murders, blackmail, thugs, corruption, brutal cops
and no-good politicos.   That's the ideal formula for a film noir, yet
DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS is no slavish copy, but a fresh work with echoes
of old movies, including the neo-noir CHINATOWN.  (I won't explain
why).
     DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS's main, crucial originality is the
excellently staged atmosphere, a reconstruction (realistic but with
some good cinematic exaggerations) of the black areas where Central
Avenue throbs with movement and color and is for many a memory of the
relatively peaceful old Los Angeles that contrasts with today's
state-of-war violence.
     As for Easy's residential neighborhood, with its pocket-size
lawns, neat little homes, kids playing safely in the street and
neighbors neighboring, it is downright Edenic.
     This, however, is 1948, and the color line, unsubtle and
pernicious, is all over the place.  What is fascinating is the
juxtaposition of vibrant black life with racism, and an unshown,
unspoken suggestion: that period, no matter how unjust, held hope for
racial harmony.  You can't help thinking with sadness that if, on the
books and in much real life, some equality was attained decades later,
but also that today races are still severely polarized.
     Carl Franklin's first film was the admired ONE FALSE MOVE, set
in recent times and about a white Arkansas sheriff going after drug
runners.  Compared to that movie, "Devil" has less of a steely mood and
less nail-biting suspense in expectation of sudden violence.  The woman
in "One False Move" was gorgeous, complicated Cynda Williams, at
center-stage.  Here, fairly inexpressive Jennifer Beals plays Daphne in
a small part trimmed down from the book's, especially an affair with
Easy.  But for the purposes of the movie's plot, she is a good choice.
(I won't reveal why).
     Another such choice is Mouse (Don Cheadle) the pal who comes from
Texas to lend Easy a hand.  He mostly lends bullets, as Two-Gun Mouse
is superlatively trigger-happy.  He also lends quite much gallows'
humor and comic relief.
     The film is narrated by Easy in keeping with one of the many
traditions of noir.  Washington's voice is rather too sweet, lacks the
tough staccato of Dick Powell, or Tom Neal's desperate tones in
DETOUR.  A bigger cavil is that while the ensemble works in DEVIL IN A
BLUE DRESS, the characters are not really terribly interesting, as, for
example, in the classic THE BIG SLEEP.  But, nostalgia apart, you can
do much worse than watching DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS, a rare, born-again
film noir.
