Title
Review for Dîner de cons, Le (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Greg King
THE DINNER GAME  (LE DINER DE CONS) (M).  
(Gaumont/Sharmill Films)
Director: Francis Veber
Stars: Jacques Villeret, Thierry Lhermitte, Francis Huster, Daniel 
Prevost, Alexandra Vendernoot, Catherine Frot
Running time: 80 minutes
(French, with English subtitles).
Writer/director Francis Veber is a dab hand at fast paced
comedies centring on odd couple relationships, and The Dinner Game (Le
Diner De Cons) finds him at his peak.  This is a fast, frantic and
hilarious farce, and one of the funniest films of the year!
The premise of this delightful and thoroughly enjoyable comedy
centres around a group of friends who regularly gather to hold an
unusual dinner party.  The object is for each of the participants to
bring along as a guest the "biggest idiot" they can find so that they
can maliciously make fun of them during the evening.  Usually the
targets of this bizarre entertainment are dull people with unusual
hobbies about which they can discourse at long and boring length, full
of trivial detail.  Publisher Pierre Brochant (Thierry Lhermitte)
thinks he has found a pearler when he stumbles across Monsieur Pignon
(Jacques Villeret), a scruffy, dishevelled taxation clerk who builds
elaborate structures out of match sticks.  He invites him to the next
dinner party, assured that he has a winner.  But things start to go
wrong, as Brochant hurts his back in a golf game and is initially
reluctant to go to the dinner.  To add further insult to injury his
wife leaves him.  The evening quickly turns into a litany of
disasters, as Pignon's well meaning attempts to solve Brochant's
problems lead to one hilarious misfortune after another.  But there is
also a humanity and a strong moral to this tale that hits home.
The Dinner Game is based on Veber's own stage play.  Although
its origins are sometimes evident in the setting, this is nonetheless
an entertaining film that overcomes the limitations brilliantly.
Veber's crisp direction and writing wastes precious few moments
throughout the film's tight and sometimes unpredictable 90 minutes.
Villeret is superb as Pignon, and he brings a wonderful physical
presence and energy to the role.  His facial expressions and
contortions provide plenty of humorous moments.
Many of Veber's previous comedies have been turned into bland
American comedies (The Birdcage, Three Fugitives, etc), and one can
almost see The Dinner Game also being turned into a typically pale
Hollywood-style imitation, with Danny De Vito in the role of Pignon.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
The title of Francis Veber's "The Dinner Game" refers to a cruel game
in which a group of men each have to invite an idiot to dinner and
entertain themselves at the idiot's expense. Pierre(Thierry Lhermitte)
has chosen to bring Francois(Jacques Villeret), because he, who spends
his free time making models out of matches, is definitely an
idiot. But as soon as Francois arrives at Pierre's home, Pierre's back
condition worsens and he cannot leave his home. Francois decides to
stay, and he turns Pierre's life upside down, forcing him to lose his
wife, his mistress, his fortune and his mind.  This throwback to the
days of classic screwball comedy was written and directed by Francis
Veber, who wrote "La Cage Aux Folles"; later remade into the inferior
"The Birdcage". A U.S. remake is also on its way for "The Dinner
Game", which is very funny itself. Although I am no fan of farce or
slapstick comedy, the comic timing in "The Dinner Game" is too superb
to be ignored. Entertaining but slight, "The Dinner Game" is a
pleasant art-house diversion.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Scott Renshaw
THE DINNER GAME (LE DINER DE CONS)
(Lions Gate)
Starring:  Thierry Lhermitte, Jacques Villeret, Francis Huster, Alexandra
Vandernoot, Daniel Prevost, Catherine Frot.
Screenplay:  Francis Veber, based on his play.
Producer:  Alain Poire.
Director:  Francis Veber.
MPAA Rating:  unrated (could be PG-13 for adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  80 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Francis Veber writes an interesting brand of farce.  For 25 years, he
has been the master of French high-concept comedy -- LE GRAND BLOND AVEC
UNE CHAUSSEURE NOIRE, MON PERE CE HEROS, LE JOUET, LES FUGITIFS, LES
COMPERES.  Where most farce either soars or crashes, Veber's occupies a
little-seen middle ground: funny enough that people like it, but not so
spectacular that it intimidates Hollywood's remake-happy execs.  "We can
do this even better," they quite reasonably say to themselves.  They then
proceed spectacularly not to do so -- THE MAN WITH ONE RED SHOE, MY FATHER
THE HERO, THE TOY, THREE FUGITIVES, FATHER'S DAY.  The simple talent for
being just entertaining enough suddenly doesn't seem quite so simple.
     THE DINNER GAME (LE DINER DE CONS) is quintessential Veber.  The
concept begins with the titular mean-spirited amusement, a weekly
challenge among several friends to bring the guest that's the biggest
loser, entirely unbeknownst to the mock-ees.  The story takes a turn,
however, when Dinner Game participant Pierre Brochant (Thierry Lhermitte)
throws out his back on the evening of the dinner, preventing him from
attending.  Unfortunately, Brochant's "guest" -- sadsack bureaucrat
Francois Pignon (Jacques Villeret) -- is already on his way to Brochant's
flat.  Thus begins a comedy of errors as the bumbling Pignon tries to help
Brochant with various problems, from his aching back to reuniting him with
his estranged wife Christine (Alexandra Vandernoot).
     Set almost entirely in Brochant's flat, THE DINNER GAME certainly
feels like the stage play adaptation it is.  Occasionally, that means the
film feels claustrophobic, with people waiting for phones to ring or doors
to open.  Veber can be something of a minimalist farceur, his direction 
taking the Blake Edwards route of getting out of the way of comic
situations rather than trying to contribute much to them visually.  His
best trick is cutting to stone-faced reaction takes by Lhermitte and
Francis Huster (as Brochant's pal), and his pacing isn't exactly
spectacular, especially in an 80 minute film.  By no means is this a
film-maker without his flaws.
     As a writer, however, Veber does know how to set up a gag and knock
it down.  There are punch lines in THE DINNER GAME that should be obvious
from the moment they're a speck in the distance, yet somehow they still
manage to zing.  Much of the credit for their success goes to Villeret, a
round-faced actor with a wild fringe of hair who could pass for a young
James Coco.  Villeret's Pignon is an exaggerated creation, to be sure, but
his bizarre goofs are made endearing by his obvious desire to be liked;
he's like a Great Dane who wags his tail so hard he knocks over everything
around him.  THE DINNER GAME generates some big-time laughs, and does
generate momentum towards its climax, when a visit by a tax auditor
(Daniel Prevost) creates even more chaos.
     Veber does predictably try to find a moral to the story, allowing
Brochant to learn a lesson about using cruelty as a spectator sport.  It's
a token effort, since neither Veber nor Lhermitte seem much interested in
developing Brochant as a character until the final five minutes.  There
are also a couple of jokes that just don't work in translation -- puns
that feel too forced, and a put-on Belgian accent that's only as riotous
as your familiarity with Belgian accents.  Still, THE DINNER GAME amuses
and entertains persistently, if not consistently, mining its basic
dolt-with-fuming-straight-man premise for all it's worth.  That final
point should be emphasized, since the Internet Movie Database notes that
Veber is preparing his own English-language version of THE DINNER GAME.
He should know by now that one moderately appealing comedy is generally
all his farces are worth.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Jacques Villeret, Thierry Lhermitte, Brochant Francis Huster,
Daniel Prévost. Rated PG-13.
The Dinner Game, a good-natured, old-fashioned French farce by Francis
Veber (La Cage aux Folles) isn't particularly good, but to the
filmmakers' credit it could not have been much better. It's the kind of
movie in which the plot itself is a restriction, preventing it from
being more than a disappointingly broad, mildly entertaining situation
comedy. One of cinema's biggest problems is movies that fail to realize
the potential of their respective storylines; here's one that milks the
most out of its storyline but still turns out to be merely serviceable.
The cockeyed premise behind this fairly futile attempt is this: a group
of rich, snobby Frenchmen get together every week for a very special
dinner. To this dinner each must bring a very special guest. This guest
must be the biggest, most boring idiot they can find. They make the poor
saps humiliate themselves by simply talking, and whoever brings the
biggest idiot is the winner.
Publisher Pierre Bronchant (Thierry Lhermitte) is lacking an idiot just
a couple of days before the dinner. One of his pals, however, pulls him
out of potential hot water and finds him a dilly of a buffoon: François
Pignon, a lowly accountant who makes miniature models of famous
structures out of matchsticks. Bronchant is sure he has a winner on his
hands so he invites Pignon to his house for a drink and then to his
dinner under the guise that his publisher friends are interested in
doing a book on his models.
Unexpectedly, Bronchant hurts his back and can't go to the dinner. He is
unable to prevent Pignon from coming over to his house anyway. So it is
that Bronchant winds up at his idiot's mercy: nearly immobilized and
with his wife leaving him (oh, I'm sorry, did I forget to mention
that?), he has nothing to do but reluctantly accept Pignon's help. The
results are not pretty.
The Dinner Game plays out with all the wacky spontaneity of a Seinfeld
episode; unfortunately it also has the same sitcom humor and feel. Much
of the film is undeniably funny, but unfortunately Veber has yet to
learn the meaning of the word "subtlety". The movie may be amusing but
it's also fairly dumb and frivolously hollow; the jokes fly at you but
as they register in your head you can think of only the fact that you
could turn on the tv and see undeniably funnier stuff.
The performances are certainly good: veteran actor Jacques Villeret is
delightful as the oddly charming buffoon and Thierry Lhermitte's
Bronchant is duly contemptable. Indeed, the actors often make The Dinner
Game funnier than it perhaps should be; a classic example of performers
not only rising above their material but bringing it up a notch too.
The Dinner Game is a well-intentioned movie, making sure that it gets
across its message: don't judge a book by its cover. Unfortunately by
the end of the movie Veber still hasn't learned the meaning of the word
"subtlety" and the movie's theme winds up being conveyed in an
annoyingly outright manner. Instead of making it a constant
undercurrent, he just comes out and tells us what he wants us to
perceive from his movie.
If nothing else, The Dinner Game is a good try; an engaging and amusing
-- although not intelligent or subtle -- farce that entertains even as
its flaws are clear as day. I can't come right out and recommend this
movie but it isn't a bad way to spend an evening, especially if the
alternative selections don't appeal to you.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) THE DINNER GAME is a lightweight French comedy from
Francis Veber, who is best known for writing LA CAGE AUX FOLLES, remade
in the U.S. as THE BIRDCAGE. THE DINNER GAME starts with a good recipe,
follows it closely, and serves it up in an appropriate (if cheap) dish.
The only thing wrong is that it's all dessert.
Mr. Brouchant belongs to a club of successful former frat boys. The club
meets each Wednesday, and each member must bring one idiot. Whoever's
idiot is the most long-winded and boring, wins. The movie introduces a
few examples of prize dates: a bank teller with an opinion on
everything, a boomerang collector, and a man who makes elaborate models
out of matchsticks. 
Brouchant's pick of the week is Mr. Pignon, the matchstick modeler. He
invites Pignon over to his house for drinks before dinner, but that
afternoon, he throws out his back playing golf. His doctor says he has
to stay home and rest.
Pignon shows up for drinks anyway, and Brouchant marvels at what a
perfect idiot he is. Not only does he go on and on about his matchstick
models, but he gets confused over the simplest conversational turns. He
is a grade-A, prize idiot.
The plot takes off from here at a steady pace that keeps increasing as
the movie races toward the end. First Brouchant's wife calls to dump
him, and Pignon wants to be a shoulder to cry on. Then Brouchant's
girlfriend calls and invites herself over, and Pignon volunteers to try
to keep her away. All the while, Pignon's "help" invariably makes things
worse. Brouchant keeps saying "au revoir" but Pignon always finds one
more reason to stay.
Eventually, what should have been a relaxing evening at home for the
ailing Brouchant, becomes a chaotic scene with Pignon, an old friend,
his wife, his wife's boyfriend, his girlfriend, and a tax auditor who
works with Pignon.
A complex comedic plot like this needs to have an ending that is not
contrived, and Veber comes up with something that caps it all off,
without coming across as DEUS EX MACHINA. It is the best possible ending
for this film.
The direction, also by Veber, is competent. The greatest directorial
challenge in a movie like this is to keep the plot moving ahead,
constantly accelerating. The pace can't slow down for a second, and
Veber handles this task very well. He also coaxes some good performances
out of his actors. I'm not familiar with any of the cast, but nobody was
wooden or amateurish. Each character was solid, "believable," and true
to the world of the script.
The most serious flaw of THE DINNER GAME is its feather weight. The
whole thing is insubstantial and meaningless. The sets and lighting are
stagey, like a play or a studio sitcom. The comedic extremes to which
the plot goes are so silly that they can't be taken seriously. As funny
and well written as it is, it's still a throwaway movie.
I found sitting through THE DINNER GAME to be enjoyable and amusing, but
I really got nothing out of it, which ultimately makes me like it less.
You could say THE DINNER GAME is all dessert and no main course.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lions Gate Films
 Director:  Francis Veber
 Writer:  Francis Veber
 Cast: Catherine Frot, Francis Huster, Thierry Lhermitte,
Daniel Prevost, Alexandra, Vandernoot, Jacques Villeret
   Back in the Jurassic Age when I attended college, some
fraternities held a yearly event known as The Pig Party. 
Each member of the House would invite the worst-looking
date he could find.  A prize would be awarded to the guy with
homeliest companion who--if the gods were feeling good that
evening--would never find out what the prize was for.  The
Pig Party, it turns out, was not exclusively an American
invention.  Professor Sorbier (Christian Pereira), a
chiropractor in the French comedy "The Dinner Game,"
relates how in his own time the college men would pull the
same gag.  Hopefully in this time of political correctness,
such shenanigans no longer exist.  That's probably asking too
much.  Witness, for example, the practical jokes of the rich
sickos in Francis Veber's "The Dinner Game," which is known
in French as "Le diner de cons" ("The game for idiots").  
   Several times each year, the country club set in North
Paris would hold dinners.  Each associate would invite a
person to this exclusive affair--the guy who he feels is the
most idiotic person he's met.  At the end of the repast, the
fellow with the biggest dimwit would win the unending respect
of his colleagues.  Sound like fun?  In any case, writer-
director Francis Veber--on the writing team for such past hits
as "La Cage aux Folles" (remade for Americans as "The
Birdcage") and "The Tall Blonde Man With One Black Shoe"--
thought such an event would be a good subject for a play. 
Out came his stage work, which he quickly adapted for the
screen.
   This is a comedy that may have gone over with a French-
speaking audience but to Americans it's going to seem
awfully predictable, obvious, and hemmed in as a
photographed play.  The action takes part essentially in a
single location, generally a mistake unless the director will go
in for flashbacks and fancy cinematic techniques to widen the
scope for the film medium.  No such luck in this case.
Though "The Dinner Game" has elements of farce (mistaken
identity, near collisions of people who should not meet), the
great French farceur, Georges Feydeau, has nothing to fear
from its competition.
   While the film opens in a park as one candidate for the
idiot's game plays with his boomerang, Veber quickly shifts to
the luxurious apartment of his principal character, Pierre
Brochant (Thierry Lhermitte), a publisher who is introduced to
a man described as the perfect idiot guest, Francois Pignon
(Jacques Villeret).  Since Brochant had just hurt his back, the
dinner is postponed, leaving the Brochant and Pignon to
converse in the living room.  When Brochant receives a
message on his answering machine from his depressed wife
Christine (Alexandra Vandernoot) who has decided to leave
him, the wheels begin spinning as the so-called idiot, Pignon-
-who had suffered a similar fate two years previously--feels
sorry for his host and seeks in his own inept way to patch up
the adversity.
   Others arrive at Brochant's apartment, serving to make
matters worse--including Brochant's friend and competitor for
his wife's affection, Just Leblanc (Francis Huster); a tax
auditor, Cheval (Daniel Prevost); and a woman with whom
Brochant has been having an affair, Marlene (Catherine Frot). 
The conversation turns on predictable jerk-jokes and some
frantic mugging for the camera.  
   In one of the dialogues, Brochant orders Pignon to call a
friend, Just Leblanc.  Pignon wonders, "Doesn't "just" Leblanc
have a first name?"  "Yes, he's Just Leblanc," replies the
host.  If this sort of "Who's on first" humor is your glass of
Dubonnet, then go for it.  After all, quite a few French-
speaking moviegoers rave on the web with comments like
"It's funny, well acted and the tempo is perfect" (from a
Montreal resident) and from Cap-de-la-Madeleine, Canada,
one Mario Bergeron bubbles over: "One of the funniest
movies of all time."  Maybe Mario ought to get out more
often.

Author
Frankie Paiva
If there has been a better comedy of errors this year than I'd reccomend it be
shown with this delightful French import from the director of La Cage aux
Folles. It could be a laugh all day film festival, because that's exactly what
this movie is. What seems like the French "Bean" turns out to be an even more
hilarious romp. This movie will have you laughing for days after, and I'm glad
I'm able to share this review with you.
A man is on a train with Francois Pignon (Villeret) when he begins to pull out
pictures of different things he has built out of matches. Guess how many
matches it took? He asks, 364,422! Pierre is charmed, because he's found an
idiot for his friend Pierre Brochant (Lhermitte.) Every Wednesday they invite
an idiot to have dinner in order to make fun of him all evening. Tonight it's
his turn, and before now, he was idiotless. Plus, this guy is in a class of his
own.
Pierre cracks his back while playing golf, the doctor tells him not to go to
the dinner for his better health but since his idiot is the cream of the crop
he attempts to go anyway. Then his wife Christine (Alexandra Vandernoot)
decides to leave him for his cruelty for others. He thinks he's gone to the man
he stole her from, then decides she's at a local love club. But in order get
the phone number there they have to call a tax auditor. The idiot worsens
Pierre's back problems and screws up any of his chances of getting back
together with his wife. A complex plot is soon laid out in the household.
Another film from Veber that is full to the brim with original comic ideas.
Name one comedy that takes happens in one place, in a foreign language, and
that is incredibly funny. One of the best parts about The Dinner Game (besides
that cool looking animation that showcases the titles and credits for the film)
is the fact that while it's called The Dinner Game, there is no dinner or no
game at all. The film's comedy owes almost everything to Villeret, he's someone
you can just look at and laugh. When the film is remade in the US (with Robin
Williams as the idiot) it will probably lose all of the charm and the wit that
is featured here. The supporting cast is good, but it's obvious who's in the
center of attention. So, go see The Dinner Game while you can, this funny,
original, and interesting French comedy gets *** 1/2 stars.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE DINNER GAME (Le Diner de Cons, France 1998) *** 1/2  Written and 
directed by Francis Veber, adapted from his play. Le Diner de Cons. 
Photography, Luciano Tovoli. Editing, Georges Klotz. Produced by 
Gaumont International/Alain Poire  Cast : Jacques Villeret (Francois 
Pignon), Thierry Lhermitte (Pierre Brochant), Francis Huster (Just 
LeBlanc), Daniel Prevost (Cheval), Alexandra Vandernoot (Christine), 
Catherine Frot (Marlene), Edgar Givry (Cordier), Christian Pereira 
(Sorbier),  Petronille Moss (Louisette Blond). A Lions Gate release. 
in French  with subtitles  80 minutes. Not rated. (If so would be 
PG-13)
A masterful French rib-tickler is the best farce of the year. It  has 
also earned a major BQ award by the BBNMM Foundation -- which has no 
statutes, dues, newsletters or meetings. BQ stands for 
Brevity+Quality. Its symbol is a burrito, a small donkey.. BBNMM 
means Bring Back the Ninety Minute Movie.
Hollywood remakes of films are big business. Most of those are of 
earlier Hollywood movies. Next come French movies, especially 
comedies. Within this category, Francis Veber--the playwright, 
scriptwriter and film director-- has been involved in a record number 
of remakes. He directed some of them: The Toy, The Goat, Three 
Fugitives, etc.  He Americanized several of his own scenarios  : A 
Pain in the A... became Buddy, Buddy; The Tall Blond Man with One 
Black Shoe became The Man with One Red shoe; La Cage aux Folles 
became The Birdcage; My Father the Hero kept its title;  Les Comperes 
became Father's Day, and others.
Francis Veber's play Le Diner de Cons was a boulevard play in Paris 
(roughly, the equivalent of a Broadway), and a huge hit.  Opening in 
1993, it had a run of hundreds of performance over two-plus years to 
four (depending on the source). Jacques Villeret played Mr. Pignon, 
as he does in the film version. The movie adaptation is almost 
totally faithful to the stage-play which it airs out minimally and 
sagaciously.
The film was also a smash-hit in France in 1998.  Its huge public 
came second only to Titanic's. It is almost ironical that this 
unspectacular, David-sized farce, was the main competitor to a 
behemoth, a Goliath among productions.
The major difference from stage to screen is that the American title 
was toned down to The Dinner Game. The French title translates as The 
Dinner of Idiots.  Literally "con" has a sexual meaning but it is 
used overwhelmingly with no vulgar connotation, since its  stands for 
"a fool, an imbecile, a creep, an idiot, an obnoxious man" and such. 
"Game" will do nicely, however.
The game --said to have been played by some in real life-- is this. A 
bunch of well-heeled, aging yuppies and practical jokers (farceurs, 
in French), meet regularly for dinner. They keep on the lookout for 
some poor benighted soul, a dum-dum, nitwit,  fool of some kind who, 
unsuspectingly, will entertain them at his expense. Whoever 
discoverers the biggest fool wins a prize. It is a cruel game, but 
then farce can be a cruel genre.
Publisher and man about town Pierre Brochant thinks that he has found 
the ultimate idiot in the person of Francois Pignon. (Pignon, is a 
funny name in French, and  discreetly symbolic, like those of some 
other characters. This aspect is lost on non-native speakers but 
that's of minor importance).
Pignon is employed at the Finance Ministry, which also, like our IRS, 
is in charge of taxes. This means that it deals with tax-evasion  and 
cheating, which makes it a menace to the perpetrators. But short, 
stout and moon-faced Pignon is a nice, sweet, simple fellow whose 
pride and joy is the building of scale models of important buildings, 
statues, bridges and the like, with matches and glue.
Brochant invites, sight unseen, the naive,  overwhelmed Pignon who 
comes to Brochant's ritzy apartment, so that the publisher can take 
his discovery to the group dinner. But hours before Pignon's arrival, 
Brochant, while playing golf, badly twisted his back and can hardly 
make it to the reunion. How sad! (Although the un-realism of farce 
makes  even back-sufferers laugh).  Pignon turns out to be better 
than anyone's wildest dreams, a world-class champion among fools.
The two men will never make it to the dinner. Brochant, after his 
initial amazement and hilarity at the little man's personality, will 
attempt repeatedly to get rid of him. Not only the bad back tortures 
him, but also Mrs. Brochant's call that she had left her spouse.
The news spread fast, followed by other, often hilarious 
complicationss that involve other characters too. All this in the 
presence of Pignon whom Brochant simply cannot shake off. Solicitous, 
kind-hearted, understanding Pignon whose own wife had abandoned him 
two years ago, is bent on being helpful. But whatever this 
well-meaning born bungler does or says -- to anyone --only worsens 
the mess and the confusions.
At various points, Brochant willy-nilly uses the services of his 
guest. Yet as soon as something positive emerges from this odd 
couple's collaboration, it is transformed by the well-meaning Pignon 
into a new screw-up.  Eventually, when he discovers to his utter 
sadness the truth about his dinner invitation, he generously 
continues his attempts to assist Brochant, whose meanness is exposed 
and who begins to feel guilty.
Pignon, in short, is that old and none-too-rare character, a Holy 
Fool. But clever Veber, instead of lapsing into sentimentality keeps 
his cynical-satirical edge alive to the very last scene.
Essentially the movie is "simply" about two men,  a speakerphone and 
an answering machine. Not so simply, in a main setting which is not a 
bit claustrophobic, it adjoins to the two anti-heroes a handful of 
perfectly and economically used comparses
Most memorable is Cheval (horse, in French) Pignon's colleague and 
friend, a sanguine, jolly fellow enlisted to help Brochant-- but he's 
also a bloodhound tax inspector ... and Brochant has not declared his 
collection of art.
( Could the name Cheval also be an in-joke, a reference to the 
real-life postman Cheval whose "naive" sculptures remind you of 
Douanier Rousseau's paintings and Antoni Gaudi's work?)
Veber's inventiveness is superb. He is clearly an inheritor of that 
greatest of all farce playwrights, Georges Feydeau (1862-1921)  whose 
wild comedies of La Belle Epoque (mostly bedroom farces and variants, 
and still revived in France and abroad), are the funniest imaginable. 
These are merciless yet un-cruel satires, splendidly timed and 
dialogued, minutely plotted, absurdist within realistic frames, and 
built with the precision of the best Swiss chronographs.
At his best, Veber shares those traits. Also like Feydeau, even when 
dealing with potentially scabrous set-ups and send-ups, he maintains 
a certain elegance, old-fashioned yet updated to late 20th century 
mores and manners but neither vulgar nor gross-out, the way film 
comedy increasingly is.
Though well subtitled, The Dinner Game's dialogue cannot have the 
full humor and impact of the spoken lines. Nor is the opening song 
untransalted. And, on the phone,  Pignon's "Belgian" accent 
--something the French think is most funny-- as he pretends to be a 
movie producer (don't ask), of course does not come through to 
non-Francophone audiences. In my case, the only unbelievability was 
the easy parking of cars before Brochant's chic building -- a miracle 
in choked up Paris.
There is, however, a mother lode of reparteee, gags, and qui pro quos 
that come through with absolute clarity. The proof of this is that 
Veber plans a Hollywood version of the picture, as The Schmuck's 
Dinner, most likely starring (shudder) Robin Williams.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DINNER GAME, THE (Dîner de cons, Le) (director/writer: Francis Veber;
cinematographer: Luciano Tovoli; editor: Georges Klotz; cast: Jacques
Villeret (Francois Pignon), Thierry Lhermitte (Pierre Brochant), Francis
Huster (Just  LeBlanc), Daniel Prevost (Cheval), Alexandra Vandernoot
(Christine), Catherine Frot (Marlene), Christian Pereira (Professor
Sorbier), 1998-France)
Francis Veber writes farcical plays which are then made into popular
films. The Dinner Game is such a scenario. The plot is about a bunch of
wealthy intellectual snobs who get pleasure from having a dinner for
idiots every week, where each guest finds someone he thinks is the
supreme idiot and brings him to dinner without the idiot knowing the
dinner's purpose.
Pierre Brochant (Thierry Lhermitte) is the snooty Parisian book
publisher, a calculating smoothie, someone who derives great pleasure
from these dinners, where the hosts relish in their guests lack of
sophistication and when they leave they have a good laugh over it,
choosing the one they think is the biggest idiot for the evening. He
thinks he has come up with the best idiot of all time in someone he met
on the train, whose hobby is putting matchsticks together of famous
Paris structures, Francois Pignon (Jacques Villeret). Francois knows how
many matchsticks goes into every bridge and tower he creates. The lowly
bureaucrat in the finance department is lured to the dinner when Pierre
tells him he might get a book published about his hobby.
Most of the film will take place in Pierre's luxurious apartment, as
Pierre invites his rotund and loquacious guest over to his house before
they go to dinner, telling his guest that this will give them a chance
to get acquainted. But just before the dinner, the writer pulls his back
out of place and is not up to attending the dinner, which leaves him
stuck in his apartment with the idiot. He also has a tiff with his very
attractive wife Christine (Vandernoot), who walks out on him, saying
that she has had enough of his mean-spirited attitude towards others.
Some might find this fast-moving play to be smart and witty. But I
didn't. The joke here, is that Pignon turns the tables on the rich snob
and makes his life a mess, as he remains in the apartment and tries to
help his new friend Pierre get Christine back. He does that mainly
through phone conversations, whereby he has a knack for saying the wrong
thing and making things worst. What results is a series of foul-ups
between Pierre's wife, his mistress (Frot), a taxman (Prevost) who says
he will audit him, and Pierre's wife finally being more upset with him
than before.
Jacques Villeret is an appealing fool, whose good-heart shines
throughout the farce, even though he proves to be a true numbskull.
While Thierry Lhermitte is in fine form as the  handsome but deeply
troubled man. There were a few laughs to be had, but this is really TV
sitcom material and not great wit.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
