Title
Review for Left Luggage (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Castle Hill Productions
 Director: Jeroen Krabbe
 Writer:  Carl Friedman (novel), Edwin de Vries
 Cast: Laura Fraser, Adam Monty, Isabella Rossellini, Jeroen
Krabbe, Chaim Topol, Marianne Sagebrecht, Maximilian
Schell
   Our era in the U.S. has become known as one that glorifies
identity politics.  Being American is fine, its advocates say,
but be especially proud of where you came from.  You're
African-American, or Italian-American or Jewish-American or
Whatever-American.  I suppose this makes some sense since
nobody--not even Native Americans--originally came from
here.  Sometimes I think it's overdone.  In any case the jury
is still out on whether people are really coming out of the
closet in droves to celebrate their origins.  My impression is
that most people, especially the young, like to think of
themselves as thoroughly assimilated into the so-called
American Way of Life, but in the film "Left Luggage"--which,
to be fair has nothing to do with the U.S. but takes place in
the Belgium of the early 1970s--director Jeroen Krabbe
pushes the idea that young Jewish people who are
assimilated into the Belgian culture should secure more of a
feeling for their Jewish identity.  
This concept comes out of Carl Friedman's novel, "The
Shovel and the Loom" as scripted by Edwin De Vries, and
centers on an assimilated 20-year-old, Chaja (Laura Fraser),
whose consciousness of Judaism is marginal even though
her parents are Holocaust survivors.  Her father (Maximilian
Schell) comes across as eccentric to her because he is
obsessed with digging all over the family's home town of
Antwerp in search of luggage he buried in the early 1940s
when in flight from the Nazis, while Chaja's mother (Marianne
Sagebrecht), on the other hand, is in denial about the
Holocaust and spends her days weaving a blanket and
making pound cake.  Because Chaja needs money to pay
rent, a family friend Mr. Apfelschnitt (Chaim Topol) secures
for her a job as a nanny with a Hasidic family headed by Mr.
Kalman (Jeroen Krabbe), whose wife (Isabella Rossellini)
teaches her the special rules of the ultra-orthodox sect. 
Falling in love with the Kalman's four-year-old boy, Simcha
(Adam Monty), Chaja is determined to find out why the little
charmer refuses to speak and to encourage his vocal chords
so that Mr. Kalman can be proud of him.
"Left Luggage" is in not as dramatic or convincing as another
Hasidic-centered tale, Boaz Yakin's 1998 "A Price Above
Rubies," a far more commercial offering starring Renee
Zellweger as an unhappy Hasidic housewife in New York City
who years for sexual liberation and the freedom to pursue a
career.  In fact "Left Luggage" is downright small, more
suitable for cable TV or the stage than for the big screen.  It
might appeal to Jews of all stripes who are curious about how
a young, liberated woman would fare in a culture clash with
people she had always considered bizarre, and to Gentiles
eager to learn more about Jewish culture and the different
ways that members of the tribe practice or do not practice
their faith.  Dialogue is occasionally so faint that it's virtually
inaudible.  The only true drama occurs toward the conclusion
when a heartbreaking event makes Chaja think long and hard
about her way of life, an event that teaches her more than
she could ever learn as a philosophy major in college.  
   Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the film is the way
that art follows life.  Its director, Jeroen Krabbe, comes from
a Jewish mother and Gentile father, and while the maternal
side of the family were destroyed in the Dutch Holocaust,
Krabbe had for a long time not been aware of the tragic
circumstances because the family were too pained to discuss
wartime catastrophes.  When he came across Carl
Friedman's book he had determined to direct the movie
version despite his lack of knowledge about the Hasidim. 
What emerges in the film is a sensitive, heartbreaking
portrayal that falls short of gripping the spectator, as the
meager story becomes lost on the big screen.
Not Rated.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "LEFT LUGGAGE" (Trident Releasing)
     Set in Belgium in 1972, this Dutch film explores the emotional journey of Chaja Silberschmidt, a Jewish, yet thoroughly assimilated, 20 year-old student (Laura Fraser). Her parents are Holocaust survivors who seem, to her, obsessed with the past. Her father (Maximilian Schell) spends his time digging all over Antwerp to find two large suitcases that he buried when he fled from the Nazis; they contain his violin, family silver and photographs. Meanwhile, her mother (Marianne Sagebrecht), in denial, compulsively weaves a blanket and makes pound cake.  Since she's in need of rent money, a family friend (Chaim Topol) finds Chaja a job as a nanny to five children in a Hasidic family, headed by Mrs. Kalman (Isabella Rossellini) who teaches her about orthodoxy. Though initially intolerant of the seemingly pointless traditions and strict rules under which the family operates, Chaja bonds with the youngest child, Simcha (Adam Monty), a five-year old, who refuses to speak, !
much to the chagrin of his formidable father (Jeroen Krabbe).
     The culture clash and survivor-guilt concept comes from Carl Friedman's novel, "The Shovel and the Loom," adapted by Edwin De Vries. In interviews, director Jeroen Krabbe revealed that he was attracted to the story, meaning both emotional and literal baggage, because he came from a mixed (Jewish-Gentile) marriage and was, for many years, unaware of his own family's wartime travail. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Left Luggage" is a sensitive, somber 7, although I suspect it's more suited to video or cable TV than the big screen. And, if you're curious about Hasidic tradition, I recommend Boaz Yakin's "A Price Above Rubies" (1998), starring Renee Zellweger as an unhappy Hasidic housewife who yearns for liberation.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LEFT LUGGAGE (director: Jeroen Krabbé; screenwriters: Edwin de Vries/from book
The Shovel And The Loom by Carl Friedman; cinematographer: Walther van den Ende;
editor: Edgar Burcksen; cast: Laura Fraser (Chaja Silberschmidt), Isabella
Rossellini (Mrs. Kalman), Jeroen Krabbé (Mr. Kalman), Maximilian Schell (Chaja's
Father), Marianne Sägebrecht (Chaja's Mother),  David Bradley (Concierge), Adam
Monty (Simcha Kalman), Chaim Topol (Mr. Apfelschnitt), Heather Weeks (Sofie);
Runtime: 100; Castle Hill Productions; 1998-USA / Belgium / Netherlands) 
A film that means well, but is too pushy in promoting its belabored point and
too sentimental to be compelling as a drama. It's Jeroen Krabbé's melodrama
about a community of Jews in Antwerp in 1972 who can't forget their bitter past.
The heroine is an attractive, carefree, nonreligious 20-year-old, Chaja
(Fraser), who wants to forget her Jewish roots by getting involved in student
demonstrations, screwing a student rebel leader, and living with her Gentile
friends away from her nagging mother (Sägebrecht) and her self-absorbed,
eccentric father (Schell). Her parents are survivors of the Holocaust
concentration camps, and her home life is filled with angst. Her mother is in
denial about the past always busying herself by cooking soup and baking cakes
and complaining about everything, while her father is more openly loving but has
recently been absorbed in searching for two suitcases filled with mementos, a
family album, silverware, and his old violin. He buried them in a garden during
the war while fleeing the Nazis, but can't locate them now due to all the
changes in the city. 
Out of frustration after quitting her job as a dishwasher and facing eviction
from her apartment, she reluctantly accepts a job as a nanny with an Hasidic
couple that an old man in her parents' apartment building, Mr. Apfelschnitt
(Topol), tells her about. The Hasidics are ultra-orthodox: they don't go to the
cinema or watch TV, adhere to strict dress codes, and strictly observe their
religious laws. 
Chaja is at first put off by the way they expect her to follow their rules, but
soon finds the wife, Mrs. Kalman (Rossellini), to be kind and she becomes
attached to one of her 5 children, a 4-year-old named Simcha (Monty) who doesn't
talk. The stern Mr. Kalman (Krabbé) is not friendly to her and considers her to
be a whore because of the way she dresses. 
To hammer home the point of how anti-Semitism hasn't gone away there's a barrage
of overdone and uninvolving scenes with a sneering Concierge (Bradley), who
keeps making nasty remarks about Jews and tries to make things inconvenient for
them by preventing the Jewish family from using the elevator. 
The film is done in by its ham-fisted script as the story, adapted from Carl
Friedman's book "The Shovel And The Loom," goes from one false note to another
until it gets lost in all the goo of its sentimentality. It starts off telling
Chaja's story of how she's a lost Jewess trying to find her identity, then to
her nanny role as she loves a mute child stuck in an insulated environment, and
then it makes it a story about the lingering effects of the bitter past that
can't be forgotten. The effort seemed heavy-handed, as the film kept delivering
too many obvious messages that it ponderously kept delivering through the stock
characters. 
The supporting cast consists of all wooden characters who give their roles a
cartoonish flavoring: Chaja's parents are given no human shades, while the
janitor villain was a particularly annoying role that was one-dimensional and
falsely acted. 
The only ones who fought through the script and showed some feelings were
Fraser, whose effervescent face was expressive of both the trying times she was
going through and the joys she felt -- but most admirably showing how she could
be so mistaken as to think that she could forget her roots; while Rossellini
gave a warm performance of a woman suffering in silence, but is strong in
accepting her faith. Topol's reassuring performance as the wise man who says all
the right things to Fraser, acts as the true voice of the filmmaker in
explaining all the sufferings with common sense. 
The film brazenly uses little Simcha to get across its agenda of pointing out
how the patriarchal world can be cruel when it can't love: it starts out by
showing how under Chaja's loving care he's taken to the duck pond and soon
starts jabbering away, beginning by saying 'quack, quack' and then going on to
ask the four questions during a Passover seder. But by showing how the boy is so
terrified of his strict father that he wets his pants in his presence, refuses
to speak because of his stern dad, and eventually becomes the victim of a tragic
accident, the film thereby exploits the boy's sufferings and his story just
becomes tiresome and not sincerely done. 
I felt I didn't just see a movie, but I attended a lecture for the whole 100
minutes of this serious but unappetizing story. It was the kind of movie that
you hoped would somehow end soon, as it seemed to be in the habit of rehashing
its same viewpoint unnecessarily--the message it keeps sending was already
received. In the last shot where father and daughter are hopelessly digging for
the lost luggage, one has the impression that no one in the film learned
anything about themselves or the past. That seems strange, since I thought that
was what this film was supposed to be about. Unless I was mistaken and the
film's real aim was to make us cry over Simcha. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
