Title
Review for Martha, Meet Frank, Daniel and Laurence (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Greg King
Romantic comedies like French Kiss, Sleepless In Seattle and
When Harry Met Sally have explored the idea that our life is often a
frustrating and sometimes unsatisfying search for the perfect partner
to share our lives.  A number of recent films in this overdone genre
have also looked at how coincidences and accidents can shape our
lives.  This charming, funny and very enjoyable British comedy shares
a number of themes and ideas in common.
The film's central premise deals with an unusual romantic
triangle that involves three friends who all fall in love with the
same woman.  Frank, Daniel and Laurence have been friends since
childhood.  Then Martha (Monica Potter) comes between them, and her
presence tests the nature of their friendship.  An American who is
leaving her messy life behind her, Martha is determined to begin a new
life in London.  In a series of chance encounters, the three friends
all meet Martha separately, and believe that she is their perfect,
ideal woman who will make their miserable, vaguely unfulfilled lives
richer.
Daniel (Tom Hollander), a narcissistic record company
executive, is the most successful of the three.  Returning from a
business trip in America he first meets Monica on the plane and tries
to impress her.  Frank (Rufus Sewell) is an unemployed and
unsuccessful actor lacking in confidence, who always suffers stage
fright and misses auditions.  He meets Monica in Hyde Park, and tries
to empathise with her about their own shared hardships.  Laurence
(Joseph Fiennes, from Shakespeare In Love, etc) is a sensitive artist
who also teaches bridge to elderly ladies.
The story unfolds largely in a series of extended flashbacks
as Laurence relates the story of how Monica's presence strains their
friendship to a psychiatrist (Ray Winstone), who conveniently lives in
a downstairs apartment.  Misunderstandings snowball with comic
consequences.  But, with a charming and witty script from Peter Morgan
and some deft direction, the idea actually comes off.  The film's
structure is occasionally a little clumsy in the early stages, but
once it hits its stride The Very Thought Of You becomes an intriguing
little tale of friendship, love and deceit.  Nicholas Hamm directs in
a suitably light manner that keeps the film bubbling along.
Fiennes, who injected the sex appeal into the Elizabethan era
in his two previous period films, slots perfectly into this more
contemporary setting.  He smoulders his way across the screen, and his
sympathetic performance here builds upon his previous solid credits.
Potter (recently seen as the romantic interest in Patch Adams) looks a
lot like a younger version of Julia Roberts, and she brings much of
the same beguiling charm and screen presence to her role.  The pair
develop a wonderful chemistry that lifts the film whenever they are on
screen together.
Sewell has a glum and brooding presence, and he seems a little
too intense for his role.  Hollander brings some humour to his
performance as the self-obsessed, obnoxious and immature Daniel.
The choice between these three lovesick lads would seem pretty
obvious, although Hamm manages to stretch out the suspense.  Hamm also
brings London to life, beautifully using the city as a backdrop to the
action.
The film's title is pretty clunky, and only marginally better
than the original, awkward, but far more revealing Martha - Meet
Frank, Daniel & Laurence, which says it all, really.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Martha (Monica Potter from PATCH ADAMS), who hails from the home of the
Mall of America, is off on a one-way ticket to London because the price
was right.  With less than $200 to her name, the penniless Martha
snagged a bargain ticket.  She's left behind her drug-dealer infested
tenement building, and she's off now to live in London on the $32 she
has left in her purse.
In a movie that never rings true, Martha is the most unbelievable
character of the lot.  Although writer Peter Morgan would have us
believe that this woman, who has been turned down for a dozen jobs in
the past year, is destitute, she appears nothing of the sort.  With
fashion model looks, make-up, clothing and jewelry, Martha doesn't
appear to have ever come any closer to poverty than an overcharged
American Express Platinum card.
A supposedly unsuccessful woman, she has an unrealistically simplistic
outlook.  "All of my life I was told that if I worked hard and stayed
out of trouble, my life would be a fairy tale."  She's depressed because
she's never met her Prince Charming.
In a story of overlapping chance encounters, Martha ends up being the
would-be girlfriend of three English buddies.
The first of these we meet is Laurence (Joseph Fiennes from SHAKESPEARE
IN LOVE), a champion bridge player, who makes his living teaching the
game to flocks of middle-age women.  The slow paced movie has him
telling the story in flashback to his psychiatrist neighbor, Dr. Pederer
(Ray Winstone).  Fiennes isn't given much to do other than mope around
with a single sad sack expression.  Still, his dour look is so
exceedingly handsome it almost makes up for his character's lack of
energy.
The first of these childhood buddies to fall under Martha's spell is
Daniel (Tom Hollander).  A fabulously wealthy record producer, he's used
to hitting on every pretty woman who comes within flirting distance.  A
proudly shallow bloke, he had his library filled with second-hand books
by his interior decorator in order to create the illusion of an enhanced
intellectual capacity.
The other friend in this male trio is Frank (Rufus Sewell), a cynic who
wears his obnoxiousness on his rumpled sleeve.  He likes nothing better
than showing off his crude behavior by obscene verbal jousting with his
buddies.  Like Laurence, Frank, with his 2-day beard and disheveled
clothing, always looks like he just woke from a long drinking binge.
In The World According to Frank, art galleries exist solely for men to
find women to lay.  His ideal partner, the egotistical Franks boasts, is
himself.  Or more precisely, himself "with breasts."
As ploddingly directed by Nick Hamm, the movie is a romance without much
genuine chemistry and a comedy without any laughs.  Best viewed as a
small, melancholic drama, the by-the-numbers story takes few chances.
Why couldn't the writer introduce some ambiguity and real mystery into
the tale and not make the outcome so obvious?
The movie's saving grace, to the extent it has any, is a nice but
completely predictable conclusion.  The ending's few fun twists add a
little spice to an otherwise bland film.
THE VERY THOUGHT OF YOU runs 1:28.  It is rated R for profanity and
would be acceptable for teenagers.  [We saw the film abroad without
the aid of an MPAA rating and suspected, incorrectly, that it was a
PG-13 film.]
My son Jeffrey, age 10, didn't think much of the movie, giving it just *
1/2.  He didn't like Frank's language and found the story confusing at
times.  He was, however, enthralled with Monica Potter, saying "man, she
was gorgeous."
The film, which is playing now in Australia, will open later this summer
in the United States.  It was released last year in Britain with the
title of MARTHA, MEET FRANK, DANIEL AND LAURENCE.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Very_Thought_of_You_ (PG-13) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
It's no big shock that Miramax decided to give a more accessible title
to this modern-day screwball comedy, which has been released elsewhere in
the globe under the unconventional name
_Martha,_Meet_Frank,_Daniel_and_Laurence_.  That strange title pretty
much sums up the eccentricities of this film, which follows Martha
(Monica Potter), an American who runs off to London to start a new life. 
Within a couple of days, Martha individually meets Brits Frank (Rufus
Sewell), Daniel (Tom Hollander), and Laurence (Joseph Fiennes)--all of
whom fall in love with her.  Little does she know that the three are
lifelong friends, and little do they know that only one of them has her
love in return: Laurence.
Of course, a number of complications, coincidences, and
misunderstandings befitting that original title ensue.  But one wishes
that the film were as simple as the new, if generic and completely
irrelevant, title it bears now.  Potter and Fiennes are charming
together, and he is proven at playing lovelorn types (albeit not while
decked out in contemporary garb, which it is actually somewhat jarring to
see him in).  I would have liked to see them in a more straightforward
love story without all the mechanical silliness involving the other two
guys.  Unfortunately, that's what one must sit through in order to savor
their too-few sweet moments together.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

