Title
Review for My Generation (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Barbara Kopple, the two-time Oscar-winning documentary filmmaker who most
recently directed Woody Allen's Wild Man Blues, gives us a striking look at
the three Woodstock festivals in My Generation.  Originally meant to be a
comparison between the 1969 and 1994 concerts, Kopple didn't need to wait
long for the 1999 fiasco to provide an apocalyptic end to her picture.
The fun starts in February 1994 and shows the behind-the-scenes genesis of
the 25th anniversary show, from the Saugerties town meeting to get the
permit (set to Primus' "Here Come the Bastards") to the merchandising
efforts to provide consumers with everything from Woodstock condoms to
Woodstock dog tags. There are nice segues between people proudly stating
that "it isn't about the money" and giant, baby-killing corporate sponsors
selling $20 slices of pizza.
There are some truly interesting musical moments in Generation, like when
Kopple cuts between Joe Cocker's performance in 1969 and 1994, or Melissa
Etheridge's Janis Joplin cover in '94 juxtaposed with a clip of Joplin from
the original concert.  The 30th anniversary show in 1999 showed the
difference between quietly raging against the machine and the misguided,
fire-stoking anger of Limp Bizkit's "Break Stuff," as three days of peace,
music and love turned into three days of fire, rape and looting.
A big chunk of the film focuses on Michael Lang, the perpetually calm
producer of all three events.  Nothing seems to faze the guy, even though he
claims the original Woodstock concert has just broken even within the last
few years (which is why you had to be bombarded with Pepsi advertising just
to see DMX).  There isn't one mention of the rapes in '99 but plenty of
coverage of various security check problems (people weren't told metal tents
weren't allowed until they were at the gate), drugs, injuries and, of
course, mud.
If anything, the film is a great way to catch a wide variety of music from
the likes of Green Day, Metallica, Nine Inch Nails, The Who, Country Joe and
the Fish and a pre-pop-chart Santana.
1:43 - TVMA for adult language, nudity and drug use
