Title
Review for Pinocchio (1940)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Eric Walker
     Without a doubt, the best movie you could see in the theatre this
summer--indeed, almost amy summer--is the re-release of Walt Disney's
PINOCCHIO.  I know it's a cliche to say this, but this time it's true:
they don't make movies like this anymore.
     Walt Disney's greatest animated feature films were FANTASIA and
PINOCCHIO, yet neither of them proved to be the big box-office hit
that SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS was.  Over the years, of course,
PINOCCHIO has since come into its own, but until now, we have rarely
if ever had a chance to see it the way it was meant to be seen: in the
theatre.  While this movie was released on video several years ago (and
is widely available in rental stores), seeing it on your TV screen just
isn't the same.  Some movies deserve to be on the big screen, and
PINOCCHIO is one of them.
     Everything about this movie is perfect.  The animation is awe-
inspiring, and the opening sequence in Gepetto's toy shop is one of the
finest animated sequences ever filmed--probably topped only by the
"Nutcracker Suite" segment of FANTASIA.  To think that the Disney
artists did all this by hand, with no help at all from computers...it
staggers the imagination.  Disney's achievement is even more impressive
when one realizes that what we see on the screen is not what the Disney
Studios first began with.  Five months into the production of
PINOCCHIO, Walt Disney was unsatisfied with the result of his studio's
work, and he shut down production to make major changes.  Essentially,
Disney started the production of this movie over from scratch, throwing
out hundreds of thousands of dollars of completed material.  No studio
today would be so quality-conscious as to abandon a completed
production; the lost money would be considered a waste, and more than
likely the studio would try to work the old footage in with the new in
order to save it.  (Look at ALIEN 3--this was a patchwork job to end
all patchworks.)  But as happened so often in his life, Disney's gamble
paid off.  PINOCCHIO is one of those few works that can genuinely be
called a Masterpiece.
     Who can forget the first appearance of the Blue Fairy?  Who isn't
moved when he hears the immortal song "When You Wish Upon A Star"?
Gepetto's kindly old father figure is never tiresome, even when he acts
foolish; Figaro the cute little kitten is a charmer (and never treacly
cute).  This was the movie that forever associated the phrase "Jiminy
Cricket" with Disney--and indeed, Jiminy is more of a world-wise soul
here than in many of his later appearances.  (And he's surprisingly
lecherous, too!)  And Pinocchio, the little wooden puppet who falls for
temptation, is charmingly naive.  We all remember these characters, and
here's your chance to remember why we love them all.
     However, parents taking very young children to the theatre should
be warned:  In PINOCCHIO, as in no other Disney movie, Disney gives us
the dark side of this fairy tale, and his vision is so intense that
young children could easily be frightened.  Leonard Maltin describes the
movie: "If SNOW WHITE was a fairy tale laced with moments of terror,
PINOCCHIO was an extended nightmare with occasional humorous
interludes."  Never again after PINOCCHIO did Disney allow such moments
of danger and terror into his movies--and they suffered as a result.
The transformation of Lampwick into a jackass is genuinely chilling, and
the final chase with Monstro the Whale is one of the most terrifying
moments in motion picture history.  When I saw this movie in the
theatre, some little children started screaming during the finale--and
Pinocchio's death scene sent them over the edge.  Gepetto's mourning for
Pinocchio is truly heartfelt.  I've seen PINOCCHIO several times now,
and this final scene still brings tears to my eyes.  It's probably the
most heart-touching death scene ever filmed--a feat that wouldn't be
equalled until E.T.  died, over forty years later.
     Some parents may hesitate to let their children see PINOCCHIO,
because their children may be too sensitive for it.  I personally
believe that this is the perfect movie for any child to see--if he or
she is ready for it.  All too often, makers of so-called "children's
movies" hesitate to add strong emotional sequences because they're
afraid to frighten the kids.  Even Disney fell into this trap of
self-censorship with such movies as PETER PAN, where Captain Hook
gives Peter a bomb instead of poisoning his milk, and where Hook escapes
at the end instead of being eaten by the crocodile.  Kids are far more
resilient than many people think they are, and while they may be scared
by PINOCCHIO, they certainly won't be scarred for life by this movie.
In fact, the very way in which PINOCCHIO presents the terrors of the
real world to children--being led from the straight and narrow path by
strangers, learning the consequences of getting into trouble--makes it
a genuine learning experience for youngsters, as well as being
tremendous entertainment.
     So I say, let the children see PINOCCHIO.  This is one of the
greatest movies ever made.  It's heart-warming, funny, exciting, and
terrifying--and they just don't make movies like this anymore.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After seeing the new live action Pinocchio movie, THE ADVENTURES
OF PINOCCHIO to which I gave ***, we decided to watch the Disney
original 1940 classic animated movie PINOCCHIO since it is the
reference standard.  Directors Hamilton Luske and Ben Sharpsteen's 1940
PINOCCHIO is wonderful - full of beauty and tragedy.  The writers
(Aurelius Battaglia, William Cottrell, Otto Englander, Erdman Penner,
Joseph Sabo, Ted Sears, and Webb Smith using Carlo Collodi's book)
fashion a morality tale that describes horrible results for any boy who
strays from the straight and narrow.
     The short version of the story is that a puppet maker named
Geppeto (voice by Christian Rub) creates a puppet called Pinocchio
(voice by Dick Jones).  He wishes Pinocchio could come alive and his
wish is granted by The Blue Fairy (voice by Evelyn Venable).  The Blue
Fairy assigns the role of Pinocchio's conscience to Jiminy Cricket
(voice by Cliff Edwards).  Pinocchio goes to work for the evil
Stromboli (voice by Charles Judels) and generally gets into a lot of
trouble in the show.
     The moral lessons come fast and furious.  The Blue Fairy tells
Pinocchio, "Remember: Always let your conscience be your guide."  This,
of course, has a double meaning given that she has delegated that role
to Jiminy Cricket.  She promises Pinocchio that he can be a real boy
and not just a live puppet if he is good.  The carrot.  He also finds
that when he lies, his nose grows so long that leaves, flowers, bird's
nests, and birds grow on it.  The stick.  She admonishes him that "a
lie keeps growing and growing until it's as clear as the nose on your
face."
     Unlike the remake, the original is much darker and more
frightening.  Stromboli is extremely sinister.  He calls Pinocchio his
"little wooden gold mine" and throws him into a bird cage when he
doesn't obey.  If the thought of some diabolical man bend on locking
them up doesn't scare little kids, not much will.  The show has more
insidious characters like Honest John.  Overall, the movie is a panoply
of the inherent horrors of childhood and much more so than the remake,
the 1940 original does not pull any punches in illustrating the
consequences of immorality.
     The piece de resistance is Pleasure Island.  There the boys get to
smoke cigars, destroy model homes, play pool and drink beer.  The
consequences of this degeneracy are near fatal as Pinocchio soon
learns.  All and all, this is a troubling but extremely well crafted
film.  In typical stereotyping, notice how the quintessential bad kid,
Lampwick (voice by Frankie Darro), has a Brooklyn accent.  Reminds me
of how movies, even today, stereotype people with Southern accents like
mine as being poor and stupid.
     There is so much more right with the movie that it is hard to know
what all to include.  Just the infectiously happy and uplifting voice
of Jiminy Cricket is certainly worth a mention.  The animators (lead by
Shamus Culhane) use a simple style in the drawings.  Most scenes have
little detailing and yet, the colors of the warm browns remind us of
the wooded nature of the protagonist and the warmth suggest that
redemption is his for the taking.
     The music (Leigh Harline, Paul Smith and Ned Washington) is
soothing, dreamy, and nostalgic.  The songs are all memorable and
great.  My favorites are "Give a little whistle," "When you wish upon a
star," and "An actor's life for me."
     I have only one major criticism of the film.  The whole Monstro
sequence runs way too long, especially the search for the whale.  If
they wanted to make the film longer, they could have added more in the
front part.  Finally, I must be honest.  As much as I like the
character of Pinocchio in this movie, I liked the character in the
remake better.  His movements are more interesting and the way he deals
with some of the situations more imaginative.  On whole, however, the
remake is not near as good as the original.  The main problem with the
remake is that they downplay the morality issue which is the heart of
the story.
     PINOCCHIO runs 1:28.  It is rated G, but little kids may be
frightened by the caging, the whale, and many of the darker images.  I
always include Jeffrey's (age 7) mini-review in my review.  I forget
this on the remake, THE ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO.  He loved it and gave
it two thumbs up.  For reasons, which he was not able to articulate, he
liked it better than the original PINOCCHIO to which he gave only one
thumbs up.  Go figure.  Personally, I give my strongest recommendation
to PINOCCHIO and rate it a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Frank Maloney
     PINOCCHIO is a film from the Walt Disney Company.  It was first
released in 1940 and has been restored and rereleased this summer.
Directed by Ben Sharpsteen.  Voices by Dick Jones, Cliff Edwards, and
Evelyn Venable.  The story is loosely based on the AVVENTURE DI
PINOCCHIO by Collodi.
     PINOCCHIO has a reputation as the most technically brilliant,
emotionally charged, and the most disturbing of any of Disney's
full-length animated films.  The current reissue allows us to see this
paragon in colors that are lusher, sounds that are sharper, in the
correct dimensions, and my judgment is that the film fully lives up to
the legend.  It is every bit as fresh and accessible (and visible,
thanks to the technique of printing the original aspect ratio on modern
film stock so that the top and bottom of the image area are not cut
off), every bit as fresh, I say, as it must have been 52 years ago.
     Disney was under pressure in 1940 to repeat the commercial success
of SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS.  Disney indeed pull out the stops to
create a cast of memorable characters, including narrator Jiminy Cricket
as Pinocchio's conscience.  He commissioned an Oscar-winning score,
including the the Best Song "When You Wish Upon a Star" and my personal
favorite "I Got No Strings."  The animation and the backgrounds are
lavish to the point of amazing.  My favorite sequence, the Monstro
sequence, which begins with Pinocchio's and Jiminy's walk on the floor
of the ocean is, I think, especially beautiful as well as impressive,
charming, mysterious, amusing, emotional, and frightening.  The level of
art makes one want to yell "Stop, wait a moment, I want to study this
frame" over and over again.  Unfortunately for Disney, the film was not
a commercial success at first, the reviews were mixed, and audiences
were put off by its episodic structure, its general lack of comedy (most
of the comedy is decidedly black), and a tonal darkness that frightened
adults as well as children.  The Paradise Island sequence is often cited
as one of the great moments of screen horror.  William Everson, as
quoted in William Arnold's review in the Seattle P-I, wrote an essay in
the 60s in which he called the transformation of Lampwick "surely one of
the screen's supreme moments of horror."
     The characterizations are detailed and naturalistic.  For example,
the kitten Figaro, while possessing its cartoon-share of human
characteristics, nevertheless is one of the most cat-like cartoon cats I
have ever encountered: spunky, sweet, bouncy, tough, playful, curious,
cautious.  When Figaro walks across Gepetto's comforter, you know that
the animators studied living kittens in the perfect way they captured
that sure-unsure, fluffy-bottomed walk.  I also especially admired the
way the characters appear to have mass and weight, to actually be
walking on a surface, instead of floating over it as in most animations.
This was especially admirable in the ocean-walk, where one could see
Pinocchio working against the viscosity and current of the ocean water
as well as his buoyancy whenever he stopped moving.  These are details
that we have pretty much learned to live without even in the best modern
animations, such as THE LITTLE MERMAID, where the animators treat the
water exactly as they do the air.
     The film, for its short 90-minute running time, is packed with more
excellences than most films you or I will have occasion to see this
year.  When you go, there will be many children in the audience.  It
will be more or less noisy, with TV-bred moppets asking what this or
that is, but unless you are terminally hostile to children, you will
almost surely find yourself so drawn into the magic of PINOCCHIO that
you will become oblivious to the background noise.  You will have your
favorite character and sequence, but you will so charmed overall that
choosing a favorite will become a work of pleasure, of choosing among
excellences.
     I strongly encourage you to see this release of PINOCCHIO on the
big screen, even if you own a video copy or intend to get one.
