Title
Review for Tunnel Vision (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Justin Felix
Written and directed by Clive Fleury.  
Starring Patsy Kensit, Robert Reynolds, Rebecca Rigg.  
Rated R (contains violence, profanity, and nudity)  100 mins.  
Synopsis:  Constantly criticized by their superior, two out-of-control
cops, one of them a suspiciously jealous newlywed, chase after a serial
killer with an artistic side.  
Comments:  To be honest, I don't have much to say about TUNNEL VISION, a
largely forgettable thriller imported from the Land Down Under, Australia.
Like the seemingly endless stream of movies dealing with serial killers,
TUNNEL VISION possesses the standard requirements: a couple of grisly
murders (female, of course), some clues, some suspicious suspects, and the
ultimate revelation of the killer's identity before he's taken care of by
the main character.  Perhaps the only thing which separates this film out
from the others (and the only reason I'm giving this turkey two stars
instead of one) are its main characters.  One of the cops turns
self-destructive during the course of the movie.  He believes his wife is
having an affair, accidently shoots a criminal, gets into disagreements
with his superior, and ultimately runs from the law in a maverick attempt
to solve the case and iron out his personal life (someone is out to frame
him).  The cop's life proves more interesting and mysterious than the main
plot of the film.  
Patsy Kensit, Mel Gibson's love interest in LETHAL WEAPON 2, plays the
cop's partner.  As in LETHAL WEAPON 2, she proves she doesn't have much
acting ability and delivers a very wooden performance.  None of the other
actors are particularly good here either.
As I've stated before (and as you can tell by the length of this review),
not much can be said for this film.  It is a by-the-books, pedestrian
thriller offering little that's unique or memorable.  If you're in the mood
for a thriller of this nature, I'd recommend something else.  You have a
lot to choose from in this genre.
