Title
Review for Lavender Hill Mob, The (1951)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     This marvelous Oscar-winning movie (Best Story and Screenplay by
T.E.B. Clarke) was one of those priceless comedies (mostly from the
Ealing Studios) that made British screen humor triumph in the 1950s.
     Oscar-nominated Alec Guinness is a milquetoastish bank employee
who dreams up one of those perfect crimes -- a gold-bullion caper --
that never turn out to be perfect.  Successful at first, the likable
malefactors are thrown into a desperate, frustrating chase after
incriminating evidence -- miniature Eiffel Towers.  The hunt takes them
to Paris, then back to England.  There is wonderful irony as the film
climaxes with the duo tracking down the last of the statuettes inside a
Police show.
     The acting by Guinness and Holloway is perfect .  They are
excellently supported by their acolytes Sidney James and Alfie Bass.
Audrey Hepburn, then a bit actress in her fourth film, has a a
microscopic part.  Thirteen years later, in MY FAIR LADY, as a big
star playing  Liza Doolittle, she would be reunited with Stanley
Holloway who played her father.
     THE LAVENDER HILL MOB is a delight of witty structure and briskly
economical pacing.  Guinness had come to world-wide attention with his
multiple roles in KIND HEARS AND CORONETS (1949).  With THE LAVENDER
HILL MOB the comic, idiosyncratic Guinness persona itself was
launched, in all its variations of quiet diffidence, cunning,
stubbornness and that famous half-smile that seems to say "I know
something you don't know."
     THE MAN IN THE WHITE SUIT followed that same year and was also
nominated in the straight screenplay category.  Then came more
comedies:  THE PROMOTER, THE CAPTAIN'S PARADISE, THE DETECTIVE, THE
LADY KILLERS, and more films with serious, funny or in-between roles,
all unique.  THE LAVENDER HILL MOB is the kind of movie where you root
for the thieves, but in its period films lacked the gumption to come
out with the conclusion that often "crime does pay."
