Title
Review for Hero (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Edwin Jahiel
HERO (1992) ** 3/4. Directed by Stephen Frears. Produced by 
Laura Ziskin. Written by David Webb Peoples from a story by 
Ziskin, Alvin Sargent and Peoples. Cinematography, Oliver 
Stapleton. Production design, Dennis Gassner. Editing, Mick 
Audsley. Costumes, Richard Hornung. Music, George Fenton. 
Cast: Dustin Hoffman, Geena Davis, Andy Garcia, Joan Cusack, 
Kevin J. O'Connor, Maury Chaikin, Stephen Tobolowsky, Chevy 
Chase (uncredited), et al. A Columbia release. 112 min. Rated 
PG-13 (language). 
Bernie (Dustin Hoffman) is a schlemiel nonentity, a small-time 
Chicago criminal out on bail, awaiting sentencing. Gale (Geena 
Davis) is a hotshot, award-winning TV reporter. She works for 
other opportunistic cynics led by her boss Chevy Chase. He is 
in top form but oddly uncredited. John Bubber (Andy Garcia) is 
a homeless Vietnam vet who lives in his car. These three do 
not know one another. But then a lot of movies depend on 
geometry-defying parallels that meet. 
At night, from his stalled junkmobile, Bernie witnesses a 
plane crash . He is the only person who reaches the disaster 
immediately. And he becomes, in spite of himself, the savior 
of all 54 aboard, including Gale whose wallet he steals. 
Bernie then disappears into the night and fog, inconsolable 
about the loss of one of his $100 shoes. He gets a ride with 
John Bubber. 
Gale's station launches a ratings-boosting search for the 
"Angel of Flight 104," offering him one million dollars. 
Seizing the opportunity, the candidates multiply. In 
credibility-straining but entertaining ways, the glory goes to 
John, literally a shoe-in thanks to his incontrovertible 
proof. 
Bathed, clothed, perfumed, showered with gifts, honors and 
national adulation, John becomes a mega-celebrity. Having 
stolen  Bernie's credit he now steals Gale's heart, by mutual 
attraction. 
Channel 4 in no way smells like Chanel 5. Its cynical 
exploitation of John increases exponentially while he grows 
into a wise, caring, role-model hero. Shakespeare wrote it in 
"Twelfth Night" : "... some are born great, some achieve 
greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them." It's 
also like the World War II song about an airman named John who 
got a Japanese Zero plane : "Johnny Zero--is the hero--of the 
day." 
John Bubber does good things for people while stating with 
casuistic sincerity that "We're all heroes if you catch us at 
the right moment," a  reassurance that the masses lap up. 
Thinking of media rather than morals, Andy Warhol had said 
years ago that everyone, sooner or later, will have a few 
minutes of celebrity.
John, however, being a decent fellow, suffers pangs of 
conscience, expressed with nice minimalism by Garcia. On the 
other hand, born loser Bernie who has no scruples is out of 
things and not in the loop.  It takes predictable, 
long-delayed but amusing twists for him to realize what's 
going on, for Gale to start suspecting the truth, and for the 
genuine and spurious heroes to be reunited on the top ledge of 
the Drake Hotel. 
The movie was written by David Webb Peoples, co-author of 
"Blade Runner" and writer of "Unforgiven." It was directed by 
Stephen Frears, the cool Brit with grit who made "My Beautiful 
Laundrette," "Sammy and Rosie Get Laid," "Prick Up Your Ears," 
"Dangerous Liaisons" and "The Grifters. "
To movie buffs, "Hero" feels like an amalgam of populist 
comedy-dramas by Frank Capra. Garcia's John Bubber is close to 
Gary Cooper's John Doe in "Meet John Doe," including the 
top-of-the building sequence. "Hero" also has mega-echoes of 
William Wellman's screwball classic "Nothing Sacred" in which 
Carole Lombard, as Hazel Flagg, first believing, then feigning 
that she has terminal illness, becomes a national heroine. 
Also recalled is Preston Sturges's "Hail the Conquering Hero," 
with patriotic Eddie Bracken rejected by the Army but set up 
by friendly Marines as a war hero. There is even a soupcon of 
"My Man Godfrey" where Depression-era, nouveau-poor tramp 
William Powell, recruited by Carole Lombard in a scavenger 
hunt as "the forgotten man," teaches mindless rich socialites 
the meaning of true class and values. Here, John merely turns 
out to be a Vietnam hero. Even Hoffman's name, Bernie 
LaPlante, recalls Laura La Plante, a silent era leading lady. 
I am not bothered by this synthetic approach since the film is 
cunningly updated to the excesses of the media. It holds a 
totally cynical Hollywood view of the people as suckers for 
romanticized heroes and celebrities. 
What weakens somewhat this entertaining movie is the lack of 
the sharp edges you find in its predecessors: Capra's variety 
of characters and issues within satirical sentimentalism ; 
Wellman's  (and writer Ben Hecht's) madcap rhythm and 
repartees; Sturges's warmth behind his cynicism. 
I am not bothered either by still another movie throwback, as 
Hoffman seems to reprise his Ratso Rizzo from "Midnight 
Cowboy."  He lives in a special twilight world of mental, 
psychological and physical debris. He is a no-thinker who 
mumbles and walks with a shuffle that will never get him to 
Buffalo, except, some day perhaps, to its penitentiary. Deja 
vu, yes, but beautifully done, though sometimes it comes close 
to tedium. 
What is really missing though is muscle and zip. Often, the 
plot mistakes agitation for tempo one the one hand, while on 
the other the film can be too slack and complaisant with  
Bernie's scenes. Many of those are self-consciously acted, 
like protracted showcases for Hoffman's abilities. All the 
scenes overdo his character as slobbish, egotistic and even 
feeble-minded, except for some quick-thinking, fast-moving low 
cunning involving illegal acts.  
Those overdrawn and overlong passages are also over-underlined 
by the many closeups that director Frears is so fond of, 
perhaps as a leftover of his old (and impressive) TV days. It 
is as though the filmmakers wanted to get every penny of their 
investment in Hoffman's star presence. They also do this in 
the technically smashing crash-and-rescue sequences. It's like 
"we invested so much in them that we better them out and milk 
them to the last drop."   
The plot keeps going from good to middlin' bits, whether  
between the sketches or within them. Clever parts are followed 
by weak ones and vice versa.  Joan Cusack, as Bernie's 
disgusted ex-wife, is marvelous as usual, but her spite is 
overdone. Her sister Susie Cusack (part of the Evanston, 
Illinois Cusack clan) makes a lovely debut as Bernie's 
court-appointed, rookie lawyer. Tom Arnold plays a likable 
bartender. Christian Clemenson as Gale's cameraman  waxes 
comically lyrical about his lenses and his shots. Davis brings 
brio to her role, but is given a dumb acceptance speech in her 
award scene. Andy Garcia controls his performance with quiet 
soulfulness, but past a certain point, his part spills into 
schlock. 
This is when, in search of a solution, the movie switches into 
abrupt, gauche changes in mood and characters, all fake and 
sentimentalized, so much so that the film now mocks its own 
maudliness with things like a heavenly women's chrous intoning 
"Glory, Glory, Hallelujah" as people mortify their souls. This 
is the ultimate in cynicism. 
Even so, while the sugar spreads around, the film still 
manages to throw in some hilarious touches, as when, on the 
Drake ledge, Bernie asks the firemen for two coffees. Then, 
for better or worse, we switch to a super-Capra, 
lump-in-the-throat Davis-Hoffman dialogue.  
Like many a movie, "Hero" left me straddling the fence. A 
second, distanced viewing will eventually help tip the scales 
better. Until then, my bottom line is that though "Hero" is 
not a must-see, it is easily a can-see.  

Author
Sean Eric Fagan
     As I was watching HERO, I kept classifying the themes to myself,
and came up with: appearances, people's expectations, both of
themselves and others, and the truths behind those.
     That's not a bad description of what happens in the movie, although
there's a bit more, of course.  The first appearance, and expectation,
is that of Gale Gayley (Geena Davis), who appears to be a cool,
professional reporter.  But she lets her guard down while receiving an
award, to show that she is tired of uncovering the half-truths and
deceptions of supposedly "good" people to find the dirt beneath, or even
of finding that the "dirt" is, itself, a deception.
     The second appearance, and expectation, is that of Bernie Laplante,
who is a fence, convicted and awaiting sentencing.  The appearance he
presents to the world is that of a cold, self-centered, uncaring,
unkempt low-life.  The world, his ex-wife and kid, and himself have all
accepted him as this, and he doesn't want to break out of it.
     But, of course, if he didn't, it wouldn't be much of a movie.  So,
fate conspires to make a hero out of Bernie Laplante, much to his
dismay.  And while he is being a hero, the world, who expects so little
from him, never gives him a chance to explain.
     Enter the third, and most obvious, charade: John Bubber (Andy
Garcia), a man living in his car, who picks up Bernie after Bernie's car
breaks down the night after making himself an unknown hero.
     Bubber takes advantage of a situation, and becomes the hero
everyone is looking for.  And, surprisingly enough, he *is* a hero, in
all but deed.  He cares about other people, he is humble, he does his
best to use his fame and fortune for others.  Then, it turns out that he
was even an unrecognized hero in Vietnam, and he gets a medal.
     Bubber *is* a good man, whom fate has conspired to keep hidden.  He
takes advantage of fate's conspiracy with Bernie, and the public eats it
up.  And as the public grows to admire their fake hero, he grows into
the role, and continues to be a seemingly-honest and noble person.  (In
fact, the only thing he is *not* honest and noble about is taking credit
for Bernie in the first place.)
     The movie takes about one third of its length to set that all up,
and does a good job of it.  Hoffman is a convincing antiprotagonist,
just as Garcia is a convincing antiantigonist.
     In the end, of course, the truth is uncovered -- sort of.  But not
before Bubber becomes a hero, again, in both name and deed, and not
before Bernie also becomes another (unknown) hero -- again.
     I enjoyed this movie, although it was not enough to grab my entire
attention (otherwise, I would not have been able to keep thinking about
classifying the themes throughout the movie!).  I do recommend it,
however.  I suppose if I were going to rate it, I would give it a +3 on
a -5 to +5 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     HERO is a film directed by Stephen Frears, from a script by David
Webb Peoples.  It stars Dustin Hoffman, Geena Davis, Andy Garcia, with
Joan Cusak, Kevin J. O'Connor, James Madio, and with uncredited cameos
by Edward Herrman, Fisher Stevens, and Chevy Chase.  Rated PG-13, due to
mild profanity, mature subject matter.
     HERO is Stephen Frears's third Hollywood movie, the earlier two
being DANGEROUS LIAISONS and THE GRIFTERS.  Frears previously directed
the British films THE HIT, MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE, and PRICK UP YOUR
EARS.  HERO is far and away his most "Hollywood" film, evoking as it
must, the films of Frank Capra.  But of course, Capra was enough of his
own artist, enough outside the Hollywood mainstream, that his is one of
the few directorial names transformed into a defining adjective by the
critics: Chaplinesque, Hitchcockian, Fellini-esque, Spielbergian,
Capra-esque.  You will be particularly reminded of MEET JOHN DOE when
you go to HERO; as Bernie LaPlante (Dustin Hoffman) says repeatedly,
trust me on this.  Frears manages to bring off a bold updating of the
Capra-esque vision of the common person as the unsung hero.  John Bubber
(Andy Garcia), in his turn, says more than once everyone is a hero, but
then John Bubber is a liar.  Some have called Frears's film cynical.  I
say rather that he is more grounded in our contemporary sense of the
ironic.
     The story, written by David Webb Peoples, balances the comedy of a
very sharp media satire with the heart-warming story about the nature of
heroism.  The story is slow and deliberate getting going -- a Frears
trademark -- but once the foundations are laid, everything proceeds
quickly and quirkily, rich in character development, in emotion and
laughs, all laid on by three nearly perfect performances.
     Another of the things that makes HERO a Hollywood movie, to a
greater degree than DANGEROUS LIAISONS or THE GRIFTERS, is the star
power of his cast.  Although Glenn Close or Anjelica Huston has an
undeniably Hollywood star power, the subject matter and source materials
of the earlier movies are sufficiently outside the mainstream as to make
them look and feel rather like imports or independents with larger
budgets than normal.  But here in HERO we have one of Hollywood's living
legends, Dustin Hoffman, playing opposite two of the hottest younger
stars working today, Geena Davis, fresh from twin successes in THELMA &
LOUISE and A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, and Andy Garcia, who knocked offf
everyone's socks in the last GODFATHER movie and is generally seen as
quite the cutie.
     Garcia, as the homeless, undecorated Vietnam War veteran becomes
the perfect hero, plays his role with great dignity and strength,
becoming a real hero.  He exudes the moral sweat of a man who is doing
the wrong thing for the right reason and turning a dishonest act into
one of high purpose and effect.  In a word, he's trapped, and no one
really wants him to escape.
     Geena Davis, as Gale Galey, begins as the ultimate in electronic
sob sisters (Chevy Chase, her boss, says, "Everyone knows you're a
marshmallow, now act like a professional marshmallow), but ends as a
real person whose job is TV news.  Davis, of course, looks fantastic,
and her acting is likewise praiseworthy.  She is endearing, dignified,
funny, suitably world-weary, suitably desperate, heartbreaking as she
warms to the idea of a hero, first as the one good story she always
wanted to report, then as an inspiration that transform her own life.
     (Look, by the way, for a hilarious performance by Kevin
J. O'Connor as Gale Galey's cameraman.)
     But it is Dustin Hoffman, in the role of the petty thief who is the
very embodiment of the the concept anti-hero, Hoffman the discoverer of
three of the greatest physical shticks in the modern movies, who walks
off with the movie.  Hoffman, the physical actor, is non-pareil, and the
movements and gestures and expressions he has discovered to characterize
Bernie rank right up there with those of Razzo in MIDNIGHT COWBOY and as
Raymond in RAIN MAN.  In addition, Hoffman is heartbreakingly perfect
when Bernie begins to acknowledge his own deeply buried compassion and
love.  Bernie is someone who had a vision of the world so threatening,
so devastating he gave up on it and himself for years.  Bernie wants
only to be a hero to his long estranged son (who oddly seems to have no
anger about his father's long absences).  Another actor might not have
seen the complex pain in Bernie, or the underlying heroism, and it is
highly doubtful that many would have so perfectly made visible that
pain.
     I recommend HERO most highly.  Even though the movie is one too
many scenes long and despite the fact that even without his rug Chevy
Chase is out of place in this serious comedy, it is still worth even a
full admission price.
