Title
Review for École de la chair, L' (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
Dominique, played stoically by Isabelle Huppert from LA SEPARATION, is a
middle-aged divorcee with a boy toy in Benoît Jacquot's THE SCHOOL OF
FLESH (L' ÉCOLE DE LA CHAIR).  She pays her live-in "lover," Quentin
(Vincent Martinez), but she isn't getting good value for her money.  The
two of them, who evidence no chemistry on the screen, go through the
motions, but not the emotions, of an affair.  They are careful to tell
each other "I love you," but they never convince each other, much less
the audience.
As a lark one night, Dominique goes into a gay bar.  The first time she
sees Quentin tending bar, their eyes lock, and she knows she must have
him.  When it is mentioned that he's a violent type, who earns his rent
by selling his body to men and women alike, she's not dissuaded.  Later,
when told that he has a pile of debts, she doesn't blink an eye.  She
whips out her checkbook and starts retiring them.
Isabelle Huppert creates her rich businesswoman character as a complete
enigma.  Emotion, such as it is, emanates from her rock solid expression
only when tears sporadically fall, as if someone has accidentally
brought an onion onto the set, and she is forced to cry.
Vincent Martinez's acting isn't much better.  He plays an uncaring
rogue, who isn't interesting enough to detest.  "When I'm old, you'll be
dead," he mocks her.  Since the only reason she pays him to live with
her is for the sex, you'd think the sex would be erotic and exciting,
but it is incredibly bland.
The script by Jacques Fieschi, based on a novel by Yukio Mishima, has
exactly one "surprise," but it is so obviously telegraphed that it is an
insult to the viewers' intelligence.  Don't be surprised if your
audience yells out at the screen.
After the setup, the movie quickly gets as stale as a week-old
croissant.  "No man will ever give you what you want," Quentin complains
to Dominique.  Since she reveals so little about herself, Quentin is
probably right.  Spending the entire movie staring off into space, she
certainly doesn't give the audience what it wants with her cold and
aloof performance.
THE SCHOOL OF FLESH runs 1:41.  The film is in French with English
subtitles.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, profanity and dope smoking
and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE SCHOOL OF FLESH (L'Ecole de la chair)
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Stratosphere Entertainment
 Director:  Benoit Jacquot
 Writer:  Benoit Jacquot, novel by Yukio Mishima.
 Cast: Isabelle Huppert, Vincent Martinez, Daniele Dubroux,
Marthe Keller, Vincent Lindon
   As I was coming home from a screening of "The School of
Flesh" the other night, I became part of a captive audience
on the A train.  Six young men seeking funds to buy uniforms
entertained our car.  They turned somersaults like acrobats
from the Moscow Circus, stamped their feet like flamenco
dancers at the Meson Madrid, and concluded their
performance with some rap that could stand up pretty well
next to Gilbert and Sullivan's patter songs.  How different this
boisterous merriment is from Benoit Jacquot's new feature
film, his tenth, "The School of Flesh," which is known in
French as "L'Ecole de la Chair."  As Professor Henry Higgins
once said, "The French don't care what they do, actually, so
long as they pronounce it properly," and the Gallic folks in
this escapade can certainly talk but they also do--the
darndest things.  The conversations in the movie are
cultivated where the break dancers are disciplined but
uninhibited. And where the dancers are nothing if not
physical, the characters in this French drama mostly sit and
discuss.
   And yet how similar are the two diversions, since the
principal individual in "The School of Flesh," a financially
successful, well educated but bored and unfulfilled woman
crosses the boundaries of age, culture and class to give
herself over to pure sexual chemistry.  As a woman running
an exclusive atelier for wealthy customers seeking the very
best in attire, Dominique (Isabelle Huppert), an outwardly
demure woman of about forty, becomes strongly attracted to
a youth of about twenty-five, Quentin (Vincent Martinez).  
Comfortable financially, she lives in a pristine apartment
virtually devoid of furniture or accoutrements that could be
considered of sentimental worth.  Her new paramour earns
his living as a gay hustler on the streets of Paris.  The two
meet at a Paris bar catering to both gays and straights,
where Quentin is serving as a bartender.  His friend Chris
(Vincent Lindon), a transvestite, will later reveal what he
knows about Quentin to Isabelle, who is out on the town with
her friend (Daniel Dubroux).  By taking us through the
association between Quentin and Isabelle, director Benoit
Jacquot means to show us what binds such different
individuals for a relatively brief but intense duration.
   When young, rugged Quentin plays cruel power games
with his new partner, as when he takes her after a dinner
engagement to a video-game parlor and then refuses to
leave, we're meant to see that he is a vulnerable person
testing the limits of Isabelle's affection.  When Quentin asks
Isabelle whether she would love him even if he lost an arm, a
leg, or other important body parts, he is similarly verifying her
fondness for him as though he were terrified of being
abandoned.  For her part Isabelle, who is bankrolling the
young man's debts without his knowledge and playing the
perfect sugar daddy, will not tolerate Quentin's declasse
habits. When he lifts his sea bass in a fashionable restaurant
to test its freshness, she barks at him to put it down because
"you're with me."  And needless to say, Quentin is not at all
comfortable in the company of Isabelle's rich friends and
customers in her atelier, acting as does the petty thief
George Dyer with artist Francis Bacon in John Maybury's
film, "Love is the Devil."
   Since the relationship does not exist in a vacuum, Jacquot
furnishes us a roundelay of social contacts who have a
bearing on the unusual relationship of the two people.  A
businessman (Bernard Le Coq) who shows interest in
Isabelle fails to turn her head away from Quentin, while
Quentin's eye for the rich, teenaged Marine Thorpe (Roxane
Mesquida) threatens to break up Dominique's affair with the
brash young hustler.  
   What is especially involving is that Jacquot has his
performers relate their tale not only by talk but by subtle
gestures, each of which bespeaks a novel--as they say.  A
look here, a tear there; a glance by one lover in the direction
of a third party, a signal of a second or so that reveals a
person's social class beyond uncertainty.  Caroline
Champetier photographs the piece clearly, if conventionally,
with a particularly arresting view of the main square of
Marrakesh.  Luc Barnier's editing is abrupt, as though to point
out the sharp turns that the relationship frequently takes. 
   Isabelle Huppert is well cast in the role of a sexually
contained woman of the upper middle class who is at a stage
that Americans would call mid-life crisis.  A major French
actress with roles to her credit since 1971, Huppert has the
quality of both  pallid features and a personality that seems
numbed to the world's pain.  She lacks the versatility that
made Isabelle Adjani so heartbreaking in "The Story of Adele
H," but in this picture, Jacquot--who has apparently directed
her to show a combination of confidence and apprehension--
has made the fitting choice.  
    Sexual attraction can cause people to bear themselves in
the most unpredictable manner and has been the leading
motivator of literary pieces since an understandably jealous
Clytemnestra did in her husband, Agamemnon and Medea
took revenge on a wandering Jason.  "The School of Flesh"
is a commendable, if more unobtrusive, addition to the genre.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
THE SCHOOL OF FLESH (ECOLE DE lA CHAIR, L') (Director: Benoit Jacquot;
cast: Isabelle Huppert (Dominique), Vincent Martinez (Quentin), Vincent
Lindon (Chris), Marthe Keller (Madame Thorpe), Dani=E8le Dubroux (Marine
Thorpe), Francois Berleand (Soukaz), 1998-France)
Adapted from a novel by Yukio Mishima, THE SCHOOL OF FLESH tries to
get us to believe in the sexual relationship and power play between a
wealthy middle-aged Parisian woman Dominique (Huppert), who is in the
fashion business. She falls madly in love with a much younger, Arabic
lower-class boxer, bartender and bisexual hustler named Quentin
(Martinez), and is willing to pay him to live with her. His great sex
is supposed to be the reason she loses control of herself and can't be
without him and will do anything for him, even as he acts nasty and
repugnant and they have nothing in common that they can talk about,
only sharing in an animal-like lust. This is asking a lot to believe,
and though it is possible, it would have been more possible to believe
if Quentin possessed some charm or something about him that would give
us a clue that he was such a good catch, because he sure couldn't act,
and since he is the focal point of all the attention, able to have his
way with either men or women, we should also have felt this
electricity generated on screen, instead of being forced fed by the
director into believing something was happening when we couldn't see
it.
Just what was supposed to be so compelling about this relationship, that
would make it interesting ? I'm afraid I don't have the answer, since I
can't find a thing about this relationship or this movie that kept me
tuned into it, as I tended to drift out of the story somewhere in the
middle, and just watched for the street scenes of Paris in the
background, which I found to be more pleasurable viewing than the movie
itself, even more erotic than the unerotic love scenes between the
lovers, and this is being said by a big fan of Isabelle Huppert, who is
usually quite engaging in the various roles she has played during her
long career, but here it is embarrassing for me to watch her vacuous
performance.
We first see Dominque pick Quentin up in the gay bar he is working at,
after several intense eye contacts, where a former gay lover and
employee of the fashionable gay bar where Quentin works, Chris (Lindon),
explains to Dominque, as he is badly emoting his part as a queen,  the
lure and treachery and violence of Quentin. But this does not stop this
ill-conceived relationship from taking place, as they spend a night
together, first in a power struggle to see who is boss, as she takes him
to a fancy restaurant which he pretends not to like, and then he takes
her to the arcades, which she honestly detests, this culminates in a
night of lovemaking, where sex is acclaimed as the sole keeper of the
relationship, in fact the sex is so good that he refuses payment for it,
but she insists, wanting to keep him on her payroll, not willing to take
the chance of losing such a good catch. The only problem with this, is
that we didn't see how good the sex was, we had to take the word of the
actors that it was so good, as dialogue came out of their mouths that is
totally forgetable or regretable or whatever, but their love was not
passionate or credible.
Once Quentin is paid for, that is his so-called debts are paid off by
Dominque to Chris, who is probably his pimp, the story limply moves
along, as some subtext to the already lame story is introduced, about
wealthy friends of Dominque's meeting Quentin through Dominque and
Quentin marrying their spoiled daughter with her parents' approval, that
was unconvincingly done.
There is one line from the film that summed up how I really felt about
what I was seeing, when at a fashion party for Dominque's wealthy
Parisian fashion clients, Quentin tells her, "seeing all these rich
people makes me want to puke." Quentin must be psychic or something,
because he was just regurgitating what I was thinking about the
characters in this film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE SCHOOL OF FLESH (L'ECOLE DE LA CHAIR)
(Stratosphere)
Starring:  Isabelle Huppert, Vincent Martinez, Vincent Lindon, Marthe
Keller.
Screenplay:  Jacques Fieschi, based on the novel by Yukio Mishima.
Producer:  Fabienne Vonier.
Director:  Benoit Jacquot.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, nudity, adult themes, drug use)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Film stories of improbable obsession are always tricky because
they're so...well, so improbable.  In a novel, it's easier to delve into
tangled psychology through interior monologue or prose -- to understand,
for instance, why a middle-aged man destroys his life for a teenager
called Lolita.  There is also the secondary problem of giving a face to
the object of desire, creating the possibility that the obsession just
won't make any sense.  A film about irrational passions has to immerse a
viewer in that irrationality, even as it gives you some small sense that
the irrationality is based on something understandable.
     Benoit Jacqot's THE SCHOOL OF FLESH (L'ECOLE DE LA CHAIR) struggles
in both respects.  It's the story of Dominique (Isabelle Huppert), an
unmarried Paris fashion executive at a point in her life when her career
is the focus of her life.  That changes one night when she spies a
bartender named Quentin (Vincent Martinez) at a local nightspot, and
becomes fascinated with him.  Though Quentin's transvestite co-worker 
Chris (Vincent Lindon) warns Dominique that Quentin is a hustler --
indiscriminate of gender -- Dominique still invites him to dinner, and
eventually to bed.  Soon Dominique has made Quentin a "kept man," sharing
her apartment and money with him even though he continues to lead his
previous life.  Their relationship twists and turns into something neither
one can quite identify, though both need it desperately.
     Exactly why they need it is not entirely clear.  The script, based on
a novel by Japanese author Yukio Mishima (THE SAILOR WHO FELL FROM GRACE
WITH THE SEA), does a decent job of painting Quentin as a troubled man who
uses his body for his personal gain, then shows disdain for anyone who
wants him for that body.  Dominique is a more perplexing case.  Isabelle
Huppert effectively conveys a confident woman slowly becoming a paranoid
mess, following Quentin on his rounds through the city.  Jacquot's
direction, however, keeps us too distanced from Dominique's obsession for
it to make sense as anything more profound than a middle-aged fling.
Though the narrative toys with the provocative notion that the childless 
Dominique is acting out a maternal fantasy as much as a sexual one, the
script is too timid to attack that subtext.  THE SCHOOL OF FLESH's
academic detachment makes it difficult to feel her pain, whatever it might
be.
     It's even more difficult to understand why Vincent Martinez is the
man who turns her world upside down.  THE SCHOOL OF FLESH is not the first
film to assert an unlikely man's attractiveness to women -- the entire
Woody Allen oeuvre comes to mind -- but that doesn't make it any easier to
accept this particular example.  Though Martinez certainly isn't ugly,
it's unlikely he'd be anyone's paradigm of masculine beauty; he most
closely resembles a slightly more swarthy Joaquin Phoenix.  Still,
everyone in the film is smitten with Quentin:  Dominique, Chris, a
distinguised attorney (Francois Berleand), an impressionable teenage girl
(Roxane Mesquida).  Quentin's animal magnetism is central to THE SCHOOL OF
FLESH's premise, yet I didn't notice enough magnetism to erase a computer
disk.
     THE SCHOOL OF FLESH still manages to be somewhat engaging, simply
because the relationship dynamics are effectively portrayed.  It's rather
touching watching Quentin try to make Dominique admit she'd discard him if
he were ugly; it's amusing watching Dominique struggle to balance her
desire for Quentin with her embarrassment to be with him in public
settings.  Both central characters are intriguing enough to follow, but
it's hard to watch them both degrade themselves when it's not clear enough
why they're doing it.  Obsession makes for great drama if the "why" is as
important as the "what."  THE SCHOOL OF FLESH leaves you wondering "why,"
as well as "why him."
