Title
Review for Dance with Me (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Scott Renshaw
    I know what you're probably thinking about DANCE WITH ME, because it's
the same thing I was thinking.  This would be nothing more than a bunch of
dance sequences strung together by something that could only be called a
plot if you were being particularly generous.  Even the film's trailer,
which featured about a dozen words in two minutes, contributed to the
impression that DANCE WITH ME wouldn't be about characters, but about
plastic wind-up dance toys masquerading as characters.  Yes, the film's
original title -- SHUT UP AND DANCE -- would certainly prove prescient.
     I'll tell you what I wasn't expecting:  one of the year's most
appealing, charismatic performances.  It comes courtesy of Chayanne, the
Puerto Rican musical sensation who stars here as Rafael Infante, a young
Cubano coming to Houston, Texas on a personal mission.  After landing a
job at the studio of dance teacher John Burnett (Kris Kristofferson),
Rafael becomes interested in one of the pros who frequents the studio,
Ruby Sinclair (Vanessa L. Williams).  Ruby is an enigma to Rafael, since
her fierce dedication to dancing doesn't seem to be connected to any real
joy.  As Rafael tries to re-introduce Ruby to the pure pleasure of dance,
a tentative romance, naturally blossoms between them.
     Simple stuff, to be sure -- perhaps even simplistic -- but DANCE WITH
ME sells its simplicity almost entirely on the strength of Chayanne's
appeal.  Though it's certainly helpful that he's has boyish good looks and
an inviting smile, his success can't be dismissed as purely hormonal.  He
has to anchor both of the film's big emotional hooks -- tentative attempts
to connect with the father he has never known, and the romance with
Williams -- in spite of a language barrier, which he does by acting with
his face and body language as well as any young performer of the last
several years.  Chayanne has that intangible something called presence,
something that gets you more involved in a simple story than the material
probably deserves.
     That presence is most forceful when he hits the dance floor in an
exhilarating sequence at a Latin dance club.  The sequence hinges on
Rafael conveying to Ruby the pure joy of dance, and that joy explodes from
his every movement.  As obviously choreographed as some of the
"spontaneous" moves in the club might be, it's still infectious to watch
when Rafael seems to be having so much fun.  He even manages to bring an
unforced charm to the Gene Kelly dance steps he breaks into in the middle
of a shower of lawn sprinklers.  Anyone who can invoke SINGIN' IN THE RAIN
without inspiring gasps at the sacrilege has to be doing something right.
     He does so many things right, in fact, that the second half of DANCE
WITH ME seems terribly wrong-headed when the focus abruptly shifts to
Ruby's attempts to re-ignite her career at a Las Vegas dance competition,
re-united with her former partner (Rick Valenzuela, playing a cartoonish
macho egomaniac).  First-time screenwriter Daryl Matthews (also the film's
choreographer) makes the mistake of making Ruby's conflict central at a
time in the narrative when there's already plenty of conflict to go
around.  Director Randa Haines, meanwhile, makes the mistake of spending
too much time showing us the competition itself.  If the point was to
prove how much more exciting club dancing is than regimented competitive
dancing, that point is made and made again for nearly half an hour,
including ridiculous comic relief from Joan Plowright as a spunky
geriatric.  The solid chemistry between Williams and Chayanne is lost, the
father-son relationship is buried and the dancing rapidly grows tiresome.
Predictable though the story may have been, at least is was energetic.
DANCE WITH ME decides to turn into a dance movie exactly when the dancing
is least interesting, and after the hero has made his impression.  His
charisma makes much of the film watchable, until it reaches the point 
where, much to your disappointment, they make him and everyone else just
shut up and dance.

Author
Joe Barlow
        Sometimes it's wonderful to be wrong.  When I saw the first
trailer for "Dance With Me," the new film from director Randa "Children
of a Lesser God" Haines, I wasn't impressed.  The world hardly needs
another movie in which boring characters wade through a minimalistic plot,
whose only purpose is to link one spectacularly-choreographed dance number
to the next.  After learning who the stars of the film were, I was even
less interested: we have pop singer Vanessa Williams as the female lead,
starring opposite Chayanne, a man who seems to have misplaced his last
name.  Oh, and Kris Kristofferson is along for the ride, too.  Yes,
*the* Kris Kristofferson.  In a dance movie.  Ooo, it's gonna hurt.
        That's the attitude I carried into the opening-day screening of
the movie; two hours and twenty minutes later I walked out, wearing
what I'm sure is one of the dopiest grins that has ever graced my face.
I knew the smile was there, but I simply couldn't get rid of it.  Every
time I tried, a wonderful moment from the film would flash across my mind
and the grin would reattach itself.  I was self-concious about this until
I took a good look at the other people filing out alongside me.  Friends,
I say this with absolutely no exaggeration whatsoever: I saw a similar
smile on *every* face emerging from the theater.  That's the kind of
movie we're dealing with.
        Our story opens in present-day Cuba, where a handsome young man
named Rafael (Chayanne) is coming to terms with the recent death of his
mother.  He receives a sympathy letter from a Texan named John (Kris
Kristofferson), an old friend of the family.  In addition to condolences,
John's note contains an invitation for Rafael to come to America for an
extended visit.  John owns a struggling dance studio and is willing to
offer the mechanically-inclined Rafael a "handyman" position, allowing
him to earn some spending money while he's in the country.  Having no
reason to stay in Cuba, and curious about the mysterious land known as
"The United States," he accepts John's offer.
        After arriving at the studio, the charismatic Rafael befriends
nearly all the students.  Only the beautiful Ruby (Vanessa Williams)
is cold and aloof, after Rafael has the nerve to offer an unsolicited
criticism of one of her routines.  Ruby is an extremely-talented dancer;
her main problem is that she KNOWS it, and is reluctant to take advice
from anyone she regards as beneath her.  This includes Rafael, who she
sees as a mere handyman with no dance experience whatsoever.  The
evidence seems to support her view: Rafael stumbles and trods on his
partner's feet when he attempts to learn even a simple waltz.
        But Rafael, though untrained, reveals himself to be a fine dancer
in his own right.  His secret: simply go with the beat of the music,
let it seep into your soul, then do whatever comes naturally.  He has no
use for "real" dance steps, since everything he needs to know is
contained in the music itself.  Ruby is astonished the first time she
sees Rafael dance this way:
        Even as a cautious friendship begins to form between Rafael and
Ruby, we learn of bigger problems.  John, whose passion for dance has
dwindled as he's aged (and is now all but extinguished), wants nothing
more to do with the trade.  Planning to retire to the coast and become
a full-time fisherman, he agrees to keep the studio open only through the
end of the following month, to allow his students time to practice for an
upcoming competition.  During this limited time frame, the friendship
between himself and Rafael grows extremely complex, which raises other
issues John does not wish to deal with.
        As our characters' relationships grow and change, we can see the
thought and depth that has gone into this film.  At no point are any of
our characters (with the exception of the one-note Julian, Ruby's ex)
less than utterly convincing; this is true even of those students with
little screen time.  My favorite is Bea (Joan Plowright), a dance student
in her late sixties, who is the spitting image of her namesake from "The
Andy Griffith Show."  All of her scenes contain a great deal of heart,
and the wonderful routine she performs with Rafael near the film's finale
generated a round of delighted applause at the screening I attended.
        The direction is subtle but more than effective; never once does
director Haines feel the need to grandstand or make any Great Statements.
The camerawork is straightforward and solid, and the wonderful Latin music
is nothing short of infectous.  The cinematographer has chosen to use very
soft lighting for most of the scenes, giving a cozy, intimate feel
that suits the movie well.  All of these traits come together in the
magnificent dance number in which Rafael and Ruby cut loose in a Cuban
club.  Watch how the camera lightly weaves in and out of the crowd as Ruby
is handed off from one partner to the next, like a human hot potato.  She
and the other dancers, male and female alike, are but a blur of smiles and
bright colors, enveloped by this amazing music.  It's at this point that
Ruby finally realises what Rafael has been telling her all along: follow
the melody, and your feet will move by themselves.  It's unquestionably
my favorite moment in the entire film.
        The movie owes much of its success to Chayanne's portrayl of
Rafael.  The guy is just so darn likeable, with a disarming smile that
makes you want to dash up and throw a brotherly arm around his shoulder,
that the story is practically guaranteed to work.  Vanessa Williams also
shows remarkable range as Ruby, covering a wide spectrum of emotions and
never once faltering.  This is vital.  Witness the following dialogue, as
Ruby explains to Rafael why she wishes to leave the studio and return to
her former dance partner:
        These lines are so perfectly delivered that we never doubt them.
If they'd been spoken by less-skilled actors, however, they could've come
across as laughably trite.
        But the biggest surprise for me was Kris Kristofferson's masterful
portrayl of John.  Arguably the most complex performance in the movie,
Kristofferson has full control of his character at all times, knowing
precisely when to reign himself in.  There are no moments of self-
indulgence, which could've been fatal to the story's believability.  I
sincerely hope that he's remembered when Oscar nominations for "Best
Supporting Actor" are announced; he's THAT good.  (What is it about
country singers that makes them great actors, anyway?  First there was
Dwight Yokam in "Sling Blade," then Lyle Lovett in "The Opposite of
Sex," and now Mr. Kristofferson.  Granted, KK has acted in other movies
before, but he's never been better than he is here.)
        "Dance With Me" is not the best film I've seen this year, but its
warm afterglow has stayed with me.  The movie is joyful and innocent; in
every shot we can feel the filmmakers' love of dance and their great wish
to share it with the audience.  We need more films like this.  Thinking
about the movie as I write these words, I can feel that dopey grin back
on my face.  But if a film can make me feel this good, I don't mind a
bit.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Get out those foot protectors, ladies.  The cherubic Rafael 
Infante, played with charm by popular Latin American entertainer 
Chayanne in DANCE WITH ME, is a klutz when it comes to dancing.  When he 
takes a partner on a spin around the dance floor, his feet have all the 
grace of a sledgehammer.
     In a movie with exactly two "surprises," one is that Rafael as 
actually an extremely accomplished dancer.  His problem is that he is 
not familiar with the more popular dances.  Coming from Cuba, he knows 
the rhythms and the moves of the local dances there, but in America, he 
is a fish out of water, or more precisely, a fish swimming in a 
different pond.
     The movie begins with the story's second surprise.  John Burnett, 
the owner of a cheap Texas dance studio, gives Rafael a job as a 
handyman in his studio as soon as he arrives from Cuba.  John bends over 
backwards to help him because of some unexplained sense of obligation.  
In the most underwritten of a group of underwritten roles, Kris 
Kristofferson delivers a bland rendition of John, an aging small 
business owner and fisherman.  The movie devotes considerable time to 
John and Rafael's relationship with little payoff in return.  The 
mystery of their relationship doesn't amount to much, and neither does 
the movie's unsuccessful attempt at poignancy when the secret is 
revealed.
     The other major serious subplot has the shy but charismatic Rafael 
falling in love with Ruby Sinclair, one of John's dance teachers and a 
professional Latin dancer.  Vanessa Williams, who plays Ruby, is a 
perfect match for the equally beautiful Chayanne, and the sweet 
chemistry between them feels genuine.
     These mini-dramas have little appeal and are not the reason to see 
the film.  People come to see the dancing and hear the music.  
Audiences, however, are likely to be disappointed as director Randa 
Haines spends an inordinate amount of time off of the dance floor in a 
film that inexplicably comes in at over two hours in length.  Why do the 
characters spend so much time on boat docks and in truck junkyards when 
they could be dancing?
     When the Latin music cranks up, the show comes alive.  The costumes 
are fun, and multicolored lights bathe the dancers.  Cinematographer 
Fred Murphy, regretfully, thinks it is his job to jazz up the picture 
with tight close-ups of the dancers' backs and sides.  This results in a 
swirl of images that blur into a montage reminiscent of a late Monet 
painting.  It becomes difficult to ascertain the skills of the dancers 
since we are rarely given the proper perspectives.
     In true formula fashion, the storyline drives toward the big game - 
dance in this case - at the "XXII World Open Dance Championship."  Ruby 
decides to partner again with her estranged husband Julian Marshall, 
played by real-life dance star Rick Valenzuela.  Julian treats her like 
dirt and even dances in a hostile manner.  In contrast, Rafael leads 
with his buttocks in a comical but slightly sensual style of dancing 
that has to be seen to be believed.
     Dance movies should be energetic, not pensive.  DANCE WITH ME comes 
alive periodically but spends way too much time with low-grade soap 
opera material.  Say what you will about the film, its two stars are 
charming.
     DANCE WITH ME runs too long at 2:06.  It is rated PG for a brief 
male topless scene that sent our audience into a chorus of hoots and 
giggles.  The film would be fine for kids around nine and up.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Dance_with_Me_ (PG) ** (out of ****)
_Dance_with_Me_'s original title was _Shut_Up_and_Dance_, and that
confrontational moniker would have been a more apt name for this dance
musical.  But it's not because the film in question is in-your-face
exuberant; rather, "Shut up and dance!" is likely what audience will be
saying to the characters of this draggy romantic drama that is too heavy on
talk and too light on fancy footwork.
Granted, the dancing that _is_ featured is quite impressive.  The central
location of _Dance_with_Me_ is a Houston dance studio, and one of its
featured instructors is Ruby (Vanessa L. Williams), a former professional
Latin dance champion determined to recapture her former glory.  Also
working at the studio, but as a handyman, is fresh-from-Cuba Rafael Infante
(Chayanne), an untrained but equally skilled dancer himself.  The slightly
cool Ruby and the fiery Rafael (and, for that matter, Williams and
Chayanne) strike immediate sparks, but these two opposites truly ignite
when they dance together, generating a palpable sexual tension and
electricity with their sizzling salsa steps, nimbly choreographed by Daryl
Matthews and Liz Curtis.
Matthews also wrote the screenplay, and, frankly, he is overextended.
While the pas de deux between Ruby and Rafael is an engaging enough core,
the pro forma plot elements surrounding it are tedious filler.  Rafael
comes to America to meet the father he never knew, John Burnett (Kris
Kristofferson), who owns the dance studio, which, in turn, is struggling to
stay afloat.  Ruby, who has never stayed in one place long enough to have a
"home," is not eager to put down roots, geographically or emotionally.
Meanwhile, a big dance competition in Vegas looms in the immediate future.
Ironically, Matthews, a former professional dancer himself, piles on these
familiar, trite subplots so heavily that they far outweigh the dancing in
terms of screen time.
Fortunately for Matthews and director Randa Haines, in Williams they have
a star who capably handles both the dance and dramatic chores.  Though her
character's baggage is strictly by the book, Williams is able to breathe
some depth into Ruby, especially in one climactic dance where her eyes
speak volumes of feeling.  As it is widely known, Williams also has vocal
chops to match, and her wide-ranging talents would make her an ideal star
for a lavish Hollywood screen musical (that is, should a studio ever be
game enough to mount one).  The jury, however, is still out on her co-star,
Chayanne, who is a major music star in Latin America.  He certainly can
move well on the dance floor, but he is rather stiff everywhere else,
likely due to unease with the English language.  Haines tries to hide
Chayanne's unease by making him flash his megawatt smile every other
second, but no amount of smiling can bail you out of a film as surprisingly
talk-heavy as this.
In the press notes, producer Lauren C. Weissman says, "What initially
attracted me to this script was the human drama."  Ironically, the
attraction for Weissman is exactly what will keep most audiences _away_
from _Dance_with_Me_, a film that falls short as a dance extravaganza, and,
for that matter, as a "human drama."  (opens August 21)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Dancing makes an otherwise banal life bearable ("Saturday
Night Fever") but can be awfully cruel ("They Shoot Horses,
Don't They?").  It can be humankind's ultimate statement of
grace and beauty ("The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle")
but can also be a hotly contested sport event ("The Tango
Lesson").  Learning to dance can change your life ("Shall We
Dance"). In Randa Haines' film "Dance with Me," it is all of
the above.  "Dance With Me" is a hot, salsa-driven hoofer
piece superimposed on a soapy story which you can all but
ignore as you get caught up in the pulsating Latin and
international tunes like "Jibaro," "Teach Me Tonight," "Arrolla
Cubano" and "Adios Santiago."  Choreographed by Daryl
Matthews and Liz Curtis with striking ballroom costumes by
Joe I. Tompkins, "Dance With Me" is directed by Randa
Haines in the Dominican Republic (standing in for Santiago de
Cuba), Los Angeles, Houston and Las Vegas.  The climactic
scene in Vegas, the locale of an World Latin dance
championship, is a stunner, one which proves that movies can
easily compete with stage in the presentation of musicals and
dance-driven works.  The movie also introduces Chayanne, a
Puerto-Rican born heartthrob, a recording artist and TV actor
in his film debut.
   When novelist E.M. Forster wrote his famous words "only
connect," he may not have been thinking about the dance
floor as the ideal place to bridge cultural gaps.  But Daryl
Mathews, who scripted this movie, uses the ballroom studio to
show how plain and fancy footwork can bring people of
diverse ages, cultures, and temperaments together.  "Dance
With Me" deals with people who have individual and distinct
flaws: Ruby (Vanessa L. Williams), the beautiful former dance
champion who has been burned in love, keeps her distance,
and dreams of re-entering the famed Latin competition in Las
Vegas; Rafael (Chayanne), a Cuban whose mother had died,
who does not know his father, and whose only familial
connection is with the people of his town of Santiago; John
(Kris Kristofferson), a burned-out owner of a fading dance
studio in Houston who has a mysterious attachment to young
Rafael; and Bea (Joan Plowright), a fun-loving senior citizen
who looks to the Houston studio to rekindle her passion for
life.
   When Rafael shows up at the Houston, Texas studio at the
invitation of its owner, John, he cannot help being drawn to
Ruby, a dance instructor who has all the right steps but
seems not really to feel the music.  She, in turn, disdains
Rafael's undisciplined but heartfelt style. When the two try to
mambo, their distinct steps are as incompatible as their
temperaments.  At first, Ruby persists in remaining aloof, but
she is unable to hold her enchantment with the newcomer at
bay.  As their affection grows, so does the attachment
between Rafael and John, the studio owner ultimately
revealing hitherto undisclosed information about their link.
  Randy Haines' direction brings out the full intensity of the
world of dance, one which is probably unfamiliar to most
people in the audience who may have thought that social
dancing was simply an enjoyable pastime to fill celebratory
weekends.  Haines introduces us to the grueling practice
needed to feel comfortable in entering the Vegas tournament
and the intensity of those who compete partly for fun but
mainly with the conviction that winning is everything. 
Photographer Fred Murphy offers us plenty of closeups of
Chayanne, who may enjoy aspirations of becoming the next
Antonio Banderas but whose acting at this point is not totally
assured.  But Vanessa L. Williams proves that a Miss
America can indeed be multi-talented.  Ms. Williams is drop-
dead gorgeous, can persuade the audience that she is a
world-class dancer, and ignites the screen with her newly
surfaced longings.   We squirm in watching the abuse handed
her by her gruff partner and former lover in the Vegas
competition, and feel a twinge of embarrassment in the way
the seventy-something Bea is patronized: a senior citizen who
twice insists, "I want to do that do" as she watches the lovely
ballet-trained Patricia (Jane Krakowski) lifted high into the air
by Rafael.
   "Dance With Me" follows the structure of Baz Luhrmann's
1992 Australian offering, "Strictly Ballroom," a spirited musical
about a competitive ballroom dancer who outrages his mother
and the establishment by insisting on dancing his own
provocative steps.  With its pulsating music, gifted performers
(both extras and principals) and charismatic stars, "Dance
With Me" is a crowd-pleaser which just might encourage
some viewers to get up and frolic in the aisles.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Just as The Color of Money taught us the jargon of billiards, and 
Rounders instructed us in the vocabulary of poker, Dance With Me makes 
us literate in the field of Latin dancing.  It's the feel of  being 
inside this specialized community that drives the narrative of the film.
Assisted by extraordinary choreography and editing, the dance scenes 
occupy a good amount of the 126-minute running time.  Their motion and 
grace pass the time easily.  We witness first the informal abandon in 
the bar in Santiago de Cuba, the hometown of Rafael Infante (Chayanne).  
Soon afterwards, we are in a Texas dance studio, the walls mirrored, the 
floor crossed and re-crossed by dancers giving lessons or practicing for 
the big-time competitions to be held shortly in Las Vegas.  The 
competitions provide some of the most interesting and tension-filled 
moments.  Finally, the scenes shot in dance clubs, reminiscent of the 
early Cuba footage, highlight the conflict that sparks the film's 
romantic subplot.  Ruby Sinclair (Vanessa L. Williams) practices 
routines that are ostensibly Latin in design, painstaking in 
choreography - but that lack the music-driven insouciance of the real 
thing.
Williams is a remarkable dancer.  From her drills in the studio to her 
twirls before the judges, she shows off her accomplishment.  She is 
quite likable in the role, even when we discover that she is a single 
mom who is quietly determined to do what is best for her son Peter.  
This family situation is one of many cliches in the plot;  it is 
forgivable, though, because Williams acts so naturally.  Particularly 
riveting are her facial expressions as she dances:  one thinks of 
Michael Jordan,  tongue out and eyes wide, pivoting and darting with 
stunning sureness.  Williams' presence onscreen guarantees the viewer's 
interest.
Her character's relationship with Rafael builds slowly.  She picks him 
up at the bus station and takes him to the studio, which is owned by the 
man who is apparently Rafael's father.  Working as a handyman, Rafael 
slowly becomes part of the family of employees of the studio.  What 
takes Ruby a while to find out is that Rafael can dance extremely well - 
just not how she is trying to instruct him how to dance.  Perhaps 
Rafael's most charming scene has him stranded on a lawn just as the 
sprinklers activate;  here Chayanne does a hopping and stomping routine 
that nods at Gene Kelly, the simulated rain bringing out his love of 
life.  Like Williams, Chayanne does his own dancing, including the body 
language that helps to show his passion.
Kris Kristofferson plays John Burnett, who for over 20 years has run the 
studio and competed in the international competitions.  Although 
Kristofferson is not convincing as a dancer - he really dances in only 
one scene, and it's generic ballroom - he does a credible job as an 
aloof but likable aging man.  It's his situation as a sudden father, and 
Rafael's reaction to the resulting behavior, which constitutes the 
unforgivable cliché in the work.  The supporting studio dancers and 
students are quirky and well-sketched.   There's Stefano (William 
Marquez), the older instructor who plays his ego for laughs;  there's 
Lovejoy (Beth Grant), the seeming manager of the place;  and there's Bea 
(Joan Plowright), Stefano's student, who steals the camera whenever it 
is pointed at her.
Most of the picture's dialogue is believable.  Once, though, Rafael 
utters the sentiment, "I'm Cuban, of course I can dance."  And there are 
a few too-long pauses, which caused me to doubt the adage, "If you can't 
say something nice, don't say anything at all."  Sometimes it's better 
to say what regular people would say, even it's meaningless.
Why should a viewer sit through Dance With Me and maybe even rent it 
upon video's release?  Because of the acting, pleasing to look at.  
Because of the music, fast and relentless.  Most of all, because of the 
dancing, which does for the viewer what a good book does for a reader:  
transports her for a time into another, fascinating world.


Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "DANCE WITH ME" (Columbia Pictures: Sony Releasing)

It's curious that the dethroned 1984  Miss America, Vanessa L. Williams,
has probably made a more memorable career for herself than the majority
of bland, pretty faces who have worn the Atlantic City crown. (She lost
her title after nude photos were published in "Penthouse" magazine.)
In her new movie, "Dance With Me," she does the older woman/younger
man samba with Puerto Rican pop singing sensation Chayanne. She plays
a sulky single mom who, having been dumped by her abusive professional
dancing partner (Rick Valenzuela), teaches two-step classes to Texans
at a Houston studio owned by Kris Kristofferson. Along comes sensuous
Chayanne, as an ambitious Cuban immigrant (think young Desi Arnaz),
and Vanessa's inner rhythms start beating Babaloo! Little does she
know that this sizzling handyman from Havana is really Kristofferson's
son - of course, no one else knows it either. The muddled,
cliche-ridden soap opera story, written by choreographer Daryl
Matthews and directed by Randa Haines ("Children of a Lesser God"),
revolves around losers becoming winners as the competitive beat goes
on, culminating in the predictable, show-stopping dance-contest
finale. And there's a brief homage to the late, great Gene Kelly as
Chayanne dances through lawn sprinklers a la "Singing in the Rain."
But, if you want to see this kind of film even better made, I
recommend "Strictly Ballroom" (1992), a witty, spirited, Australian
musical, directed by Baz Luhrmann ("Romeo and Juliet"). On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dance With Me" is a spicy, schmaltzy 6 with a
tangy salsa beat.

Author
Matt Williams
In Dance With Me, you get just what you expect.  A dance film, with a
little romance thrown in to spice things up, and not much more.
However, the sizzling dances make up for what the plot lacks in
imagination.
After the death of his mother, Rafael Infante (Chayanne) decides to
journey from Cuba to Texas.  An old friend of his mother, John Burnette
(Kris Kristofferson), owns a dance studio there, and is willing to give
him a job and a place to stay.
Working as a handyman at the studio, Rafael meets Ruby (Vanessa L.
Williams), an instructor and professional dancer (specializing in the
Latin dances). She's split from her former partner/boyfriend Julian
(Rick Valenzuela), and is now struggling to climb back to the top.
As the deadline to the National Finals looms closer, hints of romance
begin to bloom between Rafael and Ruby.  But she's got no time or use
for love, and Rafael struggles to prove differently...
As a dance film, Dance With Me falls into a predictable pattern visited
before in such films as Strictly Ballroom, and Shall We Dance?. There
are few surprises here.
But, there is dancing.  And most of it is quite good.  Vanessa Williams
gets a chance to show her moves, and she's got plenty.  Chayanne is no
slouch here, but it is clear that Williams is the star.
The emerging romance between Rafael and Ruby isn't handled poorly, but
it's far from the high point in the film.  Part of the problem is that
the interaction of the couple can't quite compete with the passion of
the dancing...so the romance gets left in the cold.
The subplots in Dance With Me vary in quality.  Rafael's search for his
father is a little predictable, and mostly diverting from the rest of
the film.  However, the antics of the studio's various dance students
(including an unlikely Joan Plowright) are slightly amusing.
On the whole, Dance With Me is enjoyable simply for its dancing scenes.
The surrounding clutter neither enhances nor detracts from the simple
pleasures of the movie.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Latin sensation Chayanne makes his way over to the United States of
America to star in this bubble gum, saccharine-filled romantic dance
movie, opposite the green-eyed, and always beautiful, Vanessa L.
Williams.   
PLOT:
Young Cuban man Rafael comes to the U.S. to find his real father. Upon
arrival, he works as a handyman at a local dance studio, and falls for
one of the dance teachers who happens to be rehearsing for the annual
Latin dance contest in Las Vegas. Dancing shoes pronounced, Rafael also
gets the opportunity to compete in the contest. Dance and romance soon
blooms.
CRITIQUE:
Light, mostly corny, lengthy dance-themed movie, that does have a great
soundtrack, and some good performances by the two, beautiful,
charismatic leads, Chayanne and Vanessa L. Williams. I would not
necessarily suggest this film for its romantic aspects, because they
are pretty weak, but if you like to stare at either of the film's main
stars, and if you like the Latin vibe and/or the dancing, then you
might not be totally disappointed with this movie. Having said that,
the dancing sequences seemed to be absent during most of the first hour
of the film, but did take over the movie, once the whole gang was
transported to Las Vegas for the dance contests.  
Chayanne, in his first American starring role, is the rich man's
Benicio Del Toro. He's great looking, dresses impeccably, dances like a
machine, and radiates great sensations with his full-toothed smile. He
also pulls off a humorous and original tribute to Gene Kelly from
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN. Vanessa L. Williams also looks great in this film,
if you like girls with super-short skirts, great legs and pumps, that
is. (turns out I do). There is also some chemistry between the two, but
unfortunately, the screenplay is pretty lame, and doesn't really do a
great job of convincing you of their absolute compatibility. No cheap
sex scenes either. Which was a bit of a letdown for most people, I
think. Then again, who cares. These bastards could dance up a storm and
look great doing it, so if that's what you're looking for, shell out
your hard-earned cash, and have a blast!
One extremely funny aspect of this film, was the fact that Kris
Kristofferson was actually cast as an experienced dance instructor, and
a man with actual emotions. It was funny watching him move around like
an ass, and squeeze his lips tight to convey emotion. On a positive
note, the soundtrack was very sweet, reminded me a bit of the MAMBO
KINGS (7.5/10) vibe, and the salsa music kept reminding me of the nacho
plate that I would soon make myself, once I got home and dug into some
real salsa. Having said all that, it must be said that I have never
been a dancer, a fan of dance, or a fan of dance movies, but Mrs. JoBlo
is. You figure out the pant-wearing scenario in that equation. For the
record, she also rated the film a measly 6/10.
Little Known Facts: 
This film was previously titled SHUT UP AND DANCE.
The "L" in Vanessa L. Williams' name stands for Lynn. She is often
confused with actress Vanessa Williams from the "Chicago Hope" TV
series. The Screen Actors Guild assigned her with the name Vanessa L.
Williams but the initial rarely appears in credits. The SAG will only
make it an issue if the other actress objects. Even news stories often
confuse the two.
Vanessa dropped out of Syracuse University to pursue the Miss America
crown in 1983, and never finished her degree. Once crowned Miss
America, she was dethroned when nude photos of her surfaced in
Penthouse magazine. The centerfold model for that issue was 16-year-old
Traci Lords. Now since Ms. Lords was underage at the time, it is
illegal to own or trade that issue of the magazine, unless the
centerfold pictorial is removed. Vanessa had three children with her
husband of 10 years, Ramon Hervey (They divorced in 1997.)
Screenwriter Daryl Matthews, partnered with Liz Curtis, was also
responsible for the choreography of the dance sequences in this film
(He is a former dancer himself.)
Chayanne is born in Puerto-Rico, where he is a recording artist and TV
soap actor.
