Title
Review for Whore (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian L. Johnson
88 min., NC-17, Drama, 1991
Director: Ken Russell
Cast: Theresa Russell, Benjamin Mouton, Antonio Fargas,
      Elizabeth Movelead, Daniel Quinn, Jason Saucier, Sanjay,
      Micahel Crabtree, Jared Barclay, Doug MacHugh,
      Amanda Goodwin, Frank Smith, Jason Kristofer, Tom Villard,
      Ginger Lynn Allen, Jack Nance
     WHORE depicts a day in the life of a prostitute.  It follows one
prostitute, played by Theresa Russell, from morning till night.  Along
the way Russell talks about her life and those she loves.
     WHORE is a gritty, depressing, graphic, yet powerful and emotional
film.  WHORE is *not* an erotic or porno film.  It doesn't try to
titillate you in any way.  It contains minimal nudity, and the sex
scenes are less than erotic.  Instead it shows what a prostitute goes
through.  The film does not try to please you, but on the other hand, it
doesn't purposely offend you.  Many people probably will be offended
because of the straightforwardness of this film, but it isn't for
everybody.  People who are out looking for cheap thrills will be sorely
disappointed with this film.  If you are in the mood for a good drama,
and you are watching with an open mind, you will probably love this
film.  WHORE is available in two versions, an NC-17 rated version and an
unrated version.  The unrated version runs for 5 more minutes than the
NC-17 one.  One a scale of zero to five, I give WHORE a five.  WHORE is
rated NC-17 for explicit language, adult situations, and female nudity.
     Part of the reason this film ends up so good is because of its
excellent cast.  Theresa Russell gives a very powerful and emotional
performance.  This may be her best film yet.  She brought me right into
her character and made me feel for her.  Benjamin Mouton gives an
equally powerful performance as Russell's slimeball pimp.  He makes his
character repellent, yet shows that he is a human too.  Antonio Fargas
plays a weird guy who Russell meets on the street.  His is an impressive
performance.  The rest of the cast of this film, who all have bit parts,
do a great job.  Especially Jack Nance as the school teacher, Ginger
Lynn Allen as the hurt prostitute, Tom Villard as the hippie, the person
who played the no-condom man, and Russell's book friend.
     I really enjoyed the opening song "Doing the Bang" by Fascinating
Force.  I feel that it accurately shows the way many people feel about
prostitutes.  I feel this song was much more appropriate than some rock
song that has nothing to do with the movie.  I don't remember the rest
of the music from the movie.  At least it wasn't distracting.
     Ken Russell's (no relation to Theresa) directing is excellent and
the writing is superb.  The story is very gripping and interesting.
Theresa Russell's flashbacks are well weaved into the film so they don't
appear awkward.  The actors don't send up with any moronic dialog, which
sometimes happens in films.
     WHORE does not condone, or put down, prostitution.  It shows it for
what it is, and nothing more; mostly from the prostitute's point of
view, some as seen by the pimp, and a very little as seen by the
customer.  WHORE could probably have gotten away with an R rating,
except that the subject matter requires a certain amount of maturity.
This is not appropriate for young teens.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When the subject of a film is sex, don't trust my opinion.  Generally
what the critics like, I don't.  I thought SEX, LIES & VIDEOTAPE was dry and
dull.  The characters bored me.  Yet the film was almost universally
applauded by the critics.  Generally I am not very impressed by films about
sex.  Also I am not keen on Ken Russell.  Russell is more interested in
putting strange images on the screen than he is in telling a story.  With
the exception of THE DEVILS and LAIR OF THE WHITE WORM, ken Russell and I
don't seem to agree on what makes a good film.  WHORE is a Ken Russell film
about sex and prostitution that has gotten a thumbs-down from most of the
critics.  That is three strikes against the film.  Who knows what possessed
me to see the film?  Yet once the film started I was totally engrossed by
what I was seeing.  Admittedly it is cartoonish and some of the scenes do
not work.  Occasionally Theresa Russell out-and-out misreads lines.  Yet
there is an undeniable narrative vitality here.  Theresa Russell is a frank
and vulgar prostitute telling us about her profession as she sees it.  If
some of her stories seem contrived, it is because that is the way she
remembers them.
     The film covers a single day in the life of Liz, a prostitute.
Initially the film seems nearly plotless.  It appears to be just a portrait
of the world of the streetwalker.  The portrait is pieced together form
unconnected incidents punctuated by Liz explaining to the audience what she
is thinking and feeling.  By the end of the film we are no longer sure that
we have not crossed over into a story that Liz is telling herself.  Much of
the narrative is in Liz's mind and memory anyway.  She speaks directly to
the camera and it becomes her confidante throughout the day.  She tells the
camera her past: a horribly failed marriage, how she got into the business
of prostitution, how she got a pimp--perhaps more accurately how he got her.
And we see a cross-section of customers from gentle to vicious.  Ken Russell
does have an eye for the ugly!
     WHORE seems to a sort of penance on the part of director Ken Russell.
His 1984 CRIMES OF PASSION was probably the most positive view of
prostitution since IRMA LA DOUCE.  Kathleen Turner as China Blue found
prostitution a creative and fulfilling art that blesses her that gives and
him that gets.  In the seven years since that film it looks as if someone
has been talking to Russell.  In WHORE prostitution is a living death of
being manipulated, lied to, and beaten.  Russell drags in every vulgar
symbol of sexuality he can muster, yet avoids being erotic.  This is a film
well-suited to the NC-17 rating.
     WHORE is an adaptation of a play by David Hines, an English taxi driver
who patched together a play based on stories he'd heard from prostitutes who
had been his customers.  Even as third-hand stories, much of what we have
seen is told with skill and ower.  I give WHORE a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Lon Ponschock
     There is an old saying which goes something like "The worst sex I
ever had was still pretty good."
     The closest film piece to this work (that I can think of) is TALK
RADIO directed by Oliver Stone and starring Eric Bogosian.  WHORE is
essentially a one-actor drama with other players.  The screenplay was
co-written by a woman and adapted from a stage play called BONDAGE.
     When the film had its theatrical release, there was nothing much
good that was said about it, save for very early on.  Prior to critical
review, WHORE was likened to a darker side of the popular film PRETTY
WOMAN which starred Julia Roberts.
     But as some reviewers today are pointing out, there is a difference
in watching a videotape out of one's house and going to the theatre.
WHORE, as a theatrical release, was a big bomb.  I didn't go to it
because, as many of you, I depend on the word of others to critique the
product beforehand.   And if going to the theatrical release of HENRY
AND JUNE can provide any insight, I think I was right is waiting for
the video release of WHORE.
     WHORE is a brutal film, but I also found moments of significant
humor.  And of course the humor has to do with sex.  This film, better
than any other shows the difference in the perception of sex between men
and women.  We're talking about sexual fantasy here and sexual fact.
Through the eyes of the prostitute, we see how ludicrous and funny
sexual fantasies can be.
     I need not enumerate what these fantasies are.  What the film shows
is the difference in point of view between the fantasy and the reality
and this can be quite funny and disturbing.
     In the concept of the Theatre of Cruelty created by French actor
and director Antonin Artaud, the author describes going to the theatre
like going to see the dentist: you know beforehand that you will be made
uncomfortable, but when it's all over, you will be better off for it.
It's doubtful that Ken Russell had the Theatre of Cruelty in mind, but
this is in effect what he accomplishes.
     See WHORE on video.  There is no need (or really any possibility
any longer) of seeing it in the theatre with guys with their hats in
their laps.  The NC-17 film has yet to made which does not make one feel
ill-at-ease with a room full of strangers.
     Make no mistake, there is much brutalizing that takes place in this
film, but that has all been done before.  What has not been done before
is to cast the cold eye of calculation on sex.  Who else is talking
about the use of condoms explicitly and repeatedly as a fact of life and
a part of *the job* in a work of fiction?
     The May 1992 issue of DETAIL magazine has a feature on the
Cabaret Royale in Houston: a new wave topless club with good taste: sort
of like a Playboy Club with "balls."  The author, after having talked
with the performers and the owner says of the performance:
