Title
Review for Super Cops, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Today we see that US television holds actual monopoly on the
adaptations of true stories. But quarter of century ago, it
wasn't the case. In the golden age of 1970s Hollywood often
allowed its director to seek inspiration for their films in
current and sometimes very recent events. One of such films
was SERPICO, Sydney Lumet's account of the real life New
York policeman who fought police establishment and
corruption as well as crime. THE SUPER COPS, made a year
later by the famed blaxploitation director Gordon Parks,
deals with the same subject and has real life protagonists
too. But, similarities between those two movies cease,
because while Lumet made very serious and depressing drama,
Parks took another direction and used that material for
light-hearted comedy.
The movie begins with the documentary footage that
introduces us to the main characters - New York policemen
David Greenberg and Robert Hantz (both of them served as
technical advisors and appeared in small cameos in the
movie). Than we see the beginning of their police careers -
after graduating they were on probation in traffic unit, but
that didn't prevent Greenberg (played by Ron Leibman) and to
pursue his dream of taking drug dealers off the street.
Assissted by his partner Hantz (David Selby), he makes whole
series of arrests working plain clothes in his spare time.
Police establishment is less impressed with the numerous
arrests than with their total disregard of internal police
protocol. As a punishment, they are both sent to 21st
Precint, stationed in the worst crime-ridden and drug-
infested part of town. There they would continue their
crime-fighting crusade, despite the open animosity of their
colleagues and suspicion by their paranoid superior, Captain
Krasna (played by Dan Frazer). Their success in putting drug
dealers out of business is turning them into local legends
with nicknames "Batman" and "Robin". However, that also
brings attention of powerful local drug bosses who order
contract on their lives.
Comparisons between SERPICO and THE SUPER COPS, despite
their genre differences, are unavoidable, and that is the
main problem with the this film. Same as Lumet's work, THE
SUPER COPS have a rather weak plot that doesn't concentrate
on a single chain of events and, instead, simply depicts the
years of someone's police career through the series of
anecdotes. Those anecdotes, mostly showing ingenious and
often very funny methods that Greenberg and Hantz employed
in order to deceive and arrest criminals, allowed Parks to
make whole series of short but very entertaining action
scenes. Unfortunately, those scenes alone weren't enough to
make coherent story out of them; script by Lorenzo Semple
Jr. simply ignores private life of the protagonists and his
characters aren't fleshed out and are often non-existent.
Ron Leibman tried to fill that emptiness by playing
Greenberg as neurotic, but that often turned into
unnecessary over-acting. David Selby, on the other hand, is
rather uninterested as his second fiddle. Potentially
interesting performance was given by Sheila E. Frazier in
the small role of Greenberg's prostitute informer, but Parks
drastically reduced her screen time. By concentrating on the
action and ignoring character development, Parks shortened
this film to 90 minutes, quite reasonable length that made
this film anything but boring and prevented many viewers
from being too annoyed with its numerous flaws. Anyway, film
is still very funny and it could also be seen as a product
of its times - one of the most hilarious scenes deals with
the hidden listening devices, theme very familiar for the
people who used to live during Watergate era. THE SUPER COPS
descended into obscurity and this is quite understandable,
since the movie was dwarfed by the real genre classics of
that era. But, on its own level it works fine and today's
audience, faced with usually inferior material of the same
genre, would probably appreciate it.
