Title
Review for Hamlet (1948)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ivana and Cooper Redwine
Starring: Laurence Olivier, Jean Simmons, Basil Sydney, Eileen Herlie,
Felix Aylmer, Terence Morgan, Peter Cushing, Stanley Holloway.
Director: Laurence Olivier.
Screenplay: Alan Dent, Laurence Olivier.
Production Design: Roger Furse.
Costume Design: Roger Furse.
Music: William Walton.
Cinematography: Desmond Dickinson.
Producers: Laurence Olivier, Reginald Beck, Anthony Bushell.
MPAA Rating: Not rated.
Running Time: 155 minutes.
Laurence Olivier's HAMLET is a classic film that is generally considered to
be one of the greatest movies of all time. It has been accorded numerous
honors, including four 1948 Academy Awards: Best Picture, Actor, Art
Direction-Set Direction, and Costume Design. There was a time when almost
every well-educated person in the English-speaking world had seen the film,
and it provides a standard of excellence against which all other film
versions of HAMLET are measured.
Olivier had complete artistic control over every aspect of his version of
HAMLET, including casting, screenplay, sets, costumes, editing, and music,
and of course he directed and played the title role. But Shakespeare
purists have always been unhappy that Olivier took extreme liberties with
the Bard's play. Olivier wanted to make a film that was not just for
culture vultures, but rather he aimed it at the ordinary moviegoer. To this
end, he shortened the drama from 4 hours to 2 hours 35 minutes by
drastically abridging Shakespeare's text, even though this involved the
cutting of significant characters (for example, Fortinbras, Rosencrantz,
and Guildenstern) and the elimination of important story elements (for
example, Denmark's conflict with Norway and the rebellion led by Laertes).
Moreover, Olivier moved some of the Bard's key scenes (notably the "To be
or not to be" soliloquy) to a different place in the story in an effort to
simplify Shakespeare's complex tale. And even for those viewers who are not
Shakespeare purists, it is jarring when Olivier, the omniscient director,
in voice-over intones words not found in Shakespeare: "This is the tragedy
of a man who could not make up his mind." Nevertheless, Olivier was largely
successful in making a movie that is engaging for both the Shakespeare buff
and the ordinary moviegoer.
Whatever can be said of Olivier's treatment of the story, it is difficult
to find serious fault with the uniformly high standard of acting in his
film. The entire cast makes the Shakespearean dialog seem easy and natural.
Basil Sydney is fine as Claudius, Peter Cushing is amusing as Osric, and
Stanley Holloway is witty as the Gravedigger (Olivier cuts Shakespeare's
Second Gravedigger). Ophelia is played adequately by the eighteen-year-old
Jean Simmons, and the obvious youthfulness of the actress helps to make the
character more credible. And of course Olivier will always be remembered
for his subtle, sensitive, and poetic performance in the title role as he
portrays Hamlet's transition from a melancholy, ineffectual dreamer to a
man of action. But while everything in the movie appears seamless on the
screen, it is interesting to realize that when Olivier/Hamlet leaped from a
fifteen-foot height onto Claudius's stand-in, he broke two of the
stand-in's teeth and knocked the man unconscious!
A distinctive feature of Olivier's interpretation of HAMLET is his heavy
reliance on Freudian psychology. It is provocative to contemplate that
while Olivier was around 40 years old when he portrayed Hamlet in his film,
the actress he cast as Hamlet's mother (Eileen Herlie) was only 27.
Olivier's Oedipal slant is strongly evident in the scene where Hamlet sits
with his mother on her bed and they exchange a prolonged kiss on the mouth.
The actions of the actors are reinforced by the folds of the drapery
surrounding the bed, which seductively transform it into a powerful image
with aspects of both womb and orifice. And the significance of the queen's
bed is emphasized by having the camera linger on it at other times in the
film, first near the beginning as the camera glides down the central spiral
staircase, and again near the end as the camera slowly moves up the same
staircase.
Perhaps the single most memorable thing about Olivier's HAMLET is its sense
of brooding intensity, enhanced by the setting in a gloomy, bleak Elsinore
Castle. The self-absorbed Danish royal court seems to live in a
claustrophobic maze with a tangle of corridors and a vertigo-inducing
spiral staircase where it is hard to know which way to turn. With tongues
planted firmly in cheeks, some wags have proposed  the exercise of trying
to sketch a floor plan of Olivier's castle, but we recommend strongly
against this.
While Olivier's HAMLET does not preserve the complexity of Shakespeare's
story, it does maintain the poetic beauty of the Bard's language, and
Olivier wraps everything in a moody black and white chiaroscuro that gives
his film a visual lyricism which is well-matched to that language. So, if
you want to see a unified, poetic vision of HAMLET that focuses on the
personal tragedy of  the Melancholy Dane, Olivier's version can't be beat.
But if you're more interested in a version of HAMLET that adheres closely
to Shakespeare's original play with all its social and political
complexities, you'll probably be happier with Kenneth Branagh's 1996 film,
although the latter version has a few rough edges and loses some of the raw
psychological power of Olivier's version.

Author
John Bauer
Undoubtedly among the most famous film adaptations of Shakespeare -- and the
only one to win a Best Picture Oscar -- Laurence Olivier's black-and-white
HAMLET of 1948 would seem to be one for the ages.  And in many ways it is.
 Any chance to see as legendary an actor as Olivier in an important dramatic
role is to be cherished as a piece of theatrical history.  It is likewise of
interest to view any interpretation of a classic work through the eyes of a
different time and culture.  Of course, time is not always kind.
Opening shots of swirling fog over an ancient castle set the mood:  this
HAMLET is of a tradition almost forgotten in our post-modern need to outfit
pre-modern texts in more contemporary trappings.  The score by William Walton
rises portentously.  And the omniscient director intones that we are about to
see the story of "a man who could not make up his mind."
In one of the unintentional ironies of this production, the famous soliloquy
which delineates the protagonist's ambivalence so clearly and eloquently is
also one of the most overwrought and ineffective scenes in the film.  When
Hamlet counsels the Players on the proper reading of their lines, he warns
them not to offend nature with declamation that is unnatural.  Would that
this film always heeded that advice.  There are moments when the conventions
of the cinema of its time threaten to overtake the story:  revelatory plot
points accompanied by loud musical flourishes and tight closeups of tortured,
scandalized faces.
Fortunately these moments are few.  The awkward soliloquy, for example, is
preceded by a wonderful scene between Hamlet and Ophelia and followed by a
well-turned entrance for the Players.  It is the preponderance of the good
over the occasional misfire that keeps the overall quality of the production
high.
Olivier's performance, while sometimes stagebound, has an appropriately
brooding intensity that draws you in (though it does seem a bit at war with
his costume:  he's been done up to look like a pixie).  The rest of the cast
is uniformly good, Basil Sydney's Claudius being unusually strong.  He
emerges as a more complex mixture of villainy and remorse than is commonly
seen.  Standouts in minor roles include Stanley Holloway as the wryly
enigmatic Gravedigger and Peter Cushing's amusingly obsequious Osric.  Jean
Simmons is not as effective an Ophelia as some of her cinematic followers
(e.g., Kate Winslet), but like the rest of the troupe, she does well enough.
In the end, what makes this HAMLET noteworthy is its cumulative strength.
 Whatever awkward moments there are mostly occur early on, so the tale is
played out with minimal distraction.  And despite some staginess in the film,
Olivier must be credited with making Shakespeare come alive on the screen to
the point where you forget you're watching "art" and simply become absorbed
in the story.  When Hamlet is finally carried out of the castle, you feel
like you've witnessed something momentous.
