Title
Review for Mrs. Miniver (1942)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Mrs. Miniver" won a mountain of Academy Awards,
including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Screenplay,
Best Cinematography, Best Actress and Best Supporting
Actress.  There were also nominations for Best Actor
and Best Supporting Actor.
With all those awards, you would think that it
would be a great film.  But time has not been
kind to "Mrs. Miniver".  Released in the summer
after the U.S. entered WWII, the film's depiction of
heroic Brits enduring the bombings of the hated
Nazis was just what America wanted to see.  Americans
wanted to feel good about the sacrifices that were
being made to support the war effort.  To criticize
"Mrs. Miniver" would be unpatriotic, even treasonous.
With the Nazis long since safely vanquished, it is
possible to detach the quality of the film itself
from the large spoonful of propaganda that it delivers.
We are left with a well-crafted production filled
with saintly characters and manipulative plot
elements.  "Mrs. Miniver" is an above-average
soap opera that falls well short of the glory
cast upon it.
The story focuses on the Miniver family.  Walter
Pidgeon is the father, Greer Garson his wife.
They have three children, one of them (Richard Ney)
is now adult and fresh from Oxford.  Ney becomes
a fighter pilot and romances Teresa Wright, who
is the daughter of elderly snob Dame May Whitty.
When faced with inevitable German bombings,
the cast is uniformly stoic and brave.  They are
also the nicest people you will ever meet.
Mrs. Miniver does slap a boasting German soldier,
but is otherwise perfect.  Pidgeon is perfect
and unflappable.  Wright is as sugar sweet as
ever.  Ney returns from Oxford as a pompous
intellectual, to the bemusement of his parents.
Upon meeting Wright, he becomes perfect
as well, albeit with more energy as befits
a young man in love.  Even the forever-outraged
Whitty, who expects the world to cater to her,
is eventually tamed and trained by Garson.
Garson was 34 years old at the time of filming,
and looks younger.  She is too young to be the
mother of a grown man.  Ney, playing her son,
was 24.  Garson and Ney would later marry in
real life.  Garson was nominated for Best Actress
every year between 1940 and 1946, except for
a lapse in 1941.  "Mrs. Miniver" was her only
winning nomination.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
