Title
Review for Ladyhawke (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Some films stand out as love stories.  Some just die in the throng of the
glut for yet another romance.  This story, and it may be because  the film
is so well done, is better than most romances.
There was a time when the church ruled.  And there were many knights  who
fought for these rulers.  And, on occasion, one knight falls prey to the
greed of the church.  This knight, Navarre, has made the mistake of falling
in love with a woman, whom the cardinal is also interested in.  The result
is that the knight is doomed to never meet this
woman again.  At night he turns into a wolf, and during the day she turns
into a hawk.  They can never share their time again.
It was all the work of a priest who, eventually, fell out of favor with  the
cardinal.  And this same priest, has to live day and night with his sin.
And a hope that one day he can do something about it to save not only the
love affair, but also destroy the glut and evil of
the cardinal.
Involved in all this is Garcon, the mouse as he is known, who has escaped
the dungeons of the law which oppresses the weak and the poor.  And it is he
who becomes the messenger between the two loves and connects them with the
aging priest who is trying to forget his old ways.  He lives in a castle in
ruins, amidst his books and torments.
And, the story develops to decipher the riddles and the meaning of the many
words which the potent magic contains, but they do not understand.
Cast very nicely, and in a very well photographed film, are all the leading
characters in the film, starting with both Rutger Hauer and Michelle
Pfeiffer.
While the directing in the film does not appear obtrusive, or overly
typecast, it is the cinematography that makes this film stand out, along a
very nice soundtrack, which, although modern, still adds a nice flow to the
film.  The impressionistic style of Vittorio Storaro and his magnificent use
of color makes this film appear even better than it really is.  But it is
nonetheless a good film that stands out.
