Title
Review for Saison des hommes, La (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rachel Gordon
The Season of Men is a ponderous portrait of Arab women slowly freeing
themselves from tradition, each generation getting just a touch more
gutsy than the one before it.
Aicha (Rabia Ben Abdallah) is the matron who starts the domino effect. 
After being married to Said (Ezzedine Gennoun) for some time, she
decides she doesn't want to wait for the one month of the year that he
returns, as is the custom of the village.  Said finally relents that if
she bears him a son, the family will move to the city with him.  It's
the dream of every woman in the village, each wife takes turns to
joyfully brag about it even knowing the chances it will actually happen
are slim.
She bears two healthy girls, Meriem (Ghania Benali) and Emna (Hend
Sabri), and finally a son, Aziz (Adel Hergal).  But after having moved
to be close to Said, it becomes apparent that Aziz has health problems,
and Aicha is blamed for this.  Now, even more estranged from Said, Aicha
decides to move back home with her daughters in tow.
But Aicha finds it difficult to keep close tabs on her growing
daughters.  Meriem is married but can't seem to provide her husband with
sex whereas Emna sleeps with a married man and doesn't acknowledge
tradition at all.
This setup could have become a gripping story of women coming into
independent power, but it falls short of the mark by concentrating too
much on flashbacks to drive cultural difficulties home.  Again and again
we see Aicha fight with her overbearing, power-hungry mother-in-law for
the rights of her daughters.  And when these scenes aren't taking over,
there's always a cryptic "character looking in the mirror" shot right
around the corner.
It is regrettable that the story doesn't focus more on interaction
between Aicha and her daughters in the present.  After all, Aicha has
chosen to drag them away from their lives, due to Aziz's constant need
for care.  Instead of elaborating on how these women are becoming
different from their predecessors, it repetitively concentrates on
scenes of feminine claustrophobia within the community.
Still, there are beautifully poignant moments to this film.  Each
character is able to shine through a mixture of emotions.  Watching
Aicha stand up for her rights during especially emotional scenes demands
respect for her decisions, even when they are fallible.  Emna is allowed
a strong, simple exploration of what she's learned when she tells her
married lover that she never wants to marry.  The overall strength of
these women is articulated well through being three-dimensional instead
of perfect icons.
The men are thankfully not seen as completely tyrannical, which is
unusual for a film about female empowerment.  For the most part they are
simply following tradition, and some are open to allowing women more
space.
The cultural details can also be refreshing, such as how these women
prepare for their men with henna.  It is interesting to see how every
person in a given family has a specific task no matter their skill. 
Aziz is a young boy with health problems, but he is put to work weaving
carpets.
The Season of Men is a unique cultural study of gradual feminine growth
within a strict community.  Though it has its share of misses, it is
still a positive and reflexive look at a people much ignored.
Director: Moufida Tlatli
Producer: Margaret Ménégoz, Mohamed Tlatli
Writer: Nouri Bouzid, Moufida Tlatli
Starring: Rabia Ben Abdallah, Sabah Bouzouita, Ghania Benali, Hend
Sabri, Ezzedine Gannoun, Adel Hergal
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Cowboy Booking International
 Director:  Moufida Tlatli
 Writer:  Moufida Tlatli
 Cast: Rabiaa Ben Abdallah, Sabah Bouzouita, Ghalia Ben Ali,
Hend Sabri, Ezzedine Gennoun, Mouna Noureddine, Azza
Baariz, Lilia Falkat, Adel Hergal
 Screened at: The Screening Room, NYC 9/30/01
   Photographer Chedli Chaouachi spares little effort to make the
complicated and often heartbreaking film, "The Season of Men,"
into a travelogue.  There is nothing here to coax Westerners,
already wary of traveling to Tunisia, to any of its tourist locations,
particularly Djerba--which resembles nothing more than a barren
location whose people have nothing to do but weave carpets.  In
one brief scene, a blonde tourist, presumably from France (which
afford the small North African country the lion's share of tourist
income), is gyrating in a discotheque, but otherwise we see little of
the capital city of Tunis or the sun-drenched island of Djerba to
the south of the country.  Moufida Tlatli, who wrote and directed
the family-centered story, has more important items on his
agenda in a story that will strike us in the non-Islamic nations of
the world with one well-represented theme: that of family
dysfunction.  Added to the usual conflicts that break out among its
women, also including the unhappy men is the clash between
traditional Islamic ways and the modern culture.
   If this film had centered in modern-day Afghanistan, no such
conflict would have existed, given the complete repression which
the Taliban-governed country has imposed on its people.  But in
Tunisia, which second to Turkey comes across as already one of
the most liberated states in the Muslim world, the struggle
between young women who crave a freer way of life and their
patriarchs (and older matriarchs) who rule over them is hardly
subtle.
   Flashing back and forth between the current year and the life of
a family circle ten and fifteen years ago, Tlatli's film observes two
generations in the same family who are at odds with each other
and in at least one dramatic case with itself.  Aicha (Rabiaa Ben
Abdallah) is shows a decade earlier weaving carpets on the island
of Djerba for sale by her husband, Said (Ezzedine Gennoun), in
Tunis.  Like most of the women in the family, Aicha is living apart
from her husband, who visits only once a year at which time the
females, alternately brooding and laughing in their daily
companionship with one another desperately hope to become
pregnant.  Aicha has a young son, Aziz (Adel Hergal), whom only
a mother could love: he is autistic, mute and difficult to manage. 
Aicha's problems are compounded by her tyrannical mother-in-
law, who does want the island home to be reduced to a workshop, 
and pushes her power to the limit in demanding that Aicha's
young daughter, Emna (Lilia Falket), remain home instead of
going to school.
   The plight of the women is seen in the present time as the
grown Emna ( Hend Sabri), a professional violinist, is in love with
the conductor (who refuses to divorce his wife) and appears
misogamistic, given the dead marriages of the women she has
known for a decade or more.  Other suffering women including
Aicha's sexually-frustrated friend Zeineb (Sabah Bouzoutia),
whose husband left her for good and is living in France and who
suffers from psychomatic pain throughout her body, and Emna's
sister Meriem (Ghalia Ben Ali), who as a child was almost raped
and now refuses to consummate her six-months'-old marriage to a
man who is losing patience.
   "The Season of Men" relates to the one month of the year that
the men who are working in Tunis visit their wives but could
describe as well the permanent condition of the male gender in
the conservative Islamic world.  The story is moving, its principal
drawback being the confusing ways that Tlatli shifts back and forth
in time.
Not Rated.  Running time: 122 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
