Title
Review for King of Comedy, The (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Kevin Cogliano
Movies To Watch So You Won't Be So Stupid #1
Hi, kids. This will (hopefully) be the first in a series of essays - NOT 
reviews - of films that I call Hidden Treasures: movies that have slipped 
through the cracks of the mainstream and are currently languishing on the 
shelves of your local video retailer.
Keep in mind that these essays are 1) entirely my own opinion and 2) right.

De Niro and Scorscese are the Tag Team Champions of the filmic world. For 
my money, these two artists are the greatest director/actor collaborators 
in the history of the medium. But while Travis Bickle and Jake LaMotta 
have spawned a million undergraduate film essays, little has been said 
about their creepiest creation - Rupert Pupkin.
Rupert is one of the greatest losers of all time, a whining, desperate 
and pathetic man who carries only one insane conviction: that he has the 
makings to be a legendary stand-up comedian. De Niro plays him like the 
buffoon that he is, wandering the streets of New York in badly-tailored 
suits and a cheesy moustache. Pupkin physically resembles a cross between 
Sean Penn circa FALCON AND THE SNOWMAN and Pee-Wee Herman.
Like most obsessed people, Pupkin eschews the whole notion of paying your 
dues in the show-biz world. He wants to start at the top. He wants a shot 
at the Tonight Show.
Of course, it's not REALLY the Tonight Show, but it might as well be. The 
alternate-reality Carson show in this movie is hosted by Jerry Lewis - a 
television personality so oily that you expect him to slide off the 
screen leaving only a thin film of grease behind.
Lewis is so shockingly brilliant in this film that it continues to amaze 
me. God knows I can't stand Jerry Lewis. His success as a popular 
comedian is one of the Great Mysteries Of The Universe, like the fact 
that, against all odds, Dennis Hopper isn't dead yet. Lewis is so perfect 
as the slimeball T.V. star that you are forced to wonder if he's actually 
acting at all. Perhaps he really IS a slimeball.
Rounding out this unholy trinity is Sandra Bernhard, who De Niro enlists 
to help with the kidnapping of Lewis. She plays a rich Jewish princess 
who is madly in love with Lewis, which means she's obviously a few bricks 
short of an outhouse. The best comic scene in the film is between her and 
Lewis when she tries to seduce him as he's tied to a chair with duct 
tape, utterly immobile. "Let's do it right here on the table, Jer," she 
breathes, and Lewis just stares, transfixed by terror.
Scorscese's direction in KING OF COMEDY is miles away from the 
baroqueness of CAPE FEAR and CASINO. His camera is a detached and 
impartial recorder of this New York madness. Scorscese has a reputation 
for being over-the-top visually, but he proves in KING that he can just 
as easily be restrained and subdued if the story demands it.
Along with AFTER HOURS, KING is my favourite Scorscese movie. There's not 
a wasted frame or missed comic moment - but, like all great comedy, 
there's a real sense of menace and incipent danger beneath the 
proceedings. KING OF COMEDY is a movie where you laugh because you're too 
nervous to do anything else.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Martin Scorsese
Writer: Paul D. Zimmerman
Starring: Robert DeNiro, Jerry Lewis, Sandra Bernhard, Diahnne Abbott,
Tony Randal, Ed Herlihy, Lou Brown, Dr. Joyce Brothers, Victor Borge,
Liza Manelli, Martin Scorsese, Catherine Scorsese
"The King of Comedy" is a very un-Scorsese-like darkly comic satire on
fame and the obsession with those who have it.  Simply put.  While
underrated because it's not as powerful as his other films, and also
because it miserably bombed at the box office (my friend told me a mere
3 million, while he usually grosses a healthy 30 to 40), it's still a
great film, just not as absolutely amazing as it could have been.
"The King of Comedy" deals with a kind of incarnation of Travis Bickle:
Rupert Pumpkin (Robert DeNiro), a flamboyantly confident wacko who feels
he has a natural knack for comedy, although you wouldn't know it when
you met him.  Instead of coming off as a funny guy, he's merely creepy,
with a giant grin on his face, and a little moustache (which he dug up
for his character in "Copland").
In the first scene, we see him outside waiting for autographs from any
or all of the guests of a hit late night talk show, hosted by a Johnny
Carson incarnation, Jerry Langford (Jerry Lewis).  Jerry is a quiet and
somehow beaten man, who was probably a riot back in his younger days,
but is now rather bitter.  Yeah, he's still funny, but it's more in that
kind of cynical way.  On this particular night, Jerry comes out to go to
his limo, but stumbles upon a little problem when an overly obsessive
fan (Sandra Bernhard) climbs into his car with him.  He gets out,
waiting for security to drag her out of the limo, then hops in. 
Unfortunately, so does Rupert.
Sounding like the typical I-wannabe-a-star kind of loser, he tells him
he wants to have a shot doing his stand-up on his show.  Jerry hears him
out, then tells him to call his office.  Rupert bugs him a bit more,
then lets him go.  Of course, we all know he didn't really mean for him
to call him.  He just wanted to get rid of this wacko.  But Rupert
didn't.
Rupert seems to plaster himself inside the reception room in his office,
handing one of his supervisors his demo tape, and even saying he'll wait
in the room over the weekend, until Jerry listens to it.  Of course,
she's the one who listens to it, disses him, and Rupert's obsession
grows and grows.  He's not aware of his lack of sanity; he's too
confident in himself and his act, which is funny because his comedy is
all about how horrible his youth was.  And when nothing else seems like
it's going to work (since he's too impatient and too old to just build
himself up from nothing, and earn the shot on the show), he goes for the
extreme way.
He and Bernhard, who has other reasons for doing it, decide to kidnap
him on one of his walks through the streets.  This is one of the things
that got to me: why does he do this?  In one scene where he does it, it
starts off seeming like a dream of his to walk down the street and joke
with some of the "plebians," but then turns into reality as people diss
him for him dissing them, and he is soon being followed by Bernhard.
But anyway, they do it sucessfully, and he's soon using him to get his
spot on the air.  Instead of being manic or something, it has a cool
kind of darkly comic presence, with several subtle jokes tossed in (like
a guest appearance by Scorsese).  The ending is brutally satirical, as
it is often realistic, although a tad on the ridiculous side.  I know
that doesn't make sense, but just bear with me on this one.
What's wrong with this film is it seems to be missing something.  Yes,
it's sucessful in its satire, but it's just...I dunno.  Maybe it was the
lack of cool Scorsese touches, like tricky camera movement, dramatic
edges rounded out with the soundtrack, etc.  The last half of the film
is not exactly riveting, but it's satirical enough.  And the comedy is
mainly chuckles, although I did laugh out loud during some of the lines
in the comedy act.
Oh yeah, the comedy act.  This is what really got me.  The way it's
presented, we feel uncomfortable laughing with it, mainly because we've
gotten to know how mentally ill this character is.  And when he talks
about some of the more heinous parts of his childhood, I started to
think that he's not really exaggerating, as much as grinning at them. 
DeNiro also plays it perfectly, not actually having superb comic
presence (his writing hints at a little touch by Woody Allen, but he
seems to deliver them like a vaudevillian), which is right for the
character, methinks.
And I wanted to mention that the whole spiel between Lewis and Bernhard
results in one of the creepiest and most horrific scenes I've ever
seen.  And there's not even any kind of Scorsese-esque violence in it or
anything bad like that.  Just imagine Bernhard sitting on your lap and
you get what I'm talking about (*shudder*).
As far as acting, DeNiro is wonderful as the self-obsessed Rupert.  He's
too blind to see how screwed up he actually is, and he does this
awesomely.  Also, Jerry Lewis gives an amazing performance.  Most of us
are used to him being the predecessor to Jim Carrey.  I mean, I saw two
minutes of one of his flicks with Dean Martin, and that high-pitched
voice of his is STILL stabbing at my brain like the knife in "Psycho." 
Here, he's quiet, and bitter.  I mean, it looks like someone gave him
some prozac or something - he's SOOO calm.  If that's what he's really
like nowadays, I wouldn't be surprised.
Anyway, "The King of Comedy" is not the masterpiece it longs to be, but
nevertheless is a very underrated flick in Scorsese's oeuvre.  While he
would perfect his comedy in "After Hours" a year later, this still shows
that he has a good knack for some comedy with substance.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
