Title
Review for Caveman (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
An engaging, low-budget flick (how much money do you need to make a caveman 
film anyway?) shot in Mexico by director Carl Gottlieb.  It was one of Ringo 
Starr's more appealing roles - aside from interesting projects like THE 
MAGIC CHRISTIAN and THAT'LL BE THE DAY he made weird cameos in films like 
200 MOTELS and LISZTOMANIA.  In CAVEMAN, Ringo's doleful expression and 
shambling  posture win us over from the start (I'm sure many a critic 
remarked at the time that the ex-Beatle's best acting performance to date 
didn't require him to speak).  Even though there is no dialogue in the film 
we learn that he is Atouk, a member of a tribe ruled by the burly, 
formidable Tonda (Oaklands Raider pro John Matuszak).  Dissatisfied with 
life in the tribe - and frustrated by his desire for Tonda's mate Lana 
(Barbara Bach, looking very sexy in furs) - he sets off on his own and 
gradually meets other loners.  Together they form their own tribe of 
outsiders.  Traditionally, in most 'serious' movies of this genre, a 
supposed misfit is ejected from the tribe and is eventually adopted into a 
more enlightened tribal society.  Here it's the opposite - Ringo's group is 
a proud mixture of minorities.  Yet it's they who discover fire, music and 
the world's largest poached egg, while the more traditional/conformist group 
gets nowhere.  By no means are you expected to draw any serious subtexts 
from these scenes - the group's accidental discoveries are played for 
laughs, though do get a little predictable after a while.  One of my 
favorite moments occurs when Ringo and friend Dennis Quaid simultaneously 
'learn' to walk erect and then immediately shrug off thoughts of returning 
to their less evolved former tribe leader.
Unfortunately, CAVEMAN resorts to physical comedy for its final act (the 
story starts taking weird turns when Quaid's character disappears down a 
river), and its lazy incorporation of classical tunes into the soundtrack is 
a little irritating, but it's still one of the more watchable cave-people 
movies.  Animator David Allen, whose creatures are generally better than the 
low-budget films they appear in, creates some comic dinosaurs that look as 
good as any found in major studio pictures of the time.  The simple 
vocabulary invented for the film consists of character names and a few verbs 
and nouns - you'll easily pick up the words for love, fire, monster, and 
others.  In one of the film's funniest elements, Evan Kim plays an Asian who 
cannot communicate with the other tribe members because of a language 
barrier - guess which language he speaks!  It's a good film for a group of 
young children to watch (one word may need to be bleeped) because its 
wordless presentation is bound to get them explaining the subtleties of the 
storyline to each other.  It's also fun for older viewers to see the 
pre-Hollywood lives of some of the cast being duplicated on screen:  former 
model Bach strikes a number of alluring poses on her bed, football player 
Matuszak finds himself on the receiving end of a dogpile, and drummer Ringo 
gets to join in an improv session around his tribe's newly-invented 
campfire.  He would go on to marry Bach shortly after production wrapped on 
the movie.  You won't have to watch it for too long to see why!
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
