Title
Review for Gattaca (1997)
Number of Reviews
31

Author
P.J. Gladnick
Have you ever taken a shower and watched hair, dandruff, and scuzz
accumulate at the drain? Usually you don't even give a thought to it or
even try to. Well, how would you like to spend  a couple of hours watching
a movie focused on pee-pee, dandruff, skin flakes, hair, and blood
droplets? That's what you'll get if you waste your money on a piece of
garbage known as GATTACA.
This movie is supposed to be about a future where people are manipulated
genetically to have high intelligence and peak physical condition.
Meanwhile there are still people such as our hero, Vince, who didn't have
the advantages of this pre-natal genetic manipulation and ends up with
myopia and some heart problems. 
In this society there is genetic screening where the genetically advantaged
get the best jobs and the others (the "Invalids") such as Vince get stuck
doing janitorial duty which is what happens when he becomes part of the
cleanup crew at the Gattaca space headquarters. Vince, having higher goals,
 pays for the use of Jerome's (a crippled"Valid") genetically superior
material so he can pass himself off as a Valid and attaining his dream of
blasting off to Titan. This is where all that scuzzy stuff that you don't
even want to think about comes in. 
Vincent scrapes the skin scales off Jerome, borrows his blood and hair, and
gets mad when Jerome drinks too much and pollutes his genetically superior
pee-pee samples. A long time is spent watching Vincent cleverly planting
Jerome's hair and dandruff at his work station to fool those in charge. He
also wears a pee-pee bag in case they do spot checking for urine. On top of
that he puts Jerome's blood droplets behind fake finger skin in so he can
fool those little genetic testing machines that seem to be set up next to
every water fountain and escalator. Yes, you will be treated to more loving
closeups of pee-pee, dandruff, hair, and blood than you ever thought
possible. 
As if you didn't have enough of the aforesaid scatalogical items, a murder
occurs at the Gattaca headquarters and guess what? The cops come in and
there is still more testing of pee-pee, blood, saliva, etc. etc.. All this
was set in motion by a stray eyelash hair that Vincent overlooked by
mistake (Remember Anita Hill and the pubic hair). So just as you get sick
of pee-pee, hair, dandruff, saliva, and blood, we get even more of it in
spades. But good news!---Director Andrew Niccol throws vomit into the mix
just for a pleasant change of pace. No, they're not genetically testing the
puke. It's just that Jerome gets drunk and barfs. Niccol does us the favor
of showing the vomit flowing out of Jerome's mouth. Thank you for sharing.
Oh, let's get back to what the space mission is all about. Don't expect to
see much of anything about space technology. The Gattaca headquarters much
prefers to spend most of its resources on those genetic machines. After
all, they can't have one of those nasty "Invalids" infiltrating the scene.
Let just one Invalid in, with his ordinary genetic material, and there goes
the neighborhood.
There is also something about Uma Thurman's secret in the movie. Actually
it wasn't really all that big of a deal. Besides, by this time you're so
sick of seeing more pee-pee, dandruff, hair, blood, and spit, that you
really don't give a damn one way or another.
Anyway, despite all hurdles our hero, Vincent, gets away with pulling off
his scam of substituting Jerome's pee-pee, dandruff, hair, and blood for
his own. By this time you will be both bored and grossed out. So what about
Vincent's dream of blasting off to Titan? Well, take a guess how much of
his time is actually devoted to training for this mission?..... 75%?
Nope..... 50%. Still too high.....10%. WRONG! Actually zero time is spent
on training for the mission. Instead all Vincent does, when not subtituting
pee-pee, dandruff, hair, and blood, is tap away rapidly on a computer
keyboard  in a room filled with other genetically superior yuppies doing
exactly the same thing. Comes the big day and Vince, along with the other
genetically superior yuppies, enter the spaceship with no more enthusiasm
than taking a coffee break. In  fact, if memory serves me right (by this
time I was bored to the point of narcolepsy) they just walked into the
spaceship wearing coats and ties without even bothering to put on
spacesuits.
O.K., I said to myself, time to wake up for the payoff. After sitting for
all this time with my senses being dulled by the director's obsession with
pee-pee, dandruff, hair, and blood, surely there will be a magnificent
sequence of the mission to Titan. Well, here it is in its totality---Vince
stares out of the ship's porthole and thinks that he doesn't really care
all that much any more about going to Titan. At this point the audience
loses all care about Titan and this movie which mercifully ends before we
can be treated to yet more pee-pee, hair, dandruff, and blood. The only
surprise in the whole flick is that we weren't treated to loving closeup
shots of doo-doo. 
If you really must see Gattaca then I would recommend that you stare at the
scuzz gathered at your shower's drainage pipe and take a leak in a clear
plastic cup while playing a sermonette on the radio. You'll have basically
the same effect but at least you won't waste your money and a couple of
hours of your life.
The only thing GATTACA manages to accomplish is to be the absolute WORST
movie of the year. And in a year of horrible flicks that is quite an
accomplishment.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
It is the near future.  Ubiquitous genetic screening and engineering 
has divided society in two: the genetic gifted, their organic problems 
ironed out and their futures assured; and the "in-valids", those whose 
chromosomes make them a poor risk and suited for only menial labour.  
Vincent (Hawke) is the result of a natural birth, untouched by the 
genetic scalpel.  But he dreams of going to the stars and when chance 
comes to assume the place of the genetically perfect Jerome (Law) he 
jumps at it and enters the starfaring Gattaca corporation.  However a 
police investigation brought about by the murder of one of Vincent's 
new colleagues threatens his identity.
Films with broad themes often stumble, particularly those adapted from 
books.  The metaphors that can suspend disbelief in print, on film may 
appear exaggerated and cartoonish.  Recall "1984" and "Brave New 
World".  Thus, "Gattaca" is fighting an uphill battle.  Despite this, 
first-time director and writer Andrew Niccol has achieved something 
rather wonderful, a good looking picture with no glitzy special 
effects nor choreographed fighting but instead a thoughtful, 
intelligent air.
Perhaps he learnt his lessons well from predecessors.  The large 
echoing sets are reminiscent of Godard's "Alphaville" with their 
depiction of the future-as-present.  Conversely, the past-as-future 
gets a run (via "Bladerunner") in the details on the set.  Large 
finned sedans abound, Vincent's childhood home has an antique fridge 
(that I remember from a student shared household in the late 1980s), 
he reads worn handset books on astrogation.  The identical suited 
masses of the Gattaca corporation could come straight from 
"Metropolis" or "2001".
Neither Hawke nor Thurman are (yet) great actors, yet they are oddly 
suited to their roles.  Hawke's Vincent is an energetic dreamer whose 
optimism has been filed away to leave a repressed, fearful soul.  
Thurman (as Irene, a coworker of Vincent) has an alien look and manner 
suited to the genetically blessed.  The supporting cast is full of 
rather nice performances as well: Jude Law as an empty and angry 
genetic superman, Gore Vidal as a patrician bureaucrat ("I haven't a 
violent bone in my body," he sniffs, without being in anyway 
figurative), Alan Arkin as a grungy old-hand detective.  Resisting the 
Hollywood ploy of sprinkling one-liners through the script, "Gattaca" 
nevertheless slips in some sly humour.  Irene sneaks a hair of 
Jerome/Vincent's in for genetic analysis, and browses the resultant 
pages of polynucleotide strings like a womens magazine.  The dour 
police, anonymous in identical fedoras and grey trenchcoats, are 
dubbed "hoovers" - two jokes for the price of one.
Then we come to the heart of "Gattaca", the idea of rational 
discrimination.  When the frail child Vincent is turned away by a 
school - which can't afford the insurance in case something happens to 
him - their bias is completely sensible and still wrong.  (The 
parallels to HIV-positive children is irresistible.)  When he is 
refused a job because of his genetic profile, the action is entirely 
logical.  Despite his dedication and superb work-record, his true 
identity would lead to his firing.  You can't help but think about 
racism and sexism (and all the other "isms") and how one doesn't need 
prejudice - just unfeeling rationality - to support discrimination.  
If a system tipped in the favour of a particular class recruits the 
best candidates, it will select those like itself.  In "Gattaca" this 
is the genetically pure, for our own world white heterosexual males.  
And this requires not the slightest bigotry.  Perhaps the road to hell 
is paved not with good intentions, but with cold logic.
"Gattaca" leaves us much to think of on these lines, an issue that 
is highly relevant in an age rich with information and genetic 
technology.  Yet it does not look at this starry eyed.  Vincent 
sacrifices a lot, even something of himself, to reach his goals.  His 
victories are small, but touching.  I would be tempted to give 
"Gattaca" the highest score and recommendation, but two things prevent 
me.  First, it is perhaps slightly - just 10 minutes - longer than the 
material will bear.  Second, some viewers will find its slightly aloof 
air too remote to enjoy.  But otherwise it comes well recommended 
[***/interesting] and "I Heard the Owl Call My Name" on the Sid and 
Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
Archived at 

Author
Jamie Peck
Columbia / 1:52 / 1997 / PG-13 (language, violence, sex, brief nudity)
Cast: Ethan Hawke; Uma Thurman; Jude Law; Gore Vidal; Alan Arkin; Loren Dean; 
Elias Koteas; Xander Berkeley; Jayne Brook; Tony Shalhoub 
Director: Andrew Niccol 
Screenplay: Andrew Niccol 
"Gattaca" represents a solid breakthrough in the recent onslaught of 
science-fiction films -- it's a genre picture that doesn't rely on alien 
creatures or loud explosions to tell its story. The movie takes place in a 
futuristic world where babies are created through genetic tampering and not 
sexual reproduction. This allows parents to predetermine what kind of eye color, 
intelligence and life span they'd like for their child, and also eliminates most 
pesky chances of health defects. Those made the old-fashioned way are labeled as 
"in-valids" and confined to the lower rung of society. 
Vincent Freeman (Ethan Hawke) is one such person, born not too long before the 
genetic process was perfected and forced to grow up in a home with his petrie 
dish-molded younger brother Anton. Fed up with being second-rate and enchanted by 
dreams of one day traveling through space, Vincent leaves home and takes a 
janitorial position at the Gattaca Aerospace Corporation. Everyday, he watches as 
"superior" folk make his fantasy a reality. Determined to do the same, Vincent 
meets a DNA broker (Tony Shalhoub in a funny cameo) who sells fake identities to 
in-valids. His counterpart for this scam is Jerome Morrow (Jude Law), an 
ex-athlete left paralyzed in an accident and confined to a wheelchair for life. 
For a price and the promise of a caretaker, Jerome supplies Vincent with his 
identity, as well as blood, skin and urine samples for all of those pesky 
on-the-job tests and physical examinations -- this future is one where employees 
clock in by pricking their fingers instead of punching a time card. Because of 
his drastically improved status, Vincent is quickly propelled to a high position 
in Gattaca, and catches the eye of comely co-worker Irene (Uma Thurman) on the 
way -- obsessed with her own minor heart defect, she's enamored by his flawless 
persona she doesn't know is a lie. But on the figurative eve of his upcoming 
planetary departure, the mission director is murdered. Two ardent detectives 
(Alan Arkin and Billy Bathgate's Loren Dean) determine the killer is on the 
inside of Gattaca, and the sole clue they find at the crime scene -- one of 
Vincent's eyelashes -- threatens to blow Vincent's cover and derail his goal. 
Even if "Gattaca" were dramatically empty, it would still boast a sublime set of 
production credentials -- the film's look is dazzling without ever being flashy. 
First-time director/writer Andrew Niccol (he also wrote the screenplay for the 
upcoming Jim Carrey drama "The Truman Show") demonstrates a keen eye for the 
stylish; his collaboration with cinematographer Slawomir Idziak, production 
designer Jan Roelfs and costume designer Colleen Atwood result in a sophisticated 
composition that emanates classy, retro ambiance. An opening credits sequence -- 
where skin, nail and hair fragments fall in slow-motion through a colored camera 
lens -- displays these combined talents uncannily. Niccol even utilizes 
voice-over narration (a device almost always poorly-employed) in an effective 
way. 
When it comes to acting, the movie is also flawless. Ethan Hawke does magnificent 
work, proving his ability to carry a film and reaffirming his enormously high 
charisma level. His chemistry with Thurman is a bit on the icy side, but 
needfully so, adding to the setting's clinical chill. As the bitter Jerome, Jude 
Law has a star-making presence, and it's his scenes with Hawke that give the 
movie its fine emotional core. In "Gattaca"'s series of final shots, the fates of 
Vincent and Jerome are superimposed over each other, and the effect is sad, 
lyrical and beautiful. Things get a little strange as the movie nears its climax, 
when Vincent's relationship with his brother comes back into view. The big 
dramatic culmination is a swim race, which is somewhat silly albeit beautifully 
photographed. 
Still, the single most surprising aspect of Gattaca is its use of backdrop -- 
it's successful sci-fi without showy special effects, it's a crisp thriller with 
character-driven thrills, it's a futuristic fable without blood and guts. Even 
its murder mystery is relegated to a secondary subplot, ensuring that a smart 
story about smart people and smart science takes center stage. Although it's 
portrayal of the upcoming century is grim, "Gattaca" serves up one of the most 
thought-provoking societal forecasts ever depicted on film. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Luke Buckmaster
To model a human's DNA would be the ultimate of playing God - and director 
Andrew Nicol pretends its all ahead of us "in the not too distant future."  But 
in the cold world of Gattaca, a society that creates a race of "super" people, 
the word "perfection" has been taken one step too far.  
Any person who enters the world from a "faith birth" (without use of DNA 
structuring) becomes known as an "In Valid", an outcast who often will end up 
with the lowest possible occupation and living conditions.  As the movie so 
bluntly states, it's technically not discrimination - but who would hire an In 
Valid over a person structured to perfection?  This is one of the many themes 
that is raised in the most engrossing Science Fiction film this year, that not 
only presents us with raw creativity and imagination but also intelligence and 
emotion on equal terms.
The film follows the narrative life of Vincent Freeman (Ethan Hawke), a child 
born the old fashioned way; with values and morals that would be respected in 
the 90's but scorned at in the society of Gattaca. At the time of his birth 
Vincent's life expectancy was estimated at a lousy 30 years; so after 
discovering this and realizing that he would have to live the life of a third 
rate citizen, his parents agree for genetics to decide the fate of his future 
brother Hugo.  Once Hugo is "born", Vincent begins to realize just weak he is, 
and despite his never ending determination to function successfully in society 
he is continuously outclassed and outmatched by people who proclaim that there 
is no way to defy genetics.  Luckily for Vincent, there is no gene for the 
human spirit.
As Vincent grows up, and his desire for social acceptance is spurred on by his 
dream to be an astronaut, he realizes that the only way to hide his identity is 
to borrow someone else's.  Enter Jeromre, a very contrasting character to 
Vincent, who was structured as an extraordinarily high-class citizen - perfect 
in every way.  But, after a failed suicide attempt, Jerome is left a paraplegic 
and is now useless in Gattaca's unforgiving society.  Deciding to cash in on 
his injury, Jerome forfeits his identity to Vincent for a large paycheck that 
will ensure a comfortable life for him. 
Of course with every person there is unique DNA and blood types, so Vincent 
quickly learns to follow a set of important activities to ensure that his 
identity remains a secret.  Brushing as much hair as possible off his body, 
using Jerome's blood and vicariously cleaning everything around him soon become 
necessary for survival and placement amongst the society which surrounds him.
Vincent soon becomes attracted to fellow worker Sally Ed (Uma Thurman), a 
beautiful young women with a terminal heart disease. A lively romantic subplot 
emerges between these two characters, and as Vincent becomes more and more 
desperate to conceal his identity their relationship will almost certainly end 
in disaster.
But Gattaca has much more in stall for viewers than just a Sci Fi drama with a 
romantic flavor - twists and developments in its story provide constant 
entertainment of a fulfilling and rewarding kind.
The claustrophobic and all too modern sets of Gattaca give an eerie 
representation of Niccol's futuristic world, perhaps making you feel that this 
sort of place may be around the corner - but it's impossible - impossible tell 
you, for anything like Gattaca to ever exist.  The very thought of DNA 
structuring society is laughable, however the illustrious mind of Niccol surely 
has created something truly special in a genre which surely produces more 
mindless duds then masterpieces.  So Gattaca's basic idea may appear to be a 
little silly - who cares?  It is not so much a film's plot that makes it great; 
rather the way it is executed, and although this film doesn't score many 
brownie points in believability it more than makes it up with maturity and 
style.
Many may argue that this "believability" factor is it's ultimate downfall, but 
anyone who does not have the imagination to fill in the blanks should steer 
clear of Gattaca all together.
For example in Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park, we almost believed that 
rampaging dinosaurs could exist - simply because the exact theory behind it was 
presented from the start and shown in a society we can recognize and relate 
with.  But Gattaca quite obviously steers clear from all the hows and whys, and 
presents us not with theories, beliefs and assumptions, but with cold hard 
imagination and a touch of wonder.
The all-important question - is this necessarily bad?  For the scientific 
minded perhaps yes - but those who value physiological effects more than absent 
minded mathematics will appreciate Gattaca's character's on going relationships 
and the way they react in a society obsessed with perfection.
When creating a film, it is one thing to hand out emotion on a platter (ala 
Jerry Maguire, where the movie's surroundings allow for a loving relationship 
between certain characters), but where the basic setting is a cold and 
unforgiving society it is entirely different.  It truly takes skill to produce 
characters that people care about, situations which people think about and 
issues that people can relate with when apparent boundaries are set. Andrew 
Nicol does this beautifully, and not for one minute does the science side of 
things replace Gattaca's superb story and its brilliance in fabulously crafted 
scenes.
As an avid fan of numerous reviewers, it has been bluntly obvious to me that 
many different opinions have been expressed about this film - a film that does 
something different, strays off the track of clichi characters and events and 
presents us with something truly brilliant indeed.  If you are able to open 
your mind and absorb only a fraction of what Gattaca has to offer, a very 
memorial experience is to be had.  Its still early days but I have no doubt in 
proclaiming Gattaca as one of the best films of 1997.
Daring to be different, Gattaca stands strong as a modern masterpiece.


Author
Luke Buckmaster
To model a human's DNA would be the ultimate of playing God - and director 
Andrew Nicol pretends its all ahead of us "in the not too distant future."  But 
in the cold world of Gattaca, a society that creates a race of "super" people, 
the word "perfection" has been taken one step too far.  
Any person who enters the world from a "faith birth" (without use of DNA 
structuring) becomes known as an "In Valid", an outcast who often will end up 
with the lowest possible occupation and living conditions.  As the movie so 
bluntly states, it's technically not discrimination - but who would hire an In 
Valid over a person structured to perfection?  This is one of the many themes 
that is raised in the most engrossing Science Fiction film this year, that not 
only presents us with raw creativity and imagination but also intelligence and 
emotion on equal terms.
The film follows the narrative life of Vincent Freeman (Ethan Hawke), a child 
born the old fashioned way; with values and morals that would be respected in 
the 90's but scorned at in the society of Gattaca. At the time of his birth 
Vincent's life expectancy was estimated at a lousy 30 years; so after 
discovering this and realizing that he would have to live the life of a third 
rate citizen, his parents agree for genetics to decide the fate of his future 
brother Hugo.  Once Hugo is "born", Vincent begins to realize just weak he is, 
and despite his never ending determination to function successfully in society 
he is continuously outclassed and outmatched by people who proclaim that there 
is no way to defy genetics.  Luckily for Vincent, there is no gene for the 
human spirit.
As Vincent grows up, and his desire for social acceptance is spurred on by his 
dream to be an astronaut, he realizes that the only way to hide his identity is 
to borrow someone else's.  Enter Jeromre, a very contrasting character to 
Vincent, who was structured as an extraordinarily high-class citizen - perfect 
in every way.  But, after a failed suicide attempt, Jerome is left a paraplegic 
and is now useless in Gattaca's unforgiving society.  Deciding to cash in on 
his injury, Jerome forfeits his identity to Vincent for a large paycheck that 
will ensure a comfortable life for him. 
Of course with every person there is unique DNA and blood types, so Vincent 
quickly learns to follow a set of important activities to ensure that his 
identity remains a secret.  Brushing as much hair as possible off his body, 
using Jerome's blood and vicariously cleaning everything around him soon become 
necessary for survival and placement amongst the society which surrounds him.
Vincent soon becomes attracted to fellow worker Sally Ed (Uma Thurman), a 
beautiful young women with a terminal heart disease. A lively romantic subplot 
emerges between these two characters, and as Vincent becomes more and more 
desperate to conceal his identity their relationship will almost certainly end 
in disaster.
But Gattaca has much more in stall for viewers than just a Sci Fi drama with a 
romantic flavor - twists and developments in its story provide constant 
entertainment of a fulfilling and rewarding kind.
The claustrophobic and all too modern sets of Gattaca give an eerie 
representation of Niccol's futuristic world, perhaps making you feel that this 
sort of place may be around the corner - but it's impossible - impossible tell 
you, for anything like Gattaca to ever exist.  The very thought of DNA 
structuring society is laughable, however the illustrious mind of Niccol surely 
has created something truly special in a genre which surely produces more 
mindless duds then masterpieces.  So Gattaca's basic idea may appear to be a 
little silly - who cares?  It is not so much a film's plot that makes it great; 
rather the way it is executed, and although this film doesn't score many 
brownie points in believability it more than makes it up with maturity and 
style.
Many may argue that this "believability" factor is it's ultimate downfall, but 
anyone who does not have the imagination to fill in the blanks should steer 
clear of Gattaca all together.
For example in Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park, we almost believed that 
rampaging dinosaurs could exist - simply because the exact theory behind it was 
presented from the start and shown in a society we can recognize and relate 
with.  But Gattaca quite obviously steers clear from all the hows and whys, and 
presents us not with theories, beliefs and assumptions, but with cold hard 
imagination and a touch of wonder.
The all-important question - is this necessarily bad?  For the scientific 
minded perhaps yes - but those who value physiological effects more than absent 
minded mathematics will appreciate Gattaca's character's on going relationships 
and the way they react in a society obsessed with perfection.
When creating a film, it is one thing to hand out emotion on a platter (ala 
Jerry Maguire, where the movie's surroundings allow for a loving relationship 
between certain characters), but where the basic setting is a cold and 
unforgiving society it is entirely different.  It truly takes skill to produce 
characters that people care about, situations which people think about and 
issues that people can relate with when apparent boundaries are set. Andrew 
Nicol does this beautifully, and not for one minute does the science side of 
things replace Gattaca's superb story and its brilliance in fabulously crafted 
scenes.
As an avid fan of numerous reviewers, it has been bluntly obvious to me that 
many different opinions have been expressed about this film - a film that does 
something different, strays off the track of clichi characters and events and 
presents us with something truly brilliant indeed.  If you are able to open 
your mind and absorb only a fraction of what Gattaca has to offer, a very 
memorial experience is to be had.  Its still early days but I have no doubt in 
proclaiming Gattaca as one of the best films of 1997.
5 stars out of 5
Daring to be different, Gattaca stands strong as a modern masterpiece.


Author
Michael Dequina
Gattaca (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
        What if the world somehow found a way to make discrimination into a
science?  That is the provocative question presented by Gattaca, the
intriguing and atmospheric debut of writer-director Andrew Niccol.
        Those looking for a more effects-laden science fiction film will be
disappointed by Gattaca, which centers more on drama than on pricey
pyrotechnics.  Set in "the not-too distant future," the film is set in a
society where one's station in life is determined solely by genetics.
Advances in genetic engineering have made natural breeding obsolete; to
ensure a promising future for their children, prospective parents turn to
geneticists to create their babies in a lab, where they take the most
desirable genetic traits of the parents--and weed out their most
undesirable--to create a "perfect" child.  This genetic elite, called
"Valid," are given all the golden opportunities in life--jobs,
wealth--while the "In-valids," those created from natural breeding, make up
the poor lower class.
        One of these "faith children," as they are called, is Vincent Freeman
(Ethan Hawke), a precocious young man who dreams of flying to the stars.
Even though his genetic makeup makes it impossible for him to realize his
dream, he does so anyway--by dealing with a black market DNA broker (Tony
Shalhoub), who arranges Vincent to swap places with Jerome Morrow (played
with scene-stealing gusto by Jude Law), a valid whose genes are of no use
after being paralyzed from the waist down.  As Jerome, Vincent builds a
successful career at the aeronautics corporation Gattaca and is all set to
fly on a mission to Titan, one of Saturn's moons.  But after the director
of Gattaca is murdered, and an In-valid eyelash is found in the ensuing
investigation, it seems like only a matter of time before "Jerome" is exposed.
        Much of this material harkens back to Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, but
I must give credit to Niccol, who paints a vivid, funny, yet disturbing
portrait of this future society.  The best moments come from the little
details in the script.  For example, when Vincent is born, the doctors can
immediately determine his lifespan and what illnesses he is likely to
suffer from; In-valids are sometimes referred to by the slur
"de-gene-erate"; and some rather curious dating rituals: when Vincent
expresses interest in Valid but slightly imperfect colleague Irene (a
strangely uninteresting Uma Thurman, in a thankless role), she offers him a
strand of her hair for a DNA check and says, "Let me know if you're still
interested."  Niccol's fascinating vision also extends to the striking
cinematography, production and costume design by Slawomir Idziak, Jan
Roelfs, and Colleen Atwood, respectively.  They obviously did not have a
substantially large budget to work with, but they succeed in creating an
otherworldly look through minimalism.  Buildings are shiny and smooth;
people dress up in nice suits; and color is all but absent--everything
seems constantly bathed in some shade of grey or silver, perfectly
conveying the sense of coldness and lack of passion that dominates this
glacial society.
        Niccol's attention to detail does not extend, however, to Gattaca's basic
plot mechanics, which are rather contrived.  The murder mystery plot turns
out to be little more than a device to put Vincent in danger of being
discovered and does not reach a satisfying conclusion on its own.  A
supposed plot twist involving one of the murder's investigators (Loren
Dean) is predictable and uninspired, and a sibling rivalry subplot explored
early in the film between Vincent and his genetically engineered younger
brother is revisited later to very little effect; it just serves as an
extraneous, redundant underscoring of the point that genetics are not
everything.  The one relationship that is supposed to lend some warmth to
the proceedings, the romance between Vincent and Irene, fails to ignite;
Hawke and Thurman may have generated sparks off camera, but very little, if
any, of that rapport is displayed onscreen.
        When I first saw the trailer for Gattaca, I and a few other people
snickered at the terribly banal tagline "There is no gene for the human
spirit."  As cornball as it is, that simple statement quite effectively
sums up the true nature of the film.  For all of its big Hollywood sci-fi
trappings, Gattaca is essentially an intimate human story, and an
unexpectedly moving and inspiring one at that.  By the time it is over, one
may just find oneself with (somewhat) renewed faith in the human race.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in your heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Alan Arkin, Jude Law, Loren Dean, Gore
Vidal, Ernest Borgnine Director: Andrew Niccol Producers: Danny DeVito,
Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher Screenplay: Andrew Niccol
There is no gene for the human spirit,
No gene to help brighten your day.
There is no gene that will carry you that extra mile,
No gene for carrying your dreams all the way.
After watching a film as sterile and polished as Gattaca, I'm kinda glad
my hair is a little dishevelled, my shirt a little wrinkled, my shoes in
need of polishing and I don't need a finger prick blood test everyday.
In an age where genetic engineering is used to eliminate "evils" like
heart disease, depression and other ill personality/physical traits,
only those near perfection are allowed the opportunities for success
available to all of us today.
There is something lacking about perfection when the creation is purely
man made. Without the imperfect traits of character and physical
disability, we would lack the personality and the will to improve
ourselves. Ever noticed that no one smiles in "Gattaca", no one laughs,
and nobody cries. It's as if emotion, one of the most important aspects
of being human has been erased with the re-sequencing of the DNA codes.
Sure I get depressed when I fail a task, and I get angry when something
goes wrong, but I can also laugh at my mistakes and forgive myself for
making them.
In the stylised world of "Gattaca" these issues are nicely illustrated.
Ethan Hawke is the imperfect being who shows us that character strengths
are more than a list of percentages or likelihood for success. Sure this
movie is a long sit, but it has enough good material and thought put
into it than most of the recycled crap churned out by Hollywood.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Gosh, it's bad enough that people are treated like second-
class citizens because of their ethnic, religious, and racial
circumstances, and as well for their sexual and ideological
preferences.  As the twenty-first century gets under way, a
new excuse for contempt comes along: a disdain for people
born out of the loving embrace of men and women, that is,
people like you and me.  What's so bad about being what we
in the year 1997 consider insipidly ordinary?  Just this: the
vast majority of those living in the near future have been
designed in a petri dish:  a master race genetically
programmed to perform specialized tasks just
as purebred dogs are bred for specific traits.  These offspring
have been engineered like a genetically produced tomato to
be free of the natural defects.  Radial keratotomy is obsolete,
as these new human beings will never become nearsighted. 
Forget Minoxidil: baldness has been programmed out of
existence.  No need for phen/fen or Prozac or nitroglycerine
tablets as obesity, heart disease and depression simply
cannot happen in this brave new world.  
   We can only guess why, but one couple decide to have
their kid born the natural way.  When Vincent emerges from
the womb he is immediately scanned by the latest medical
equipment, and the news is not good: he has an 89%
possibility of heart disease, is burdened with Attention Deficit
Disorder (though we never see symptoms), and is expected to
live only 30.2 years.  No wonder the folks decided the next
kid, Anton, would go the genetic route.
   "Gattaca," which is also the name of a corporation which
sends specially designed human beings into space
exploration, ranks with "Contact" as one of the two intelligent
movies of its genre to hit the screens this year. While
"Gattaca" is authentic sci-fi, it features no green people with
antennas intent on destroying the earth, no Godzilla-like
dinosaurs intent on trampling San Diego to a desert, no Buck
Rogers laser guns or giant roaches or brilliant doctors who
turn into ghouls without warning.  This is adult sci-fi, the sort
of picture which is about believable characters living in the
very near future as an outgrowth of experiments actually
being made today in space travel and genetic engineering.
Like other films of its ilk such as "The Stepford Wives"
(gender discrimination), and "Logan's Run" (age bigotry), it
makes incisive, edgy commentary on our own contemporary
world, by showing us the ugly face of prejudice--as
experienced by the natural-born Vincent.
   Each time Vincent (Ethan Hawke) reads books about space
travel, he is warned by his parents to stop dreaming. 
Because of his genetic flaws--weak heart and attenuated life
span--he is unfit for the Gattaca project and will have to
content himself with being a sweeper under the supervision of
Caesar (Ernest Borgnine) inside the ultra-modern, impeccably
clean building which houses the astronauts.  When the
bespectacled Vincent is introduced by a DNA broker, German
(Tony Shalhoub), to Jerome Eugene Morrow (Jude Law), a
superior specimen who has been recently paralyzed, the three
work out a deal by which Vincent would assume Jerome's
identity and pass himself off as one of the elite--a Valid rather
than an Invalid human being.  Convinced that one need
not play the hand which has been dealt, Vincent uses
Jerome's blood and urine samples to pass himself off in his
new identity, determined through rigorous training to defy the
diagnosis given him at infancy by the doctors.
   When the director of the space mission is murdered,
detective Hugo (Alan Arkin) discovers an eyelash which is
traced to Vincent, who is believed to have disappeared.  As
investigators close in on the disguised space traveler, Vincent
plans his escape with the help of his new love, the genetically
flawed Irene (Uma Thurman).
   By keeping the action down-to-earth and only cautiously
going beyond what has already been accomplished by
science, New Zealand born Andrew Niccol's directorial debut
is this side of awesome.  Using his own screenplay, Mr.
Niccol offers a film which obliquely comments on the
willingness of so many people nowadays to avoid reaching,
much less going beyond, their potential.  A film which could
be used to inspire schoolchildren, "Gattaca" is never didactic:
it does not wear its message of hope and inspiration on its
sleeve, but unfolds a story which is compelling science fiction
as well as thematically heartening.  Ethan Hawke has gone
beyond the teen heartthrob role, having matured into a
handsome and confident twenty-something actor, whose
performance is given solid backing by the tongue-in-cheek
Gore Vidal as Gattaca Corporation's wily director, Uma
Thurman as the somewhat repressed love object, Jude Law
as the despondent, wheelchair-bound hero, and Loren Dean
as the genetically perfect brother who turns out to be weaker
than the all-too-human Vincent.  Alan Arkin is not as amusing
as he was as the psychiatrist in "Grosse Pointe Blank" but
acquits himself professionally as the insistent detective
investigating the director's murder.
   Writer-director Niccol is no Luddite.  You do not emerge
from his movie wanting to tear down the labs of geneticists. 
After all, if some piano sonatas are written so that only people
with twelve fingers can play them--as is the case in this film--
let's design people with twelve fingers.  In fact, he is not really
against genetic engineering at all.  He does, however, most
effectively exploit current experiments in the field to fashion
an inspirational movie.  Even more important, he knows how
to tell a crackling good tale. Rated R.  Running Time: 105
minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Andrew M. Niccol
Starring: Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Jude Law, Loren Dean, Alan Arkin, Gore
Vidal, Ernest Borgnine, Tony Shalhoub, Xander Berkeley, Blair Underwood,
Ryan Dorin, Elias Kosteas, Jayne Brook
If you had a chance to create a genetically perfect child, would you do it?
 "Gattaca" is a film which presents a future where society has answered
"yes" to this question, but then ponders if this was actually the right
decision.  "Gattaca" came out only a couple months following the first
genetically engineered creature, the lovable Dolly the Sheep, and with this
in mind, the film only becomes more frightening.  The way the realm of
genetics is heading, it may only take a couple decades until the future
"Gattaca" presents becomes true.
Contrary to the misleading trailers, "Gattaca" is not a sci-fi thriller, in
the way that there's lots of murder, Hitchcockian suspense, and chase
scenes.  This is a quiet, sad film about intelligent theories.  In fact,
the film seems like it would have been written by George Orwell or Aldous
Huxley (the latter who's novel "Brave New World" featured genetically
engineered children).  It's a film that may likely become a cult hit to
people who are frightened by a promise of shallow Utopia, which is exactly
what "Gattaca" presents...and the main reason I dug it so much.
The story revolves around the genetically insufficient Vincent Freeman
(Ethan Hawke), a man with high hopes but a 90% chance of heart problems,
and a prospected life span of around 30 years.  As a child, he was put down
because of the threats of genetics, while his younger genetically perfect
brother, Anton (Loren Dean), was promised whatever his heart desired. 
Vincent yearns to be an astronaut, but when he gets a job at a giant space
company, it's as a janitor (Ernest Borgnine plays his boss!).
But one day, he finds out that it's probably possible that his desires can
come true in the form of a business deal brought out by a black market
geneticist (or something), German ("Wings"' Tony Shalhoub, who did like
hundreds of cameos in films back in '97: "Men in Black," "A Life Less
Ordinary"...), who's client is a genetically perfect man, Jerome Morrow
(Jude Law), who has unfortunately been crippled.  Fortunately, though,
there's no record of the accident, and he's willing to give someone else
his life. Since Vincent looks a bit like him...
After a couple alterations (some minor, some really major), he has donned
the life of Jerome, and is doing his job.  There, he meets a genetically
imperfect woman, Irene (Uma Thurman, who's genetically perfect in real life
anyway, hee hee), and the two begin a kind of relationship, albeit a very
shallow one since romance is deemed by how great a man's stats are.
However, a murder of a high-level worker at his office is killed, and one
of Vincent/Jerome's eyelashes is found by the anal retentive investigators
headed by a semi-wily inspector, Hugo, (Alan Arkin), and none other than
Vincent's long lost brother, Anton, who hasn't seen him since they were
teenagers.  We know Vincent/Jerome didn't do it, but with his older picture
being posted everywhere, not only Vincent/Jerome's in trouble, but also the
real Jerome, who's as much in it as he is.
However, there isn't many big suspense set pieces, which is actually a
blessing because if they were tossed in, the film would lose it's message
and descend into just being a sci-fi thriller a la William Gibson.  The
suspense in the film comes from the idea that Vincent and Jerome can easily
be captured just by dropping a hair or dead skin.  While there are several
scenes which are pretty frightening, there are no big distractions from the
point of the film, much to the dismay of commercial audiences.
What is actually portrayed is the lack of life in the Utopian society that
is created.  Irene has no real spunk in her life, and is rather amazed by
the sheer beauty of a sunrise rather than genetically perfect people.  And
the genetically flawless Jerome is in actuality a bitter man, claiming that
his accident was really no accident.  What Jerome has done is fool the
system in giving a man who yearns for better things a chance at that, and
the ending is shocking as it's a definite work of dystopian propaganda, but
doesn't have the down ending of other works of this kind.
The production design of this film is probably the best I've seen this
year: it's stunning, very pleasing to the eye, but still very cold.  Since
genetics has ruled out any chance of improvement, the world has cooled into
a state of inhumanity, and the sets echo a sense of shallow misery.  And
the sequence of all the high-level workers doing their jobs has a kind of
Gilliam-esque feel to it, showing the nightmare of slipping into a routine
zombie-like life.  The ability to perfect people has left humanity cold and
generally unhappy.
The acting from everyone is great, with Thurman giving a wonderfully cold
performance, and Hawke creating a character who has been beaten down by the
system but has found a new sense of optimism by a bitter man who was
willing to give it out anyway (interesting pointless fact: Uma and Ethan
started dating after this film, and currently she is pregnant with his
child).  But the best performance belongs to Jude Law, who steals every
scene he's in, and creates a character filled with the pessimism over
having such a horrible burden placed on his burden.
I think that people are generally tempted by the fact that genetics can
actually create perfection in a child, but whether or not they would
actually act on this temptation is something I'm not sure of.  "Gattaca"
warns us not to go any farther, chiefly because we'll create a world of
elitism where the elite are shallow and unhappy, and as bitter and angry as
the lesser people are.  And when I see a possible future featuring a
12-fingered piano player, well folks, that just creeps me out.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 10/24/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:52
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Violence, mature themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Alan Arkin, Jude Law, Loren Dean, 
      Gore Vidal, Ernest Borgnine
Director: Andrew Niccol
Producers: Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher
Screenplay: Andrew Niccol
Cinematography: Slawomir Idziak
Music: Michael Nyman
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Welcome to the 21st Century, an era when things aren't that much 
different, but people are.  No longer is standard procreation the 
accepted way to reproduce.  Consider all of the birth defects that such 
an approach can bring about.  And, while it would be unreasonable to 
outlaw sex for the purpose of producing offspring, be aware than any 
children so conceived are almost certain to be "in-valids" -- 
genetically imperfect and ill-suited to be productive members of 
society.  There is a better, more rational way -- a method that will 
guarantee health, stamina, and physical attractiveness.  Let science do 
a little tinkering with the DNA.  Everyone does it.  Or at least 
everyone who wants their child to have a shot at a normal, well-adjusted 
life.
     This is the chillingly feasible premise of GATTACA.  While in 1997, 
science has not yet perfected the genetic engineering techniques used in 
this film to routinely develop babies, every day brings the medical 
profession closer.  As a result, GATTACA doesn't just function as a 
science fiction thriller, but as both a cautionary tale about the 
dangers of letting scientific ability outstrip ethics and as a morality 
play about the irrationality of bigotry.
     Andrew Niccol's oppressive future, which contains more than an 
element of Orwell's "Big Brother is watching" mentality, isn't just a 
clever backdrop against which to set a thriller.  Instead, it's an 
integral part of the story.  While it's true that there is a murder 
mystery, that's just a subplot.  The main focus of GATTACA is the 
struggle of a genetically inferior man, Vincent Freeman (Ethan Hawke), 
to survive and prosper in a world where his kind is routinely 
discriminated against.
     Shortly after they were married, Vincent's parents decided to start 
a family the old-fashioned way, without any help from doctors and test 
tubes.  The result was a boy who was diagnosed as 99% likely to have a 
serious heart defect.  That rendered Vincent ineligible for all but the 
most menial of jobs.  But his dream was to one day work at The Gattaca 
Aerospace Corporation and participate in the first-ever manned flight to 
the moons of Saturn.  For most "in-valids", this would have remained a 
fantasy, but Vincent possessed the determination and drive to make it 
real.
     With the help of a shady middle-man, Vincent locates Jerome Morrow 
(Jude Law), a genetically superior individual who was paralyzed as the 
result of an accident.  He agees to sell Vincent his identity (including 
blood and urine on demand, fingerprints, hair and other body debris, 
etc.).  So, equipped with Jerome's genetic resume, which guarantees him 
work anywhere, Vincent applies for a position at Gattaca.  He is 
accepted and quickly proves his worth to everyone.  But, a week before 
he is to attain his lifelong ambition of making a space flight, he 
becomes a suspect in a murder investigation and his carefully-guarded 
secret is in danger of being exposed.
     One of the things that impressed me the most about GATTACA is its 
ability to keep the level of tension high without compromising the 
script's intelligence or integrity.  First-time director Andrew Niccol, 
a New Zealander working in Los Angeles, displays a sure hand in his 
execution of the material.  One scene in particular, a masterfully-
edited sequence cutting back and forth between the cops (who are closing 
in) and a man struggling to accomplish a Herculean physical task, is 
guaranteed to render audiences breathless.  And there are enough little 
twists and turns to keep even the most easily-distracted audience member 
involved.  From a visual perspective, Niccol's cinematographer, Slawomir 
Idziak, uses his trademark filters to differentiate the soft, warm glow 
of the outside world from the harshness of the windowless interior of 
Gattaca.  
     Ethan Hawke (BEFORE SUNRISE) is solid as Vincent, effectively 
portraying both his single-minded determination to rise about the 
disadvantages of his birth and his constant wariness of being caught 
once he has reached that goal.  Jude Law's Jerome is a fascinating 
individual -- a man who is torn between despising Vincent because of his 
inferiority and admiring him because he's succeeding.  In fact, Jerome 
is arguably GATTACA's most complex character.  Meanwhile, Alan Arkin 
gives a delightful turn as a hard-bitten detective.  Uma Thurman's 
limited range isn't taxed as Vincent's love interest (there isn't much 
chemistry between her and Hawke, but, since romance is a tertiary 
element of the story, it doesn't make much difference).  And Loren Dean 
(the title character in BILLY BATHGATE) plays a cop with a special 
grudge against Vincent.  
     The average thriller, even if it's set in a faraway or futuristic 
world, tends to offer visceral, ephemeral excitement, and not much else.  
However, while GATTACA has the energy and tautness to compare with the 
best of those, its thought-provoking script and thematic richness 
elevate it to the next level.  GATTACA is not a perfect motion picture 
(I would have appreciated a little more political background), but, at a 
time when so many science fiction films are dumber than dirt, it makes 
for a refreshing change-of-pace, and is a fine addition to the Fall 
movie season. 
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Andrew Niccol (The Truman Show)
Ethan Hawke (Great Expectations) as Vincent Freeman / Jerome Morrow
Uma Thurman (Pulp Fiction) as Irene Cassini
Alan Arkin (Grosse Point Blank) as Investigator Hugo Coldspring
Jude Law (The Talented Mr. Ripley) as Jerome Morrow / Eugene Morrow
Loren Dean (The End of Violence) as Investigator / Aton Freeman
Elias Koteas (The Thin Red Line) as Antonio
We're all becoming Orwells. Hollywood, me, you, the Internet, everyone is
becoming in a constant state of surveillance. It's a trend. Enemy of the
State and The End of Violence use it. The Truman Show, Dark City,
Pleasantville. All of them used it. And, as good as any one of those films,
Gattaca uses it.
Gattaca is a character drama in the guise of a thriller, the same way that
The Truman Show was a drama in the guise of a comedy. Andrew Niccol works
his beautiful charms with both of them. In Gattaca, he offers us a stunning
vision of the not-so-distant future, a time where genetic engineering is so
commonplace that it is common practice. The world, of course, has the
drawback that anyone who was not genetically engineered is part of a new
class of society, called an invalid.
Vincent Freeman was born this way. He chooses, however, not to remain and
invalid but become what is known as a de-generate, someone who uses other
people's blood, urine, hair etc. to fake a genetic code superior to their
own. His dream was to end up in space and being this particularly loathed
thing is the only way he is able to do it. Lending his dream to the real
Gerome Morrow, a suicidal cripple, the two band together to get him into
space. Everything is going well, he is set to leave in a week. Then the
mission director is murdered.
This occurs, in my opinion, only to keep less intelligent viewers interested
in the story, which contains enough pathos to warrant me watching it if it
didn't involve a murder at all. As Vincent tries to keep his secret, he is
falling in love with Irene Cassini, another worker at Gattaca, the story's
equivalent of Cape Canaveral. The panic caused by the moment causes each
person involve to examine themselves, society, and the state of the world.
The sad thing about Gattaca is that so many people will hate this movie
because of its utterly slow pace. It does not keep the interest of someone
not intrigued by people, which encompasses most every viewer today. So that
takes out studio fans, and its Star Trek target audience. Everyone else,
including you indie lovers, should tape it the next time it airs on HBO,
though.

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
The local video store is doing a rent-one-DVD-rent-second-free thing
this month, and I picked up Gattaca as the bonus movie last week,
having missed it when it was in theaters.
Intelligent science fiction films, where the focus is on the play of
ideas rather than wizbang special effects of aliens, is a rare thing.
Gattaca follows in the tradition of Blade Runner rather than
Independence Day.  True, Blade Runner has dazzling visuals, but the
core of the film is the philosophical question, what does it mean to be
human?
Gattaca's particular idea, that genetic information contains much
information which may be used destructively, has timeliness.  Witness,
for example, the recently hubbub over the New York Police Department's
proposal to begin DNA sampling of everyone arrested.  Privacy advocates
note that this goes far beyond fingerprinting as identification, as
genetic information may contain confidential medical information.  This
is perhaps how the filmmakers envision their dystopia coming about:
baby steps down a slippery slope.
The plot of the movie concerns the efforts of Vincent to pass himself
off as Jerome.  Vincent is freeborn, conceived without the benefit of
genetic tinkering to, say, remove a tendency for heart problems or
learning disorders.  Jerome is the result of such extensive
manipulation, gifted with the genes of high intelligence, physical
performance, and slicked back hair.  He, unfortunately, broke his back,
and is confined to a wheelchair.  He sells his identity to Vincent,
literally his body, as identity consists of blood and urine samples,
flakes of dandruff and loose hair, all carefully drawn and placed where
snoops may find it.
Vincent's ultimate goal is to travel in space.  All the effort to
disguise himself as Jerome goes towards getting into Gattaca, some sort
of future space agency in which only the genetically perfect are
selected.  The bulk of the film shows the plot starting to unravel, as
someone is murdered on Gattaca's premises and Vincent leaves an eyelash
in the wrong place.
This is a stylized, designed future, a vision of the world as decorated
by Hugo Boss.  The geneticall perfect were well-tailored suits, the
offices are quiet, sleek temples of efficiency.  Space travel here does
not involve the sensible application of duct tape in the right places,
but well-apportioned dabs of hair gel for that perfect look.  Yes, the
film goes out of the way to emphasize the dominance of style and look
in this world.
Actually, one nice style effect is the garb of the detectives
investigating the case.  The long gray coats and fedoras suggest the
1930s, when Fascism was at its high tide, and genetic discrimination
more acceptable.  This sort of style is also somewhat embodied in the
cars, and the look of the high end night clubs.
Well, there are some flaws.  The, uh, cosmetic flaws include the
unnoticed necessary condition of the main character looking like, say,
Ethan Hawke, instead of looking like, say, me.  Ethan Hawke can pass
himself off as a genetically scuplted uebermensch to Gattaca Human
Resources and Uma Thurman; I doubt I can.  While there may not be a
gene for the human spirit, Our Hero wouldn't have gotten far without
looking good in the thousand dollar suit.
There are nice touches to the film, touches that add credibility to
this world, a necessity for science fiction.  One is the Genetic
LoveTest, sort of like http://www.lovetest.com, but where you enter
hair or saliva samples instead of Zodiac signs.  Yes, genetic testing
trickling down to the advertisement-supported mass market.  True, the
filmmakers were trying to convey how twisted this society is by having
this sort of genetic assay be par for the course, but I just liked the
furtive, cyberpunk grungy seediness of the whole thing.
For the larger issues, I'm of two minds about the films portrayal of
genetic discrimination.  Many of the traits mentioned in the film,
especially the positive ones, may well have tendencies because of
genetics, but they are also strongly influenced by environment.  A
tendency for lung cancer may only be expressed if that person smoked.
Some gene for musical talent won't matter one jot if that person
mangled his hand in some childhood accident.  Contingencies of the
environment matter.  More strongly, genes are carriers of evolutionary
information, and nothing more.  We know very clearly that they do not
constitute the entire person.  I have doubts that any reasonable
society would ignore this.
I also don't have serious problems with using genetics to correct clear
biological problems, like diabetes or tendencies for breast cancer.
Genetic technology, like most technologies, can be used for both good
and evil.  It's up to the culture using it to determine that
congenitcal heart defects are something to be addressed, while hair
color is not.
Perhaps I have more faith in such matters than I should.  Culture cuts
both ways.  Even primitive assays can be used for what we would call
evil purposes.  Consider China's shortfall of baby girls, because the
culture places prominence on firstborn sons.  Simple miotic fluid
assays are sufficient to cause this deficit, to say nothing of
sophisiticated genetic tests.
Arguably, this is the practice of leaving babies on the mountaintop
made more precise.  Interestingly, the filmmakers, on one of the DVD
extras, seem to claim that once the Human Genome Project is complete,
we will begin to control our own evolution.  This is clearly wrong:
we've been controlling our own evolution since the beginnings of
civilization, as natural selection no longer really applies.  Culture
has a long shadow.
The film also trips lightly past the issue of remediation after birth.
It appears that all of medical technology has wilted away in favor of
genetic intervention during conception (for that matter, detective
works seems to have suffered a similiar wilting, but that's a plot
matter rather than a thematic one).  Treating, say, heart murmers with
surgery, or high cholesterol with diet and exercise  seems to have
slipped everyone's mind.  This blindness to what medical technology
should be able to do in this world is symptomatic of the pure focus on
genetic consequences.
The DVD, which, unfortunately, I only had for one night, has a
selection of "lost" scenes, which were cut for pacing or thematic
reasons.  In particular, the "Coda" sequence -- over a starry
background text noting that the Human Genome Project is nearing
completion, and that many of the Most Interesting People of the
Millennium had genetic defects -- was thankfully, tactfully cut.  The
filmmakers perhaps realized that they were approaching serious overkill
by whipping out the central theme and repeatedly slapping the audience
with it.

Author
Christopher Null
     I'd been looking forward to GATTACA since its clever promotions began
several months ago, promising a story of a future-gone-wrong, a time when
ethnic prejudice has given way to something even more frightening:  genetic
discrimination.  It's in this setting that the genetically-inferior Vincent
(played by Ethan Hawke) tries to advance his station by assuming the identity
of Jerome (played by the creepy Jude Law), and putting the moves on the
also-flawed Irene (Uma Thurman).
     Everything goes well for awhile, and just as Vincent is about to realize
his dream of going up as part of a space mission, the web starts to untangle. 
Here's where the problems of GATTACA start:  you see, as a mystery, it really
isn't much of one.  The investigation into the murder of the mission director
who may have known Vincent's secret is never very focused, and Alan Arkin's
"Columbo"-type flatfoot seems to uncannily know where to go at every turn.  By
the time the investigation is over, the whole thing has felt like a put-on to
waste an hour of screen time.
     On the other hand, GATTACA succeeds quite well at making us feel like
this could really happen.  Director Andrew Niccol has put beaucous work into
the set and costume designs, and the yellowish lighting makes GATTACA a real
creep-out.  As a cautionary tale about not messing with Mother Nature, GATTACA
is similarly successful, if obvious about it.
     This movie is great if you're looking for more of 1984 than STAR TREK for
your brand of future-shock... and if you're willing to believe that Ethan
Hawke and Uma Thurman are flawed in any way, GATTACA's definitely your cup of tea.
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Kevin Patterson
As we near the end of the millennium, one of the most popular topics in
modern narrative fiction has been how humankind's recent technological and
scientific advances might change certain things we take for granted about
life. Andrew Niccol, who has since gained notoriety for his screenplay of
THE TRUMAN SHOW, puts in his two cents on the subject with GATTACA, a
science-fiction film in which all procreation is artificial, genetically
engineered for the best possible results. Vincent (Ethan Hawke), the
protagonist of GATTACA, was conceived naturally, and has a heart condition
which the family's doctor predicted would kill him by the age of thirty.
Vincent, and others like him, are labeled "invalids." Discrimination
against them is not sanctioned by the law, but it goes on as a matter of
routine nonetheless. The only way that he can hope to succeed at his
lifelong dream of going on a mission into outer space is to assume the
identity of another valid who, for whatever reason, can no longer fulfill
his or her place in society. An underground figure helps him locate Jerome
Morrow (Jude Law), who has been paralyzed in an accident, and the two of
them come to an agreement. Jerome will supply Vincent with the necessary
genetic samples to make the impersonation hold up under investigative
scrutiny, and in return Vincent will continue to provide for his lavish
lifestyle through income from his new position at Gattaca, the future
equivalent of NASA.
Thematically, the most obvious note that GATTACA strikes is a cautionary
one about genetic engineering: Niccol seems to have been inspired at least
partly by the seminal BLADE RUNNER, in which scientists created quasi-human
"Replicants" who were then simply shut off or killed when they became
inconvenient. However, there's also a parallel between the world of GATTACA
and our own, in which discrimination is technically illegal but
nevertheless occurs on a regular basis. Vincent is surprised to discover,
when he applies at Gattaca, that his "interview" consists of a urine test,
and I would not be shocked to learn that interviews for some socially
marginalized groups last just about as long at certain American companies.
Niccol also does a good job handling the science fiction elements of the
story. The futuristic set design, with its cold, metallic interiors, is
impressive and conveys a sense of technological menace without being too
overdone or outlandish. The technology is also pretty believable: both
artificial fertilization and the genetic testing and cataloguing through
bodily samples are within the realm of today's science. GATTACA also
manages to recapture some of the wonder of space travel that has been
diluted in modern culture by all the bug-monster alien invasions and
"hyperspace jumps" that tend to dominate science fiction. It keeps the
science simple and believable (Vincent's mission is a trip to Mars), and
focuses on its human implications rather than on special effects.
GATTACA does unfold rather awkwardly at times. There's a long narration
from Vincent near the beginning that only serves to make brain-poundingly
obvious what would have eventually become evident anyway. A murder mystery
is introduced, apparently to provide Vincent with cause for fear of
discovery (since the detectives' DNA investigation could turn up evidence
of an "invalid" at Gattaca), but it fails to generate much tension: it's
just another expository device. There's also a sibling rivalry, which
occupies too many of the film's closing moments for a subplot that had
disappeared after the introductory narration, and a romance between Vincent
and a co-worker (Uma Thurman) that is fairly formulaic.
The triumphs of GATTACA are to be found mostly in the care with which
Niccol has designed his future world: the science is very plausible, the
visual design is outstanding, and the issues raised by the film are good
food for thought. It would have been better if he had found a more smoothly
flowing story to frame in this world, but his conception of it is still
enough to qualify GATTACA as one of the more interesting recent science
fiction films.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.

Author
James Sanford
GATTACADirected by Andrew Niccol
 In the future, a "love child" could face problems far worse than
anything ever imagined by Diana Ross and the Supremes. After all, in the
world of "Gattaca," the right genetic make-up determines your future,
and parents are willing to pay plenty for designer genes to ensure that
their children live long, healthy and comfortable lives. Those unlucky
enough to be "natural births" run the risk of being labelled "in-valid,"
a title that guarantees a future of menial work.
 Such is the pre-determined destiny of  Vincent (Ethan Hawke), the
product of his parents' romantic getaway on "the Detroit Riveria."
Vincent dreams of being an astronaut, but, having been born with poor
vision and a 99 percent chance of heart disease, he's quickly set
straight by his father, who warns him that "the only way you'll see the
inside of a spaceship is if you're cleaning it." So what's a guy to do
but borrow the identity (i.e. the blood, urine, skin cells and hair) of
a "valid" to get into Gattaca, the training ground for astronauts?
 "Gattaca" is a smart, beautifully crafted piece of
not-so-science-fiction that manages to successfully mix social
commentary and suspense into a generally enthralling story.
Writer-director Andrew Niccol's vision of the world of the near-future
is strikingly simple, an environment dominated by golden hues and dull
greys, sparked ocassionally by electric blues and greens. While
technology has marched ahead--with instant DNA analysis making life much
easier for police officers and employers--fashion has gone back to the
Camelot years, with men confined in rigid business suits and women
sweeping up their hair into Doris Day-style honeybuns. Michael Nyman's
spare neo-classical score complements the picture beautifully.
 Vincent's risky masquerade would have provided more than enough of a
plotline by itself, but Niccol raises the stakes by introducing a love
interest (Uma Thurman) whose outer perfection hides her inner
weaknesses, as well as including a hastily resolved murder subplot
that's easily the movie's flimsiest element. Niccol also gets solid
performances out of Hawke and Jude Law, as the crippled genetic superman
who sells his persona to Vincent. Aside from looking gorgeous
throughout, Thurman doesn't have much to do, but she seems much more at
home here than she did in the campy climate of "Batman & Robin."
 Unlike most recent science-fiction, "Gattaca" actually gives you
something to talk about on the way home, and you're certain to think of
it again the next time you clip your fingernails and buff away some dry
skin.
James Sanford

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
I admit that I was very excited to see "Gattaca", and perhaps my expectations
influenced my feelings about the film, either good or bad. I think this is
probably common thing that happens to movie critics. The premise for this
movie really intrigued me, and I've been anxious to see it ever since I saw
my first preview for it a few months ago.
The point is, I quite liked this film. I battled with myself over whether it
deserved more than 3 stars, but to be completely honest, it probably doesn't
deserve more. DESERVE being the main factor.
The plot for "Gattaca" is very intriguing though. The issues it brings up,
even by themselves, made this film so noteworthy. Sure, some people will
argue that similar things have indeed been done, but I still found this film
to be very magnetizing. The main problem here is the lack of character
development. I didn't find the stoic-ness of the actors to be quite as
negative as many critics seemed to. I think their lack of emotional depth was
all part of the story; part of what it was trying to say about the future.
Still, the characters did need more attention, and perhaps their "true
feelings" should have been buried deep down, stiffled, but making themselves
known here and there. Instead, the people just seemd to be void of emotions.
That may work for what the movie is trying to say, but when it comes to some
of the central characters, we needed more to draw us in.
The opening visuals were great. Nothing profound, but still, near microscopic
images of falling fingernails, hairs, and skin cells were very well done.
Nice imagery to start out the film.
There were also a few problems with the plot besides character development.
Some unanswered questions remained at the films end. Subtle continuities were
passed over, but probably nothing to worry about. Other things, however, just
seemed too simple or too implausable within the futuristic setting. "If they
can do this in the future, how come they can't do this?" Those are the kinds
of things that went thru my mind.
This review sounds harsh and negative, but I do want to stress that I quite
enjoyed the film and I would definitely recommend it. I think that all my
"ranting and raving" was more to help myself feel at peace for not giving it
a higher grade. That's how much I liked it. This is one of those films where
I have to remind myself that QUALITY and ENJOYABILITY are not quite the same.
Still, this is definitely a worthy effort!

Author
Scott Renshaw
GATTACA
(Columbia)
Starring:  Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Alan Arkin, Jude Law, Loren Dean.
Screenplay:  Andrew Niccol.
Producers:  Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg and Stacey Sher.
Director:  Andrew Niccol.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, sexual situations, violence)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     GATTACA arrives with the kind of "torn from today's headlines"
premise which should guarantee a provocative story.  Studies suggesting
genetic predispositions for certain medical conditions and stories of
cloned animals have generated the uneasy feeling that ethics are trailing
science by too wide a margin.  On the heels of those stories comes a film
about a near-future where genetic determinism has turned America into a
de facto caste system.  A blood test at birth brands every individual with
an incontrovertible marking post of his or her potential; those whose base
pairs don't line up quite right (a chance of developing diabetes, perhaps)
are relegated to the fringes of society.  Parents genetically engineer
offspring rather than risking a "faith birth," because spinning the
ribonucleic roulette wheel could have Junior designated a janitor before
the umbilicus is cut.
     Into that world steps Vincent Freeman (Ethan Hawke), a "faith birth"
doomed from the start with myopia and a weak heart.  Vincent, however,
isn't willing to play by the rules, not when his dream is to enter the
space program headquartered at Gattaca.  Enter a black marketeer (Tony
Shalhoub) whose business is helping the genetically disadvantaged.
Vincent is introduced to Jerome Morrow (Jude Law), a stellar genetic
specimen who, inconveniently, was rendered parplegic in an auto accident.
Thus Vincent and Jerome become a team -- Vincent providing a healthy body
for Jerome's identity, and Jerome providing the necessary bodily fluids to
validate that identity.  There is only one small problem, or rather
several million of them:  any hair, any cell, any trace of Vincent could
betray his true identity as an "invalid."
     Writer/director Andrew Niccol does an exceptional job of guiding the
feel of this brave new world, from Jan Roelfs' sterile production design
to Michael Nyman's restrained score, creating an intriguing backdrop for
the exploration of how people deal with externally imposed limitations.
The concept works; Niccol's execution of that concept often doesn't.
GATTACA ends up reading much better than it plays, though it doesn't play
terribly.  It's simply an intellectualized film experience, one which
attempts to make its point in overly hushed tones.
     In principle, that's a noble goal, particularly when some film-makers
(who shall remain Oliver Stone) prefer to beat their messages into the
back of your head.  But GATTACA is framed as a suspense film and a murder
mystery -- the unknown "invalid" called Vincent Freeman becomes a suspect
when his hair is found where "Jerome Freeman's" boss has been killed --
and Niccol doesn't have a handle on creating the requisite tension.  As
many times as Vincent is almost discovered in GATTACA, the film rarely
gets you caught up in his personal predicament.  The subject matter is
ready-made for inspiring passionate feeling, discomfort or outrage
directed at a social order so contrary to our notions of personal
responsibility and freedom.  It's not enough for Niccol to give viewers
something to nod their heads at in agreement.  He should be working
harder to make them angry.
     It's a particularly frustrating approach because GATTACA is
unimpeachable on so many other levels.  The performances are rock solid,
the production values impeccable, and the script well-stocked with
supporting characters who have a chance to learn about themselves through
Vincent's determination.  It just doesn't _move_; it's a philosophy lesson
more than a gripping narrative.  GATTACA is well-crafted enough that it
could very well leave you thinking.  If it left you _feeling_ nearly as
much, it might be deserving of its own headlines.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Has that body of yours not lived up to your expectations?  Has it
not proved suitably adroit?  And has your mind been all too fallible?
     Well, if you lived in "the not too distant future" as Vincent
does, then you could blame your defects on your parent's choice.
Unless they recklessly conceived you in a "natural" or "faith" birth,
you were genetically engineered in a petri dish, and your parents got
to choose all of your characteristics from the best of their genes.
All they needed to do was make their desires known to the genetic
counselor and science took over from there.
     Although this may sound like Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World,"
the mesmerizing new thriller GATTACA by writer and director Andrew
Niccol has closer genetic kinship with CONTACT for its love of science
and its mystical aura of an unknown future.  Whereas CONTACT was laden
with pretension, GATTACA, in contrast, takes a more lyrical than
literal approach.  Both share a surprising tranquillity even when their
characters are being overwhelmed by the situation at hand.
     The movie GATTACA comes with its own fail-safe system.  Even if
you hate the story -- highly unlikely -- the production will dazzle you
with its striking beauty.  Unless all Hollywood misses seeing the film,
there will undoubtedly be a host of Academy Award nominations for the
film's artistic achievements.
     The sets by Jan Roelfs (LITTLE WOMEN) are breathtaking.  From the
futuristic treadmills to the desks surrounded by short cylindrical
cubicles to the sleekly cold and starkly massive buildings, every set
is a treat for the eyes.  Slavomir Idziak's bronze-hued cinematography
and the dreamy music by Michael Nyman (THE PIANO) give a peaceful edge
to an intense story.  The GQ uniform-like attire by Colleen Atwood
(LITTLE WOMEN) reminds one of the lemmings-like schoolroom scene from
PINK FLOYD - THE WALL.  Even the film's hair stylist, Bette Iverson,
deserves special mention for the high greasy sheen look.  The net
result of this creative team is to transport you to the future without
heavy reliance on science fiction gadgets or fancy special effects.
     "They used to say that 'a child conceived in love is a child of
happiness,'" complains Vincent, the film's protagonist.  "They don't
say that any more."  Vincent, played with suitably cold precision but
an undeniable inner charm by Ethan Hawke, has been branded for life by
his parent's indiscretion.  He was born because of an assignation in
the backseat of a car rather than the proper mixing in a test tube.
When the machine at his birth pronounced that his heart had a
ninety-nine in a hundred chance of failure by age thirty, his parents
decided not to gamble again.  They paid the money necessary to ensure
that Vincent's brother Anton (Loren Dean) would have a scientific
birth.
     The future belongs to the genetic upper class.  "We now have
discrimination down to a science," complains the genetically challenged
Vincent.  Jobs go to the perfect, and constant urine and blood tests
ensure that none of the riffraff sneaks in.
     Vincent has a single desire in life, to become an astronaut.
Although the best he can do is secure a position as a night-time
janitor in the space agency, Vincent has a plan, and what a plan, to
break into the elite corps.
     Vincent procures the aid of a DNA broker (Tony Shalhoub) to fake
an identity.  Using the DNA from a donor named Jerome (Jude Law), the
broker tells Vincent, "you could go anywhere with this guy's helix
tucked under your arm."  And he does.  With an interview that consists
of nothing more than a blood test, Vincent, hence forward known as
Jerome, starts work as an astronaut.  The riveting story devotes more
time to the minutia of the ways the two Jeromes contrive to fool the
agency than to the fake Jerome's romantic attachment to fellow agency
scientist Irene Cassini (Uma Thurman).
     All of the acting is exceptional with Ethan Hawke, especially in
his voice-over, being the best.  In a richly textured show, many minor
characters stand out.  Alan Arkin and Loren Dean, for example, are
marvelous as a detective and his investigator who look into the
mysterious death of the director of the space agency.  The film has
enough material for a much longer film, but editor Lisa Zeno Churgin
manages somehow to trim it down to normal length with the result that
every minute is captivating.
     In a film with so many high points it becomes difficult to
highlight a few.  One has to be the chemistry between the real Jerome
and his genetic fake.  "I got the better end of the deal," reflects the
genetic donor to his donee.  "I only lent you my body, but you lent me
your dreams."  Even the small aspects such as the frequent rockets
blazing off to the far planets give the show a serenity that has to be
seen to be properly appreciated.  My personal favorite: the way one
character deduces that the space agency's astronaut is the ersatz
Jerome.  GATTACA is the rare show that far surpasses its already
promising trailers.
     GATTACA runs a fast 1:52.  It is rated PG-13 for a scene of a dead
body and for mature themes.  Although the film would be acceptable for
kids nine and up, they probably need to be teenagers to be interested.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Jude Law, Loren Dean, and Alan Arkin
Ingredients: 
Futuristic corporate world where genetics determines promotion,
impersonator who bucks the system, girlfriend, murder 
Synopsis:
In a world which lacks emotion or real relationships, Vincent (Ethan
Hawke), a nearsighted young man with a heart condition, dreams of being
selected for a manned space mission. Unfortunately, Vincent lives in a
futuristic world with a rather cruel social system - - where society is
based completely on DNA testing. The world is robotic, cold fish, and
corporate; well-dressed crowds of people file behind desks in long,
neutral office rooms after going through a series of DNA detection
machines. In order to accomplish his astronaut dream, normal guy Vincent
impersonates someone genetically perfect, since only genetically
enhanced people can get white collar jobs.
As the movie starts, Vincent is only moments from being selected for the
space mission of his dreams. He's wearing a dark suit, and everyone
calls him Jerome. Through a flashback and voice narration Vincent
explains to us that he is not really Jerome. He is an imposter who is
impersonating Jerome. He has risen through the ranks with the help of
the real Jerome (Jude Law), a wheelchair-bound genetically enhanced
person who is bitter at the system. (When an accident left him paralyzed
and no longer elite, Jerome soon found he didn't like the system.) To
spite the system, Vincent and Jerome have joined forces in an elaborate
charade. Vincent has been impersonating Jerome, while Jerome has been
supplying the blood, urine, fingernail and hair clippings, etc. needed
in order to fool DNA testing. If they can manage the charade for just
one more week, Vincent will accomplish his dream of participating in a
manned mission to one of Saturn's moons.
Unfortunately, when one of the directors at Vincent's workplace is
murdered and police are crawling all over the facility, all it takes to
discover Vincent and Jerome's secret is an eyelash, a hair, a touched
door handle, a print on a glass or a bit of saliva in the wrong place.
Soon the innocent Vincent (in his guise as Jerome) is implicated in the
murder, and the charade becomes a matter of life and death. 
How long can they maintain the charade?
This film is a suspenseful, intelligent science fiction piece whose main
theme is impersonation (i.e. the film is not about romance, action, or
solving a murder). The setting of the story is a rather robotic future,
but despite the setting's lack of emotional warmth, it fascinates
because the genetic situation appeals to our real life fear of the
consequences of genetic tampering on society. 
'Gattaca' keeps our attention with good old fashioned suspense, and the
fear that the hero might be discovered at any time is with us all the
away until the final 10 minutes of the movie. A subplot of the film is
Vincent's romance with Irene (Uma Thurman). Here, too, the romantic
element isn't emphasized but serves as another way the charade might be
discovered; the charade makes the movie.
On the negative side, the last 10 minutes of the film include a scene
with a swim contest that doesn't really matter, and an underplayed scene
where Vincent sees a doctor before the movie ends. These last few
minutes could probably be sharpened and improved by cutting out the swim
contest entirely and hyping the suspense music on the doctor scene
before the movie ends. 
I like the movie because of its underlying questions.

Author
Ernest Lilley
British filmmaker Andrew Niccol wanted to make a film longer than 60 
seconds. With the release of GATTACA, billed by Columbia Pictures as a 
"science fiction thriller", he has succeeded beyond his wildest dreams. 
Alas. Not only is GATTACA longer than a minute, its pacing appears to 
stretch the time spent watching the movie like some relativistic time 
dilation.
Ethan Hawke (EXPLORERS, DEAD POET'S SOCIETY, REALITY BITES) plays 
Vincent, a child conceived out of love and good intention, into a 
society where conception is a matter of careful genetic screening and 
manipulation. Although he escapes the intervention of the pre-natal 
geneticist, at the moment of his birth he receives his sentencing as a 
drop of his blood is read into sequence analyzers to be interpreted like 
the entrails of a sacrificial fowl. Damned by a litany of probable 
shortcomings, including a tendency towards violence and an expected 
coronary failure by age 30, Vincent is a willful weakling, ever in the 
shadow of his genetically flawless brother, the product of his parents' 
recantation of nature and society's taste for gene tailoring. 
Though the odds are on the genetically perfect, Vincent possesses that 
popular element of classic SF - the indomitable spirit, manifested in 
the desire to become an astronaut. Specifically a "Navigator Third 
Class" on the upcoming first mission to Titan, a role that none but the 
most genetically pure could be considered for. Vincent may not be 
perfect, but he never accepts his limitations. Through a very special 
broker he finds a member of the genetic elite who has suffered a 
crippling injury and assumes his identity through a bizarre symbiosis 
where the cripple, Jerome (Jude Law) provides him with a name and enough 
body waste and clippings to fool the genetic scanners at the GATTACA 
space agency. Why they call it GATTACA is one of the film's little 
mysteries. Nobody ever says. Vincent, now Jerome, rises to the top of 
the organization and reaches out to accept the coveted space on the 
Titan mission.
When the agency's director is beaten to death with a keyboard and the 
entire organization is subjected to increased scrutiny, Jerome/Vincent's 
deception becomes even more fragile. At the same time he falls in love 
with Irene (Uma Thurman - BATMAN AND ROBIN, PULP FICTION), despite the 
androgynous 1940s business suits that everyone wears. Will he manage to 
avoid the murder investigation and join the Titan mission? Will Irene 
lose her flawed heart to Jerome/Vincent? Will this movie ever end?
A remarkable cast assembled to create this deadpan dystopia. Alan Arkin 
plays a future Colombo on the killer's trail. Gore Vidal is the Mission 
Director who has devoted his life to the exploration of space, Ernest 
Borgnine (Borg-9? Any relation to Seven of 9?) is a janitor whose role 
in the film is only hinted at. His real contribution to the film is 
lying, I suspect, on the editing room floor.
Andrew Niccol wrote and directed this bit of supposedly serious SF, but 
I suspect that he's never read SF and is a bit put off by it. Mr. 
Niccol's future is as devoid of trappings of technology as he could make 
it. The only science evident exists in black boxes that pop up pictures 
of the owners of whatever bit of hair, skin or spittle is fed into them. 
Evenings are spent in classic smoke filled salons in formal evening wear 
and "hovercraft and epaulets" have been strictly banned from the set. 
Mr. Niccols has taken it on himself to reinvent Science Fiction by 
removing the techno-glitter from Sci-Fi and creating the world in a 
retro-classic image. Although the cast praised his vision, comments by 
the writer/director are conspicuously absent from the studio's press 
kit. His moral message of the inadequacy of class distinction is 
delivered with little enthusiasm, and less plausibility. Yes, it is a 
frightening prospect that testing may reveal so much about us that we 
never dream of challenging our proscribed limits. No, I didn't believe 
that Jerome/Vincent could get away with it, or even that he should. 
Worse, I strongly doubt that anyone will remain interested in the film 
long enough to come to their own conclusion. Even if you were to remove 
the minute traces of SF from the film it would teeter shakily on its 
underpinnings of Mystery and Romance. If studios cannot bear the thought 
of turning to authors of SF for good SF scripts, they should stick to 
Sci-Fi SFX extravaganzas.
If GATTACA is the Science Fiction Drama of the year, 'tis a lean year 
indeed.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
In 1986, British police officers changed the face of law enforcement
forever. Baffled by two brutal rape-murders, the police decided to take
blood samples from every young man in the area. The search for the
murderer, dramatized in Joseph Wambaugh's "The Blooding", ended in the
apprehension and conviction of a suspect based solely on genetic
identification.
The same concept is carried to a fare-thee-well in "Gattaca", a
cautionary fable about the dangers of genetic discrimination. Our hero
is Ethan Hawke, a genetically disadvantaged social climber trying to
join the genetically perfect elite in a futuristic society where it's
not what you know, or even who you know, but who you are that counts.
The only "network" you use to get a job at Gattaca, Inc. is the
double-helix network of your DNA strand. Like a light-skinned
African-American "passing" for white in a racist society, Hawke is
forced to live a precarious double existence, buying tissue and blood
from a disabled person with superior gene structure (Jude Law) and
living in what looks like a Danish modern genetics lab. When the murder
of a co-worker puts the law onto Hawke's genetic trail, a game of
cat-and-mouse ensues.
The futuristic trappings aside, the plot of "Gattaca" doesn't differ
from "The Blooding" in any appreciable way. Hawke, innocent of the crime
of murder, has committed the crime of genetic impersonation, and it's
just a question of how long he can evade the constant genetic probes
before his own genetic structure gives him away. That's not interesting.
The characters aren't interesting, either. Hawke plays his
poor-man's-Tom-Cruise part to the best of his abilities, but he does
nothing to hold the audience's interest. Uma Thurman is wasted as a
genetically superior ice princess. The supporting cast isn't much
better, with a raft of refugees from NBC's Thursday night schedule (Tony
Shalhoub, Ernest Borgnine, Blair Underwood) and not much else. All the
performances are strictly room-temperature, save for Jude Law's turn as
the sarcastic wheelchair-bound tissue donor.
My question is this. You're parents, right? You can make your kid into
anything you want to be, whether he's a pianist with twelve fingers or a
prototype NFL quarterback. You would think that billions of different
people would make different choices, right? But in "Gattaca", it looks
like everyone has bought the same showroom model -- the Yuppie LX. (The
set design looks just like an Infiniti ad.) The "Gattaca" employees are
bland, dull, Organization Men in identical designer suits. Looks as
though they've edited the gene for non-conformity right out of the
genome. If this is the point of the movie -- and it may well be -- it
may not be worth making.
And if they're going to show one side of the coin -- the genetic elite
setting orbital patterns in a Bauhaus office complex -- I think the
filmmakers have an obligation to show the dark side of genetic
tampering. I was driving down Guadalupe Avenue in Austin this evening
and got a good look at what the GenX college students are doing as far
as hair color and tattoos -- I wonder what would happen if they gave
these kids their own gene splicer to play with? But there's no
subversive cyberpunks anywhere to counterbalance the bland conformity
that is "Gattaca".
"Gattaca" (the name, by the way, derives from the letters G, A, T, and C
in genetic coding) is a serious, almost humorless movie. To it's credit,
the film does a good job in raising questions about the intersection of
human rights and genetic technology, almost before they've been asked.
But as entertainment, it's a snooze, and as a thriller, it's a flat out
disappointment.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
Your Guide to the Hollywood Stock Exchange
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Are you kidding?  No jury in the world would
convict a baby for murder.  Well, maybe Texas."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     While some pairs of identical twins lead surprisingly similar
lives, frequently they do not and frequently they show different
interests and potential.  So there are limitations on the information
about the adult that can be augured by a DNA examination.  That makes
it seem to be unlikely that we would ever get to the world as it is
shown in GATTACA where everything anyone wants to know about you is
encoded into your DNA.  However, GATTACA assumes that the world has
decided that DNA is the most reliable way of judging a person in spite
of counter-examples like Vincent (played by Ethan Hawke) the main
character of this story.  Vincent has been delegated to the labor class
based on his DNA.  He looks wistfully at the rockets blasting off from
the Gattaca Corporation and dreams of going off into space.  He is
highly motivated, but nobody notices because his DNA says that he just
does not have the potential to be much more than a floor sweeper,
permanently a part of the under-class.  One wonders how so inaccuratea
test could be accepted without question by a society, particularly
after age of civil rights and civil liberties advances.
     Vincent knows he does not have a chance of being chosen by the
Gattaca Corporation for one of their probes into space, so he decides
to literally reinvent himself.  There is a criminal element who are
willing to match him up with a human with a much better DNA structure
who can supply him with hairs, urine samples, blood samples and any
other kind of sample so that all the samples that Gattaca takes from
him will really be from Jerome (Jude Law).  Jerome agrees to live with
Vincent, providing him with sufficient biological specimens to give to
the company and letting Vincent take on Jerome's name.  This is a
tricky process involving things like false finger tips filled with
Jerome's blood form the ID machine that takes a sample.  We see how
Vincent is occasionally able to substitute Jerome's specimens for his
own, but it is never really convincing that he could do that whenever
the need arises.  Vincent romances a fellow employee Irene Cassini (Uma
Thurman) who gets pulled into this web of deception.
     The story moves at a languorous pace showing how the world has
changed since the conversion to the DNA standard.  Andrew M. Niccol who
wrote and directed has given us a "not too distant future" that is not
entirely convincing, but is still worth seeing.  Loose ends abound, but
that may be part of the point.  For example, Vincent has taken over for
Jerome and is telling the world that he is the same person, but Jerome
has a "toffee-nosed" British accent and so presumably comes from an
environment that would produce such an accent.  Vincent does not havea
British accent at all.  Yet nobody seems to even care to compare
Vincent to his claimed background. It is hard to place how far this
world is in the future.  Women and men at Gattaca dress in almost
identical uniforms and women wear their hair in almost masculine
styles.  Cars make the whining sound of turbines, but still look a lot
like the cars of today.
     The photography by Slawomir Idziak is just a bit showy, bathing
some scenes in yellow or blue light. Particularly in the first half of
the film it is often his camerawork that creates the mood in scenes
devoid of any music.  It gives the world a repressive, sterile, dry
feel.  Michael Nyman's score when it does kick in is repetitive almost
to the point of being minimalist.
     GATTACA has a few places where it could have had the details
better developed, but it is a complex story, perhaps of the complexity
of a novel.  It is told without the too common problems of science
fiction of too much special effects replacing careful thought.  If
anything, GATTACA is a film that substitutes intelligence for
explosions.  This is about people caught up in a sort of cautionary
dystopic world.  It may not be a likely world, but it has well-
developed character in this world.  Overall I would rate GATTACA a +2
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) In a world where children are genetically screened and
filtered before birth, Vincent is born with no artificial genetic help
from his parents. Which is too bad for him because he is born into a
society where a job interview consists solely of evaluating your DNA. 
Vincent's parents decide to have another child - a boy, for Vincent.
This time they get the help of a geneticist. So Vincent grows up weaker,
shorter and less graceful than his younger brother Anton. If that
weren't enough, mom and dad treat the boys differently, as if Vincent
might break from the same fall that Anton brushes off. Understandably,
Vincent grows up wanting to get as far away from home - and from people
- as possible, all the way to the moons of Jupiter. 
Vincent (Ethan Hawke) makes an arrangement with Jerome (Jude Law), a
genetically superior person who had the bad luck to become paralyzed
from the waist down in an accident. Vincent uses Jerome's blood, urine,
skin, and name to get the job that will send him away from Earth. Jerome
gets room and board and a part of Vincent's income. 
When Vincent's mission director is murdered, cops and FBI "hoovers"
(referring to the cell-gathering vacuums and to J. Edgar Hoover) begin a
close genetic scrutiny of all employees at Gattaca. A wayward eyelash of
Vincent's (not Jerome's) is found and the cops believe they are close to
finding the murderer. 
It sounds a lot like a sci-fi thriller, but really Gattaca is more a
human drama. The backdrop happens to be an Orwellian future, but the
story itself is a simple tale of a man with a dream fighting against
stereotypes. 
On the one hand, It was wonderful. It was a somber, dark, quiet, human
movie. The story was a noble struggle against an unfair oppressor, but
it was handled with quiet determination, not violent intensity. The
metaphoric details were relevant both to the story and to the underlying
myth. For example, our hero's last name is Freeman, his dream is to fly
to the stars, and those who hold him back judge his ignoble birth, not
his spirit. 
The pacing was calm and unhurried. The lighting and production design
was not literal but mood-setting: cars had fluorescent bulb-colored
headlights, Vincent's home was richly tinted blue, work was cold, stark
and clean. Overall, it felt like a return to the womb. It really drew me
in and made me want to stay. Gattaca started with a simple, beautiful
idea, took a calm and dignified approach, and was capably and coherently
given life. It could have been a superb movie. 
On the other hand, several details were, not BAD, but missed their mark. 
When I attended film school, we called making use of narration an "NYU
Save," the joke being that if you failed to make a coherent movie,
adding a narration would save it. (It also allowed us to make fun of
another film school.) There is a lot of narration in GATTACA. It didn't
DETRACT, but it made me wonder why the filmmakers thought so much of it
was necessary. Perhaps if I weren't privy to the film school joke, I
wouldn't have even noticed the narration. But it is a valid criticism in
a medium that is supposed to show rather than tell. 
Also, the movie's setting says that genetic makeup might one day
predetermine our lives. This is the adversity the hero must face. But it
is a straw man adversity. The movie makes the point that a man is more
than just his genes, but there's little satisfaction in proving the
point because nobody is seriously arguing otherwise. 
Finally, and most importantly, many of the movie's specifics were very
obvious or very simple. For example, If you were in-valid (not
genetically enhanced) the only job you could get was night janitor.
Literally. The real killer is identified because she spat in her
victim's eye. Literally. These pieces ALMOST felt as if they were
included to make the story mythic, timeless, or metaphoric. But the rest
of the movie was too specific to make a good myth, and so these
literalized metaphors felt almost like a joke. 
The story itself, "overcoming discrimination to achieve your goals,"
suffers the same problems. It sounds timeless and mythic, taken out of
context. But in a specific movie with a specific cast in a physical set,
open-ended metaphor slips down into uninspired reality. That's why I
think Gattaca would make a better book than a movie. All the elements
that, in the film seemed uninspired, would, with a reader's imagination,
be accepted more poetically. 
I'm rooting for GATTACA to do well because I think it was an inspired
attempt at timeless filmmaking (by a novice director, no less), but for
me, it didn't quite make it.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Matt Petras
Reviewer: M.P.  (bootsector@hotmail.com)
In a world where being conceived the natural way is looked
down upon, and being genetically altered is the only way to get a real
job. A story is born, a story that shows us a brief glimpse of what
could be and of what is mere fantasy. Gattaca is about the struggle to
survive against the impossible odds. Vincent(Ethan Hawke), is an
invalid who has a dream of flying into the stars because he doesn't
feel like he belongs. He is bared from decent jobs because he is an
invalid, a child who's conception was left to chance, he wasn't
genetically altered. Vincent goes against all the odds that a genetic
heart condition will kill him in his early 30's finds a way to get
past the system. Everything goes great until there is a murder at his
place of work, 'Gattaca'. The ensuing investigation brings him closer
to Irene(Uma Thurman) a co-worker assigned to help the police
investigation of the murder. The murder threatens his survival more
than seemingly possible since he had nothing to do with the crime in
question.  
This story is build up very well and the pacing of it builds
up very well. The story is set in a very sterile environment...
something similar to our earth today, albeit a bit further in the
future. And the director lets the audience know what the circumstances
are and how the protagonist finds himself in his situation. Although
this portion of the movie is a bit slower than the rest of the movie,
it is required and well balanced to the rest of the movie. Unlike many
other Sci-Fi movies of late, this one gives you the background to its
complex setting and brings the audience further into the story. The
setting is marvelously created, and everything seems fairly accurate
with at the very least current technology. Although some things can be
questioned, the movie does not leave gaping holes about the setting,
or situation, what holes are there can be overlooked. This movie shows
details that many other movies have intentionally avoided, so if the
sight of urine in a jar or bag bothers you, you may be advised not to
watch this movie. BUT don't get me wrong, these are merely props and
aren't the focus of the movie although they are seen from time to
time. That had to be mentioned unfortunately because not all people
react the same way to seeing bodily fluids. A few small things didn't
make much sense, and in my opinion seemed a bit predictable. But these
things although predictable to some extent are well placed and for the
most part not blatantly obvious. Aside from Vincent's real brother
just happening to be assigned to the murder case(must use willing
suspension of disbelief). Then again no story can be perfect and
without flaws, but that one point is a tad bit big... things like that
don't happen very often.
The acting in this movie is spectacular! The casting for this
movie in my opinion is perfect.  Although Ethan Hawke does look a bit
on the clumsy side in some places, and there is at the very least one
mistake in the script(wrong word used in dialogue). Ethan, plays the
role of Vincent almost perfectly. His mild clumsiness, shows that the
real Vincent is flawed and human, and at the same time shows a certain
grace that gives credit to the role. Although the acting by Ethan is
very good in my opinion, it wont be getting him an Oscar nomination.
Uma Thurman, who plays the role of Irene, is just stunning. The role
couldn't have been cast better. She plays the role very well, although
the role is a bit stiff at times. Uma, seems to glow in this movie(I
could be wrong here simply because I am male and find her very
attractive). Jude Law (Jerome, the person whose identity Vincent
borrows), also puts in a spectacular performance and plays the part of
Vincent's accomplice in duping the system really well. He seems like
he belongs in the role. And the conditions of the role demanded a fair
amount of patience, and the demands were more than met. All the acting
in this movie is of exceptional caliber, Ethan and Uma shine through
marvelously and are in themselves good reason to see this movie. 
Despite its flaws, and in some cases style oddities, this
movie is well worth the money you pay to watch it. Although I am
partial to Science Fiction movies in general, this one is in my humble
opinion one of the better ones that have been made in a rather long
time. And to top it all off, there are some subtle messages and ideas
in this movie.. it will leave you thinking, and if it doesn't you
should at least find the story entertaining. I rate this movie 3.5/4. 

Author
Homer Yen
Imagine that immediately after birth, a single drop of blood from the
newborn is taken and analyzed.  The genetic sequence reveals the
baby's entire future.  Its likelihood of disease, brain disorder,
baldness, and even its life expectancy is disclosed with a
slap-in-the-face cruelty.   In the not-so-distant future world of
Gattaca, medical science has evolved to such a point whereby this
procedure is commonplace.  The societal implications are more
profound.  Looking at one's genes is like looking at one's SAT scores.
Your results will predict (rightfully or wrongfully so) your success
and what you'll be able to accomplish.  
But why chance a less-than-perfect creation?  Medical science has also
progressed to the point where you can take the best of what the mom
and dad has to offer and genetically engineer the perfect baby.  And
as Gattaca begins, we see the young lives of two brother's who develop
a bitter sibling rivalry.  One is the perfectly engineered Anton
(Loren Dean).   The other, Vincent, (Ethan Hawke) was naturally
conceived.  He is God's child; an "de-gene-erate"; an "in-valid."  He
is diagnosed with a learning disorder, suffers from extreme myopia,
and is projected to live only 30 years.
But despite all of his imperfections, he has the desire to live, and
works hard to enter the Gattaca corporation, which launches manned
space flights.  But this is a fearsome world that subtly promotes
genetic discrimination.  After all of his attempts are thwarted
because he doesn't have the correct genetic makeup, he uses an illegal
DNA broker who sets him up with Jerome (Jude Law), a "valid" who was
paralyzed in a previous accident.  Jerome provides urine samples, hair
samples, blood samples and other body flotsam so that Vincent can
assume his identity and pursue his extraordinary goals.
Melancholy in atmosphere, the film focuses on Vincent's ascension
through a system that seeks to ground those who are genetically
deficient.  Danger presents itself for him in several ways.  A murder
at Gattaca makes Vincent the prime suspect, and he must summon all of
his wit to hide behind the facade of Jerome.  A slow-developing
relationship with a co-worker (Uma Thurman) may reveal his true
identity.  And there is also the uneasy relationship that he shares
with the real Jerome who at times seems unstable, cynical and
suicidal.
Jerome's character is fairly complex, who is a prisoner of perfection.
When they first meet, he displays his Olympic silver medal in disgust.
"I was supposed to be perfect, but only came in second.  How do you
expect to succeed," he asks.  Their relationship is one of the better
elements of this movie as both need each other to accomplish the
impossible.  However, other components of the genetic story line fall
short of their potential.  The storytelling is deliberate, but
ultimately boils down into a minor battle between the archetypes of
structure (Gattaca) vs. passion, intuition and heart, all of which are
embraced by Vincent.  Ethan Hawke does a good job emoting the
frailties of humanity against the lab-generated expectations of
perfection.  However, the script suffers from a lack of impact.  They
do well to give us a stimulating look into their antiseptic future.
Plausible and interesting, Gattaca poses what promises to be one of
the most complex moral issues that we will eventually face.  However,
the movie seemed unsure in its direction, and then ultimately decides
to "go Hollywood" by relying on a feel-good ending to wrap things up.
A tidy ending for such a tidy-looking movie?  That was a bit of a
shame when there were so many complex layers that could have been
further explored.
Science fiction in the movies has recently specialized in alien
invasions, but the best of the genre deals with ideas that peek into
our own humanity.  It was smart for this movie to stress character and
atmosphere over computer-generated effects.  The futuristic look is
also nicely accomplished.  Unfortunately, Gattaca only achieves a
slightly better-than-average composition.

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Alan Arkin, Jude Law
written and directed by Andrew Niccol
How I wanted to love Gattaca. From its bizzare opening credit
sequence, in which we see nail clippings and stubble fall to a neon
blue ground in slow motion, we know we're in store for unusual
Hollywood fare. But as with many directorial debuts (Niccol was given
a chance to direct based on the originality of his screenplay),
Gattaca falls short not in ambition but in execution.
Hawke stars as Vincent, a custodian in "the not so distant future",
who dreams of becoming an astronaut. High hopes, indeed, for in this
future births are genetically manipulated to help conceive "perfect"
children, and our naturally birthed hero has both myopia and a heart
condition which prevent him from becoming anything more than a
second-class citizen. "In the future, discrimination has come down to
a science," he intones in (seemingly endless) narration.
Enter Jerome (Law), a "valid" citizen recently left paralyzed from a
car accident. He'll assist Vincent by donating his perfect blood and
perfect urine for a price, a price which the desperate janitor gladly
accepts. A few months later, Vincent, now calling himself Jerome, is
an eager executive of the Gattaca Aerospace Corporation, welcome in
the rooms he was once only allowed to sweep. But when the Mission
Director's murder coincides with "Jerome"'s promotion to astronaut,
Vincent worries in the act of investigation his true identity may be
uncovered.
To his credit, Niccol sets about telling his complex story in a simple
manner, with emphasis on emotions and not science. But said story is
also repetitive, clicheed, and a romantic subplot between Vincent and
Irene (Thurman) is oddly unerotic and unsentimental. Yes, they're
essentially clones, but they're not robots! It doesn't help that Uma
Thurman is weightless as an actress, upstaged by her own beauty.  The
most effective performance comes from Law, who in a few broad strokes
creates a realistic, sympathetic, tragic figure worthy of a better
film.
And, while no plot string is left untied, there are too many endings
and pat resolutions. More often than not lately I find myself wanting
a film to finish twenty minutes before it does (Ransom is a perfect
recent example), and Gattaca is no exception. Though I will have fond
memories of Michael Nyman's lovely score, some of the production
design, and the performances of Ethan Hawke and Jude Law, I will
always recall Gattaca as having, like its main character, too many
flaws to be taken seriously.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Gattaca (1997)
Rated PG-13 for brief violent images, language, some sexuality, and nudity
---------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Ethan Hawke, Uma Thurman, Loren Dean, Jude Law, Alan Arkin, Tony Shalhoub, Gore Vidal, and Xander
Berkeley
With the release of GATTACA, I began to wonder why all science fiction
films deal with destructive aliens, or aliens in general.  Hollywood
has given audiences plenty of thrills with those alien films, but what
was usually lacking was a good story... and good characters... and
good acting, etc (CONTACT being the exception).  And for some reason,
Hollywood has never taken a look at the aliens here on Earth.  The
closest, that I have seen anyway, was 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY, which
made mankind an alien race themselves, being dwarfed by the technology
which they created.
Now comes GATTACA, another film about technology reigning supreme,
except here on our planet.  The difference between 2001 and this one
is simple: GATTACA is more frightening.  Most of the concepts of this
movie are based on recent discoveries in genetic engineering.  Using
this premise, writer/director Andrew Niccol creates some genuine
suspense and thrills.  Unfortunately, due to a lack of advertising, I
fear GATTACA may fair horribly at the box office.  Since seeing the
film, I have been asking people if they have seen GATTACA.  Lately,
however, I have been asking them if they have even heard of GATTACA.
Most people don't even realize that it is a film.  Despite this fact,
I surely hope that the audience members who have seen this film will
tell their friends about it.  Niccol's film deserves more than what
Independence Day made because it is smarter, better produced, and more
realistic.
GATTACA begins in the 21st Century.  Procreating is now done in a
petri dish, and genetic engineering is the normal way of doing it.
Natural child birth is considered old-fashioned.  We are introduced to
Jerome Morrow (Ethan Hawke), an employee of the Gattaca space program.
One of the directors of the program has been murdered, and the main
suspect is one Vincent Freeman.  The only problem is that Jerome
Morrow IS Vincent Freeman.  Vincent was born the natural way when his
parents decided on bringing their first child into the world through
love.  However, after his birth, and through several genetic tests,
doctors tell his parents that he will have a 99% chance of a weak
heart, as well as poor eye sight and a short life span.  As a result,
both parents decide to bring their next baby into the world via
genetics.  Anton (Loren Dean) is produced without flaws, and the
competition between brothers spawns.  Vincent has a dream to fly a
solo-flight around the Titan, the 14th moon of Saturn, but because of
his condition, Gattaca, and society in general, forces him to do
menial labor around the company.
Labeled an "in-valid," Vincent's dream seems impossible, until he
meets a black-market DNA specialist, German (Tony Shalhoub).  German
introduces him to a "valid" who has been paralized from the waste down
due to an automobile accident.  Jerome Morrow (Jude Law) agrees to
give Vincent all the proper identification tools (urine, blood, skin
and hair samples, etc.) that he will need to get past Gattaca's tight
security.  In exchange, Vincent will provide Jerome with the rent
money and friendship.  After the murder, however, his dreams are put
at risk due to one of Vincent's eyelashes left at the scene of the
crime.  Irene Cassini (Uma Thurman) is a genetically flawed "valid"
working for Gattaca, and she begins to fall in love with
Vincent/Jerome.
GATTACA is one of the best science fiction films I have seen in a long
time.  Only two other intelligent science fiction films have come out
in the past two years (CONTACT and THE ARRIVAL) and GATTACA will rank
among them.  Unfortunately, whenever one intelligent film comes out
against special effects-laden films, it normally gets buried.  The
second best thing about GATTACA is the production design by Jan
Roelfs.  The orange glow of GATTACA's scenes are impressive, but the
sets deserve most of the credit.  The sets are very well done,
creating a futuristic sense, but not too futuristic as to alienate
viewers.  As we look at the designs, we realize that these buildings
aren't too far into the future.  This brings the plot even more
credibility as genetic engineering becomes more possible by every
passing day.  The best thing, however, is the plot.  The story is more
than your average sci-fi/thriller.  At its heart, it develops a theme
which is never overpowering but is always present.  Perhaps Niccol is
warning our race about the changes genetic tampering could bring.
Would our society become a bunch of soulless zombies?  Maybe human
nature is a result of mankind's flaws.  If we get rid of flaws, do we
get rid of dreams as well?  Niccol's intelligent script handles all
these questions extremely well, and the result is an incredibly smart
thriller set against a dramatic story, or vice versa.
The power of the actors brings a lot of credibility to flat
characters.  While flat may sound like a poor job on Niccol's part, it
actually enhances the meaning behind the story.  Ethan Hawke has
developed into a handsome adult actor, giving his best performance of
his lifetime so far.  His curiosity and motivation pushes his
character past all the discouraging remarks from his parents and
"valid" peers.  Uma Thurman is... well, Uma Thurman.  Her character is
slightly underdeveloped, but the story isn't about her.  However,
Thurman gives a lot of depth to the flat character.  Jude Law gives
the most complex performance of the film with the most disturbingly
realistic character.  He provides several nice touches, and his final
scene is a very touching and heartwrenching one.  Loren Dean gives a
nice performance in his well-developed character.  Dean is also
responsible for some of the most suspenseful scenes in the movie.
Alan Arkin portrays one of the detectives with a little less more
excitement than with his psychiatrist in GROSSE POINTE BLANK.  Still,
he does a good job.  Gore Vidal and Xander Berkeley both provide some
very good supporting roles, and Berkeley also gives a heartfelt
discussion towards the end of the film.
GATTACA is rated PG-13 for brief violent images, language, some
sexuality, and nudity.  Despite the somber and desolate mood of the
entire film, I wasn't exactly prepared for the ending which left me
feeling empty.  It turned me off slightly, but then I realized that
everything turned out the way it should have.  If this had been a
typical Hollywood film, it would have ended much differently.
However, with all the mindless science fiction films out there, it is
nice to have a film which doesn't talk down to its audience (I
especially like the ironic title and how it consists of the four
letters which make up the genetic coding: G, T, C, and A).  Instead,
it provides some much needed entertainment which gives us science
fiction fanatics just what we want: a science fiction film with morals
behind it.  Whatever happened to giving the audience a lesson while
entertaining?  Hopefully more writers and directors will learn from
GATTACA... and hopefully audiences will too.
P.S. Personal note to P.J. Gladnick: How dare you call this film the
worst film of the year.  I can't even begin to image what film you do
like.  That frightens me beyond anything.
Reviewed by Respect (pun intended) - respect@aros.net
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     GATTACA is a good-enough genetic-engineering thriller, set in the
not-too-distant future, where a daring young janitor (Ethan Hawke) is
determined to become an astronaut, despite his having a set of genes
that precludes any participation in the space program.  (In this far-
from-far-fetched future world, a job interview involves little more than
a blood test.) With an assist from his friendly neighborhood black-
marketeer (Tony Shalhoub), he adopts the identity of another young man
(Jude Law), a crippled-but-otherwise-okay lookalike whose record doesn't
reflect a broken back, and who can provide the requisite samples of
blood, skin, hair, and urine.  And everything works wonders until a
murder happens at Mission Control and the resulting cell-by-cell sweep
of the scene yields a certain person's eyelash.  Ouch.  As a cautionary
tale of science-we'll-soon-see, GATTACA is endlessly intriguing.  As a
sci-fi potboiler, however, it just ain't suspenseful enough.  The char-
acters are stronger than you might expect, but writer/director Andrew
Niccol doesn't put 'em through nearly enough paces.  (The climax is... a
swim chase!?) And then there are those nagging story details, like bus-
iness suits worn aboard rocket ships.  Or that urine sample at the be-
ginning.  (How *does* Hawke's character fake it, with the doctor right
there staring at his schlong?  You got me...) With Uma Thurman, Alan
Arkin, Loren Dean, Ernest Borgnine and, looking completely out of place,
Gore Vidal.  Splendidly stark production design, too, by Jan Roelfs.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GATTACA ** Written and directed  by Andrew M. Niccol. Produced by Danny
DeVito et al. Photography, Slawomir Idziak. Editing,Lisa Zeno Churgin.
Production design, Jan Roelfs .Music, Michael Nyman. Cast: Ethan Hawke
(Vincent/Jerome), Uma Thurman (Irene Cassini), Gore Vidal (Director Josef),
Xander Berkeley (Lama), Jayne Brook (Marie), Elias Koteas (Antonio), Blair
Underwood (Geneticist), Mason Gamble (Younger Vincent), Vincent Nielson
(Younger Anton), Chad Christ (Young Vincent), William Lee Scott (Young
Anton), Clarence Graham  (Personnel Officer), Ernest Borgnine (Caesar, the
top janitor), Tony Shalhoub (German,the black-marketeer), Jude
Law(Jerome/Eugene Morrow, Alan Arkin (Hugo Coldspring), Carlton Benbry
(Gattaca Hoover), Loren Dean (Investigator/Anton Freeman), et al.  A
Sony/Columbia film. 106 min. PG-13.
Released in 1936, and just a stone's throw away from World War II, the
futuristic 1936 movie "Things to Come," from a much earlier novel by
H.G.Wells, was a vision of disastrous conflicts that were much later
followed by the new, utopian start of the space age. "Gattaca," set "in a
not too distant future", does not have a such a redemptive conclusion.
Life in it is pretty dreary. Genetic engineering divides people --at least
the limited groups we see, in two : the elite and all the others. The elite
comes from those babies that were created in vitro. They are all perfect
specimens. The rest , conceived in the nice old-fashioned way (including
the back seat of automobiles), are, like us, all born with weaknesses that
are predicted by immediate tests.
Of two brothers born respectively via the new and the old method, Anton
will join the Valid people's favored class, Vincent the In-Valids, the hoi
polloi. There is sibling rivalry. From his earliest years, Vincent dreams
of becoming a space explorer but realizing that he has the chance of a
snowball in hell, becomes bitter, albeit wonderfully well self-taught. Like
a few others (how many, we never learn), he eventually rebels against the
system. His tactic is "if you can't lick them, join them).
He hires a "DNA broker" whose illegal business is to have In-Valids assume
the genetic identity of Valids. For me this echoes the oft-made old film
"Imitation of Life," (from the Fannie Hurst novel), in which Claudette
Colbert (and later Lana Turner), had a black friend whose daughter's
complexion allowed the girl to "pass" for white. There is also "Pinky" and
other films.
In "Gattaca" this passing is called "a borrowed ladder." Vincent, modified
in sundry ways, borrows his identity from Jerome, a cynical, sad, boozing
former Silver Medalist swimmer, now wheelchair-bound after an accident. He
trades identities with Vincent and provides him with samples of blood and
urine. These are routinely, constantly used for identification.
As "Jerome," Vincent goes from janitor to scientist, joins the aerospace
(plus more, but this remains hazy) corporation called Gattaca, and hopes to
be among the chosen astronauts for a coming exploration of the planet
Titan. His impersonation is not without suspense yet works out until a
director of Gattaca is murdered. This brings in the police and heats things
up for our hero.
Much has been made in the media about "Gattaca" being a sci-fi picture that
shuns the deja vu effects, blasts, chases, shootings, ray-guns, morphing
and such of the contemporary sci-fi genre. There is, indeed, merit in a
picture that shifts gears from high to low in order to offer us a variant
of dystopia based on class distinctions. The film keeps the gadgetry down,
though not entirely out. It creates a sterile (rather than frightening)
atmosphere through people who act like semi-zombies, all in identical
business suits and moving in near lock-step.
There's much hidden irony here in the parallels with the hordes of
similarly desk-bound office-workers, whether in real life or in older (I'd
say pre-1960s) pictures. But "Gattaca" almost unremittingly takes itself
seriously. The "humorous relief" items that I remember are two. In one, a
pianist plays a Schubert  "Moment Musical," then is revealed to have 12
fingers. The other bit is linguistic. The terms for investigators are "J.
Edgars" or "Hoovers," doubly witty expressions since "to hoover" in British
English means to vacuum-clean.
In investigations, everything is "hoovered," as a single human hair or
flake of skin can prove the real identity of a suspect.  To protect himself
Vincent-Jerome engages in lengthy, vigorous ablutions to remove particles
of skin. But this is a patent impossibility and a flaw in the movie's
reasoning.
"Gattaca" is a high-concept film that tries to be an un-silly think-movie
too. Both ideas work, but feebly. Beyond the DNA premise we just don't have
enough --or any-- information about the minds, psyches, life or non-life of
the people; about the form of government; about anything else beyond the
narrow focus of Vincent's ambitions, and so on.
More attention is paid to the look of things than to their substance. No
doubt, the stage settings are good in their oppressive monotony,
uniformity, curves (rather than angles), dull colors and low light
levels--the latter typical of places where  computers do not require strong
ambient light.  No doubt there is superior camera work by the late director
Krzysztof Kieslowski's favorite cinematographer. But the rhythm is too
languid; there are enough holes to drain spaghetti through; a certain,
mixed retro look that includes cars and a depressing ballroom sequence goes
unexplained, as well as other sights.
In no order of importance, here are some other weaknesses. The  return to
obligatory cliches with the inclusion of Vincent's unexciting affair with
co-worker Uma Thurman who is more decorative than functional. The answer to
who was the killer, which I guessed effortlessly. Repetitions that include
the musical score. The lack of edge-of-seat suspense. The improbable
revelation that a major character bore close kinship to another person. The
lack of dimensionality of characters.
Like an increasing number of first-feature makers --often
promising--writer-director Andrew Niccol comes from the world of
commercials. (He is a New Zealander who made them in England). His
background may explain the lack of depth of this cautionary tale. The film
is by no means a failure, but as food for thought, it is a Continental
breakfast rather than a four-course meal of high cuisine.

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Nobody in Hollywood could have been more pleased with the scientific
   breakthrough announced earlier this year that British researchers had
   performed the first successful cloning of a live sheep than those at
   Sony Pictures associated with the GATTACA project.  In terms of
   timing, such news couldn't have been more perfectly orchestrated,
   bringing to the forefront of public awareness the increasing
   sophistication in the science of genetic research over the past
   decade.  When one combines this with the rampant paranoia and
   mistrust of the government pervasive in popular culture -- the number
   of conspiracy-oriented books lining shelves in stores and the success
   of similarly-themed TV show THE X-FILES is indication enough -- it's
   the perfect climate for the release of a film like GATTACA, which
   profiles a dystopic world of the future where one's DNA is the most
   crucial and valuable commodity.
   Yet, like most great science-fiction, the strength of GATTACA is that
   the film really isn't exclusively a science-fiction film -- at its
   core, it's a very human and often poignant story which deals with the
   themes of potential, spirit and identity.  There's no heavy reliance
   on showy visual effects or displays of stunning future technology, as
   is typical in most sci-fi films; GATTACA is essentially a
   character-oriented drama spun off from a dynamite premise.
   It's the not-too-distance future, and scientific advancements have
   reached an advanced state where genetic tinkering allows the rich to
   create offspring literally devoid of any imperfection. Society has
   been divided into two distinct classes, where success is determined
   by science: the genetically-engineered 'Valids', and the
   naturally-conceived 'In-Valids' who are limited by society due to
   their imperfect DNA structures to serve as working drones.  It's a
   world where prosperity is predetermined at birth; the Valids have the
   world at their feet -- an infinite realm of possibilities to pursue
   -- while the In-Valids have nary a reason to hope.  So what's Vincent
   Freeman (Ethan Hawke), an In-Valid with nearsightedness, emotional
   volatility and a congenital heart condition, to do?  Burdened his
   whole life by living in the shadow of his Valid brother Anton (Loren
   Dean), and by his seemingly-unfulfillable ambition to become an
   aeronautics navigator for the elite Gattaca Aerospace Corporation,
   he's left toiling as a maintenance worker, eyes aimed upwards at the
   stars.
   Of course, Vincent is not content to passively accept his fate, and
   GATTACA, then, is essentially an Underdog Film -- a familiar One Man
   Against Society story.  On that level it works well, but where the
   film truly flourishes is when it focuses upon Vincent's indomitable
   determination to surpass expectations and push himself to the
   boundaries of physical limitation in order to attain his dream,
   against all forms of adversity.  His relentless drive to succeed in a
   near-suicidal, virtually hopeless piece of subterfuge is powerfully
   affecting.  Aided immeasurably by Michael Nyman's stirring score --
   to date, the best score I've heard this year -- it's a genuinely
   moving celebration of the human spirit, while avoiding the trappings
   of becoming schmaltzy or sentimental.
   In fact, New Zealander screenwriter-director Andrew Nicol's feature
   debut is such an auspicious piece of work that it's mildly
   disheartening that the film delves into a generic thriller subplot,
   dealing with a murder mystery on the grounds of the Gattaca Aerospace
   Corporation.  While this successfully taps into paranoiac elements --
   given that Vincent's true identity can be traced through any form of
   DNA residue left, it's entrancing to observe his ritualistic grooming
   each morning to attempt to mask his true identity, and fascinating to
   watch him attempt to cover his tracks by stealthily vacuuming his
   desk and leaving decoy DNA samples (it reminded me in a sense to the
   great moment in WAIT UNTIL DARK where Alan Arkin's Harry Roat Jr.
   markedly pointed out that he hadn't *touched* anything in Susie's
   apartment) -- it also leaves gaping holes in logic which push
   credibility beyond the bounds of belief; consider, if you will, wily
   Detective Hugo (the aforementioned Mr. Arkin) unable to match a
   completely undisguised Vincent against a clearly-identical headshot
   image -- perhaps *Hugo* is nearsighted too.  The murder mystery
   flounders, adding very little to enhance GATTACA and distracts from
   the film's primary theme, but it doesn't sink it.
   Another vaguely ineffective subplot in GATTACA involves fellow
   Gattaca Aerospace Corporation trainee Irene, a genetically perfect
   woman (Uma Thurman - 'nuff said) who provides an interesting
   counterpoint to Vincent in terms of their approaches to adversity,
   but generally serves merely a decorative role in the film.
   Among its arsenal of strengths (crisp, sharp visuals by
   cinematographer Slawomir Idziak; wonderful costumes by the legendary
   Colleen Atwood), GATTACA benefits from superb casting.  Mr. Hawke is
   very solid and sympathetic as the undaunted protagonist and
   demonstrates that he can carry the film, while Ms. Thurman makes what
   she can out of her smallish role.  And who else would one cast as the
   authority figure in the enormous future techno-bureaucracy of the
   Gattaca Aerospace Corporation other than Gore Vidal?
   The standout performance in the film, however, belongs to Jude Law.
   His performance of the crippled Valid unable to fulfill his
   predestined greatness, Jerome Morrow, is a remarkable combination of
   pathos, wit, and quiet resilience and strength, and his subtle
   blurring of the lines of identity between himself and Vincent is
   interesting.  The strange, symbiotic relationship between Jerome and
   Vincent is fascinating and compelling, and Mr. Law and Mr. Hawke play
   well off one another.
   While Jan Roelfs' top-notch production design assists in creating a
   dystopic and conformist world, the ultimate credit must go to Mr.
   Nicol.  His screenplay is intelligent, thoughtful, and well-written,
   and his direction is most accomplished.  The impressive GATTACA marks
   a science-fiction film which eschews effects and explosions in favour
   of a more fundamentally human story, and succeeds wonderfully.  While
   the world depicted in the film is cool, distance, and impersonal, at
   the heart of the picture is real warmth.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"The separate forms of social behaviour that we associate with film and
 television are also starting to break down..." - Jonathan Rosenbaum, 1979

Author
Steve Kong
In the not too distant future you can have the child of your dreams. Don't
want your child to have violent tendencies? The geneticists can remove that
gene. Disease? The geneticist can tell how long your child will live, what
the child will die from, and can eliminate that gene also. Want the child
to be a piano prodigy? Well, lets give him twelve fingers. 
The premise for Gattaca is great. In the not too distant future, DNA
manipulation is helping society crank out near perfect children. Natural
inception is no longer wanted, instead, society has geneticists who will
help create the perfect child. Everything about a person can be told with
as little as a hair, dandruff, a drop of blood, or saliva.
Though law prohibits gene discrimination, the law against this
discrimination is also not well administered. Discrimination is now not
based on sex, age, or skin color, but on genes. Obviously, the perfected or
valid children get more than the "unperfected" or in-valid children.
Society is now split because of this. Vincent is one of the "unperfected"
children growing up with his older brother who is a perfected child.
Vincent aims to go to the stars, but, because of his genes, companies will
accept him. Because no matter how hard he tries, he will never have the
genes of a laboratory created child, which is what the space company
Gattaca is looking for.
Working with a gene broker, Vincent meets up with Jerome. Jerome is a
perfected child but is now left to languish because he was hit by a car and
is paralyzed from the waist down. Vincent uses Jerome's blood, urine, and
hair to get into Gattaca. But, after qualifying for a yearlong trip to a
moon of Saturn, there is a murder in Gattaca and Vincent becomes the number
one suspect.
Gattaca is a well-intentioned film with a well-intentioned message. And
there are passages of Gattaca that are really enjoyable. The set design and
the cinematography create a world where everything is sterile. But, the
director and writer Andrew Niccol creates characters that are,
unfortunately, also as sterile. The performances of the lead actors are
just as sterile. Hawke shows little to no emotion during the film, even at
the climax. Uma Thurman seems to be in the film just to look good.
What stands out and is not sterile are the supporting cast and the music.
The supporting cast includes the inspector played by Alan Arkin and Jerome
played by Jude Law. Arkin gives a wonderful performance but is not given
enough screen time. Law is given more screen time and does a better job.
Law is the one to look for during the film. The music is quiet and haunting
and fits the movie just right.
Gattaca is without its flaws. Though, most of them don't show up until one
steps out of the theatre. For example, the security entrance for Gattaca
uses a little pin that pricks one's finger for blood that is
instantaneously analyzed. This lets the computer allow or deny one's
entrance into the company based on their DNA. Vincent easily gets past this
device, but I can thing of many ways that can be added to this device that
are more conventional and less painful. (Maybe retinal scans? Fingers print?)
Gattaca is definitely a matinee film that, if you can wait, could be seen
on video. A very well intentioned film that falls because of its length,
exceptionally slow pace, and sterile performances by its lead actors. For
those expecting to see some heavy sci-fi, action and special effects, you
will be disappointed. This is a drama wrapped around a sci-fi premise.
"There is no gene for the human spirit."
