Title
Review for Beauty and the Beast: The Enchanted Christmas (1997) (V)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
Beauty & the Beast: The Enchanted Christmas
Reviewed by Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
Stomp Tokyo Video Reviews (http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo/)
Our rating: Three lava lamps (out of five).
By now, we've all gotten used to the Disney Plan for Animation: Release an
animated movie with as many possible elements in common with previously
successful films, and if it takes off, release sequels to video. With
really successful movies, like Aladdin, those sequels may even spawn a
television cartoon series.
Unfortunately, the direct-to-video sequels thus far have been
disappointing. The Return of Jafar and Aladdin and the King of Thieves,
while commercially successful, were rather pale knockoffs of the original,
in story, song, and animation. By the time King of Thieves came out, we
were ready to give up on Disney's OAV (original animated video) efforts for
good.
This winter, however, Disney has released Beauty and the Beast: The
Enchanted Christmas. While it's still not in the same league as the
original film, it is a much better effort than either of the two Aladdin
videos.
When we heard about this sequel to Beauty and the Beast, we were concerned
that any film taking place after the original would not feature the Beast,
who was a large part of the appeal of the first movie. Fortunately, this
movie takes place during the winter montage of the original film; it is
presented as an "untold chapter." Thus all of the original characters are
present, and with their original voices (including Jerry Orbach, Angela
Lansbury, & David Ogden-Stiers). Also present are several new characters,
with equally impressive voice actors. And let us not forget the inimitable
Frank Welker, man of a thousand voices, most of them attributed to animals.
As Christmas approaches during Belle's first few months in the Beast's
castle, the enchanted servants inform her that the Beast has forbidden the
celebration of Christmas in the castle. It was on Christmas Day that the
self-serving prince turned away the enchantress in disguise and was placed
under a spell, transorming him into the Beast. Not wanting to celebrate the
day of his own downfall, he calls a halt to Christmas.
Belle, of course, plans a Christmas celebration without him, enlisting the
help of the various servants-turned-household-objects. This leads to the
introduction of Angelique (Bernadette Peters), the castle's former
decorator, now transformed into an Angel tree-topper. Excited at the
prospect of celebrating Christmas once again, an initially-reluctant
Angelique and the other servants begin to decorate the castle and make
preparations. 
Unfortunately, some of the castle's residents are conspiring to ruin
Belle's Christmas. These residents are Maestro Forte and Fife, a pipe organ
and piccolo who don't quite fit in with the rest of castle life. Maestro
Forte (voiced by Tim Curry) was once the court composer with a penchant for
gloomy compositions. Fife (Paul Reubens) is Forte's crony, doing Forte's
dirty work at the promise of a solo written expressly for the piccolo.
Because the Beast's depression has turned him on to Forte's dark music,
Forte feels the need to defend his newfound territory -- even if it means
killing Belle. In the end, of course, there will be a happy ending, because
this is not only a Disney film, it's a Disney film about Christmas.
As we mentioned before, the first thing to suffer in previous Disney OAV
sequels was the animation. Characters became distorted, the frame rate
dropped tremendously, and the backgrounds were just plain shoddy.
Fortunately, Enchanted Christmas doesn't suffer as much. Most of the
character animation, while not theater-quality, is well above average, and
the character design has barely changed. We think we can detect a slight
change in Belle, but the other characters are flawless. The specialty
animation, including the entirely computer-animated Maestro Forte, is
dazzling. Several musical sequences feature uniquely-animated segments that
are distinct from the rest of the film, and quite memorable. Watch for
Belle's storybook sequence and the ectoplasmic Cupids in Forte's big song.
The music, too, is above par. The tunes in the Aladdin sequels were either
forgettable or based on tunes from the original film, but these songs are
both original and memorable. We would have liked to have heard more from
Bernadette Peters, one of the most accomplished singers in voice acting,
but she was given at least one big number, so we did get something. 
Like all Disney movies, Enchanted Christmas has a message, and it hammers
away at that message until all viewers are guaranteed to remember it.
Fortunately, this film's message is the same on multiple levels: just as
Belle reminds us that Christmas represents hope, so too does Enchanted
Christmas represent hope for quality OAVs from Disney. Okay Mickey, don't
drop the ball now.

Author
James Berardinelli
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS
Featuring the voices of: Paige O'Hara, Robby Benson, Jerry Orbach, 
      David Ogden Stiers, Angela Lansbury, Tim Curry, Bernadette Peters, 
      Paul Reubens
Director: Andy Knight
Screenplay: Flip Koler & Cindy Marcus and Bill Motz & Bob Roth
Music: Rachel Portman
Lyrics: Don Black
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Sequels have always been a popular means of cinematic 
entertainment, even back in the days of the old cliffhanger serials.  
After all, by using previously-established characters, there's a built-
in audience.  In recent years, it's almost an axiom that any film 
grossing $100 million will have a continuation, no matter how ludicrous 
the premise.  Walt Disney Pictures claims to have a policy against 
theatrical follow-ups to their "animated classics" (although this 
doesn't explain 1990's THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER), but that policy doesn't 
extend beyond the silver screen  THE LITTLE MERMAID was converted into a 
Saturday morning TV show.  ALADDIN already has two direct-to-video 
sequels (THE RETURN OF JAFAR and ALADDIN AND THE KING OF THIEVES).  Both 
THE LION KING and POCAHONTAS have new videotape adventures on the way.  
And, with the heavily-marketed release of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: THE 
ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS, one of the family-friendly company's most-beloved 
features now has a new chapter.  
     The familiarity inherent in a sequel is a double-edged sword.  On 
the positive side, it allows us to visit old friends.  Less time can be 
spent establishing the characters, since we already know them, so it's 
possible to get into the heart of the story more quickly.  On the other 
hand, comparisons are inevitable, and, with a genuine classic of BEAUTY 
AND THE BEAST's stature, they're not likely to be favorable.  No matter 
how much effort was put into the production of THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS, 
there's no way it could live up to the standards established by its 
predecessor. 
     As a direct-to-video effort, THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS is more than 
respectable.  It's far ahead of the two ALADDIN tapes, and is arguably 
better than Disney's latest animated theatrical feature, HERCULES.  It 
goes without saying that we're not getting something of comparable 
quality to the original BEAUTY AND THE BEAST -- the time, effort, and 
budget are considerably less, and it shows in many ways.  Surprisingly, 
the animation is one area that suffers only a minor degradation.  For 
the most part, it's crisp, clean, and smooth.  The computer generated 
sequences featuring the new villain, Forte the pipe organ, are 
impressive.  I was frankly impressed by how good THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS 
looks, especially considering the unevenness of the ALADDIN sequels.
     The biggest step down is in the writing.  THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS 
is clearly aimed at a young audience, with little consideration for the 
adults who may be watching.  The script isn't stupid or insulting, but 
it lacks the polish and maturity of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  The story, a 
"mid-quel" (as opposed to a prequel or sequel), occurs during a time 
period partway through the original film, presenting a "missing" chapter 
from the long interval when Belle (voice of Paige O'Hara) and the Beast 
(Robby Benson) are growing more fond of each other.  (Bookend THE 
ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS with the scenes from BEAUTY AND THE BEAST where the 
Beast saves Belle from the wolves and where he shows her the library.) 
The evil Forte (Tim Curry), the Beast's talking pipe organ and former 
court composer, is jealous of his master's attachment to Belle, and, 
along with his unwilling henchman, Fife (Paul Reubens), plots to destroy 
their relationship.  Meanwhile, Belle, with the aid of her friends 
Lumiere (Jerry Orbach), Cogsworth (David Ogden Stiers), Mrs. Potts 
(Angela Lansbury), and the ornament Angelique (Bernadette Peters), plans 
to bring Christmas back to the gloomy castle, even though the Beast has 
strictly forbidden its celebration.  
     The best parts of THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS are those that 
concentrate on developing the relationship between Belle and the Beast.  
There's a scene where she tries to teach him to skate, and another where 
they reconcile after a misunderstanding.  Unfortunately, the film makers 
have added a lot of "adventure" to the mix, and, while this aspect of 
the movie may be fine for younger viewers, more sophisticated viewers 
will find it routine.  As a villain, Forte is neither sinister nor 
frightening (his inability to move is a distinct flaw), although he does 
get to utter a few delicious lines.  There are five new songs from the 
team of Rachel Portman and Don Black (who wrote the lyrics to "Diamonds 
are Forever"), all of which are more obligatory than inspired.  They're 
not bad, but they don't add a lot to the proceedings.
     The entire principal vocal cast is back, and they're all in fine 
form.  Joining them are Tim Curry as Forte, Paul Reubens as the flute-
like Fife, and Bernadette Peters as the angelic Angelique.  Combining 
well-known voices with familiar animated faces makes watching THE 
ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS a comfortable, genial experience.  It's not a 
classic, and the videotape won't get the same kind of play afforded to 
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, but, if only for the chance to spend 70 minutes 
with old friends, THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS is a welcome release.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Mathew Tschirgi
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST- ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS
Featuring the voices of Angela Lansbury and Tim Curry
I was rather surprised when Disney decided to recently release a 
direct-to-video sequel to the animated feature they made in the early 1990's 
called BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  The Disney animated features have gone down-hill 
since THE LION KING (1994).  However this direct-to-video release surprised 
me- it is quite good.
The thing that surprised me the most at first was how they kept the animation 
quality to a high standard.  Computer graphics are used in spots, but look 
best when they animate the evil church organ Forte (voiced by Tim Curry, who 
was Dr. Frank N Furter in ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW and was the Butler in the 
movie CLUE).  The animation isn't cheap looking, as it was in RETURN TO JAFAR 
for example...  I haven't seen the third ALADDIN sequel yet, so I can't 
comment on its animation.  Anyhow, this movie has great animation quality and 
uses a wide variety of camera shots.
Also the plot is not a  re-hash of the original film.  The plot involves Belle 
wanting to celebrate Christmas, even though she knows from her silverware and 
furniture friends (among which are Mrs. Potts, voiced by Angela Lansbury 
(star in MURDER SHE WROTE tv series, among many other things) that the Beast 
despises the holiday.  Meanwhile the evil organ Forte "helps" the Beast by 
releasing his dark side, sort of like what the Emperor attempts to do to Luke 
Skywalker in RETURN OF THE JEDI (1984).  Tim Curry does a marvelous job as the 
villain.  The script is rather good, with some cheesy lines you would expect 
from a movie like AIRPLANE! (such as the line 'Don't whine glasses...'.  get 
the pun? :) ).
The songs are very good, unlike songs from HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME and 
HERCULES.  While the animated features I just mentioned contain maybe one song 
I like from each of them, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST- ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS contains 
songs that are at least hummable and enjoyable all throughout.  I noticed the 
person who composed the music and wrote the lyrics was the same person, but 
not the standard Disney Menken/Rice team.  She should move up to doing songs 
for feature films!!  The plot is darker, which I liked.  Watch this film.  It 
has a high production quality while using the same voices from the original 
movie, as well as new ones.  It is a little bit over an hour long, a bit 
short, but still is quite good.  I give BEAUTY AND THE BEAST- ENCHANTED 
CHRISTMAS ***1/2 out of ****.  Little kids might not like the dark aspects to 
it.

Author
Eric Pickup
Disney's Beauty and The Beast: The Enchanted Christmas (1997)
A film review by Eric Pickup
Copyright 1997 by Movies At Home
Robby Benson, Tim Curry, Angela Lansbury, Paige O'Hara, Jerry Orbach,
Bernadette Peters
In a new addition to the Academy Award winning film Beauty and The
Beast, Enchanted Christmas tells the tale of how Belle and the Enchanted
Objects brought Christmas back to the castle despite Beast's wishes to
the contrary. Beast, who long ago lost everything on Christmas day hates
it and those who wish to celebrate it. Feeding this loathing is Forte, a
evil pipe organ who has decided that he likes life better as an
Enchanted Object than as a man and doesn't want things to change. Now
the friends, including the reluctant Angelique - a beautiful tree
ornament who was once the castle decorator must organize to bring
Christmas about in secret.
Beautifully animated and featuring great musical numbers including five
original songs in addition to a collection of Christmas classics,
Enchanted Christmas is sure to be a favorite for the kiddies. For the
parents it will also be fun to watch on Christmas Day, although it lacks
some of the charm of the original. The computer generation of Forte
actually adds to his sinister and evil charm when compared to the rest
of the characters who are drawn with traditional techniques. He is
devilish in the way he is realised. The rest of characters who are drawn
from the original movie are beautifully animated and brought to life.
Generally speaking, this won't be considered an all time classic like
the first installment, but it will add to the list of movies that the
kids just need to watch on Christmas day.
