Title
Review for Wirey Spindell (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Woody Allen transformed nerdiness into art while Eric
Schaeffer tries to follow that path with "Wirey Spindell," a
semiautobiographical look at his current screwed-up
personality with peeks at the 36-year-old man during various
earlier stages of his life.  The result is a strange movie,
mixing vulgar, Kevin-Smith type comedy with a disheartening
view of the title character--a blend that does not come off but
at times demonstrates Schaeffer's inclination to locate key
incidents in his life that made him the person he is.  The film
is based on his ten-year-old unpublished novel, though
Schaeffer in effect produces the book by providing so much
narration in the movie that you wonder if Schaeffer really
wants to cram the novel down your throat by way of the
screen.  Still somehow the narration does not come off as
intrusive as you'd expect if you were annoyed with the
perpetual philosophisizing on the sound track of Terrence
Malick's "The Thin Red Line."
   The picture gets off to an awful start, one that could
encourage people to walk out on what promises to be a
prelude to a sophomoric story.  Wirey (Eric Schaeffer) sits
fully clothed in the bathroom while his fiancee, Tabatha
(Callie Thorne) opens the door in time to hear Wirey
complain that she is invading his space during his private
time.  But Wirey does not simply explain this point to his girl
friend but illuminates it such a nebbishy way that Woody
Allen could be considered Laurence Olivier next to him. 
Things can only get better after that.
   The basic conflict examined by the movie is Wirey
Spindell's inability to sit next to his fiance without having his
eyes wander around the room, scrutinizing just about anyone
in a skirt and presumably fantasying about what it's like to be
intimate with her.  This is not all that drives Tabatha crazy:
for the past nine months, Wirey has been unable to perform
in bed with her.  Exploring his background as though under
analysis by a Freudian therapist with an earthy sense of
humor, Wirey ultimately discovers the cause of his neuroses,
an origin that is all too farfetched and which, having been
discovered, can hardly cure him of his malady in time for his
upcoming, and probably short-lived, marriage.
   Spindell takes us to seminal incidents of his past, starting
with his first memory of being blown across the room while
licking an electrical outlet to his battle with addiction to drugs
and alcohol (his father was a hippie), through his experiences
with several women in junior high, high school and college. 
Unpopular with his male peers, he has mixed success with
women culminating in a heartbreaking fling with the sexy
Samantha (Samantha Buck).
   Much of what Schaeffer shows us has been done in other
films with more resonance, poignancy and humor.  The
wacky therapy sessions (his stepmother's former lesbian
lover as the analyst); affiliations with some wacked-out coke-
heads and with leggy and pliant females; the sorrowful
contacts with a mother and estranged father who demand
obedience but haven't a clue how to express their love to the
young man.  
   There isn't a single likable character in the film, from the
high-school teacher in Vermont who makes fun of the New
Yorker on his very first day to the uninspiring fiance who calls
her boyfriend honey and sweetie at least a decade before
such endearing terms should ever be used.  For the most
part Mr. Schaeffer, by mixing melodrama and comedy in
ways that they do not combine, neither shows how Wirey's
early life is so terrible that he winds up a drugged and
drunken misfit nor jogs the comedy to a level beyond the
mildly amusing.
Rated R.  Running Time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
