Title
Review for Burglar (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I hate having to echo Siskel & Ebert, but something *has* to be done about
getting Whoopi Goldberg some decent scripts.  Her latest film, BURGLAR, once
again tantalizes us with brief glimpses of potential, but smothers it under
ridiculous plotting and inadequate backup from supporting characters.  The fact
that I left the movie liking Goldberg's character, DESPITE some of the
lines/situations that had been fed to her, says what kind of actress she is;
she has a lot of charisma.  A cinematic natural resource, if you please.  But
she keeps getting into these half-baked projects (like this and JUMPIN' JACK
FLASH) which end up making me distraught because, while giving some degree of
satisfaction, they consistently reminded me how good they COULD HAVE BEEN with
a little work in the script department.
     BURGLAR is an adaptation of Lawrence Block's "Burglar" books, specifically
"The Burglar in the Closet."  I've read most of these books (I'd give them a C
average), so I my be more sensitive to anomalies in the script that those who
have not read these books.  In some bizarre twist, the sex of the majority of
the characters in the book has been changed: Bernie Rhodenbarr (sp?), the
burglar, has gone from a he to a she (Whoopi Goldberg); his lesbian friend and
neighbor has become a male heterosexual flake (Bob Goldwaith), the dentist who
has hired Bernie to ransack his wife's apartment has become Leslie Ann Warren,
and the wife has become a husband.  Actually, it works pretty well, especially
Goldberg, with the exception being Goldwaith, whose character has to be one of
the most annoying to appear on the screen in years.  If you disliked the old
Saturday Night Live characters "The Whiners," you're going to HATE Goldwaith in
this film.  How did Goldwaith get here?  Personal friend of the producers?  Of
Goldberg's?  Did she marry him?  (I understand she recently got married).  You
keep wondering why someone as together as Goldberg's Rhodenbarr is hanging out
with this nebbish.  Other characters who don't work very well are G.W.
Bailey's crooked cop, who was generally fairly friendly in the book, but here
often acts like a savage.  Warren overacts, which is her standard modus
operandi these days, as far as I can tell.  The rest of the cast is forgetable.
     I really wish I knew what the scriptwriters were trying to do--the plot
of this movie is absolutely schizoid.  On one hand, it seems to be trying to do
a fairly accurate adaptation of the film (despite the sex changes et al); and
then suddenly it goes for a car chase or some action sequences which really
don't work with the rest of the movie.  It's not a terrible script, but it is
blazingly awkward, consistently stumbling when you were just getting interested
in what's going on.
     Throughout it, Whoopi Goldberg plays Bernie Rhodenbarr into an
interesting, level-headed character; actually more appealing than the burglar
in the books, in my mind.  There are points where even she can't overcome the
script--her having to consistently rattle off the spiel about how she only
robs people who "deserve it"; you expect her to jump up on a rock and give an
Errol Flynn speech about robbing from the rich to give to the poor.  And she
does go into Whoopi Goldberg schticks on occasion--but many of them fit into
the character of the burglar, so it works (I especially liked the Italian game
show host, as she examines the dentist's husband's closet).  But over-all, she
plays a self-assured, in-charge character you really get to like by the end of
the film.  She also is the only heroine since Sigourney Weaver in ALIENS that I
can remember who saves the day and brings in the criminal herself, without any
help from a man.  Wish we'd see more of that...
     End result:  A film that is marginally watchable, and constantly shows
potential that it never lives up to.  Dammit, Whoopi, get a new agent!

Author
Randy Parker
        BURGLAR, as a whole, is boring, confusing, incoherent, and not
particularly funny.  However, two fine comic performances almost salvage
the film and make it somewhat worthwhile.  Whoopi Goldberg is perfectly
cast as a cat burglar whose masculine behavior challenges traditional
sex-role stereotypes.  The film makes good use of Goldberg's talent for
drifting in and out of a wide range of characters.  Goldberg's multiple
personalities provide about half the fun and humor in BURGLAR; the Bobcat
provides the other half.
        Comedian Bob "Bobcat" Goldthwait almost steals the movie with his
hilarious performance.  In his largest film role to date, Goldthwait plays
Goldberg's best friend, a poodle hairdresser.  Goldthwait successfully
incorporates material from his stand-up act into the film.  Nearly every
one of Goldthwait's scenes evokes laughter, which is quite a feat since the
laughs in BURGLAR are few and far between.  Goldthwait's performance is
more restrained than usual, making BURGLAR his best work to date.  Lesley
Ann Warren also stands out as the yuppie dentist who hires Goldberg to
commit a burglary.
        Unfortunately, these amusing performances are BURGLAR's only merit.
The movie's plot is uninspired and muddled, leaving the viewer confused
and ignorant of the mystery's solution.  Goldberg's character, after an
hour of detective work, figures everything out, but she and the film fail
(or forget) to enlighten the audience about her conclusions.
        Perhaps BURGLAR's main problem is its ineffective mixture of
suspense and comedy.  Many films, such as BEVERLY HILLS COP, have
successfully assimilated comedy and action into one package.  BURGLAR, on
the other hand, fails to do so and consequently suffers from a lack of
direction.  The movie would have been more appealing had it committed
itself exclusively to comedy or to suspense.  Given the cast, comedy would
seem to have been the appropriate path to follow.
        Goldberg, Goldthwait, and Warren succeed in giving BURGLAR  a few
genuinely funny moments, but the laughs are just too infrequent to give the
movie any significant momentum.  With a stronger sense of direction
(towards comedy), BURGLAR could have been thoroughly entertaining, but as
is, one's appreciation for the film is limited to the cast's noble efforts
to salvage it.
