Title
Review for Ni neibian jidian (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
Tsai Ming-Liang has garnered some deserved recognition for articulating
difficult emotions through the mundane actions of every day life.  How
more simply can a lack of motivation be expressed than when watching a
character urinate into a water bottle (no frontal nudity, don't worry)
placed beside his bed instead of getting up to go to the bathroom, not
10 feet from his bedroom door?
In What Time is it There?, like his previous work with The Hole and Vive
L'Amour, Ming-Liang utilizes long, ponderous, closely-framed shots of
characters amidst detailed backgrounds that reveal more about their
lives than anything that could come out of their mouths.  It's not
whether the character is clean or dirty so much as the items in their
lives that make up these traits.  There is virtually no dialogue. 
Together, these elements create the thrill of unpredictability.  There
seems no reason for the camera to linger on a specific moment, and there
are no recognizable clues as to what will happen next.  It's a
fascinating, but irritating, way to keep your attention focused on
screen.  You never know if a character is going to speak or what
reaction they will have to a given situation, if any at all.
The plot also matters little, or at least his films aren't based on a
structure of specific events in a given order.  Ming-Liang seems to
appreciate a documentarian's view, letting the camera hang at a
particular angle for a given period of time while people or props cross
in and out of frame at will.  The focus is kept on portraying the
complexities of human nature, mostly feelings associated with
alienation.  All the other film-related aspects of situation,
environment, and even camera work play second fiddle.
What Time is it There? centers on the experiences of Hsiao Kang (Lee
Hang-Sheng, whom Ming-Liang has used in all of his films) after his
father dies.  Kang sells watches from a suitcase on street corners,
smokes a lot, watches television, and basically walks through life on
auto-pilot -- until a customer who comes to purchase a watch begs him
for his watch before she leaves for Paris.  For no known reason,
possibly just looking for some purpose to guide himself, Kang sets out
to change all the clocks in Singapore to reflect what time it would be
in Paris.
Meanwhile, he and his mother recede from each other.  As Kang's
obsession with clocks escalates, so do his mother's compulsive acts to
help his father's spirit return.  It is in these uncomfortable familial
scenes that Ming-Liang's techniques strike their strongest chords.  It
is impossible to know how far each will disrupt the other's life before
something gives.
There is method behind those excessively long takes, during which your
interest is piqued into believing that surely something is going to
happen soon.  The buildup of silences and tension is akin to horror
films where you know somebody is about to get killed.  Only many of
There?'s scenes are disappointing because nothing does ever happen. 
Payoffs occur much later in the film.  Suddenly, Ming-Liang will cut to
the next scene and you'll still be trying to figure out what he was
accomplishing in the last.  This style of directing is effective but
it's consistently tiresome.
The physical extension of scenes makes this 2-hour film feel much
longer.  That the majority is focused specifically on one character at a
time, often for 15-minute stretches, doesn't help either.  Still, the
characters are easy to relate to, and that helps to hold interest. 
Overall, What Time is it There? is not so much a work of entertainment
as it is a unique, well-crafted psychological study of grief.
Aka Ni neibian jidian.  Screened at the 2001 New York Film Festival
(feature coming soon).
Director: Tsai Ming-Liang
Producer: Bruno Pesery
Writer: Tsai Ming-Liang, Yang Pi-Ying
Starring: Lee Kang-Sheng, Chen Shiang-Chi, Lu Yi-Ching, Miao Tien
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
