Title
Review for Mutiny on the Bounty (1935)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Mutiny on the Bounty" is an outstanding film, with
excellent cast and cinematography, and an even better
script.  The film never flags for a moment, and
all scenes work, whether dramatic, romantic or comic.
In late nineteenth century England, a ship is launched
to Tahiti, to obtain breadfruit trees for feeding slaves
on a British colony.  Captain Bligh (Charles Laughton)
is a brutal taskmaster, punishing his seamen even upon
death.  First Mate Fletcher Christian (Clark Gable)
openly disapproves of Laughton's methods.
With both men stubborn and hot-tempered, conflict is
inevitable.  Gable takes the ship and sends Laughton off
in a lifeboat with some loyal mates.  Against all odds,
Laughton makes it to England, and returns to the sea
in a second ship to catch and hang the mutineers.
It is difficult to say what is more impressive: the
cinematography of the big ships, cleverly giving the
illusion of sailing the high seas, or the script,
which gives the actors dramatic but natural lines.
I liked how events went after the mutiny.  Laughton, who
was selfish and cruel on the Bounty, is equally just and
kindly on the lifeboat.  This character transition was
credible to me, because these were his loyal men, because
it was what was needed to reach shore, and his anger
was focused on seeing Grant hang.
Grant and the mutinous crew are hunted men without a
country.  Grant shows remorse for becoming an infamous
outlaw, but no remorse for taking the ship to save
lives and stop Laughton's cruelty.
Tahiti is depicted as a tropical paradise, with the
most benevolent people (natives who look suspiciously
anglo-saxon) in world history.  Too bad civilizations
like that cannot exist long, since it is ripe for
exploitation by outsiders.
"Mutiny on the Bounty" won the Oscar for Best Picture.
Laughton, Grant, and Franchot Tone (who plays a good-guy
officer tried for mutiny) were all nominated for Best
Actor, but must have split the votes between them.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
