Title
Review for Little Women (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     At their best, family-oriented stories should have the same depth
and intelligence of those that are intended primarily for adults.  The
makers of the latest film adaptation of Louisa May Alcott's LITTLE
WOMEN recognized the intelligence in the story and have created a very
literate and mature film.  The film is full of wonderful characters and
situations that should appeal to everyone whether young or old, male or
female.
     The film lovingly presents a few years in the lives of the March
family, led by Marmie (Susan Sarandon) the poor but loving mother of
four daughters.  Most of the film centers around Jo (Winona Ryder), the
strong-willed daughter who hopes to one day become a writer.  The other
daughters are romantic Meg (Trini Alvarado), quietly contented Beth
(Claire Danes), and artistic Amy (played early in the film by Kirstin
Dunst and later portrayed by Samantha Mathis).  The film also
introduces us to three key men in the lives of the March family: Thomas
"Laurie" Lawrence (Christian Bale), the boy next door who becomes the
sister's closest outside friend; Laurie's tutor (Eric Stoltz) who
captures Meg's heart; and finally a German professor (Gabriel Byrne)
who meets Jo in New York and encourages her to write from her heart.
     It is initially tempting to say that LITTLE WOMEN does not have
much of a story, but that really isn't accurate.  The story here simply
follows the lives of a group of believable and realistic characters.
The film never seems overplotted or allows the story to overwhelm the
characterizations.  By the end of the film, the characters all seem
like very real people and we have seen an interesting portion of their
lives.
     I have never read Alcott's original novel so I don't know how much
she balanced the time given to each of the sisters.  For this
adaptation, screenwriter Robin Swicord and director Gillian Armstrong
selected to focus the majority of their attention on Jo.  This turns
out to be a wise decision, providing the film with a strong central
focus by allowing the audience to see the other characters mainly
through her eyes.  Occasional voice-over narration is used to
strengthen the feeling that Jo is telling us the story.
     This focus on Jo places a lot of importance on Winona Ryder's
performance. Ryder gives an Oscar-worthy performance, which is a large
part of the reason why the film works so well.  Over the last several
years, Ryder has established herself as one of the most distinguished
actors of her generation.  She has been courageous with her selection
of roles and she is just as good in period roles such as this as she is
in more contemporary films.  Ryder brings a great deal of strength,
intelligence and determination to her performance as Jo.  Her Jo is
something of a tomboy, but also has a definite feminine side that she
doesn't hesitate to show when appropriate.
     One of Ryder's greatest strenghts as an actress is her very
expressive face that allows her to often convey much more then just the
simple, literal meaning of her dialog.  This is a skill that is put to
good use a number of times in this film.  There is one scene in
particular late in the film where her facial expression adds a bunch of
additional meaning to a very simple one-line answer to a question.
This generated a strongly positive reaction from the audience at the
screening I attended.
     Ryder's performance as Jo provides an interesting contrast to her
Oscar-nominated performance in THE AGE OF INNOCENCE.  Both films take
place in similar periods and concentrate quite a bit on societal roles
(particularly for women).  In the earlier film, Ryder's character
seemed outwardly innocent and naive as she went along with the rules of
society while subtlely showing that she was aware of, and even
controlling, everything that was going on.  As Jo, she is much more
vocal about her feelings as she frequently and consciously goes against
society's expectations.  Comparing these two exceptional performances
strongly illustrates Ryder's impressive range.
     While Ryder tends to dominate the film, several of the other
actors are also able to make strong impressions.  As the one sister who
is most torn between the traditions of society and the desire for a
more liberated life, Trini Alvarado's Meg shows some interesting inner
conflicts.  In her own way, she bucks tradition just like her sisters.
Claire Danes (who is so good on the vastly underappreciated TV series
"My So-Called Life") gives the film's most subtle performance.  Beth's
ambitions in life are less grand than those of her sisters, but she is
able to quietly find her own form of happiness.  When her life starts
to take a tragic turn of direction late in the film, Danes is given
some interesting opportunities to shine.
     Amy ends up being the film's weakest character.  In the first part
of the film, she is very well-played by Kirstin Dunst (the young
vampire in INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE) who brings a lot of spunk and
sparkle to the role.  About two-thirds of the way through the film,
there is a four-year jump forward in time and Samantha Mathis takes over
the role.  At this point, the four sisters go their separate ways and
the film (wisely) continues to concentrate primarily on Jo.
Unfortunately, this leaves Mathis with very little time to make much of
an impression.  There really isn't anything seriously wrong with
Mathis' performance, but it is jarring to have the sudden shift in
actors (particularly since Dunst's performance is a hard act to follow)
and the movie never fully overcomes this.
     Susan Sarandon does not have a lot of screen time as Marmie, but
she gives her usual skilled performance.  Her character is unusually
liberated for her time, but she never seems anachronistic.  It is clear
that she is very *aware* of the customs of the time, but simply does
not fully believe in some of them.  Sarandon portrays Marmie as a stern
parent who is also clearly very loving and fair. It is very easy to
understand why her daughters respect her and it is also clear that the
respect is mutual.
     Other than the Marchs, the most visible character in the film is
Laurie.  Ever since his stunning debut performance in Steven
Spielberg's EMPIRE OF THE SUN, Christian Bale has continued to give one
strong performance after another in a variety of period films
(including HENRY V, NEWSIES and SWING KIDS).  Even when the films have
not been very good, his performances have been just fine.  Bale plays
Laurie as a character who is close to all of the March sisters in a
series of relationships that even he does not fully understand.  He
brings some impressive emotion to the scenes where he explores these
relationships, although his relationship with the older Amy probably
should have been a little more fully explored.
     As the other key men in the lives of the March sisters, Gabriel
Byrne and Eric Stoltz are not given much screen time but give decent
performances (although Byrne's German accent takes a little getting
used to).  Even though Byrne is second billed in the film, he doesn't
even appear until the last half hour and only has a few major scenes.
Those scenes are pivotal to the story, though, and he and Ryder work
well together.
     One particularly effective aspect of Swicord's script (and I
assume this comes from Alcott's novel) is the respect and admiration
that it shows for the art of writing.  Jo's desire to write seems
exceptionally genuine and the film does take the time to show some of
the sense of liberation that can come from expressing your feelings on
paper.  The sequence in which Jo finally is inspired to truly write
from her heart is one of the best staged depictions of the *act* of
writing that I have seen on film.
     The cinematography and production design very effectively express
the look of the period.  The details seem very authentic and believable
and the camerawork never gets in the way of the storytelling.  Although
many filmmakers tend to shoot this type of period drama in scope, the
decision to shoot this one in a narrower format was a wise one.  The
intimate nature of the story might have been harmed by a wider format.
     I truly hope that this smart and very engaging drama manages to
find the audience that it deserves.  I worry that people will avoid the
film on the basis of it being a "children's movie" or a "woman's
movie".  In truth, it is simply a good, smart drama with some teriffic
performances.  It is one of the best films of 1994.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released: 12/21/94 (limited);12/25/94 (general) 
Running Length: 1:50 
Rated:  PG (Nothing offensive) 
Starring: Winona Ryder, Trini Alvarado, Claire Danes, Kirsten Dunst, 
          Samantha Mathis, Susan Sarandon, Christian Bale, Gabriel Byrne, 
          Eric Stoltz 
Director: Gillian Armstrong 
Producer: Denise Di Novi 
Screenplay: Robin Swicord based on the novel by Louisa May Alcott 
Cinematography: Geoffrey Simpson 
Music: Thomas Newman 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     "I think the title [of LITTLE WOMEN] has been so off-putting for
men over the generations.  They feel this is a terribly 'girly' story.
But it's actually a wonderful epic tale about family where men's roles
are just as important and deeply involved in the story....  It is ...
full of heartfelt emotion and such memorable characters whose lively
appeal transcends the years."
          - Gillian Armstrong, director of LITTLE WOMEN
     This third, and most recent, film adaptation of Louisa May
Alcott's classic 1868 novel about family and crossing the barrier
between girlhood and womanhood, is a treatment for today's audiences.
As faithful to the original story as a two-hour production is likely to
be, LITTLE WOMEN is in ways similar and dissimilar to its two cinematic
predecessors (released in 1933 and 1949).
     This tale of four independent sisters of differing temperaments is
undeniably melodramatic, but it's very good melodrama, with an
accumulation of vitality and charm that elevates the movie to an
unexpectedly high level.  The basic plot of LITTLE WOMEN isn't terribly
original or invigorating; it's the effective realization of several
memorable characters that gives this film its strength.
     For those not familiar with the novel, it centers around the March
demesne of Orchard House in Concord, Mass.  With her husband away
fighting in the Civil War, Marmee (Susan Sarandon) is left alone to
care for her four daughters:  the volatile and imaginative Jo (Winona
Ryder), the sophisticated Meg (Trini Alvarado), the compassionate Beth
(Claire Danes), and the romantic Amy (Kirsten Dunst as a child and
Samantha Mathis as an adult).  The girls share a bond that no outsider
can penetrate, although there are some willing to make the
attempt--most of whom are men.  There's Laurie (Christian Bale), a
neighbor with a passion for the piano who becomes a friend to all the
Marches; John Brooke (Eric Stoltz), a poor tutor who is smitten with
Meg; and Professor Bhaer (Gabriel Byrne), a German immigrant who
develops a friendship with Jo.
     With rich, colorful cinematography (the Autumn scenes are
especially vibrant) and a fine score by Thomas Newman, LITTLE WOMEN is
technically accomplished.  It's the performances, however, that make
this movie special.  Winona Ryder fashions a near-perfect Jo, Alcott's
headstrong alter-ego in the fictional autobiography.  Had it been
demanded of her, the actress undoubtedly could have carried the entire
film.  However, this version allows the other sisters some development
independent of Jo, and all the actresses hold their own.  The only
hiccup comes as a result of the change in the aging Amy from the
energetic and charismatic Kirsten Dunst to the more sedate Samantha
Mathis.
     Christian Bale, after a couple of extremely weak performances (in
NEWSIES and SWING KIDS), finally displays some recognizable talent.  In
fact, Bale is so solid as Laurie that it's hard to credit this actor as
the same one who joined Robert Sean Leonard in the streets of Nazi
Germany.
     Perhaps the greatest fault--and some may not see it as such--is
that even the best-developed characters in LITTLE WOMEN display an
alarming lack of character flaws.  Everyone is almost always good,
kind, sweet, and pleasant.  Rare are the moments when someone says
something nasty or does something unsavory.  So much niceness
occasionally makes LITTLE WOMEN seem too sugary and scripted.
Nevertheless, the tale is engrossing enough, and the film put together
with such obvious affection, that it's not hard to dismiss those things
as necessary elements of a beloved period piece.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Winona Ryder, Gabriel Byrne, Trini Alvarado,
           Christian Bale, Kirsten Dunst, Claire Danes,
           Samantha Mathis, Susan Sarandon.
Screenplay:  Robin Swicord.
Director:  Gillian Armstrong.
     It would be a tremendous disservice to think of LITTLE WOMEN as a
picture post card with a plot.  Sure, it is lovingly photographed, rich
in atmosphere and steeped in period detail.  But does Louisa May
Alcott's saga of 19th century adolescence have anything to say in
1994?  Is it really *about* anything?  The answer is a resounding yes.
It's about family, love, and the struggle of young women to find their
voice.  As brought to life by a magnificent cast and directed with
restraint by Gillian Armstrong, LITTLE WOMEN is sweet, glorious and
relevant.
     Set in Civil War-era Massachusetts, LITTLE WOMEN is the story of
the March family:  aspiring writer Jo (Winona Ryder); social Meg (Trini
Alvarado); shy, frail Beth (Claire Danes); and romantic Amy (Kirsten
Dunst, later Samantha Mathis).  Living with their mother (Susan
Sarandon) while their father is off fighting the war, the Marches
struggle with matters financial and personal.  Jo befriends a wealthy
young man (Christian Bale), and Meg is courted by a teacher (Eric
Stoltz).  Eventually, Jo finds herself in New York to pursue her craft,
where she meets Friedrick Baehr (Gabriel Byrne), a German scholar who
sees potential in her that even she herself is unable to recognize.
     Director Armstrong, who addressed the subject of women struggling
in a man's world in MY BRILLIANT CAREER, has done a splendid job with
this latest version of the oft-filmed story.  She never attempts to
inject inappropriate action into the narrative, and keeps her actors
quiet and naturalistic.  She is also assisted by a wonderful technical
crew.  Cinematographer Geoffrey Simpson captures snow-covered
landscapes and glowing fall colors with grace, and production designer
Jan Roelfs fills the screen with lovely interiors.  The crowning touch
is Thomas Newman's beautiful score, which perfectly complements the
beautiful images Armstrong provides.
     The primary reason the screen glows, however, is a remarkable cast
which features the most talented young actresses in the business.  Jo
is the showcase role, and Winona Ryder gives her most complete
performance yet in taking it on; she is full of ambition, joy, and
self-doubt.  Physically, she's quite wrong for the part (it's hard to
believe anyone would consider Ryder's hair her "one beauty," even
without makeup), but she's so impressive emotionally that her looks can
be forgiven.  Trini Alvarado is an effervescent Meg, and Kirsten Dunst,
fresh from her triumph in INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, is the perfect
image-conscious Amy.  Claire Danes, from TV's critically-praised by
largely unwatched "My So-Called Life," may be the best of the bunch.
Beth's role is small, but Danes injects phenomenal emotion into every
one of her scenes, and her large, sad eyes guarantee that many eyes in
the audience will be damp at certain moments.  As a group (and
including Susan Sarandon as the progressive matriarch), they are so
uniformly good that they seem to keep making each other better.
     What may be most impressive about this LITTLE WOMEN, adapted by
Robin Swicord, is how it seems as though it might have been written
yesterday.  There is no anachronism in Alcott's Transcendentalist
proto-feminism, though upon first glance it might appear so.  These
little women struggle with all the issues involved in becoming grown
women, from the mundane (Meg's concern about the dress she wears to a
society function) to the profound (coping with the difficulties of
love).  Most of all, they struggle to assert themselves as individuals
in a world which still questions their motives for wanting to be
individuals.  Jo is frustrated in her first attempts at publishing her
work because she is attempting to something and someone else; her
realization that her own experience is valid, and that she can touch
others through its expression, is a revelation.
     I saw LITTLE WOMEN in a theater where perhaps one third of the
audience consisted of girls under sixteen.  LITTLE WOMEN may be a story
to which they are most attuned, but it is a delight for anyone who
appreciates genuine emotion, insight, and beautiful filmmaking.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        No, this movie doesn't feature the many girlfriends in the life 
of Tattoo from "Fantasy Island" (located two miles east of Gilligan's 
Island), it's an adaptation of the classic Louisa May-Alcott novel about 
the Civil War days... and a darn good one at that. I wasn't too thrilled 
about two hours of repressed women in bustles, but once I gave in to 
my feminine side (I know you're snickering right now, so just stop it), 
I got into it.
        Fueled by excellent performances from Winona Ryder (the 
movie was almost retitled SLAVERY BITES), Claire Danes (star of the 
defunct drama "My So-Called Life"), Kristen Dunst (who gets my vote 
of approval just for saying kissing greasy Brad Pitt in INTERVIEW 
WITH THE VAMPIRE was "yucky") and Susan Sarandon (obviously, 
she plays the mother), LITTLE WOMEN is thoroughly entertaining 
without the usual 90's Hollywood hang-ups of sex, violence and 
profanity. Well, someone does say "blast it!" (gasp!) in LITTLE 
WOMEN, but otherwise, it's profanity-free.
        If you were ever forced to read the book in school, you're 
already familiar with the dainty-yet-tough-as-nails ladies in the March 
family, who are making it on their own in the absence of the father, 
who is off fighting the war. The main character, Jo, wants to be a 
writer (let's not draw any parallels here), while the other sisters just 
want to find husbands (women never change). We see two hours of 
their trials and tribulations, with moments of tense drama and female 
bonding.
        It's a good movie, but even though I tried to block the flow of 
testosterone to my brain for two hours, I was still bored and restless at 
times. It took me no less than six sittings to get through LITTLE 
WOMEN, so a word of warning to you non-movie-reviewing guys--this 
movie is not to be entered into lightly. Male minds require great 
persistance to finish LITTLE WOMEN, which is one of the ultimate 
chick flicks out there, but once you get through, you can list it on your 
resume for the rest of your life.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LITTLE WOMEN is the story of four sisters and their mother.  They
have a father, but he remains pretty much a non-person through the
entire show.  The movie is set in Concord, Mass.  in what appears to be
somewhere between say 1800 and 1890.  Eventually in the middle of the
movie we are finally told that the show is firmly set in the 1860s
because the missing and almost never mentioned father is off fighting a
war.  [And he probably thought they missed him a lot and appreciated he
was risking his life to save his country!]
     Did I say the show had four sisters and their mother?  I lied.  It
has four saints who are sisters, and who all live with their even more
sainted mother.  These five perfect females have a few males around
them at times for decoration, but it is the women's show.
     The movie is populated with all of the latest heart throbs from
Hollywood (Winona Ryder, Trini Alvarado, Samantha Mathis, Kirsten
Dunst, Gabriel Byrne, Christian Bale, and Eric Stoltz) and with Susan
Sarandon in the Mother Teresa role.  The acting is all incredibly
shallow, but this is a fault of the script they were given.  The
characters are two dimensional stick figures.  They do absolutely no
wrong.
     If they had made them more believable and less sugary sweet, one
could have cared about them when tragedy struck.  As it was, I just
felt like the script was being manipulative.  Yes, maybe this is a
problem with the book as well.  Frankly, I do not remember the novel
that well.
     Another smaller irritant was the role of the mother saint.  It
seemed like half of her dialog were sermons on the need for female
equality.  I had no problem with what she was saying, but it was
delivered so preachy that it seemed stilted and unreal.  I found myself
wondering if the book gave this subject so much emphasis or if this was
a little revisionist writing.
     On the good side, you have never seen more lovely scenes of New
England snow (actually filmed in Victoria, Canada).  Curier and Ives
could not have done it better.  The cinematography inside was equally
stunning with wonderful warm candlelight glow yet bright enough to be
able to see things well.  Finally, I loved the last minute of the show.
The outdoor images there were striking and almost moving.
     The movie runs way too long at 1:50.  I lost track of how many
times I looked at my watch wondering how much longer I had to sit there
and endure it.  It is rated PG but should have been G since there is no
sex, nudity, violence or even a single gosh darn.  The only reason for
the PG rating is that some of the themes (sickness and death) are more
mature.  I do not recommend this show to anyone.  Nevertheless, I
suspect there is a large audience for this movie especially among girls
from say 10 to 16.  I give it * 1/2 strictly for the setting and the
cinematography.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The most enduring so-called "girls' book" ever written is Lousia
May Alcott's 1868 LITTLE WOMEN, based in large part on her childhood
experiences growing up in Concord, Massachusetts.  The novel has
previously been filmed five times, beginning with a 1918 silent version
and including a British mini-series.  It was even turned into a short-
lived television series in 1979.  The sixth filming may well rank as
the most beautiful and compelling version, though certainly some will
still prefer George Cukor's classic 1933 version with Katherine Hepburn
as Jo March and Spring Byington as her mother.  The newest version is
directed by Australian Gillian Armstrong of MY BRILLIANT CAREER and
MRS. SOFFEL.
     The Marches are a very tightly-knit family of four sisters and
their ever-perfect mother.  The family lives in 1860's Concord,
Massachusetts.  I have heard about families like this but never
actually believed they existed.  They share everything with each other
and are bound to each other with a love that transcends even the rare
imperfections.  They do things like give up their Christmas morning
dinner, including delicacies like sausage that are almost unavailable
during the Civil War, to feed a hungry immigrant family.  The girls
read poetry, put on little plays written by Jo (played by Winona
Ryder), and steal glances out their window at the boy next door, Laurie
(Christian Bale), and his stodgy tutor (Eric Stoltz).  The girls roll
bandages and take care of the sick and hungry while waiting anxiously
for letters from their father who is off fighting for the Union cause.
The sisters do have their occasional differences, but they always give
them up with a sigh of relief when something happens to bind them even
closer together.  Eventually Laurie becomes like one of the family and
there is no doubt that he will eventually court one of the March girls.
When he goes off to school the film jumps ahead four years and everyone
but young Amy (Kirsten Dunst) looks just the same.  Amy (now Samantha
Mathis) looks like she has aged about eight years.  Each daughter
develops into the woman her childhood characteristics made her.  Jo
writes melodramatic potboilers and goes to New York (following her
mothers suggestion, "Embrace your liberty") to make her fortune.  And
she becomes romantically entangled (big surprise!) with a German
philosopher who shares the boarding house where she is staying.  There
is sad family tragedy, there is warm family love, and there are
romantic entanglements.  Remarkably, Armstrong makes this story of
traditional values (with just a light whisper of feminism) work for a
90s audience, assisted by Geoffrey Simpson's nostalgic camera work.
British Columbia stands in for Concord and makes everything look homey
and beautiful.
     The casting of some of the major roles is a bit too Hollywood and
not enough Alcott.  Trini Alvarado looks more like a young Andie
MacDowell than like Alcott's plumpish Meg.  Alcott had Jo be tall and
awkward, and even the film script calls for her to be plain and to have
her long hair be her one nice feature.  Does it sound like I am
describing Winona Ryder?  The casting of beauty in roles that call for
plain tends to oversimplify the motivations of the various suitors.
Claire Daines as Beth is the only daughter who approaches being homely-
--in both senses of the word--in this version and the only one for whom
we never see a suitor.  Susan Sarandon conveys the warmth and wisdom of
Alcott's overly-idealized mother.  She is always there with just the
right insight, with a nursing talent that puts doctors to shame, and
with a noble and charitable thought for others.  Kirsten Dunst seems
far too precocious as the child Amy to grow into the placid Samantha
Mathis adult version.  Dunst does a good job, but she will be
remembered more for her role as the adult vampire trapped in the body
of a child from INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE.
     Among other things, the film chronicles how Jo's childhood writing
develops into what she writes as an adult.  Here her imagination is
seen as positive and constructive.  But the timing of the release
should invite interesting comparisons to Peter Jackson's HEAVENLY
CREATURES.  And LITTLE WOMEN sorely needs something for the viewer to
think about when it is over rather than just being left with a warm
feeling.  I give LITTLE WOMEN a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
