Title
Review for On the Waterfront (1954)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Elia Kazan
Writer: Budd Schulberg (based on his story)
Starring: Marlon Brando, Karl Malden, Eva Marie Saint, Lee J. Cobb, Rod
Steiger, Pat Henning, John Hamilton, James Westerfield, Leif Erickson, Fred
Gwynne
"I coulda been a contender," says Marlon Brando in the most famous line in
the most famous sequence of this film, a classic which won a ton of Oscars
back in '54, including a well-deserved one for Brando himself, who was in
the prime of his career.  Sadly, this seems to be all that "On the
Waterfront" is remembered for.  Many great Hollywood films are remembered
for mere sequences, lines, or great performances when there are hundreds of
thousands of things to love it for.  "On the Waterfront" is not just "the
film where Brando says "I coulda been a contender," but is instead a
multi-layered intense drama about the importance of unionizing, and even
deeper, of standing up for yourself...and even deeper, of doing what is
right despite the consequences...and even yet deeper, of being
anti-McCarthyistic.  Allow me to explain that last one.
But first, the story of "On the Waterfront" deals with an uneducated dock
worker named Terry Malloy (Brando, when he was young and thin), who's motto
for life is basically "Do it to him before he does it to you."  Everyday,
he and hundreds of dock workers line up on the waterfront to get jobs, but
the mafia who controls the union always overadvertises, and only a select
group of men can get jobs for the day, leaving many with a cold "Come back
tomorrow."  But Terry always gets picked, not only because his brother,
Charley (a young Rod Steiger), is a major player in the head of the union,
run by the ruthless Johnny Friendly (a scene-stealing Lee J. Cobb), but
also because in one of the early scenes he helped them catch a man who was
going to rat on them to the courts the next day...but unbenknownst to
Terry, they were going to kill him.
Soon, not only does he run into the man's daughter, Edie (Eva Marie Saint,
later playing the mischeavious girl in Hitchcock's "North by Northwest"),
who begins falling for him, but also Father Barry (Karl Malden), who is out
to get the workers to unite and rebel against the harsh treatment by Johnny
Friendly and his goons.  However, no one will join up for fear of murder or
a lack of a job afterwards, but after one of Terry's friends, "Kayo" Dugan
(Pat Henning) joins up with the Father and is subsequently murdered in an
"accident," Terry begins to doubt what he's doing, and begins to think
about his past and what he should do.
Turns out that Terry, who everyone calls a "bum," was once a boxer, and the
night he made it all the way to Madison Square Garden for the fight of his
life, where he knew that he'd be the big winner, his brother, who was
managing his career at the time, forced him to go down for a bit of money,
leaving Terry a broken boxer, and crippling his self esteem.  Terry has
been afraid to take any action for his life up till now, but the film
explores it intelligently, as ratting on his bosses may mean harm for not
only him, but people around him.
The ending of the film, taking place after Terry has gone to court and told
everything he knows about Johnny Friendly and his operation, is heroic and
crowd-pleasing, but also smart and downright wonderful.  It might seem like
a typical Hollywood ending, but has backed itself up smartly, and truly
earns any cheers from the audience.  The film on the surface seems to be
about the importance of unionizing for the downtrodden workers (somewhat
Communistic, which explains why this was controversial even before it was
released), and also about the importance of doing the right thing no matter
what the horrific consequences.  Terry's dilemna is a real-life deilemna,
and the film explores it as a parable about ordinary life, not just about
dealing with unions.
But when one knows the history about this film, they know that the director
Elia Kazan (who also directed the original brilliant "A Streetcar Named
Desire," which also starred Brando) was under questioning in the McCarthy
trials, where he was forced to name names about who was a Communist and who
wasn't.  While this doesn't directly parallel the film (the film seems to
be pro-Communism, sorta, and views the men he has to rat on as really being
bad), it seems to be Kazan's way of trying to get forgiveness for what he
did from his peers.  Sure, it's personal propaganda, but it works anyway.
Seeing as this is a powerful drama, it also features lots of stand-out
acting from various actors.  Lee J. Cobb as the boss Johnny Friendly is one
hell of a scene stealer, while Rod Steiger is wonderful as a brother who
knows he has harmed his sibling almost beyond recognition or forgiveness,
and Pat Henning is brilliant in his short role as a doubting dock worker
who choses the wrong day to go to work.  In bigger roles, Karl Malden is
typically awesome as the rousing priest, and Eva Marie Saint, who won an
Oscar for her performance, is downright wonderful as the loving but
vengeful sister, out to stop the men who killed her brother.
But need I even say the best performance is from Brando?  Brando's an actor
who at his best if the best actor who ever lived, and here, he's in one of
his very best roles, a performance which almost overcomes his acting as
Stanley Kowalski in "Streetcar."  Brando's a method actor, so he's really
Terry Malloy, and he's 100% believable in the role.  Every quirk and
mannerism seems like the character's, and he presents him as a man who's
simple, but filled with a past which haunts him all the time.  Watching
Brando is one of the greatest experiences in all of film history, and his
Terry Malloy is one of the best performances by an actor ever captured on
celluloid.
What's left after "On The Waterfront" is not just the climactic "I coulda
been a contender" scene, but the entire message and feel of the film.  Who
can forget Terry's cynical motto in the beginning?  Or the sight of Brando
caring for pigeons on the roof of his building?  Or the pain in Rod
Steiger's eyes when he pulls a gun on his brother?  Or the finale, which is
filled with so many emotions that we're not sure how to react to them right
away?  "On the Waterfront" is one of the best films I've ever seen, not
because it's a complex execution in film surrealism like a Bergman film
(which it isn't), but because it's one of those films that can inspire and
touch an audience with a unviersal message, move people with an emotional
and powerful dramatic storyline, and even get people to forgive anyone who
is forced to rat on his friends.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
"On The Waterfront" is a classic film that nearly measures
up to its reputation.  While the characters are too neatly
divided into good and evil, and the drama is sometimes
overdone, there's never a dull moment, and the cast and
cinematography is excellent.
Marlon Brando stars as a dense washed-up boxer who works on
the waterfront as a flunkie for corrupt union boss Lee J.
Cobb.  Brando's older brother, Rod Steiger, is Cobb's
attorney.  Cobb has a policy of murdering workers who inform.
Brando unwittingly assists in a union-ordered murder,
and gets a subpoena to testify against Cobb.  Aggressive
priest Karl Malden and goody two-shoe new girlfriend
Eva Marie Saint want him to testify.  Cobb tells Steiger
that Brando had better not, or else.
"On The Waterfront" is most famous for Brando's performance,
especially the scene where he tells Steiger that "I coulda
been a contender, I coulda been somebody."  Brando is fine,
but almost anyone could have played the palooka.  Malden
is a bit hammy, but his energy is still welcome.  Cobb is
excellent as the menacing union boss.
Academy Awards and nominations were showered on the cast
and crew of "On The Waterfront".  The film won Best Picture,
Best Writing, Best Actor (Brando), Best Director (Elia Kazan),
Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction (sets).
Eva Marie Saint won Best Supporting Actress, while Malden,
Cobb and Steiger had to settle for Best Supporting Actor
nominations.
It was Marie Saint's first feature film, although she was
already a veteran television performer.  She is proof
that a great production contributes more to receiving
an Oscar than one's performance.
Kazan and Malden must have worked well together, since
Malden had a starring role in four of Kazan's films.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
