Title
Review for Day the Earth Stood Still, The (1951)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Repertorial theaters have just about vanished from the American
landscape.  There are a few left in some of the bigger cities and near
some college campuses, but today's movie going public generally is
stuck choosing between the latest massive action thriller or the latest
ode to dumbness.  Viewing an old film on the big screen is an option
for fewer and fewer people.
     I am fortunate to live in an area where the demise of these old
picture palaces is not yet complete.  Besides the Stanford theater in
Palo Alto, there are also places in Berkeley and San Francisco.  Nearer
to home is the lovely old Towne Theatre in San Jose.  It is an art
house and sometimes repertorial theater.  Right now they are having
their second science fiction festival.  It lasts for three weeks, and
they are showing several films per weeks.
     I had the pleasure of seeing THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL (1951)
for, I think, the first time in the theater.  Since I was five at the
time it was released, I can not say for sure.  Like most sci-fi films
of that era it is certainly hokey and full of special effects so awful
that are more amusing than believable.  Untypical of early sci-fi, this
one is serious and deals with issues like nuclear annihilation, and it
even dabbles in politics.  Perhaps most surprising is that the movie
has a well known cast and crew, including a twice Oscar winning
director, Robert Wise (THE SOUND OF MUSIC and WEST SIDE STORY).
     Like INDEPENDENCE DAY, it starts with a flying saucer over the
nation's capital.  Unlike INDEPENDENCE DAY, however, these aliens are
on a non-violent mission.  They are from a nearby planet, and they have
been watching earth and all of our petty squabbles for sometime now.
With the advent of our nuclear era, they are worried that we will
develop nuclear spaceships and come and threaten their peaceful
existence.  In short, they think we're a bunch of warmongers, and if we
don't cut it out, they'll blow earth to smithereens.  They are ready to
kill to preserve their non-violent lifestyle.  Actually, as they
present it, it has a much more childlike and believably simplistic
logic.
     As the flying saucer lands on the lawn across from the capital,
listen for the sound of that quirky musical instrument, the Theremin.
Consider that motivation to rent the engrossing documentary film
THEREMIN: AN ELECTRONIC ODYSSEY (1993) about its invention and its
fascinating inventor, Professor Theremin.
     After the uninvited guests arrive on our planet, people all over
the world huddle around their radios wanting to know what they look
like.  Famous radio announcer Drew Pearson, playing himself, supplies
the play-by-play events for the country, "Every eye, every weapon is
trained on that ship.  Just a minute Ladies and Gentlemen, I think
something is happening..."  Surprise, they look like an English
speaking human (Michael Rennie as Klaatu) and his tinfoil giant robot
(Lock Martin as Gort).  The robot is every bit as immutable and massive
as a Colonel Sanders statue.
     Klaatu assures the earthlings, "We have come to visit you in peace
and with goodwill."  Nevertheless, a nervous soldier shots him, which
causes trusty Gort to disintegrate all of their weapons.
     In the hospital, Klaatu tells the president's representative, Mr.
Harley (Frank Conroy), "I won't resort to threats, Mr. Harley.  I
merely tell you the future of your planet is at stake."  God, I love
science fiction.  You get such wonderfully overblown dialog.  There
aren't mere problems.  Oh no, the fate of at least a planet and
sometimes an entire galaxy is at stake.  Compared to this, the issues
that confront are leaders today are trivial.  But like our current
world leaders, the ones in the movie have trouble even with simple
decisions like where to meet.  The future of our civilization hangs in
the balance while the heads of governments dicker on whose country
should host a conference with the space invader.  As Klaatu puts it,
"I'm impatient with stupidity.  My people have learned to live without
it."  Sounds like he lives on my kind of planet.
     Eventually, he goes incognito to stay in a rooming house where
Helen Benson (Patricia Neal) and her son Bobby (Billy Gray) are living.
He wants to learn the ways of these inhabitants of planet Earth.  At
the breakfast table the discussion centers on the aliens, with one guy
demanding, "why don't the people in the government do something?"  But
his friend admonishes him, "They're not people.  They're Democrats."
     The way you have to suspend disbelief in some of the early sci-fi
films is actually one of their charms.  Take just three examples and
contrast the answers to similar questions in INDEPENDENCE DAY.
     How many guards would you put on night duty to guard this saucer
that has a killer robot in front of it and is two hundred yards from
the White House?  Two.
     How many citizens think it is interesting enough to stay up late
to observe it?  Zero.
     When the army quarantines the entire capital, what percentage of
the forces are dispatched when an unknown insurance salesman calls and
says he saw the alien at his girlfriend's house?  Every single soldier.
     From beginning to end, THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL is a lot of
fun, and for its time, the production is well constructed and acted.  A
worthy ancestor of STAR WARS and INDEPENDENCE DAY.
     THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL runs just 1:32.  It is filmed by Leo
Tover in a handsome black and white.  It is unrated, but is pure G.
There is no sex, nudity, violence, or bad language.  If the show had
been on earlier in the evening, I would have taken my son as it is fine
for kids of any age.  Given the seriousness of part of the material and
some of the slower pacing, kids will probably need to be seven or so to
enjoy it.  There was a nine year old in our audience who certainly
seemed to enjoy it.  I recommend THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL to you
and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL, THE (director: Robert Wise; screenwriters:
Edmund H. North/based on the story "Farewell to the Master" by Harry
Bates; cinematographer: Leo Tover; editor: William H. Reynolds; cast:
Michael Rennie (Klaatu), Patricia Neal (Helen Benson), Billy Gray (Bobby
Benson), Hugh Marlowe (Tom Stevens), Sam Jaffe (Dr. Barnhardt), Dorothy
Neumann (Hilda, Barnhardt's Secretary), Lock Martin (Gort); Runtime: 92;
1951)
This is a well crafted sci-fi film from the 1950s, that became a cult
favorite and helped generate interest in the sci-fi film as a popular
genre. It had a well-intentioned liberal message in the face of the
time's McCarthy witch hunts, it only lacked an edge to its
straightforward rational call for world peace and an end to the nuclear
arms race.
The film will always be remembered for Patricia Neil saving the world by
saying to the eight-foot metallic robot who is about to destroy the
world because his master was shot by the U.S. Army, "Gort! Klaatu barada
nikto."
Michael Rennie is Klaatu, the sleekly tailored alien, dressed in a
silver suit to match the color of the flying saucer, who has come from
outer space to save the world from its petty strifes by delivering a
pacifist message. The world is now a more dangerous place because of the
Atomic Bomb and its potential use to blow up the world, as Rennie is
made into a refined Christ-like figure who has come 250 million miles to
tell the world leaders and the scientists that if they can't settle
their differences on this planet, his world has authorized the robots
they created to act as world policemen to destroy those who can't live
in peace.
This intelligent and humanitarian film plays like a Christian allegory.
Klaatu even uses the alias Mr. Carpenter, an obvious reference to
Christ.
The film opens with a flying saucer landing in Washington, D.C. and
Klaatu stepping outside with an offering of peace, and as he reaches
into his spacesuit for a gift for the President, he is shot in the
shoulder by an antsy soldier. Meanwhile, Gort does his thing, by opening
up the visor on his helmet and shooting cosmic rays at the Army tanks
and bazookas, completely disintegrating them. The Defense Department
didn't like the film's message, so they failed to cooperate in the
filming, but the Washington National Guard gave its approval, so all the
troops and equipment came from them.
Klaatu recovers from the gunshot in Walter Reed Hospital after the
bullet is removed and by self-healing he miraculously closes the wound,
which startles the doctors, who realize how backward their technology is
compared to the spaceman's. When security locks him in his hospital
room, he easily escapes and as a fugitive ends up boarding at the
wholesome Benson family's house, living incognito. Patricia Neal is the
widow Helen Benson and Billy Gray is her young son Bobby. The kid bonds
with the kind-hearted alien and takes him on a tour of Washington, where
they go to Arlington National Cemetery and the Lincoln Memorial, and
then the kid takes him to meet the smartest man in the world, Dr.
Barnhardt (Jaffe). But the scientist is not home, so Klaatu breaks into
his home and corrects a mathematical problem the scientist is working
on, and leaves a note requesting that the Einstein-like scientist meet
him.
Klaatu's request for a world meeting has already been turned down by the
world leaders as being impractical. But Klaatu tells Barnhardt when he
meets him, that he will show the world that he means business about how
important this meeting is, and as a demonstration of alien power, the
world's electrical power supply is shut off for a half hour, except for
hospitals and airplanes in flight. But the government only becomes more
hostile and when Helen's boyfriend (Hugh Marlowe) betrays him in order
to gain personal glory, the alien is shot by the military. That is when
Helen, following his instructions, goes to Gort for help. Gort revives
the dead alien, and before Klaatu goes home, he tells the scientists
convened for their meeting, his urgent message of peace for the Earth or
else the Earth will be destroyed.
Lock Martin played Gort. He was the 7'7'' doorman employed at Grauman's
Chinese Theater and recruited to play the robot. Bernard Herrmann's
brilliantly haunting musical score aided in capturing the alien
atmosphere of the story. It's hard to argue with the rational message
delivered, I just wished the film took on the politics of the scientists
sleeping in the same bed with the government, who are just as much a
detriment to world peace as the xenophobic media and the cowardly bunch
of world leaders. Robert Wise (West Side Story) should be credited with
another great film in his long and distinguished career.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Louis Proyect
Last night I watched "The Day the Earth Stood Still" on video. It was
the first time I had seen it since its original theater appearance in
1951. It is one of the first films of the period to question the cold
war even if on an allegorical basis, just as another science fiction
flick "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" was designed to increase
anti-Communist hysteria.
A flying saucer lands in Washington, DC and discharges its two
passengers, the humanoid Klaatu, played to a tee by Yorkshireman
Michael Dennie who bears a striking resemblance to David Bowie, and
his assistant Gort, an 8 foot robot with super-powers.
Klaatu has come to the planet Earth to deliver a message to the
assembled leaders of all governments. He belongs to an interplanetary
confederation that has outlawed warfare and become aware of the
earthlings' recent experiments with guided missiles carrying nuclear
warheads. They fear that eventually these types of weapons might be
introduced into outer space. So an ultimatum is to be delivered.
Unless these experiments are called to a halt, the confederation will
send a fleet of robots to destroy the planet Earth.
Klaatu can not even get to first base with the truculent and
irrational earthlings. The Russian government will only attend a
conference if it is based in Moscow, while the British are opposed to
setting foot in Communist territory. Meanwhile, many Washingtonians
believe that Klaatu is a Communist spy, while others simply want to
eliminate him as a threat to the status quo.
In order to find out more about the mores of the planet, Klaatu
disappears into the streets of Washington and finds a furnished room
in a house where Patricia Neal and her young son live. Klaatu takes
the two into his confidence and they find themselves in solidarity
with his mission. In the climax of the film, Neal rescues the planet
from immanent destruction by giving "Don't shoot" instructions to the
robot: "Gort! Klaatu barada nikto!"
Klaatu also makes an effort to set up a meeting with the world's
greatest scientist, Dr. Berhardt, who is played by Sam Jaffe, and
other leading scientists. Bernhardt. Bernhardt is an obvious stand-in
for Albert Einstein, who had come out repeatedly against atomic
testing and for socialism during those insane years.
Although director Robert Wise is better known for his "West Side
Story" and other mainstream Hollywood flicks, there is some strong
circumstantial evidence of leftist sympathies. He was chosen by Harry
Belafonte to direct "Odds Against Tomorrow", a noir masterpiece that
was written by blacklistee Abraham Polonsky and which challenged some
of the major racial stereotypes of the 1950s.
In the climactic scene Klaatu is killed by a fear-mongering government
agency, then resurrected by his robot charge Gort. Astonished by the
power of this foreign technology, Patricia Neal asks him whether
control over life and death is possible. Klaatu assures her that such
powers belong only to the "Almighty Spirit" and that his life
extension is good only "for a limited period," the duration of which
"no one can tell." In Edmund North's original script, Gort resurrects
Klaatu without limitation. But the movie industry's censors told the
producers: "Only God can do that."
North's other best-known writing credit was the screenplay for Francis
Ford Coppola's "Patton," about which he stated, ''I hope those who've
seen the picture will agree with me that it is not only a war picture,
but a peace picture as well.''
The film's producer Julian Blaustein also produced "Broken Arrow,"
based on the Elliott Arnold novel "Blood Brother," Blaustein
demonstrated great enlightenment for that time in Hollywood by working
hard to portray Native Americans fairly. He employed 375 Apaches to
perform in the film, build authentic wickiups and other props, play
native instruments and teach the movie-makers traditional dances. 
"We have treated them as people, not savages," Blaustein told The
Times in 1950. "We have tried to show that the only real 'heavies' are
ignorance, misunderstanding and intolerance."
It is very likely that Robert Wise, Edmund North and Julian Blaustein
were all touched to one degree or another by the great outpouring of
radical politics and culture of the 1930s and 40s. Their story is
being told by Paul Buhle and others. It is worth emulating as we move
toward a new radicalization provoked by the capitalist contradictions
of the new millenium.
