Title
Review for Mercury Rising (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critic's Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
The easiest noun to use in describing 'Mercury Rising' would be
"routine".  It's a simple description but it fits.  I have to say up
front that the movie is mildly entertaining on a trashy sort of level in
the sense that it's best not to think about it too much after you leave
the theatre.  You can't fault movie critics too much for repeating
themselves because it's only due to the fact that films keep repeating
themselves and critics comment on what they see.  It's sort of like a
quarterback who sticks with the plays that work.  If it's a winning
formula, stick with it and as long as people keep dishing out enough
money to see action stars in their repetitive vehicles, Hollywood will
keep making them.
The problem with Bruce Willis is that he fails to connect in finding a
different personality for each character he plays.  Clint Eastwood made
Dirty Harry different from Josey Wales and his gunslinger in
'Unforgiven' was quite different from the drill sergeant he played in
'Heartbreak Ridge'.  All the recent characters that Bruce Willis has
played have looked and felt the same.  1997's 'The Fifth Element' was
like watching John McClane (Willis' character in the 'Die Hard' trilogy)
wake up after being in a chamber of cryogenic technology for three
hundred years, thawed out to strut his stuff with futuristic bad guys
and it failed with most critics except those radical science fiction
fans who refuse to knock even the worst of that genre.  I really haven't
seen Willis in a top notch role since his 1994 attempt at serious stuff
such as 'Pulp Fiction' and 'Nobody's Fool'.  I wish he'd go back to the
stuff he has the potential with and earn a respectable name for himself
but he's becoming a stereotyped performer like Sylvester Stallone and
Wesley Snipes.
The plot line in 'Mercury Rising' concerns a nine year old autistic boy
who has cracked a secret government code which will be used to protect
the covert operations of secret U.S. agents all over the world.  He got
the code from a puzzle book and it just so happens that two government
computer programmers put the code in the book on purpose, testing its
reliability, knowing (or at least counting on the fact) that no one will
be able to crack it but not understanding that the human brain will
always remain a mystery.  Their boss, an evil government stooge (Alec
Baldwin), is outraged that his employees would pull such a stunt and
Baldwin takes steps to eliminate all traces of the boy's involvement
with the code and the government office that created it.  This includes
killing the boy's parents and Willis plays a demoted FBI agent who
investigates the murder of the boy's parents and eventually ends up the
boy's protector when things get more and more dangerous.
Director Harold Becker ('The Onion Field', 'Taps', 'Sea of Love',
'Malice') has used his typical style of stretching a story out to be
much more than it really is, spreading the plot too thin in an attempt
to cover up plot holes and while it hasn't worked for him in the past,
it doesn't work here.  Based on the novel 'Simple Simon' by Ryne Douglas
Pearson and written by Lawrence Konner, Ryne Douglas Pearson and Mark
Rosenthal, 'Mercury Rising' isn't a film I can recommend for its
originality, but it has some decent action sequences as the film is
evenly paced and it is touching in a certain way as Willis plays the
responsible role of the boy's protector and while that may be no big
deal to cynics, the film has a style with an average intention to please
audiences and because of that it does have some merit.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal Pictures/Imagine Entertainment
 Director:  Harold Becker 
 Writer: Lawrence Konner, Ryne Douglas Pearson (novel),
Mark Rosenthal
 Cast:  Bruce Willis, Alec Baldwin, Miko Hughes, Chi McBride,
Kim Dickens
   In David Lean's 1957 blockbuster "The Bridge on the River
Kwai," a British colonel played by Alec Guinness builds a
bridge while held as POW by the Japanese in World War II. 
The bridge will greatly help the Japanese war effort by
enabling them to transport supplies and is therefore a prime
target of Japan's enemies.  When fellow prisoners played by
William Holden and Jack Hawkins plot to destroy the
overpass, Guinness perversely seeks to preserve it.  The
moral: if you create something and take great pride in your
workmanship, you will do anything, however self-destructive,
to keep it vital.  
   Like Guinness, another Alec (Baldwin) has created a
masterwork--a supercode for the United States National
Security Agency, a cryptogram considered so impenetrable
that he is praised mightily by his superiors and is a man on
his way up.  When a mere nine-year-old kid cracks the code,
an autistic boy no less, the obvious thing for its creator to do
would be to announce its defeat and scrap the failure.  But its
architect has become so bound up with his innovation that he
will not throw in the towel.  Instead, he resolves to eliminate
the "enemy" who has thwarted him and all individuals 
connected with that betrayer.  
   This is not to say that "Mercury Rising" approaches the
caliber of "The Bridge on the River Kwai" however similar the
theme.  David Lean's expansive drama is crammed with the
tension created by a psychological battle of wills, exploits the
stirring music of the Colonel Bogey march, and is conclusively
more believable given the fact that the lines were clearly
drawn between the opposing camps.  "Mercury Rising" is
involving enough as are all slickly-made thrillers with top-
drawer performers, but ultimately it's a by-the-numbers
paranoid thriller highlighting the struggle between opposing
forces within the U.S. government.  
   Released at about the time of two other "disease" movies--
"Niagara, Niagara" (La Tourette's Syndrome) and "Go Now"
(Muscular Sclerosis), "Mercury Rising" focuses on an autistic
nine-year-old, Simon (Mike Hughes), a diehard fan of
crossword and other puzzles, who inadvertently cracks the
supercode by intuiting a phone number buried on a page of
cryptography.  When two middle-level workers in the National
Security Agency report their taped conversation with the kid,
the code's designer, Nicholas Kudrow (Alec Baldwin), orders
his hit men to "erase the tape."  They catch his drift.  The rest
of the story combines buddy genre with road movie as
Kudrow and his lackeys go after young Simon, who is
protected by FBI special agent Art Jeffries (Bruce Willis) and
Jeffries' one pal in the bureau, Tommy B. Jordan (Chi
McBride).
   Whether or not the viewers become mesmerized by an
ambulance chase, a dramatic rescue of the wandering kid on
railroad tracks, building roofs and dangerous Chicago
sidewalks, they will absorb some information about autism. 
As played out by young Miko Hughes who spent considerable
time studying the antics of youngsters afflicted with the severe
emotional disturbance, the disorder is characterized by an
inability to connect emotionally or even to look other people in
the eye, a repulsion of physical contact, and a craving for
routine.  When Simon comes home from his special school,
for example, he automatically heads for the jar of Swiss Miss
cocoa and, when preparing to drink it, repeats by rote his
mother's advice to sip the hot liquid slowly.  When touched by
a stranger, he wriggles and screams like a spoiled brat and
when playing with toys he is altogether absorbed in their
mechanics.  He displays one trait which is not uncommon
among people with his ailment: he is a savant--in his case
one who can automatically decode the most intricate of
cryptograms.
   Harold Becker, who directs the action, takes care to show
why agent Jeffries takes such an interest in the boy: when
acting as an undercover agent caught in a standoff between
bank robbers and the FBI, he begs the authorities to give him
a few more minutes to effect a surrender of the gunmen. 
When the authorities ignore him and rush the bank, they kill a
young, impressionable man of about the age of 19 who had
been influenced by the hardened adults, who was ready to
come out and surrender, a needless gunning down of a man
in his prime.  Other aspects of the story are less than
believable, principally the naming by the NSA of one particular
man whom the code is designed to protect--one Rashid
Halabi, an agent placed by the U.S. Government among
Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard. Would the very careful
Kudrow have gratuitously given out this specific information? 
Yet another scene which is hard to swallow deals with Stacey
(Kim Dickens) who, having done a favor for a complete
stranger (Jeffries) by watching the kid for a few minutes in a
downtown shop, opens the door to him at 2 a.m. wearing only
a flimsy slip--even while thinking that the man's FBI
identification is a $5 certificate that anyone could forge.
Stacey's role, we might add, is a bit of an "in" joke.  In her
last movie, "The Zero Effect," she assumes the role of Gloria
Sullivan who lines up for a physical therapy session with a
suitcase by her side.  A private detective played by Bill
Pullman looks at the suitcase and determines her profession--
a paramedic.  In "Mercury Rising," Jeffries and Stacey meet
when the former "accidentally" trips over a very similar
suitcase in order to arrange an introduction.
   Mike Hughes joins the ranks of superior child actors, having
mastered the tics and gestures of autism, performing his role
with the prescience and expertise of a talented young man
indeed.  Alec Baldwin is underutilized: sporting his signature
pompadour and exuding his usual refinement he turns in a
conscientious performance as a guy who is intoxicated with
his success and determined to let no one stand in his way.  In
what is now the standard practice of Hollywood pictures, he is
reviled for his wealth: Willis has a ball knocking over an entire
section of the precious wines from Baldwin's well-stocked
cellar.
   The movie does not shirk from the extreme violence that
audiences have come to expect from the genre, but the car
chases, chopper rescues, U.S. government malcontents and
adorable kids are mixed together with no trace of an original
point of view. Rated R.  Running time: 130 minutes.  (C)
Harvey Karten 1998

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bruce Willis, Alec Baldwin, Miko Hughes, Chi McBride, Kim Dickens
Director: Harold Becker
Producers: Brian Grazer, Karen Kehela
Screenplay: Lawrence Konner, Mark Rosenthal based on the novel SIMPLE 
      SIMON by Ryne Pearson
Cinematography: Michael Seresin
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     The film may be called MERCURY RISING, but that title doesn't 
describe the trajectory taken by this motion picture, a routine thriller 
that combines government cover-ups with a cloying and poorly-motivated 
buddy story.  The "hook" that is supposed to make MERCURY RISING unique 
is that the young protagonist is autistic.  However, aside from giving 
actor Miko Hughes a chance to win raves for his performance, this 
particular aspect of the film comes across as nothing more than a 
convenient plot device.  Those expecting to see even a semi-thorough 
exploration of the condition will be disappointed.  MERCURY RISING 
treats autism with the same degree of efficiency that many action 
thrillers accord to alcoholism.
     The script for MERCURY RISING is exceptionally tiresome and hard-
to-swallow.  I don't know whether the problem is in the original book, 
SIMPLE SIMON, or in the screenplay adaptation, but this movie easily 
exceeds the intangible threshold beyond which a suspension of disbelief 
is no longer possible.  Once again, certain standby plot elements -- the 
high-level government conspiracy and the maverick law enforcement agent 
-- are recycled, and not to good effect.  While Bruce Willis can play 
the action hero as well as anyone in Hollywood, this particular outing 
leaves him marooned in situations that are characterized by too little 
tension and too much nonsense.
     The story begins with a formulaic sequence in which The Tough FBI 
Agent with a Heart of Gold, Art Jeffries (Bruce Willis), is confronted 
with his own failure.  Unable to resolve a hostage crisis in time, he is 
forced to observe as two teenagers are shot to death.  The event weighs 
heavily on his conscience and heavy-handedly establishes his motivation 
for protecting 9-year old Simon Lynch (Miko Hughes) when he discovers 
the autistic child hiding in a closet after his parents have been gunned 
down by The Evil Hit Man Who Looks Like an Ex-Football Player.  Soon, 
Art and Simon are on the run from seemingly everyone -- fleeing for 
their lives and bonding at the same time, with The Evil Hit Man Who 
Looks Like an Ex-Football Player always just a step behind them.  Along 
the way, they are helped by The Best Friend Who Defies Orders to Help 
Out His Buddy (Chi McBride) and the Supporting Female Who May or May Not 
Become a Love Interest (Kim Dickens).  
     Why is Simon in danger and why were his parents turned into Swiss 
cheese by The Evil Hit Man Who Looks Like an Ex-Football Player?  
Apparently, the government has spent millions of dollars developing an 
ultra-secret code called "Mercury."  To make sure it can't be cracked, 
they do the most intuitive thing possible:  place a sample of it in a 
"nerds' puzzle magazine."  Of course, no one can solve it -- no one 
except autistic Simon, that is.  When he calls the phone number listed 
in the solution, he gets the NSA.  As a result, The Cold-Hearted, 
Sneering Government Man (Alec Baldwin) decides that Simon has to be 
eliminated -- for the good of the country, of course.  But he hasn't 
counted on The Tough FBI Agent with a Heart of Gold, even though 
everyone in the audience has.
     It's hard to get worked up about a routine thriller that doesn't do 
anything exceptionally well, and does quite a few things rather poorly.  
For those who are desperate to find elements of this movie to like, 
MERCURY RISING manages to manufacture tension from time-to-time, but 
even the most exciting scenes (such as the one where Art and Simon are 
crouched down, avoiding passing trains) aren't that pulse-pounding.  The 
climactic struggle is a real ho-hum affair which leads to a finale that 
is painful in its obviousness.  Overall, director Harold Becker is 
constantly struggling (and failing) to generate even a moment that isn't 
derivative or obligatory.
     Bruce Willis' star seems to be fading.  This is his fourth straight 
lackluster outing, following LAST MAN STANDING, THE FIFTH ELEMENT, and 
THE JACKAL.  Willis isn't terrible, but this is the kind of role he can 
sleepwalk through, and often does.  Alec Baldwin, combining elements of 
his characters from GLENGARRY GLENN ROSS and MALICE, does some scenery-
chewing, but his performance is surprisingly lacking in menace.  The 
film's real star is young Miko Hughes (Heather Langenkamp's son in WES 
CRAVEN'S NEW NIGHTMARE), who does as good a job as Dustin Hoffman 
playing an autistic individual, but is about 50 years younger.  
     MERCURY RISING joins the likes of HARD RAIN, THE REPLACEMENT 
KILLERS, and U.S. MARSHALS on the heap of pallid 1998 thrillers.  For 
those who like action and adventure in the theater, this has not been a 
good year.  Hopefully, the advent of summer will change that.  Until 
then, the best choices (for Bruce Willis or any other action hero) are 
on video.  And, if you're determined to see Mercury rising, check out 
the morning sky in early May.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MERCURY RISING (1998) *  Directed by Harold Becker. Written by Lawrence Konner
and Mark Rosenthal, based on the novel "Simple Simon" by Ryne Douglas
Peardon. Photography, Michael Seresin. Editing, Peter Honess. Production
design, Patrizia von Brandenstein. Music,John Barry. Cast: Bruce Willis
(Art Jeffries), Alec Baldwin (Nicholas Kudrow), Miko Hughes (Simon), Chi
McBride (Tommy B. Jordan), Kim Dickens (Stacey), et al. A Universal
release. 131 minutes. Rated R (violence)
There were two previews for summer 1998 movies at the screening of "Mercury
Rising" : for "Lethal Weapon 4" and for "Black Dog," both depressingly
familiar with their ever-lasting, dumbing-the-public scenes of supercops,
blazing guns, bloodshed, spectacular (ugh!) car crashes, in short, Men With
Guns and Wheels. Then, adding to this hopeless state of things, came the
feature, an inferior Bruce Willis vehicle.
In search of at least one new twist, "Mercury Rising" invents Simon, a
9-year old autistic kid in Chicago. He is played by Miko Hughes who must be
12, since, debuting at age 2, he has been in 10 movies (plus TV) in the
last 10 years.
Knowing too little about autism I cannot judge the realism of Simon's
portrayal. No matter. Although given a very limited range of things to do
-- mostly sadly peculiar facial expressions and body-language, and minimal
speech-- young Miko does better than anyone else in the cast. But he can't
steal the show, because there is nothing to steal.
Art Jeffries (Willis) is an undercover FBI agent who has infiltrated some
South Dakota fundamentalists. He's with them during a bank robbery. A small
army of lawmen surrounds them, and kill them all by not following
Jeffries's instructions that would lead to a bloodless surrender.Seething
with rage Willis roughs up the FBI leader. All this is plotted
unconvincingly.
The result is two-fold. Jeffries, now deemed unusable as an undercover
specialist, is stuck with more ordinary duties; and he will be pursued by
visions of the youngest of the dead Dakotans.
A kindly therapist gives autistic Simon a book of puzzles. Glancing at a
page of letters, numbers and symbols, he discovers in a flash a hidden
telephone number, calls it and contacts two nerdy fellows in a
computer/communications room. The guys panic.
Explained as muddily and stupidly as possible, it turns out that they are
employees of the NSA (National Security Agency), and are somehow involved
(don't ask) with a state of the art new code ("Mercury"), which they had
decided to test by including it in a puzzle book. (It all makes no sense,
whether in broad lines or specifics).The nerds, terrified as Big Boss Lt.
Colonel Kudrow.gives them hell, come up with streams of reasons and excuses
in 80 mph technobabble that is impossible to understand.
The code is the project of NSA's Kudrow. He is livid. Deciphering the
cryptographed messages will result in the death of hordes of American (and
friendly foreign)  operatives throughout the known universe. Without a
second thought he orders the execution of Simon. A killer pumps bullets
into Simon's father and mother, but no one can find the boy. Yet when
Jeffries, called in as a matter of routine, arrives on the scene of the
murders, he locates the kid (don't ask) hiding in the house.
Somehow (again, don't ask) aware of the hunt for Simon, Jeffries becomes
his rescuer, savior and protector as he drags the child through
mega-improbable action-adventures about which the least said, the better.
The movie must have been written by a bank of computers on automatic pilot.
If it is about  secret intelligence, it sure shows no human brains, hidden
or in plain sight. Its high tech is high dreck. Willis uses about three of
his habitual six expressions; Baldwin follows suit. Both men are getting
plumpish. But while Willis is always hot and dressed in sweaty t-shirts and
jeans, Baldwin is cool and fashionably dressed.
If you do not understand or accept the plot and its details, do not worry.
But if you do, you might wish to undergo a brain-scan. Do not worry either
about the alphabet soup of Government or other organizations (NSA, FBI,
CIA, CBS, NRA, UF0, STP, TBA, PTA, etc.) There's a kernel here of what
might have been shaped into a different movie, about rivalries, mutual
undercutting and the like, but it is not exploited.
At a Washington, D.C, reception "chez" Kudrow,  his popularity with the
Establishment is established. During that same party comes the first
encounter between hero and villain in the latter's dream-cellar. Grungy
Willis guzzles from a bottle of Chateau Petrus, a great French wine, then
vengefully brings down racks of liquid gold. It's in the Hollywood
tradition of the good plebeian rising against the nasty upper-class fellow.
I rate "MR" as one-star rather than zero for these reasons. My pity for
poor Miko Hughes having to act in a role hard on his face and body; the
pretty good production values in Chicago, albeit in cliches ; the small
female roles are not given to gorgeous dames; and especially because that
with all the high tech premise, the solution comes from a low tech sheet of
carbon paper.
Otherwise, "MR" is a yawner, dumb, uninvolving and worst of all, unpleasant.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
David N. Butterworth
        The opening, very deliberate minutes of "Mercury Rising," Bruce
Willis' latest retread, sets up the oft-seen hostage situation in which a
bunch of raggedy bank robbers negotiate with police.  For a moment I was
reminded of that film-within-a-film finale of Robert Altman's brilliant
"The Player," in which a pumped-up Willis caricatures himself, busting in
at the last possible minute and rescuing a frail Julia Roberts with an
apologetic "traffic was a bitch."
        But in Harold Becker's action thriller, undercover FBI agent Art
Jeffries (Willis) is already inside the bank and doing a little negotiating
of his own.  Jeffries thinks he can end this standoff without bloodshed,
but the impatient cops move too soon and Jeffries is left, quite literally,
with blood on his hands.
        Said to have lost his magic touch, Jeffries is assigned to "sit on
a wire" from hereon out.  But shortly after one of the film's secondary
characters repeats the transit metaphor--"traffic was like mud; I oozed
home"--a couple of shots are fired and a nine-year old boy is suddenly left
parentless.  Enter Jeffries stage left.
        Of the thousands of scripts a major studio reviews each and every
year, only about a dozen are so are produced.  One wonders, therefore, why
the executives at Universal chose to greenlight this particular project.
"Mercury Rising" is certainly no worse than any half dozen Bruce Willis
shoot-em-ups.  It's just not any better.
        The film's "hook" is that the kid in danger here is autistic.  The
filmmakers go to great lengths--and I mean *great* lengths--to show us what
that means, exactly.  Simon (convincingly portrayed by Miko Hughes) stares
off into space, presses doorbells very deliberately, repeats things by
rote, and acts afraid in the presence of strangers (unless they happen to
be *cute* strangers, like the one played by Kim Dickens, for example).
        Simon also enjoys puzzles, and this proves to be his undoing, as he
inadvertently deciphers a matrix of seemingly random characters in a
"geek's puzzle magazine," placed there by two National Security Agency
compududes to see if anyone human out there could crack a two billion
dollar chunk of code known as "Mercury."
        My favorite scene in the film comes when one of these nerds tells
Jeffries that he'll leave him an e-mail message in an account called
"einstein."  Jeffries has a savvy librarian do a Web search for "FBI" and
"einstein," instantly locating the address, and logging in.  "Try Arthur"
Art suggests for the password, but that's not it.  "How about E=MC2?" and,
as an afterthought, "all caps."  He's in!
        Why worry about some juvenile savant puzzledoer posing a threat to
national security when you've got Bruce Willis: SuperGuesser to contend
with?
        One of the interchangeable Baldwin brothers plays Lt. Colonel
Nicholas Kudrow, creator of the NSA code, who wants Simon erased (er, why
exactly?).  You know he's a bad guy because he talks in a very loud
whisper.  Kudrow and Jeffries eventually duke it out atop a skyscraper that
looks a little too like the Nakatomi building in "Die Hard," with the
autistic kid wandering around on the ledge to increase the tension.
        Willis is no Olivier but he's always fun to watch.  Unfortunately,
the rest of "Mercury Rising," even with its autism bent, is simply stock
footage.

Author
Homer Yen
Bruce Willis plays FBI agent Art Jeffries in a film about compassion and
conspiracy.  As a man living with a ghost and looking for redemption,
his chance for penitence comes when he is called to investigate a crime
involving the slain parents of Simon Lynch (Miko Hughes), an autistic
child.  Why were the parents killed?  The audience knows that Simon's
autism gives him the ability to 'see through' a newly developed
government supercode called Mercury.  A Mercury-encrypted message was
slipped into the back of a puzzle magazine, and when Simon reads it, he
calls a phone number revealed within the message.  When NSA officials
learn of this, they believe that Simon is a dangerous threat to national
security and decides to take drastic actions. "Nothing can connect the
boy to this office," says the NSA officer (Alec Baldwin).  Jeffries,
however, is unable to question the boy because of his condition.  But
when he learns that Simon's life is in jeopardy, he takes it upon
himself, at great risk, to take care of Simon and try to learn why Simon
is being relentlessly hunted down.  
This may seem like a formulaic movie to some degree, and indeed, several
elements here can be found in many other films of the same genre.  For
example, during his investigation, Jeffries must go into hiding as
several parties make him the target of a manhunt.  He has no personal or
family ties which justifies his apparent willingness to go way above and
beyond the call of duty.  He even has a partner who is reluctant to help
at first but then eventually gives in.  However, there are several
elements that makes this an enjoyable movie.
What I appreciated about this film was its restraint.  It finds a
suitable middle-ground that melds action and drama.  It never went
over-the-top, and took itself seriously by carefully underscoring its
dramatic elements.  Willis is perfectly cast as the anti-hero and ably
handles the reigns of this film.  He realizes that the stakes are high
and that saving the boy is not some kind of cavalier stunt.  His fear
and frustration can be seen on his face.  Despite his pug nature, he
tries to do the right thing.  A subtle level of suspense is maintained
throughout the film.  In a nicely executed sequence, both Jeffries and a
hired killer are looking for Simon in the hospital where Simon is
staying.  Later, all 3 of them wind up in the same elevator.  Our
attachment to Simon is quickly developed, and we cringe when the bad
guys begin to close in or when Simon decides to walk out into a middle
of a busy intersection or onto the middle of the train tracks.  We also
feel good when we see Jeffries finally begin to make inroads into
Simon's autistic world.
Mercury Rising has several moments that begs you to be 'open-minded' and
not question the reasoning behind some of the actions taken.  If you can
make these minor sacrifices, like I did, then it offers enough to make
this a satisfying movie experience.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Now that the "evil empire" of the USSR has been emasculated, writers
have had to find new villains. In Simple Simon, author Ryne Douglas
Peardon,  did not have to look beyond our own back yard.  Here the
villain is Lt. Colonel Nicholas Kudrow (Alec Baldwin) a high-up
official in the covert, secretive NSA, (National Security Agency)
who upon discovering that a top secret code had been broken by a
10-year-old kid, is out to get him even if it means killing him.
 The kid is Simon, (Miko Hughes) an autistic savant.   In an attempt
to find him, his parents are killed by NSA agents.    Art Jeffries
(Bruce Willis) is an FBI man who has been made a scapegoat in an
earlier episode, is relegated to routine work.   That suddenly
blossoms into something big when he discovers Simon and the 2
murdered parents. He decides to take care of Simon and protect him
from the NSA.
 This may have sounded exciting on paper but Bruce Willis and his
monotone voice and equally mono-expression is hardly the one to
bring you to the edge of your seat.    While actor Miko Hughes was
allowed to witness autistic children, the better to portray them,
the director allowed him to do little more than roll his eyes upward
and to the side.  That soon became boring even if in real life that
is how some autistic children behave.   This is a movie; it needs
more than that.   Much more.   Further, very little was shown that
would demonstrate he was a savant.
 The film, in addition, is very violent, with the F word tossed about
carelessly. I lost count of the number of bullets fired but it must
have been well into the  hundreds.   Very gory.   But the worst sin
is that it was boring.
 Alec Baldwin has a smallish role until the last scenes.  Tommy B
Jordan (Chi McBride) is the only government person who is a friend
of Jeffries.   McBride comes across as ready to take on some meatier
roles.

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Harold Becker
Screenwriter: Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal
(based on the novel "Simple Simon" by Ryne Douglas
Pearson)
Stars: Bruce Willis (Art Jeffries), Alec Baldwin
(Nicholas Kudrow),  Miko Hughes (Simon Lynch), Chi
McBride (Bizzi Jordan), Kim Dickens (Stacey)
MPAA Rating: R.
Review: *1/2 (out of ****).
"Mercury Rising" has numerous flaws, but there is
one that really stands out: its central plot
device is unnecessary. That's right. The major
aspect of the film, that which is supposed to make
it different from other routine government
conspiracy / action flicks could be dropped from
the beginning, and the movie would turn out
exactly the same, if not better.
This central device is the fact that a
nine-year-old boy is autistic. His name is Simon,
and an evil government bureaucrat named Nicholas
Kudrow (Alec Baldwin) wants him dead because he
unknowingly cracked a supersecret government code
slipped into the back of a puzzle magazine by its
programmers just to see if someone could beat it.
Simon is intended to be the heart and soul of the
film, and we are supposed to feel for him because
he is a poor handicapped child thrown into a
violent, unfair world against his will, with only
a renegade FBI agent played by Bruce Willis to
protect him.
The fact that he is autistic does nothing for the
emotional intensity or the plot necessities of
"Mercury Rising." I suppose the original novel
upon which the movie was based did much more with
this aspect of Simon's character and his
relationship with Willis, but here it is lost.
Miko Hughes, the young actor who plays Simon, goes
through the prescribed motions of being autistic:
he walks slowly, drawls his words, kicks and
screams when he's touched, and has a hard time
looking at other people. It's a difficult role for
an adult, much less a young child, to play, and
unfortunately Hughes never convinces us that he
isn't playing like he's autistic. Unlike Dustin
Hoffman's performance in "Rain Man" or Leonardo
DiCaprio's in "What's Eating Gilbert Grape," we
are always painfully aware that Hughes is
acting.
However, unlike "Rain Man" which used its
character's autism in unique and interesting ways
to build a credible and touching story, "Mercury
Rising" could go right about its generic,
predictable plot with Simon being simply a really
smart but really shy kid. Hell, he doesn't even
have to be shy. In fact, the movie might have been
more interesting if he had had a more active role,
rather than just being carted around under Willis'
arm.
Willis' character, Art Jeffries, is a
disillusioned FBI agent who has been removed from
undercover work and is now doing menial tasks like
listening to wiretaps with rookies who are happy
to be doing anything. He becomes involved with
Simon when he is called to check out a murder
scene at Simon's house, where his father has
apparently shot his mother in the back and then
committed suicide.
Of course, we know that isn't the way it happened
happen because we saw an evil, square-jawed
government hitman with a mean-looking crew-cut
knock off the parents. Simon was able to get away,
and Jeffries finds him hiding in a secret
compartment in a closet, which the rest of the
Chicago police department had overlooked. Jeffries
-- who is accused by several characters at
different times of being paranoid although his
actions never suggest it -- knows there is
something more, and he makes it his personal
mission to go against everything and everyone in
order to protect Simon. This is quite a task
because that same hitman who knocked off Simon's
parents is crawling everywhere, attempting to kill
Simon at the hospital, on the highway, and every
other place he goes.
Late in the movie, Jeffries is forced to enlist
the aid of a pretty young woman named Stacey (Kim
Dickens) who he meets at a coffee shop. Of all the
hard-to-believe aspects of the movie, this is the
worst. I can believe in the decency of the human
heart, but Stacey's character is far too
accommodating. Not only does she agree to watch
Simon while Jeffries runs off to solve the
mystery, she lets him into her apartment at two
o'clock in the morning when she knows the police
is after him, and then lets him leave Simon in her
apartment which means that she has to forgo a
business trip that is desperately needed to pay
the rent. The grinding squeals of the rusty plot
machine are almost overbearing at this point.
The movie might have been redeemed by some good
action sequences, but even here "Mercury Rising"
doesn't rise to the challenge. The movie was
directed by Harold Becker, who has made some good
suspense films including "Sea of Love" (1989) and
"Malice" (1993), but his talent is nowhere to be
found in this latest excursion. There is one fight
on a streetcar between Jeffries and another hitman
(played by Peter Stormare) that is so ineptly
directed, shot and edited, that I had no idea 1)
exactly where they were on the streetcar, 2) who
was hitting who, and 3) where this hitman came
from and how he knew where Jeffries and Simon
were. The grand finale takes place on the roof of
a tall building, and features a harrowing (yawn)
scene where Simon walks along the very edge of the
building, not because he has to, but because it's
more suspenseful that way.
Taken as a whole, "Mercury Rising" is an tepid,
confused movie that lacks style, wit, and any
traces of a sense of humor. Usually Willis brings
his personal brand of understated humor to his
roles, but here he is too straight and serious.
This is because the movie wants to be an action
flick and a heartfelt drama at the same time, but
it ends up failing on both fronts. Maybe the book
was better, but the way it's handled here is a
perfect case study in formula filmmaking
guaranteed to bore.

Author
Monika Huebner
9 year old autistic Simon (Miko Hughes) loves to solve all kinds of
riddles. But who would suppose that his hobby can put him into mortal
danger. One day, however, his caretaker gives him a riddle magazine
that has one very special riddle - the solution of which is a top
secret telephone number.
The American secret service has developed a new encryption code for
correspondence with their foreign contacts. The code is supposedly
unbreakable for computers, not to mention for the human brain. The
programmers came up with the ultimate test for the code: they hid an
encoded phone number in one of the riddles in a magazine. When the
phone actually rings and a kid is on the other end a torrent of events
is kicked loose that they can no longer control.
Lt. Nicholas Kudrow (Alec Baldwin) immediately gives the order to
silence the kid and his parents once and for all. But Simon manages to
escape the killers. FBI agent Art Jeffries (Bruce Willis) is put in
charge of the case, and a frantic run for the boy's life begins.
Even if this time only one little boy's life is at stake and not the
fate of the Earth as in THE FIFTH ELEMENT or ARMAGEDDON Bruce Willis
is more convincing in his unusual part as involuntary nanny. The
scenes with him and little Simon - very well portrayed by Miko Hughes
- raise this movie slightly above the average. Art Jeffreys differs
from John McClane of DIE HARD fame not only in that he doesn't sport a
bloodstained undershirt, he also is not so excessivly tough and
resorts to pills to calm his strained nerves. The man of steel seems
to have some dents, or what else is to be made of that? He survives a
fall out of a flying helicopter, though. So don't you worry, he's
still invulnerable.
Jeffrey's adversary Kudrow is a very different type. Alec Baldwin is a
good choice for the part. He's the kind of guy who never gets his own
hands dirty and always has his men for the ugly jobs. Not a very
likable guy. You can't help wishing for him to end up a grease spot.
Considering that kids are never seriously harmed in Hollywood flicks
and Bruce Willis always comes out on top you know full well who is
going to be alive when the end credits are start rolling. Minor
characters serve only to add some blood and noise to the action
scenes. As far as suspense is concerned MERCURY RISING is no better
than other movies of the kind.
The one riddle of the movie is Peter Stormare's short appearance, but
you won't need a Cray computer to solve it. I can offer the following
explanations: 1. It was a lifelong dream of his to fight on camera
with Bruce Willis. 2. He had some very urgent bills to pay. 3. After
everybody saw him in Spielberg's THE LOST WORLD he no longer believes
that doing an action movie is bad for his image. His talent was
completely wasted on MERCURY RISING, but the more famous names on the
poster the more people will want to see the movie.
Miko Hughes turns in a great performance as the autistic boy. Apart
from Bruce Willis, who simply does what he always does, Hughes is the
real star of the movie and makes the viewers stick out till the very
predictable ending.
No surprising plot twists or brilliant ideas, but easier to digest
than ARMAGEDDON, where the Last Judgement turned out to be just a
harmless shower of meteorites with a pompous prelude.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
Bruce Willis teams up with bad-guy Alex Baldwin in a film that essentially
introduces elements of WITNESS to the underlying theme of RAINMAN (8/10).
The film also offers us one of the crappiest titles to grace a movie screen
in a while, and has the privilege of being the recipient of "my shortest
review award", due to the generic nature of its existence and the "been
there, done that" feel of its development.
PLOT:
FBI agent Art Jeffries is a rebel within his own clan, and is demoted to a
rookie officer's job until he bucks up. While on an open-and-shut case,
Jeffries runs into an autistic child, who was able to decipher an elaborate
governmental code in a magazine, and suddenly finds himself attached to this
kid's safety. Covert agents from the government are after the boy, and want
him, and anyone else who knows about the discovery, dead.
CRITIQUE:
Sub-par movie, this film doesn't truly live up to anything, because it
doesn't offer enough action to be considered an "action movie", nor enough
thrills to be considered a "thriller". Its dramatic touches are far from
effective, so skip the drama category, and its semi-witty repartees don't
amount to a hill of beans in regards to a legitimate comedy. So what is it?
Who knows! It certainly isn't a great picture, but it does offer an
interesting premise, a good actor in the kid who play the autistic child,
and a few moments of quasi-action scenes. It also offers a one-dimensional,
overacting bad guy in Alec Baldwin (Sure Alec, it's all about
patriotism.....yawn.), many, and I do mean many plot holes (Which may, or
may not bother you, depending on the type of movie-watcher you are), and a
weak conclusion. All in all, a film in which the title character resembles
and acts like the John McClane character from the DIE HARD series, but put
them head to head in an ultimate cage-match, and McClane would chomp this
pup's cheezy one-liners, and fake concern for breakfast. Bruce, it's time to
listen for the bell, my friend, cause it seems to be tolling for thee.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Alec Baldwin, at some point in his life, respectively dated Michelle
Pfeiffer, Janine Turner and Ally Sheedy. He is currently married to actress
Kim Basinger. What a man!
Bruce Willis' full name is Walter Bruce Willison. His nickname is Bruno.
This film's title went through some changes before the geniuses at the
studio settled on MERCURY RISING (Great idea, guys! Way to sell those
tickets!). Some of the earlier titles were SIMPLE SIMON, MERCURY FALLING
(how innovative), and SIMON.
Director Harold Becker has directed some solid films before this one. He's
the man behind 1981's TAPS (7.5/10) with a young Tom Cruise, SEA OF LOVE
(8/10) with the come-back of Al Pacino, and the 1996 drama CITY HALL (7/10).
The one inside joke in the film comes in the way of Alec Baldwin telling
Bruce Willis that "you've been watching too many of those 4-wheel-drive
commercials" (Baldwin himself being the television voice of Chevy trucks). -
Thanks to Scott Renshaw for that one.
The autistic kid in this film, actor Miko Hughes, is not autistic in real
life. His name means Chief in Chickasaw. He is a Native American. He also
played Tom Hanks' son in 1995's APOLLO 13 (6.5/10).
Bohdi Elfman, who plays the character of Leo Pedranski in this film, is the
nephew of composer Danny Elfman, and married to TV star Jenna Elfman.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MERCURY RISING is another of those tales that the Hollywood
establishment loves.  We find out again that deep within our government
is a super-secret agency, whose agents lurk in the shadows to kill our
own citizens, lest they foil its many and nefarious plans.  NSA is the
agency with the killer spooks this time, all to protect its new and
supposedly uncrackable security code.
     But even recycled stories full of balderdash can be interesting if
written intelligently and cast right.  MERCURY RISING's script by
Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal, based on Ryne Douglas Pearson's
novel, doesn't even have sense enough to put in a few twists.  The
story is so obvious from the beginning that director Harold Becker
doesn't even try to have the actors hide anything as they march to its
completely predictable and totally unbelievable conclusion.
     It all starts when recently disgraced FBI agent Art Jeffries is
put on a lost child case.  Art is played with class by Bruce Willis in
his standard action hero garb - constant one-day old beard and
prominent cuts and bruises.
     The "lost child" turns out to be a 9-year-old autistic savant
named Simon, played beautifully and realistically by Miko Hughes from
ZEUS AND ROXANNE.  He and his parents have been ordered killed by a
hissably wicked agency officer named Lt. Colonel Nicholas Kudrow.  The
Colonel is in charge of the security code, which Simon has managed to
break.  It seems that when a couple of "velociraptor" computers
couldn't crack the code, two of Kudrow's nerds put an encoded string
into a puzzle magazine to test "the geek factor," i.e. could anybody
break the encryption using his mind alone.  Simon turned out to be just
such a superhuman.
     "My wife says my people skills are like my cooking skills - fast
and tasteless," Kudrow explains.  As Kudrow, Alex Baldwin delivers just
such a performance.  He appears quickly and blandly, and then,
thankfully, disappears again.
     With Bruce Willis in the lead, the director keeps the action
sequences coming fast and furious, which is a shame since it is during
the quieter scenes between Art and Simon that the movie comes alive.
Willis displays a remarkable tenderness and compassion for his young
charge, and the chemistry between them always seems genuine.
     The show's funniest scene occurs when, knowing that all the
electronic equipment is being monitored, two of the people being
trailed buy a typewriter at a flea market to foil the high tech
eavesdroppers.  But in a show rife with improbabilities, the killer
manages to get everything typed on it but leaves behind the used carbon
paper, which is in full view.
     If you check your brain at the door and concentrate on the
relationship between Art and Simon, the movie becomes watchable.  And
if you're the type that doesn't like surprises, this may be just
picture for you.
     MERCURY RISING runs 1:48.  It is rated R for violence and
profanity and would be fine for teenagers.

Author
Michael Redman
Like every other aspect of human existence, Hollywood prefers to stay with
the familiar tried and true. If something works once, it should work again.
And again and again. Even if it doesn't succeed after a while, at least it's
easier and more comfortable than trying something new.
Of course this leads to failures that feel good. Take a look around. Most
people are following this plan as the default arrangement for their lives.
"Mercury Rising" is a fine example of how this philosophy functions in the
entertainment industry.
FBI agent Art Jeffries (Bruce Willis) is a (gasp!) tough lone wolf. When he's
undercover and a hostage situation goes wrong, two teenage boys are shot dead
by other agents. This pushes Jeffries further into his self-imposed isolation
and the new assignment of baby-sitting a phone tap doesn't help his morale.
His life changes when for some reason unexplained by the film, he is assigned
to help Chicago police investigate an apparent murder-suicide. He discovers
Simon Lynch (Miko Hughes), the dead couple's autistic nine-year old son,
hiding in a crawl space. Before long it's apparent that a hitman was sent to
kill the boy.
Simon is a mathematical savant and has decoded a complex cypher in World
Of Puzzles magazine. He draws attention to himself by calling a phone
number to claim his prize. Unfortunately for him, the phone rings in a NSA
(National Security Agency or, as it's referred to in the film, "No Such
Agency") office. Their newest project is "Mercury", an unbreakable code
designed to protect the identities of double agents around the world.
A couple of computer experts placed the puzzle to check the "geek factor" of
the code. Although Simon cannot logically understand it, the hidden message
comes to him as he stares at it much like Magic Eye pictures pop into view.
He's the only one in the country to solve the enigma.
It doesn't take a psychic to predict that the head of Mercury is a
power-hungry politician who will stop at nothing on his rise to power. Lt.
Colonel Nicholas Kudrow (Alec Baldwin) decides that the best way to deal with
the problem is to eliminate Simon.
When Jeffries learns of the assassination plot, yet another Bruce Willis as
the renegade lawman fighting to save the innocent while everyone is trying to
kill him adventure gets underway. There is an abundance of shooting, loud
noises, speeding trains and close calls. Everything that you've come to expect
and everything that you've seen hundreds of times before.
As one of my guilty cinematic pleasures, I usually enjoy Willis'
performances. He's one of the best there is at what he does, but even I am
beginning to tire of the same old stuff. There are a number of actors that are
essentially the same character film after film, but at least people like Clint
Eastwood have the wisdom to vary plots. Bruce Willis playing Bruce Willis
still works, but it takes a better story than we have here to make it interesting.
Director Harold Becker ("Malice", "Sea Of Love") has filled the movie with
scenes that don't make sense. When Jeffries meets shoe-saleswoman Stacy (Kim
Dickens) in a cafe, she watches Simon and later lets them spend the night in
her apartment although she knows that he's a wanted man. All for no
discernible reason. They never make any real connection. She's in deadly
danger, yet she's willing to become part of the scheme and we never understand why.
The similarity of Jeffries and Simon holds promise early in the film. Each is
cut off from the world: Simon by his autism, Jeffries by his choices. The only
exception to his exile is a friendship with fellow agent Tommy Jordan (Chi
McBride in the mostly lively performance in the film) which provides the few
episodes of personable interactions. As the young boy and his protector spend
time together, they grow closer but not by much. Mostly Jeffries drags the
screaming boy around. To give the film credit, at least Simon doesn't become
magically cured.
Autism is an eerie situation where the person lives mostly internally,
relating to the outside world only when forced to. Hughes does a superb and
very realistic job of portraying a young boy with the affliction. In real life
there is a distance between the autistic and other people. It's difficult to
relate to someone who isn't interested. As fine as Hughes is, on the screen
the barrier is magnified. There's no getting inside his head. We understand no
more about Simon at the end of the film than we did at the beginning.
The rest of the actors are decidedly mediocre. You know what to expect from
Willis. Baldwin walks through his role as if he's reading his lines off a
teleprompter. Dickens almost becomes real, but doesn't make it. The geeky
computer wizes are irritatingly interesting but their characters go nowhere.
The ending is particularly hackneyed. With helicopters fluttering around,
Willis and Baldwin engage in a slugfest atop a skyscraper as Simon wanders
near the edge and lots of big guns shatter glass in the background. Innovation
is not the name of this game.
The title "Mercury Rising" was apparently chosen to impart some sense of heat
to this film. I think someone got the wrong weather report.
(Michael Redman has written about films for 23 years and is often willing to
throw himself in front of bad movies to protect his loyal readers.
Redman@bvoice.com is the electronic connection.)
[This appeared in the 4/23/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Harold Becker
Cast: Bruce Willis, Alec Baldwin, Miko Hughes, Chi McBride, Kim Dickens
Screenplay: Lawrence Konner, Mark Rosenthal
Producers: Brian Grazer, Karen Kehela
Runtime: 108 min.
US Distribution: Universal
Rated R: language, violence
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        I just don't understand why Bruce Willis lends his talents to films as
bland and uninspired as Mercury Rising.  It seems like every film he
does is just another action film, designed to fade from memory almost
immediately after viewing.  I, for one, think he's a terrific actor (see
Mortal Thoughts if you don't believe me).  And he can do a great job,
even in generic, formulaic action films like this one.  But action films
as great as Die Hard come around about once a decade, and so my advice
to Mr. Willis is as follows:  move into another genre (and do it
fast!).  
        In Mercury Rising, he plays Art Jeffries, a lonely FBI agent who
normally works undercover, but is forced into more menial jobs such as
wire tapping after the introductory-action sequence ends in the needless
death of five militia men.  Skip ahead a few days, and we meet young
Simon (Miko Hughes), an autistic boy who cracks a government supercode
hidden in a puzzle magazine.  The head of the operation that uses this
special code is a man named Kudrow (Alec Baldwin), and he tries to have
Simon and his family executed.  Naturally, the parents bite it early,
but Simon lives long enough for Jeffries to find him and take care of
him.
        Mercury Rising is straight formula, played with poker-face stiffness by
director Harold Becker.  It has all the familiar scenes, such as the
intro scene that proves our hero is really committed to his job, and the
windy climax at the top of a building, where the lives of three or four
individuals are dangling off the edge.  There's barely an original
moment in this film:  everything from the setup to the conclusion is
predictable and stale, and is made watchable only by the performers.
        Willis, as I stated, is a great actor, and he's good here.  I liked the
fact that he isn't just another burn-out cop, but that he is actually a
pretty level-headed individual.  Some of the scenes are fuelled by
Willis' charismatic performance, such as the opening scene (which is
actually very intense, despite its predictable outcome and purpose). 
Miko Hughes also does a pretty good job of playing the autistic kid,
although I would have preferred that the autism been given more thought
and not just been used as a plot hook.  Baldwin is good as the bad guy,
but like all action-film bad guys, he's not very human, and present just
to serve the story.   
        Some of the stuff in this film is downright absurd.  There's a subplot
involving a woman, Stacey (Kim Dickens), who Jeffries literally meets on
the street somewhere.  He asks her to take care of Simon for a few
minutes, and she agrees.  Later, he shows up at her house and demands
more babysitting.  The plausibility problems with this situation could
have been instantly solved by making Stacey a woman that Jeffries knew
beforehand.  And everything about the government code is silly:  the
technicians explain why they placed the code in the puzzle book, but it
still doesn't make much sense.  And what does the code do, anyway? 
Well, we're told that it protects the identities of important
individuals, but how or why is never explained.  
        And I might have been able to overlook these things, had the story been
more original.  But it's not.  Mercury Rising fits the far-too-familiar
action film template down to the last detail, and the result is an
uninspired, forgettable movie that, in the end, is only worth watching
for Bruce Willis' unwavering conviction for his roles.  This is just
another entry in a big pile of films that he's too good to be in.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 3, 1998
Starring: Bruce Willis, Alec Baldwin, Miko Hughes, Chi McBride, Kim
Dickens, Robert Stanton, Bodhi Elfman, Carrie Preston, Lindsay Ginter
Directed by: Harold Becker
Distributed by: Universal Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (violence, language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/mercury.htm
Bruce Willis' career as an actor, now in its eighteenth year, commands a
list of nearly forty titles. Add to that almost ten more titles which he
served on as a producer or a writer or various other crew roles, and
there is no denying the statement that Willis is very accomplished in
the motion picture industry. It's somewhat surprising to consider, then,
that the majority of his achievements have not moved beyond the limited
confines of action or thriller movies. While some have been benchmark
entertainment, like DIE HARD, PULP FICTION, and 12 MONKEYS, Willis'
flashes of brilliance do not counterbalance the many senseless movies
he's made. His newest star vehicle, MERCURY RISING, isn't as bland as
other work he's done, but it is a thriller doesn't achieve what genre
fans expect. 
Although primarily a thriller, MERCURY RISING has scenes where it wants
to be and fades into simple, guns-blazing action (scenes of Willis
running through a hospital come to mind). These tentative, cross-genre
steps cause the thriller component to lose value, because the intent of
a thriller is to build tension slowly but steadily. When a gunfight
errupts, its as though all of the tension built to that point has been
thrown onto the screen, and the movie has to start over. Genre fans, who
expect an edge-of-their-seats ride, or at the very least, constant
excitement, will be disappointed by the lulls as MERCURY RISING goes
through the cumbersome rebuilding process. Harold Becker, who last
directed the mediocre political thriller CITY HALL, gets the pacing down
by the end of the movie, although the his finale is somewhat
anticlimactic. 
As the principal, Bruce Willis is unconvincingly bland, although his
character is easy to stomach. He plays Art Jefferies, a special agent
with the FBI who, after striking a superior officer following a botched
hostage situation, is relegated to a missing-child case. Arriving at the
boy's house, he finds both parents shot dead and the child hiding away
in a closet. He attempts to get to know the kid, named Simon (Miko
Hughes), but this proves difficult as Simon is autistic. Unaware of the
world as most people see it, Simon's autism enables him to read and
decipher complex encryptions developed by the nation's most secretive
agencies. When he interprets the National Security Agency's newest
communications code, nicknamed Mercury, he encurs the wrath of the
division head, Nicholas Kudrow (Alec Baldwin). Only Art (of course) goes
with his gut feeling and helps the kid out. 
Both Willis and Baldwin turn in fairly credible performances, and while
this was one of Willis' more likeable roles over his past efforts (THE
JACKAL, THE FIFTH ELEMENT), Baldwin lacks the sinister sliminess that
has pervaded his other antagonistic roles. His gravelly voice makes up
for some of it, but his lack of screen time means he can't lend the
gravity that he did in THE EDGE or THE JUROR. Miko Hughes is the most
outstanding actor here, with a stunning portrayal of an autistic boy
that lends realism to Willis' character. The acting overall is bearable,
but it's present in a genre that doesn't demand it. The movie doesn't
deal with its genre well enough to receive full credit, though, and
MERCURY RISING is watchable by anyone who doesn't demand perfection. 
FINAL AWARD FOR "MERCURY RISING": 2.5 stars - an enjoyable movie.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Ryne Douglas Pearson, Lawrence Konner, and Mark Rosenthal
(from a novel by Ryne Douglas Pearson)
Starring: Bruce Willis, Miko Hughes, Alec Baldwin, Kim Dickens
Ingredients: Autistic kid, disgraced FBI agent looking for redemption
Synopsis: 
A nine-year-old Chicago autistic boy named Simon (Miko Hughes)
accidentally breaks a top secret government code that was placed in a
dime store puzzle book. The problem is that Lt. Colonel Kudrow (Alec
Baldwin) of the National Security Agency has a lot of money invested in
the code. Kudrow reasons that if the kid can crack the code, then he's a
security hazard that must be terminated. Soon Kudrow's hired assassin
wipes out Simon's hapless parents.
Meanwhile down-in-the-dumps outcast FBI agent Art Jeffries (Bruce
Willis) is assigned to find Simon. He finds Simon and then, while on the
run, must figure out who's trying to murder the boy and why. In the
process, he bonds with Simon.
Opinion: 
The premise of MERCURY RISING sounds promising. After all, what audience
can resist feeling for a handicapped kid in trouble, hounded by
sinister, big bad government forces? Unfortunately MERCURY RISING
suffers from two major movie turnoffs: a passive hero and a contrived
plot. 
Ideally in a movie you want a hero to be actively searching for clues or
nosing around for ways to conquer or circumvent a terrible dilemma. But
Art Jeffries - - the FBI hero of this story - - doesn't do this. He gets
chased and finds he can't trace the killer. Then he basically hangs out
and doesn't know what to do until the end of the movie, when an NSA girl
contacts him.
The plot? It leaves you asking questions such as "How did the dead guy
with a bullet in his brain manage get up and dial 9-1-1? And why would a
beautiful single woman wake up and willingly open her apartment at 2:00
AM to a strange man? And if the nerds knew the bad guy was a killer, why
did they just sit there and wait for the killer to kill them?" The
actions seem contrived.
On the other hand, the dramatic strategy behind MERCURY RISING is to
develop audience sympathy for the autistic kid and the disgraced FBI
hero and then give us a happy ending for them. MERCURY RISING does this. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There comes a time in a critic's life when he simply has nothing to
say about a film as gruellingly generic as MERCURY RISING, but he's got
space to fill so he keeps on jabbering away anyway.  This is the kind of
action film where dogs jump out of nowhere to spook the audience, where
glass shatters in slow motion, and where children are placed in jeopardy.
It's the kind of action film which went through a slew of title changes --
from SIMPLE SIMON to SIMON to MERCURY FALLING to MERCURY RISING -- but may
as well have been called BRUCE WILLIS ACTION FILM PROJECT 1998.  It's a
hero with a gun, a villain with an attitude, a woman with nothing to do
but cringe in fear and a script with some time to kill.  It's competent,
business-like and utterly uninspired.
     I suppose MERCURY RISING deserves at least an ounce of credit for
trying to make its protagonist human.  Willis plays Art Jefferies, an
undercover FBI agent thrown into a depression when a Waco-like shootout
results in the death of two teenage boys.  Re-assigned to penny ante
detail, Jefferies stumbles upon an apparent domestic murder-suicide which
turns out to be more than meets the eye.  The surviving family member is
a 9-year-old autistic savant named Simon Lynch (Miko Hughes) who
unwittingly has broken a top-secret government code called Mercury, hidden
by its creators in a puzzle magazine as a test of the "geek factor."  When
National Security Agency nasty Lt. Col. Nick Kudrow (Alec Baldwin) orders
the boy "erased," only Jefferies puts his life on the line to save Simon.
Thus begins a rather one-sided paternal bonding experience, in which
Jefferies tries to redeem his previous failure (underlined in grainy
flashbacks that haunt his dreams) and connect with Simon between spurts of
gunfire.
     Nice try, bad idea.  I don't know who thought it was wise to remake
RAIN MAN as a gritty thriller, but it's a combination that falls
completely flat.  Though Willis is a cut above his action hero
contemporaries as an actor, he still can't work miracles with a character
reduced to baleful stares and hoarse whispers as he vainly struggles to
befriend his troubled charge.  It's not just that he has trouble
connecting with Simon, which is sort of the point -- he has trouble
connecting with anyone.  Willis moves as though on auto-pilot, exchanging
dialogue with his supposed best buddy (Chi McBride) as though they were in
different rooms, and making no discernible effort to differentiate this
action film from his last (THE JACKAL), which also happened to include a
scene where someone gets caught between two trains speeding in opposite
directions.
     It's that kind of creative deja-vu which makes sitting through
MERCURY RISING such a chore.  It's not that it's a terrible film; in fact,
director Harold Becker's pacing is a cut above recent genre cousins, the
narrative never actively insults, and the performances are solid all the
way around.  Baldwin, in prime arrogant S.O.B. mode, even gets off a sharp
little inside joke when he tells a mach-posturing Willis "you've been
watching too many of those 4-wheel-drive commercials" (Baldwin himself
being the television voice of Chevy trucks).  But those are the kind of
moments you grasp for when you've seen the same film a dozen times a year
for the last five years, when you've written about the same film a dozen
times a year for the last five years.  If your objective in watching a
film like MERCURY RISING is spending a two hour block which will
immediately blur into previous two hour blocks, you've found a winner.
You may even have something worth writing about it.  If so, I've got a
couple of column inches you could help fill.

Author
Matt Williams
Bruce Willis needs to stay away from straightforward action pictures.
Mercury Rising adds to a growing list (including such stinkers as The
Jackal, Last Man Standing, Striking Distance and The Last Boy Scout) of
stale actioners he has headlined. And though Mercury Rising tries to
spice things up by throwing an autistic kid in the mix, it is every bit
as stale.
Art Jeffries (Bruce Willis) is your typical tormented FBI agent.  You
know the type, haunted by his job, yet so good at what he does that even
physically assaulting another agent merely gets him a slap on the wrist.
Enter Simon (Miko Hughes), an autistic boy, who, like Rain Man and all
other autistic people, is a savant.  He can merely gaze at a
super-encrypted message, and, while little computer beeps go off in his
head, he can understand what it says.
Naturally, this talent has brought him to the attention of the federal
government.  Lt. Col. Nicholas Kudrow (Alec Baldwin), an NSA official
bubbling over with evil, has spent countless time and money implementing
the newest "unbreakable" code, Mercury.  However, when two of his
underlings (Robert Stanton and Bodhi Pine Elfman) publish a
Mercury-encrypted message in a puzzle magazine as a final test of its
effectiveness, Simon cracks the code.  Naturally, this infuriates
Kudrow, who sends a terminator-like hitman (L.L. Ginter) to eliminate
the security hazard.
And that's where Art Jeffries comes in.  For some reason that's never
explained in the film, the FBI is called in to help, and through a
series of intricate machinations, Art becomes the sole protector of the
young autistic boy.  In a few unrealistic sequences, he enlists the aid
of a stranger, Stacey (Kim Dickens), to help out, but she is given very
little to do overall.
The central concept behind Mercury Rising is ludicrous. Why bother
trying to kill the kid...I mean, who would know? It's not like the kid
(or anyone else for that matter) knew he was cracking a government
super-cypher.  And even if he is eliminated, what does that help?  He's
already proven that Mercury can be broken. There's always the chance
that someone else would crack it...but I guess without a kid in
jeopardy, there's not much of a movie here.
For all its faults, the film actually starts relatively well (once you
pass the painfully familiar teaser).  The film flirts with developing
real characters, and a semblance of a plot...then Mr. Terminator the
hitman appears and everything begins going downhill...quickly.
Miko Hughes does a decent job, for his age, at creating a touching
performance.  However, don't go to this film looking for any new
insights into autism (not that many people will).  Instead he merely
becomes the latest unique partner in a routine buddy-cop movie (think
Cop and a Half...with a twist!)
Willis and Baldwin are just overplaying to type. Rather than creating a
nuanced character, Baldwin simply oozes sliminess. And for Willis' part,
he simply recycles the stock role of the loner cop/FBI agent (which he
has honed in the Die Hard series).  As almost an afterthought, about
halfway through, the film carelessly gives him a character trait (an
addiction), and then drops it in the next scene.
But the biggest problem with Mercury Rising is the screenplay.  This
film wasn't well thought out at all.  The film goes to extraordinary
lengths to pad in as many convenient coincidences as possible. The
carbon paper scene alone is unworthy of the most gullible audience
member. At first the bad scenes just trickle in, but by the gruesomely
bad finale they're a veritable flood.
The film's few decent moments come in the form of bad jokes (mainly from
the geeks who developed the supercode).  But they're not nearly enough
to make the film worthwhile. Mercury Rising is a thriller that you're
more likely to groan at than cheer.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Jon Popick
It must have something to do with the title.  First, they gave us Deep
Rising, and now they force Mercury Rising on the unsuspecting public.
Mercury boasts a bigger and better cast, but is still just as
ridiculous.  And I'm not even sure that ridiculous is strong enough of a
word.
Is it just me or is Bruce Willis just playing the same role over and
over again?  Don't get me wrong, I like Bruce.  I mean, he was in three
of the best films in the past few years (Pulp Fiction, 12 Monkeys and
The Fifth Element), but is still mostly typecast as the downtrodden
recently fired/demoted law enforcement type guy.  In Mercury Rising, he
is Art Jeffries, an undercover FBI agent busted down to an office grunt
after taking the fall for a Ruby Ridge-type militia standoff.
One of his assignments is to look for a missing kid named Simon (Miko
Hughes, Spawn), who has somehow cracked the government super-code using
his amazing and seemingly limitless powers of autism.  Now, call me
crazy, but how often is this kid going to run across scrambled
government code involving top secret military plans.  It's not like
they're putting this stuff on the back of Cheerios boxes.  But, rather
than ignoring the problem, the powers that be (represented by Alec
Baldwin, The Shadow) decide that it would be a better world if Simon
would just die.
And what's the deal with Alec Baldwin's career?  When was the last time
he was in a profitable or well reviewed film?  I can't remember either.
He is arguably the least talented of all the Baldwin Boys (and is
approaching Daniel for the largest), but yet somehow remains on the
`A'-list of Hollywood leading men.  Of course, I might be saying all of
this because I'm jealous of the fact that he probably "loved" Kim
Bay-Sing-Er with her own Academy Award.  `Just relax, Kim.  This is an
Oscar tradition.  No, I'm not making it up'.
You can probably figure out the rest of the moronic story (from the
writers of For Love or Money) on your own.  There's lots of gunplay and
fighting and punching and yelling.  There's the token girl thrown in for
no reason (Kim Dickens, Zero Effect).  The only characters that I even
came close to liking were the two geeky computer experts that work for
Baldwin.  But, even they couldn't hold my attention, which was busy
thinking of the most poetic way to kill each character.  I also wondered
if the film would be any better if they had cast the wives of the male
leads instead.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Bruce Willis, Alec Baldwin, Miko Hughes, Chi McBride, Kim Dickens
Director: Harold Becker Producers: Brian Grazer, Karen Kehela
Screenplay: Lawrence Konner, Mark Rosenthal based on the novel SIMPLE
SIMON by Ryne Pearson
After viewing MERCURY RISING, it may be wrongly supposed that Bruce
Willis appears to be fumbling about for interesting side-kicks to fill
his action flicks. This movie may be viewed as DIE HARD WITH AUTISTIC
BOY, mixed in with strong psychological elements of remorse and
atonement for past failures (failing to save teenagers in a foiled bank
robbery). The plot attempts to pull at the viewer's heart strings, by
setting up too many a situation where a handicapped child is put in
harms way, only then to be rescued and hugged by the burly Willis  Oh
please! Or this may be seen as a egotistical movie where Bruce gets to
do all the talking, whilst his autistic co-star Simon (Miko Hugues) does
little except stare into blank space, grunt and scream when touched.
MERCURY RISING is not all bad, cause I can name at least one other
Willis movie that far out stinks this one  THE JACKAL. This movie
speaks of the ruthlessness of the NSA (National Security Agency). When
an autistic child is able to crack the American Government's toughest
code, their solution to the problem is to eliminate the child and
family. Naturally Bruce baby (FBI Agent) sees through their charade and
goes about to right wrongs in a DIE HARD/BOY SCOUT sort of a way. One
would think that perhaps after soooo many movies where disputes are
settled by fists and guns, a solution to the problem would be found
through mature discussion  after all, the FBI and NSA are on the same
side! But noooo, Bruce and Alec have to fall into the childish routine
of slugging it out in the end, like kids in a playground fight. I
personally felt that instead of trying to kill the kid who can crack any
code, the NSA should have utilised his abilities to break enemy nation
security codes  resolving the situation peacefully, calmly and
sensibly.
So I was not impressed by this movie, or by Willis' acting, attitude or
action. Alec Baldwin (ruthless NSA chief) has hardly any screen time and
is not seen much till the end of the movie. As for the poor kid they
dragged into making this movie, I just hope he doesn't become
psychologically traumatised by all of this Hollywood, BULLAHOO
commotion.
The only thing that rises in this movie is your blood pressure, at
having to endure such heartfelt trash.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html
