Title
Review for Wedding Planner, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Adam Shankman.
Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Matthew McConaughey, Bridgette Wilson-Sampras, Justin 
Chambers, Judy Greer, Kevin Pollak, Frances Bay.
2001 - 107 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for mild profanity and a scene of scatological humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 27, 2001.
For 107 minutes, "The Wedding Planner," a distressingly lifeless romantic 
comedy directed by Adam Shankman, stands as an embarrassment for every person 
that was involved in its creation. With the commitment of such talented movie 
stars as Jennifer Lopez and Matthew McConaughey, it is destined to stand as a 
negative footnote in both of their careers, as neither one even give us the 
pleasure of good performances. Lopez's strong point is most certainly not 
comedy, as she consistently resembles a deer caught in the headlights, while 
McConaughey simply looks bored. Together, they flounder and desperately 
overact in an attempt to bring life to the charmless screenplay, hideously 
written by Pamela Falk and Michael Ellis, and insipid direction by first-time 
director Shankman.
Mary Fiore (Jennifer Lopez) has been a dedicated and highly successful 
wedding planner for five years, effortlessly controlling everything involved 
in the festivities. In fact, so much of her time is taken up by her 
profession that romance has been absent from her personal life for two whole 
years. That all changes when she has a strained meet-cute with doctor Steve 
Edison (Matthew McConaughey), who saves her from a runaway garbage cart. 
Following a magical night which they spend watching an old movie in a San 
Francisco park, Mary is appalled to discover a couple days later that Steve 
is engaged to marry her latest client, Fran Donolly (Bridgette 
Wilson-Sampras). Forced to work with the couple as she plans their wedding, 
Mary cannot help but fall for Steve, who is likewise beginning to have doubts 
about Fran being "the one" for him.
The romantic comedy genre is one that you don't really expect to be 
unpredictable. In almost all cases, the two unlikely lovers end up together 
in the end. Because of this, it is vital that the film exhibit at least a 
modicum of sweetness and entertainment value, with the two characters 
invoking charisma together. Take the similar 1998 film, "The Wedding Singer," 
for example, which wasn't the least bit surprising in the story department, 
but flourished because of its bright writing and the standout performances by 
Adam Sandler and Drew Barrymore. The makers of "The Wedding Singer" had their 
hearts in exactly the right place, and it ended up being one of the best 
comedies of that respective year. "The Wedding Planner" is almost a carbon 
copy of every romantic comedy ever made, but its humor never fails to fall 
flat, and the whole production seems to be stuck on autopilot.
It cannot be denied that Jennifer Lopez (2000's "The Cell") and Matthew 
McConaughey (2000's "U-571") are attractive performers, but they are walking 
stiffs in this film, and their characters offer up no rooting interest. The 
supporting cast are a little better, but they, too, often overact with the 
skill of an untrained tiger. Judy Greer (2000's "What Women Want") at least 
has some fun as Mary's friend and coworker, which is more than can be said 
for the two main stars. The only two actors who come away unscathed are 
Bridgette Wilson-Sampras (2000's "Beautiful") and Justin Chambers (1999's 
"Liberty Heights"), who bring dignity and intelligence to their roles of 
Steve and Mary's potential suitors. Wilson-Sampras is especially good, and 
the final scene between her and McConaughey is one of the few well-written 
passages in the entire picture. Tellingly, it is a quiet, dramatic sequence, 
leading one to hypothesize that the movie might have been more successful 
without all of the stupid slapstick, which is not helped by Mervyn Warren's 
cartoonish, nails-on-a-blackboard music score. 
You would think that romantic comedies would be one of the simplest genres to 
write for. After all, they don't ask much in the way of creativity, and only 
require the assistance of a sturdy screenplay and a cute couple. When even 
those slight requirements are not met, as they fail to be in "The Wedding 
Planner," you know that the whole enterprise is in serious trouble. By the 
time Lopez and McConaughey reunite at the end to consummate their love for 
one another in the crucial final scene, I caught my mind wandering to "The 
Pledge," the far superior film I saw right before this one. That is as 
telling a final statement as anything in "The Wedding Planner."
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com 

Author
Ross Anthony
Well, it's certainly an attractive money making idea. Put man-magnet, 
Jennifer Lopez (I don't know any guy who doesn't find this woman 
perfectly cute and sexy) in a chick flick and release it in January. 
Every 12 to 22 year old of either sex is going to see this movie. And 
they won't be disappointed. They might not be thrilled, but they won't 
be disappointed. 
Jennifer Lopez plays Mary Fiore, the ultra-organized-organizing wedding 
planner who can produce the perfect social event for anyone, except 
herself. She's the bride's coach, counselor and spiritual advisor to 
boot. Having faith in the concept of arranged marriages, her Italian 
father tries to marry her off to the young pizano she grew up with back 
in the homeland (Italy ... surprise). Meanwhile, Jennifer gets her shoe 
stuck in the middle of the street and falls in love with a handsome 
passerby. It's actually a very sweet scene from slapstick action to 
charming dialogue. And the children (that follow) in the hospital back 
it up 100%; sorry to see them leave the film forever after just one 
scene. 
Later, Jennifer and bo share two or three "old movie cliche" scenes that 
just stop the picture in its tracks. These sequences feel horribly 
"added later" as if the writers were trying to create a nostalgic homage 
sympathetic to the old black and white reel playing on their first date. 
Unfortunately, it doesn't work. "I don't even know your father's first 
name, but I know the curves on your face." Yikes ... that scene is as 
bad as a later bride/groom pre-wed chat scene is fresh. 
Here's a mild spoiler ... err, ah, the guy she literally "falls for" is 
the fiance of the woman who's hired her to plan the wedding. This sticky 
news sets up the conflict for the rest of the film. 
Popeye would have loved Penny, Jennifer's assistant in plandom. Judy 
Greer nails this bumbling Olive Oil sidekick role. 
Basically, "The Wedding Planner" is a sweet love story hampered by 
contrived conflicts. Lopez and McConaughey act very well and create 
great chemistry. A good portion of the dialogue is superb, the direction 
and editing very skilled; however, less than interesting portions of 
script were unfortunately never omitted. Especially after a crisp 
appealing first third, expect some serious downtime between peaks. 
Overall, a light night out. 
The Wedding Planner. Copyright Š 2001. 
*  Starring Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Matthew McConaughey, Bridgette Wilson, 
Justin Chambers, Judy Greer,Alex Rocco. 
*  Directed by Adam Shankman. 
*  Written by Pamela Falk, Michael Ellis. 
*  Produced by Gigi Pritzker, Deborah Del Prete, Peter Abrams, Robert L. 
Levy, Jennifer Gibgot at Columbia/Intermedia (C)2001. Rated PG-13. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Brandon Herring
After 2000's visual feast "The Cell", Jennifer Lopez takes a complete 360 and 
makes a wonderfully flawed romantic comedy, that even with the predictability 
and cliched dialogue still captured me in my seat and kept me entertained 
throughout. Jennifer Lopez and Matthew McConaughey have such great formula as 
an onscreen couple, that it is impossible not to like them, if not the movie.
Maria "Mary" Fiore (Jennifer Lopez) is a young wedding planner who has been 
single for a while, and is married to her work. After getting her high heel 
shoe stuck in a sewage drain in the street, she is rescued from a menacing 
trash dumpster on it's way to smoosh her. Her rescuer is non-other than Dr. 
Steven James Edison, a pediatrician whom takes care of the bump on her head. 
Instantly she falls in love with him, and soon to find out...he is the groom 
of the next wedding she has planned, the same wedding that will make her go 
up in her business. Now she must try and figure out how to get through it, 
and how to fall out of love, with the one person that might truly be the one.
A light, fluffy romantic comedy "The Wedding Planner" is not a bad film at 
all. Through the opening credits and through the end credits I was 
entertained and had fun with the film. It does however have a few flaws, 
which come from the predicability and the cliched dialogue (how many times do 
we have to sit through the "How much I love you, but I'll never get you 
speech?). In the end however, you get that warm fuzzy feeling inside, and 
leave with a smile on your face, and your heart warm warmed up.
Adam Shankman, a choreographer of several movies including 2000's "Mission to 
Mars", 1999's "Inspector Gadget" and "She's All That", this is his first 
major motion picture as a director and he does do a good job at making a 
movie. Nothing special goes into a romantic comedy, so nothing special is 
expected and what is Adam Shankman gives it. The cleverly written dialogue by 
Pamela Falk and Michael Ellis is funny and fun to listen to.
For the acting, Jennifer Lopez in the title role is to me, the only person 
really cast for this role. After hitting it big in 1997's "Selena", Jennifer 
Lopez shows she can do any film, comedy, thriller, drama. She is great in the 
title role, and very funny as well. Matthew McConaughey is somewhat miscast 
in the role as Steve her love interest, and acts a bit like he doesn't want 
be in the movie. In too many scenes he is too plain and drained. Bridgette 
Wilson as the groom of the wedding is a beautiful and talented actress, and 
she gives a good performance as well.
"The Wedding Planner" is a nice, subtle romantic comedy that would make a 
great date movie. It's one of those movies you could watch a couple times, 
then leave it on the shelf, then watch it again. Its not even close to being 
a bad movie, but then again its not even close to being an excellent movie 
either.

Author
Christopher Null
Ah, welcome to San Francisco, the place I call home.  It's a city of
exorbitant housing costs where we're facing two years of electricity
blackouts, and it's home to some of the most ridiculously magical
romances ever conceived.  (See also: The Bachelor.)
In what is either a sassy updating of the fable of marriage or a vicious
lambasting of its sanctity, depending on your point of view, The Wedding
Planner presents us with Jennifer Lopez and Matthew McConaughey as an
unlikely pair who somehow manage to get together -- against all odds, of
course.
Utterly absurd and hopelessly dated from its opening scenes (Bridgette
Wilson-Sampras plays a millionaire who made her fortune by selling
gourmet food on the Internet -- uh huh), The Wedding Planner borrows
heavily from My Best Friend's Wedding without getting much of its
humor.  The tired story is predictable: Lopez's Italian(!),
anal-retentive Mary (so particular that she alphabetizes the credit
cards in her wallet) runs into Steve (McConaughey) on a San Francisco
street, and soon they're whisked off to an impromptu date in Golden Gate
Park.  Oops -- l'il Stevie is about to get hitched to Fran
(Wilson-Sampras), and Mary's been hired to plan the wedding!
Sounds like fun, no?  Well, for short stretches of The Wedding Planner,
it is.  But for much longer stretches, the film is just plain stupid,
consisting of ridiculous, random setups designed to get our star-crossed
lovers intertwined, with an inevitable punch line to pay it all off. 
When Fran's family goes horseback riding (for some reason bringing Mary
along on the trip), of course her horse is going to bolt and Steve will
have to save her.  When Fran leaves town for a week and Mary and Steve
go shopping for statues(???), of course a stone penis is going to break
off and get glued to Steve's hand.  But the biggest insult has to be a
truly wretched subplot, which has Mary's father (Alex Rocco) actually
arranging a marriage for Mary with some schlub from back home.
Considering the source material, I'm not terribly surprised by any of
this.  Clearly intended as a vanity project and star vehicle for
Jennifer Lopez to continue her climb through the ranks of Hollywood, the
script is the first-produced film from writers Pamela Falk and Michael
Ellis (feuding lovers themselves, how cute!), and the first major
directorial work of Adam Shankman, best known for being a choreographer
on more than 20 films, from Mission to Mars to Weekend at Bernies II. 
The movie screams amateurism because it really is the work of amateurs. 
That said, the cinematographer does manage to get Alcatraz, the
Transamerica Pyramid, and many other S.F. landmarks in just about every
shot -- nicely done!
Anyway, never mind that arranged marriage crack -- I have to say the
biggest insult is actually that we're supposed to believe Matthew
McConaughey is really having trouble choosing between Bridgette
Wilson-Sampras and Jennifer Lopez.  Wilson-Sampras is a fading B-lister
with a pointy chin and a bad dye job who starred in Love Stinks.  On the
other hand, Lopez is a former Fly Girl and rising star with a nice chin,
a good dye job, and a flawless ass the size of two overripe watermelons.
Director: Adam Shankman
Producer: Peter Abrams, Deborah Del Prete, Jennifer Gibgot, Robert L.
Levy, Gigi Pritzker
Writer: Pamela Falk, Michael Ellis
Starring: Jennifer Lopez, Matthew McConaughey, Justin Chambers,
Bridgette Wilson-Sampras, Judy Greer, Alex Rocco, Joanna Gleason, Kevin
Pollak, Charles Kimbrough, Fred Willard, Lou Myers, Frances Bay
http://www.sony.com/theweddingplanner
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
When casting a light comedy, Jennifer Lopez and Matthew McConaughey 
would probably be two of the last names that would come to mind. But in 
Adam Shankman's THE WEDDING PLANNER these choices prove superb. A 
good-spirited, romantic comedy with an almost child-like innocence, the 
movie sweeps you off your feet and puts you in the mood for laughter and 
love.
The frequently inspired script is by Pamela Falk and Michael Ellis -- a 
pair of love birds, according to the press kit, whose relationship did 
not survive the many years it took to get the script produced. THE 
WEDDING PLANNER is a film that's easy to fall in love with, but, like 
the writers' romance, the relationship gets rocky. After a marvelously 
successful first half, the romantic comedy runs out of humor, leaving 
the love story alone to carry the second part. It turns out, however, 
that the film is at its most romantic precisely when it's the funniest.
Mary Fiore (Lopez) is the wedding planner. An anal-retentive who 
alphabetizes her credit cards, Mary laments that "Those who can't do, 
teach, and those who can't wed, plan." But she is a planner par 
excellence, running weddings with hilarious, military precision. "Cover 
me. The FOB is MIA", she barks to her assistant, Penny (Judy Greer), 
over her wireless microphone. (Translation: The father of the bride is 
missing.)
After Dr. Steve Edison (Matthew McConaughey), Mary's knight in shining 
armor rescues her from a killer dumpster, it's love at first site. There 
is, however, the slightest of problems. Steve turns out to be the groom 
of her high profile new client, Fran Donolly (Bridgette Wilson-Sampras). 
To add further complications, Mary's father (Alex Rocco) introduces her 
to Massimo Lanzetta (Justin Chambers), her newly arranged husband-to-be. 
The last time Mary saw Massimo, he was a mud-munching little kid in 
Sicily. Judging from his accent, he just got off the boat.
The chemistry between the control-freak wedding planner and the more 
laid back pediatrician is delightful. They create sparks on the screen 
even though their relationship is confined to a single kiss. 
The movie is easily one of the mildest PG-13 films in recent memory. 
Save a reference to a female organ and an innocent and sweetly funny 
scene involving a male nude statue, the movie would have been at most 
PG.  THE WEDDING PLANNER is a comedy that warms your heart instead of 
grossing out your stomach. Imagine that. It's no coincidence that some 
of the key scenes happen while an old film is playing in the background. 
In many ways, THE WEDDING PLANNER is a charming throwback to a simpler 
time at the cinema. But the film never feels dated. It's a dynamite date 
movie and a good family film as well.
THE WEDDING PLANNER runs 1:40. It is rated PG-13 for language and some 
sexual humor and would be acceptable for all ages.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 WEDDING PLANNER, THE (director: Adam Shankman; screenwriters: Pamela
 Falk/ Michael Ellis; cinematographer: Julio Macat; editor: Lisa Zeno
 Churgin; cast: Jennifer Lopez (Mary Fiore), Matthew McConaughey (Steve
 Edison), Bridgette Wilson-Sampras (Fran Donolly), Justin Chambers
 (Massimo), Judy Greer (Penny), Alex Rocco (Salvatore), Fred Willard
 (Basil St. Mosely), Charles Kimbrough (Mr. Donolly), Joanna Gleason
 (Mrs. Donolly), Kathy Najimy (Geri); Runtime: 102; A Sony Pictures
 Entertainment release; 2001)n
Jennifer Lopez is Mary Fiore, she's the workaholic wedding planner,
someone who hasn't had a date in six years. The Wedding Planner is a
romantic comedy cut from the cloth of the Hollywood studio zany comedies
of the '50s. It reminded me most of "The Father of the Bride," only it
didn't have Spencer Tracy's assurances that everything would turn out
OK, as the film looked real good for the first 70 minutes and then slid
into tedium and then into a contrived ending ala "The Graduate."
The refreshing zaniness is there in the opening scenes when Mary gets
her Gucci shoe stuck in a sewer hole in the streets of San Francisco and
a hunk by the name of Steve Edison (McConaughey) rescues her from being
crushed by a runaway dumpster. She looks at him and he looks at her, and
it's love at first sight.
He turns out to be a pediatrician, and when Mary's assistant, with the
rolling eyes and high sqeaky voice, the loopy Penny (Judy Greer), senses
romantic sparks in the air seeing the two together, she arranges a date
for them in Golden Gate Park. This is an amazing park, because besides
having an amusement ride and an outdoor dance floor, it screens movies
and on their two visits to the park they watch rarely seen Hollywood
musicals: Two Tickets to Broadway (1951, with Janet Leigh, Tony Martin,
and Gloria De Haven) and Flirtation Walk (1934, with Dick Powell and
Ruby Keeler).
On the dance floor, only a rain storm stops them from kissing.
Mary has talked her conniving boss Geri (Kathy Najimy) into giving her a
partnership if she can snag the account of the soon-to-be bride, Fran
Donolly (Bridgette Wilson-Sampras). Her family is extremely wealthy,
having made a fortune in the high-tech business and are willing to spend
a small fortune on the wedding. Mary has worked her way into being one
of the best planner's in the business due to her diligence in planning
the perfect wedding. But the surprise that comes her way, after happily
landing this big account, is learning that Steve is the sexy guy Fran is
going to wed.
The film comes armed with an inane subplot, that wasn't particularly
funny or believable, as Mary's very heavily accented, doting, Italian
immigrant, widowed dad, Salvatore (Alex Rocco), foists Mary's childhood
playmate, Massimo (Justin Chambers), on her and lets it be known that
they are engaged. Massimo is a manipulative clod, with a penchant for
saying and doing the wrong thing, and is someone she never liked, even
though he's not bad looking.
Upon the introduction of Massimo into the story, the film loses its
energy. For someone who is billed as a control freak such as Mary is,
there is no way she would not have put a damper on the relationship
instantly. But since she doesn't and the chilly Fran shows only
friendship for Steve and no love -- we are forewarned of what will
happen to their intended wedding plans. Only, first-time director Adam
Shankman builds the tension up to ridiculous proportions, by having both
couples getting married to the wrong person at the same time -- Fran's
in the park, Mary's in city hall.  But there should be no surprise how
everything is resolved.
It's a modestly successful romantic comedy, much like those
old-fashioned fluff films of yesterday. It's ready made for an audience
that applauds when two people who are meant for each other, wind up with
each other no matter what. Hollywood loves churning out stories like
that because they're good box office and have mass appeal. This is one
of those films, and if that's your poison, be my guest, you won't be
disappointed by this one. The two stars are glamorous, with Jennifer and
Matthew throwing some PG-13 heat onto the screen. The film's big joke is
when Jennifer is told she has a big neck, an obvious reference
to Jay Leno's running gag about her big derriére.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE WEDDING PLANNER  *  (2001) Directed by Adam Shankman. Screenplay, 
Pamela Falk, Michael Ellis.  Photography, Julio Macat. Music, Mervyn 
Warren. Cast: Jennifer Lopez (Mary Fiore), Matthew McConaughey (Steve 
Edison)   Bridgette Wilson-Sampras (Fran Donolly),  Justin Chambers 
(Massimo), Judy Greer (Penny), Alex Rocco (Salvatore Fiore), Joanna 
Gleason (Mrs. Donolly),  Charles Kimbrough (Mr. Donolly), et al . A 
Sony release. 101 minutes. PG-13
"Veni, vidi, vici" said Julius Caesar, "I came, I saw, I conquered." 
Re The Wedding Planner, I came, I saw, I was monumentally bored.after 
he first reel. In the latter, Mary (Lopez) is the powerhouse top 
handler in a chic firm of wedding consultants in San Francisco. The 
early sequences are amusing. She runs a wedding with the modern, 
technological efficiently of a three-star general. Self-assured and 
fully aware of her value to the firm, she is gunning for a 
partnership. The scenes are fast-moving and fast-talking, like a 
throwback to classic screwball comedies such as Twentieth Century, 
Bringing Up Baby or His Girl Friday.
But her private life, while minutely organized, is empty. Then, while 
planning the highly profitable wedding of heiress Fran, in a forced 
development a street accident causes Meeting Cute with pediatrician 
Steve (McConaughey). In a mega-coincidence  of the kind that give  a 
bad name to movies, romance raises its head as soon after Steve turns 
out to be is the fiancé of client Fran.
An unlikely quid pro quo is reinforced by shovelfuls of artificiality 
in plot, cardboard characters, relationships, antagonisms, 
side-events ... Another thread has Mary's father Salvatore  (Alex 
Rocco), surprise her with the arrival from Italy of Massimo (Justin 
Chambers) a childhood playmate. As absurdities escalate, Massimo 
wants to marry Mary. His role is useless, gratuitous and plain 
stupid. His Italian as well as his Italian-accented English are 
atrociously false, as are daddy Salvatore's.
Shots, scenes and sequences pile up in a gauche, unintegrated script. 
The movie is like a cut-up cadaver that they are trying to make whole 
with stitches. There is no forward movement, no impetus, no suspense, 
no guessing in all this flab. You can see everything coming from Day 
Two as the "developments" increase to Himalayan heights of dumbness.
In the finale, the Lopez character and the pediatrician will be the 
new couple. Predictable. But it makes no sense that she blames 
herself for having been a control freak. She was simply doing her 
job.  All this is nap-inducing with the force of five Tylenol-Plus.
There's an embarrassment of choices in attributing film guilt to the 
makers. A first-time director whose trade is choreography; a novice 
writer and her inexperienced collaborator; a regiment of producers, 
executive producers and co-producers; a plethora of companies ( the 
credits read: A Sony Pictures release of a Columbia Pictures and 
Interme presentation of a Tapestry Films/Dee Gee Entertainment/IMF 
production in association with Prufrock Pictures.) Too many cooks?
The screening of this feature was preceded by three unpromising 
previews. The Wedding Planner confirmed that after the mostly awful 
summer 2000 movies, and after their subsequent replacement by some 
good films year-end items (the usual pre-Oscar race), bad movies are 
back to reinforce the dismal norms of Hollywood.
By coincidence, a couple of hours after seeing The Wedding Planner, I 
caught on cable Gregory Nava's 1997 biopic "Selena," with Jennifer 
Lopez in the title role. It is about the Tejano singer who was 
murdered in 1995, at age 23, just as she was becoming a household 
name. It is just a good movie --but it  feels even better when 
compared to The Wedding Planner.
A trivial note: Fran is played by the former Bridgette Wilson who 
married tennis player Sampras and now goes under the hyphenated name 
Wildon-Sampras.
A non-trivial note: for her role Lopez was paid 9 million dollars.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
"We Put the SIN in Cinema"
 ŠCopyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Prepare yourself for the Jennifer Lopez media onslaught. Her new record
is due in stores just three days before her latest film debuts in
theatres, and it probably won't be long before Puff Mommy is on Court TV
testifying in boyfriend P. Diddy's trial for gun possession, bribery and
the inability to create his own music. Since the entertainer has gone
from critical praise for Out of Sight to tepid box office returns for
The Cell to, well, being Puffy's bagman, you might be asking yourself,
"How low can J Lo go?"
The answer is The Wedding Planner, an inane romantic comedy that makes
you wonder if the Writers Guild hasn't already gone on strike. Lopez
plays Mary, a successful, no-nonsense wedding planner who oversees
expensive ceremonies and lavishly detailed receptions like a finely
tuned military maneuver. Mary is good at what she does, donning a
headset and watching the ceremony from a monitor like a television
producer, and she's got a belt with enough gadgets to make Batman's
tights fall down.
While she carefully plans memorable, romantic days for happy young
couples, Mary's own love life is at a standstill. She was ditched at the
altar several years ago and hasn't had a date in over two years. To make
matters worse, her Italian father (Alex Rocco) keeps trying to fix her
up with a young man from the Old Country (Justin Chambers, Liberty
Heights). All in all, it's a pretty sad state of affairs for a woman to
used to plan extravagant weddings for Barbie and Ken as a girl. Like she
says, "Those who can't wed, plan."
But things start to become brighter for Mary. She lands the big wedding
fish in Fran Donolly (Bridgette Wilson-Sampras, Beautiful), an affluent
woman about to get hitched in a money-is-no-object wedding to end all
weddings. And she falls head over heels for a pediatrician at a local
children's hospital (Matthew McConaughey, U-571), too. Everything is
coming up roses for Mary, at least until she finds out her dreamboat is
engaged to Fran.
Planner, written by debut scribe Pamela Falk and Little Voice editor
Michael Ellis, invents all kinds of ridiculous ways to get the two of
them alone together, but nothing remotely interesting or comedic. A
scene where she measured his inseam at a tuxedo fitting would have been
a step in the right direction, but you won't find anything that
entertaining here.  Director Adam Shankman instead chooses to fill the
film full of sappy music. For the record, this is Shankman's feature
film directorial debut, but he was a choreographer on some of the worst
movies made in the last few years (Isn't She Great, Dudley Do-Right,
Inspector Gadget, The Out of Towners).
The final scene shows how fiercely these filmmakers are committed to
putting a quality product on the screen. It's supposed to be June in San
Francisco (home of bad wedding films - see The Bachelor for more proof)
but you can see the icy breath coming out of Lopez and McConaughey. The
scene also abruptly shifts from the sunny mid-afternoon to the dark
evening, simply to force the characters back into the setting in which
they fell in love. Now that's romantic.
Just in case you've recently suffered a stroke, or taken a sharp blow to
the base of your skull and can't figure out how a movie like this ends,
they give the whole thing away in the trailer. If you've seen it,
there's absolutely no reason you need to see the film. Save your money
for J Lo's new record instead. Her acting is probably better in the
liner notes.
1:45  PG-13 for language and some sexual humor

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures/ Intermedia Films
 Director: Adam Shankman
 Writer:  Pamela Falk, Michael Ellis
 Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Matthew McConaughey, Justin
Chambers, Bridgette Wilson, Judy Greer, Alex Rocco
   Taking on the theme of "always a wedding planner but
never a bride," Adam Shankman's throwback to sentimental
romances like Taylor Hackford's 1982 adventure "An Officer
and a Gentleman" updated with elements from Mike Newell's
"Four Weddings and a Funeral" has a few things going for it
to make its relative charms at least somewhat tolerable to
viewers.  The principal couple played by Matthew
McConaughey and Jennifer Lopez are pure box office, with a
palpable chemistry and the ability to portray professional
people from different ethnic roots who must overcome
hardships before securing a happy life together.  Julio
Macat's lensing shows us a gorgeous San Francisco,
avoiding the stereotypical hills and trolleys in favor of a more
lived-in town, lived-in, at any rate, by the well-to-do.  But
blatant predictability, a tendency of supporting players to
overact, and a craving of Mervyn Warren's music to pump up
every emotion dooms what could have been as buoyant as a
just-baked wedding cake into just another elaborately nut-
filled but unsatisfying confection.
   From the very opening, Shankman shows us the sort of
work that is done by the titled wedding planner, an assured
hostess who, like a film director for the rich, smoothly
commands her subordinates to assure that each ceremony
runs calmly and gracefully.  Mary Fiore (Jennifer Lopez) darts
about the lavish expanse of one of San Francisco's most
exclusive parlors, even arranging to change the seat of a
guest whose elevated mane gets in the way of the video
camera in much the way movie patrons in non-stadium
theaters block the view of those seated behind them. 
Aspiring to a partnership in a firm run by the goofy Gery
(Kathy Najimy), she is to be rewarded if she can get the
account of wealthy but equally goofy high-tech executive Mr.
Donolly (Charles Kinbrough) and his ditzy, oenephile wife
(Joanna Gleason).  When Mary and a cute pediatrician meet
cute after Dr. Steve Edison (Matthew McConaughey) saves
her from an attack by a wandering dumpster, Mary enjoys a
moment that can be described only as love at first sight. But
since Pamela Falk and Michael Ellis's screenplay abide by
the leading convention of romantic comedies--keep the
principals apart until the very end--we have no trouble
believing that Steve and Mary are destined to remain just
friends as the physician is engaged to the headstrong and
horsey Fran Donolly (Bridget Wilson-Sampras).
   We need not wonder why Jennifer Lopez enjoys the
attention of an extensive fan club.  Emulating Julia Roberts in
the beauty arena, Ms. Lopez's career often features her
mellifluous voice.  This time around, we learn that she is an
accomplished ballroom dancer.  At one point she turns in an
impressive gambol at the tango, a performance for which
McConaughey allegedly needed to rehearse for several
weeks before being released on the ballroom floor for the
cameras.  But even here, our enjoyment of the scene is
impeded by the over-the-top demeanor of Fred Willard as
dance instructor Basil St. Mosely.
   While leaving the theater, an eavesdropper could hear at
least two members of the audience joking that Matthew
McConaughey is the prettiest actor in the movie.  The
versatile, thirty-two year old performer has strutted his stuff in
roles as varied as that of Richard Linklater's "Dazed and
Confused" and Joel Schumacher's adaptation of John
Grisham's "A Time to Kill."  He exudes genuine charm as
opposed to the mock enticements of Judy Greer as Penny,
an assistant to the wedding planner, and the irritating
presence of Calvin Klein model Justin Chambers in the role
of a naive immigrant, Massimo, who is pushed by Mary
Fiore's annoying dad Salvatore (Alex Rocco) to propose to
her.  (Massimo's only knowledge of Mary was in a brief stint
as childhood friends, at which time Massimo recalls "she was
ugly and had no breasts").  "The Wedding Planner" is as
excessive as the haute bourgeois members of the horsey set
and the equally irritating people into whose lives they intrude.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 102 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A very pretty, but lonely, wedding planner unknowingly falls for a guy whose
wedding she is planning. As the wedding day approaches, she and the
groom-to-be spend more and more time together, and then...well, I think we
could pretty much all guess the rest, eh?
CRITIQUE:
Whose opinion do you think is more important for this type of movie? Me or
my girlfriend's? Well, as it turns out, she and I had diametrically opposed
opinions about this movie, so let's try this experiment and play the ol' "he
said, she said" game:
HE SAID:
Jennifer Lopez looked really beautiful in this movie. Matthew McConaughey
also looked mighty handsome. But put all that beauty aside and whadda you
got? Jack all! In fact, here's yet another example of a movie that blows
away its entire story in one 30-second trailer. Trust me...if you've seen
the trailer, you've seen the movie, folks! Sure, there are a couple of
"Jennifer acting cute" moments and the décor nice to look at, but the film
as a whole is just too hollow, predictable, fluffy and tired. In fact, I'm
personally starting to get really tired of watching these 1-2-3 romantic
comedies. And oh yeah, I think I forgot to mention corny. I don't know,
maybe I just don't "get" this kind of movie since many people in our
audience seemed to be enjoying themselves. But try as I might, I just could
not see past this film's obvious story line, I'm talking from scene one to
scene last, lack of chemistry between the leads, crappy dialogue and phony
baloney "family" moments. Blech! I just didn't buy any of it!
The whole thing just smelled like a "vehicle" for a couple of movie stars
looking for a "romantic comedy" project. Even the so-called "comic relief"
Italian boyfriend in this movie did nothing but annoy me with his accent.
And was Alex Rocco really trying to sound Italian, too? Boy-oh-boy. But I
could sometimes even forgive predictability when the film as a whole is able
to entertain, or at least make me laugh, but even there, this film came up
very, very short. It was just so damn ho-hum! I mean, did you read the plot
breakdown up there? Lopez and McConaughey basically just walk around trying
to find stuff for his wedding the whole time...walk here, walk there, talk
about this inconsequential something, talk about that inconsequential
something. And why was it that this sexy, gorgeous, sensitive, loving, smart
businesswoman didn't have a boyfriend in the first place, you may ask? God
knows. I guess it made sense for the plot...but sadly, the plot doesn't
carry much weight in the real world. Ugh. See this movie if you liked any of
the other romantic comedies that I gave low scores to below. That would mean
that we don't see eye to eye on these types of movies and that this one
might appeal to you. And the missus' point of view...?
SHE SAID:
Well, she saw it all under a different light. She loved the whole look of
this movie, the flowers, the dresses, the clothes, the locales...all that
crap...uhhhm ,I mean, stuff! (Note to self: She might be trying to tell you
something, you commitment phobic dunce!). Anyway, she also bought into the
whole "will McConaughey and Lopez" end up together "mystery" (granted, she
hadn't seen the trailer) and thought that all of the characters were
believable and well-developed enough to care about (yup, she shed tears,
folks!). She also loved all of the romance sprinkled throughout the film
(the tango scene in particular) and really enjoyed the performance put forth
by the over-the-top Italian guy with the accent (natch!). Anyhoo, the one
thing that we did agree on was that the film didn't necessarily have many
humorous moments. Overall, not an original piece of work, but apparently fun
to watch (according to her). She scored it a 7/10.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Bachelor (5.5/10) - My Best Friend's Wedding (7/10) - Father of the
Bride (7/10) - Notting Hill (5.5/10) - The Wedding Singer (7/10) - What
Women Want (5/10) - You've Got Mail (5.5/10)

Author
Bob Bloom

The Wedding Planner (2001) 1 star out of 4. Starring Jennifer Lopez,
Matthew McConaughey, Bridgette Wilson-Sampras, Justin Chambers, Judy
Greer, Alex Rocco, Joanna Gleason and Charles Kimbrough. Music by Mervyn
Warren. Writtrn by Pamela Falk and Michael Ellis. Directed by Adam
Shankman. Rated PG-13.
 While watching The Wedding Planner, I played a game called ěCount the
Cliches.î
 What are the rules? Simple. Just count characters or situations youíve
seen in countless other movies.
For example in The Wedding Planner we have:
 1. The successful, single career woman who everyone thinks lives a
glamorous life, but who goes home to a drab apartment, fixes a frozen
meal and watches The Antiques Road Show.
 2. The man-crazy, overly perky assistant who sees every single male as
a potential match for her boss.
 3. The meet-cute situation in which he and she come together, their
eyes meet and sparks fly.
 4. The old-world father ó hers ó who sees his daughter as a failure
because sheís still single.
You get the idea.
 The Wedding Planner is a slick little trifle that is insipid,
inoffensive, corny and unoriginal.
 Itís a movie that wastes the talents of Jennifer Lopez and Matthew
McConaughey. It play more like a TV pilot than a feature film. Even the
music gives off a sitcom-like aura. The only thing missing is a laugh
track.
 This film is so predictable that if you canít figure out what is going
to happen 10 minutes before the event, you need a remedial course in
Movie Watching 101.
 Lopez plays Mary Fiore, the always-in-control A-list wedding planner of
San Francisco who makes everyoneís most memorable day perfect and every
brideís dream come true.
 She has just landed the biggest account of her career ó the wedding of
Fran Donnelly (Bridgette Wilson-Sampras), who is the daughter of a famed
Internet tycoon. This prize means she rises to partner in her company.
 But on this fateful day, Mary almost has a near-fatal collision with a
runaway Dumpster. (Like I said, this is sitcom situationland.) She is
rescued at the last minute by Dr. Steve Edison (McConaughey), a
gorgeous-looking pediatrician.
 After a quick checkup at the hospital, Maryís overly-eager assistant
invites Dr. Steve to join the two women that night for a
movie-in-the-park date. Of course when the doc shows up, Maryís
assistant takes a powder, thus allowing the two to share a lovely
evening.
 But, guess what? Fran drops by Maryís office a day or two later to
begin planning her wedding and drags her fiancé along. And you know who
that is?
 No need to go on. The rest of the plot falls into place as neatly as
those big-piece puzzles you buy a pre-schooler.
 The Wedding Planner is a chick flick, and a lame one at that. It offers
nothing original. Even at about 100 minutes the movie seems to drag.
 Lopez has some pleasant moments as the successful Cinderella looking
for her Prince Charming, but McConaughey appears totally bored and seems
to bring nothing to his character. He acts as if itís strictly a
take-the-money-and-run gig for the young heartthrob.
 The Wedding Planner is rated PG-13 for some silly reason, and I canít
fathom why since the movie is so inoffensive and innocuous.
 In the film, one of Maryís talents is predicting how long a marriage
will last by noting the color of the brides maidsí gowns, the types of
flowers selected and the title of the coupleís wedding song.
 Too bad screenwriters Pamela Falk and Michael Ellis, along with
director Adam Shankman, didnít have a Movie Planner advising them on
this project. They may have left it at the altar.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
