Title
Review for Kolya (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KOLYA (Czech Republic, France, UK, 1996) *** 1/2. Directed by Jan Sverak.
Written by Zdenek Sverak. Story, Pavel Taussig. Photography,Vladimir
Smutny. Editing, Alois Fisarek. Production design, Karel Vasanek. Costumes,
Katerina Hollak. Music, Ondrej Soukup.Produced by Eric Abraham & Jan
Sverak. Cast: Zdenek Sverak (Louka),  Andrej Chalimon (Kolya), Libuse
Safrankova (Klara), Ondrez Vetchy (gravedigger Mr. Broz), Stella Zazvorkova
(Louka's mother), Ladislav Smoljak (Mr. Houdek), Irena Livanova (Nadezda),
Lilian Mankina (Aunt Tamara), et al. A Miramax release. 105 min. In Czech
and bits of Russian. Subtitled. Rated PG-13. Oscar for Best Foreign Film,
also of the Golden Globe Award.
"Kolya" deserves its Oscar for Best Foreign Film as well as its Golden
Globe . Its closest contender this year was the French "Ridicule" (shown at
the Art months ago), for its wit, originality, lavish images and clever
ironies. I had seen both films at the 1996 Cannes Festival. Both were even
better on second viewing. "Kolya" was the best Film Market ( i.e.
non-official or competing) movie I watched at Cannes '96.
It also deserves a clean print, which is not always the case with foreign
movies that, no matter how praised, play mostly in art houses.And since
such theaters are not big producers of income for distributors, the latter
only too often send them battered copies. In "Kolya," much good classical
music is tied to the story and very well played, so that the sound is just
as important as the images.
It also belongs in the tiny category of Best  All-time Father-and-Son
movies. Jan Sverak directed it. His father Zdenek Sverak wrote the script
AND plays the top role of Louka.
Virtuoso cellist Frantisek Louka (Franta to his family and friends, Maestro
Louka for others) was dismissed from the Czech  Philharmonic Orchestra by
order of the apparatchiks who collaborated with the Soviets. The reason was
so ludicrous that it makes good sense within the absurd context of the
times.
The place is Prague, the year, 1988, the last one of the Soviet  presence
that will end with the  final liberation of the country, the Velvet
Revolution of 1989 (shown near the film's end) and the retreat of the
"115,000 heavily armed Soviet soldiers that occupy our homeland" as per a
Radio Free Europe broadcast heard in the movie.
The specific reason of Louka's fall comes out in bits. I won't reveal it in
the body of this review, but I will do so after the end, for those who burn
with curiosity.
Riddled with debts even after selling his car, the cellist can hardly
survive by playing in a small ensemble at funerals in the Prague
Crematorium, which the musicians call The Bakery.  He also re-gilds ("with
real gold") inscriptions on tombstones.
Maestro Louka is 55, has thinning hair, a beard with more salt than pepper,
but he is a handsome, youthful figure a la Sean Connery in certain hirsute
roles. Always worried by lack of money, he normally wears a serious
expression.
Don't let this fool you. He is a bachelor who took his late father's advice
that a professional musical career is incompatible with marriage. But Dad
said "marriage" and not "women." Louka is a Don Juan, a womanizer whom the
opposite sex finds irresistible. There is a large line-up of ladies, all
professionals, all attractive in looks and personality.
If the man is politically incorrect by Government standards, as a
lady-killer he is even more feministically incorrect .He cannot resist
making passes at Klara, the group's singer, as they perform. An
incorrigible voyeur, he lifts her skirt with his bow. On the street, his
eyes rove. He still has his beautiful apartment with a view ("my tower") at
the top of a lovely old building. He keep his phone busy as he calls old,
recent or new conquests, married or into relationships. Just about all are
willing to come and spend the night. Louka's little black book and his
memory are so full that he often mistakes one invitee for another.
The movie paints a full, colorful portrait of Louka before getting into its
other, big topic. This starts out with the musician's need for a car. He
cannot even afford an outrageously priced, second-hand Trabant, that
famous/infamous, hardy but primitive, uncomfortable polluter from East
Germany. A grave-digger friend (another likable fellow, and with a
picturesque family) comes up with a scheme: a hefty sum if Mr.Louka weds --
in name only --a Russian woman who wants Czech papers and the benefits
thereof, mainly not having to go back to Russia.  Reluctantly, Louka
yields. This aspect is what, in the U,S. would be called the Green Card
side of the picture.
Nadezda, the bride-on-paper, is ravishing, speaks no Czech, has a 5-year
old boy called Kolya. Soon after the wedding she skips to West Germany
where she has a married lover, leaving Kolya with Aunt Tamara. But when the
older woman is hospitalized, Frantisek Louka gets stuck with the kid.
The child speaks no Czech, Louka remembers only bit of school-Russian.
Problems of  communication, legalities, and "fatherhood" arise. If you
can't guess the rest, you haven't been going to the movies enough. But how
can you help seeing things coming? The gradual bonding between Louka and
Kolya, the changes in both, the growing "Dad" and "Son" relationship.
This has been a genre of films of all periods and nations. Yet if the
tale's skeleton is familiar, the flesh that covers it in "Kolya" is
wonderfully original. Yes, "Kolya" manipulates its public, but sometimes we
love to be manipulated, especially when this is done with such charming,
colorful, picturesque events and details. The movie has a way of keeping
our interest without dead moments or breaks. It places whatever deja vu
components it contains within a fresh-feeling context (and a quickly
decipherable subtext) of Czech society, culture and life under the Soviets.
No one likes the Russians, least of all Louka's mother who lives at the
family home along a beautiful provincial square. Inventive Louka first
tells her the child is a Yugoslav, but this won't wash. The few Russians
seen are soldiers, not ogres but nice young men, as we glimpse them in a
terrific sequence where Kolya meets them.
The film is the production of a finally independent Czech Republic that no
longers fears censorship and can say things that were taboo for decades.
Nonetheless, what really gives it its fascination is that it remains
faithful to the unique nature of films, the bittersweet irony, the
distinctive humor, a feeling for absurdism, of films made mostly during the
artistic boom of the Spring of Prague, that hiatus which began with
liberalization in 1963 and ended with the Soviet invasion of 1968.
There is also that lovely thread of Czech literature that has little people
fox, or get even with, unreasonable authority -- although this is
attenuated here first because the Maestro is not an ordinary man and second
because the Velvet Revolution is what brings a closure to his problems with
the Establishment.
The basic scheme of Louka-Kolya rapport may be sweetly predictable, but the
details and the presentation are consistently clever and novel. Among them
is the fact that through thick and thin, Louka 's sexual adventures are
unabated. In one, a beautiful blonde violinist comes to the Maestro because
she wants to switch to the cello. It is a collector's item of eroticizing
musical talk and instruments. In contrast, on another occasion Louka calls
a different girlfriend, a teacher of Russian, not with an invitation to
spend the night but for her to read to Kolya over the phone a fairy tale in
the boy's native language.
The actors are superb, down to the smallest of supporting roles.  Prague's
great beauty is used of course, but functionally and discreetly, not in
exploitative travel-poster fashion. Always in the background, the politics
of the country are given a mocking or caustic rather a melodramatic
treatment. Sentiment, leavened by wit, is ever-present, but not
sentimentality in the pejorative sense of the word.
In an unassuming way "Kolya" covers a wide territory with warmth and
deftness. It does not bang, it glides.  Its production values are
first-class, especially the imaginative and unpretentious photography and
editing.

Louka's brother had emigrated to the West and done well. Louka was allowed
to visit the West. On his return he was grilled by the Czech police.
That did it. That was the impertinent answer that cost Louka his job.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Miramax)
Directed by     Jan Sverak
Written by      Zdenek Sverak
Cast            Zdenek Sverak, Andrej Chalimon, Libuse Safrankova,
                Ondrej Vetchy, Stella Zazvorkova, Ladislav Smolijak
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for sexual situations)
Running Time    112 minutes
Reviewed at     The Colony Theatre, Raleigh, NC (22MAR97)
     KOLYA is one of the richest films I've seen in some time.  Zdenek
Sverak plays a confirmed old bachelor (who's likely to remain so), who
finds his life as a Czech cellist increasingly impacted by the five-year
old boy that he's taking care of.  Though it ends rather abruptly-- and
I'm whining, 'cause I wanted to spend more time with these characters--
the acting, writing, and production values are as high as, if not higher
than, comparable American dramas.  This father-and-son delight-- Sverak
also wrote the script, while his son, Jan, directed-- won a Golden Globe
for best Foreign Language film and, a couple days after I saw it, walked
away an Oscar.  In Czech and Russian, with English subtitles.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Rob Reser
 Franta Louka has his hands and life full with his mother's
deteriorating house, his lack of money, and simply just trying to make
ends meet. Once a famed cellist in Soviet-occupied Czechoslovakia's
philharmonic orchestra, Louka (played by Zdenek Sverak) is now forced to
play at funerals and gain extra cash by painting tombstones. Director
Jan Sverak paints a wonderful portrait of a grumpy bachelor who can't
seem to catch up on his debts. Not wanting to let his badgering mother
find out what he has been doing to keep up with the constant monetary
demands, Louka reluctantly decides to engage in some illegal activities
that end up filling his plate with much more than he can handle. Louka
ultimately finds himself in the awkward position of caring for a small
boy that he neither wants nor needs to have around. Fear of getting
himself jailed, however, forces him to keep the boy and make do with the
situation. Andrej Chalimon playes the adorable Kolja who makes the
screen sparkle with every moment that he is on it. The movie follows the
unlikely pair as they both make important realizations about themselves.
Entertaining from start to finish KOLYA is an incredible offering from
the Czech Republic.  Academy Award and Golden Globes winner for Best
Foreign Language Film.3 ˝ spots (out of 4) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I'm only a distant father," pleads confirmed bachelor Frantisek
Louka.  "I meant to say a step-father."  An ambulance driver is leaving
Louka's 5-year-old step-son Kolya with him, and Louka tries in vain not
to accept delivery.
     Kolya's mother had paid him to marry her temporarily so she could
get out of Russia.  On his doorstep now is a boy whom he never expected
and doesn't want.  It gets worse.  The kid is adorable but only speaks
Russian, and Louka only speaks Czech.  And worse still,  since the
mother has fled the country, the police interrogate Louka about the
marriage scam.  Being questioned by the police in Prague in 1988 is not
to be taken lightly.
     Thus is the setup for the sweet and touching little picture KOLYA
by director Jan Sverak.  KOLYA is this year's entry from the Czech
Republic to the Academy for consideration for best foreign film.
     KOLYA is a sometimes slow picture that quickly wins your heart.
There is great chemistry in the acting of the two leads.  Zdenek Sverak
plays Frantisek Louka, a 55-year-old man who is extremely handsome and
believably has several romantic interests.  He is a serious looking but
playful man whom women in the story find charming, and so does everyone
in the audience.  The film's sexual situations are never explicit, and
yet the show has some naturally erotic scenes.  The best has to do with
Louka's bow while playing at a funeral.  He uses it to caress the
singer and his main romantic interest, 40-ish Klara (Libuse
Safrankova).
     Besides taking one of the lead roles, Zdenek Sverak, the father of
the director, also created the imaginative script.  In the story Louka
earns his income as a musician playing at funerals -- lots of funerals.
Since he needs more money, he has several odd jobs, including restoring
gravestones.  It is through the latter position that his friend Mr.
Broz (Ondrej Vetchy) talked him into marriage as a way to solve his
financial difficulties and allow him to buy that little used car he
wants.
     Zdenek Sverak's performance is strong enough to carry the film,
but he is usually upstaged by the other lead, Andrej Chalimon as the
little boy with whom he does not quite know what to do.  Chalimon is
one of the sweetest and most photogenic child actors I have seen in a
long time.  His facial expressions are so sincere and sad that they
will steal your heart.  Most of the time he is that way, but in some
precious little scenes, like the time he is read to in Russian over the
phone, he comes alive and chatters away.  The press kit said that they
had some difficulty with Chalimon since he is such an incessantly happy
little boy.  They took to reading him sad stories before many of his
scenes so he could get into character.
     Although it will come as no surprise that the script has Louka
coming to love his unwanted son, it is significantly more believable
and involving than the Hollywood-style versions we have come to expect.
When the inevitable child-in-danger part comes, you will be as
frightened as I was and yet never feel manipulated.
     The show ends on both a sad and a happy note.  I was starting to
cry at the former until I almost started to clap at the latter.  KOLYA
is a show that will make you richer in spirit for having seen it.
     KOLYA runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual situations and for
a couple of mild profanities.  To be interested kids should probably be
about ten or so.  I recommend the film to you and award it ***.

Author
Christina Gross
Cellist Frantisek Louka (Zdenek Sverak) is an aging playboy. Since he
was thrown out of the National Philharmonic Orchestra because of
"subversive remarks" (the movie takes place before the communist
regime in Czechoslovakia came to an end), he only plays at funerals
and makes some extra money re-painting gravestones.
Because of his pressing financial needs he agrees to a fake marriage
with Nadeschda (Irina Livanova), a Russian woman who wants to obtain
czech citizenship.
According to their agreement they shouldn't see each other again till
the divorce, but she escapes to the West and thus draws the attention
of the police to him. To make things worse her mother suffers a stroke
and the paramedics leave Nadeschda's five-year-old son Kolya (Andrej
Chalimon) with Louka.
Louka doesn't know what to do with the frightened child who doesn't
even speak his language. His mother refuses to take care of him
because she hates the Russians. So Louka is stuck with Kolya and even
has to take him to work. Kolya is fascinated with the crematory. He
keeps drawing coffins that go through doors and once even re-enacts
the scene with his puppet theater.
Louka tries to hand the boy over to the authorities, but they are too
busy and tell him to wait. After a while Kolya starts to fit into his
bachelor's life. When finally a social worker shows up and tells him
that Kolya will probably be sent back to the Soviet Union he and the
boy hide with a friend in the countryside.
After the communist regime in Czechoslovakia crashes Nadeschda comes
back to get her son.
Jan Sverak has made a movie that's neither kitschy nor exessively
cute.
Andrej Chalimon is a real treat. The chemistry between him and Zdenek
Sverak is great. Kolya is no precocious boy wonder and Louka doesn't
become an unbelievable super-dad.
KOLYA concentrates on telling the story of the two protagonists, but
doesn't neglect the important events of 1989 and shows in an
unobtrusive way details from daily life in Czechoslovakia.
Louka goes to Prague with his friend Houdek to celebrate their new
freedom - and meets the two policemen who questioned him after
Nadeschda disappeared. Now the wave czech flags like all the others.
There are more charming minor characters. Louka gets his girl friends
to help him care for Kolya. The teacher Susie reads a Russian fairy
tale to the boy over the phone while her husband is next door taking a
shower. The singer Klara helps him to take care of Kolya when he is
sick.
Another highlight is the grave-digger's crazy family. He is
Nadeschda's cousin and the fake marriage was his idea.
All in all a great movie. Please give us more of that.
Gesehen und Gelesen: Buch- und Filmkritiken
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin

Author
Ben Hoffman
This is the Czech entry for the Academy's best Foreign Film.  I have
never yet seen a Foreign Film entry that I did not like, and KOLYA is
no exception.   True there are periods when the action does not seem to
be moving fast enough but those are mostly at the film's beginning.
The film picks up greatly, however, with the appearance of 5-year-old
Kolya (the 6-year-old Andrej Chalimon who was discovered in a
kindergarten.)
Every moment in which Kolya appears is delightful and once he enters
the story he dominates the film.  He is a very handsome child, who with
a little luck will be asked to act in many films in his future.  He
seems born to act; his face, his movements, are all professional yet
childlike.  One wants to hug him.
The story is of Fratizek Louka (Zdenek Sverak, who also wrote the
screenplay), a cellist in the Czech Philharmonic but, with Russia's
army in Czechoslovakia, he cannot earn enough to live on and so he
supplements his income by playing in a chamber group at funerals.
A friendly grave-digger suggests that Fratizek marry his niece; not a
real marriage but signing a slip of paper.  In exchange he will be paid
sufficient money to buy a small car, pay his rent.  Fratizek wants to
remain in every way a bachelor but when he sees the pretty niece, he
relents.
Things now happen quickly.    His "bride" runs off to Germany with her
lover but leaves her 5-year-old son Kolya with his "father",
Fratizek.    In no time at all, as we can easily surmise, Fratizek and
Kolya love each other as if they were, in fact, father and son.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Frantisek Louka (played by Zdenek Sverak) is a fifty-five-year-old
Bohemian--both figuratively and literally.  He plays the cello for the
Czech Philharmonic when he can, plays for funerals when he must to make
ends meet, and supplements his meager income by performing cosmetic
maintenance on gravestones.  He still retains some of his good looks so
that he can still womanize.  His only responsibility in life is
occasionally taking care of his mother.  But times are hard in 1988
Prague and he has to look for money where he can.  That was how he
learned of Nadezda (Irena Livanova) an attractive Russian woman looking
for a technical husband so that she can establish Czech citizenship.
She is willing to pay well and reluctantly Frantisek agrees to marry
her for one night.  Even then she disappears into the night, escaping
to West Germany and leaving her son Kolya (Andrej Chalimon) with his
grandmother.  Frantisek is pleased that the incident is over when
suddenly the grandmother suffers a stroke and Kolya has to go to live
with his new stepfather, Frantisek
     This year's nominee for Best Foreign Language film from the Czech
Republic is a nice amiable movie that has been done many times before
in several different languages.  A bachelor finds he has inherited a
five- year-old.  At first the child is a monumental inconvenience and
the man wants to see the boy gone.  But of course they learn to love
each other and then have to struggle to stay together. .  The old man
and the boy go through much the sort of relationship that has been
shown so often before.  We have the scenes of the father's sex life
being interrupted by the presence of the child.  There is the requisite
sequence of the child getting sick and the father worrying over him.
It would be nice to accept this film as a creative entry from Eastern
Europe, but so much of the film is predictable and taken up with
sequences that have become hackneyed that one has to start faulting the
film for this lack of originality.  KOLYA is too much like THREE MEN
AND A CRADLE/BABY, KRAMER VS. KRAMER, BABY BOOM or LITTLE MISS MARKER-
-with minor variations in each case.  The plot has an irresponsible
adult reluctantly forced into a parental role discovering what he (or
she) has been missing all these years.  It is at heart an affirmation
of parenthood that pretty much cannot fail to win the favor of the
audience.
     Where this film gets much of its novelty is in the political
climate of Czechoslovakia in 1988.  Nearly everyone in Eastern Europe
had an intense hatred of anything Russian.  Frantisek has to hide the
fact that Kolya is Russian.  Even Frantisek's mother does not want the
boy in her house when she discovers that he is Russian.  Frantisek in
talking to the boy compares his inability to get rid of the boy with
his country's inability to rid itself of the Russian occupiers.  We get
some idea of why the Russians are so hated by seeing the Soviet Police
and their interrogation of Frantisek when they believe he has married
Nadezda to get around the law.  Our last scene with the two policemen
makes the single most striking irony of the film.
     KOLYA was directed and co-produced by thirty-one-year-old Jan
Sverak.  He is the son of Zdenek Sverak, who plays Frantisek.  Zdenek
co-authored the screenplay.  He is well-cast as Frantisek, still having
much of the verve of his youth but matching it with distinguished good
looks.  One could believe that at fifty-five this man could still
fascinate a string of lovers. Andrej Chalimon is, of course, an
adorable child with a round face and big eyes.  He perhaps cries a
little, understandably, but he never seems to have the sort of bad-
behavior days that real children seem to have.  He is just a bit too
perfect.  Such children do exist, of course, but after what this child
has been through it seems unlikely that Kolya would still be one.
There are a number of attractive paramours for Frantisek, but the sex
is never explicit.  In general this film is a bit too likable and neat.
This is good entertainment rather than good art.  Overall I would rate
it a high +1 on the - 4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Czech Republic, 1996 
U.S. Release Date: 1/97 (limited) 
Running Length: 1:45 
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, sexual situations, brief nudity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1 
Cast: Zdenek Sverak, Andrej Chalimon, Libuse Safrankova, Ondrej Vetchy, 
      Stella Zazvorkova, Ladislav Smolijak 
Director: Jan Sverak 
Producers: Eric Abraham, Jan Sverak 
Screenplay: Zdenek Sverak 
Cinematography: Vladimir Smutny 
Music: Odrej Soukup 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
In Czecholsavakian with subtitles 
     Prague, 1988:  the twilight of communism in the Czech Republic.  As 
the Iron Curtain begins to collapse all across Eastern Europe, the 
collective voice of the Czech people is finally heard in what became 
known as the "Velvet Revolution."  Yet, even with such world-shaping 
events happening in the background, KOLYA is still a deeply personal 
motion picture that has far more to do with the human soul than with the 
political restructuring of a country. 
     Even though KOLYA comes from Eastern Europe (the director, Jan 
Sverak, is a member of the new wave of Czech cinema), its message and 
intentions are universal in scope.  The film's essential kernel -- one 
man's discovery of the importance of love by caring for a child -- has 
fueled numerous other films through the years in many different 
languages.  Recently, such diverse works as IL LADRO DI BAMBINI, CIAO 
PROFESSORE!, and even last year's dimly-received BOGUS, have relied upon 
this theme.  
     The film opens by introducing us to Louka (Zdenek Sverak, the 
director's father, who also wrote the script), a 55-year old 
professional cellist who has three great passions in life:  music, 
women, and disdain for the Russians occupying his country.  Because of a 
past blunder, Louka is forbidden to perform in the Czech Philharmonic 
Orchestra, where he once held a revered post.  Instead, he must work 
menial jobs, such as refurbishing grave headstones and playing his 
instrument at cremations.  But Louka is fighting a losing battle against 
poverty -- he's in debt and sinking fast.  However, financial stability 
becomes a tantalizing possibility when his friend, Broz (Ondrej Vetchy), 
offers him a proposition. 
     If Louka, a confirmed bachelor, agrees to a marriage of convenience 
with a young Russian woman (she needs Czech citizenship), he'll be 
rewarded handsomely.  Against his better judgment, he agrees, but the 
results are disastrous.  His new bride runs off to West Germany to be 
with her lover, and Louka is left behind minding her 5-year old son, 
Kolya (Andrej Chalimon).  Then a strange thing begins to happen -- the 
harder Louka tries to get rid of the boy, the more he becomes attached 
to Kolya. 
     One of the reasons why KOLYA satisfies is that it effectively 
marries the metamorphosing political umbrella with the changes in 
Louka's personal circumstances.  Essentially, this is a tale of new 
beginnings.  Louka, who has wandered through life living only for his 
music and never wondering what it might be like to have a family, 
experiences not just a rejuvenation of his soul, but a rebirth, even as 
a different country is rising out of the ashes of the former socialist 
dictatorship.  Kolya opens Louka to experiences and emotions he never 
believed possible, and at age 55, he discovers new meaning in an 
isolated existence that had grown repetitious. 
     Without question, KOLYA is a beautifully composed motion picture; 
there's an almost-poetic quality to the manner in which many of the 
scenes have been framed.  The film also boasts a strong cast.  Zdenek 
Sverak bears a resemblance to Sean Connery not only in appearance but in 
screen presence.  Complimenting him is young Andrej Chalimon, whose 
unaffected performance allows us to forget that we're watching an 
inexperienced actor.  Finally, Libuse Safrankova brings a great deal of 
appeal to the role of Louka's would-be girlfriend, Klara. 
     Recently, the number of foreign-language films released in the 
United States has slowed to a trickle, and, of those that have opened 
here, few have been from Eastern Europe.  KOLYA represents Miramax's 
first major foreign-language release of the new year, and, for those who 
aren't intimidated by subtitles, it offers a charming, warm-hearted 
evening of cinema. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
