Title
Review for Richard III (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Victoria Foyt, Viveca Lindfors, Jon Robin Baitz, Andre Gregory, 
      Martha Plimpton, Brooke Smith, Roddy McDowall
Director: Henry Jaglom
Producer: Judith Wolinsky
Screenplay: Henry Jaglom and Victoria Foyt
Cinematography: Hanania Baer
U.S. Distributor: the Rainbow Film Co.
     With a style that's a cross between VANYA ON 42ND ST. and a home 
movie, Henry Jaglom's LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS pulls the viewer in.  
This intimate look at a dysfunctional family uses a perspective so 
seemingly-real that it would be easy to mistake parts of this film for a 
documentary rather than a work of fiction.  Hanania Baer's 
straightforward cinematography contributes to the illusion, as does a 
script with frank dialogue that often concentrates on minutiae.  
     The story, which is really just an excuse for monologues on 
assorted profundities, dialogue about almost anything, and quirky 
character interaction, is set in East Hampton, Long Island.  There, 
three generations of a "theater family" are spending the final weekend 
of their last summer at a home that has served as their vacation retreat 
and acting school for decades.  Because of their declining economic 
fortunes, they can no longer afford the place, so the family matriarch, 
Helena Mora (Viveca Lindfors), has been forced to put it on the market.  
     Gathered for this weekend are an odd assortment of people, 
including pupils of the acting school, friends, and relatives.  The 
"honored visitor" is actress Oona Hart (Victoria Foyt), a Hollywood star 
who has just hit it big with a blockbuster movie.  However, she's less 
interested in headlining the inevitable sequel than in exploring 
"meaningful" work, such as taking the lead role in a play written by 
Helena's grandson, Jake (Jon Robin Baitz).
     Screen life mirrors real life in LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS.  
Helena's career reflects that of Lindfors, the actress who plays her 
(this was Lindfors' final performance before her death last October).  
Both have spent long, rewarding careers on screen and on stage, and have 
little cause to regret their choices.  Real-life playwright Baitz plays 
the author of a production that everyone wants to be a part of.  
Renowned director Andre Gregory plays a director, and numerous members 
of New York's acting community take up roles they should be at home in.
     At the crux of LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS lies the age-old 
question of commercial viability versus artistic honesty.  Can something 
that makes money also be artistically pure?  Oona is wondering this when 
she comes to the Hamptons, since her career aspirations are divided 
between making money and doing "real" acting.  This issue is mulled over 
during a number of the film's seemingly-endless conversations, with all 
sorts of interesting viewpoints coming to light.  There is, of course, 
no resolution.
     The melodrama illustrating the emotional fractures within the 
family is less successful.  In Jake's words, his relatives are "a barrel 
of theatrical eels poisoning one another over and over."  According to 
him, none of them can do anything without turning it into a performance.  
He apparently includes himself in that sweeping generalization, since 
one of the most unpleasant revelations concerns his relationship with 
his sister.  Jaglom occasionally goes overboard trying to get us to care 
about the characters.  The well-honed dialogue and intimate camerawork 
would have been enough without the soap-opera-like interludes.
     As might be expected, the best performance is turned in by Viveca 
Lindfors, who, like Jean Moreau, could boast screen presence even at an 
advanced age.  She heads a cast that doesn't have many weak 
participants.  When the screenplay grows thin, the wealth of acting 
ability pushes LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS through the rough spots.  
Whether tightly-scripted or not, many scenes have an improvised feel.
     LAST SUMMER IN THE HAMPTONS is tailor-made for those who enjoy 
talky, somewhat pretentious, dialogue-rich motion pictures.  While the 
character interaction isn't as sharp as in an Eric Rohmer picture, it is 
deft enough to involve an interested audience.  LAST SUMMER IN THE 
HAMPTONS isn't a landmark film, and it doesn't broach any new issues, 
but the unconventional style makes it worthwhile for those who 
appreciate offbeat fare.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Loncraine
Adapters: Richard Loncraine and Ian McKellen (based on the play by
William Shakespeare)
Starring: Ian McKellen, Annette Benning, Jim Broadbent, Kristin Scott
Thomas, Robert Downey Jr, Maggie Smith, John Wood, Nigel Hawthorne
In the first scene of this adaptation of Shakespeare's awesome play, a
group of 30s soldiers are sitting in a room, when suddenly a huge tank
crashes through the wall.  All the unsuspecting soldiers are shot to
death, and the apparent King is shot in the head by a man who pulls off
his gas mask to reveal he's Richard of Gloucester (Ian McKellen), the
protagonist who seeps evil.  If you're going to do a film adaptation of
a Shakespeare play, the best thing to do is make it interesting and
original (much like Branagh).  And surprisingly, the relocation of time
and the inclusion of graphic darkly comic violence somehow works with
the text.
I've always thought of "Richard III" to be not only my favorite of
Shakespeare's plays, but also the most darkly comic.  The lead is a
selfish, deformed, and cunning villain who acts all kind to people when
he wants to screw them over, then turns to the audience and winks,
letting us in on his treachery.  This film captures all the mood of the
original play, and makes Richard of Gloucester into one of the great
screen villains, wonderfully portrayed by the underrated Ian McKellen.
The back story is Richard, one of three brothers, is the black sheep,
but helps his brother, the king (John Wood) ascend to the throne by
killing the current king, all during the end of the War of the Roses. 
He then decides he will screw everyone over, even family, and takes
several steps to eventually ascend to the throne.  He enlists the aids
of several people, uses them until they crack, then has them murdered
off.
The twist to the story is that he is no longer in the War of the Roses,
but rather in 30s England.  The sets, art direction, and cinematography
wonderfully show us the world of swing music, and cigarettes, and then
we get a satirical view of it as Richard gradually seizes the country
and turns into a kind of fictitious equivalent of Hitler.  Of course, he
burned a couple bridges on the way up, so he constantly has little
problems with become bigger and bigger throughout the film.
The film ousts a lot of the dialogue (the play, if run with all the
dialogue, would be rougly three and a half hours long), making it into a
swift hour and forty-five minutes.  Some characters are missing, and
some are even combined to make one whole one.  But the key to doing
Shakespeare is not the little details, like the prophecies of Margaret,
but rather whether or not we get the story and the theme, which this
film does.
Ian McKellen, who also co-adapted this, actually does a better job than
Lawrence Olivier did in his film, which played it much like the play
(without Margaret), but lost a lot of the comedy and edge in the
process.  This film takes a lot of great risks and original ideas and
puts the great poetry of Shakespeare in with it.  Where else could you
see the "Now is the Winter of our Discontent" speech done at first as a
public speech to the King who he will soon try to have killed, and then
head on into the bathroom to pee while reciting the speech?  Where else
could you see Lord Grey (Robert Downey Jr) be killed like a horny camper
in one of the "Friday the 13th" flicks?  Where could you see the
depressed Lady Anne (Kristin Scott Thomas) injecting heroin into her
thigh?  And where else would you see the doomed Richard leap into a
bunch of flames like James Cagney in "White Heat?"
The direction is fantastic.  As I said, the film grasps the wonderful
30s (with a twist), but he does so much more.  All the scenes are
plotted out magnificently, with several scenes being embedded in the
viewer's mind.  A throwaway scene with Richard's first doomed brother
(Nigel Hawthorne) where he discusses a prophetic dream he had is done in
a creepy and, well, prophetic way.  The ex-Queen's (Annette Benning)
blessing to her doomed sons is moving, shot through a cage for the
maximum effect.  And the ending is wonderfully funny (with Richard's
line "A Horse! A Horse! My Kingdom for a Horse!" standing out, as well
as the chase scene).
But the film, as a whole, belongs to Ian McKellen.  His Richard is the
perfect villain: cunning, and likable, which works so much better since
he's the protagonist.  He cringes and barks to his characters, and
occasionally acts sincere, then turns to the camera and lets us in on
the joke.  He holds off being a king, then accepts, and turns to the
camera and hysterically says, "I'm not made of stone."  And when he woos
Anne sucessfully, even after killing her husband and father-in-law
(which I guess is a good thing) in the first scene, he struts off
acompanied to upbeat jazz music.  He brings pure joy, energy, and life
to a character that was written as a comically tragic role.  I mean,
it's tough to actually do a better job than Olivier, but McKellen pulls
it off with his Richard role.
"Richard III" is a fantastic flick, filled with welcome life, and
hysterically darkly comic humor.  If you're going to do a deadly
Shakespeare flick, make sure you have chain-smoking, graphic violence,
and tanks.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For someone who is a strict traditionalist when it comes to
Shakespeare, and to opera too for that matter, I was amazed at how much
I was enthralled by Ian McKellen's vision of RICHARD III as a World War
II British Fascist.  This is a well acted production where the images
are even more impressive than the acting.  Usually when critics say the
images are the best part of a movie, they are reviewing a mediocre show
where the visuals are its redeeming feature.  Here they enhance an
already outstanding production.  As an aside, the theater where I saw
the film had an overscan problem and the opening title clearly
proclaimed the movie to be RICHARD II so I thought for a second I was
going to see a prequel.
     After hating director Oliver Parker's recent and dreary rendition
of OTHELLO, it was refreshing to see director Richard Loncraine breath
such tremendous life-force into RICHARD III.  No since the even better
Kenneth Branagh's HENRY V and Franco Zeffirelli's ROMEO AND JULIET,
have I enjoyed Shakespeare so much.
     Ian McKellen is the executive producer, cowriter along with the
director, and lead actor.  The film is based on Shakespeare's play, but
I believe many of the lines were either rearranged or abbreviated.  I
read that Ian McKellen spent several years trying to sell various
Hollywood studios on the making of this film, but when the studios read
the script, they kept saying that they hoped he made it, but they were
not going to be the ones to fiance anything that bizarre.  Eventually,
he got the funding, and the movie is a triumph.  Whether there is a big
enough audience for a film like this to turn a profit is another
question of course.
      RICHARD III starts with a dance in a royal ballroom.  The band is
playing 1930s dance music.  People come in and greet each other,
seemingly with great happiness.  Finally, the music ends and Richard,
Duke of Gloucester (Ian McKellen), delivers the famous "Now is the
winter of our discontent" speech.  In this speech and most others in
the movie, it is pronounced and given nuances fresh and not found in
most actors' Shakespearean repertoire.  The speech actually continues
as nature calls, and Richard leaves to use the urinal.  In most movies
I find contrivances like soliloquies in the bathroom to be silly at
best, but McKellen's strength of acting manages to pull it off
effectively.
     This is a fascinating and true story that averages a murder every
five minutes, and thanks to great editing by Paul Green, the movie
flies along.  As Richard says, "plots have I laid."  As the words moved
fast and furiously, I realized why Shakespeare is so unapproachable to
a mass audience, it requires attention.  Unlike the sound bites of
political campaigns or MTV, all thoughts are not delivered in short
sentences full of monosyllabic words designed to let the brain stay on
autopilot.  I will not insult your intelligence by attempting a
condensed version of the story here.  Instead I will concentrate on
reviewing the film itself.
     The cast is full of good actors and actresses who are coached by
the director to give some of their very best performances even though
their roles may be quite minor.  Robert Downey Jr., for example, plays
Rivers and has less than a dozen lines, but delivers them to great
effect.  Adrian Dunbar plays Tyrell as a chilling man who has almost as
few scruples as Richard.  Jim Broadbent has a larger (pun intended)
role as Buckingham, playing him as the Herman Goering of the picture.
     Annette Bening is wonderful as Queen Elizabeth, the wife of King
Edward (John Wood).  After Richard has killed her two sons, a.k.a.,
"the little princes", Bening delivers her best lines.  She says, "I
have no more sons of the royal blood for you to slaughter."  Richard
smiles deviously and replies with a sweet voice, "You have a daughter."
In another she asks him, "Shall I be tempted by the devil then?".  He
quickly retorts in a melodious voice, "Yes, if the devil tempt you to
do good."
     Kristin Scott Thomas plays Richard III's wife Lady Anne.  She is
degraded by him and becomes a heroin addict.  In one shocking scene we
have her hiking up her dress to shoot up.  A chilling performance, but
a bit hard to watch.
     Now who else have I forgotten in this ensemble cast?  There is
Nigel Hawthorne as Clarence, Maggie Smith as the Duchess of York, Jim
Carter as Hastings, the great Edward Hardwicke as Stanley, Tim
McInnerny as Catesby, Bill Paterson as Ratcliffe, Donald Sumpter as
Brackenbury, and Dominic West as Richmond.  There is not a bad acting
job in the movie.
     The best acting, and one worth many awards, is that of Ian
McKellen.  He creates a ruthless tyrant who is willing to kill men,
women, and children of any age if they get in his way even for a
moment.  During his villainy, he manages to grovel in front of his soon
to be victims as if he is their devoted servant.  In perhaps his key
line, delivered in a 1930s war train, he admonishes his troops,
"conscience is but a word cowards use."  In case you are curious, the
"a horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse" speech is delivered in a
broken down jeep.
     The best part of the entire movie are the sets by Tony Burrough.
The Tower of London is transformed into a dim and damp basement full of
overhead pipes and harsh lights.  When he chooses a real set, he uses
the Crystal Place at Brighton which is as close to an unreal real set
that you can get.  The best set is the one for the party rally.  It is
a direct copy of that from Leni Riefenstahl's TRIUMPH OF THE WILL which
covered Hitler's 1935 Nazi party congress.
     The wide variety of costumes (Shuna Harwood) range from army
uniforms reminiscent of the Nazis to lush clothing for teas full of
cream colors for the men and primary colors for the women.  Richard's
make-up (Pat Hay) has him with the required hunchback and a deformed
left arm and with a perfect little quasi-Hitlerian mustache.  The
cinematography (Peter Biziou) of hazy and shiny blues and greens with
strong flesh tones adds a feeling of death and conniving around every
corner.
     The real Richard III died in the Battle of Bosworth Field.
McKellen's ending is in a World War II battle complete with tanks and
tremendous explosions.  The last scene with the loud Al Jolson music
is, well, a hoot.
     RICHARD III runs a quick 1:45.  It is rated R for tastefully done
violence, a little sex, very brief nudity, and one hard drug usage
scene.  I am sorry to say that it has massive smoking for no purpose.
This show would be fine for teenagers, and I would strongly encourage
them and anyone with an attention span longer than 15 seconds to see
this film.  It speaks to our time and every time.  I gladly give the
movie *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Alan Cleaver
by Alan Kersey, Cambridge Evening News, UK
     WHEN Clarence is taken off to The Tower it is by motor launch ...
to Battersea Power Station.  And when a jubilant Richard III celebrates
his ghoulish seduction of his future queen he dances a jig through a
tube station lined with injured men, women and children.  This is a
fascinating interpretation of Shakespeare's portrait of our most
villainous king; and Sir Ian McKellen is awesome in the lead.  Even he
must have been aware of the hard act he had to follow. With Sir
Laurence Olivier's twisted hunchback still fresh in the minds of most
veteran filmgoers after 40 years, it was time, though, for a fresh
approach ... and this is certainly fresh.  It is also full of
surprises, albeit without tinkering with text. We are kept guessing for
the first few minutes as the social scene of high society in the
Thirties gives the impression that we are in for something that is more
Wodehouse than Shakespeare.  Although it is not without humour,
however, it does have all the tragic elements as it dawns on the
audience that this Richard had more in common with Adolf Hitler than
Henry VIII.  In fact, the parallels with Nazi Germany come to a head
with his introduction at a Nuremberg-style rally just prior to his
coronation.  Red and black are the prime colours but it is a wild boar
on the flags instead of a swastika.  Sir Ian reminded me of Tom
Courtenay in Dr Zhivago as he boarded the train that takes his troops
to the final battle. And when he utters those immortal words "A horse,
a horse. My kingdom for a horse" what he really needs is a Chieftain
tank.  The civil war obviously has to be fictitious but the equipment,
from divebombers to ak-ak guns, is authentic.  Debatably the most
memorable scene is of the beleaguered king manning an anti-aircraft gun
with his only good arm before getting his final come- uppance ... to
the tune of Al Jolson's I'm Sitting on Top of the World.  All this
could prove too bizarre for some Shakespeare lovers and I did have
doubts about it myself.  The fact that is all handled so brilliantly
and by such an impressive cast carries the day. Alongside Sir Ian is
Nigel Hawthorne, fresh from his BAFTA award for The Madness of King
George and playing a very sad and stoical Clarence; Annette Bening as
Queen Elizabeth, Jim Broadbent as the Duke of Buckingham, Bill Paterson
as Ratcliffe and, perhaps best of all, Adrian Dunbar as the murderous
Tyrrel.  I was fairly happy with Annette Bening's accent but very
uncomfortable with that of Robert Downey Jr, whose performance as Earl
Rivers was fine until he opened his mouth and reminded us that he is
more at home in Beverley Hills than war-torn London.  Maggie Smith
provides a formidable Duchess of York and Kristin Scott Thomas is
convincing as Lady Anne.  They all help to make this one of the most
interesting films for years and one destined to be as memorable in its
own bizarre way as the 1955 classic shared by John Gielgud, Ralph
Richardson and Claire Bloom.  The icing on the cake is that Sir Ian
will be at the Arts in person this Friday to launch Richard Loncraine's
powerful masterpiece on its three week run.  I advise early booking.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I generally do not like to see historical dramatic works done in
modern dress.  I was excited when the Bayreuth production of Wagner's
RING OF THE NIBELUNGS was to be broadcast in this country, but when all
of the fantasy was sucked out by staging it in late 19th Century dress,
I decided that I was not really so anxious to see it after all.  It
seemed an attempt to replace the magic with social comment.  But in
this film, based on a popular London stage production, the modern
context is as much the show as the story.  We have a Britain in an age
to which we can relate brought under the control of a Fascist King.
Suddenly it is clear why modern dress (relatively speaking) can open up
and even transform the meaning of a story.  RICHARD III is told with
visual imagination and panache unusual for a 1930s film or a
Shakespeare play.  There are huge sets out of THE TRIUMPH OF THE WILL,
while other scenes have almost the flair of a Terry Gilliam.  The view
of 1930s England has a nicely accurate and detailed view even if this
is politically a very different 1930s England than the one we know from
history.
     Ian McKellen gives us a more immediate and riveting Richard than
the one we are used to from Laurence Olivier.  A bit more soft-spoken
than we usually think of for Richard, he nonetheless makes a chilling
and wonderfully vicious Fascist dictator.  Americans Annette Benning
and Robert Downey, Jr., at first may seem odd choices for Elizabeth and
her brother the Earl Rivers, but a 1930s King of England might well
have married an American and for once it might be perfectly reasonable
to cast Americans in Richard III.  The major roles are nearly all
played by familiar and respected British actors.  If Downey plays his
fey playboy a little too broadly there is the marvelous casting of
Adrian Dunbar, formerly cast as sweet and callow in HEAR MY SONG, here
as the amoral assassin Tyrell.
     Stylistically the film has some terrific moments, oozing period
feel.  Richard's political rally seems to come from somewhere between
Nazi Germany and Ruritania with its boar's head party symbol.  Great
art deco buildings, stylish royal residences and sterile hospital
hallways form the setting.  The battle scenes are unexpectedly violent
but also unrealistically brief.  Richard's army seems much too easily
beaten at the end of the film.  The final minute of the film is perhaps
the worst stylistic misstep of the film leaving the viewer with a
slightly bad taste in his mouth.  The only other real problem with the
style is that the invented setting is so compelling and has such a
powerful effect on the thrust of the film that the staging threatens to
overshadow even Shakespeare's writing.  Considering the wit of the
writing, that says a great deal.
     While I enjoyed the warm Tuscan feel of Kenneth Branagh's MUCH ADO
ABOUT NOTHING, it just never was as riveting this amazing production of
RICHARD III.  It may end a minority opinion but this exciting
adaptation was for me the better of the two films and I rate this film
a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States/United Kingdom, 1995
U.S. Availability: 12/22/95 (limited)
Running Length: 1:45
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, sexual candor, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Ian McKellan, Jim Broadbent, Annette Bening, Kristin Scott-Thomas,
      John Wood, Maggie Smith, Robert Downey Jr., Nigel Hawthorne,
      Edward Hardwicke, Jim Carter
Director: Richard Loncraine
Producer: Stephen Bayly
Screenplay: Ian McKellan and Richard Loncraine based on the play by
      William Shakespeare as adapted for the stage production by
      Richard Eyre
Cinematography: Peter Biziou
Music: Trevor Jones
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     RICHARD III -- it's Shakespeare that has nothing to do with Kenneth
Branagh.  Actually, at first glance, this film doesn't appear to have
anything to do with the Bard's play, either.  Opening in a 1930's
England war room with a tank crashing through a wall, one is immediately
struck by the realization that, whatever this movie is doing, it
certainly isn't preserving the story's original time frame.  However,
while the sets and costumes have been moved to a mythical, Nazi-like
pre-WWII England, the dialogue, characters, actions, and themes remain
unchanged from the original text by Shakespeare.  While this curious
clash between a near-modern setting and the much older source material
might seem confounding, it actually serves to energize the play, as well
as making it more palatable to present-day audiences.
     Being released at the same time as a new version of OTHELLO (which
has Branagh, along with Laurence Fishburn and Irene Jacob), RICHARD III
is likely either to usher in a new, mini-era of screen Shakespeare
revival, or show that two Shakespeare films are capable of glutting a
small marketplace.  OTHELLO is a far more traditional interpretation
than RICHARD III, and, other than authorship, about the only thing the
movies have in common is that both excise significant portions of
dialogue from the original text in the interest of saving time.
     RICHARD III is the last in the series of Shakespeare histories to
chronicle England's tribulations during the period before the Tudors
took the throne (an event which occurs at the end of RICHARD III, when
Henry VII, the first of the Tudors and grandfather to Shakespeare's
Queen Elizabeth, becomes King).  This play tells of the machinations of
Richard (Ian McKellan), a royal prince with a twisted spine and
grotesque physical appearance, to place himself in power.  Richard is a
spiteful person who kills without compunction and, in the process, earns
nothing but enmity from all around him.  There are four bodies that
impede his march to the crown:  two of his brothers -- Clarence and King
Edward -- and the king's two young sons.  One-by-one, Richard has them
removed, caring only that he should one day rule England.
     Sir Ian McKellan, a veteran of screen and stage, takes the title
role of Richard and turns in a performance that is equal parts
captivating magnetism and chilling menace.  It's an amazing piece of
acting that is worthy of notice at Oscar nomination time.  A fine cast
supports McKellan, including Kristin Scott-Thomas (FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL) as Anne, Richard's wife; Annette Bening (THE AMERICAN
PRESIDENT) as Queen Elizabeth; Nigel Hawthorne (THE MADNESS OF KING
GEORGE) as Clarence; John Wood (SABRINA) as King Edward; Jim Broadbent
(ENCHANTED APRIL) as Buckingham; Maggie Smith (THE SECRET GARDEN) as the
Duchess of York, Richard's mother; and Robert Downey Jr. (CHAPLIN) as
the queen's brother.
     Does Richard have a conscience?  Can evil such as his triumph
completely, with no recompense expected on this side of the grave?  Can
the British monarchy exist without venom and corruption filtering up to
the highest levels?  These are a few of the more cogent questions
addressed by RICHARD III, and McKellan and director Richard Loncraine
make sure that they remain intact in the final version of the film.
     In its own bloody way, RICHARD III is as enjoyable to watch as any
recent screen production of Shakespeare, and the shift to the 1930's
with its attendant Nazi imagery (parallels between Richard III and
Hitler abound) gives the film a twist that conventional productions do
not have.  If there's a flaw to the movie, it's that this is one of
Shakespeare's least ambitious and less thematically rich plays. 
Nevertheless, since the only memorable motion picture version is
Lawrence Olivier's 1956 version, RICHARD III doesn't suffer from
overexposure, and this new interpretation offers an unconventional-- and
easily accessible -- perspective. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
Shakespeare has rarely been displayed on the screen so well. It might do the
bard proud.
This version of the play, is really what West End has been about with
Shakespeare that film has not come to yet, or only recently has it gained
the guts to recreate the stories. And it takes a staple of actors willing to
share the vision, to make it come about. This is riveting Shakespeare
at its very best, taken to the x-factor, to display even better, the
rudeness and the beauty of its characters, villains included.
The story of Richard III is not new. The bastard king that killed his way to
the throne, one day, eventually, finds himself on the wrong end of the
stick. But what makes this special is the time period that it was created,
and what becomes a serious attack on the British crown, in a subtle way,
that really states, that the English also are guilty of the same stuff....
we know they were, even if Shakespeare is the only one that will describe
the events. The history books seem to soften things up.
In this version, it is a sort of pre Nazi area, that to this reviewer  could
just as easily be Germany, as it was in England. There is, and there
was, no less manipulation in the golden years of the English crown.
But if the story is not enough, what the actors do in this play is worth the
price of admission. Few will actually think of this as a movie, though,
for it is a "play" and it works like it, and not as a smooth film story
that Hollywood would ever touch. But the bits that Hollywood would enjoy,
that the play has, like the asides, really are what makes this film so
enjoyable. We see Richard at his villainous best, and the line delivery
is comparable to Sir John Gielgud's lines in PROSPERO'S BOOKS, another film
that takes Shakespeare to a level that is way and above its own abilities on
a stage.
With some riveting acting, by Ian McKellen, this film is very good, and,
really, off the wall. I almost would prefer to see this on the stage, so
that I can give it a standing ovation, which it merits. But, in no way, does
it mean that the rest is not well done. Annette Benning, as the bought off
queen is very good, as is the rest of the cast.
Excellent production, but don't go see it if you like traditional
Shakespeare, or you will be disappointed. Other than that it is magnificent,
and fresh.   Would love to see "The Merchant of Venice" done this way....

Author
Martin Rich
Shakespeare's plays contain some of the most graphic descriptions of 
inhumanity ever.  We tend to overlook these, perhaps because we are used 
to quite decorous productions of Shakespeare, but this adaptation of 
Richard III for the cinema proves that Shakespeare is still well able to 
shock.
There is, in fact, blood and gore a-plenty.  We have children being 
suffocated, a man stabbed while having sex tied to a bedpost, one of the 
King's brothers attacked in his bath, and a hospital of the most 
extraordinary grimness.  I wonder through what quirk of literary 
sensibility the film came to be classified as a '15' in Britain.
But, if you can stomach the violence, you will see a fine portrayal of an 
empire weighed down by decadence, and by lack of respect for human life. 
Ian McKellen is Richard, and also collaborated on distilling the 
screenplay from Shakespeare's original work.  As a callous, embittered, 
hunchback he is frightening - the more so because he is so cool and 
embittered.  The cast is tremendous - especially Annette Bening and 
Maggie Smith as two of the women caught in Richard's machinations.  
Shakespeare's text has been cut to little more than half its original 
length, but preserving much of the original wording and ensuring that the 
story moves on at an impressive pace.
Thanks to carefully designed sets, costumes (details such as the watch 
that Richard wears), music, and some terrific locations, the film has a 
fine and accurate period feel.  But it isn't Richard III's period, nor is 
it Shakespeare's.  This production is set in a mythical 1930s London, 
torn by civil war, and lest we doubt the sort of monarch that Richard 
was, his supporters wave red and white banners which owe a lot to Nazi 
imagery.
Setting Shakespeare out of his own time will always be controversial.  
But some of the best stage productions have been in twentieth century 
dress: during the 1980s the Royal Shakepeare Company transplanted the 
Merry Wives of Windsor to the 1950s, an age of 'new Elizabethans', and 
more recently the Royal Court staged King Lear in the early 20th century. 
In the same way, this adaptation uses its new context to advantage.  
Richard's fascist tendencies, and his predecessor's glamorous American 
wife, both have echoes of Edward VIII.  And Shakespeare's 
characterisation is timeless; he didn't write plays to be performed as 
period pieces, and it's appropriate that we don't see them as period 
pieces either.
Those locations deserve a few further remarks.  The 'tower' is actually 
Battersea Power Station.  For the final battle it is pictured overlooking 
a vast open space - Bosworth Field - in defiance of both history and 
geography, but to great effect.  The film owes a lot to the Gilbert Scott 
family of architects, as St Pancras Station also appears on several 
occasions.  And there is Brighton Pavilion, its fanciful architecture and 
its associations with yet another generation of royalty making it into a 
symbol of royal decadence.  Shell-Mex House is the King's urban base.
If you're prepared to see Shakespeare in a new light, see this film.
-- 
Martin Rich                               (0171) 477 8627
Lecturer in Information Management  Fax(0171) 477 8628
City University Business School,    M.G.Rich@city.ac.uk
Frobisher Crescent,         http://www.city.ac.uk/~sf309/home.html
Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB, UK
