Title
Review for Creepshow (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Wilcock
The two masters of horror, George A. Romero and Stephen King, join toghther
to what should be a horror fans dream. However, well not really acheiving a
high level of greatness, this film is still just enough fun to past the time.
The film is done as a comic book (the comic called 'Creepshow') and takes
five of the animated stories and turns them into real life. The first one,
'Fathers Day' is not very good. It involves some dead guy rising from his
grave, searching for a cake which he never got. (Instead, he got the rather
pleasent gift of a marble ash tray smashing into his tray) Of course, the
person who smashed the ash tray into his head meets a sticky end.
The second story stars Stephen King, as an unlucky bumpkin who discovers a
meteror that turns everything into vegetation (including King) Now, although
King can write (so some people say) he most defefently CAN'T act (and
direct, as shown with MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE) And anyway, this segment just isn't
very good.
So, you're just about to switch it off, when you come to the Leslie
Nielson/Ted Danson segment. Nielson plays a jealous man who buries his
ex-wife and her new boyfriend (Danson) into the sand to drown. So he sitting
in his house, looking rather smug, and should raise from the dead, looking
rather wet (and some great makeup from Tom Savini)? Yes, thats right, Danson
and his girlfriend. And of course, they chuck Nielson into the sand to
drown. I found this segment bizzarely watchable, as Romero keeps the tension
up when Danson and friend enter the house. (Nielson has lots of cameras in
his house, and we keep seeing glimpes of the ghosts on the screens, until
they finally pop out.)
However, the last two segments are the best. The fourth segment, 'The Crate'
is great. Under the stairs of a college is a big crate, with a monster
living it. A college professor has an annoying wife, and guess what he does
to her...I found this segment great, and it also has the best comedy.
Then theres the last segment. I can't say much about this one, as it would
give it all away, but it involves A LOT of cockroaches. And theres a really
sick sequence at the end.......
So, basically with Creepshow, the first two segments are pretty awful, but
it picks up from segment three. The actings fine, and so is the direction.
Overall, a good horror movie to watch late at night.
