Title
Review for Hong fen (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BLUSH (HONG FEN)(director: Li Shaohong; cast: Wang Ji (Qiuyi), Wang
Zhiwen (Lao Pu), He Saifel Xiao), Cao Lei (narrator), Wang Rouli (Mrs.
Pu),  1994-China)
There is no doubt about the oppressiveness of the Chinese Communist
regime, and this film, more than any other that I have seen, recently,
presents the devastating emotional conflicts the Communist revolution
has done to its people, even though, it is not overtly critical of them.
It is beautifully filmed in the style of a formal Chinese landscape
painting, using the commonplace to be viewed as something that goes
beyond its present linear form, to give it an eternal flavor from what
it might first appear like. The story is from a work by Su Tong, whose
other novel was the basis for RAISE THE RED LANTERN. The story is
related to us by a woman narrator (Cao), who we never see on screen.
In 1949 The People's Liberation Army closes down all the country's
brothels, and in the outskirts of Shanghai, they close down the Red
Happiness Inn, where all the girls are taking aboard a barge and turned
over for re-education to an internment camp. Qiuyi (Ji) and Xiao (He)
are very close, like sisters, with Xiao being weak-natured (she was born
to be a whore, born in the Red Happiness Inn) and is very dependent on
the independent minded Qiuyi.
Qiuyi escapes the camp and seeks out a rich playboy client, Lao Pu (Wang
Zhiwen), who lives with his mother. He puts her up in their luxurious
house, and takes pleasure in their relationship, until his mother openly
disapproves of the girl and asks her to leave. He looks for a compromise
to the situation, and tells Qiuyi he will get her an apartment where
they can share a love nest. She is insulted by this, and storms out of
the house, choosing to follow wherever fate takes her. It takes her to a
Buddhist monastery, where she is forced to shave her head and live a
pure life without any worldly desires, if she wishes to stay there. With
much reluctance, she does this, and lives unhappily there until the nuns
discover that she is pregnant and ask her to leave. Meanwhile, Lao is
rebuffed when he visits her in the monastery, she is ashamed for him to
see her without her hair. He leaves, and we witness how the People's
Liberation Army confiscates his land and wealth, and forces him to
become an accountant in a factory, paying him an unlivable wage. He
starts a relationship with Xiao, after visiting her in the factory she
now works at after being rehabilitated. After a night of sleeping
together, she conjoles him into marrying her, telling him he will never
see Qiuyi again.
At their marriage, Qiuyi comes by to give her a bracelet as a present.
Xiao follows her outside, begging her to listen to why she got married,
telling her that Lao talked her into it. Qiuyi says there is nothing to
say, that she is not stupid, she knows when someone is lying to her, and
then she gives Xiao, impulsively, another present, her umbrella, telling
her she doesn't need it now that it stopped raining. The narrator tells
us that in Chinese, umbrella sounds very similar to separation.
The marriage results in a son; they name him the "sad one", as their
marriage is an unhappy one, full of fights and rancor, she is
disillusioned that her husband can't give her a good life, and he,
despondent about what has become of his life, realizing now, that he is
married to the wrong girl. The third party in this unhappy triangle
returns home to her impoverished childhood, after the monastery kicked
her out and she miscarriaged at the shut door of the monastery, in the
driving rain, and would have died except for the belated pity of  one of
the nuns who saved her life. As things seem hopeless, and she seems to
have lost all her confidence; just to survive, she marries an old man
who has a tea shop. He is so insignificant to the story, that we never
even see him.
After much misery, seeing no way out of his problems, Lao decides to
embezzle money from his factory. He mails most of the money he stole to
Qiuyi, and he gives enough for Xiao to have a week's worth of pleasure.
He is caught and executed. The narrator relates to us the events of the
firing squad, and we learn how insignicant his death was. All we see, is
the camera following the bland landscape, and all we hear of his death,
are the shots being fired and the narrator telling us how he was
expressionless at the time of his death.
Qiuyi learns she can't have children anymore, so she pays a visit to
Xiao, who finds the child to be a burden on her. Qiuyi offers to take
the child from her and raise him as her own. This is consummated when
Xiao meets someone from the north, and decides to run away with him.
Qiuyi renames the baby "New China". That is about as optimistic as it
gets for this bitter tale of politics and romance, told from a woman's
point of view.
This is a very serious, stylized film, artistically filmed with many
long angle camera shots, that give the film a depth that goes beyond the
mere telling of the story, though it seemed to be dragging it heels at
times, as the story just hit dry spots in it. Its use of color
cinematography was startling, as yellow was most effectively used to
both evoke a sense of renunciation and hope. It was the color of Qiuyi's
umbrella and supposedly her favorite color.
This is a most interesting but not particularly penetrating film to come
out of modern China, one that is most blunt and cruel in picking up the
human travails and emotional discontentments that the people faced in
the hands of their liberators, but not able to say too much about why
these hardships are taking place. It always seems that the one's who
want to help you the most, end up doing you the most harm, and that
seems no different with the self-righteous Communists trying to change
the lives of prostitutes, than it does with any other group blindly
follow their ideologies and forcing their will unto others.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ji Wang, Zhiwen Wang, Caifei He
Director: Shaohong Li
Producer: Zhigu Cheng, Chen Kunming, Yi Liu, Jimmy Tan
Screenplay: Ni Zhen and Shaohong Li based on the novel by Su Tong
Cinematography: Nianping Zeng
Music: Wenjing Guo
U.S. Distributor: First Run Features
In Chinese with subtitles
     Many Chinese films exported during the past half-decade (or so) 
have shared a fondness for tragic melodrama.  Titles such as JU DOU, 
RAISE THE RED LANTERN, FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, TEMPTATION OF A MONK, TO 
LIVE, and SHANGHAI TRIAD all end bleakly.  This isn't necessarily a bad 
thing (in fact, some of the above movies are excellent), but it creates 
certain expectations when viewing a motion picture originating from 
Mainland China.  To a large extent, BLUSH delivers what we anticipate, 
although the ending isn't as joyless as those of its many predecessors.
     BLUSH takes us back to the Communist "Liberation" of 1949, when 
Chairman Mao stormed into power and swept away the decadent old ways.  
Landowners' property was seized for distribution, wealth was 
confiscated, and those holding unproductive jobs were placed into 
"rehabilitation centers" to learn how to become workers.  Unlike many of 
the movies that came before it (such as TO LIVE and FAREWELL MY 
CONCUBINE), BLUSH doesn't have a cynical or negative perspective of the 
Liberation.  Shaohong Li, directing from a script based on a book by Su 
Tong (who also wrote the novel RAISE THE RED LANTERN), views these 
events as historical facts that form the backdrop for a story, not an 
opportunity for a political statement.  Her depiction of the revolution 
and its aftermath is evenhanded.
     The film opens as the prostitutes from the Red Happiness Inn in 
Shanghai are being herded like sheep into a re-training center.  In the 
group are the strong-willed Qiuyi (Ji Wang), who refuses to go quietly, 
and her meek friend, Xiao'e (Caifei He).  During the inevitable 
confusion caused by detaining so many women, Qiuyi escapes, then makes 
her way to the house of a wealthy former customer, Lao Pu (Zhiwen Wang), 
who takes her in as his mistress.  Eventually, Lao's mother complains, 
and a pregnant Qiuyi is forced to leave.  She goes to a nearby convent 
for sanctuary.  Meanwhile, after being properly re-educated, Xiao'e, now 
a loyal worker, begins to spend time with Lao Pu.  Her goal isn't subtle 
-- she wants to marry him.  
     Despite the subtitles, scrupulously accurate period details, and 
strong acting, BLUSH is basically a cinematic soap opera.  There are 
betrayals, attempted suicides, unplanned pregnancies, tearful 
confessions, and jealous suspicions.  All of these things take place in 
the shadow of the central love triangle between Lao Pu; his true love, 
Qiuyi; and the woman he marries, Xiao'e.  Disappointingly, however, many 
of the most important events are not shown, but are instead related via 
a voiceover narration.  This fundamentally unsatisfying method of 
presentation undercuts the film's dramatic power.  The ending is 
especially weak because a key aspect of the denouement is described, but 
never depicted.
     BLUSH's primary message is that, to survive, people can adapt to 
any situation.  Like social chameleons, Qiuyi and Xiao'e are constantly 
changing.  Qiuyi is transformed from a glamorous prostitute to a 
pampered mistress to a Buddhist nun to a humbled mother.  For Xiao'e, 
the final destination is the same, but, because she is less stubborn and 
more manipulative, her route is less turbulent.  
     Really, it's the historical context that makes this movie 
worthwhile, although primarily for those with interest in the era.  
There's nothing remarkable about the storyline, and the tear-jerking is 
only marginally successful.  Nevertheless, the movie affords us another 
perspective of a period in modern Chinese history that has already 
received much film exposure.  BLUSH is well-paced and moderately 
entertaining, but it lacks the depth which has characterized many other, 
recent exports from that part of the world.  Sadly, this basic 
deficiency makes for a largely unmemorable motion picture.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
