Title
Review for Falling Over Backwards (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Millennium, whether it was real or just a media hype for
those who had missed math classes in school, was good
opportunity for many people to ponder about changes in human
society in the last 1000 years and also a chance to think
about future trends. One of such trends, which might prove
to be the most disturbing, is the collapse of traditional
family and resulting alienation of individuals in modern
industrial societies. Generational gaps are becoming bigger
and bigger - modern people are getting alienated from their
parents; old people, instead of being treated with respect,
are usually shoved into nursing homes. Modern people are
also having problems not only with past generations, but
with future too. Industrial nations all over the world are
having big problems with declining populations - economic
conditions and urban way of life discourages people not only
from having big families, but also from having children in
the first places. Some of the dark prophets of 2000 are
already painting pictures of anti-Malthusian nightmare -
fewer and fewer people working overtime to feed multitudes
in nursing homes, only to realise that nobody would be there
to support them when they get old. Those trends might be
disturbing, but they could also provide some inspiration for
romantic comedies. Interesting example is FALLING OVER
BACKWARDS, relatively unknown 1990 Canadian film directed by
Mort Ransen and one of my personal favourites.
The protagonist of this film is Mel (played by Saul
Rubinek), Jewish schoolteacher who was emotionally
devastated with recent divorce. After a while, the
lamentations about good old times give him a bizarre idea
how to improve his life and overcome loneliness. He not only
rents a house in his old neighbourhood, but also brings his
old wheelchair-bound father Harvey (played by Paul Soles),
out of nursing home. Their life, which is hardly idyllic,
gets complicated with the presence of Jackie (played by
Julie St- Pierre), their French Canadian landlady who is
also young and attractive woman. Tension is caused not only
by her strong feminist ideas being opposed to Harvey's
traditional worldview, but also with Mel realising that he
loves her.
Everyone who makes Top 100 or Top 10 lists of best films
ever made must reconcile with the fact that such lists could
never objective or accurate. Not only because of subjective
criteria, but also because many times really excellent films
never get necessary attention. This little film, shot in
Canada for a small amount of money with the cast of relative
unknowns is one of such examples. FALLING OVER BACKWARDS
also shows that Canadian cinema can be superior to
Hollywood; romantic comedy, probably the most despised genre
among critics today, could be turned into interesting,
intelligent and truly touching film without Hollywood big
budgets and media hype. Screenwriter and director Mort
Ransen does this by creating bizarre yet everyday characters
faced with problems and situations most of us could relate
to. Humour in this film is provided by unusual, yet
believable situations, and all the characters are treated
with respect and made likeable despite having serious flaws.
The resulting "feelgood" atmosphere never descends into
usual Hollywood sappiness, though. Ransen contrasts this
feeling by referring to some very dark, disturbing and
potential controversial issues in this film - suicide,
abortion, domestic violence - but those references never get
overbearing or turn into "politically correct" sermons.
Instead, Ransen even uses them as a source of occasional
laugh or two - something that could be quite unthinkable in
films made in overly sensitive USA. Ransen also evades
taking the side in the conflict between traditional values
and realities of the modern life - the touching finale of
the film could be viewed as a victory for the both camps.
The use of characters with different ethnic background also
lacks any stereotypes, making them more natural than in
PC-infested Hollywood.
Atmosphere in the film is provided with simple but good
musical score by Milan Kimlycka, where old songs play the
role of Greek chorus. Ransen as director didn't experiment -
his directorial techniques are as ascetic and everyday as
movie locations. However, plain look of this movie doesn't
hide the depth of its content. Ransen leaves most of the
work to actors, and they use such opportunity to give
impressive and memorable roles. Most interesting thing is
this movie is a rare opportunity to see Saul Rubinek, one of
the most recognisable character actors in Hollywood films,
in a lead role. Rubinek obviously enjoyed such opportunity
and his Mel is walking the fine balance between comedy and
tragedy. Rubinek's partners are also great - Paul Soles very
effectively turns his initially grumpy character into the
voice of conscience. Julie St-Pierre, on the other hand,
manages to evade any bimboish stereotype of her character by
confronting her attractive feminine looks with tough,
pseudofeminist attitude, thus providing a lot of laughs.
FALLING OVER BACKWARDS, by being film that reconcile good
feelings with real life, as well as entertainment with
common sense, is a truly precious piece of cinema, small,
unknown Canadian film that gives new definition to the term
"hidden gem".
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
