Title
Review for Looking for Mr. Goodbar (1977)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Richard Brooks || Screenplay: Richard Brooks (based on the novel by
Judith Rossner) || Stars: Diane Keaton (Theresa Dunn), Tuesday Weld (Katherine
Dunn), William Atherton (James), Richard Kiley (Mr. Dunn), Richard Gere (Tony),
Alan Feinstein (Martin), Tom Berenger (Gary), Priscilla Pointer (Mrs. Dunn) ||
MPAA Rating: R
"Looking For Mr. Goodbar" is a none-too-subtle cautionary tale about the dangers
of living a hedonistic nightlife masked by a legitimate daylife. The film stars
Diane Keaton as an attractive young woman named Theresa Dunn, who is a
successful and caring teacher of deaf students by day, and a nightclub-carousing
libertine by night. The message of director Richard Brooks, who adapted Judith
Rossner's popular novel of the same title, is twofold: first, a person can't
wear two faces at the same time without them interfering with each other, and
second, hedonism can only lead to eventual self-destruction.
Brooks gives us numerous reasons to explain Theresa's dangerous and often stupid
behavior when it comes to sex with strange men. Some of it is due to the
Freudian relationship with her overbearing father (Richard Kiley), as well as
her strict Catholic upbringing (why is Catholicism always blamed for sexual
dysfunction?). There was also a childhood episode involving extensive back
surgery, which left a long scar to remind her of the year she spent miserable in
a body cast.
Brooks also spends the first half-hour of the film detailing an unfulfilling
sexual relationship with her college professor, a blunt married man named Martin
(Alan Feinstein). Theresa has a crush on Martin, and although she gives up her
virginity to him, he basically treats her like dirt and dumps her, thus
introducing her to the notion that sex and love don't necessarily have to be
related. For the rest of the film, Theresa reverses the scenario with other men,
making sure that she is in the position of being the uncaring recipient of
pleasure, who doesn't have to take any responsibility for her actions.
And then there's the influence of Theresa's sister, Katherine (Tuesday Weld), a
light-headed airline stewardess who has numerous affairs and at least one
abortion, jumps into a quickie marriage with a Jewish man, and then experiments
with drugs, pornography, and group sex. Watching the two sisters develop as
characters is like watching side-by-side elevators going in opposite directions
- Katherine ends up getting clean and taking control of her life again, while
Theresa sinks into drugs, nameless sex, and general hedonism.
At one point in the film, Katherine tells Theresa that everybody is somehow
hurting, so everybody is looking for a painkiller; for Theresa, her heedless
lifestyle is her painkiller. She thinks that if she can have fun by sleeping
with strangers who never stay the night, she can absolve herself of the burden
of responsibility. The fact that it didn't work for Katherine should have been a
lesson for Theresa, but some people are simply intent on learning life's
harshest lessons firsthand, even if it means paying the ultimate price.
During the course of the film, Theresa meets a string of men, all of whom are
dangerous in one way or another. First, she meets a swinging, somewhat psychotic
playboy named Tony, played by a young Richard Gere with a bad Italian accent.
She later meets a liberal social worker named James (William Atherton), and
although he seems squeaky-clean on the outside, he harbors darkness inside.
There are others that are briefly mentioned in fleeting scenes, including a
perverted furniture salesman and a hypocritical police detective. Theresa sleeps
with all of them, because to her it's the sex that matters, not the person.
Parts of "Looking For Mr. Goodbar" are successful, especially its detailed
depiction of the Manhattan nightlife in the seventies. Some of it looks
painfully dated, especially the disco-themed soundtrack, but the basic timeless
elements are all there - heavy drinking, drug use, impulsive behavior, and an
atmosphere or reckless abandon.
The film was made several years before the AIDS epidemic struck, but that should
not blur the film's message. People sometimes forget that venereal disease is
not the only negative consequence of casual sex - there is a personal and
spiritual destruction, as well threats of physical violence. Anytime a person
allows someone else into that kind of physical closeness without knowing a thing
about him, there is an inherent element of risk that is made abundantly clear in
the film's graphically violent, but somehow inevitable conclusion.
Brooks, who has made many gritty, realistic films like "The Blackboard Jungle"
(1955) and the stark adaptation of Truman Capote's "In Cold Blood" (1967), would
seem like a perfect choice for this material. Social reality seems to be his
forte, but he goes against his better instincts by including several needless
fantasy sequences that are intended to illuminate Theresa's thoughts and dreams,
but end up being silly and distracting. Brooks also could have trimmed the film
by about twenty minutes, because it takes much more time than is needed to make
its point.
Much of the film's success can be attributed to Diane Keaton's stunning
performance. Almost the entire film is told from her point of view, which means
she is on-screen in almost every scene. Keaton makes Theresa into a complex
woman who knowingly wears two faces despite the obvious damage it is causing.
This is an incredibly difficult role to pull off, because Theresa must be both
infuriating and sympathetic at the same time. Keaton manages to do just that,
which lends weight and credibility to the cautionary tale the movie is so
desperate to put forward.


Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Brooks
Writer: Richard Brooks (based on the novel by Judith Rossner)
Starring: Diane Keaton, Tuesday Weld, William Atherton, Richard Kiley,
Richard Gere, Alan Feinstein, Priscilla Pointer, LeVar Burton, Richard
Bright, Tom Berenger
It's obvious what Richard Brooks' intentions were for making "Looking for
Mr. Goodbar": he not only wanted to show how leading two lives ultimately
results in tragedy, but he also wanted to make a very unsubtle statement
against nightclubbing and sleeping with lots of men, an infamous pasttime
of the late 70s right up until the explosion of the AIDs virus. 
Unfortunately as a tale of two lives, it's too ridiculous, and as a
condemnation of promiscuous life styles, it's too preachy and ends all too
conveniently.
The film's real strength is in how it creates a certain kind of world from
a certain kind of perspective.  The entire structure and everything that
goes on is customized so that it fits that of the film's protagonist,
Theresa Dunn (Diane Keaton, the same year she won an Oscar for "Annie
Hall"), a young woman who by day is a first grade teacher of deaf kids, and
by night is out in the bars, picking up men, taking them back to her flat,
and having her way with them.
It's a proposterous situation because the two parts are just too different
from one another to be taken seriously, which is part of why we can't
totally be swayed by its message, at least in this way.  But what the film
lacks in literal substance it somewhat makes up in the way in which it's
presented.  "Looking for Mr. Goodbar" is an incredibly frustrating film to
watch because it is told entirely from her perspective, and as such we
often see some of her dreams and wishes.  Take for example the beginning
when we are introduced to her in the classroom learning about how to teach
young kids: she imagines everyone in class leaves and that she ends up
making out with her teacher (Alan Feinstein), but then we see that it was a
daydream, but in the next scene she is actually making love with her
teacher in his apartment after class.  What is real and what isn't, this
film often asks, and we can only answer a little bit later on.
What "Looking for Mr. Goodbar" feels like to the audience is being Theresa
watching herself and everything she feels and thinks, and then making a
critique about what was done.  In the beginning, Theresa lives at home and
feels suffocated by everyone around her, especially her ultra-Catholic
tyrant of a father, played with gusto by Richard Kiley.  As such, these
scenes feel claustrophobic and difficult to watch, and when the scene
shifts away from the house and her family, one feels like taking a breath
of fresh air, just like Theresa probably does.
Once moving out of her family's house, she moves into an apartment building
with her sister, Katherine (a glowing Tuesday Weld, who received an Oscar
nomination for her role), where she begins to bring various men home.  Over
the course of the film, there are only about five men we see her with, but
they constantly reappear, so much that we can barely keep recollection of
them, as Theresa no doubt does.  There's James (William Atherton), the
clean-cut all-around good guy who her father likes, but who does have a
darker side to him like all people.  Then there's Tony Lapanto (a pre-fame
Richard Gere), an overly-confident schmuck who decides to show up inside
her apartment whenever he decides he wants to boink her...or do a bizarre
ritual dance.
And of course, there's her job, which she gradually begins to ignore as the
film goes on.  Although being consumed with it when she first gets her job
towards the beginning, the more sex she has and drugs she takes, the less
interested in it she becomes, and it's obvious that a balancing act between
the two will not be had.
Every now and then we see her aforementioned sister, Katherine, who is
always at the opposite end of the poles than Theresa.  In the beginning,
she's partaking in drugs and group sex while Theresa keeps to her school
studies, but by the end, Katherine has cleaned herself up and started anew,
while Theresa has redefined herself as a druggie and sex addict.
The ending is, yes, a shock, but it's also cheap and ends only so that the
message of the film can be completed.  Though I must say that it is a much
imitated scene, having been stolen by films like "Twin Peaks: Fire Walk
With Me" and "The Doom Generation," though neither are as good as this is.
Still, "Looking for Mr. Goodbar" leaves the viewer wanted a little bit
more, perhaps because it promises to have more depth on the topics of
promiscuity and leading a double life.  Instead it come off all too
fable-like, and often intends to shock us more than it intends to say
something very meaningful.  But with a great performance from Diane Keaton
(who acts very human...and bares a lot more of herself than she normally
has, and she was even in the original cast of "Hair"), this film comes off
as one of those deeply flawed classics that you don't necessarily enjoy or
even like, but you never forget.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
