Title
Review for My Fair Lady (1964)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
It's far too long at 170 minutes.  The pace is too slow.
Some of the songs are tedious (especially "On the Street
Where You Live", the theme song for stalkers worldwide).
Eliza's father (Stanley Holloway) should make his own
movie, as his character doesn't quite fit in this one.
Hepburn is more likeable as a squawking flower girl than
as a robotic fashion model.
But despite all its faults, "My Fair Lady" is still a
good film.  The costumes are excellent, the script, sets
and casting is good, and, with the exception of lovesick
Freddy (Jeremy Brett), the main characters are both
likeable and credible.  While songs come from the moon/june
school of songwriting, blandly tailored to appearl to
the widest possible audience, the choreography that supports
them is good (My favorite has Hepburn fantasizing an
execution of Harrison).
"My Fair Lady" is based on the George Bernard Shaw play
"Pygmalion".  Conceited linguistics Professor Henry Higgins
(Rex Harrison) makes a bet with fellow blue-blood Colonel
Pickering (Wilfrid Hyde-White) that he can transform flower
girl Eliza Doolittle (Audrey Hepburn) into a lady.  Hepburn
becomes subject to Harrison's relentless and degrading
training methods, but at least she gets to wear a wide
variety of expensive dresses.  Hepburn is a success at a
ball, winning Higgins' bet, but the question of Hepburn's
future, and her relationship with the insulting Harrison,
remains to be settled.
For years, "My Fair Lady" could only be seen on NBC.
Eliza's exhortation "Move your bloomin' arse" was dubbed
to "Move your bloomin' legs", thus demonstrating that
even a G-rated movie could not always get past network
censors.
"My Fair Lady" is regarded as a dinosaur today; a lavishly
produced musical whose target audience is middle-aged
women and not their teenaged sons.  Of course, the film
was more highly regarded in its era.  It won eight Oscars
including Best Picture, Director (George Cukor), Actor (Harrison),
Cinematography (Harry Stradling) and Score (Andre Previn).
It also won for sets, costumes, and sound. Supporting actor
nominations went to garrulous Holloway and Gladys Cooper
(She played Harrison's mother, and was the fortunate recipient
of the film's best lines).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
ram@csb.stanford.edu
My Fair Lady
http://www.ram.org/ramblings/movies/my_fair_lady.html
/My Fair Lady/, released in 1964, is hailed as one of the greatest
films ever made and I had the opportunity to watch the remastered 30th
anniversary edition for the first time while spending Christmas at
Yosemite National Park.
The film is based on the story /Pygmalion/ (1912) by George Bernard
Shaw (the name refers to the King of Cyprus who fell in love with a
statue of his own making). Henry Higgins (Rex Harrison) is an English
Linguistics Professor who takes on Eliza Doolittle (a beautiful Audrey
Hepburn) under his tutelage to change her from an unrefined flower girl
with a Cockney accent to a genteel who brings forth the majesty and
grandeur of the English language (which hasn't been used in America
for years) with every utterance. Higgins is a misogynistic bachelor
who pushes Eliza day and night, while wondering why a woman can't be
more like a man, so she can learn to speak properly.  Riding on
Eliza's success is a bet Higgins makes with his friend, Colonel Hugh
Pickering (Wilfred Hyde-White), wherein Higgins claims he will be able
to pass Eliza off as a Duchess in six months.  As Eliza and Higgins
train together, they become accustomed to each other even though it is
an abusive relationship on Higgins' part. Finally the inevitable
confrontation occurs: Eliza has surpassed the teacher's expectations,
but the teacher still considers her a common flower girl.  How does
one move forward in such a situation?
The script, by Alan Jay Lerner, retains Shaw's acerbic wit and
delicious irony and succeeds for that reason. Both the dialogue and
the song lyrics are crafted extremely well. The music itself has a few
high points but there are plenty of low ones as well.  The acting is
impeccable: Rex Harrison's role as a happy-but-cynical misanthrope
(his excuse for treating Eliza badly is that he doesn't treat anyone
any better) is played out extremely well. Audrey Hepburn's
transformation from a common girl to a cultured lady is extremely
convincing, particularly in terms of her accent (although her songs
were dubbed by Marni Nixon).  The supporting cast is excellent:
Eliza's father Alfred P. Doolittle is played in a irreverent and
charismatic manner by Stanley Holloway who gets some of the coolest
lines in the film and was my favourite character; Jeremy Brett shows a
bit of the talent that would later come in handy when he played
Sherlock Holmes; and Gladys Cooper as Henry Higgins' mother also gets
to deliver a few barbed lines of her own ("Henry, what a disagreeable
surprise").
Even though the film's tongue is firmly in its cheek, the degree of
social commentary that occurs amidst the happy songs and the
straight-forward story is amazing.  The film comments about the
British class system, class systems in general, and the notion of
language being the reason for there being a class division (an almost
Universal concept prevalent in any culture). Further the movie
addresses the virtues of being "civilised" (when Eliza becomes a lady,
all she can do is sell herself), the virtues of morality when one has
nothing to left to lose (as Eliza's father says, he can't afford it),
and the repressed nature of British society in general.
The direction by George Cukor is amazing: the use of pausing
characters, the fantasy of Eliza thinking about Higgins' death, the
detached race track scene (with the classic "move your bloomin' arse"
line), and the use of novel devices to measure Eliza's speech, which
is a tangent on its own and done as a throwaway, are brilliant.  The
remastered audio and video brings the film to a vibrant life, with the
latter presenting an extremely colourful and bright Technicolour look
that is not seen in movies today.
I still think Higgins gets away too easily considering the poor way he
treats Eliza, reflecting the mentality of the era the movie was
made. At about three hours, the movie is a little too long, but is
great to watch with a date or as a group event. I highly recommend it.

