Title
Review for Djomeh (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Hassan Yektapanah's Djomeh won the Golden Camera Award (for best first
feature) at Cannes, firmly establishing Iran as the world's current
cinematic hotbed.  Fans of Abbas Kiarostami (The Wind Will Carry Us) and
Jafar Panahi (The Circle) should love Djomeh, as Yektapanah honed his skills
by working as an assistant director for both filmmakers (he wrote, directed,
edited and even served as a production designer here).
The film is about a young man (Jalil Nazari) from Afghanistan (hey, that
rhymes!) who leaves his homeland because of his country's traditions
regarding marriage.  Djomeh wants to marry by his 20th birthday, but customs
say he must wait until he is much, much older.  So he relocates to Iran and
gets a job at a dairy farm, where he milks the cows and goats and drives
around town to collect milk from everyone else, accompanied by his boss
(Mahmoud Behraznia), who becomes somewhat of a father figure to Djomeh.
The two have long conversations about love and marriage, revealing Djomeh to
be an intelligent, well-spoken, sincere lad.  On one of his delivery stops,
Djomeh meets a girl (Mahbobeh Khalili) and falls head-over-heels, but
because of Iranian customs, she can't even speak to him.
With a soundtrack toplined by moaning cows and goats, Djomeh, like other
recent offerings from Iran, is comprised mostly of long shots from a single
stationary camera and uses a group of actors with no background in film.
This makes the picture seem more realistic and much more enjoyable to watch
than something packed full of professional actors (like America's
Sweethearts).

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  If you think that the Muslim world in the Middle East is one big
happy family, remember the seven-year war between Iran and
Iraq and the invasion of Kuwait by Saddam Hussein's Iraq.  On a
more personal level, think of what if must be like for the family of
residents of one country if their daughter were romantically
pursued by an immigrant from a brother nation.  Such is the case
in "Djomeh," yet another in the string of Iranian films which have
graced out shores during the past few years, all eschewing the
Hollywood blockbuster ethic in favor of exploring the nature of
universal human emotions.  Hassan Yektapanah's story, filmed
by Ali Loghmani in remote Iranian mountains that in one village
scene resembles a community lived in by the Flintstones, may
seem distant from the lives of viewers from Beverly Hills, but
carry universal emotional truths that should resonate with a
thinking audience.
  The story centers on the 20-year-old title character (Jalil
Nazari), a shy Afghan refugee living as a dairy farmer in an
outlying Iranian village with an older landsman named Habib
(Rashid Akbari).  Djomeh is an expatriate in part because his
country is at war and in part because he had been involved in a
scandalous love affair with a woman twelve years his senior.  His
roommate Habib is conservative, not even trying to assimilate
into Iranian society and determined to head back home at the
earliest opportunity.  Djomeh therefore confides his hopes and
dreams instead to his more open Iranian boss, the 40-year-old
unmarried owner of the cows, Agha Mahmoud (Mahmoud
Behraznia), whom he asks to serve as middleman to arrange a
marriage with grocery-store clerk Setareh (Mahbobeh Khalili)--
who acts toward this shy suitor as though she were Silent Bob.
   I don't know the political views of director Hassan Yektapanah,
who is directing his first film after having been mentored by
Abbas Kiarostami, but they're obviously more in line with the
positions of Iranian president Mohammad Khatami than with the
country's religious head Ayatollah Sayyed Ali Khamenei.  In fact
we'd not be stretching an analogy to say that Djomeh's boss,
Mahmoud, is a stand-in for the president while the rest of the
bunch would fall in with the Ayatollah.  Look at what's going down
in the film.  Mahmoud is open and sympathetic to the young
Afghan.  He listens to the kid's stories about his relationship with
the older widow and empathizes.  He shows a willingness to be a
go-between with Setareh's dad even if such a deal carries a risk
for Mahmoud's reputation and his milk selling business.  He is no
way a Know-Nothing.  He's no Patrick Buchanan, in other words. 
On the other hand, there's an old guy, a customer in Setareh's
bodega, who pretends to be sympathetic to young Djomeh,
patronizing the kid by saying that the world is for everyone, and
yet contemptuously predicting that not a single Afghan refugee
will return home when the war is over.  Setareh opens her mouth
only once to recommend a scarf, otherwise ignoring the young
man completely when he talks to her.  The children of the village
steal Djomeh's bicycle and throw stones at him--never mind that
Djomeh's a fellow Muslim.  
   Aside from the intriguing story of loneliness--of the insular,
rejecting world--"Djomeh" is a tale visually told.  There are no
jump shots, there is no intrusive music needed to tell us what we
should feel.  There is no need for dialogue to show us just how
far back in time the inhabitants of the Iranian village are as we
watch Djomeh and Mahmoud weigh out the milk that is sold to
the residents.  The jug goes on one side, the weights on the
other.  Fine tuning is arranged by adding some stones to the side
with the jug.  A villager complains that the container has not been
separately weighed.  The choice is not that of the Santa
Monica supermarket but, "Goat's milk or cow's"?   
   There's a feeling that when the people say "God is great" as
they do several times a day, they know whereof they speak,
because in a way, this is the kind of life that we were meant to
live--not behind a computer, not inside an air-conditioned office,
but out of doors, away from the pollution of cars, trucks, planes
and noise.  I don't think I could stand the way of life for more than
six hours, but that's another story.  As for the Chekhovian story
of "Djomeh," it's a winner.
Not Rated.  Running time: 94 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
