Title
Review for Baxter (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ryan Davis
        Talking dogs might sound like kids stuff, but Baxter is far from a kids
film. Its an extremely dark look at communism, which can't be categorized into
just one genre, it's horror, suspense, thriller, and an intense character
driven film. Also its about a dog that thinks.
        Baxter(a dog) is given to an older women, Ms. Deville who overcomes
her fear of him to annoy the dog to death. You see, Baxter wants a challenge
he wants to be told what to do. Unfortunately Ms. Deville, has a tragic
"accident" and dies. Baxter is handed of to a young couple who lives close
by, who Baxter has admired from afar. He is happy and content with his life
until the women has a creature(Baxter's word for baby). Shortly after the
birth, the baby has a near-fatal "accident" and the young couple decides its
best to get rid of Baxter. He is finally given to a young teenager Charles,
who has a Hitler complex. Baxter has found his master and listen to Charles
commands to the end, and learns a lesson "Don't Obey"
        Baxter can be viewed on to levels, as a social commentary or a funny
little movie about a talking dog. Baxter is a brilliant film, the script and
direction are flawless and it is very interesting. Charles(François
Driancourt) gives an engaging performance as the young sadist, and all the
other actors/actresses are very convincing. The script is brilliant and
thought provoking, showing us the general publics want to be told what to do,
no matter what it is. If you can stand reading subtitles during a movie, go
rent this one, its a film worthy of several viewings.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Brian L. Johnson
82 min., not rated, Drama, 1991, In French with English subtitles
Director: Jerome Boivin
Cast: sorry, missed them
     The life of a dog, as told by a dog.  The dog, Baxter, travels from
owner to owner trying to find one he likes.  The first owner is an old
lady who just sits around all the time doing nothing fun and worrying
about when she is going to die.  The second owners are a couple of young
lovers.  The final owner is a sadistic boy who is really into Naziism.
     I found BAXTER to be a generally unappealing film.  It does,
however, seem to have a message behind it.  I feel that Baxter
represents the average person.  The old lady represents people who have
given up on life.  The lovers represent people who feel that life is
nothing but fun and that they don't have any responsibility.  The boy
represents overachievers, and sadistic fanatic.  Baxter has to find
where he fits in.  I think he represents the human race trying to find
where they fit in.  With all things considered, I give BAXTER a two on a
scale of zero to five.  BAXTER is unrated but contains female nudity,
adult situations, violence, and explicit language.
     The dog picked to portray Baxter is a not very attractive looking
dog.  This gives the film an unpleasant feel.  There is really nothing
bad to say about the acting.  The actors/actresses seem to do a good
job, but the characters they play are not very pleasant:  the old lady,
who has given up on life moping around; the two lovers, who at first
only care about themselves; the boy, who is brilliant, psychotic, and
brutal.  Speaking of the boy, his character is especially chilling.
Being psychologically able to do some of the things he does is almost
unthinkable.  The settings for the film are grim and unpleasant to look
at too.
     I don't recommend that you go see this film, or if you do that you
go to a very cheap showing so that you don't come out thinking that you
wasted your money.  I really didn't enjoy it very much.   One last note,
this film is not for animal lovers, because of what happens to some
animals in the film.

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
The story of a dog, a bull terrier, who goes through a succession of
owners in search of an authoritarian master.  A black comedy/satire that
explores the strange things that people do.  The film is
thought-provoking, but not very entertaining.
France (English subtitles), color, 1991, 82 minutes.
Director:  Jerome Boivin
     The screenplay for this film was written by the Director and
Jacques Audiard, and is based on the novel "Hell Hound", by Ken
Greenhall.  (I haven't read the book, so cannot comment on how the film
relates to the book).  The film is the story of Baxter, a dog, a bull
terrier.  Perhaps I should identify the bull terrier breed; the dog in
the beer ads, "Spuds McKenzie, Party Animal", is a bull terrier.
     The story is told from Baxter's viewpoint, with extra scenes added
that Baxter does not appear in, to complete the story.  Some scenes are
shot from Baxter's point of view, i.e., close to the ground.  The story
is narrated by Baxter, who relates his thoughts and plans.
     The story begins as Baxter is taken from a breeding kennel and
given to an old woman.  Baxter quickly tires of living with the old
woman, because he wants discipline; he wants to obey, and the old woman
will not discipline him.  Baxter looks across the street at the young
couple moving in; their liveliness and strong smells excite him.
     The old woman suffers from two mysterious accidents (were they
arranged by Baxter?), and Baxter is given to the young couple.  That
arrangement does not last, and Baxter is given to a new, perhaps ideal
owner: a young teenage boy with a Nazi fetish!  The story continues as
Baxter is disciplined by his new owner, who constructs a replica of
Hitler's bunker in the junkyard that he plays in.
     The film has some black comedy in it, and at times becomes a sharp
satire on human relations and customs.  Unfortunately, the film is not
very entertaining; there is not much humor.  Indeed, one local newspaper
mini-review described it as a horror film (in some ways it is).
     However, the film gives a rich insight into the personality of
Baxter, and the craziness of humanity.  There are layers of social
commentary present, in allegorical form, to analyze.  Inasmuch as Baxter
is searching for someone to obey, his relationship with people can be
seen as an allegory of the "fatal attraction" humanity has with
totalitarianism.  An alternate view is that Baxter, with his strong need
to be controlled, is the "ideal citizen" for whom social and political
activists are only too happy to provide control.
     Because the film is not very entertaining, I would not suggest it
to a general audience.  If you want a film to analyze for its layers of
social comment, it is worth considering.
Distribution. Now in its first U.S. theatrical run. Playing in the San
Francisco area; should be available in other areas also.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
