Title
Review for Larry David: Curb Your Enthusiasm (1999) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Larry David: Curb Your Enthusiasm (1999, TV-MA)
There's a moment in Larry David: Curb Your Enthusiasm that I became sure that
I was dealing with a mockumentary.  Larry is in the offices at HBO and, over
Larry's shoulder, there was a poster for Lenny Bruce: Swear to tell the Truth.
 Seeing as the last documentary made by Robert Weide was the Academy-award
nominated Lenny Bruce film, that was simply too coincidental to rule out any
possibility that the documentary was real.
Of course I had my suspicions before that.  The conversations Larry David was
having were a little too Seinfeldian in nature.  The conflicts a little too
contrived.  What they said all seemed to flow naturally, as most mockumentary
dialogue does (see The Blair Witch Project's bit about "Gilligan's Island"). 
The camera shook just the right amount.  The colors had that amateurish hue
associated when you don't have cinematographers shining lights in people's
faces or a very good DV.  Knowing Weide's latest works (Lenny Bruce: Swear to
Tell the Truth and being the writer-producer for Mother Night), I couldn't
help but crack a smile as I realized that one was being put over on millions
of HBO viewers across the country.  Its the exact kind of thing that Larry
David and Robert Weide would (and obviously do) love.
The mockumentary is the documentary's teenager.  It runs around, does
whatever it wants, and keeps going back and forth between the line between
entertainment and intelligence.  Contrary to popular belief, it existed before
this summer's smash The Blair Witch Project (see This is Spinal Tap), and will
exist long after the profit record for BWP is broken.  To give a simple
definition, it is a documentary that either tackles a fake subject or tackles
a real subject in a contrived way.  Much as I praised Lenny Bruce: Swear to
Tell the Truth for being one of the finest documentaries I had ever seen,
Larry David: Curb Your Enthusiasm is the best mockumentary I have ever seen.
Larry David: Curb Your Enthusiasm is the supposed documentary about the
preparation for Larry David's return to stand up with an HBO special, which is
eventually canceled at Larry's request (between a 3000-seat auditorium and a
picture of him that looked like Woody Allen as if a cigarette had just been
removed from his mouth, he goes the way of George's dad and says "I can't take
it anymore" (but of course lies about the reason)).  Over the period of
forty-four days, Larry David is followed by the camera which records
everything from a bit regarding Carolyn instead of Caroline, a near-divorce
because Larry gets caught in the park with his adulterous manager's
girlfriend, and a letter of recommendation gone to hell in a handbasket. 
Because Weide is a great documentarian, he is able to be a great
mockumentarian.  He is so very familiar with the technical aspects and
stylistic giveaways of documentary filmmaking that his mockumentary seems to
be so perfectly real.  It balances effortlessly the interviews and the raw
footage, inserts David's comedy sets at just the right moments, and puts in
some seriousness just to placate all documentary die-hards.  Larry David is
able to toss the jokes out with the same perfection as he did for nine years
as a producer on "Seinfeld", and the two of them combine their efforts to make
the mockumentary as surreally believable as some of the episodes of "Seinfeld"
are.
As always, I cannot let a movie off without complaining about one thing.  My
complaint with Curb Your Enthusiasm is that the film seems to have too much
direction to it to be completely believable.  There are too many little
touches for you to believe that this is real, and, in any mockumentary, this
is distracting.
But it isn't distracting enough to keep you from laughing your ass off.
MovieKritic2000: Reviews for the Generation of a New Millenium
http://www.geocities.com/moviekritic2000/
Help support MK2K, become a member of http://www.epinions.com/.  It's free and
you can post opinions on books, movies, music, travel, software, and just
about anything else under the sun.
To subscribe, email MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To email the critic, email MK2K@usa.net

