Title
Review for Psycho (1960)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Andrew Hicks
        No movie critic worth his fat wouldn't give this Alfred 
Hitchcock masterpiece a four-star rating. I appreciated it even more 
after seeing the three sequels (look down for reviews of those). I 
just wish I hadn't known every little secret of this movie's plot before 
seeing it. I can only imagine how much I would have liked PSYCHO 
without knowing beforehand the details about Norman Bates and 
his mother.
        And if you haven't seen PSYCHO yet, forget about being 
surprised when you find out Norman's been dressing up as his dead 
mother and committing the murders himself. Hey, someone ruins it 
for me, I ruin it for someone else.
        The set-up: A beautiful (by 1960 standards) secretary is 
entrusted with taking $40,000 to the bank. She bypasses the bank 
and heads home instead, where she packs and skips town. The guilt 
gets to her, though, and when night falls, she makes one final (fatal) 
mistake--checking into the Bates Motel. Shoot, even I wouldn't 
check into a motel with an outdoor sign reading "Color TV, Heated 
Pool, Round-the-Clock Stabbings."
        Norman's mom is a little jealous of this beautiful woman 
stealing Norman's attention, so once she hits the shower, mama 
comes down with a kife and... well, wouldn't want to give _too_ 
much away. Needless to say, the shower scene is one of the most 
memorable in cinematic history, even more memorable than the fat, 
vomiting guy in MONTY PYTHON'S THE MEANING OF LIFE.
And don't forget the three lackluster sequels...
PSYCHO II (1983) **1/2
        That psycho Norman Bates (Anthony Perkins) is back 
again, fresh out of the asylum in this, the first of three sequels to 
the 1960 Hitchcock classic. Bates is given a job in a diner as the 
cook's assistant (You've gotta be crazy to work in a diner!), where 
he meets an attractive young waitress with no place to stay. Say, I 
do believe I can recommend a place. Why not the Bates Motel? Yes, 
Norman takes the girl back to his old digs, but changes his mind 
when he finds the manager has turned the Bates into a dive for 
fornicating druggies. Norman protests, saying he won't stand for 
such immorality. Why, he remembers the good old days, when the 
Bates Motel was a place for peeping toms to watch women taking 
showers and later stab them to death.
        After firing the manager, Norman and the waitress head 
up to the ramshackle Bates mansion, which now has no trace of 
"mother." Norman tries hard to be sane, but how can he when he 
keeps getting notes and phone calls from mommy dearest? As the 
girl stays a few more nights (they're platonically shacked-up, you 
might say), Norman begins to relapse. Soon, the old hotel manager 
turns up dead and guess who they point the finger at. The man 
dressed up as an old woman carrying on both sides of a 
conversation with his mother? No, the waitress.
        PSYCHO II is by no means on the same level as the 
original (God rest its soul), but it's better than most horror movies 
with a Roman numeral II in the title, including the second Friday 
the 13th, Halloween, Texas Chainsaw Massacre, 
Nightmare on Elm Street and CHILD'S PLAY movies. 
Still, Norman Bates has to be the wimpiest horror movie killer 
ever.
PSYCHO III (1986) *1/2
        What's that sound I hear? Oh, that's just Alfred Hitchcock 
turning over in his grave. Yes, Norman Bates is up to his old (yawn) 
tricks again. He's been exonerated for all that went on in the second 
PSYCHO and is trying to make an honest living in the motel 
business. But he's set off again by a woman, this time a guilty 
ex-nun (the best-looking nun I've ever seen) who bears a striking 
resemblance to Norman's first shower victim from the original 
PSYCHO.
        Also along for the ride this time are Norman's rude new 
assistant manager, a reporter digging up history on Bates and a 
group of partying co-eds (no 80's horror movie would be complete 
without them). As with any horror movie series, the PSYCHO films 
have outlived their usefulness. There's only so long we can watch a 
man dress up as his mother and carve people up with a butcher knife 
before we get bored.
PSYCHO IV: THE BEGINNING (1990) **1/2
        This one, a low-budget made-for-TV effort, is actually an 
improvement over the strictly blood-and-guts mentality of the third 
movie. Part IV provides an origin for Norman Bates (Anthony 
Perkins), with most of the movie centered around Bates' call to a 
radio talk show (yes, there still is such a thing as a radio show), the 
subject, of course, being men who have killed their mothers (and, 
naturally, bad sequels to classic movies).
        Through flashbacks we learn Norman's mother was kind of 
weird, not to mention overbearing, with little Norman. Though the 
relationship was never sexual (There is a part where Mrs. Bates 
makes Norman take off his clothes and get in bed with her... but that 
doesn't mean anything), there was an abnormal level of affection 
with those two, so when Mother brings home a boyfriend and heads 
straight for the motel room with the peephole, young Norman 
decides something has to be done -- and fast.
        Hey there, Norm, you can't solve all of life's problems with 
sharp knives. There are also machine guns and hand grenades to 
think about.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Zachary McGhee
Rated R (re-rated for video release, though it's
not clear why; the film met censorship standards
for its original release and contains only mature
themes and off screen violence), 110 minutes.
Anthony Perkins, John Gavin, Vera Miles, Martin
Balsam, and Janet Leigh. Screenplay by Joseph
Stefano. From the novel by Robert Bloch. Directed
by Alfred Hitchcock. Paramount/Universal.
"A boy's best friend is his mother." That line,
uttered desperately by Anthony Perkins' Norman
Bates during the infamous conversation between he
and Janet Leigh, frightened me more than anything
which came before it, or followed. The wispy vocal
presentation, the secrecy of Norman's attitude; he
yearns to protect what he knows is evil, for many
reasons. First, loyalty to his mother, and
secondly, a perverse, sexual longing that Norman
has for Leigh's Marion. If she knew the truth,
what he was concealing, she would never, in
Norman's mind, entertain the idea of sexual
congress of any kind with him; in reality, she
would never consider it regardless, she sees right
through him-to a degree; she obviously doesn't
spot the murderous intentions and psychological
torment going on inside this poor boy-she sees
that he's being manipulated, that he's protecting
something, though she doesn't detect precisely
what.
Everything that Alfred Hitchcock tried to inspire
in the viewer exists in that scene, everything
about human emotion, hidden desire, pain, lust,
and voyeurism (see the birds, lurking in the
background of the frame, and later in the film
when Norman spies on Marion as she undresses); the
recognition of those basic, but covert, elements
of the human psyche, that third face which we
build to conceal our very selves with the facade
of compassion were what Hitchcock was most
interested, what he most deeply explored in his
films. See Leigh sitting there, her body language
conflicting; she closes off to this young man
because, although he's personable enough, there is
something obviously wrong. She senses it, she
strives to decipher it, but she can't. Not, at
least, to the point of saving her own life. Just
as Norman refuses to acknowledge his own
underlying distress, she refuses to recognize the
depth of the danger which surrounds her. He tries,
as much as he can, to open up to her, because he
truly begins to care for her; she wouldn't have
died if he didn't.
Friday, December the Eleventh, 2:43p.m. We pan to
a hotel room in Arizona; two lovers are inside
after a romantic encounter, flirting with one
another. She is Marion, he is Sam Loomis (John
Gavin). She wants to marry, he's content meeting
in hotel rooms on the weekends, paying his
alimony. They part, nothing's been settled. He
retreats to his home in CITY, she returns to work.
A large sum of money comes into her possession and
she steals it, hoping to take it to Sam so that
they might be married. It begins to rain as she
drives, she grows tired, weary, sees a little
motel, the Bates' Motel, stops there for the
evening, chats with the young man, Norman Bates,
who runs it under guidance from his contemptible
mother, steps into her cabin for the evening,
decides to return the money the next day, takes a
shower in preparation for bed, and someone comes
in and quickly and brutally murders her.
"He liked that whole introduction to the movie; he
liked that it was going to be about her, and then
we were suddenly going to do this awful thing to
you and say, ‘No, no, it's not about her, it's
about him'," recounted screenwriter Joseph Stefano
of his meetings with Hitchcock. The deception is
most effective, leading to not only one of the
greatest films of all time, but also revealing one
of the themes of the film: manipulation.
Psycho was based, loosely, on the novel by Robert
Bloch of the same name. Having read the book for
the first time roughly a year-and-a-half ago, I
can say that it is a very powerful, striking piece
of writing, but it has little in common with the
subsequent film. "We never mentioned the book; we
never returned to the book again," said Stefano.
The changes made in the translation to the screen
are appropriate, putting to shame the adaptations
of many modern novels to film. In the book, Norman
has regular conversations and arguments with his
mother, and descriptions of her are given, making
the end revelation a little less obvious, and
indeed the ending itself is rather ambiguous until
the absolute conclusion (i.e., Norman, Norma, and
Normal). Stefano's script is more subtle than
ambiguous. He and Hitchcock instead opted to
create an incessant theme of our maternal
attachments, with very few conversations overheard
between Norman and his mother, which, in the film,
makes the subject matter much more personal.
Take, for example, the framing of the scene in
which Norman wraps Marion's body, carefully
constructed so as not to show the nude, lifeless
remains. Obviously censorship standards at the
time would not have allowed it, but I doubt that
the scene could have had such power otherwise; the
mental firewall, the detachment, which Norman
constructs for himself in that scene-which is the
only way he ever could have concealed such an
grotesque, evil act as a character-is communicated
flawlessly with this technique, and drives the
audience's self-examination of their own ego,
their individuality, and how we as human being are
able to, as Roger Ebert says, build mental
firewalls between our outward personalities and
the evil or sinful deeds which we commit.
The performances are heartbreaking. Perkins'
Norman is a poor, misguided man who earns our
sympathy quickly, if incorrectly (at least, as far
as morality goes). Leigh is a little more distant,
and aptly so, until her final moments when our
hearts weep for her. John Gavin remains equally
aloof, a man who can't quite deal with or accept
the inevitable. Vera Miles as Marion's sister,
Lila, is more greatly sympathetic; rightfully
angry, but not hostile. And Martin Balsam's brief
stint as the inspector seems out of place to us.
He does his job, and we know that, but because, at
the time, we sympathize more with Norman and Lila
we don't understand the scope of his performance
until his violent death. The score by Bernard
Herrman is the soul of Psycho. Herrman's orchestra
was all strings, no percussion or brass, but
rather an eerie, stark representation of our inner
selves, Herrman never lets up.
And then there's those final moments. The one flaw
among perfection. The psychiatrist's speech.
Stefano fought for it, because it was something he
knew; he was in analysis at the time Psycho was
made and found an explanation necessary. Really,
though, ambiguity was more fitting here; to
dismiss and explain away the madness, the torment,
the suffering, the chaos of the past hundred
minutes undermines the preceding material. "Hitch
called it a hat grabber," he said. Indeed,
Hitchcock had his doubts about it, but Stefano was
adamant, and I'd have to agree with the master. If
the speech was cut, Norman's experience would not
have been easily labeled and resolved as a mere
"condition", but rather as an unexpected,
unexplainable force of evil, like John Carpenter's
Michael Myers in Halloween. No explanations, no
resolutions. Just a terrifying, and therefore more
disconcerting, power.
Still, it's a minor qualm. If I had my way, I
wouldn't have sat through seven, count ‘em seven,
Halloween films in the first place, none of the
Psycho follow-ups would've never been made, and
Jack Nicholson and Helen Hunt would've been "just
friends" at the conclusion of As Good As It Gets.
The speech in Psycho only dents, but does not
destroy, the ultimate reputation of Hitchcock and
his masterwork. Psycho is a devastating, potent
motion picture from one of the greatest, most
insightful directors who ever lived.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho" is the grandaddy of all horror thrillers - the
penultimate textbook statement on thrills and suspense. There has never been a
greater Master of Suspense, and this is surely Hitch's greatest suspense
thriller. Even after 40 years, it has not lost the power to shock or surprise. 
"Psycho" changed movie history forever after its release in 1960 - in a sense,
the innocence of the 1950's was forever crushed by Hitchcock's atmospheric pull
and sinful characters. Here we had Janet Leigh as Marion Crane, the bank clerk
who has embezzled 40,000 dollars and leaves the town of Phoenix, Arizona in the
hopes of starting a new life with her beau, Sam Loomis (John Gavin). Along the
way, she runs into ominous policemen, suspicious used car dealers, and a nice,
callow motel owner, Norman Bates (Anthony Perkins) who rents a room to her, and
offers a meal ("just sandwiches and milk") in his parlor. We are itching for
Marion to get away, but she decides to go back to Phoenix - her "private trap"
as she calls it. Her conversation with Norman almost turns awry as she suggests
keeping his invalid mother in a home. "In an institution," asks Norman, while
in the background we see stuffed birds. We begin to think that Marion will get
away the next day, and hope that Norman will not get in the way. She calmly
takes a shower, and suddenly a silhouetted figure opens the shower curtain and
kills her! A major shock to the senses in one of the infamous montage sequences
in film history. This is the section that most people recall when "Psycho" is
brought up. It is also the most misunderstood. 
The shower sequence occurs barely halfway through "Psycho" and Hitchcock still
has a lot of tricks up his sleeve. The trick is that we were following Marion
Crane all through the story, assuming all along that the film is about Marion
and the money she stole. Hitchcock makes it very subjective, we see this story
through her eyes. Credit Janet Leigh for making Marion into one of the most
sympathetic, humane female protagonists of all time. It is precisely for this
reason why we are so shocked by her murder - a life has been taking away from
us and we are left helpless like those stuffed birds in Norman's parlor. It is
not a matter of punishment considering that Mother does not kill Marion for her
money - we, the audience, only see it as punishment. Suddenly, the subjectivity
shifts to poor Norman Bates since we assume that his mother killed Marion
because he was attracted to her, and perhaps wanted her sexually. 
This is the second act of the film, now focusing on Norman and Marion's
tempermental sister, Lila Crane (Vera Miles). She comes to Sam Loomis asking
where Marion might be, and there is also a private investigator, Arbogast
(Martin Balsam), making inquiries. Arbogast eventually discovers that Marion
(having used her alias Marie Samuels) had stayed at the Bates Motel. This sets
up a brilliantly tense and comical scene where Arbogast asks Norman questions,
realizing Norman is lying about the situation, and is curious about his mother
sitting in the upstairs window of the house next door. 
"Psycho" has one clever sequence after another, building its tension through
surprises and mounting suspense. Who is Mother anyway? How come she has to be
carried out of the house by Norman yet somehow moves at lightning speed when
she attacks with the kitchen knife? The secret to the tension is in how Hitch
switches from subjectivity to objectivity. For example, the Arbogast murder
starst subjectively as he walks up to the house and enters through the front
door - every shot is seen from his point-of-view. Then he walks up the stairs,
and Hitchcock cuts to a shot of a door opening. Who is it? Could it be Mother?
We are aware someone is up there but Arbogast does not know, thus the tension
builds with acute dexterity. Low-angle shots to a high-angle shot of Mother
steadfastly attacking Arbogast. 
Subjectivity has always been Hitchcock's secret to suspense and unparalleled
tension, and never before did it make such an impression as in "Psycho." It is
a film that changed our perceptions of what a film could be, and it sired a
genre rooted in gratuitous gore and cheap shocks - the slasher genre. The
countless rip-offs and remakes never did any justice to "Psycho," with the
exception of the cleverly Hitchcockian suspense thriller, "The Stepfather," and
Scorsese's lone thriller, "Cape Fear." In terms of slasher fare, there is John
Carpenter's influential "Halloween," which borrows from Hitch freely as well as
Brian De Palma's early thrillers. 
What most slasher films forget is that Hitchcock never intended on featuring
the sole two murders in "Psycho" without any rhyme or reason - his sole purpose
was not just to shock or titillate. The justification comes from the screenplay
by Joseph Stephano, who wisely spent time investing humanity and dimension in
these characters. Most of today's thrillers or slasher films spend an
inordinate amount of time lopping off characters whom we could care less about
- witness the execrable "I Know What You Did Last Summer." The latter cared
more about the killing methods than about the thin characters. 
"Psycho" is nearly a perfect thriller, though the ending where a psychiatrist
(Simon Oakland) explains Norman's condition is still trite and unnecessary -
sometimes nobody can acutely pinpoint a murderer's motives. But then Hitchcock
has a brilliant finish where Norman is in his cell and we hear Mother in a
voice-over spreading a sense of optimism about her confinement - "Why she would
never harm a fly!" says Norman. The final shot is a superimposition of Mother's
skull over Norman's smiling face while there is yet another superimposition of
a car being drained from a swamp containing Marion's body. 
"Psycho" is dated in certain respects, but it retains the potency it has in its
thrills and excitement. A visceral experience like no other, it shows Hitchcock
at the height of his powers. The late Anthony Perkins might have become
miscast, but his empathetic, almost too human look at Norman Bates will always
enthrall precisely because he does not seem so evil. "Psycho" will never be
forgotten, and stands as the standard thriller by which all others thrillers
have and will be measured. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Dragan Antulov
It is common knowledge that the reputation of some films,
even the classic ones and those generally regarded as
masterpieces, change through times. But few films suffer
because of wear as original version of PSYCHO did. Simply,
being one of, if not the, most influential film of all times
is a great burden that could produce serious, sometimes even
devastating, impact on its watchability among the newest
generations of film viewers. In the last thirty- nine years
multitudes of filmmakers had seen this film and were very
influenced by it. Those influences found way to produce
themselves in the various rip-offs, homages, spoofs
scattered all over the globe and in all kind of genres,
including even video-clips. So, today it is really hard to
find a living soul that could be spoiled about the major
plot points of PSYCHO (and it would happen even without
three unnecessary sequels and utterly pointless 1998
remake).
Thanks to that, PSYCHO is actually the film most often
associated with the name of its director, the great Alfred
Hitchcock. And, ironically, when it was originally released,
it was considered to be the most un-Hitchcockian of them
all. It was shot in 1960, at the zenith of Hitchcock's
career, yet it lacked many of his distinctive trademarks.
Hitchcock shot it very quickly and very cheaply, using his
second-hand crew, cast of the relative unknowns and even
distributed it as nothing more than cheap exploitation
B-thriller. Hitchcock even didn't use his trademark
technique of building suspense and instead simply shocked
the audience with totally unexpected plot twists, and
depictions of violence and sexual innuendo that was very
daring for its time.
Plot of the film, based on the novel by Robert Bloch, begins
in Phoenix, Arizona, where Marion Crane (played by Janet
Leigh) works as office clerk in real state agency. Marion is
utterly unhappy with her life, mostly because her lover Sam
Loomis (played by John Gavin) can't marry her because of
huge alimony owed to his ex-wife. One hot day Marion acts on
impulse and steals 40,000 US$ from one of agency's clients.
She begins her long road trip towards Sam's hometown in
California. Along the way she would make a stop at isolated
motel. There she meets the manager, lonely, sometimes odd
but basically friendly Norman Bates (played by Anthony
Perkins) whose major problem in life seems to be his
physically and mentally ill mother, living in nearby gothic
house. Her short stay in Bates motel is terminated when she
gets fatally stabbed under shower. Norman, convinced that
his pathologically jealous mother committed the crime, hides
the body and all traces of Marion. However, Milton Arbogast
(played by Martin Balsam), private detective sent by the
agency to retrieve the stolen money, tracked Marion to the
motel. And Marion's sister Lila (played by Vera Miles) is
also more than eager to find what actually happened to her
sibling.
PSYCHO is not just the one of the most popular or
influential films of all times. It is also one of the most
studied films, with each shot and elements being subject of
at least half a dozen monographs or even books. So, everyone
who tries to review PSYCHO has a really hard task to be
original. However, some things must be told, even at the
risk of being repetitive. So, PSYCHO was very revolutionary
film for its time. It was the first major Hollywood film to
feature women dressed in underwear; the first major
Hollywood film to feature toilet bowls and flushing water,
but the most original thing was Hitchcock's use of
protagonist who is to be killed half way through the movie.
Such practice was unheard of until that time, and it is
rarely used even today. That shouldn't surprise anyone - few
people could imagine emotional shock and disturbing effect
such demise had on the audience. The killing of Marion Crane
per se, and not the blood, gore and suspense, make PSYCHO
one of the scariest movies of all times (or to be precise,
used to make it the scariest movie of all times, since the
shock value is long gone among audience these days).
That killing was depicted in one of the most memorable
scenes of all times. The legendary shower scene lasts 45
seconds, but in reality was shot in a week. For some people
this scene, most remembered and most often quoted element of
the film, is the embodiment of cinematic perfection.
Brilliantly edited, with excellent use of black-and-white
photography, Bernard Herrmann's music and many tricks that
cheated censors, this scene puts audience on the emotional
roller coaster. In those 45 seconds viewers first satisfy
their voyeuristic instincts, only to be shockingly reminded
of the human mortality when the movie protagonist becomes
totally helpless, naked and unshielded. The same scene also
paved the way to future use of stereotype of "sex=death",
cliche that made PSYCHO the great grandfather of all slasher
horror movies.
However, the real horror of PSYCHO doesn't lie in the
graphic or shocking depictions of murders. What is most
disturbing in PSYCHO is the utter lack of foreshadowing. The
audience, same as the unfortunate heroine, didn't know where
the real danger was coming from. Slasher movies, same as
PSYCHO, scare the audience because the danger doesn't come
in the form of monsters or supernatural beings; the killings
are committed by ordinary people next door, people who might
be friendly and nice and people who might even not be aware
of their own homicidal tendencies. Such was the role of
Norman Bates, played superbly by young Anthony Perkins. That
actor portrayed conflicting emotions and made the audience
care for his character, and won sympathies that stayed until
the end. Perkins played the role of his life, but,
unfortunately, his acting triumph doomed his career -
afterwards he was often typecast, playing cheap imitations
of the same, mentally troubled character.
PSYCHO might be the most influential, but it is definitely
not the best film of all times. It was splendidly paced,
superbly directed by the master and still remains one of the
most memorable viewing experiences. Even the time seemed to
be kind to it, and without its own overexposure, PSYCHO
might be truly enjoyed by new generations. However, the
ending, same as with few other great Hitchcock's films,
represents a disappointment. The last, terrifying scene that
revealed the true horror of Bates' insanity, is ruined when
Lila, the last of the protagonists, escapes the fate of
their predecessors with the conventional yet unbelievable
deus ex machina. This scene is followed with the scholarly,
detailed yet overlong expose given by psychiatrist Dr.
Richmond (played by Simon Oakland) whose expert opinion
actually insults the audience - he just tells us what we
already know. Perhaps such scene was needed for 1960s
audience, unaccustomed to bizarre forms of psychotic
behaviour, but today it slows the film that would end
perfectly just with the last shot of imprisoned Norman Bates
sitting and not harming a fly.
PSYCHO might be not perfect, but it is still watched and
maintains its reputation, despite the fact that even those
who watch it for the first time know everything about it.
This strange fact is the ultimate viewing recommendation.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Alfred Hitchcock.
Cast: Anthony Perkins, Janet Leigh, Vera Miles, John Gavin, Martin 
Balsam, John McIntire, Simon Oakland, Patricia Hitchcock, John Anderson, 
Frank Albertson.
1960 - 108 minutes.
Rated R (for violence).
Reviewed December 3, 1998.
>From the master of suspense, "Psycho," is Alfred Hitchcock's most 
well-known, and widely considered, best film, a great feat for a 
relatively low-budget horror picture. It terrified audiences in 1960, 
and surprisingly, still holds up very well today. When I first viewed 
the entire film about four years ago, it really did scare me, and with 
my most recent viewing, it is still a powerful, unforgettable 
experience.
"Psycho," starts off from the point-of-view of Marion Crane (Janet 
Leigh), a young banker who, on her lunch breaks, often meets her 
long-time boyfriend, Sam Loomis (John Gavin), in a hotel room. Desperate 
to break free and be with him, she steals $40,000 in cash and goes on 
the lam, only to stop at the backwoods Bates Motel for the night, where, 
as everyone knows, she meets her ill-fated demise by being stabbed to 
death in the shower by a mysterious female figure. When the motel 
manager, Norman Bates (Anthony Perkins), whose invalid mother is always 
looking out the bedroom window of the house overlooking the motel, 
discovers Marion, he desperately disposes of the body by putting her in 
the trunk of her car and driving it into a nearby swamp. After missing 
for a week, Marion's older sister, Lila (Vera Miles), grows concerned 
and enlists the aid of both Sam and the police detective, Arbogast 
(Martin Balsam), to investigate the disappearance.
At the time of its release, "Psycho," was a highly courageous and 
explicit film, dealing with brutal murder, risque (in 1960) sexual 
situations, and the ideas of the Oedipal complex and transvesticism. In 
today's times, these elements are not nearly as shocking, but 
Hitchcock's "Psycho," is still a masterful, outstanding motion picture, 
and one of the best horror films I have ever seen, next to 1978's 
"Halloween." 
The screenplay, by Joseph Stefano, which is also closely being used for 
the recent remake by Gus Van Sant, is way ahead of its time in both its 
dialogue and surprising construction. For those unfamiliar with the 
shower scene, it would come as a huge surprise that the character of 
Marion, who has been the main character from the start, dies within the 
first hour. There are two murder set-pieces in, "Psycho," and they are 
both dazzlingly executed. Without giving it away, the sequence with 
Arbogast on the staircase remains one of my favorite moments in any 
horror picture, old or new. The first time I saw it, I actually jumped 
in my seat, which is almost unthinkable for a film that was made in 
1960. All other horror movies, prior to, "Psycho," are simply not scary 
in today's time because audiences have become more adept to handle 
violence.
The character of the occasionally charming, partly threatening Norman 
Bates will always be associated with the late, great Anthony Perkins, 
who never had a role as memorable as this one, and he is perfect. Janet 
Leigh is outstanding as the film's anticlimactic heroine, and all of her 
early scenes, although not dealing with a horror aspect, manage to 
vibrantly come alive, thanks to her, and a scene involving a policeman, 
and another at a car dealership, are genuinely suspenseful.
The cinematography, which was nominated for an Oscar, consists of some 
of the most stylish black-and-white photography I have seen. It adds a 
great deal of atmosphere, foreboding, and mystery that might have very 
well been lost in color. And the flawless, eerie music score by Bernard 
Herrmann, which has been largely ripped-off since, is one of the most 
well-known scores in motion picture history. I simply could not imagine, 
"Psycho," without that music, with its striking orchestral chords that 
are able to send a shiver up your spine just listening to them. Again, 
no horror film score has been able to match it, besides John 
Carpenter's in "Halloween."
Alfred Hitchcock's, "Psycho," is a masterpiece in all senses of the 
word. As a horror film, it is a horrifying study in terror, and as film 
in general, it is a brilliant study in style and mood, as well as the 
darkest regions of a person's psyche. The fact that it holds up just as 
perfectly nearly forty years after it was made is a testament to 
Hitchcock's well-earned title, "The Master of Suspense." He was a 
"master," in more than one sense of the word, too. 
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Brian Koller
"Psycho" is one of Alfred Hitchcock's best and most famous films.
Although it has been called a black comedy or a horror movie,
perhaps it qualifies better as a mystery.  There is considerable
suspense throughout, the Bernard HerrmanX score is outstanding, 
the script and directing is excellent, and Anthony Perkins'
character (Norman Bates) and performance is one of the most 
infamous in film history.
There are spoilers in the following paragraphs, but it would
be difficult to discuss the film properly without giving much away.
The story begins with blonde beauty Janet Leigh, whose character
is vulnerable but calculating.  She steals a large sum of cash
from her employer and flees town.  She sells her car, and stops
for the night at a cheap hotel.  There, she meets lonely hotel
owner Perkins.  Perkins has a strong love-hate relationship with
his abusive mother, who is heard but not seen.  Leigh is murdered,
apparently by Perkins' mother.  Later, a private detective traces
Leigh to the motel.  This leads to more confrontations between
Perkins and those looking for Leigh.  It is revealed that
Perkins has a split personality: one as Norman, the other as his
long-dead mother.
Hitchcock plays a trick on us by focusing the first half of
the film on Leigh, when the film is really about Norman Bates.
Even in the second half, the story is told from the viewpoint
of other characters.  These characters only know part of the
truth, adding to the mystery and suspense that permeates the
film.  
The dramatic tension is strong and endless:  Will Leigh steal
the cash?  Will she get caught, by the policeman or the car
salesman?  What is Bates' relationship with his mother?  Will
Bates get charged with his mother's crime?  Is Bates' mother
still alive?  If not, who is the old lady who lives with him?
Hitchcock keeps the audience guessing by teasing it with
misleading information.
Poor Anthony Perkins.  Prior to "Psycho", he played leading 
man roles, in successful films such as "Fear Strikes Out" and 
"On The Beach".  He was sort of a Timothy Hutton of the
1950s.  But after "Psycho", he could only be seen by the
audience as Norman Bates.  He could then only get Bates-style
roles, such as in "Pretty Poison" and the Psycho sequels.
My only real complaint about "Psycho" is the conclusion.
A psychiatrist is trotted in to explain Perkins' behaviour.
He seems to know everything: that Bates killed his mother,
other strangers, buried them all in the swamp, and didn't
steal the money.  Tying up all the loose ends in "Psycho"
goes against the grain of the rest of the film.  I can
imagine this character appearing in "2001: A Space Odyssey"
to explain things: "The monkeys represent early man, whose
murderous instincts required alien intervention to advance
human society..."
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Anthony Perkins; Vera Miles; John Gavin; Martin Balsam & John
McIntire
Psycho is the Alfred Hitchcock film considered by many to be a masterpiece.
When it was released in 1960 it was probably one of the scariest movies ever
made. By today's standards it has a couple of shocking moments, but it
certainly wouldn't be what I'd consider to be a real scary film. Since I'm
judging Psycho by today's standards, it is for that reason that I wouldn't
really recommend Psycho to someone who was looking for a real good scare.
They won't find it in Psycho. Even the famous shower scene has lost its
shock value. When Psycho was first released it had the virtue of never
having been done before. Today there are very few people out there who
haven't at least heard about the shower scene. As a result, when it happens,
it isn't a real big surprise to anyone watching. As soon as Janet Leigh
turns on the water in the bathroom, you know exactly what is coming next.
But I'm getting ahead of myself.
The afore mentioned Janet Leigh plays Marion Crane. Marion steals a large
sum of money from her employer and hops into her car and leaves town. She
decides to spend the night in a lonely motel out in the middle on nowhere.
It's the very deserted Bat's Motel run by the very odd Norman Bates (Anthony
Perkins) and his mother. To be brief, Marion decides to go in for a shower
after she settles into her room. Once she goes in, she never comes out again
alive. The rest of the movie centers on Marion's sister, boyfriend and a
private investigator hired by her employer, trying to track down Marion, who
has seemingly disappeared off the face of the Earth. And none of them get
any help from Bates, although they all suspect that he knows a little more
than he is willing to let on.
While I wouldn't recommend Psycho for its shock value, I would recommend it
on the basis that it is brilliantly made. Even though I'm not a big fan of
black and white movies, visually it works very well. Add to that some of the
best music found in a horror film, and you have a decidedly creepy, if not
scary movie. The final reason, and the main one for recommending Psycho is
the performance of Anthony Perkins as Norman Bates. It was probably the
performance of his career. With the exception of Anthony Hopkins in Silence
Of The Lambs, you will never find a more eerie personality on screen than
Bates. Almost as soon as Perkins appears on screen, the audience knows that
something just isn't right about this guy and he is bound to be trouble. For
the sake of those 2 or 3 people that are just waking from a coma that
they've been in since the early sixties, I won't go into any more detail
about why good old Norm is as frightening as he is, let's just say his
problems seem to run in the family.
Psycho is a classic, and like many classics, I've found it to be just a
little disappointing when compared to current films. The only reason to
watch Psycho is for the haunting performance of Perkins, which is more than
ample reason to plunk down a few bucks at the video store. As a personal
note, the original is a far better way to spend your time and money on that
the 1998 remake starring Vince Vaughn and Anne Heche.
7/10 -- Most of that due to Perkins' performance and Hitchcock's direction.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writer: Joseph Stefano (based on the novel by Robert Bloch)
Starring: Anthony Perkins, Janet Leigh, Vera Miles, John Gavin, Martin
Balsam, John McIntire, Simon Oakland, Patricia Hitchcock, Virginia Gregg
I've seen "Psycho" about three times in my short lifetime, and I'm actually
surprised how well it holds up even now.  It's sad that many suspense films
are so silly that you can't take them seriously, when at the same time,
older films like this are almost as silly yet you can take them seriously. 
I'm not even sure how Hitchcock did it.  Here's a flick where the
protagonist of the film is killed off at the half-way point, and the
supporting characters are left trying to find out what happens only to
discover that one of the other main characters did it in drag.  Looking at
it like this, it seems so moronic that I can't believe I enjoy almost every
minute of it.  But that's the power of film, I guess.
"Psycho" is not the best film Alfred Hitchcock (who for my money is the
greatest director who ever walked the face of this god forsaken planet)
ever made, yet it's thought to be so by the general public.  I think
"Psycho" is definitely absolutely on Hitch's "Very Best" list, which
includes such amazing films as "The 39 Steps," "Strangers on a Train,"
"Rear Window," and "Vertigo" (just to name a few).  But it's just not his
best.  He's been better.  But yeah, it's his most popular.  Why is this?
It seems the answer to this is the infamous shower sequence, which is
absolutely positively one of the 10 best-directed sequences I have ever
seen on celluloid - there's no room for debate on this one.  Hitch's
editing, timing, everything has never been better on a scene, and just
everything about it wreaks of greatness.  But for me, at least, it's not
why this film is just amazing.  It's my favorite scene in the film, and
yes, when I re-watched it on my birthday (the cool anniversary widescreen
edition was one of my few birthday presents this year), I was blown
away...and I rewatched it to see the editing and number of cuts, not just
to see a glimpse of the supposed Janet Leigh nipple I've heard so much
about.  Honestly.
What makes this film so amazing for me is one thing: Anthony Perkins.  I
know that it's commonly said that Robert Walker's performance in "Strangers
on a Train" is the best piece of acting in a Hithcock film - I mean, Nick
Clooney has publically said that a couple times on AMC.  But while his
performance was brilliant in just the brilliance of it all, Perkins
performance is brilliant because it gives us some sympathy...scratch that,
a LOT of sympathy for the main subject of this film: Norman Bates.
First, let me give a quick run-down of the plot: secretary Marion Crane
(Leigh), a bit of a tired-of-hiding woman (she's carrying on a little
affair with the dashing Sam Loomis, played by the dashing John Gavin) who
steals 40 grand from her employer when he entrusts her with the task of
putting it in the bank.  She starts on a paranoiac trek with the stolen
money, and eventually winds up at a little middle-of-nowhere place, the
Bates Motel.  Too bad she didn't see the sequels first.
There, she befriends the lonely clerk, Norman Bates (Perkins), who lives in
a giant, brooding house above the 12 rooms of the motel with his mother,
whom we never see in these first scenes, but who's presence is made known
in a couple scenes where she yells at Norman frantically.  When Marion goes
to take a shower that night, a woman sneaks in behind her, and stabs her
fatally a bunch of times, and then leaves her to quickly die.
The second half of the film (you didn't think it was all just the shower
scene, did ya?  seems that way sometimes) deals with Sam and Marion's
sister, Lila (Vera Miles), trying to discover what has happened to her.  We
also get to meet a private investigator (Martin Balsam), hired by the men
who's money was stolen by Marion, who tries to do some snooping around
every motel and hotel in a million mile radius, but, unfortunately meets at
a short, and untimely end.  In this half, we also discover the BIG twist,
which Hitchcock tried to keep secret back in '60, but asswholes like myself
and the people who made the sequels have spoiled for those of you who have
never seen it (shame on us!).
The film was an escape for Hitch, who's previous film was the
amazing-as-hell "North By Northwest" (my favorite Hitch, and the single
best "chase" movie I've ever seen).  "Psycho" is grittier, less glamorous,
and features no name actors (for the time).  This probably gave Hitch an
excuse to do some wildly experimental stuff with his directorial tactics,
like giving us more gory death scenes, killing off the protagonist, using
inner-voice dialogue weirdly (Marion imagines what her friends and
co-workers will say when they discover what she's done), and also giving us
a killer the likes of which had never been seen, and has rarely been copied
since.
This is the thing that makes the movie.  Sure, the entire film is an
amazing display of great suspense tactics.  I'm just freaked out during the
whole beginning, where Marion tries to escape cleanly, but can't stop
giving herself away to everyone she comes in contact with.  Okay, I'm
freaked out during the whole thing.  Directing-wise, it's a masterpiece.
But these things would leave the viewer with a flat experience if it
weren't for the way Hitch, his screenwriter Joseph Stefano, and his actor
playing the role, Perkins, show Norman Bates off.  He's the killer of this
film.  He's schizophrenic, divided between Norman and his mother.  It's his
portrayal of the Norman part, which dominates most of his screentime, which
is so great.  Norman is not a homicidal maniac.  Nor is he a transvestite. 
He's a mild-mannered, sensitive, and despereately lonely person, reaching
out for any signs of life he can reach, but keeps getting trapped by his
other ego.  Who knows?  If he wasn't schizoid, he and Marion may have hit
it off.  But his other ego, afraid he'll lose him to another person, has
Marion killed off quickly and in a grizly state.
It's an amazing thing watching Perkins do his schitck with the role.  He
inhabits him with so much sympathy and so much to like that when you find
out he's really the killer, it's devastating.  I mean, he's such a great
person!  Sure, sometimes he goes a tad off kilter, most notably when
talking about his passion: stuffing birds.  But Perkins cleverly plays him,
showing off more to like but hiding some bits of darkness within.  And this
set of levels get dangerously out of whack as the film progresses.
It's this that makes "Psycho" such a great film.  It's this that separates
it from any other film about serial killers/homicidal nutcases.  I have
never seen a film before or since its release that has been so sad when its
killer is revealed.  Sure, it almost spoils the entire film by giving us a
denouement featuring almost nothing but psych-talk (ugh), but just
fast-forward through that scene if you've already seen it, and watch that
final scene with Norman in the chair with the blanket, with a voice over by
his mother's ego (voice by an uncredited Virginia Gregg).  The film quickly
redeems itself from a final scene where those in the audience that didn't
catch it the first time that Norman is crazy can have it fed to them on a
spoon (I wouldn't be shocked at all if he didn't have some sort of fit with
the distributors).
Never mind the shower scene.  Or the big twist.  Or even the paranoid
beginning.  That's all bullshit (they're amazing on their own, but an
entire great film they do not make on their own).  The reason this film is
so amazing, why I think it's one of Hitch's "Very Best," is because of
Norman Bates, and how he's portrayed.  He makes the whole thing real.  He's
the real reason this is an amazing film, not because for two minutes, you
get to see a perfectly filmed murder sequence.  Although that scene's good
for other reasons.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Max Scheinin
To follow the career of Alfred Hitchcock, is to experience the various ups
and downs which are habitual among any artist. The rotound, wickedly droll,
master of suspense reached his height in the thirties, fifties and sixties.
What comes afterwards, before and in the middle is of little consequence.
Does anybody (but me) remember Blackmail, Shadow Of A Doubt, or Frenzy?
These soft efforts pale next to what I consider his top four. The Lady
Vanishes takes place on a train, revolving around a terrific set-piece in
which an older woman dissapears. Psycho follows a nice young fella who
killed his mudda and went crazy. Rear Window lets us peep on all those
crazy neighbors who leave their curtains drawn during the day AND night.
And Vertigo is...something more. It is one of the most haunting, goreously
photographed, involving, beautiful films ever commited to screen. It is his
least overtly entertaining, yet most rigorously thought provoking. And it
grows greater and greater with every viewing. Upon first observations, one
can remain unimpressed by his slow pacing, overdramatic music, strange
plot, stereotypical characters. Yet, the more and more I see it, the more I
love it, and understand what Hitchcock was thinking. I could easily write
pages, disecting every few minutes, pointing out loose ends -- what
happened to Midge?, why was Madeleine in that window? -- and anybody who
wants to hear
 about this, can subscribe (details below), for I soon plan to gather these
ideas into an entire essay. But, as these thoughts have not yet been
arranged, polished, perfected, let me say that it remains a mystery why it
was so thorougly thrashed upon its initial release, in 1952. (This was,
coincidentally, the same year that Sight & Sound conducted its first poll
of the ten greatest films of all time. Citizen Kane had been seen so little
that it was nowhere in sight -- or sound -- but by 1962, it was at #1,
where it has been ever since). I more understand why it hit high spots such
as #7 in '82, #4 on the critic's list in '92, and #6 on the director's list
in '92. It is ravishing, entertaining, and out of place in Hitchcock's
repertoire. It has inspired directors from Steven Speilberg to Tim Burton
(for particulars see Jaws and Batman). It is one of the greatest films ever
made. You can lump The Lady Vanishes, Psycho, and Rear Window into the same
category -- Shadow Of A Doubt goes there too, although it doesn't really
live up to the other's complete mastery. They are entertaining peices, well
arranged and easy to swallow. The first three are masterpieces, and
individually there is much to say -- which will eventually be said. But
after so thoroughly discussing his greatest masterpeice, I find that its
somewhat easier just to state that they are great films, worth a look. They
just don't inspire the same reactions -- they're easier to deal with. To
quote the man himself, to me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a
piece of cake.
- Max Solovitch Scheinin
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an regular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"We all go a little mad sometimes."
- Anthony Perkins @ the Bates motel.
