Title
Review for Claire of the Moon (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 5.0 out of 10 (D+, *1/2 out of ****) 
Date Released:  varies (limited distribution)
Running Length:  1:47
Rated:  NR (Nudity, sex, language, mature themes)
     Claire Jabrowski (Trisha Todd) is a California author who has
reached recognition based on titles like LIFE CAN RUIN YOUR HAIR.  To
write her next book, she has decided to spend some time at an
all-female Pacific Coast writers' retreat.  She arrives there to meet
her roommate, Dr. Noel Benedict (Karen Trumbo), the author of the
infamous THE NAKED TRUTH and an avowed lesbian.  Noel and Claire are as
different from each other as two women can be, and that's the cause of
inevitable friction.  Where Noel is neat, orderly, non-smoking, and
averse to casual relationships, Claire is the exact opposite.  Yet as
the story progresses, the two find themselves inexplicably drawn to
each other.
     In the past few years, a number of films portraying the gay
community and culture in a positive light have come out (the most
controversial of which has to be Gregg Araki's THE LIVING END).  Most
of these, however, have explored male relationships.  CLAIRE OF THE
MOON is one of the few movies to cross over and present the issues from
the female perspective.
     The film has its interesting points, but almost all are realized
on an intellectual and not an emotional level.  There's a great deal of
academic discussion on the differences between heterosexual and
homosexual relationships, the nature of intimacy, and why there is so
much difficulty communicating in modern society.  While the viewer may
not always agree with the conclusions of the characters, it's
impossible to deny that the reasoning is well thought-out and the
topics are certainly worth investigation.
     There's another interesting feature about CLAIRE OF THE MOON that
may make some male viewers squirm a little.  Men are not treated
particularly well in this film, and writer/director Nicole Conn makes
no apologies for this.  They are portrayed as little more than sex
objects--bodies to satiate Claire's hunger.  Turnabout, after all, is
fair play.  How many times have women fit this role in male-oriented
movies?
     CLAIRE OF THE MOON ultimately fails because it does a poor job of
entertaining.  While the film undoubtedly attempts to pique the
intellect, it is, above all else, a love story and, as such, should
rouse the emotions as well.  For a number of reasons, it proves
entirely unable to do so.
     First and foremost is the amateurish quality of the screenplay.
The basic story is old, formula-riddled, and predictable (the only
difference being that the lovers are two women rather than a man and a
women).  On top of that, the dialogue is unbelievably stilted.  People
talk like they're reading from an intellectual treatise.  I know a lot
of people with excellent vocabularies and they don't talk anything like
the characters in CLAIRE OF THE MOON.
     The acting isn't going to win any awards either.  At their best
moments, the principles are merely adequate.  Their characters lack
depth, more often acting as mouthpieces for a philosophy than as the
unique people they're supposed to be.  Worse still are the five or six
supporting performers who consistently go annoyingly over-the-top.  One
character in particular (Caren Graham's Tara O'Hara) is so awful--a
walking cliche with a terrible Southern accent--that the film is
painful to watch when she's on-screen.
     Finally, the Nicole Conn's direction isn't much better than her
writing.  She has a lot of mellow scenery shots with Claire in
reflective poses that look like they belong on the cover of romance
novels.  Accompanied by a "dreamy" score, these moments are almost
comically absurd.  Then there are the two fantasy sequences, which look
and sound like poorly-conceived music videos.
     There can't be many copies of this film, because the one that I
saw (on the second day of release) was not in good condition, an
indication that the print has been shipped from city-to-city.  Other
copies across the country (however many there are) aren't likely to be
in better condition.  This is a minor quibble, but it is noticeable,
especially at the beginning.
     While it's possible to applaud the motives of CLAIRE OF THE MOON,
as well as its message, the project is simply not a strong enough movie
to recommend.  This is a good example of a small, independent film that
boasts neither high production values nor good acting.  It is a
single-issue picture that's too flawed to be given the serious
attention the subject warrants.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Lesbianism examined in the same hushed and reverential tones
reserved for a terminal illness. Potentially interesting idea made stagy
and boring.
CLAIRE OF THE MOON is such an impossibly serious and sober movie that I was
waiting for someone to sneeze, just to break the ice. It's a perfect
example of what my wife calls an S.F.E. movie, where S.F.E. means So
F***ing Earnest. Movies like this need wit and brashness to be absorbing.
CLAIRE is one strained speech after another, written delivered with all of
the energy and spontenaity of a DMV clerk.
CLAIRE takes two women, Claire and Noel, both writers, and throws them
together in the same cabin at a women-only writer's retreat. Claire wrights
light comedy, while Noel is a scholarly authority on porn and sexual
behavior. Obviously, the two of them are going to have plenty to talk
about, and for the entire one hundred and twelve insufferable minutes of
this movie, that's all they do: talk.
The movie sets up its (microscopic) plot with beat-a-dead-horse-into-glue
obviousness. The evening talks at the camp are chaired by a motherly type
named Maggie, a self-professed lesbian, and when Noel owns up to also being
a lesbian, Claire looks like she's been hit with a sockful of wet sand. The
movie then quickly degenerates into lots of scenes where Noel Glances At
Claire With Significance, and Claire Looks Out Over The Water Reflectively.
(Ugh!) The most amazing thing about the movie is how people so intelligent
can talk so much and yet get so little through their thick heads.
All of this, of course, leads up to a scene of complete inevitability:
Claire and Noel, in a scene that should have come an hour earlier, because
then the movie ends without even the benefit of reflection about what's
just happened. We never get a hint about how any of this has changed
anyone, only how they felt about things that didn't even happen yet.
The problem with CLAIRE... is not lesbianism as such, but the leaden way
it's handled. Why is it that any "serious" (a better word would be adult or
at least thoughtful) examination of sex in a movie almost always winds up
producing a movie that's unwatchably boring? The way this movie deals with
lesbianism, we might as well be watching an overheated docudrama about
AIDS.
Many other movies have used the same subject in ways that are a thousand
times better -- more engaging, more creative, more intellectually and
artistically interesting. Look at John Sayles' LIANNA, or the interesting
and little-seen DESERT BLOOM; both of them have more life and vibrancy than
CLAIRE. What this movie needed was a good swift kick in the pants.
