Title
Review for Adventures of Baron Munchausen, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Director: Terry Gilliam
Producer: Thomas Schuhly
Screenplay: Terry Gilliam, Charles McKeown
Principal cast: John Neville, Sarah Polley, Eric Idle, Jonathan Pryce,
                Valentina Cortese, Uma Thurman, Oliver Reed, Bill Paterson,
                Alison Steadman
Production Company: Prominent Features/Laura Film
Released by: Columbia Pictures
     This highly publicized movie (set for national release beginning Friday,
March 10) largely lives up to the publicity preceding its release.  The story
deals with Baron Munchausen, one of the most famous liars ("storytellers") in
history, and his fantastic exploits.  The story begins in an unspecified
European city in the late 18th century.  The city is under siege by the Turks,
and is in grave danger of falling.  A traveling theater company is performing
the story of the adventures of Baron Munchausen in the city, when their
performance is interrupted by an old man claiming to be the real Baron
Munchausen.
     The real Baron proceeds to tell his stories, and they are fantastic
indeed.  As the film progresses, the Baron has one adventure after another.  He
wins a treasure in a bet with a Sultan (using the super-powers of his
companions); he goes for a ride on two cannonballs; he goes to the moon on a
hot-air balloon (made exclusively from women's lingerie); he falls into a
volcano, meets Vulcan the god of war, romances his wife (Venus, the god of
love), etc.  These adventures take place at a very fast pace.
     The film is laced with the great sense of humor (warped?) that
characterized the other films of Director Terry Gilliam (TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL).
Some examples: when the Baron first encounters Vulcan the god of war (played by
Oliver Reed in an excellent performance), he is having labor troubles with his
workers, and is negotiating a "work contract" with them.  Vulcan, as portrayed
by Reed, comes across sounding and acting like a harassed British shop
supervisor (the humor is subtle, but very good).  Robin Williams appears as the
King of the Moon, in a manic performance that is -- surprise -- very funny
(Robin Williams is one comedian I generally can't stand.  For me to actually
like his performance is most unusual!).  Oh yes, the King and Queen of the Moon
have detachable heads, which fly around independent of their bodies (which are
off doing "bodily functions").
     On a deeper level, the film deals with the issues of fantasy vs. reality,
truth and fiction, life and death, youth and old age.  Throughout the film the
Baron is pursued by a ghoul-like figure that represents death.  These issues
are dealt with in a layered fashion, and are illustrated to varying degrees in
the fantastic exploits of the Baron.
     From a non-intellectual viewpoint, the film is simply loads of fun.  You
don't need to intellectualize, just sit back and enjoy the Baron's utterly
fantastic adventures!  Stylistically and thematically, the film is closer to
TIME BANDITS than it is to BRAZIL.  It is fairly safe to say that most fans of
either film (TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL) will like THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN.
     Overall evaluation: excellent; worth seeing.
Reviewer: Thomas E. Billings; Department of Statistics
          University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact: teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU

Author
Craig Good
     THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN caps Terry Gilliam's trilogy begun with
TIME BANDITS (the escape of the boy) and BRAZIL (the escape of the man).  The
Baron represents, among other things, the escape of the old man.  This film is
so packed with images and ideas that I hardly know where to begin.
     The story is set in the late 17th Century, the dawn of the "Age of
Reason."  A city is under attack by the Turks, and a small troupe of actors is
performing "The Adventures of Baron Munchausen" -- who is the protagonist of
European legends and folk tales.  An old man enters the shelled-out theatre and
proclaims himself the *real* Baron Munchausen.  No one believes him except for
a young girl.
     The Baron starts to tell his story, and the line between fact and fiction
stretches to the breaking point.  He and the girl embark on a bizarre quest to
re-unite the amazing Baron with his equally amazing servants: the strongest man
in the world, the fastest man in the world, a dwarf with amazing hearing and
the ability to create gale-force winds from his lungs, and a marksman capable
of seeing -- and hitting -- a bulls-eye from half way around the world.
     The sheer scale and audacity of MUNCHAUSEN is tremendous.  Gilliam has the
amazing ability to make metaphors, legends and gods literally walk and talk.
Any one of a dozen sequences from this film could have been the climax of any
ordinary movie and still been enough to make it a good one.  Gilliam has
combined a child's sensibility, thousands of years of myth, and his own
formidable genius and vision into a truly fantastic film.  His ability to pack
the frame with new ideas and minute details to build a consistent and wonderful
world was very evident in BRAZIL, but now with MUNCHAUSEN he has eclipsed
himself.
     The imagination at work here makes THE WIZARD OF OZ seem cautious and
PINNOCHIO appear plausible.  There are many levels to this film, but I think
that THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN is primarily the story of romance
versus reason, of imagination versus science, and of fantasy versus fact.  And
romance, imagination and fantasy win triumphantly.
     If this isn't the best movie of 1989 it will have been a very, very good
year indeed.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Once again the ever-so-slightly
     exaggerated adventures of the great Baron are told.  Terry
     Gilliam brings many of the great images of the Munchausen
     stories to the screen but the story that ties them together
     has problems.  Rating: high +1.
     THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN is purported to be the final
installment of a "trilogy" of films directed by Terry Gilliam, the animator
for the "Monty Python" television series.  And while the first two, TIME
BANDITS and BRAZIL, were based on original screenplays, BARON MUNCHAUSEN is
an adaptation of the famous adventures which are for Europe sort of what the
Oz stories are for the United States.  The earliest Munchausen stories were
first published in 1785.  Since then the tall tales have taken many forms.
Many Americans first became aware of the Baron through NBC's 1933 radio
program THE JACK PEARL SHOW, in which Pearl played the Baron.  There have
been at least two previous film versions, one from Germany in 1943 with Hans
Albers as the Baron and one from Czechoslovakia in 1961 with Milos Kopecky.
The latter used to show up on New York television and did some very
imaginative combining of live actors and animation.  Terry Gilliam's version
is the latest version, and like the 1961 and probably the 1943 versions,
visually it owes very much to one of the great book illustrators of all
time, Gustave Dore.
     The story of Gilliam's film is not taken from the book but rather is a
tying together of the more imaginative scenes that Dore illustrated but in
what is at times a more rapid-fire pace.  And only "at times," because the
pacing of BARON MUNCHAUSEN is extremely uneven.  As in TIME BANDITS, Gilliam
has little idea of which of his sequences are really entertaining and which
are simply dull.  More than once the viewer feels like telling Gilliam that
he has made his point, is wasting precious screen time on an idea that has
no more to offer and should get on with things.  Then as often as not the
next scene is a gem.
     The story has a small theatre company putting on their production of
"The Adventures of Baron Munchausen" in a city besieged by the Ottoman
Turks.  As the pallid play proceeds who should arrive but the Baron himself
to give his own account of his adventures.  The story is difficult to relate
from there, not just because it is hard to tell what is fantasy and what is
reality, but because the script actually contradicts itself as to what is
its actual story line versus story-within-story.  Hence the story line does
not bear close examination.  Somewhere in all this is the Baron's bet with a
sultan and a trip to the moon with Robin Williams playing a very strange
moon man.  There is a visit to Vulcan's forge, and another to the belly of a
huge fish.  Finally there is a stupendous battle between the Ottoman Turks
and the Baron's friends, who amount to virtual super-heroes.
     Like the 1961 version, this film is a treat more for the eye than for
the mind.  Scenes of the city under siege are done with tremendous
historical realism.  Some scenes of fantasy are done with great imagination.
Then just when the proper mood is established, Gilliam will throw in an
anachronistic reference and get a chuckle from the audience at the expense
of the mood.  THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN is a film that when it is
good is very, very good, and when it is bad, it can be quite bad.  It is a
tough film to rate overall, but probably deserves a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale--better than TIME BANDITS, not as good as BRAZIL.
