Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    Midway through FORREST GUMP, I realized how much I loved watching 
Tom Hanks act.  This, for all the dazzling array of special effects 
(that are starting to look dated every time I watch this), is a movie 
driven by the wondrous Hanks, who gives perhaps the most indelible 
American performance in the last 20 years.  I honestly don't know if 
there is a better actor alive than Tom Hanks.  Hanks is destined to be 
mocked more than Marlon Brando's creation of Vito Corleone for THE 
GODFATHER, because his performance is so good.  It is impossible to say 
what it feels like to watch Tom Hanks on screen, using every bit of his 
immense talent to bring a character to life, to catch the sympathy of 
the audience with just one line, one mannerism, one something, to make 
us feel.  As Andrew Beckett in PHILADELPHIA, Jim Lovell in APOLLO 13, 
and Capt. Miller in SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, Hanks was able to do the exact 
same thing: give commanding performances that dominate the movie.
That said, the movie is a winner by all standards.  The plot is 
relatively simple: an Alabama man named Forrest Gump (Hanks), who has an 
IQ of 75 (below normal), goes through life, somehow meeting great 
people, and acheiving great things.  The movie is dominated by his love 
for Jenny (Wright), who takes a different turn than he does, but winds 
up in the same place.  Along the way, he meets lifelong friends that he 
manages to turn around.
FORREST GUMP was able to acheive all of its magic through great 
effects, although they are starting to wear thin.  What doesn't wear 
thin are the simply marvelous performances.  Gary Sinise, in one of the 
most beautifully constructed supporting roles in history, gives an 
astounding, career-making performance as Lt. Dan, one of Forrest's 
closest friends.  Sinise probably has the most difficult role in the 
film, but manages to make it his own through a powerful performance 
which contains the frustrations of every veteran on the face of the 
Earth.  Robin Wright, whose role is also more difficult than Hanks', is 
also great as Jenny, the girl of Forrest's dreams.  Her performance is 
that of lost innocence, of someone who missed the boat early on, and 
never got back on track until late.  Sally Field also shows up for a 
fine turn as Forrest's mother. 
The one immense strength of FORREST GUMP is its inflappable star.  I 
don't understand how Tom Hanks is so good: he just is.  Hanks' role is 
not the most difficult.  However, it is a lot harder than it looks.  
Hanks adds so much more to the character than isn't there.  The 
mannerisms, the certain tendencies, and the flawless portrayal of a man 
who is so simple than he could be mistaken for dumb.  Hanks turns a role 
that isn't so difficult, and does the absolute best he can with it, 
turning it into an indelible performance worth seeing time and again.  
There is no reason why I wouldn't see Tom Hanks act.
FORREST GUMP does fall when it comes to its message.  There are 
moments of absolute hilarity and purely bad filmmaking, at times (when 
Forrest learns how to run...eegh').  The film also has a tendency to 
really make fun of the stupid, which is a shame.  More enigmatic is the 
film's political message.  A film about so many events must have a 
message.  If there is one, its that goodness will prevail, but much of 
the film is awfully contrived, like the ridiculous 'running around 
the country' episode.   The film is not for radicalism, but neither 
for the 50's ideals.  It wants to fall in the middle, but it can't.
As a piece of entertainment, however, FORREST GUMP is unbeatable.  A 
mulitple Oscar-winner, it is arguable whether or not is should have 
beaten PULP FICTION, but no one can deny its emotional thump, especially 
towards the end.  A tour-de-force not for director Zemeckis, who made a 
great but not superb film, but for Hanks, who delivers the decade's most 
unforgettable performance.  Everything in this movie emanates from Tom 
Hanks, and there's nothing wrong with that.  Hanks' performance and 
character are so much a part of American film, that FORREST GUMP works 
better as a cultural phenomenon than as a movie.  No matter.  It's still 
a great film, and an opportunity to see this generation's Jimmy Stewart 
in fine form.  One of the essential Tom Hanks movies, and that says a 
lot.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Since I began reviewing films, no film has left me as stumped as
FORREST GUMP.  While I was watching, I was carried away, delighted by
an original and stunningly executed experience.  But almost as soon as
the closing credits started to roll, I began to feel that something
just wasn't working.  FORREST GUMP is, by turns, hilarious, overly
precious, touching and disturbingly simplistic.  So the question
becomes, which FORREST GUMP do I review:  the in-the-theater
experience, or the in-the-car experience?  The undeniably entertaining
crowd-pleaser or the pre-digested primer in pop philosophy?  Naturally,
I found my answer somewhere in the middle.
     Tom Hanks plays the title character, an Alabama naif with an IQ of
75 but a heart of gold.  His mother (Sally Field) makes sure he
maintains his dignity by going to school with the other kids, but it is
soon clear that Forrest is not like everyone else in more ways than
one.  His amazing speed lands him a scholarship at the University of
Alabama, where he is an All-American kick returner.  He joins the Army,
befriends a fellow enlisted man (Mykelti Williamson), and becomes a war
hero in Vietnam for saving his platoon leader (Gary Sinise).  And just
to top things off, he becomes an international ping-pong sensation.
Yet through all Forrest's experiences, one thing remains foremost in
his mind:  his love for childhood sweetheart Jenny Curran (Robin
Wright).
     There is little question that the craft of FORREST GUMP is a
wonder to behold.  The digital wizards at ILM have triumphed again with
the sequences placing Forrest in footage with Presidents Kennedy,
Johnson and Nixon, as well as George Wallace and John Lennon.  Perhaps
even more impressive are the shots in which Gary Sinise is made to
appear a double amputee.  Yet for all the notice- grabbing visuals, it
was the sound that blew me away.  One Vietnam battle scene will shock
you out of your seat, and the sound of a hurricane is equally
stunning.  This is not say that director Robert Zemeckis rests on his
technical support.  Several of his shots are truly beautiful:  a
wedding overlooking water; a mountain reflected in a lake; and my
favorite, a subtle moment when Jenny tells Forrest "You don't know what
love is," as the neon sign of a strip club called "Love's" appears
slightly out-of-focus in the background.  FORREST GUMP never fails to
be a feast for the senses.
     It's also frequently a feast for the funny bone, but unfortunately
Zemeckis succumbs to the same tendency that sometimes hampered WHO
FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?, namely a desire to throw in too many winking
cultural asides.  The biggest laughs are purely character moments, such
as Forrest discovering his speed while blowing apart his leg braces, or
the rambling shrimp-based menu delivered by Forrest's Army buddy
Bubba.  But Zemeckis and scripter Eric Roth feel the need to make
Forrest responsible for Elvis Presley's pelvic gyrations, the Watergate
bust and the "Have a Nice Day" smiley face.  At a certain point, it's
just overkill, and it detracts from the whimsical tone with its
heavy-elbowed nudges.
     Tom Hanks' performance as Forrest is problematic.  While he avoids
most of the one-note traps of Dustin Hoffman in RAIN MAN, he is still
far too mannered, particularly when compared to the dynamic
naturalistic performances of co-stars Robin Wright and Gary Sinise.
Wright delivers a wrenching performance worthy of high praise, and
Sinise may have found the role which makes him a household name (if THE
STAND didn't already do so).  Hanks may garner yet another Academy
Award nomination, but he was better in a comparable role in BIG, and
for my money even better in his much criticized performance in
PHILADELPHIA.
     My biggest problem with FORREST GUMP is that in its attempt to
re-construct America's turbulent last thirty years, it has created a
philosphical monster.  GUMP has most often been compared to 1979's
BEING THERE, but there is a critical difference.  Jerzy Kozinski
created a biting satire of how the platitudes of a dim-witted man
became wisdom in a sound-bite society.  There is no such distance in
FORREST GUMP; Forrest's bon mots *are* the film's philosophy, and as
such they seem like Truth McNuggets.  GUMP may be a paean to an
innocence lost, but it is also troublingly anti-intellectual, history
filtered through Robert Fulghum.  These will not be the concerns of the
average movie-goer, I'm certain.  They will be more interested in the
pure entertainment value of Forrest Gump's picaresque journey through
life, and the film's emotion.  GUMP will be many things to many
people.  To me, it was just another good but flawed movie.

Author
Jon Ridge
CAST:  Tom Hanks, Sally Field, Robin Wright, Gary Sinise, Mykelti Williamson
DIRECTOR:  Robert Zemeckis
SCREENPLAY:  Eric Roth
CINEMATOGRAPHY:  Don Burgess  /  VISUAL EFFECTS:  Ken Ralston
RUNNING TIME:  2:19
RELEASE  --  July 6, 1994
     "We all do things sometimes that, well ... just don't make sense."
     For all its broad scope, all its twenty years of American History,
FORREST GUMP tells a simple story of two people who can never be
together.  Through the eyes of the title character, the film quantum
leaps over a number of important events (wars, and such), but never
loses sight of what's most important.  Life unfolds comfortably here;
what our hero does may not make sense ... but it sure is noble.
     Tom Hanks (outdoing anything he's done to date) portrays Forrest,
a simpleton whose IQ may not meet basic educational norm, but whose
heart is as big as life itself.  As a young boy, Forrest faced
persecution from others not as understanding of his physical handicap
as mama (Sally Field).  Young boys and girls wouldn't let him sit next
to them on the school bus; they threw rocks at him, insulted him.  To
make life a bit more morally miserable, mama had to tell people things
about daddy that didn't seem quite right, and do things with men that
made no sense to Forrest.  But it was all for the benefit of her boy,
whom she would stop at nothing to get "the same opportunity as everyone
else" for.  Her loving devotion gave Forrest enough inspiration to, one
sunny afternoon, break away form the chains holding him back and
discover in himself an inner strength, something that no one else had so
much of--speed.
     Not all little children were unkind.  One girl accepted him for
who he was, and showed friendship still.  The daughter of an abusive
father, Jenny Curran understood with total clarity of young, open mind
the pain that Forrest was going through, perhaps in a different
respect, and with him sought refuge from home life.  As narrated by the
older Gump:  "She was my most special friend.  My only friend."  The
two children never separated for more than a second than need be and,
as we watch them grow older, we see that nothing between them changed.
     As high school ends, and Forrest enters college on sole account of
his running ability on the football field, he and Jenny are forced to
split up.  That's not an easy thing, especially when, during one of
many frequent visits to her all-girl college, Forrest sees her in the
midst of front-seat sex.  He doesn't know much about anything, and
understands even less why Jenny hasn't (apparently) kept him in her
heart as he has kept her.  It's one of many life, learning, experiences
that Forrest encounters throughout the film--others being Presidential
visits with the likes of Kennedy and Nixon, Vietnam, professional
shrimping, world-class ping pong championships.  But above all else,
the one experience that proves most difficult to endure is life without
Jenny.
     It's a nifty premise.  Forrest Gump--a man less smart than anyone
else around, finding more success and good fortune in life than anyone
else around.  The film would seem to say that if one has a good heart,
nothing can go wrong, nothing bad can happen.  Nothing, except the one
thing dearest to a heart.  And that's understandable for a man like
Forrest Gump; he may be an idiot, but he knows more about love from
silently loving one girl all his life than most men find loving
hundreds of women.  That one girl for Forrest can't (or won't) give him
what would mean more to him than a thousand wars, a thousand visits to
the White House--romantic love.  He would never harm her, never break
her heart, and always keep her safe.  It's extremely ironic, then, as
in a scene in which Forrest has just rescued her from a group of
perverts in a strip-tease, that she demands him leave her be:  "I can't
help it.  I love you."  She says, "You don't know what love is" and yet
he knows more about it than she does.  It's truly amazing how a person
can know someone else all their life, and never *really* know them at
all.  Just as he doesn't understand what love is (as far as Jenny
thinks), he doesn't understand to stop loving her, either.  The feeling
he has for Jenny is probably the only true, human emotion Forrest has
ever known, and the best thing for her even as she cannot reasonably
accept it.
     That's what FORREST GUMP is all about--relationships.  Aside from
Jenny, Forrest meets a man as intellectually down as himself named
Bubba, whose only goal in life is to eat and sell as much shrimp as
humanly possible.  In the army, Forrest meets and serves under
Lieutenant Dan Taylor, the man whose life Forrest saves, but whose
dignity Forrest "cheats" away.  These are friendships we care about,
with people we care about; people Forrest would do anything for, never
disobey, and always be loyal to.  But like Jenny, they don't always
know how to handle it; a scene with Forrest and Lt. Dan in a hospital,
after the Lieutenant's legs have been amputated, displays the madness
and rage of man whose life has been morally diminished because of the
bravery of another:  "Every man has a destiny in life, and you cheated
mine away from me."  Taylor is a complicated character--a man whose
entire life has been garnered to fight and cease to be in war, as did
every one of his ancestors in every American war; as Forrest narrates
of the first time he met Taylor:  "I guess you could say he had a lot
to live up to."  Sitting on the floor, as we witness one of the film's
remarkable special effects, the frustration of man dead inside is made
audible:  "What am I going to do now?"
     Forrest strongly effects the lives of several major and minor
historical figures, and those closest him.  Returning home from war,
Forrest becomes a rich man from ping pong advertisements and uses the
money to keep the promise he made his friend in Vietnam; the friend who
died there in his arms.  Forrest takes his riches and purchases a
shrimping boat, having little success at first, but major triumph in
the end.  From that springs even greater financial well-being, giving
him the opportunity to do something good for Bubba's family, even
though Bubba is gone, and for other places he visited along the way.
His partner in the shrimping business, also keeping a promise to a
friend, is Lt.  Dan who, through Forrest's belief in The Almighty and
the chance at a new life given him, finds spiritual meaning in the
world and the strength to carry on.  Just to see all this happen to her
son is the greatest success of all for Forrest's mother who, on her
death-bed, tells him with all honesty, "I did the best I could."
     Tremendously entertaining, FORREST GUMP brings with it deep and
heartfelt emotion.  The film is one of the best examples I can bring to
mind of artists who believe in telling a good story, and trust in the
power of it.  Forrest is a good, honest individual to whom good things
seem to come naturally.  But Director Robert Zemeckis--working with a
script by Eric Roth--doesn't rely on the fact that Forrest is mentally
'slow', or even want you to care for him merely because he is "not a
smart man."  You get the feeling that even if the character were
presented as normal (total contradiction to the novel on which this
picture is based), his actions would still warrant our trust and
dedication.  Forrest does whatever people tell him to do; in the
Army, a soldier tells him to turn off the television, and he does so
without question; Lt. Dan orders him run to the store and fetch a fresh
bottle of wine, and he instantly gets up to go.  And the best instance
of Forrest's obedience comes when Jenny is just about to leave him
(again), and he gives her the Medal of Honor he received for saving so
many lives in Vietnam; she refuses to take it from him but, as he
explains, he only got it for doing what she told him to do--what he
does best.  The scene ends just like this: "Why are you so good to
me?"  "... You're my girl."  Jenny--"I'll always be your girl."  A
nice, subtly moving moment between two people who care for each other
more than words could ever say.  That's what this movie incorporates
better than any other this critic has seen thus far in 1994--quiet
moments that endear into the heart and mind.  Some- thing not likely to
be forgotten any time soon after the film has made peace with itself,
or ever.  This is superb work from Director Zemeckis, most assuredly
the very best accomplishment of his career.
     Casting of the lead must have proven difficult task.  What actor
alive could play a man like Forrest Gump, bring out his inner strength,
beauty and struggle without letting the audience think he isn't taking
any of it serious?  Tom Hanks is probably not the first name that came
to mind.  But he puts a completely new spin on his talent here, while
at the same time putting forth the best performance of his career.
With Hanks as our guide, we see Forrest's pain, his frustration and
terror, his sadness and doubt, without actually seeing any of it at
all.  What's on the surface is the mostly blank-faced, open-eyed
sincerity of, not a retarded man, but a man who would have it all if
only God had permitted his intelligence to rise above.  What's
underneath all that is a strong spirit with more love to give, more
contributions for his world to make, than he or anyone else knows what
to do with.  An actor who can put that on the screen, non-judgmentally
and without satire, after it's all said and done making the viewer
agree without a doubt that Forrest deserved his, good fortune, is going
way above and beyond his duties as actor.  Hanks turns out to be the
key.  His performance is breathtakingly simplistic, but not simple; his
mannerisms, intonation, annunciation are all perfect.  Hanks' work is
not just good ... it's ethereal.
     As the love of his life, Robin Wright makes for a constant delight
in Jenny.  A woman who should probably open her heart to Forrest more
than she does but cannot because the heart she has is distraught, Jenny
wants to be a part of life, experience it for whatever good or bad it
will bring.  She and Forrest share a complicated relationship; he
begins life with total back-hold and ultimately find freedom of being,
while Jenny starts out with freedom but winds up immersed in
self-intoxication, prisoner to the demons inside.  What life has to
offer her is initial good followed by lack of control (drug abuse,
abuse from men): In a disturbing scene, Jenny walks out onto an
apartment ledge, high on drugs, contemplating suicide, the lyric "I
can't change" leading her along.  Over the course of two turbulent
decades, this emotionally scarred young woman proves willing to delve
so deeply into "expanding her mind" because of pain suffered her during
a mother-less childhood--as the film would seem to say during a
quietly moving scene in which Jenny throws rocks at the deteriorated
house she once called home.  When she falls to the ground in tears, you
realize just how lost this person is.  And yet, for all that complexion
Jenny remains somewhat of an enigma.  She cares for this man Forrest,
but does she *love* him?  Time apart passed by like a nightmare, and
once it is ended, the 80s are set into motion and she comes to him one
last time, her intentions are unclear.  Despite this lack of full
substance, Wright delivers a performance of delicacy and the utmost
care; you want Jenny and Forrest to come together, somehow, and that it
can never be is heartbreaking.  Why the underrated, talented, beautiful
Wright isn't working more is a mystery.
     Rounding out the flawless cast is Mykelti Williamson as Bubba,
Sally Field as Forrest's mother and (most notably) Gary Sinise.  Sinise
brings power and fury to the film just when it's needed, giving an
already tremendous motion picture its edge in the best performance of
his career.  Michael Humphreys effortlessly establishes the innocence
of the film, and little Hanna R. Hall is just the sweet "angel" she
needs to be.
     What surprised me most of all about FORREST GUMP is that, as easy
as it would have been to do, it does not exploit a war.  During the
brief appearance of it on screen, Vietnam is presented with more
authenticity than most films that've dealt with it directly.  The
soundtrack, an eclectic blend of songs from days gone by, is not here
to create anything the film doesn't already have.  The music
effectively enhances the mood.  And Alan Silvestri's score softly
provides a feeling of nostalgia, so that just as Forrest is narrating
the events of his life there is an extra level of poignance.
     1994 is seven months deep, and not too late to begin serving up
its crop of best pictures.  FORREST GUMP is one of them.  It has a
sense of being and, more importantly, time and place; an uplifting epic
of the human spirit about being all that you can be.  Its people, I
was happy to meet ... and awfully sad to say goodbye to.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Robert Zemeckis
Written by Eric Roth, based on the novel by Winston Groom
Cast Tom Hanks, Sally Field, Gary Sinese, Mykelti Williamson, and
     Robin Wright
MPAA Rating     "PG-13" (but *filled* with adult references, including
                         drug use, sexual references, and profanity)
Running Time    140 minutes
     FORREST GUMP is a supremely entertaining triptych of American
history, circa 1950 through 1980, as seen through the eyes of the
slow-witted title character.  From racial integration to Watergate,
there stands Gump (Hanks).  He never knows exactly what's going on, but
his big heart and good intentions eventually make him a millionaire.
He even meets three presidents, courtesy of ILM's gee-whiz special
effects that place Tom Hanks in the middle of historical footage.
     Think BEING THERE meets ZELIG as THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GUMP.
     Forrest Gump, IQ of 75, resident of rural Alabama, was born into
braces.  Leg braces, that is.  As the story opens, Forrest is being
fitted to fix a back that's "as crooked as a politician." But Gump runs
right out of those braces and once he starts running, he never stops.
He runs through college on a football scholarship. He runs through
Vietnam and is wounded in action.  He even runs across country to
become a folk hero.
     The script, by Eric Roth from the Winston Groom novel, places Gump
at the center of nearly every major event of the "baby boomer" era.  He
meets everyone, from Elvis Presley to Richard Nixon (The King to The
Crook?), travels everywhere, and even invents the phrase best
translated as "ka-ka occurs."
     Where the fun comes is from hearing what Gump to has to say about
all these things. His reactions are priceless--in Vietnam, he recalls
"we were always looking for this guy, Charlie"--and add a wealth of
honest humor to a rather humorless period of American history.
     The anchor, the center, the thing-that-holds-this-film-together is
Tom Hanks, giving a command performance in the title role.  He draws
upon that deadpan innocence from BIG and creates a character not too
far-removed from the good-natured hayseeds that Andy Griffith played so
well.
     The small supporting cast includes Robin Wright and Sally Field,
both perfunctory as Forrest's girlfriend and mother, respectively.
Gary Sinese is quite good as Gump's war-buddy and later business
partner.  Best of the rest is Mykelti Williamson, playing a
scene-stealing slow-mover who becomes Forrest's best friend.
     FORREST GUMP *should* be as powerful as all get-out, but, instead,
feels both vaguely empty and slightly sterile.  The lack of emotional
punch is probably due to the title character--who can feel a
rollercoaster of emotions about a character who cannot?
     Nor is FORREST GUMP as gritty as the story suggests. The Vietnam
sequence is harrowing, no duh, but never *quite* crosses the line into
complete believability.  Still, what do you expect from the director of
WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT and BACK TO THE FUTURE?  Coppola he ain't, but
who *other* than Zemeckis could choreograph so many diverse effects in
one film?
     For some, FORREST GUMP shall be the season's most effective (and
only?) tear-jerker.  Others may find themselves less affected,
observing the events the same way as Forrest Gump does: without feeling
much of anything.  But watch out at Oscar time!
NOTE:  Gripes to Paramount Pictures, for including too many key plot
       points in their trailer.  What a shame.

Author
Derek Miner
     As a fan of director Robert Zemeckis, I have eagerly anticipated
his next directorial effort since DEATH BECOMES HER two years ago.
FORREST GUMP lives up to my expectations and surpasses them also.  The
film tells a genuine and moving story about an amazing character.
     FORREST GUMP is the remarkable story of a man (Tom Hanks) who,
despite an IQ somewhere in the area of 70, always seems to achieve
great success.  Forrest's amazing achievements are played out as a
humorous gimmick, but they are also part of his involving life story.
     The story, as told by Forrest himself, opens in his childhood.
Forrest not only is stigmatized by his low intelligence, but he also
must wear leg braces because of a crooked back.  His caring mother
(Sally Field) tries to teach him that despite his problems, he is no
different than everyone else.  Forrest is befriended by a young girl
named Jenny (Robin Wright) who is abused by her father.
     A sequence of events thrusts Forrest into the spotlight.
Literally shattering his leg braces, Forrest finds that he is an
amazing runner, which takes him through college as a football player.
Soon after, he enlists in the military, and is sent to Veitnam.  In
Veitnam, he meets a young black man named Bubba (Mykleti Williamson),
whose goal in life is to be a shrimp boat captain.  He also meets
Captain Dan (Gary Sinise), who eventually becomes legless through a war
injury.
     The three characters of Jenny, Bubba, and Captain Dan figure the
most in Forrest's life direction.  But throughout everything, the
inborn desire to do right and his love for Jenny are Forrest's
motivation.  Beyond Veitnam, there's more to Forrest's adventures, but
to reveal more would ruin the experience of watching the event's of his
life unfold in front of your eyes.  To experience such an emotional and
involving story is special.
     At the heart of FORREST GUMP are a lot of strong performances.
Tom Hanks plays Forrest as a friendly sort who you can appreciate,
rather than pity, for his innocence because it makes him more of a good
person than others with full mental capability.  Gary Sinise provides
some emotional shift in the film as Captain Dan, who comes out of
Vietnam bitter for having lost his limbs rather than his life.  Mykleti
Williamson's short but important role as Bubba, who is similar to
Forrest, is perfect in its simplicity.  One can see how Bubba and
Forrest latch on to one another, influencing Forrest's direction in
life.
     At first, FORREST GUMP doesn't appear to be the type of film
director Zemeckis (of BACK TO THE FUTURE fame) would tackle, but on
close inspection, it remains consistent with his previous work.  In
almost all his films, Zemeckis recreated a period of time, from
February 1964 in I WANNA HOLD YOUR HAND, his first film, to 1955 in
BACK TO THE FUTURE and even the late 70s in DEATH BECOMES HER.  In
FORREST GUMP, an entire lifetime is covered, from the early 50s to the
early 80s.  In between, the character of Forrest is convincingly
interwoven into old news and television footage.
     It also seems that Zemeckis had an urge to "grow up," so to speak,
like colleague Steven Spielberg did with SCHINDLER'S LIST.  The humor
and pathos in Forrest's life are well-balanced and create a story that
the audience can sympathize and identify with.  Unlike Zemeckis'
previous work in broader comedy, FORREST GUMP tells an intimate story
on an epic scale.  Also contrary to previous Zemeckis spectacles,
special effects are used subtly, most notably to make Gary Sinise
appear legless.
     FORREST GUMP is not a perfect film nor is it one-of-a-kind.  But
it is near perfect and not easily equaled.  It is instead special,
accomplishing an emotional link that many films try, and fail, to
attain.  FORREST GUMP is a film that entertains yet makes us think, not
by forcing the audience to keep up, but by letting us see the world we
know through someone else's eyes, the eyes of Forrest Gump.
- Derek Miner (ind00163@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu)

Author
Jon A. Webb
     FORREST GUMP is a highly entertaining film, though one expects
more of a message from it.  Tom Hanks turns in a great performance as a
mentally limited Southerner, who has a hand in practically every
significant cultural event from 1960-1985.
     Gump spends his life being a good person and unwittingly following
the Zen precept of "Eat when you're hungry; sleep when you're tired"
while waiting longingly for the love of a woman he first meets on the
bus on his way to his first day of school.  This takes him very far, to
the White House multiple times, for example, through a number of
remarkable accidents.  Through remarkable special effects technology we
see him meet Presidents, appear on the Dick Cavett show, and so on.
     The movie is as light as a feather, to which it makes reference.
It does not try to draw any lesson from Gump's experience, or really
from our own vast cultural changes in the last generation.  Instead, it
merely affirms the Horatio Alger myth that a good heart and hard work
will take you to the top, and moves on.  This is not a great failing.
     Tom Hanks's performance is perfectly fine.  He's gone a little
further here than in previous roles; he has a peculiar way of talking
(each syllable carefully enunciated, with a Southern accent) to
master.  Perhaps Hanks's somewhat reserved performance keeps this movie
from conveying a more rich message; he is a spectator at the
significant events  he participates in, never getting emotionally
involved; even in his lifelong romance he seems to hold back a little.
     The strongest thing about this film is the script; a remarkable
number of memorable cultural events are changed into things that
happened to Gump, just as the invention of several different
cylindrical plastic objects played a major role in THE HUDSUCKER
PROXY.
     Gary Sinise puts in an acceptable turn as Gump's
destined-for-martyrdom Lieutenant in the Vietnam War.  But he doesn't
submerge himself in the role the way Hanks does.  The use of special
effects technology in his appearance is as remarkable as it is
convincing.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Well, I now have a better appreciation for what the Supreme Court
Justices must feel when they have to write a dissenting opinion in a
8-1 case.  Everyone I know from my friends to Siskel and Ebert have
gone bananas over FORREST GUMP.  I saw it, and I was extremely
disappointed.  From BIG to PHILADELPHIA, I have seen and loved almost
all of Tom Hanks's movies.  In a nutshell, I found this one to be a
long bore.  I checked my watch frequently and got sleepy by the end of
the movie although we went to the 5:30 showing.
     FORREST GUMP is about a boy with a marginal IQ.  He discovers that
he is very athletic however, and he finds to his amazement that this is
important in life.  Forrest lives his life not for this, but for his
friends and for the central character in his life, Jenny, his childhood
sweetheart (Robin Wright).  Sally Field plays an almost minor role as
his mother.  Gary Sinise plays a Vietnam vet.
     The good parts of the movie are all technical.  Gump manages
personally to see numerous presidents and other historical figures.
You will be amazed at how well the special effects work.
     The best, and only good performance in the movie, is Hanks.  His
performance was amazing, but at times it was too mechanical - almost an
automaton.
     Sinise, who was brilliant in OF MICE AND MEN, overacts as a cliche
of a burned out Vietnam vet.  Field is okay.  Wright was miscast as the
girlfriend.  This was the second central figure in the movie, and
Wright was a weak actress who gave no life to the part.
     My main fault was with the director (Robert Zemeckis) and the
screen writers (Winston Groom and Eric Roth).  Why did they have to
make it so long (2:22)?  Why did they feel they had to have Forrest
switch to a totally different amazing feat every 10 minutes?  Why not
develop some aspects more?  It was almost like it was written by a
committee and everybody got to write 10 minutes of the story.
     Most of all, why didn't the director have people that were real
and that you cared about more?  All were way too mechanical for my
taste.  I should point out that almost everyone disagrees with me
although Janet Maslin of the N.  Y.  Times was not impress by the show
so at least I am not totally alone.  There was lots of crying in the
theater hence one of the reasons it is making zillions at the box
office.
     FORREST GUMP is rated PG-13 for violence, a little nudity,
discussions of sexual incest, battle carnage, etc.  I saw many many
grade school kids in the audience.  Frankly, I think that was a
mistake.  Teenagers, fine, but this not a kids (preteen) stuff movie no
matter how cute the previews may look.  I give the film * 1/2 for
technical merit and do not recommend it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A cultural landmark despite its many flaws, GUMP is at the very
least unique.
Many movies are about people who are unintentionally depicted as stupid,
and are therefore boring to watch. FORREST GUMP is about a man who is not
intelligent, but is never boring to watch, because the way he reacts to his
improbably dreamlike existence is the very substance of this unique but
troubled movie.
The very oddest thing about FORREST GUMP is how some parts of it work so
well and come so naturally, and how other parts of it are at such odds with
the rest of the film. I wondered how no one making the movie could sense
the inherent schizophrenia. And yet, as a whole, the movie works in ways
that defy description. It's vastly overrated, but it's still worth seeing.
Forrest is played with the grace of a tightrope walker by Tom Hanks. He
(Gump) is mildly retarded; he has an IQ of 75 at the movie's start and
stays pretty much on that level all the way through. His trove of facts
increases, but his basic methodology of handling the world never changes.
As a boy, with braces on his legs, he peers at life and expects little more
than to be heard and acknowledged, and the first person aside from his
doting mother to do that with him is his lifelong love, Jenny (played
glowingly by Robin Wright, of THE PRINCESS BRIDE).
Then one day the braces come off -- more or less by accident -- and Forrest
discovers he can run like hell. He couples that with advice from Jenny --
that the best thing to do when you're in trouble is just run -- and this
becomes the big asset that gets him through college on a football
scholarship. And the one thing that gets him through Vietnam, allowing him
to save most of his platoon and receive the Congressional Medal of Honor*.
Although he rescues his platoon leader (Gary Sinise), the man has nothing
but rancor and bitterness, since he lost his legs, while Gump only got shot
in the rear (in a development which starts funny and then gets tiresome).
Good luck rains down on Gump the way bad luck rains down on the rest of us.
He goes on to be the captain of a shrimp boat, a Ping-Pong champion
(clobbering the Chinese in the process), a millionaire, a cross-country
runner. The sly thing about the movie is the way he just sort of backs into
everything, doing what comes naturally, and is even happy when nothing
happens. All he wants out of life is the love of a woman, even though she's
a damaged and desperate person who frantically avoids real love out of the
fear that she will just bring a person that's better than her down.
Too much of any one thing in Hanks' performance would have sent the whole
thing crashing down. The balance is almost unbelieveable: it's no wonder he
won an Oscar for this role. He plays a man who is, quite simply, dumb --
but not uninteresting. He understands just enough about evil to know that
it's something to be avoided, and leaves the analysis to someone else. He
asks himself a question at the end of the movie -- do we have a destiny, or
are we just playthings of destiny? -- and based on everything he's seen,
he's convinced the answer is a little of both. 
The movie throws this into sharp relief with Sinise's character -- a man
who has been screwed badly, but eventually finds a kind of peace with
himself, when he realizes he wanted to die nobly but on false pretenses.
There are two big trends in the movie that work against it. One is the
nonstop running gag about Forrest's dumb luck, which is milked in some
scenes that are charming and other scenes that are not. Another is the way
he's consistently involved with high-profile historical figures in ways
that are totally peripheral and only used to make shallow historical
pointers. (The scene where he "accidentally" spills the beans on the
Watergate break-in, for instance.) After a while, I started questioning the
wisdom of this whole strategy: What was the real point, story-wise, of
having him intersect with such high-profile fate? To further throw his
attitude about life into sharp relief? It only makes us conscious of how
the screenwriter (Eric Roth) is employing the whole thing as a manipulative
gimmick.
This attitude extends into other areas of the movie. In another scene,
Forrest, still in his Army outfit, winds up at a peace rally, and when
asked to speak about the war, the PA malfunctions and all we see is his
mouth moving. The scene serves ultimately only to reconnect him with Jenny,
so it's another irritating throwaway. I, for one, would have loved to hear
what he had to say. The way the script sabotages its own development
through scenes like this is annoying; it makes the Gump character into a
gimmick, not a person.
There's also a tendency throughout the movie to paint people that have more
discrimination and analysis than Forrest in their blood as buffoons: a
scene in a Black Panther cell, for instance, or a scene where he's mobbed
by reporters and hangers-on when running cross-country. Gump isn't morally
superior to these people (how could he be?), just differently motivated,
and to try and make them look like fools is itself foolish. It's a
troubling sign that the filmmakers themselves didn't quite understand what
they were doing, that they hadn't quite taken the extra step in making the
film more than just the sum of its ingredients.
And yet, what an unmistakeably different movie this is, and at times, a
very moving one. The best moments are the simplest: The ice cream in the
bedpan. The ping-pong matches. Or when Forrest finds Jenny as a stripper,
or when he has his son introduced to him for the first time. I am reminded
strongly of BEING THERE, the mind-blowing film in which Peter Sellers
played a simpleminded man whose entire outlook on life has been formed by
television, and how his attitude is misperceived by everyone who comes into
contact with him. BEING THERE was far wickeder and knowing that GUMP, and
contained a final shot that even today people still have heated arguments
about. GUMP never quite has a moment like that, sadly.
* A friend of mine, who was in the service, commented that Sinise's
character would have been required to put in a recommendation in order for
Gump to win the medal. I decided that the movie wasn't ultimately
interested in the factual details of his life, but it did irk me.syegul@ix.netcom.com                                       EFNet IRC: GinRei
http://www.io.com/~syegul                          another worldly device...
Finger me on IRC for address for after-hours (EST) experimental HTTP server.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Tom Hanks, Robin Wright, Gary Sinise, Mykelti Williamson, 
           Sally Field 
Director:  Robert Zemeckis 
Producers:  Wendy Finerman, Steve Tisch, and Steve Starkey 
Screenplay:  Eric Roth based on the novel by Winston Groom 
Cinematography: Don Burgess 
Music:  Alan Silvestri 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Ever find the grind of life getting you down?  Is the day-to-day
struggle threatening to drag you under?  If so, there is a movie out
there that can replenish your energy and refresh your outlook.  FORREST
GUMP has a perspective of life that is passionate, and an execution
that's magical.  This is a tonic for the weary of heart and spirit, and
a rare gem in summer's crown.  For those who feel that being set adrift
in a season of action movies is like wandering into a desert, the oasis
lies ahead.
     Back when Tom Hanks' movie career was still relatively new, the
actor made a film called BIG, which told the story of a young boy
forced to grow up fast as a result of an ill-advised wish made at a
carnival.  In some ways, FORREST GUMP represents the antithesis of that
earlier movie.  In this case, the main character remains a child in
heart and spirit, even as his body grows to maturity.  Hanks is called
upon yet again to play the innocent.
     Forrest Gump (Hanks), named after a civil war hero, grows up in
Greenbow, Alabama, where his mother (Sally Field) runs a boarding
house.  Although Forrest is a little "slow" (his IQ is 75, 5 below the
state's definition of "normal"), his mental impairment doesn't seem to
bother him, his mother, or his best (and only) friend Jenny Curran
(played as an adult by Robin Wright).  In fact, the naivete that comes
through a limited understanding of the world around him gives Forrest a
unique--and positive--perspective on life.
     During the course of the next thirty years, Forrest becomes a star
football player, a war hero, a successful businessman, and something of
a pop icon.  Through it all, however, there is one defining element in
his life:  his love for Jenny.  She is never far from his thoughts, no
matter what he's doing or where he is.
     A trio of assets lift FORREST GUMP above the average "lifestory"
drama:  its optimism, freshness, and emotional honesty.  Though the
movie does not seek to reduce every member of the audience to tears, it
has moments whose rare power comes from their simplicity.  Equally as
important is laughter, and FORREST GUMP has moments of humor strewn
throughout.
     During the 60s and 70s, no topic more inflamed the turbulent
national consciousness than that of Vietnam and those who were sent
overseas to fight.  Forrest, as might be expected, has a unique view on
his time spent there: "We took long walks and were always looking for
this guy named Charlie."  In this observation can be found the essence
of the title character's nature.
     Through the miracle of visual effects, Forrest gets to meet his
fair share of famous people--George Wallace, Presidents Kennedy,
Johnson, and Nixon, and John Lennon.  While the mixture of real footage
of these notables with new images featuring Hanks is not a flawless
process, the result is nevertheless reasonably effective.
     In some ways, the tone of this film is reminiscent of that of
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES.  Story-wise, the two don't share much, but both
have a similar "feel."  The characters presented by both films possess
a quality and depth which quickly endears them to the audience.
     FORREST GUMP has several messages, some of which are less obvious
than others.  The most frequently recurring theme is an admonition not
to give up on life.  Why surrender when you don't know what lies
ahead?  By contrasting Forrest's life with the lives of those around
him, and by showing how the passage of time brings solace to even the
most embittered hearts, the movie underlines this point.
     Tom Hanks won last year's Academy Award for PHILADELPHIA, but his
performance here is more impressive.  The Alabama accent may seem a
little awkward at first, but it doesn't take long for the acting to
dwarf the twang.  The role is never overplayed, and Hanks has no
difficulty creating a totally human character that is free of guile and
deceit, and barely able to comprehend a concept like evil.
     Robin Wright gives the best performance of her career, surpassing
what she accomplished in THE PLAYBOYS.  Looking and seeming like a
younger Jessica Lange, she is believable as the object of Forrest's
undying affection.  Her interaction with Hanks is one of the movie's
more subtle pleasures.
     The real scene-stealer, however, is Gary Sinise.  A renowned
director and theatrical actor, Sinise is probably best known to film-
goers for his portrayal of George in 1992's OF MICE AND MEN (which he
also directed).  In this movie, his Lieutenant Dan Taylor is multi-
faceted and riveting.  The passion and pain he brings to the middle
portions of FORREST GUMP hold some of the weaker moments of the story
together.
     The soundtrack boasts a wide variety of sounds of the era--perhaps
too wide a variety.  Half the end credits seem to be music-related.
Often, pop and rock songs can be useful in establishing a mood, but
FORREST GUMP goes beyond that into the realm of overkill.  There are
sequences when the choice of music is inspired (the use of "Running on
Empty" for Forrest's "long run" comes to mind), but the soundtrack
could have used a little pruning.
     Ultimately, however, any gripes that I have about FORREST GUMP are
minor.  This is a marvelous motion picture--a mint julep on a hot
summer's afternoon.  Don't get me wrong--I still love SPEED, but
FORREST GUMP is an atypical Hollywood change-of-pace that's more than
worth anyone's two-plus hours in a darkened theater.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David S. Cowen
     I went into FORREST GUMP with high hopes--I had both faith in
Robert Zemeckis, whose other films I've enjoyed, and in the story.  I
was all ready for a heart-warming tale about a man who, while slow in
thought, managed to see some truths in life that other people didn't.
Already this year I was treated to two such films with similar plots:
THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, with Tim Robbins' comic turn as a "wise fool," and
WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE, where Leonardo DiCaprio's Arnie steals the
movie.  While I went into the movie with much anticipation, after the
movie, I didn't quite as inspired as the other people who have reviewed
or mentioned the movie here on r.a.m.  But boy, did I feel like RUNNING
IN MY NIKES to get an ice cold DR PEPPER, which I'd take home and use
on my new APPLE COMPUTER.
     All three of these products seem rather conspicuous in the film,
but none of them have a direct bearing on the plot.  For example, when
Forrest goes to "meet the President" for the first time, he talks about
his awe at seeing all of that food laid out for the guests.  That's
part of the plot--Forrest *would* be more awed by food if he was
hungry than meeting the President.  Suddenly, though, we see the 7-UP
and DR PEPPER bottles ... and Forrest mentions "But I was more thirsty
than hungry--and I drank *15* DR PEPPERS."  Shot of Forrest guzzling
another DR PEPPER.  Feeling thirsty, people?  We continue to see Dr.
Pepper all through the film.
     Then, we have the whole theme about him running across the
country.  While his shrimping excursion was one of the more enjoyable,
inspirational parts of the film, we suddenly have him going home and
not having anything to do, so he runs across the country.  Huh?  Does
that sub-plot make any sense?  Only if you think of it in terms of
NIKE, who was able to have Forrest show off his well-worn Nikes and
wear a NIKE T-shirt during the entire sub-plot.
     But the most beguiling thread is the Apple Computer plug.  The
film is very specific as to times and dates--at the beginning of the
film we see a bus go by advertising "The 1981 Mercury Capri."  After
Forrest becomes a mega-zillionaire because of Apple stock investment,
Jenny comes home.   They watch the Bicentennial on TV (another subtle
time placement, and one that makes sense given that young Forrest looks
about 5-ish in 1981).  But wait, Apple Corporation was *started* in
*April* of 1976 ... and public stock wasn't available until 1978.  If
Apple didn't pay to have their logo in that movie, than why wouldn't
Zemeckis & Co. have used IBM, whose stock was booming from 1976 into
the 80's?
     Plugs in films don't bother me if they're well integrated with the
plot, or make sense given a certain character or environment (if I see
a Coca-Cola poster in, say, a set of a convenience store, that's
natural).  But in FORREST GUMP, these promotions seemed to have a lot
of control on the script of the film.  I don't go to a movie to see
advertisements subtly linked to a film, I go to see plot, and
characters, and emotion, and action.  Obvious plugs are just
distracting, and pull me out of the kind of emotional webs that a movie
can create.
     There's more I could point out that just didn't make sense in
FORREST GUMP.  I didn't know that dying of cancer or AIDS made you so
happy--Forrest's mother, on her deathbed, seems perfectly healthy and
downright ebullient.  And Tom Hanks, well, he seemed to just be hamming
it up.  DiCaprio's performance in Gilbert Grape was awe-inspiringly
realistic, Robbins' performance in Hudsucker was laugh- out-loud
funny.  Both are inspiring.  Gump's character is none of those, and I
don't think either Zemeckis or Hanks knew whether to play Gump for
laughs or for drama.
     "Life is like a box of chocolates--you never know what you'll
get."  I know what you'll get.  You'll get chocolates.  And if you're
really intelligent, you know what the little squiggles on top of the
chocolates mean.
Rating: FORREST GUMP was neither heart-warming or entertaining, and
seemed more designed to sell than to affect.  Go rent Gilbert Grape
when it comes out on video.  2 out of 10.

Author
John M. Bozeman
     In general, I tend to avoid plays and movies that I think will be
sappy and/or overly sentimental--not because I have an intrinsic
dislike for them, but because they are such a hit-or-miss affair.  A
good production of DEATH OF A SALESMAN left me misty-eyed.  A STAR IS
BORN had me wishing that the guy had killed himself a lot sooner than
he did.  Thus, it was with much reluctance that I went to see FORREST
GUMP.  I must say, however, that I was most pleasantly surprised by
what I found.
     Forest Gump is a man with not particularly bright prospects.  Born
in rural Alabama, he has a curved spine and a low IQ.  He does have a
few things going for him, though:  a resourceful mother (Sally Field)
who loves him, one friend who helps him through school, a good heart,
and a lot of luck.  Running from bullies allows him to discover a
talents that carry him though college and the army and eventually to
run a successful business.
     But, as the cliche goes, arrival at the destination is not as
important is the journey.  Gump wears many hats along the way to his
destiny, and his simple, direct approach to life is usually a blessing
to those around him.  Indeed, while a lot has been said about the
film's spectacular special effects, these are overshadowed by the sheer
humanity of the story.  The plot itself is not terribly original
(boy-meets-girl, boy-loses-girl, boy-becomes-famous-and-maybe-gets-girl)
and the underlying theme (do your job, work hard, be yourself, and you
will do well) is rather conservative.  Instead the movie is successful
through old-fashioned cinematic virtues such as characterization,
pacing, and irony.  Gump, brilliantly played by Tom Hanks, allows us to
perceive our world through the eyes of a simpleton, and thus see how
funny--and how stupid, and how sad, and occasionally how heroic--people
can be.  The result is a film that is sometimes funny, sometimes sad,
but always engrossing.
Overall rating:  A (worth seeing even at full price)

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Robert Zemeckis
Writer: Eric Roth (based on the book by Winston Groom)
Starring: Tom Hanks, Robin Wright, Gary Sinise, Mykelti Williamson, 
Sally Field
I don't know about you, but I cringe when I hear about the "Feel Good 
Movie of the Year."  Sounds like it plays it safe and tries to do too 
much, but does guarantee a couple scenes that are so "touching," they'll 
make you recreate that scene from "Stand by Me."  But my big question is 
what in the goddam hell is Robert Zemeckis doing the "Feel Good Move of 
the Year."  But I guess doing creative black comedies just doesn't cut 
it in this business; you have to go do "Feel Good" movies to get 
superficial recognition.  Also, he put himself around the top of the 
cult film-lovers death wish by butting one of the greatest films of all 
time ("Pulp Fiction") from winning the Best Picture Oscar...AND stealing 
the direction oscar from Quentin Tarantino.  Ironically, this is 
probably at the bottom of his oeuvre.
"Forrest Gump" steals its idea from a Woody Allen film (a crime in the 
usual state, just look at "Last Action Hero" which stole from "Purple 
Rose of Cairo").  This one steals from "Zelig," a brilliant film about 
non-conformity which played as a perfect documentary with more laughs 
than a Chris Farley movie (a good amount for a pseudo-documentary).  It 
tells the story of a simple man, a man with a low IQ who goes through 
life screwing with everyone involuntarily: he tells Kennedy he has to 
piss; he accidentally discovers the whole Watergate thing; he gets us 
back in the Ping Pong competition in China; etc, etc, etc.  These things 
are funny.  But in between meetings with Dick Cavet, we have to put up 
with hokey melodrama, like his relationship with the paper-thing female 
character of Jenny (Robin Wright), who's name is annoyingly uttered each 
time.  If they had maybe made her more of a person OR only spent a bit 
of time with her a la Mia Farrow in "Zelig," she might have worked.  But 
she's just there to get AIDs and take off her bra for Forrest.
The thing that saves it, other than the acting, is the comic timing by 
Robert Zemeckis.  His comedy is so funny that it saves the film.  He 
goes for surreal comedy, subtle comedy, sight gags, intellectual jokes, 
etc.  But his drama is artificial and disgustingly hokey.  The film's 
laughs come easily, but he tries to shove the sentimentalism in our 
faces with a goddam plunger.  But, people love this.  The regular 
filmgoing population is not used to actually feeling something that's 
actually real.  If you wanna see a funny film that's touching in the 
real way, see the similar "Sling Blade," similar because it deals with 
simple protagonists.
Tom Hanks does a great job with his part but it's nothing I would give 
him an award for.  He was so passionate in "Philadelphia" and totally 
deserved the Oscar for that.  But this one's just for popular opinion.  
And so they can compare him to Spencer Tracey.  I would have given it to 
Travolta or Hawthorne or Freeman before Hanks.  Sinise is great as the 
resident cynic who (sniff) finds love from Forrest and gets over the 
fact that he's missing two appendages due to a war.  
The worst thing is the film goes for brilliance when it really isn't.  
It's good for some laughs here and there, but the laughs are only worth 
it if you have a working remote control in your hands with your thumb on 
the fast forward button so when "JENNY" comes on screen, you can 
fast-forward (not that Robin Wright is bad, but her character's an omen 
to whip out those Hefty-brand jumbo-size barfbags).  So is this a 
comedy?  A drama?  An allegory?  Kinda like a mix of the first two, but 
none of the latter.  What would the mesage be?  If you're stupid, you 
have a better life?  Better drop out of school.
It's not a horrible film, but it's highly overrated.  And why it grossed 
so much, I don't know.  It's "Feel Good" for about 10 minutes.  Funny 
most of the time, even if there aren't any intentional jokes in there.  
I used to like it, but I guess I matured or immatured, I dunno.  It's 
funny, but not great.

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, PG-13, 142 minutes [2 hours, 22 minutes]
[lighthearted drama]
Starring: Tom Hanks (Forrest Gump), Robin Wright (Jenny), Gary Sinise
(Lieutenant Dan), Mykelti Williamson (Bubba), Sally Field (Mrs. Gump),
written by Eric Roth, produced by Wendy Finerman, Steve Tisch, Steve Starkey,
directed by Robert Zemeckis, based on the novel by Winston Groom. 
"Forrest Gump" is quite a magical movie. It has a charm I haven't
experienced since "Back To The Future" (not surprisingly both films were
directed by Robert Zemeckis). It's an enjoyable, and often touching story of
a slow man who somehow experiences every major American historical event from
the 1950s to the 80s.
Tom Hanks delivers an incredible performance as Forrest Gump, a man who
isn't too bright, but is certainly likeable. The story is told from a park
bench as he is waiting for a bus, and proceeds to tell strangers his life
story. Some of them don't seem to be interested in what he has to say, but we
certainly are.
Forrest was born mentally and physically challenged. And since this is a
story about a child who is different, he is ostracized by the other children,
expect for one sweet girl named Jenny.
The immediate chemistry between young Forrest and Jenny is very sweet. It's
hard to explain why the film is so touching so quickly. Maybe because there's
a real sense of innocence to it, that Forrest isn't quite clever enough to
figure out what's really going on, and the love he has for Jenny isn't
typical Hollywood stuff.
But the film is not an intense drama, it is lighthearted and has a
satirical, comical effect at times. For instance we learn how Forrest (played
by Hanks from age 17 up) has a gift for running fast, and this allows him to
succeed by playing football, even though he doesn't know the rules. When
Forrest scores a touchdown he keeps running back to the locker room until
someone tells him to stop. This kind of subtle humor is scattered throughout
the movie and makes it so charming and enjoyable.        
However, not everything is so cheery in this picture, as Jenny (played by
Wright from age 17 up) grows up to become a drifter. When Forrest is in boot
camp he finds out that she posed for "Playboy" and was expelled from college
for it. She then becomes a stripper of sorts, and Forrest comes to her
rescue, but is never really able to save her in the long run.
This was the only problem I had with the film, the Jenny character does not
seem to keep with the rest of the story. She and Forrest were best friends as
children and we see her always coming back to him, and then running away. As
Forrest proceeds to go through amazing situations such as fighting in Vietnam
and becoming a champion ping-pong player, Jenny falls into a life of drugs
and abusive relationships.
Special mention must be give to Gary Sinise who gives a great supporting
performance as Lieutenant Dan Taylor, who claims Forrest cheated him out of
his destiny when he rescued him from death in Vietnam. The chemistry between
the two is of absolute contrast, with Forrest being a naive optimist, and Dan
the realist pessimist who hates everything, but for some reason finds
friendship in Forrest.
Even in the midst of all these situations that are quite tragic, it still is
able to present them in a very lighthearted and high spirited manner, and
that's what makes "Forrest Gump" great. Maybe because Forrest is ignorant,
and if ignorance is bliss, we'll absorb this mindset and find it enjoyable.         
(10/30/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [also by Zemeckis: "Back To The Future,"
"Back To The Future Part II," "Back To The Future Part III"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Eugene R. Ahn
Starring: Tom Hanks (Forrest), Robin Wright (Jenny), Gary Sinise (Lieut),
          Sally Field (Forrest's mother), Mykelti Williamson (Bubba)
Directed by: Robert Zemeckis
     It has been a long while since I felt motivated to write a movie
review.  Frankly, the ones I've seen in that long span have been either
awful or only superficially entertaining.  For example, take SPEED--a
claustrophobic action flick led by a hollow scarecrow of a protagonist
whose only charm is his lucky survival instincts (in real life, better
known as just "luck").  Eventually the soul-less movie blows itself up
by stretching our suspension of of belief like silly putty with
ludicrous scenes, such as "bus leaps over a hundred-foot gap on a
highway."  All in all, SPEED was nothing but a cheap thrill, and quickly
forgettable.
     What makes SPEED forgotten summer fodder and FORREST GUMP
(directed by Robert Zemeckis of WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT? and BACK TO
THE FUTURE fame) one of the best movies of 1994 is the difference in
devotion to characterization.  GUMP has its own stretches of the
imagination, and one could say that they were equally as non-plausible
as a bus leaping a hundred feet across a broken highway, but when GUMP
lands you cheer, because the story is about Forrest always.
     The story begins simply enough.  Forrest is at a bus stop and
tells his life story to a previously unknown bystander.  His southern
accent is thick and his speech is slow.  The woman sitting beside him
ignores him, probably thinking he lacks something upstairs, and reads a
People magazine instead (oh, the irony, eh?).  But while Forrest lacks
intelligence, he slowly wins the audience over with his simplicity,
honesty, and innocence.
     His story begins in Alabama, his home town, and we immediately see
that he is scorned for various handicaps--leg braces for a bad back and
an IQ of 75.  We see that his widowed mother (played by Sally Fields)
is, shall we say, determined to see that he gets a fair education
despite his handicap.  Finally, on his first bus trip to school, he
finds his first friend in Jenny Curran (Robin Wright) who offers the
seat beside her.  We later learn that Jenny is abused by her father,
but Forrest lacks the intelligence to understand the problem exactly.
He only knows he loves her companionship, and as he would repeat
throughout the film, "We was like peas and carrots together."
Forrest's relationship with Jenny has echoes of Faulkner's Benjy and
Caddy.
     Then in a hilarious plot turnaround, Jenny indirectly helps
Forrest realize that he can run without his leg braces and just like
that, the audience is suddenly taken for a ride through the highs and
lows of American history.  Forrest's newfound speed leads to his
recruitment onto a college football team.  He graduates and enlists in
the army to fight in Vietnam.  Eventually he meets Kennedy and Nixon in
the White House, he plays ping pong against the Chinese and attends a
peace rally in DC.
     Throughout the movie, Robert Zemeckis almost flawlessly
interweaves Tom Hanks into actual footage of past US presidents and
prominent historical moments.  The result is impressive.  The
adventures that Forrest endures become hauntingly familiar and make our
empathy with Forrest stronger.  A musical score highlighted by a
healthy diversity of popular tunes from their respective decades also
helps ground Forrest's experience into our own.
     One of the great attributes of GUMP is how well the script holds
together as it jumps from historical moment to the next.  Forrest's
three friends--Jenny, Lieutenant Dan Taylor, and Bubba (the latter two
he befriends in Vietnam), his lack of intelligence, and his ability to
run all hold the narrative into a well-developed, progressive plot.  It
would be almost corny in another script, but Zemeckis gets away with it
because Forrest has been clearly characterized as innocent and simple-
minded.  Instead of grunting in disbelief, we laugh because it is
Forrest we are laughing at, not the script.
     While Forrest seems almost destined to survive every American
crisis thrown his way, his sweetheart remains, as ever, constantly just
out of his reach as she rides a more dark and radical path.  She
mingles with hippies and the Black Panthers.  She is abused by her
boyfriends, performs in nude bars and she eventually ponders suicide.
There even seems to be a vague reference to AIDS.  But Forrest loves
her no less.
     I don't know what the "social" significance of FORREST GUMP is.  I
have a few ideas, but I know any answer I might offer would be
incomplete because GUMP works too well as a character movie to reduce
it into an idea.  There are great melodramatic moments when Forrest
suddenly hears Jenny call to him at the peace rally in DC and they run
to each other and hug in the pool.  When Jenny revisits her father's
home, collapses and throws rocks at the house in rage, Forrest
comments:  "I guess sometimes ... there aren't enough rocks."
     I think GUMP is about healing the wounds of our past--finding a
reason to stop throwing rocks and to make a peace.  If you leave
watching FORREST GUMP feeling better about yourself, then I think
FORREST GUMP as a movie has succeeded and deserves....

Author
Richard Matich
   A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
Somewhere out there is someone almost like Forrest
Gump. They have a limited Iq. Thats about as close to
being like Tom Hank's charecter as they are probably
ever going to get. Most people of that mental age are
in a "home" out in chicken coop country. Or perhaps
they attend "classes" in the city where they watch
Barney tapes, stare at the walls, or paint bad
watercolor. When they are not busy with those "fun"
activities, they are being cleaned because they wet
themselves. Forrest Gump is a uniquely American screen
figure. Money seems to be at the very heart of the
story. The morel to this tale is that you will live in
happiness and all problems are soon to fade as long as
you are rich and tremendously famous. What a naive and
twisted  vision! My theory on why this film has been so
widely populer is well [don't laugh] simple. Americans
have an extreme guilt for the way they treat the
"mentaly challenged". This film makes the average Joe
sixpack feel better about himself and the American way
of life all at the same time. He does not even have to
think all that much about plot since the music that
fills the movie gives a music video feeling. Take out
the music and you have one dull film that would not
"inspire" half as much as has been claimed by some
reviewers. I do not totaly hate the movie. The end was
done to great effect. It does tug at the heart strings,
even though it takes the mind for granted. It is
intresting as a look back at the times from the 1950s
to the 1980s. But, I must stress, its no substatute for
a great documentary on the era. Hearts And Minds,
Woodstock, and others are out there for you to see.
Hank's performance as Gump was exicuted in great ways.
I liked the accent that he learned from the boy who
plays Forrest as a youth. The score, by Alan Silvestri,
was one of the few treats of the film. I bought the
soundtrack on cd for that reason alone. If you like the
film, more power to you. I just think it is overly
simplistic to believe that this retard ends up winning
the beutiful blond, meeting several Presidents and
celebraties, and becomes a war hero. Want to explain
how any University "gives" a degree to somebody of
Forrest's low Iq? Want to explain how he graduated from
High School [or even passed any classes]? I dod'nt
think you can even begin to defend the "in your face"
problems with the script. If you want to see a movie
about a person of the Gump vein, I must recommend the
Hal Ashby and Peter Sellers collaberation Being There
[1979]. "Thats all I have to say about that!"-Forrest
Gump.

Author
Sukumar Ramanathan
     The simple-minded naif is a staple of literature.  Think of Don
Quixote tilting at windmills or of Huckleberry Finn on a raft down the
Mississippi.  They are direct and open in their dialogue with the
reader, recounting events with amazement, little aware that the rest of
the characters are laughing up their sleeves at their innocence and
naivete.  By the end of the book, however, we know that it is these very
facets of their characters that let them vanquish the cynicism and
seeming hopelessness of everyday life.
     Forrest Gump (Tom Hanks) is such a character.  He is born with an
IQ of 75, and plagued with rickety legs.  Children refuse to sit next
to him on the school bus.  They chase him on their bicycles as he tries
desperately to hobble away, and throw stones at him.  The only two
people that believe in him are his mother (Sally Field) and his friend
Jenny (Robin Wright).
     And yet, through every setback that life can throw at him, Forrest
persists.  He becomes an All-American running back, a war hero, a
fishing-boat magnate, a philanthropist and a cult hero.  Slow-talking
and wide-eyed, painfully enunciating each word as he talks, Forrest
overcomes contempt and barbs and violence to achieve both acclaim and
internal peace.
     Along the way, he is our window on twenty-five years of American
life, ranging from the early Elvis to the beginnings of AIDS.  Through
him and Jenny, we see desegregation, the Vietnam war, Watergate, disco,
and the running boom.  While dissent and protest rage all around him,
Forrest remains unsullied.  His momma has taught him to be proud of
himself, to try hard, and to be a man of honor.  This is so unusual to
the masses around him that they see him as a mystical leader.
     The danger with a story like this is that it is as delicate as
spun sugar.  A single misstep, a false note of dialogue, and you've
broken the fantasy that the audience has suspended itself in.
     Hanks comes through with flying colors.  He is at once so earnest
and sweet, like a character in a Frank Capra film, that you find
yourself rooting for him every step of the way.  Not once does he step
outside his character or offer a knowing wink.  Forrest Gump is a
character of little self-awareness and of no internal life.  In many
ways, he is like Chance the Gardener (in "Being There") or Zelig.  He
reveals himself only by his actions.  Hanks gets you to empathise even
after divesting himself of any inside spark.  It is a high-wire act
without a net, and the film succeeds because he traverses the tightrope
with nary a hitch.
     Robert Zemeckis, the director, specializes in stories that ask you
to indulge him with their premise.  His previous movies include BACK
TO THE FUTURE and WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT.  Just accept this idea of a
DeLorean that takes you back in time, he says, or that cartoon
characters can coexist with humans.  I'll envelop you in the story and
have you believing by the end.  It's ROCKY with a little help from
Industrial Light and Magic.
     The technical people behind the scenes have done a terrific job.
Here's JFK shaking hands with Forrest.  There's Forrest showing LBJ the
war-wound on his buttock.  And who is this?  Why, it's John Lennon as a
fellow guest on the Dick Cavett show, getting inspiration for "Imagine"
from Forrest's words!  The splicing is seamless and doesn't distract
from the story at all.  The editors even get the graininess of the old
newsreels spot on.
     There are certain scenes in movies that linger long in memory.
They show a director in full cry, completely in command of the
storytelling.  Think of the Mercury astronauts striding down in their
spacesuits with the surging Jerry Goldsmith score surrounding you in
THE RIGHT STUFF; or of the continuous three minute shot where
Scorsese shows you just how heady it is to be an up-and-coming
Goodfella in the hottest nightclub in New York.  There are at least two
such scenes here.
     The first one is where the young Forrest discovers that he can
run.  The background gets brighter, he pumps his arms furiously, and
slowly, magically the bolts on his leg-braces explode, the struts fly
off, his knees actually flex, and he is off in a cloud of dust.  It
makes you want to get up and run for joy.
     The second scene is when Forrest wears his Crimson Tide uniform,
tucks the ball under his arm and cuts across the football field for a
touchdown.  In that one dizzying minute-long montage, Zemeckis shows us
the excitement, the joy and the exhilaration of being a college star.
     The cinematography here is strong and evokes strongly a sense of
each place and time.  The fifties in the South are all white clapboard
houses and wide green fields.  A decade later, Forrest is running
through fiery napalmed jungles, the Doors jangling loudly on the
soundtrack.  When he returns and marvels at the sunset off his
shrimp-boat, the sky is a gorgeous medley of purple and orange.  And
when Forrest runs near Mirror Lake, the mountains behind reflect on the
still waters with impossible beauty.
     Hanks will probably be nominated again for an Oscar for his work
here.  There is a scene where he hears about his son.  Mixed with his
joy is the terrifying fear that his boy is slow too.  His eyes tear up,
his voice develops a hitch and he hesitatingly asks if his son is
stupid like he is.  It gives you a wrenching feeling inside.
     When he first meets his son, he walks up to him timidly, crouches
protectively over him and then sits down by his side to watch Sesame
Street on television.  The boy has his face away from us, and his head
is cocked at a slight angle.  There is a pause as Hanks arranges
himself next to his son.  Slowly, imperceptibly, he cocks his head at
exactly the same angle.
     There is a bittersweet love story in here too.  Robin Wright never
quite gets the essence of Jenny, though.  She is traumatized as a
child, and spends much of the movie rebelling and exploring different
lifestyles.  It is only at the end that you feel that she inhabits the
character, and by then it is almost too late.
     There are some very funny moments, and none are really contrived.
In the coming days, you will see the advertisements describing this as
a dramedy or as the feel-good movie of the summer.  Restrain your
natural impulse to gag, and go see it anyway.  Forrest Gump, like life,
is a box of chocolates.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring Tom Hanks, Sally Field, Robin Wright, and Gary Sinise
Directed by Robert Zemeckis
     What a surprise!  I cannot say enough about this film.  It didn't
seem to appetizing from it's ad campaign, but it sure has taken me
unawares.  I was glad I went to see it, even though it was strictly
from the curiosity factor.  A definite good time at the movies.
     FORREST GUMP is the story of a rather remarkable individual named,
as you might have already figured out, Forrest Gump.  He's a rather
unremarkable individual on the outside, but when you listen to the
things he's been through in his life, you sit there in amazement.  How
can a simpleton from Alabama get into so much that is happening in the
world?  How can someone so suggestible be so suggestive?  It's a feat
that makes for pure movie entertainment.
     Tom Hanks is, as always, superb as the not so smart Gump, who
through unlikely coincidences and very plausible scenarios gets to meet
three presidents, becomes a war hero, starts and maintains a
million-dollar business, and marries the girl of his dreams.  It all
sounds very fairy-tale-ish, but you have to see the movie to understand
how this all happens.  It's not all handed to Gump on a silver
platter.  Often times he just gets it without really trying.  But
that's his appeal--that a man so simple--simpler that the average
everyday Joe--can get into such extrordinary circumstances and still
come out shining.  Forrest Gump shows that life is how you look at it.
Even the most horrible things in the world can be looked at simply.
The character and the movie FORREST GUMP is a refreshing alternate look
at recent history and today's events, through the eyes of a man you
would have never thought would be affected by any of it.  It seems,
instead, that he had an effect on history, rather than history
affecting him.
     This movie is a pure treat.  It has something for everyone.  The
battle scenes are amazing, historical figures are made to say things
they never said, the story in just plain funny, and the special effects
are something to see (I challenge people to find *all* of the effects
in this movie--they were that good).  I came out of the theater with my
jaw in my lap.  I never thought I would come of out a theater like that
when it was playing a story about normal everyday events, but I just
did.  Go see it--it's worth any admission price!

Author
Steven Hildebrand
     "Life is like a box of choc-o-lates ... you never know what you'll
get" says Forrest Gump (played by Tom Hanks) in the movie by the same
name, and that simple philosophy is just one of many messages of this
film.  Gump is a simpleton with an IQ of 75--not quite retarded, but
definitely not a rocket scientist either--and an unforgettable
character in an unforgettable story about life, love, friendship,
destiny--and dogged persistence.
     As a child with a dull mind, crooked back and braces on his legs,
Gump suffers indignities at the hands of other children, and his mother
(Sally Field) also suffers a few indignities of her own in the process
of looking after him.  Gump is befriended by a girl named Jenny (Robin
Wright) who becomes his best friend and lifelong love.  He spends much
of the movie protecting Jenny in one misguided way or another, and
trying to get her to marry him; she spends most of the movie running
from Gump and looking for something outside herself to make her
happy--men, drugs, political causes.  A victim of incest, her head is
like a bowl of spaghetti and she has obviously never heard the saying,
"Happiness is an inside job."
     In a key scene early on, Gump is attacked by a gang of boys
pelting him with rocks.  As he tries to run away from them, hobbling
with great effort, his leg braces literally fly apart and he discovers
that after years of wearing those braces, he can run like a gazelle.
This scene sets the stage for the rest of the movie, as Gump's life
becomes a miraculous comedy of errors in which running is a recurring
theme.
     In the process of running away from another gang of punks when he
is older, he runs across a football field during a game, attracting the
attention of several scouts with his blinding speed ... and Gump goes
off to college on a football scholarship, becoming a football hero for
Alabama's "Crimson Tide," despite having great difficulty understanding
that he's supposed to stop running after the end zone.
     Following graduation, he enlists in the Army where he fits in
perfectly, following orders without question.  He becomes a war hero in
Vietnam, winning the Congressional Medal of Honor for saving his
platoon during an ambush, including his platoon leader, Lt. Dan Taylor
(Gary Sinese in an excellent supporting role).  Lt. Dan survives the
war as a legless, embittered veteran who is angry at God and Gump for
saving his life, believing it was his "destiny" to die on the
battlefield like many of his ancestors had. Forrest, through his natural
optimism and persistence, helps Lt. Dan to make peace with God, with
Gump, and himself.
     Gump shakes hands with several Presidents, inspires Elvis and John
Lennon (watch the movie), becomes a world ping-pong champion, foils the
Watergate break-in, and eventually winds up a millionaire, a husband
and a father.  It is a wonderful movie full of strange miracles and
poignant kindnesses.  Though some call him "retard," his so-called
handicap actually works in his favor and allows him to walk through
life comforting the afflicted and afflicting the comfortable without a
trace of guile or meanness. They say that God works thru people, and we
can see this clearly as Gump touches many lives and heals a few broken
people with his selflessness and unconditional love.
     I just can't say enough about this film ... the acting, the
directing, the script--it is all so very good.  It had me alternately
laughing and crying, and in one scene, doing both simultaneously.  This
is Hanks' finest performance ever, one to rival his role in the
award-winning "Philadelphia," and look for this movie to be a major
contender for multiple Oscars.  Tall kudos also to the supporting cast,
and especially to director Robert Zemeckis.  On the 10 scale, I'll give
this one an 11 and urge everyone to see it on the big
screen--definitely the movie of the Summer.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There is more to FORREST GUMP--both the character and the film--
than what is happening on the surface, but I am not clear just what it
is.  This is Robert Zemeckis's symbolic exercise that belongs beside
films like BIRDY, CATCH-22, HAROLD AND MAUDE, THE WORLD ACCORDING TO
GARP, and especially BEING THERE.  I think if I could figure out what
BEING THERE was *really* all about, I would have a big clue on FORREST
GUMP is about beneath the surface, and vice versa.  My problem is that I
can see many possible meanings, and none is particularly profound.  You
could see FORREST GUMP as being an allegory implying God or angels look
out for the simple and the pure of heart.  (Personal note: to me that is
the self-congratulatory philosophy of the fortunate, and it has a
sinister touch of victim-blaming for many good people who suffer through
what I think is no fault of their own.)  At least on some level this is
the story of a man with an IQ of 75, the victim of a lot of cruelty from
his peers, who overcomes his problems with a natural talent for running
at super-human speeds, for playing ping-pong at super-human speeds, for
assembling guns at the same speeds, and for just being a nice person.
He overcomes his disability to the degree that he becomes a winner of
the Congressional Medal of Honor, one of the most successful businessmen
in the country, and the center of a sort of runners' cult, all by just
being a really, really nice man with just a few minor super-powers and
having friends who guess well about what stocks are going to take off.
He also is unknowingly the catalyst for many events of American history
from the 50s to the 80s.
     The film is told with the same peculiar structure as MAVERICK.
That is the first three-quarters of the film is told in flashback and
from there it proceeds without flashback, but it is not clear why the
starting point is what it is.  Most of the story is told by Gump (Tom
Hanks) on a bus stop bench to anyone who will listen.  His captive
audiences, at first indifferent, become more and more engrossed and
inspired by his story.
     Gump is born with a bad spine in addition to his below-average IQ.
The local school children in Greenbow, Alabama, ostracize and torment
young Forrest and this somehow causes his back problems to go away in
one mysterious moment and for him to become a super-runner able to out-
pace bicycles and pickup trucks.  His high-speed running and his nice
guy attitude make him first a football hero, then a war hero, and
continues throughout his spectacular life.  He prospers tremendously,
then goes on to look for meaning in his life.  In fact he gets
everything material anybody could want but the one thing Gump really
does want.  He never seems to be able to hold on to his childhood
sweetheart, Jenny.  With a talent for making wrong decisions, Jenny
walks a self-destructive path through the same world as Forrest, but
without the benefit of his simple good ways or his super-powers.  Along
the way we see a lot of American history and here a lot of popular music
whose lyrics often echo the plot twists in the film.  (And along the way
there is also some sloppy writing.  One personal bugaboo: an event we
are told takes place on a Saturday morning is later given the date March
22, 1982.  That was a Monday.)
     Tom Hanks is decent in his role as far as I can tell, but can one
really say he was believable in so unbelievable a role?  In a way he is
the wise foole.  But one cannot say people like him behave the way he
does, since there just is nobody like he is in this film.  About the
best one can say is that he maintained his accent fairly uniformly.
Robin Wright as Jenny gets a little chance to act, but only sufficiently
to prove herself competent.  This role was more demanding than her title
role in THE PRINCESS BRIDE, but still did not provide her the emotional
range to prove whether she can actually act, or just read lines.  My big
complaint concerning the acting is with Gary Sinese.  He has spent too
much time on the stage when it was clear that films are desperately in
need of his talents.  I hope we will be seeing more of him in future
films because he is one talented actor.  This is a soft, soft film in
need of more of the intensity only he provides it.  Sally Field at one
time could not turn in a bad performance either, but as Forrest's mother
she is recreating the same characterization she has played all too often
in the past.  In her sleep she can do sweet, homey, folksy, women with a
small stubborn streak.  This is just one more.
     Somehow this is not what you would think of as a special effects
film, yet in fact some of the visual effects are quite impressive.  What
most people would pick up on are the scenes of Hanks shaking the hands
of Presidents.  They are not actually executed as well as might be
expected in spite of the praise they have gotten.  The scenes that
impressed me concern an actor who loses limbs in the course of the film.
There are standard ways to create this effect that involve body doubles
or binding back the limb so the camera cannot see it.  At least one
scene in the film cannot be explained using either technique.  All I can
think of is that digital technology might have been employed but it
genuinely looks like this actor had legs amputated for the role.  Scenes
in which Forrest moves at high speed also are very impressively done.
Generally undercranking a camera leaves tell-tale signs in other parts
of the scene, perhaps branches wave much too fast in the wind.  Here
again the techniques are not obvious but they are convincing.  Of course
Robert Zemeckis's films are often very heavy on special effects, so he
is no stranger to special effects wizards.
     FORREST GUMP is certainly supposed to be an enigmatic film,
hopefully no less than I found it to be.  If it was supposed to be
inspiring in some way, it missed my wavelength.  It was competently made
but overlong and occasionally infuriating.  I would give it a 0 on the
-4 to +4 scale.  But, being fair, I will point out that your mileage
will possibly vary.  The film received an ovation at the end in the
theater where I saw it, so it is pleasing some audiences.

Author
Gregory N. Bond
[Old news to 'merkins, but it's about to open locally]
Stars: Tom "Philadelphia" Hanks, Robyn "The Princess Bride" Wright
     This was previewed for local audiences on the weekend, prior to
official release this week.  The film is basically story of Forrest
Gump (Hanks), a borderline moron with a perfect soul, who rises from a
tough childhood to become football star, war hero, world pingpong
champion, shrimp fisherman and millionaire.  Through it all Gump is the
anchor for the soul of Jenny (Wright), an abused child and a deeply
troubled woman, and "Lieutenant Dan," the officer Gump rescues from his
fate to die in glory in Vietnam, leaving him a bitter cripple.  Gump is
also remarkably unaffected by all that life has brought him: "So I went
to the Whitehouse--AGAIN--and met the President--AGAIN" in a very
ho-hum voice.
     The story is told initially as a series of flashbacks, with Gump
sitting at a bus stop, relating his life story to a series of interested
or incredulous listeners.  The later part of the film takes a more
conventional narrative form.
     The whole saga of Forrest Gump the person is set against the saga
of America the nation, centered mainly in the 60s and 70s.  The most
fascinating thing about the film is the brilliant use of computer
graphics (attested to in the long list of technicians in the credits)
to completely seamlessly merge action from the film with the archival
footage of the events of the era.  Hence you have Gump meeting various
Presidents, shaking hands, etc; the Vietnam rallies with hundreds of
thousands of people in Washington imperceptibly merging with the
characters.  (In fact, it was not until the credits rolled that I
realised this was real footage, not just look-alikes.  I suspect some
of these film clips are much more famous in the US than they are out
here.)  Even the Vietnam scenes are some of the best (and most
frightening) war footage I have seen, and the serious digital sound in
the Russell Cinemas certainly aided the impact.  (The weakest part of
the computer graphics also occurs in Vietnam--a Napalm attack by F-4
Phantoms had a very matte'd look.)
     In all the incidents, the basic humanity and downright niceness of
Gump is used as a telling contrast to those around him, even the best
intentioned.  The man is *way* too perfect.  A Saint.  Mother Teresa is
nothing on him.  Despite a character that could be a major pain in the
arse, Gump is someone you feel for, sympathise with, and by golly you
wish you could meet him.  Hanks handles a very demanding role very
well, the script is excellent, and Wright (who obviously appreciates
the chance to show she is an actress, not just a princess) is also
excellent.
     The film is full of humor, the writing excellent, the acting
great, the effects stunningly seamless.  A lot of fun.

Author
Alex Lopez-Ortiz
     FORREST GUMP is a sleeper par excellence.  In Canada, it opened
without any announcements, and on its first day in town, all of ten
people attended the first show.  A week later, it is the number two
film, and fourteen days later it has a larger lineup than BLOWN AWAY.
     What makes this movie so successful?  I would say it's originality
together with a masterful directorial work by Zemeckis.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its theme.  It is not about crimes, or
violence, or spies, or a silly comedy.  It is about people, and in that
respect it reminds me of Fried Green Tomatoes.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its execution.  The movie is narrated
from a bench in a bus stop, and actual dialogue is sparse.  In most
cases such format would get tiresome pretty quickly.  But somehow the
audience never grows tired from 140 minutes of slow southern-accented
speech go about unnoticed.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its dialogue.  This is a movie about a
retarded person.  I was expecting the movie, at one point or another,
to turn into a speech about impaired people, but it remained subtler
than that.  The director let Forrest speak for himself, literally and
figuratively speaking and the message comes across as all the more
genuine.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its plot.  Rather, it does not have a
typical plot.  It has no introduction, problem or solution.  Forrest
flows seamlessly through life, and the movie just keeps that pace.  No
need for dramatic scenes.  Even, some dramatic scenes are surprisingly,
but intelligently left out: we never get to see Forrest's momma die or be
buried.
     FORREST GUMP may be a period piece.  Remarkable only in as much as
it differs from the current school of cinematic production.  But even
if it is only that, it is still a refreshing intermission in the
avalanche of gun-them-down productions of late.
