Title
Review for Nothing to Lose (1997)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Chad Polenz
Nothing To Lose
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1997, R, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[comedy/crime]
starring: Tim Robbins (Nick), Martin Lawrence (T. Paul), John C. McGinley
(Davis "Rig" Lanlow), Giancarlo Esposito (Charlie Runt), produced by Martin
and Michael Scott Bregman, Dan Jinks, written and directed by Steve Oedekerk.
Hmmm.... something's not right here. The elements that make up "Nothing To
Lose" are pretty much the same old stuff: completely opposite characters who
become best friends; a long road trip; many chase scenes; an intricate
robbery; a few cliffhangers here and there; and some supposedly sentimental
scenes. Taking this into account, it's surprising I liked this film, but I
guess I shouldn't look a gift horse in the mouth.
The setup to the story is so basic the film wastes no time in trying to
establish details and sub-plots. Oedekerk knows you want to see the funny
mismatched buddy comedy the promotions promise, and he gets right to it in
less than 15 minutes. 
We meet Nick (Robbins), your typical L.A. middle-aged yuppie who comes home
from work early one day to find his wife having an affair. But this film is
very lighthearted and instead of some piss-off scene, Nick just quietly walks
out the door and drives off in his GMC Yukon not knowing where he's going. Of
course when people are depressed they never make smart driving decisions and
thus he ends up on the wrong side of town and is carjacked by T. Paul (a
character that could only be played by Martin Lawrence). But Nick doesn't
care, he goes ballistic and drives his truck all over the place in a
situation that could only happen in such a Hollywood comedy. When the two
find themselves way out in Arizona it's obvious the roles have reversed.
The film goes through the motions you'd expect it to, first: bickering. T.
Paul can read Nick like a book and they start to argue, which then leads to
the next logical step: fighting. The two don't really get in a fist-fight,
instead they just wrestle around like kids - but the fact this takes place at
a redneck coffee shop with characters who interact is what makes it funny. 
Of course the next step is reconciliation. From here on the film becomes a
funny comedy about the two being in the wrong place at the wrong time. They
are mistaken for two highway robbers - Davis "Rig" Lanlow (McGinley) and
Charlie Runt (Esposito) who don't like their image being clouded by Nick and
T. What ensues are scenes on top of scenes of the comedic crime genre. I
don't think I've ever seen a film about "accidental" crime before, nor one
about a yuppie who decides to become a robber. Maybe this isn't the most
realistic premise, but you have to admit it's original.
Nick and T. figure out a way to rip off thousands of dollars from Nick's
boss, and the way they must go about this and the robbery itself is strange
but quite funny. I've always wondered why criminals have to be so mean and
the film answers this with another funny robbery scene in which the two argue
with an old clerk about who was "scarier."
Although the film remains pretty consistent in terms of storytelling and
comedy, it does start to weaken as the last act approaches. It's difficult to
describe specific flaws without spoiling the entire story, but let's just say
it doesn't live up to your expectations. On the other hand, I have to give
the film credit for throwing in as many plot twists as it does. 
I'm still not sure why I liked "Nothing To Lose." Was it the acting? Maybe.
Robbins and Lawrence make a funny odd couple. Was it the story? Maybe. It
certainly wasn't what I expected it to be. Was it the screenplay itself?
Maybe. I've seen better though. So what was wrong with it? Nothing as a
whole, but it's far from perfection.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Michael Redman
Successful LA advertising executive Nick Beam (Tim Robbins) has lost the most
important thing in his life. Upon a surprise early visit home, he discovers
his wife in bed with his boss. In shock, he drives aimlessly.
In an undesirable section of the city, carjacker "T" (Martin Lawrence) jumps
into the passenger's seat and demands his wallet and keys. Beam explains
"You've picked the wrong person on the wrong day," and heads out into the
Arizona desert with T, a captive.
As you might expect in this salt and pepper comedy, the two become good
buddies and go on a crime spree. It turns out the T is highly skilled but
can't get a job because he has no legitimate experience and has to support his
family somehow. Hatching a plot to get revenge on his boss, the two plan a big
buck heist.
Occasionally there are bits that are almost humorous, but they seem played
wrong. The timing is off, the delivery is off and the story is just plain
stupid. Every plot turn is telegraphed long in advance. The team steals
flashlights to use in their robbery. Quiet and stealth are of the utmost
importance in the operation. The flashlights have built-in radios. Can you see
it coming?
The worst give-away has to do with the pivotal scene that changes Beam's life.
Anyone who pays the least attention to the events before he walks in on his
wife's indiscretion can see what's coming an hour later.
Robbins does a credible job with a very limited role and Lawrence adds some
spice to the film although neither are very funny. This seems a fatal mistake
in what is supposed to be a comedy.
With very few exceptions, the audience will discover that in "Nothing To
Lose", there is really nothing to gain.
(Michael Redman, after over 21 years of writing this column, is currently
holed up in an air-conditioned room making only rare sojourns out into the
sweltering day. mredman@bvoice.com are the magical letters.)
[This appeared in the 7/24/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Ben Hoffman
The story is far-fetched; the overly-friendly relations between
our white hero and a black family are somewhat heavy-handed.  The
explanation involving the wife's infidelity is quite a stretch, and
the ending should have come sooner; no need to dot every "i" and
cross every "t."  Despite those caveats, I enjoyed almost every
moment.   It was a feel-good movie.
Nick (Tim Robbins) is an advertising executive who comes home early
one day and discovers his wife (Kelly Preston) in bed with his boss.
Nick flies out of the house and furiously drives away unmindful of
traffic.  His life is ruined; he has NOTHING TO LOSE.
A carjacker, T Paul (Martin Lawrence) pulls a gun on him when Nick
stops at a traffic light but Nick, crazy with grief and NOTHING TO
LOSE, not only takes a swipe at T Paul but gets him into the car
and drives away with him.   T Paul explains that he is an educated
person who cannot find a job.  In order to support his wife and
kids, he got the stupid idea of carjacking.  Before very long,
they become friends.   With NOTHING TO LOSE, Nick and T Paul set
out to rob Nick's boss for having slept with Nick's wife.
Unfortunately for Nick and T Paul, they are being followed by
another couple of gangsters, who like them, one is black and the
other white.  (Giancarlo Esposito and John C McGinley)  Neither
Nick and T Paul nor the cops on their trail are aware that there
are 2 sets of black and white suspects.
When T Paul goes home to his family with Nick, T Paul's mother
slaps them around; her son for staying out late and Nick for
probably being a bad influence. In the end, of course, everything
turns out fine . . . by use of two unoriginal bits of mistaken
identity to make the plot work.   Still, quite funny. and
entertaining.

Author
Mike Borzumate

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    Although very funny in some parts, Nothing to Lose often drags through
the filler.  Luckily, the scenes that work (mostly) make up for the ones
that don't. 
    I think the main gripe I had directly with the acting was how forced
it seemed.  It often seemed that Martin Lawrence was straining to be
believable instead of just being his funny self, and that Tim Robbins was
reacting in the way he figured was expected by the audience, instead of
going with his comedic instinct.
    Much of the plot is farcical, but then this isn't a serious movie, so
the plot weaknesses can be overlooked for the most part.  The problems
arise, however, during the long gaps between the very funny scenes where
the movie drags on and on through poorly-delivered filler comedy. 
    Don't let the occasional yawn discourage you, however!  The movie gets
better as it goes along.  All scenes with T. (Lawrence)'s family work
wonderfully, and the section of the movie with Henry (Patrick Cranshaw)
is roll-on-the-floor funny.
    So, if you can be patient, Nothing to Lose is a worthwhile matinee or
video experience. 

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tim Robbins, Martin Lawrence, John C. McGinley, 
      Giancarlo Esposito, Kelly Preston, 
Michael McKean
Director: Steve Oedekerk
Producers: Martin Bregman, Dan Jinks, and Michael Bregman
Screenplay: Steve Oedekerk 
Cinematography: Donald E. Thorin
Music: Robert Folk
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     There have been two ACE VENTURA directors:  Tom Shadyac and Steve 
Oedekerk.  Shadyac, after helming the first (and better, although not by 
much) of the two pet detective outings, moved on to more amusing and 
less barren projects like THE NUTTY PROFESSOR and LIAR LIAR.  Oedekerk, 
on the other hand, hasn't directed in two years, and his return 
engagement, NOTHING TO LOSE, is hardly triumphant. 
     The "moronic comedy" (a movie where people commit stupid acts with 
little regard for things like logic and credibility) is a motion picture 
staple, dating back to the silent era.  Once, film makers invested a 
great deal of creativity into these projects, but, these days, almost 
every entry into the genre is routine, formulaic, and of limited 
entertainment value.  As a result, watching films like NOTHING TO LOSE 
can be tedious.  The movie offers a few legitimate laughs, but there's 
not enough quality or quantity to support a ninety-minute production.  
In between the widely-spaced, effective gags, we're treated to a mind-
numbingly contrived script, inane dialogue, and flat characters.  
     NOTHING TO LOSE introduces us to Nick Beam (Tim Robbins), a mild-
mannered advertising company executive who, as the film demonstrates in 
an early scene, is involved in an apparently-perfect marriage with the 
gorgeous and bubbly Ann (Kelly Preston).  Then, on a day when Nick 
arrives home unexpectedly early, he makes a shocking discovery -- his 
wife in bed with his boss (Michael McKean).  Devastated, Nick gets in 
his car and drives into the seedier portions of Los Angeles, where he's 
car-jacked by Terrence (Martin Lawrence), a slick-talking thief.  That's 
where the revenge fantasy takes over, as Nick turns the tables on 
Terrence.  Instead of meekly handing over his wallet, Nick puts his foot 
on the gas and effectively kidnaps his would-be robber.  What follows is 
a variation on the standard, tired buddy movie concept, with a few car 
chases, shootouts, and mistaken identity subplots thrown in for good 
measure.  
     Had Oedekerk settled for a straight, mindless farce, things might 
have turned out okay.  Unfortunately, he makes the fatal mistake of 
attempting to inject an element of social commentary into NOTHING TO 
LOSE.  That's right -- social commentary in a movie that's as airheaded 
as they come.  Oedekerk is apparently on the pro-Affirmative Action 
bandwagon, since his semi-serious point is that White Corporate America 
is racist.  That statement may be accurate, but the writer/director 
chooses a poor arena in which to argue it.  Additionally, attempts to 
humanize Nick and Terrence fail as we're force-fed character-building 
moments that don't work on any level.
     Tim Robbins is better than the material.  It's to his credit that 
he's somehow able to generate sympathy for such a one-dimensional 
character.  Martin Lawrence, on the other hand, is playing the same guy 
he always plays:  Martin Lawrence.  It's an act that gets old quickly.  
After films like BOOMERANG, BAD BOYS, and A THIN LINE BETWEEN LOVE AND 
HATE, Lawrence has become overexposed (and I'm not even considering his 
recently-canceled TV series, which I haven't seen).  He's a personality 
with little discernible range, as NOTHING TO LOSE ably demonstrates.  
Meanwhile, the supporting cast, which includes Kelly Preston as Nick's 
wife, Michael McKean as his boss, and John C. McGinley and Giancarlo 
Esposito as a pair of bumbling crooks, is populated with unremarkable 
performers.  The only one who makes an impression is Irma B. Hall, who, 
playing Terrence's slap-happy mother, steals both of the short scenes 
she's in.
     Moments of inspired comedy are few and far between.  In addition to 
the Hall appearances, there's an amusing bit where Nick and Terrence 
compete to see who can be more frightening during a convenience store 
robbery.  Beyond that, the film offers the usual array of unfunny, 
repetitive attempts at humor.  NOTHING TO LOSE isn't so bad that it can 
be singled out as one of the worst movies of the summer, but there's 
nothing about this film to distinguish it from the many other sub-
mediocre non-entities currently in theaters. NOTHING TO LOSE promises to 
rob you of both time and money. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Palisades Pictures/Artistic License Films
 Director:  Eric Bross
 Writer:  Eric Bross & Tom Cudworth
 Cast: Adrien Brody, Sybil Temchen, Michael Gallagher, Tony
Gillian, Frank Vincent
   When you're young, the worst thing that can happen to you
is to be a misfit: to be shunned by fellow students in your
junior high or high school.  Todd Solondz's "Welcome to the
Dollhouse" brings this out better than any other American
movie about 12-year-old kids.  Then in that writer-director's
astonishing "Happiness," Solondz portrays the disastrous
effects of being a nerd right in the opening scene, with Jon
Lovitz playing the hapless cipher who has just been given his
walking papers by his 30-year-old date.  But what about the
young people who are accepted by their peers, who have a
lot going for them in their own, supportive circles?  Director
Eric Bross interprets the lives of a clique of people in their
early twenties, working-class stiffs who appear to have no
emotional maladjustments, but who get into a mess because 
the ambitions of one of their number outclass his background. 
"Ten Benny" is a low-budget job that has made the rounds of
the indie circuit in L.A. and Sundance, a small picture
featuring earnest acting but one which leaves the viewer
unsatisfied.
   Its overriding problem is a lack of transcendence.  In laying
out a misadventure that befalls its principal figure, Eric Bross--
who wrote the screenplay with Tom Cudworth--introduces a
story that has the stamp or autobiography.  Bross, who states
in the production notes that he knows people just like the
ones in his movie, shows us a slice of life which has no
surprises, little tension, and is deficient in originality.  It is an
inconsequential tale that makes for a somewhat involving 98
minutes, largely because the young performers play decent
sorts of guys-next-door who get into a jam because of their
inexperience with the hard rules of the fast-money world.  Ray
(Adrien Brody) does not really crave a life of glamour and
fame but wants only to attain normal, working-class goals of
marriage, family, and a measure of financial stability.  Though
he has not gone through the rite of passage needed for
success in today's world--four years of college--he has the gift
of gab and can sell people things that they never knew they
wanted.  Why he did not put his talent to work in pushing
more than shoes is anybody's guess.
   The story takes place in suburban New Jersey with a stint
in Atlantic City and involves Ray's plans to make big bucks
fast in order to get his girl friend Joanne (Sybil Temchen) a
diamond ring and set himself up in his own business.  Getting
a tip on a race at the trotters in the town of Freehold, he
borrows $10,000 from a loan shark he has known since
childhood, Donny (James E. Moriarty) but is staggered by the
failure of the horse to come through for him.  Threatened by
the hoodlum should Ray fail to come up with the money--
surely not an innovative idea for a film--Ray faces a bleak
future, his relationship with his girl threatened by a night of
passion she has with Ray's best friend, Mike (Michael
Gallagher).
   While at least one critic who has seen the film when it was
on the festival circuit calls Ray a "charismatic" fellow, a young
De Niro or Pacino, he does no come across as particularly
magnetic or handsome, witty or expressive possessing the
depth such a protege requires.  A droopy-faced character,
Adrien Brody does not inspire his audience to care all that
much about what happens to him, nor do his pals--who are a
typical bunch of suburbanites who celebrate one another's
birthday parties and spend most of their leisure time together-
-offer much in the way of audience curiosity.  Frank Vincent
as the boy's father, Ray Sr., stands out in a relatively small
role, bearing the professionalism and soignee of an
established performer in a movie that is nothing distinctive or
bearing the flavor of a work you could not see any night on
TV.

Author
David Wilcock
Tim Robbins and Martin Lawernce team up in this road
movie comedy. Robbins plays an exec who discovers his
wife having sex with his boss. He goes into depression, and
drives around his neighbourhood until he arrives inside the
usual 'ghetto' side of every American city. There,
Lawernce attempts to steal his car, but to no avail, and is
dragged along with Robbin's on a trip to Arizona. There,
they hold up a store, are mistaken for two other robbers
(just like in My Cousin Vinny) and are chased by the
police, and the other robbers. Of course, there's gags along
the way, usually from Lawernce. 
Although the film is midly funny, and quite watchable,
there's something so horribly familiar about it all. This
film should really be called Beverly Hills Midnight Run
There's Lawernce with his wisecracking and heavy
profanity, just like Eddie Murphy in Beverly Hills Cop,
and pratically the same idea as Midnight Run. It's full of all
the road movie cliches, and even has a 'comedy' car chase,
which just seemed so eighties. Even the credit sequence
seemed to be out of a Steve Martin, or Chevy Chase,
eighties comedy. 
There also isn't much chemistry between Robbins and
Lawernce. In PLANES, TRAINS AND AUTOMOBILES,
there was real chemistry between Steve Martin and John
Candy. In NOTHING TO LOSE, there is hardly
chemistry at all. Towards the end the chemistry seems to
work, but for the bulk of the film, there is hardly any, 
The director directs the film in a workman like fashion, but
gets the jokes across. And although there is no chemistry
between the two leads, they give good performances on
their own. Lawerence gives a good Eddie Murphy
performance, and Robbin's is alright aswell. However,
Robbin's performance is nowhere near as good as the
characters he played in JACOB'S LADDER, and THE
PLAYER. In fact, if you want to see Robbin's do comedy
much better than in NOTHING TO LOSE, I suggest you
rent out THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, where he is much
funnier. 
NOTHING TO LOSE does have some funny moments in
it, however. The humour isn't particulary sophisticated, but
if you enojyed DUMB & DUMBER, you might enjoy this.
The characters in Arizona are funny, and there's also a
good scene where Robbin's asks a shopkeeper which
'threatening approach' was better, Lawerences (which
consisted of Lawerence threatening to shoot the
shopkeeper's ass, and swearing a lot), or himselfs, (which
was speaking in a deep, scary voice) But the gags are
predictable, the lack of chemistry infurating, and the
ending too far-fetched and 'perfect' 
NOTHING TO LOSE then, is Robbin's first 'bad' movie
(and hopefully his last), and suggests that Odereick should
twice before making another film. He nearly ruined
Carrey's career with ACE VENTURA: WHEN NATURE
CALLS, let's hope he hasn't ruined Robbin's (or even
Lawerence's) with NOTHING TO LOSE. 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Tim Robbins, Martin Lawrence, John C. McGinley, Giancarlo
Esposito, Kelly Preston, Michael McKean Director: Steve Oedekerk
Screenplay: Steve Oedekerk
The humour in this movie is mostly derived from a clash of personalities
and different walks of life. Advertising executive Nick Beame (Tim
Robbins) has a pefect wife, a perfect job and a perfect life until he
walks into his bedroom to find his wife in bed with the boss. From this
point on his life takes a spiral downhill, as does the movie.
This man has lost the will to live and begins a series of
self-destructive tendencies as an out let for his anger and frustration.
Enter petty thief Terrence (Martin Lawrence) who gets dragged into the
grand scheme of reckless driving, petrol station hold-ups, rival villain
shoot-outs, robbing the boss and cutting the manhood of a fertility god.
I have always admired Robbins versatility in any role he plays, but he
has chosen something meaningless and forgettable in the character Nick
Beame. You'll be kicking yourself in the end when you realise the entire
fiasco was a mere accident of mistaken identities. It really doesn't get
more stupid than when you mistake your sister-in-law for your wife in
bed.
Martin Lawrence is a relative new comer to film. His annoying antics,
constant whining and endless nagging is reminiscent of nails scratching
the black board. If his career is to be based on this show of hysteria,
it may not be a long one. Especially where there are those on the market
who do it better and get away with it - namely the Murphys and Carries.
This is an absurd tale about losing all hope when you catch your wife
cheating. It basically states that everything else is meaningless
without her in your life. It's a sad philosophy and concept to carry
through life when per chance anyone could suddenly die or leave you.
Sure there's nothing more to lose when the thing you cherish most
disappears, but there is also nothing to gain by trying to destroy
yourself. Perhaps there will be a note of remorse from others when
you're dead, a black coffin that matches your suit, a homely Wake and a
touching quote from Ecclesiastes 3:20, but one has to realise that life
goes on after you're gone. The world does not stop revolving just
because you have decided to jump of the merry go round.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: What a surprise: a big-name Hollywood comedy that's actually funny.
Tim Robbins and Martin Lawrence both score points (although Robbins comes
out slightly ahead).
The opening scenes of NOTHING TO LOSE hit me like a left hook when I was
expecting a body blow. Tim Robbins, playing a corporate hustler named Nick
Beam, is in bed with his wife, murmuring in a dead, empty voice about how
the love is gone. Then we get a surprise -- several, actually -- that had
both me and the rest of the audience falling out of our seats. This sets us
up on several levels: not only is Robbins a good actor, but so is the Beam
character.
Nick works for an advertising company which fills his hours, but he still
manages to find time for his wife. One afternoon, he gets out of a whole
slew of corporate obligations and comes home early... to find his wife and
his boss in bed together. He wanders downstairs, dazed, and then does what
no man in a blue funk should ever do: get in his car.
His aimless driving leads him to a carjacking, courtesy of a fellow named T.
Paul (Martin Lawrence), who senses Mr. Whitebread ain't firing on all
thrusters when he doesn't even look at the gun pointing at his temple. "Boy,
did you ever pick the wrong guy on the wrong day," Beam mutters with a
deadly little smile, and floors it.
One scarifying ride later, the two of them take stock in a diner far outside
the city. They don't like each other, but they're forced to rely on each
other when the Land Rover runs out of gas and Paul sticks up a gas station
to fill it up. Bit by bit, Beam's story comes out... along with a bizarre
plan to get revenge on his boss by robbing him blind.
The movie's a pastiche of recent comedy cliches, and there's no point in
ignoring it. What's different is that the movie is funny. Most comedies that
try to play this kind of mix-and-match don't work; they strike the wrong
notes, or make the heroes into idiots. Both Beam and Paul know what's what,
which makes them interesting to watch: you wonder what they're going to do
next. In one scene, they rob a sporting-goods store, and what could have
been a routine stick-em-up turns into a heated competition over who had the
more intimidating stickup style.
Martin Lawrence is an odd duck. I can't figure out if I like him or hate
him, but I liked him in this movie: he does things with his voice and face
that shouldn't be physically possible, which is half the reason for the
laughs he gets. The other half is his timing and attitude: pay attention to
the scene where he dresses down Beam for not having a tighter grip on his
wife (and Beam's reaction, too). Or the scene where he tries to tell Beam
he's in danger, and gets shrugged off.
Ultimately, the cliches win in NOTHING TO LOSE, but that doesn't mean the
ride isn't enjoyable. My basic rule of thumb for comedy is: Did I laugh?
Yeah -- a lot more than I probably should have, but I can't say that about
most movies. And the scene with the security guard Goth-dancing in the laser
vault has to be seen to be believed.

Author
Jamie Peck
Touchstone / 1:37 / 1997 / R (sex, language, violence)
Cast: Tim Robbins; Martin Lawrence; Kelly Preston; John C. McGinley;
Giancarlo Esposito; Michael McKean; Irma P. Hall; Rebecca Gayheart
Director: Steve Oedekerk
Screenplay: Steve Oedekerk
On-screen couples don't come any odder than "Nothing to Lose"'s Tim
Robbins and Martin Lawrence. The pairing of Robbins (coming off a career
high from directing and writing the enlightening Dead "Man Walking") and
Lawrence (coming off a career low from directing, writing and acting in
the horrible "A Thin Line Between Love and Hate") could have resulted in
a quirky good time, but "Nothing to Lose" has almost nothing on its mind
-- and the result is a 97-minute running time that feels about as long
as three viewings of "The English Patient."
Robbins is well-cast as Nick Beam, an even-tempered Los Angeles
advertising executive whose serene, routine life is interrupted through
a series of hapless coincidences. Nick's happy marriage to wife Anne
(the omnipresent Kelly Preston) is turned topsy-turvy when he returns
home from work early one day to discover what appears to be her in bed
with another man -- and the cufflinks on the downstairs endtable suggest
that it's his boss (Michael McKean). Distraught and upset, Nick hops
into his car and goes on a drive to clear his head. When he's at a
stoplight, novice hoodlum T. Paul (Lawrence) attempts to car-jack him --
but T. Paul has clearly picked the wrong guy on the wrong day.
Nick steps on the gas and doesn't let off until he and his new "friend"
are well out of the city limits. They strike up a hostile, chummy
rapport that leads to many disagreements, most of them over T. Paul's
habit of robbing from convenience stores to support his family. This
gives Nick an idea, albeit a naughty one -- why not steal from his own
boss as payback for sleeping with his wife? To top everything off,
Nothing to Lose also introduces us to another set of criminals (John C.
McGinley and Giancarlo Esposito), only these guys are hardcore into
their profession, and the local police keep on getting their exploits
confused with those of Nick and T. Paul.
Robbins is a likable guy, and Lawrence can be such when he wants, so
it's a surprise that the time they share together falls flat on its
face. The two have no chemistry whatsoever, a testament to how poorly we
get to know Nick and T. Paul as a duo. We are unwisely spared the
moments when they first meet -- the movie jumps from T. Paul's failed
hold-up to a scene where they're stopping for food many miles away.
"Nothing to Lose" never tries to explain their relationship to us, and
therefore it totally overlooks what likely could have been its best
scenes. In place of development is a long, violent sequence where Nick
and T. Paul knock each other around outside a diner. It's as if nobody
knew what else to do.
Don't get me wrong -- "Nothing to Lose" does contain its fair share of
out-loud laughs. It's just that none of them belong to either Robbins or
Lawrence -- they're given to supporting performers that are each
utilized for about one brief scene each. There's a good bit with an
elderly general store clerk who gives Nick pointers on how to be a
better criminal. Director/writer Steve Oedekirk cleverly casts himself
as a security guard who's a slave to the rhythm. Great character actress
Irma P. Hall is fine in her two bits as T. Paul's slaphappy mother. And
the film's brightest sequence is executed early on, with Nick
criticizing an employee for creating a "magical" trail of chocolate
chips that follows a cookie company's mascot -- the semi-sweet morsels
hilariously resemble excrement.
"Nothing to Lose" is never a terrible movie, but I still don't think I
could subject myself to it again. When the film is smart, it can really
catch you off guard. But that's almost a rarity, because the story takes
turns being either too silly or too socially relevant. There's even a
plot twist near the movie's midsection that's insubstantial because it
should surprise no one who observed closely and listened carefully
during the film's first 20 minutes. All these weaknesses make it clear
that there's not much to gain from watching "Nothing to Lose."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sometimes an audience can work against you.  For the press
screening of the comedy NOTHING TO LOSE, the studio and the hosting
radio station had given out more tickets than seats.  And the vast
majority of those fortunate enough to find a place acted like card
carrying members of the Martin Lawrence fan club.  Lawrence, from A
THIN LINE BETWEEN LOVE AND HATE and the HOUSE PARTY series, has a happy
demeanor to go with his fast and sometimes foul mouth.  He's quite a
likable star so I can understand part of his attraction.
     When Lawrence, playing robber Terrence Paul Davidson, said two
words, any two words, the audience went into pandemonium.  Since I
thought the first part was only sporadically funny, I felt strangely
isolated.  As pleased as I was that the audience was having such a
great time, I found the audience's riotous attitude off-putting since I
thought most of the initial gags in the movie only barely worked.
     Perhaps the biggest surprise for me was that writer and director
Steve Oedekerk (ACE VENTURA: WHEN NATURE CALLS) eventually won me over
by sheer audacity.  The broadly written comedy in NOTHING TO LOSE takes
many risks and some of them pay off beautifully.  And then again, some
sink like a stone.
     Tim Robbins, who had many fewer fans at my screening, was much
funnier than Lawrence.  Although most people associate him with his
more serious parts, as in THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, he has a wide
comedic pedigree from the hilarious (BULL DURHAM) to the comedically-
challenged (HOWARD THE DUCK).  In NOTHING TO LOSE he has the delayed
reaction down pat.  After a pregnant pause, he delivers his lines with
great deadpan humor.
     In NOTHING TO LOSE Robbins plays rich advertising executive Nick
Beam, who works out of a palatial suite of offices in Los Angeles.  The
story starts simply but lovingly with him and his wife, Ann (played by
Kelly Preston from CITIZEN RUTH), engaged in make-believe while sitting
on their bed.  She would make up a lie that she was having an affair,
and he would have to try to keep a straight face, and then they would
switch sides.  The chemistry and love between them seems genuine from
the first scene.  They call each other on the phone during their hectic
work schedules just to flirt with all the passion of two new lovers.
In short, a perfect marriage.
     Nick comes home early one day to find his lecherous boss, Philip
Barrow (Michael McKean), whose office contains arguably the funniest
fertility statue ever, having sex with his wife.  Rather than speak up,
Nick slips out the door in a state of utter devastation.  His drives 16
MPH on the freeway and in town oblivious to the world he no longer
cares about.  When Terrence hops in Nick's car to rob him, Nick looks
at him with a vacant stare and declares, "Boy, you picked the wrong
guy, on the wrong day."  Nick starts his sport utility vehicle on a
kamikaze mission.  When he fails at getting them both killed, he heads
for the Arizona desert, turning the robber into a crying hostage.
     Slowly the two leads begin the inevitable bonding process which
culminates with Nick's concocting a scheme to steal money from his
boss's safe as a way to get back at his boss for ruining his life.
     Not content with having Lawrence play a robber, the writer had to
design a Norman Rockwell family for him and let us in on his secret.
The reason he has turned to a life of crime is that people will not
hire him.  Although he has the skills to make it in the computer
industry, people will not give him a chance because he is black and
inexperienced.  We are even shown a stack of rejection letters.  Why
can't a robber in a comedy just be a robber?  (Still, it does make for
one joke that people in the computer field will appreciate.  Terrence
wants to know exactly what kind of computers they have in Nick's
office.  "NT?" Terrence asks.  Looking like someone who has just wasted
their money on the wrong designer shoes, Nick sheepishly replies, "No,
just Windows.")
     Along the way to their big crime, Terrence and Nick run into two
lowlife criminals named Rig (John C. McGinley) and Charlie (Giancarlo
Esposito), whose purpose is to supply a plot device to complicate the
big burglary.
     Of the movie's farcical scenes that work, two stand out.  In one,
Terrence and Nick steal two flashlights from a hardware store and use
the owner as a focus group of one to evaluate the fright factor of
various ways of holding people up.  In another, the guard watching the
boss's office does a late night John Travolta-style dance number that
our two would-be robbers worry will never end.
     NOTHING TO LOSE's name says it all.  Not a great comedy, but one
worth trying.
     NOTHING TO LOSE runs a fast 1:37.  It is rated R for profanity and
sex.  Although we were shocked to see a large part of our audience
under 9 and many under 6, kids under 13 have no business being there.
For teenagers, the show should be fine.  I give the picture thumbs up
and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Matt Petras
        Life is absolutely perfect for Nick Beame, he loves his wife,
he loves his job, he's well off. Nothing could be better, then he
comes home to find his wife in bed with someone. Next thing he notices
are his boss' cufflinks. Putting two and two together he assumes the
worst. Now if his troubles weren't bad, he gets mugged, well not
really mugged.. this is where the fun begins. The would-be mugger is
taken for a joy ride along with the audience. 
        This movie turned out to be surprisingly funny. I knew, I was
going into a comedy from the moment the ticket was purchased.  But I
was not expecting any intelligent conversation, not to mock either Mr.
Lawrence or Mr. Robbins I just wasn't expecting something this
amusing. Needless to say this is actually a funny comedy the plot is
fairly believable, there is little blood spilt, and unless my memory
has decided to fail me there was no explosions. It was refreshing to
see a movie come out of Hollywood that relied on the acting of its
cast to produce the desired effect as opposed to relying on special
effects like Jurasic Park 2 was inevitably forced to do. Tim Robbins
puts in a good performance as Nick Beame, and Martin Lawrence Tee(AKA
Terrence) also puts in a respectable and witty performance. 
        The actual storyline of the movie is believable although not
something likely happen, it is possible and that is what lends this
movie credibility.  Remarkably the movie shows us the two contrasts in
our lives the poor and the fairly well off as they truly are, Humans
above all else.  Although this movie is no revelation it did bring up
the point that people have a hard time getting jobs and in many cases
its not due to their skills but due to other factors such as sex or
skin color. It  pokes some fun at life, at the same time showing that
something's in life are brutally hard to cope with. This movie is a
movie that lets your take a break relax, kick back, have some fun and
get away from it for about 2 hours. What you get from it is time well
spent and in most cases a smile on your face.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In Hollywood, the place where paradigms reign and conceptual
blockbusting goes to die, among the most hallowed of paradigms is the 90
minute running time.  You may be able to get away with 85, and five or ten
fewer for an animated feature, but anything less would appear to risk
rending the very fabric of space-time.  Never mind that a popular
45-minute film, with its potential for nine or ten cut-rate showings a day
plus concession sales from twice as many intermissions, would be an
exhibitor's fantasy.  The 90-Minute Mandate exists for one fairly obvious,
and fairly depressing, reason:  it's less complicated for studios to keep
throwing money at bloated, mediocre films than it is for them to figure
out how to make and market shorter, better ones.
     NOTHING TO LOSE could have been a hilarious 30 or 40 minutes of comic
film-making.  Instead, it's an over-stuffed 97 minutes, not because it
should have been but because it _had_ to be.  The premise is solid enough:
upper-crust L. A. ad executive Nick Beam (Tim Robbins) comes home from
work one day to find his wife (Kelly Preston) in bed with is boss.
Devastated, Nick begins driving aimlessly through the city, until he is
accosted at a stop light by rookie car-jacker T. Paul (Martin Lawrence).
Much to T. Paul's chagrin, however, Nick does not go gentle.  Instead, he
kidnaps the would-be assailant, beginning a road trip of armed robbery,
mistaken identity and buddy bonding which will take the pair from L. A. to
Arizona and back again before they launch a plot for revenge against
Nick's arrogant boss.
     Along the way, writer-director Steve Oedekerk places Nick and T. Paul
into some bizarre and truly inventive situations.  One scene finds a
terrified hardware store clerk asked to compare the respective hold-up
stylings of Nick and T-Paul; another lets Oedekerk himself kick up his
heels as a security guard who uses an empty office building to practice
his dance moves.  At odd moments, NOTHING TO LOSE will catch you off guard
with a memorable supporting performance or an unpredictable punch line.
     Since Oedekerk is a veteran of stand-up comedy and sketch writing for
"In Living Color," it should be surprising that hit-and-run gags play to
his strengths.  Nor should it be surprising that the length of a feature
film does not.  He fills the spaces between clever comic moments with
sub-plots which probably were meant to provide "depth," but instead merely
provide "length."  T-Paul, it seems, is no criminal, merely a computer
whiz who can't catch a break; Nick, in turn, is actually an oblivious
white-collar in need of racial enlightenment.  This lame attempt at social
commentary robs both characters of the edge which would have made a
shorter, sharper NOTHING TO LOSE crackle with creativity.  Tim Robbins as
just another uptight liberal-in-training is a bore.  Martin Lawrence as a
sympathetic family man is a strain on credulity like a tractor-trailer is
a strain on a Vespa.
    NOTHING TO LOSE really disintegrates when Oedekerk spends valuable
minutes on a feud between our protagonists and a pair of tough guy outlaws
(John C. McGinley and Giancarlo Esposito).  Every scene between them drags
the film to a crawl, making you long for a version of NOTHING TO LOSE in
which Oedekerk simply let Nick and T-Paul go off on their own unlikely
crime spree, free of sentimentality.  Ninety-seven minutes gives him too
much time to search for a happy ending, one which would have been much
happier for all involved if it had come an hour earlier.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Steve Oedekerk
Starring: Tim Robbins, Martin Lawrence, John C. McGinley, Giancarlo
Esposito, Kelly Preston, Michael McKean, Rebecca Gayheart, Steve
Oedekerk
For four days at the crap college theatre, where you can see mainstream
films with bad quality for a mere buck 25 (with college id, of course),
they were playing a "surprise movie."  Could it be perhaps a new movie,
or maybe an upcoming film?  Or maybe a popular classic, like "Star
Wars?"  Welp, I got there and it turns out to be none other
than..."Nothing To Lose."  Since I had hiked across campus to find out
what it was and perhaps see it, those were my exact sentiments on
whether I was going to see it or not.
"Nothing To Lose," as the previews stated, is a comedy about racial
unity, robbery, vengeance, and suicidal tendencies.  It has a nice
little gimmick that at least got a little smirk across my face:
sucessful white boy named Nick (Tim Robbins) finds his wife (Kelly
Preston) is cheating on him with his boss (Michael McKean), so he goes
out in his big car, is carjacked by "T" for Terence (Martin Lawrence),
and he figures he has nothing to lose, so he hits the accelerator, and
the two end up being partners in crime.
The premise might be really shallow and all, but it's at least a nice
idea for a good old comedy.  And with serious actor Tim Robbins playing
off of hyperkinetic comic actor Martin Lawrence, you could tell that
this little odd couple would make up for any poorness the script could
possibly posess.  But while I was right on both counts, there's
something missing from the big picture.  Sure, I was laughing, but I
still left feeling like this was just an "ok" movie.
Where's the problem in this?  Well, for starters, the whole suplot of
the two other robbers (John C. McGinley and Giancarlo Esposito) is so
unfunny and weak.  I mean, it has its moments (I actually laughed when
all of them were cursing at eachother for a full minute), but it's just
a poor excuse to get them in more trouble (and extend the length of the
film).  Most of the jokes in this section of the film are cheap, and
unfunny...and it doesn't help that McGinley and Espostio are horrible in
their roles (both CAN act, but not here, strangely).
And the whole adultery gimmick has a really horrible pay-off at the end,
which just exhumes cheapness.  It's just another example of a film
pulling its punches at the last moment, too afraid to go for an original
ending which might not be satisfying to a programmed mass audience.  You
have to see it to believe how dumb it is.  And a little fling Nick has
with a person at his work (Rebecca Gayheart, who was on "90210" for a
while as Luke Perry's girlfriend - I bet you're all wondering how I know
this - oh, and she was the "Noxzema Girl" for a while) is nothing short
of cheap and moronic.
But perhaps the chief problem is with the writing and direction of Steve
Oedekerk (who did the second "Ace Ventura" film, which I still refuse to
see unless I can see it for free).  The film has a totally outrageous
premise, and the film isn't outrageous enough.  As I said, it pulls many
punches, but that's only part of it.  The writing isn't funny enough,
the scenes aren't as wildly shot as they should be, and the storyline
doesn't go as beserk as it should.  Of course, it could be me.
The two leads, on the other hand, are very funny.  Robbins and Lawrence
would probably never be caught in the same movie other than this one,
and they actually posess some good chemistry.  Robbins has done comedy
before (although no one saw it: "The Hudsucker Proxy"), and here he's
hysterical.  He has a way of being extremely likable witout
overshadowing his partner, which is kinda hard since it's Martin
Lawrence, of the now-defunct "Martin."  I've never really been a huge
fan of Lawrence, but I have to say he was hilarious in this one. 
They're the best thing of this film.
Kelly Preston and Michael McKean show up in the beginning and end in
very under-written parts, though Preston and Robbins have some scenes
where they have some great chemistry.  Poor Michael McKean, though. 
He's a funny guy (need I remind anyone of "This is Spinal Tap?"), but
the 90s have been very cruel to him (save "The Brady Bunch Movie"). 
He's always getting very unfunny parts where he tries his best, and
here's another example.
"Nothing to Lose" is funny and all, but it's not really worth going out
of your way to see.  If you can see it for cheap and with very little
physical movement, go for it.  But you're not going to come out enriched
or anything.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Touchstone)
Directed by     Steve Oedekerk
Written by      Steve Oedekerk
Cast            Tim Robbins, Martin Lawrence, John C. McGinley,
                Giancarlo Esposito, Kelly Preston, Michael McKean
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language)
Running Time    98 minutes
Reviewed at     Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (18JUL97)
     Tim Robbins and Martin Lawrence are certainly the oddest couple to
come down the pike in a while.  Mr. Susan Sarandon plays Nick Beam, a
Southern California ad executive whose car is jacked by an unemployed
electronics expert (Lawrence).  The catch?  Nick has just discovered his
wife in bed with the boss.  "Boy, did you pick the wrong guy on the
wrong day." Click go the door locks, squeal go the tires, and you can
take it from there.  Yes, they become reluctant best buds.  Yes, they
become partners in crime.  Yes, these and other ridiculous plot points
are cheerfully telegraphed in advance by writer/director Steve Oedekerk
(THE NUTTY PROFESSOR, ACE VENTURA 2: WHEN NATURE CALLS).  Though the
shaggy dog story grows increasingly (and distressingly) warm and fuzzy,
Robbins and Lawrence have a remarkably playful chemistry.  In fact,
they're almost *too* playful.  During several exchanges, the actors
appear barely able to maintain straight faces.  With John C.  McGinley,
Giancarlo Esposito, Kelly Preston, Michael McKean, and, whap!, Irma P.
Hall.
