Title
Review for After Dark, My Sweet (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chris Loar
At first glance, Westerns don't seem to have much in common with films   
noir; they seem to occupy opposite ends of the genre-cinema spectrum.   
 Westerns are all about wide open spaces, and are full of real heroes   
doing heroic things.  Noir flicks are crammed into constrictive   
cityscapes, with depressed midlife men drinking too much whiskey and   
trying to decipher complex plots that sometimes even their writers don't   
completely understand.  But, of course, this opposition is illusory; noir   
is the Western's illegitimate child, and the two genres have fertilized   
and influenced each other in countless ways.  Most obviously, the best   
films in the two genres share the same ur-protagonist, a complex hero who   
is at once sinner and saint.  He is often a mysterious stranger, or at   
least an outsider, entering situations of chaos and restoring a semblance   
of justice and order.
But I've never before seen a film that tried to merge these genres in   
quite the same way as James Foley's AFTER DARK, MY SWEET.  For while this   
film -- and the Jim Thompson novel on which it's based -- has a fairly   
standard film noir plot, all intrigues and lies and ambiguous motives,   
it's got none of the standard visual cues that go along with that plot.   
 Film noir relies on urban settings, sharp contrasts, chiaroscuro, and   
the flavor of night.  AFTER DARK, despite its name, is first and foremost   
a movie of the desert and of daylight.  Filmed in and around Indio,   
California, the movie is about agoraphobia, not claustrophobia, and uses   
emptiness and space rather than density and texture to make its visual   
points.  It's this conspicuous use of the desert that makes us see the   
Western that lies beneath the surface of so many noirs and neo-noirs.
The story revolves around Kevin Collins (Jason Patric, looking hunky).   
 Collins, or "Collie," has a pronounced nervous disorder which gives him   
an unusually sudden temper -- a temper which, combined with the skills of   
a former boxer, makes him a little bit dangerous.  Which is why he's been   
in and out of institutions for a number of years.  As the movie opens, we   
meet Collie on the run from one of these institutions.  Bedraggled and   
tired, he's looking for a lift, and he finds it in the form of Fay   
Anderson (Rachel Ward), a recent widow who offers to let him do a few odd   
jobs around her home.
Fay is a classic noir enigma, a wasted, leggy beauty; not surprisingly,   
it's Collie's attraction to her that gets him involved in the   
machinations Fay's friend of Uncle Bud (Bruce Dern).  Bud is a former   
detective, but he's clearly not on the side of truth and justice.  Uncle   
Bud has a proposition for Collie, though, that might set him up for the   
rest of his life, or so he claims.  He plans to kidnap a wealthy man's   
son -- and, with his inside connections to the police department, all he   
needs is the right man to help him along.  Dern is perfect for this part;   
his performance is gloriously unctuous, and he carries himself with a   
seedy charisma that gives this film some much-needed energy.
The storyline is firmly grounded in Thompson's novel; much of the   
dialogue is culled more or less word for word.  But the novel has a   
punchy energy that this film lacks; the novel ends up as a framework for   
Foley to do what he wants to do.  And what he seems to want is to give us   
a noir that's really a sort of hollowed-out Western.  Fay's cavernous   
house, where much of the film takes place, is missing a husband and   
father; Collie is missing a purpose in life; Uncle Bud is missing a few   
screws.  And it's hard to do a film that's mostly about absence; it tends   
to hollow out the entire project, and indeed, this film is missing any   
real energy or drive.  Which leaves us with a film that's more   
interesting to think about than it is to watch.
Compounding this difficulty is the presentation of Collie.  In Thompson's   
novel, the reader is very much sucked into Collie's consciousness; he   
feels very authentic, and unlike many of Thompson's protagonists, he's   
almost entirely sympathetic.  In the film, we're largely locked out of   
Collie's head; we hear his words as voice-over at times, but (partly but   
not entirely due to the intrinsic limitations of film) it's hard to   
identify with him.  This problem is enhanced by Patric's performance.   
 It's not that Patric is bad in the part; quite the opposite, he's   
surprisingly good -- convincing, enigmatic, complex.  And that's part of   
the problem -- he plays things a little too complex, leaving the audience   
without a solid reference point.  There's a lot going on behind those   
blue eyes of his -- but while Thompson let us know exactly what was   
there, Patric and Foley only provide hints and glimpses.
All of which leaves AFTER DARK as an admirable but not exactly compelling   
picture.  It's certainly a lovely movie to watch (rather less so on video   
than on the big screen, of course); shots of the barren California   
deserts echo spacious interior shots that at times echo Orson Welles with   
their depth of focus and complex content.  The performances range from   
good to excellent, and the writing is vintage Thompson.  But when it's   
all said and done, it's really too airy and spacious to feel very   
substantial.

Author
Sandra J. Grossmann
Cast:       Jason Patric, Rachel Ward, Bruce Dern
Director:   James Foley
Screenplay: Robert Redlin & James Foley, based on Jim Thompson's novel
     Just about any book on screenwriting stresses that the first few
pages of a screenplay must establish the main character's personality
and introduce the major conflict.  "Few" means 3, 5, or 7, which
translates to 3, 5, or 7 minutes.  It's a good thing that Redlin & Foley
ignored such advice.
     AFTER DARK, MY SWEET pulls you in bit by bit, always holding back
and making you try to fit the pieces together.  Interesting from the
very beginning, it sure as hell doesn't follow a formula.
     Ken Collins (Jason Patric) is an ex-boxer.  When we first meet him,
we discover that he has escaped from an institution, but it isn't clear
why he was institutionalized.  We meet up with him in the Californian
desert, where his voice-over begins the narration that continues
throughout the film.  He has a diffident voice:  stumbling,
non-energetic, shy, and reserved.  Non-Hollywood.  His gait is curious,
too; he walks with his shoulders hunched forward, his legs advancing him
toward an unknown opponent in the peculiar, somehow-awkward stance of
the boxer.
     He stops in a bar and tries to strike up a conversation with Fay
Anderson (Rachel Ward), who immediately sizes him up as a stupid oaf.
When the bartender attempts to throw him out, Collins' reflexes take
over.  He stumbles out into the desert along the highway, where Fay
impulsively picks him up.
     She looks at his face and renames him Collie.  There they are on a
road in Indio, California.  The landscape provides nothing--absolutely
nothing.  No reason to stay but too hot and still for people to summon
the energy to leave.  Everything that happens just seems to happen all
by itself, and the flat, endless landscape is flattened still further by
a relentless sun.
     A friend describes this film as Technicolor noir.  Maybe he read
that somewhere, or maybe he made it up himself, but it's a good label.
Certainly the tone is film noir, and the overbearing light in this film
serves the same purpose as the dark, shadowed images of yesteryear.
While regular film noir depends upon particularly malevolent characters
and a pervasive pessimism, AFTER DARK, MY SWEET differs in that the
characters aren't stereotypical or especially stylized.  Although the
characters are at once recognizable, they are in some sense archetypes
instead of stereotypes.  Also in contrast to film noir is the holdout
for hope that the characters maintain.
     I don't want to spoil this for you by telling you too much about
the story or giving away too much about the characters.  Let me put it
this way, though: these characters are complex and their relationships
constantly shift.  The acting is superb.  I'd never even heard of Jason
Patric before, but I know of him now and greatly respect his ability.
Rachel Ward is grand.  Bruce Dern is perfect as Uncle Bob, a schemer who
amuses Fay.
     Hats off to the writers of this play for creating such complete
characters and events that just start happening.  In contrast to many
screenplays, the characters' reactions to events and opportunities
actually drive the story.  Put another way, the plot doesn't drive the
characters--the characters drive the plot.  Rare is the screenplay that
allows this to happen.
     Why this didn't get more attention is beyond me.  It's well-worth
seeing, and Patric's performance makes this a film worth buying.  Rent
it, though, and tell me what *you* think.  And tell me what the heck the
title has to do with the film, OK?  I never did get it...
Sandra J. Grossmann         sandyg@sail.labs.tek.com 
