Title
Review for Profundo carmesí (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
DEEP CRIMSON
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Ivania Films
 Director:  Arturo Ripstein
 Writer:  Paz Alicia Garciadiego
 Cast: Julieta Egurrola, Bianca Florido, Giovanni Florido, Rosa
Furman, Daniel Gimenez Cacho, Sherlyn Gonzalez, Veronica
Merchant, Regina Orozco, Marisa Paredes, Patricia Reyes
Spindola
   At: Film Forum, 209 W. Houston St. New York City
   Films and plays that treat murder in comic ways are
abundant, a leading example being "Arsenic and Old Lace," in
which a couple of dotty old ladies poison lonely widowers to
put them out of their misery.  "Deep Crimson," a tortilla-y-
frijoles remake of the 1970 cult movie "Honeymoon Killers,"
uses takes a true series of events which occurred in the
1940s and injects an almost surreal take.  The picture, which
is called an example of the genre "mad-love," makes
cartoon figures out of two petty creatures living seedy lives in
Mexico and shows how their merger in mayhem melds them
into blood siblings.  What a duo!  Coral Fabre (Regina
Orozco) is obese and just not-all-there, while the man she
adores, Nicolas Estrella (Daniel Gimenez Cacho) is
handsome enough when he wears his hairpiece, generally
bemused, and ultimately surprised by the depth of his feeling
for the repulsive Coral.
   The story begins by showing just how randy and forlorn
Ms. Fabre must be.  A nurse in a seedy institution, she makes
advances on an 80-year-old, wheelchair-bound man. 
Reading the personals column she discovers an ad that
describes the guy of her dreams: a Spaniard who comes
across as a true gentleman.  When he quickly departs after
meeting her complaining of a migraine headache, we assume
the pain is a ruse to get away from this humongous creature
(played by Shirley Stoler in the 1970 American version).  But
he returns and during their courtship she rifles through his
papers and discovers his plan to extort money from the
widows he charms.  She is pleased.  Teaming up, Coral and
Nicolas set their sights on other women whose loneliness
makes them as desolate and dried-up as the backwater
surroundings. 
   Director Arturo Ripstein lingers over each operation of this
larcenous duo as they take care of a fidgety woman who
claims she is imprisoned by her gypsy husband; a fanatically
religious widow who is warned by her cynical, atheistic
neighbor that her new love interest is a fraud, and a young,
businesslike woman who seems to need only another
mechanic to help run her repair shop and to keep the eyes
and hands of the local machos away.
   "Deep Crimson," which also has the Spanish name
"Profundo carmesi," takes its title from Coral's favorite color,
one which matches the blood which gushes from their victims
whose lives are snuffed out not so much for their money but
because of Coral's envy.  Unable to tolerate the
attentions which her man is giving to the victims, she turns
her own madness into serial killing and her beau into an
accomplice.  Hers is the sort of passion which knows no
boundaries: she has even given up the two children she loves
to satisfy the whims of her sleazy partner in crime.
   Hairpieces have always been the subject of jokes. In "Deep
Crimson," much is made of the value which Nicolas places on
his rug--justifiably, though, since he is a great deal more
handsome while wearing it. Ripstein unfolds Paz Alicia
Garciadiego's screenplay in a straight, narrative style, drawing
us into the activities by cleverly alternating the comic with the
disturbing.  While Coral's plight calls out for some sympathy
from the audience, her loathsome obesity prevents us from
commiseration.  Not so Nicolas, who, despite his history of
embezzlement, is a nice-looking soul who believes he is
earning the money he misappropriates by providing his lonely
women with the solace and company of a handsome escort.
   "Deep Crimson" is played less tongue-in-cheek than its
predecessor, "The Honeymoon Killers," and so could hardly
be a candidate for cult status.  It is well acted by an ensemble
cast particularly Marisa Paredes as the ultra-religious Irene
Gallardo and Patricia Reyes Espindola as the Widow Ruelas. 
Watch for the scene in which Coral, who has had some
experience with embalming, props up one of her victims in a
chair "until rigor mortis sets in.  Not Rated.  Running Time:
114 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DEEP CRIMSON (PROFUNDO CARMESI) (director: Arturo Ripstein;
screenwriter: Alicia Paz Garciadiego; cinematographer: Guillermo
Granillo; cast: Daniel Giménez Cacho (Nicolas Estrella), Regina Orozco
(Coral Fabre), Marisa Paredes (Irene Gallardo), Julieta Egurrola
(Juanita Norton), Rosa Furman (Mrs. Silberman), Veronica Merchant
(Rebeca Sampedro), Patricia Reyes Espindola (Mrs. Ruelas), 1996-Mex.)
A very troubling film, regarding the crimes of Martha Beck and Raymond
Fernandez, who were executed in 1951. This Mexican version is a
re-working of The Honeymoon Killers (69) and is set in the Mexico of
1949. It offers a vivid picture of greed, vanity, and pure evil. This
film differs from the former in its more gaudy and cartoonish style and
careful camerawork taking note of the reflecting light patterns that
surrounded the couple, and with a penchant for showing the troubled
characters gazing into mirrors, as if they were looking for their lost
souls. The grim nature of its story was made less austere by the film's
black comedy, which was a staple of both films. As diabolical as this
film was, in showing the couple to be moral degenerates with no
conscience or redeeming qualities, the earlier film, the one I still
prefer, takes a slightly different emphasis, holding a more cult-like
look at the grotesque couple, while also showing them to be heartless
weirdos without any redeeming qualities.
Coral (Regina Orozco) is overweight and suffers from halitosis. She is a
nurse and a part-time embalmer whose search for her own Charles Boyer
ends when she meets gigolo-confidence man Nicolas (Daniel Gimenez Cacho)
through a lonely heart ad she responds to. This is match made in hell.
He poses as a native born Spaniard and a gentleman, who sleeps with her
at her urgings, and awakens from this bed of bliss to rob her, which she
sees but says nothing. She tracks him down with her two small children
in tow the next day and declares he is the man she always wanted and
will do anything for him. She even tells him, while she is waiting in
his apartment the next day for him to return, that she read all his
letters and knows that he is an extortionist and murdered one widow by
giving her an overdose of medication. When he waivers at her proposal to
live together, she takes the children the same day and dumps them in an
orphanage, saying she would rather have him than them. She tells him
that she would rather kill herself than not have him. This pleases the
egocentric gigolo, who suffers from severe migraines. He realizes that
this could work out for him, that she will never betray him.
The most important thing in Nico's life is to look good. His most
important possession is his hairpiece, as he is ashamed of his baldness
and spends long periods of time in front of the mirror adjusting the wig
and his fedora hat with the brim turned down. There is one point in the
story where he loses his hairpiece and he falls apart, until she comes
to the recue and has one made up with her hair.To say that this cowardly
couple has some psychological problems, is to say a mouthful.
The two team up, presenting themselves as brother and sister, as they go
on a long string of crimes together. Their first big job together, they
answer a lonely heart ad from a widow named Juanita (Egurrola). Things
go wrong when they meet her in a remote lounge and she tells him she is
penniless, living with a jealous lover and having to sneak out to meet
him. When the two start dancing romantically together, things go
bizarre, as the obese Coral has a jealousy tantrum and spikes the
widow's drink with rat poison, which kills her. So now their crime spree
is not only over greed but resorts to murder because of jealousy, and
the gigolo becomes her murder accomplice.
Their next victim is a lonely widow, Irene (Marisa). They convince her
to go along with them on a Christian crusade. Her anarchist, Jewish
neighbor (Furman) recognizes these two as charlatans and tries to warn
her friend, but to no avail. She is so desperate for a man in her bed,
that she runs off with the two and gets married in a cemetery. When they
check into a motel and she wants to sleep with her husband, the jealous
Coral cracks a statue over her head, and that takes care of another
widow. Her arrangement with Nico, is that he doesn't sleep with anyone
but her.
Their last murder is their most horrid and sloppiest one, as they answer
a personal ad from a widow (Espindola) in a backwater town, who wants to
meet a mechanic and will marry him after a two month courtship is proved
to be satisfactory to her. She turns out to be a young woman with a
young daughter, and is very sexually aggressive with Nico. She demands
that his sister leaves, which she does, but soon returns on Nico's
request that he needs her, that he is having migraines and that the
widow is pregnant. The cowardly couple have no qualms killing both the
mother and daughter, and it only through betrayal by one of them that
the cops are called.
In their execution the next day, the police gun them down like dogs in
the field, and the vain Nico only begs to be shot with his wig on. He
doesn't want to die in front of Coral without it on. I think that little
touch of vanity got weary after a while, and the director just made too
much of it. It lost its humorous quality by then in the story.
Nevertheless, this is a chilling tale by one of Mexico's most respected
director, who left no room for sympathizing over these two twisted
lovers, swindlers, and killers. The director caught the slimy couple's
depravity full-blast and never let up on them. To watch Coral put the
widow's young child in a bath and wantonly kill her, while at the same
time mothering her, was a ghastly sight to see.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David Dalgleish
Starring Daniel Giménez Cacho, Regina Orozco, Marisa Paredes, 
Verónica Merchant
Directed by Arturo Ripstein
Written by Paz Alicia Garciadiego
Cinematography by Guillermo Granillo
American movies are fascinated by the idea of violent lovers on the 
run.  BONNIE AND CLYDE, WILD AT HEART, NATURAL BORN KILLERS: they are 
repelled by their heartless, cruel anti-heroes, but they are also 
seduced by them, because underlying their violence is the romantic 
myth of the outlaw, an American myth if ever there was one.  DEEP 
CRIMSON is a mordant black comedy about a pair of violent lovers on 
the run, but it is a Mexican movie, and apparently Mexicans are less 
inclined to to romanticize their outlaws, because what we get is a 
portrait of homicidal loners rather different from the one we're used 
to--a portrait that is, I suspect, closer to the truth.
The lovers/loners in DEEP CRIMSON are Coral and Nicolas (Regina 
Orozco, Daniel Giménez Cacho).  She's a pathologically lonely single 
mother of two children, somewhat overweight but convinced that she is 
monstrously obese; he's a balding would-be Lothario, convinced that 
he's a freak because of his baldness, which he conceals with a 
hairpiece and a fedora.  She fantasizes about Charles Boyer (the time 
is the 1940s) while she reads Lonely Hearts columns in search of 
eligible men; he romances and then robs lonely women, meeting them via 
ads in Lonely Hearts columns in which he claims to look like Charles 
Boyer.
And so, of course, they meet.  They have an awkward first encounter; 
he leaves; he returns and they make love; he robs her and goes home.  
She, fully aware of his crime, follows him to his home, her children 
in tow, and demands that he let her live with him.  He says he can't 
have her in his home because he cannot afford to keep two children.  
She abandons the children, and--it's that kind of a 
relationship--touched by this act, he acquiesces to her demands: she 
will be his lover, and his partner in crime, helping him to select his 
victims.
They attempt to choose rich widows and then divest them of their 
wealth.  Unfortunately, Coral and Nicolas are not particularly good 
criminals: they manage to kill the widows, because Coral is jealous, 
but they turn out to not be so wealthy after all.  Soon the couple are 
fleeing from one backwater to another, disposing of the evidence as 
best they can after each failed scam.
DEEP CRIMSON has no illusions about Coral and Nicolas.  They are not 
young, beautiful, and coolly amoral.  There is nothing remotely noble 
or heroic about their anti-social stance.  Their fate is not tragic; 
it is pathetic.  The murders they commit are messy and complicated.  
And while American movies of this kind usually find the criminals more 
interesting than their victims (who tend to be rednecks, buffoons, and 
non-descripts), here each victim has a personality.  The final victim 
(Verónica Merchant), in particular, is shown to be a decent, 
hardworking, admirable young woman.  What Coral and Nicolas do to her 
is unforgivable; what they do right after that is even worse.
The film would be relentlessly bleak if it didn't have such a wicked 
sense of humour.  During their initial 'date,' when Nicolas notices a 
picture of Coral's children on the wall, he remarks that she failed to 
mention them in her ad.  Oh, she says, "it's just that they're so 
well-behaved that sometimes I forget they exist."  Indeed.  And in 
what may be the best scene, the murder of the couple's second victim 
(Marisa Paredes), an act of sudden and appalling brutality becomes 
laugh-out-loud funny because of the choice of murder weapon and the 
way in which its staged. 
Arturo Ripstein directs the film with verve, although scenes do tend 
to drag on too long.  The camera lingers on each setting, giving us 
plenty of time to take in every detail; the movie is seduced by its 
own production design.  Granted, the production design is terrific--be 
it a desolate exterior shot of brown, sere grassland or a cluttered 
interior shot of a widow's homely parlour where, inevitably, a 
figurine of the Virgin Mary stares down from the mantelpiece--but the 
pacing could have been faster, if only to direct our attention away 
from the realization that, despite the fresh approach, the story 
itself is nothing new (quite literally, since it's based on a true 
story previously filmed as THE HONEYMOON KILLERS).  There's a fine 
line between inevitability and predictability, and the plot of DEEP 
CRIMSON stays on the right side of that line, but only just.
Happily, aside from its morbid wit, the movie brings a great deal of 
insight to the story.  It understands that the Bonnies and Clydes of 
the world are few and far between, and murder is usually committed by 
desperate, lonely, confused people who probably never thought they 
were capable of killing, but one day they were pushed over the edge by 
factors that remain incomprehensible to them, by some insignificant 
event, and there was no turning back.  And then, if they're like Coral 
and Nicolas, they cling to whomever they can for as long as they can, 
and pray that someone, somewhere, will forgive them, although they 
know it's not bloody likely.
