Title
Review for Prom Night IV: Deliver Us from Evil (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
95 min., R, Horror, 1992
Director: Clay Borris
Cast: Nikki de Boer, Alden Kane, Joy Tanner, Alle Ghadban,
      Ken McGregor, Brock Simpson, James Carver
     Not so holy priest James Carver starts killing "loose" girls, along
with their boyfriends in the 1950's.  Carver gets stopped by the church
and is hidden away where he can't do any harm.  In the present day Nikki
de Boer, Alden Kane, Joy Tanner, and Alle Ghadban are all graduating
from high school and they skip their senior prom.  Instead they go off
to a secluded house, which, just by chance, happens to be the church
where Carver was during his killings so many years ago.  Carver gets
away from his prison and he goes back to the church and finds the four
there.   He proceeds to try to kill all four.
     PROM NIGHT 4: DELIVER US FROM EVIL is the sequel to PROM NIGHT 3:
THE LAST KISS, which is obvious from the title, but not from the content
of the film.  Other than a brief mention of Jamie Lee Curtis in PROM
NIGHT, this film has nothing to do with the earlier three, which makes
one wonder where the title came from.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give PROM NIGHT 4: DELIVER US FROM EVIL a zero.  PROM NIGHT 4 is rated R
for explicit language, adult situations, violence, and brief female
nudity.
     PROM NIGHT 4 is a completely unoriginal, uninventive slasher film,
which falls into all the cliches of poor slasher films.   The characters
in the film do completely ludicrous things and have moronic lines.  The
gore isn't done very well and there aren't any really good effects.  The
ending has been done so many times before that I could see it coming
from half way through the film.
     The actors in this film do a horrible job.  They are completely
unconvincing, at points to the extent of being funny.   The writing for
this film isn't very well done.  The plot has been done before so many
times, and so much better, that this film just falls flat.  The premise
is rather senseless, although the priest's gasoline holy water is cute.
     Do yourself a favor and don't rent this film, it isn't worth any
price.  Instead watch, or rewatch, the earlier PROM NIGHT films (PROM
NIGHT, HELLO MARY LOU: PROM NIGHT 2, and PROM NIGHT 3: THE LAST KISS).
