Title
Review for Killer Klowns from Outer Space (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Craig Good
     Last night I spotted an unusual title on the "horror" rack of my
neighborhood video rental place, and decided to give it a whirl.  KILLER KLOWNS
FROM OUTER SPACE turns out to be a real kick.  It's really much more than you'd
expect from a low budget horror/comedy.
     The Chiodo brothers serve up some original, eye-catching art direction in
this wonderfully twisted flesh-eating aliens story.  The character design of
the malevolent bozos is a hoot.  I like the spacecraft that looks just like a
circus tent.  I like the gun that shoots popcorn.  I like the cotton candy
cocoons in which they encase their victims.
     Sure the acting is bad.  So's a lot of the dialogue.  (Although I do like
the line the punk in jail gets after watching an incarcerated klown dispatch a
pesky cop: "So.  What're you in for?")  The important thing is that what little
money there was went into the right places.  The pace is pretty good once it
gets going, and the whole thing seems remarkably fresh.  A lot of imagination
went into figuring out new ways for the grotesque gang to take their victims.
And you get all of this in a PG-13 package with no nudity and no buckets of
blood.  KILLER kLOWNS FROM OUTER SPACE is rather refreshing, in its own
perverse way.

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
     They came from outer space, in a spaceship that looks like ... a circus
tent!  They're aliens who look like circus clowns, and they're here to kill.
They dispatch their victims  with imagination, style, and circus magic!  An
imaginative, offbeat, black comedy; a very good midnight movie.
     A shooting star blazes across the sky above a lover's lane, landing
nearby.  A young couple investigates, only to find what appears to be a circus
tent.  They discover that it is a spaceship, run by aliens that look like
circus clowns.  By good luck (and running very fast) the couple escape the
clutches of the killer clowns, and go to town to report their discovery to the
police.  The clowns follow them into the town, and begin a night of terror and
murder.
     Will the killer clowns take over the earth?  Will the young couple
triumph?  Can humanity be saved?  See the film & find out.
     Despite the ridiculous premise, or perhaps because of it, this is a very
funny film, albeit with a savage sense of humor.  The "stars" of the film are a
bunch of unknowns, and the acting of the people in the film is rather poor.
However, the clowns are very well done.  It is clear that the Director chose to
spend his budget on make-up and special effects.  This is for the good, because
it is the clowns that make this movie worth seeing!
     The clowns are very large and look like ordinary clowns, except for their
sharp, fanged teeth and large ears.  There are a few dwarf clowns also, and
there is a savagely funny scene where a dwarf killer clown on a clown bicycle
terrorizes an entire motorcycle gang!
     Given that the humor here concerns murders, the film is definitely a black
comedy.  If it is a parody or take-off on anything, it is more a parody of
slasher films than science-fiction.  Rather than someone in a hockey mask
(FRIDAY THE 13TH series) or Freddie Krueger, we have a bunch of clowns
committing the murders.  However, the methods the clowns use to dispatch their
victims are imaginative, inventive, and outrageously funny!  I won't say
anymore on this point to avoid spoiling anything.  The Chiodo brothers
(writers, producers, and director) deserve high marks for the originality and
imagination shown in this film.
     An examination of the production values of this film indicates that it is
definitely a "B-movie."  The acting (of the people, but not the clowns) is
poor, the script occasionally weak; only the outrageous clowns & their equally
outrageous antics save the movie.  The clowns are so silly that, when you see
them, it is hard not to laugh!
     Despite the limitations of the film, it is worth watching (assuming you
have the properly warped sense of humor) just to see the clowns and their
antics.  If you like "midnight movies," this is definitely worth seeing!  If
you don't like "midnight movies" then perhaps you shouldn't see it.
Overall evaluation: very good for a "midnight movie."
P.S.  This film is now available on video.  You might consider viewing it, late
at night, with a group of people who like this kind of humor.
Reviewer:  Thomas E. Billings;  Department of Statistics
           University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
