Title
Review for Saturday Night Fever (1977)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Badham
Writer: Norman Wexler (from a story by Nik Cohn)
Starring: John Travolta, Karen Lynn Gorney, Donna Pescow, Barry Miller,
Martin Shakur, Fran Drescher
Anyone who knows me knows that I adore this movie almost as much as I
adore, say, "Pulp Fiction."  Ever since I finally saw this, I could
recite the movie, call the dances (I can't actually do them, 'cause I
look like Ed Grimley when I do), and even do the cool walk in the
beginning.  But even though some might call this a "guilty pleasure,"
this is actually a very well-made film that could have been a shallow
dance movie starring that guy from "Welcome Back, Kotter," but turns out
to be a very intelligent character study that just happens to have some
of the coolest dance scenes ever made.  I know Gene Siskel will back me
up on this one.
John Travolta, fresh off of "Kotter" and "Carrie," in the role that made
him a superstar (and also spawned a stupid sequel I have yet to see),
plays Tony Manero, a kind of dim Brooklynite who works in a paint store
during the week, and on Saturday nights, goes out with his friends to
the local disco place, the nicely named "2001 Odyssey," where he's a
superstar since he takes up the dance floor whenever a cool tune comes
on (usually a Bee Gees tune, who wrote about six tunes in a week for
this flick).
One night, he sees a woman there (Donna Gorney), who is a great dancer
and catches his attention.  After he meets her, she turns out to be kind
of feisty and a little too intelligent for him, but he persits. 
Meanwhile, his other partner (Donna Pescow), who has a big crush on him
and begs him for sex constantly, is dumped by him cruelly so he can
pursue a hopefully more than kosher relationship with Gorney.  Also, his
brother, who was a priest and the pride of the family, has quit the
parish, and is moving on, shaming the family, and making Tony feel
better.
Like all dance flicks, there's a big dance competition, and Tony and
Gorney want to go and win.  But this film is too intelligent, and ends
in a kind of mature and shocking manner.  Throughout the film, Tony
matures (he's only 19), not only in intellect, but in just an all-around
kind of way.  Like Renton in "Trainspotting," he grows out of his
friends, who are self-destructive and totally immature.  I mean, these
guys go onto the Brooklyn Bridge, dance on the sides, and pretend to
fall to their death.  A big melodramatic thing occurs later on, but it
actually feels moving and shocking, instead of stupid and shallow.
Of course, the big thing to admire in this is the dance scenes, which
are totally awesome.  I mean, I usually don't get into big dance
sequences, but I mean, I'm just all into the ones in this one.  And, you
also get to see John Travolta in his first Oscar-nominated role.  He's
an incredible actor and is just incredible, even if he has a Brooklyn
accent.  He creates a character with many levels, who actually seems
more human than he would in a lesser film.  Also look for great
performances from Gorney and Pescow.
Also, look for a cameo from Fran Drescher (she has weird hair) as a
chick who goes up to him, says a memorable line, and even gets to grab
his ass, which she revels in even these days.
"Saturday Night Fever" is one of the most memorable and entertaining
(not to mention addictive) films I've ever seen.  It's not the most
brilliant film, but it's certainly one of the more intelligent dance
films.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Richard Matich
              SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER [1977]
           A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
This film was not only made in the 1970s, it was the
1970s! Fresh from his stint as a high schooler in the
tv sitcom "Welcome Back Kotter", John Travolta became
both a household name and an idol to millions of
adoring fans. Grease [1978] would rocket him into the
stratisphere in the coming year. Long before
Travolta was in Pulp Fiction, he was getting his first
Oscar nomination for this film. The story is based on a
magazine article on the New York night lives of some
working class young people. The film hasTravolta as a
guy that is tough, street smart, and "oh so much" the
womens favorite on [and off] the dance floor. The dance
moves had all of America talking back then. People
would get their hair cut the way Travolta had it done
for the movie. The clothes made the "disco look" out
pace the "Annie Hall look" [women with neckties, vest
and/or baggy chinos] of the same year. Discos became
the hot destination for countless Americans [and even
in other countries] all because of Saturday Night
Fever. The soundtrack to the film won
Grammys and set records for albulm sales for years to
come. At one time it seemed as though everyone had that
soundtrack! The story works well enough and it remains
a cultural benchmark. It made a lot of people plenty of
money at a time when the U.S. economy needed "anything"
to get it going. Travolta &
company helped the nation's finanial and emotional well
being more so than did the Ford and Carter
administrations combined! The power of film!!!
