Title
Review for Random Hearts (1999)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Trivia quiz.  Two strangers, both married, meet at a train
station and find themselves drawn into a short but poignant
romance.  Rachmaninoff's Second Piano Concerto pumps up
the amour.  You're on the money if you named David Lean's
1945 "Brief Encounter," a picture that deserved four stars
then but would hardly rate the same good fortune in 1999. 
The time is over for this time of languorous movie.  Adultery
then was delicious.  Today it's shrugged off so much that a
sitting president actually furthered his popularity by engaging
in hanky panky outside his marriage.  Trying to capitalize on
the film and literary conventions of a bygone age may
occasionally work, but in "Random Hearts," with its all-star
troupe of lead performers and a superior bunch of supporting
people, it does not.  
   I was ready to attack Todd McCarthy for what I considered
his pigeonholing of movie audiences, but now I'm not so sure. 
McCarthy said of this film in "Variety" that it is "an ideal rainy
day matinee attraction for well-to-do ladies of a certain
age...pic's sobriety and deliberate pace, combined with an
utter lack of allure for anyone under about 40, spells a short
theatrical visit."  In fact now I'd as soon amend Variety's
opinion.  An online critic whose 81-year-old grandmother
recently saw "American Beauty" called it the best movie she'd
seen this decade, making me wonder whether even the old-
timers want to return to the stodgy, torpid, sentimental
fantasies of yesteryear.
   Director Sydney Pollack--a fine actor who justifiably injects
himself into the action as a political campaign adviser--does
give the picture a particular spin by throwing together people
of wholly different classes as William Friedkin did in 1971 by
contrasting a down-to-earth cop played by Gene Hackman
with a sophisticated, classy criminal played by Fernando Rey. 
Harrison Ford inhabits the role of an obsessive cop, Internal
Affairs Sgt. Dutch Van Den Broeck, who is as consumed by
the search for truth about his wife as he is about tracking
down corrupt policemen.  You could never imagine that
sparks would fly between him and the patrician
congresswoman, Kay Chandler (Kristin Scott Thomas),
because Chandler not only is a Republican accustomed to
hanging out in upper-middle-class circles but seems only
vaguely preoccupied with learning the truth about her straying
husband.
   What brings the two distinct personalities together is a
plane crash that claimed the lives of Dutch's wife Peyton
(Susanna Thompson) and Kay's roving husband, Cullen (an
almost unrecognizable Peter Coyote).  Both Kay and Dutch
were unaware that their spouses were traveling together to
continue their fling in Miami, but the discovery that they
occupied seats 3A and 3B on a plane that neither was
supposed to be taking causes diverse reactions by their
surviving partners.  While Dutch is determined to find out
every detail of the tryst, Kay is concerned that the news
would hurt her campaign for the next session of Congress.
   As in virtually all romantic dramas, parties are kept apart as
long as possible.  In this case, the obstacle that keeps Kay
and Dutch strangers is Kay's unwillingness to get close to the
police officer for fear that the public will gossip and because
she is in denial about her husband's affair.  When they finally
lunge at each other animalistically in a car, the thrust is far
from believable, nor do the two exhibit much chemistry for the
remainder of this overly long, albeit soberly designed and
produced movie.  While Pollack is interested in comparing the
two careers--Kay's campaign and the kitschy ways her
advisers tell her to speak to the public on TV vs. Dutch's
blow-by-blow activities as a cop--the scenes involving Dutch's
trailing of a guy he suspects of murder seem out of keeping
in a film of this nature.
   Harrison Ford does convince us of his determination to get
at the truth while Kristin Scott Thomas's is best at showing
her change from uptight, contained patrician to a much softer,
more compassionate human being.  We learn at least one
additional detail that we hope we never have to experience:
that when the immediate family are summoned to the airport
to identify their loved ones after a crash, they do not see the
actual bodies but rather a transmission of the head on a TV
screen.  

Author
Michael Redman
Stress makes people do weird things. Major stress makes people do _really_
weird things. Suddenly solid ground disappears and they're swimming in an
unknown ocean without the usual rulebook.
When their minds abruptly teleport them into their own personal "Twilight
Zones", they don't have the usual patterns to fall back upon. Their worlds are
filled with alien landscapes; their thoughts, bizarre assumptions. This is
often the opportunity for psychological and spiritual growth. It's also
occasionally the provocation to climb to the top of a tall building with a
high-powered rifle.
There are many different ways of dealing with anxiety. Some people work
through it. Some shut down. Others throw themselves into an obsession. Still
others deny anything has happened.
Washington D.C. internal affairs cop Dutch Van Den Broeck (Harrison Ford) has
just received horrible news. His wife was killed in an airplane crash on her
way to Miami. It gets even worse. She was flying their with her lover.
Dutch has to get to the bottom of this. Using his detective skills, he's
determined to find out what was going on: why she was having an affair. He
can't accept that there are no answers. The truth is it's not why, it just is.
He questions her co-workers, harasses the airlines and finally discovers her
lover's identity. Then he shows up on the widow's doorstep.
Shocked Kay Chandler (Kristen Scott Thomas) is a congresswoman from a small
town in New Hampshire and has chosen the denial method of coping with her
grief. When she hears the news of her husband's death, she changes history. He
told her he was going to New York, but she decides she heard wrong and he
actually said "Miami". Dutch's tale of infidelity is obviously fiction.
When Dutch refuses to abandon his obsession and continues stalking his dead
wife, his and Kay's paths cross repeatedly. She begins to soften towards him
and a forbidden attraction develops.
What had the potential for a probing look at grief and how different people
react to it, instead plods along sending the audience into thoughts of how
uncomfortable the theater seats are. Instead of looking at the numbing effects
of shock and stress, we experience the numbing effects of various body parts
falling asleep.
The film's 130 minutes feels like days as the story moves at a snail's pace
towards its inevitable conclusion. The first hour could have been edited to 15
minutes and lost nothing. There's so little that happens for such long periods
of time the mind wanders to grocery lists and choirs that need to be done.
Although the acting skills for the most part are more than adequate, there's
nothing special happening. Ford is almost always a delight to watch, but he
doesn't put much into this role. Thomas is a little better, but never really
breaks out of her ice princess character.
The chemistry between them is mostly negligible. The one scene that is an
exception takes place in her car parked at the airport. The sudden and
desperate groping in the front seat feels real and for a minute you think
something's going to break through the barrier between them.
Their romance growing from grief is unusual, but not out of the realm of
possibility. The problem is they are so detached it's difficult to believe.
The supporting actors fare better. Dutch's partner (Charles Dutton) and Kay's
campaign worker (Bonnie Hunt) are much more interesting characters and add a
little life. But not enough.
The police case and political campaign sub-plots look promising at first, but
drift into nothing but filler for a film that doesn't need it. The time spent
on these could have been used much more effectively on the real story.
Director Sidney Pollack has a history of admirable films, but this one doesn't
add much to his resume. His acting role as the unfeeling media spin doctor is
more impressive than his work behind the camera.
Life has enough tedium that there's no need to go to a movie for more of it.
Skip this one and step outside for the last few warm days of autumn instead.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 24 years and he'd like to
think he has better things to do than sit in a dark room being bored. Email
your non-boring comments to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 10/14/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
This week's Y2K article: http://www.indepen.com/
Y2K archives: http://www.indepen.com/y2k.html

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
In Eyes Wide Shut--which Sidney Pollack also had a bit part in--a husband
overextends himself trying to deal with his wife's betrayal. Random Hearts
isn't so different, insofar that 'Dutch' Vand Den Broeck (Harrison Ford)
also goes to great lengths in an effort to deal with his wife's adultery. An
occasionally misguided effort, but then we all know love isn't rational.
Random Hearts is kin to Kubrick's swan song in more ways than just story,
though. Pollack seems to be consciously imitating the precise camerawork and
haunting music of Eyes Wide Shut (length as well). They just feel the same.
However. Random Hearts, in spite of a sub-par title, has a much stronger
story.
Instead of grounding it in myth, per Kubrick, Pollack (or, novelist Warren
Adler) chooses instead to order the unlikely romance of Dutch and
Congresswoman-hopeful Kay Chandler (the aquiline Kristin Scott Thomas)
around something like the cuckold's idea of fair play: that if you slept
with my wife, I'll sleep with yours. And vice-versa for Kay. And what kicks
it all off is a variation on another trope: the husband dying in the wrong
bed. Except of course this time it's a plane. And they both die. And Dutch,
Internal Affairs detective that he is (his job is to investigate 'improper
conduct'), is compelled not only to try to make sense of this affair through
good, solid policework, but is also intent upon making Kay face up to what's
happened.
All of which makes for a strong story, especially since Dutch's motivations
are so complex: Is he investigating because knowledge will be some sort of
curative, in spite of how much it'll hurt to 'know?' If so, then it's a
rather masochistic narrative, as if he's punishing himself for never having
realized what was going on. Too, though--and he even goes so far to say
this, which is of course our cue to doubt it--he could just be trying to
figure out why his wife would feel the need to have an affair. As if the
reason is going to present itself in the form of something tangible she and
her lover left behind, yes, as Kay deftly points out. Which is to say he's
on a fool's mission. But then, they both are. Grief isn't easy. And, by
sifting through the immediate past, they don't make it any easier.
What's really nice about Random Hearts, though, is that Pollack/Adler has
Dutch and Kay more or less begin repeating the 'crimes' of their
deceased/adulterous spouses, in that they start keeping secrets from each
other, getting paranoid, all that, which plays out wonderfully, if a little
long. The high point of it though is that soon enough Kay's in 'competition'
for Dutch--with Dutch's dead wife. Meaning now he's the one cheating. If
sleeping with your wife's lover's lover is fair play, then this would have
to be a moralistic refraction of that: that fair play and the idea of poetic
justice aren't that distant, are in fact causally related, in that in order
to bring about fair play, Dutch has to 'become' his wife. It's all pretty
delicious.
Just so things don't get too monotonous, though, Random Hearts also has some
distraction, in the form of Dutch's ongoing Internal Affairs investigation,
which, because it doesn't tie into Kay's election campaign in all the
high-stakes ways we expect it too, doesn't make us get into any suspended
disbelief games with the movie. It does matter some, though, of course, but
in such an offhand way that you wonder how you missed it. Or, rather, wonder
how you dismissed it. Which is what good moviemaking is all about. Random
Hearts is a good movie, in spite of the fact that it seems to end in the
same airport as Love of the Game. It is a love story after all, and airports
do more or less represent conventional moments of decision as far as
relationships are concerned. And, any last second typicalness is more than
made up for by the atypical complexity that comes before. It's not often
that a movie can end in as generic a place as an airport terminal and still
manage to remain unique. Random Hearts does just that.
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Random snores? Not for me, but my buddy to the left who, admittedly was
surviving on only two hours of sleep, did happen to nod off from time to
time during this film's two hours and fifteen minute run. I managed, but did
find this to be a passable film at best, with Ford offering us the worst
haircut of his career, and proof that "range" is not his strongest suit as
an actor.
PLOT:
A police sergeant's wife dies in a plane crash. As if that wasn't bad
enough, he soon finds out that she was on the plane with a man with whom she
was having an affair. For closure's sake, the cop decides to track down the
widowing wife of the man who she was banging. It turns out that the widow, a
congresswoman, was also unaware of their secret relationship, and would
rather just leave it under wraps. Over time, the grieving duo find more than
just betrayal in common and begin to "console" one another.
CRITIQUE:
Do you really need 133 minutes to tell a pretty standard story? The answer
is no. This film goes about half an hour too long, offers a solid
performance by Kristin Scott Thomas, a stoic showing by Ford and his
goofy-looking earring, a completely forgettable subplot, but ultimately,
didn't bore me. The closest film to which I could compare this one would be
MESSAGE IN A BOTTLE (6.5/10) with Kevin Costner. It's about grieving,
getting over someone, needing closure, and yes, finding love in places which
you'd least expect it. I liked MESSAGE a little better because of the
Costner factor (Ford lacks the charm and the romantic appeal of a
better-looking Costner), and the more believable romance scenes. On the
other hand, I did appreciate the ending to this film much more than the one
offered by the BOTTLE, but enough about the comparisons!
The two things which could have easily made this film so much better is 1)
If they had gotten completely rid of the ridiculously obvious plot device
involving Ford and his job as a cop, which was not only uninteresting, but
ultimately swayed our interest and made the film 20-25 minutes longer, and
2) Given the part played by Ford to a better looking man, a bigger charmer
and an actor who would have been able to convey a little more emotion than a
simple raised eyebrow every now and again. If you pay close attention to
Harry's "crying scene", you will note that it actually lasts less than three
real seconds (Don't hold back, Indy!). Very weird. Kristin Scott Thomas, on
the other hand, managed to hold a decent American accent for the most part
of the movie, and did convey a deeper sense of loss and grieving, two
feelings which seemed completely absent from Ford's "despondent" (?)
character.
So why am I still recommending this film, albeit barely? Well, the premise
is interesting, the development is well done, Sydney Pollack is really good
in it, and the lightly surprising ending kind of helped levitate this film
past my basic cinematic recommendation line. No need to see it in the
theatres though. Definitely a lazy night rental with the loved one, so that
you could forward the parts which should have been cut out. And remember,
this is a character-driven film, not plot. If the characters don't seem
interesting to you, skip this adult drama and drum up a romantic evening of
your own. You can never have too many of those!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Ironically, director Sydney Pollack lost his own son in a plane crash in
1993. Sydney was born in Lafayette, Indiana.
Harrison Ford is listed as one of 50 people barred from entering Tibet.
Disney clashed with Chinese officials over the 1997 Martin Scorsese film
KUNDUN which Ford's wife, Melissa Mathison, wrote. She also wrote the
screenplay for the worldly popular Steven Spielberg film, E.T. the
EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL.
Over the past 15 years, at least five different screenwriters, two
directors, James L. Brooks and Ivan Reitman, plenty of actors, including
Dustin Hoffman, have been connected to this film based on Warren Adler's
1984 novel. Of Adler's 25 published novels, ten have either been bought or
optioned for films. His novel "War of the Roses" became a film starring
Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner.
Screenwriter Kurt Luedtke won an Academy Award for Best Screenplay based on
Material from Another Medium for his work with Sydney Pollack on OUT OF
AFRICA, which also won Best Picture, and Best Director for Pollack.
Nepotism-alert: As we see director Sydney Pollack let brother Bernie Pollack
take care of the costume design for this picture. To be fair to ol' Bernie,
he has a reputation of his own in this industry. He also dressed the cast of
MESSAGE IN THE BOTTLE, SABRINA (Sydney Pollack film) and HAVANA (Sydney
Pollack film), amongst others... :)
This film had a reported budget of $54 Million.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Sydney Pollack.
Cast: Harrison Ford, Kristen Scott Thomas, Charles Dutton, Kate Mara, Bonnie 
Hunt, Dennis Haysbert, Sydney Pollack, Dylan Baker, Richard Jenkins, Paul 
Guilfoyle, Susanna Thompson, Peter Coyote, Lynne Thigpen, Ariana Thomas, Bill 
Cobbs, Susan Floyd, Edie Falco.
1999 - 131 minutes
Rated R (for brief violence, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 9, 1999.
"Random Hearts" is a motion picture clearly holding so much promise that, 
when midway through it throws its thought-provoking notions to the wind in 
order to develop a thoroughly unconvincing love story, you can't help but 
feel cheated. Tech credits are at the top of their game all-around, from Dave 
Grusin's appropriately atmospheric, jazzy music score that boasts as a 
counter for the character's uneasy feelings, to Philippe Rousselot's 
gorgeously polished cinematography that paints its attractive 
settings--Washington, D.C., New Hampshire, and Miami--with palpably vibrant 
flavor. All performances are impressively handled, as well, and the editing 
is mostly tight and well-paced, if slightly overlong. The film itself, 
however, is floundered by the heavy-handed romantic subplot that eventually 
becomes the main focus, and since we don't believe for a second the 
coldly-detached relationship, all tension evaporates in no time.
Adapted from a novel by Warren Adler and directed by Academy Award Winner 
Sydney Pollack (1985's "Out of Africa"), "Random Hearts" opens with an 
emotionally stirring first act, as we individually meet two strangers 
far-divided by their profession and status, yet will soon be drawn together 
under dire circumstances: Dutch Van Der Broeck (Harrison Ford), a 
happily-married D.C. cop in the internal affairs department, and Kay Chandler 
(Kristen Scott Thomas), a congresswoman who is in the midst of a bid to be 
re-elected. Throughout the day the film opens on, the big news on the 
television is the fatal airplane crash of a 747 headed for Miami that plunged 
into the Chesapeake Bay. Dutch thinks nothing of it, until he receives his 
wife's message on their home answering machine, letting him know she was 
unexpectedly called to do a catalogue shoot in Miami, and would be gone for 
the weekend. Acquiring her co-workers' help, Dutch discovers that there was 
no planned model shoot in Miami, and that, on the plane, his wife was seated 
next to a man--Kay's husband--and was listed on the ticket as Mr. Chandler's 
spouse. Devastated to think that the woman he thought he knew for years had 
been hiding countless secrets from him all along, Dutch seeks out Kay to tell 
her, but she makes it perfectly clear that she has a teenage daughter (Kate 
Mara) and a high-profile career to protect, and any information that leaks 
out about the affair will make front-page news on the D.C. papers.
That's the first hour. Dutch and Kay's first meeting surprisingly comes at 
the 60-minute mark, and what follows only comes off as little more than a 
gimmick to create romantic sparks in a story that it is truly unnecessary in. 
Both unknowingly travelling to Miami to check out the hotel their spouse's 
were to have met at, Kay and Dutch meet up, and after a night of 
salsa-dancing and alcohol "on the rocks," Kay breaks down crying in the car, 
and what does Dutch do? He probably tries to comfort her, you say? Nah! 
Instead, he roughly grabs her and they start to kiss and grope each other, to 
which Kay's immediate response is, "well, that was fun." As Dutch becomes 
more and more embroiled in his mission of finding out the particulars of his 
wife's affair, and Kay struggles to keep the press and her daughter from 
finding out the sordid truth, they look to each other for companionship, and 
indulge in a close, loving relationship that nonetheless must be kept a 
secret--at least, until she has lost the election, if she does.
The basic premise of "Random Hearts" should have been merely a jumping-off 
point to develop an engrossing, highly-charged drama about the issues of 
infidelity, death, and human relationships, and it honestly couldn't have 
been better in its opening sections. That Dutch keeps hearing about the crash 
on the news, and yet is oblivious to the fact that his wife has been killed, 
is deeply poignant, and his growing suspicions that the woman he loved was 
not the woman he thought he knew, is a fascinating concept, handled with 
precision and taut direction by Sydney Pollack. The portrait of Kay's prime 
discovery, in contrast, is also quite realistic. She is upset, of course, but 
in true political fashion, hides most of her feelings from the public, and 
tries to give off a strong exterior, when she is crying inside.
Once Dutch and Kay come together and first lock lips, the authenticity of the 
story vanishes, and the so-far contemplative, provocative tone dissolves 
into, more or less, the type of film Roger Ebert often labels a "Shaggy Dog 
Love Story," in which a romance is treated in the most cliched, overwrought 
manner, and is melodramatic simply for the purpose of being melodramatic. If 
this, the weakest aspect of the picture, still is stronger than the hideously 
corny romance in the recent "For Love of the Game," that still is a rather 
small compliment, and the only one I can give it. Like Kevin Costner and 
Kelly Preston, but to a slightly lesser extent, it is never believable that 
Harrison Ford and Kristen Scott Thomas are falling in love. Kay's 
characterizations, especially, make no sense and are hypocritical, as she is 
cold to Dutch one minute, and falling into his arms the next, then angry 
again. Has Hollywood recently been grossly misinformed that the way to get an 
audiece to care about a "love story" is to portray the characters as not 
being able to stand each other? To make an even more general criticism, Dutch 
and Kay never appear to be naturally swept away by each other; instead, they 
seem to be doing it for the sole purpose of moving the gradually 
deteriorating plot along.
Through its startling ups and downs, it is the powerful performances from 
Harrison Ford and Kristen Scott Thomas that keep the film afloat. With most 
of the supporting players wasted (save for Kate Mara's refined, quietly 
touching role as Kay's 15-year-old daughter), the show depends almost 
entirely on the charisma of Ford and Thomas. They have zero romantic 
chemistry on-screen, sorry to say, but when apart, give superior performances 
to almost anything else I've seen them in. Dutch's feelings of resentment and 
anger at his own cluelessness over his wife's "other life," are all the more 
effectively-drawn due to Ford's sometimes underrated acting chops. In a role 
not quite like any others he's played, and a far cry from his stock action 
pictures, Ford holds his own against Thomas, an always-sparkling actress who 
has the power to be both funny and firmly affecting.
When "Random Hearts" is good, it really is exceptional and unusually 
intelligent for a studio picture, but when it is mediocre (that would be the 
whole last 70 minutes, save for the final scene), it makes you downright 
frustrated. The screenplay, by Kurt Luedtke, is an extremely uneven one. With 
a first hour of such obvious power, how could Luedtke have taken such a 
disappointing u-turn? If the film had stayed on the more-than-promising 
course it originally was on before its derailment, the picture would have had 
the capability of being one of the best films of the year, and with someone 
such as Atom Egoyan (1997's "The Sweet Hereafter") at the helm, it 
undoubtedly would have been. As is, "Random Hearts" has one-half of terrific 
material, and then resorts to the ultimate betrayal: formulaic filmmaking.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Sydney Pollack's RANDOM HEARTS, starring Harrison Ford and Kristin Scott
Thomas, is a study of the contrasting ways in which two people from
vastly different backgrounds face identical tragedies and of the romance
that ensues between them.
As directed by Pollack and scripted by Kurt Luedtke, based on Warren
Adler's novel, the frequently enthralling film is needlessly
frustrating.  Pollack sets a languid pace, bringing in the picture at an
unnecessarily long 2:11, but then doesn't take the time to setup the
pivotal scenes in the story.  The net result is that incidents that
would work quite well with proper motivation instead come completely out
of left field, turning possibly plausible actions into ridiculously
unbelievable ones.
Harrison Ford plays Dutch Van Den Broeck, a tough and explosive sergeant
in the Internal Affairs Division of the DC police department.  His wife
is off on a business trip to Miami.  Or is she?  Meanwhile, back at his
office, he is trying to nab some crooked cops in a superfluous subplot
that seems tacked onto the main story in order to supply some action and
cheap thrills.
In contrast to Dutch's bluster, a reserved Kay Chandler (Thomas) is a
member of Congress from "a little town in a little state."  She's
fighting for her political life, running against a self-made millionaire
with deep pockets.  Remarkably demure for a politician, she can honestly
claim a spotless background.  When asked by her friend (Bonnie Hunt)
about the worst thing that she had ever done, Kay doesn't say what it
is, but reflects that if it turns out to be the worst thing that she
ever does, "it's going to be a really dull life."
Oh yes, her husband is also off on a sudden business trip to Miami.
Their respective spouses die in a plane crash, and Kay and Dutch later
find out that they were sitting together in first-class, seats 3A and
3B, and that they were registered as man and wife.  The tentative
conclusion is that they were having an affair.
This propels Dutch in an obsessive drive to find out "the answer" as to
why it all happened.  Ford chews up the scenery as his character stays
constantly at the boiling point.  Dutch expresses his emotions
physically and immediately, holding nothing back.
Kay, on the other hand, wants to forget her husband and his tawdry
adultery as quickly as possible.  And one thing is for sure and certain,
she wants nothing to do with the other woman's husband.  When Dutch
keeps poking his nose into the mystery, she tells him in no uncertain
terms to stop, lest others get wind of it.  "If they find out about your
wife, it's gossip," she points out.  "If they find out about my husband,
it's in the newspapers."
More than just worrying about her career, Kay has a teenaged daughter
(Kate Mara) to protect, and Kay, as is her nature, represses emotions.
As a battle veteran of a life in the public eye, she has hidden her
feelings down so deep that the real Kay Chandler hasn't been seen in a
long time.  In one of the few times that she lets herself come alive,
she remarks, perspicaciously, "nobody knows who I am anymore."
As the investigation, that Kay doesn't want but Dutch desperately needs,
forces them into ever closer proximity, they switch from antagonists to
lovers.  The abruptness of this transition is one of the movie's key
downfalls.  One minute they barely tolerate each other, and the next
minute, in a scene that resembles a collegiate wrestling match, they are
all over each other in a car like cats in heat.  With some buildup, this
could have been a powerful scene.  Instead, it came across so awkward
and unbelievable that it generated snickers from our audience.
(Another equally improbable scene happens earlier in the picture.
Dutch, who up until then believed he had a completely faithful wife,
comes to realize that his wife's trip might have been because she was
having an affair and that she might be in the plane that crashed.
Although he's not at all sure of either, he gets a plastic bag and
removes every personal item of hers from the house.  Few people would do
this based only on hunches, especially someone who makes a living
investigating other people's lives.)
For all of the movie's problems, the performances by the two leads are
always interesting.  Thomas, in particular, has a history of bringing a
graceful intelligence to her romantic parts from THE ENGLISH PATIENT to
THE HORSE WHISPERER.  Expressing so much while showing so little, Thomas
gives an endearing yet remote performance as Kay.  The chemistry between
Dutch and Kay, however, never quite reaches a convincing level.
Individually their performances are excellent, but somehow the mix never
seems quite right.
The supporting cast of the movie is superlative, down to the third
string.  Pollack was able to attract actors would normally demand much
larger parts.  The best of these is Pollack himself, who plays Kay's
tough minded media consultant, Carl Broman.  Carl doesn't care much
about Kay's tragedies, he's more interested in how to mold public
opinion about them.
As a romance, RANDOM HEARTS comes very close to working.  As a character
study, it constantly fascinates.  But as a movie, it's a mess.  It plays
like one of those test screens in which studios show works in progress
in order to gather audience feedback so they can see how to reedit the
film and see what scenes need to be added.  RANDOM HEARTS, however,
appears to have skipped that step, or, if they had it, they must not
have paid proper attention to viewer response cards.  It's all such a
shame.  There's a wonderful movie buried here, but they released it
before they finished it properly.
RANDOM HEARTS runs way too long at 2:11.  It is rated R for brief
violence, sexuality and language and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Sydney Pollack
STARRING:         Harrison Ford, Kristin Scott Thomas, Charles Dutton,
Sydney Pollack
WRITTEN BY:       Darryl Ponicsan, Kurt Luedtke
RATED:            R for brief violence, sexuality, and language
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       Philippians 3:13, Job 42:10, John 16:20-22
Mankind does have a proclivity for complicating life.  Such complications
are never more evident than in affairs of the heart.  The new film, RANDOM
HEARTS, tells the "romantic" story of four people.  The twist is that two
of the four are dead.  That rules out any possibility for this being a
romantic comedy.  Call it a romantic tragedy instead.
Harrison Ford (SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS) stars as Dutch Van Der Broeck, a
DC police sergeant working in the Internal Affairs Division.  His happy
marriage is about to be exposed for the facade that it is when a plane
crashes into the Chesapeake Bay on its way to Miami, FL.  One of the
accident casualties, traveling under an assumed name, is his wife who just
happened to be accompanying another woman's husband.
The other woman is none other than US Congresswoman Kay Chandler, played
by Kristin Scott Thomas (THE HORSE WHISPERER) who is surprised and
embarrassed at her husband's deception, but willing to put it behind her
and move on with her life.  Dutch is not as willing to let it go.
Obsessed with finding out about the details of the affair so as to
understand why it happened, Dutch begins digging for information,
something that the congresswoman, in the middle of her reelection battle,
can ill afford.  So, in order to try and control the potential media
damage, Kay meets with Dutch and they try to make sense of their shared
situation.  With bruised egos and hurt hearts, they visit the site of the
clandestine trysts of their recently deceased spouses and, in so doing,
they become attracted to each other.
At the same time, their lives continue but are not unaffected by the
grief and frustration they are feeling.  Van Der Broeck risks his career
and life pursuing and baiting a suspect when he has no hard evidence
against him.  Chandler, touched by the level of brutal honesty upon which
Van Der Broeck insists, finds that she may no longer have the stomach to
mount an effective political campaign where truth is often a liability.
Harrison Ford can play the no-nonsense cop roles with aplomb and does so
with some level of effectiveness here.  But with spiked or tousled hair
and pierced ear jewelry, it appears that Mr. Ford is attempting a more
youthful appearance.  To this reviewer's eye, it is having the opposite
effect.  I did not believe him as a romantic lead in this picture.
Kirstin Scott Thomas, on the other hand, was fully believable.
Demonstrating the class of a woman of means and power, yet still managing
to show the frailty and vulnerability of a woman in love, Ms. Thomas is
captivating on screen.
  Sydney Pollack (TOOTSIE), as director, is at the helm of RANDOM HEARTS,
keeping the movie at its steady but interminably slow pace.  The nearly
two and one-quarter hour length of the movie works against the picture.
The longer it runs, the more illogical and weak Mr. Ford's character
appears.  His inability to let go of the pain that his wife's infidelity
brought to him threatens the promise of beginning a new relationship with
Kay.
Living in the past can be a trap in and of itself.  We may learn from the
past and we may hope for the future.  But to be effective as sons and
daughters of God, we must live in the present.
"Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before."  Philippians 3:13 [KJV]
Certainly grief is something that we must all handle and we understand
that there is an appropriate amount of time needed to gain full control of
one's thoughts and emotions when dealing with a loss of a loved one.
But staying in a perpetual state of mourning, anger or resentment is
damaging and dangerous as it could easily lead to spirits of depression or
melancholy.  Such continual states of being are very selfish as one's full
attention and energy of thought is directed inward.  It should be
remembered that Job's deliverance and restoration did not occur until
after he prayed... not for himself, but for his friends.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Harrison Ford, Kristin Scott Thomas, Charles Dutton, Bonnie Hunt, and
Sydney Pollack
What does Hollywood have against us?  Year in and year out, we fork over
millions and millions of dollars to see movies that are consistently bad. 
Sure, a few of them are good and more than a few of them are enjoyable, but
most of the movies are bad.  Yet we still pay.  And still they proceed to
torture us with movies like Random Hearts.
Torture is the correct term for such a movie, one that spends two hours and
twenty minutes evoking boredom, yawns, and snores from the audience.  There is
no kinder way to put it.  However, I could be completely honest and say that
this is perhaps the worst two and a half hours I have spent in a movie theatre
all year and I've seen a lot of really bad movies.
Random Hearts is the long, drawn out, unbearably slow story of Dutch Van Der
Brock (Ford) and Kay Chandler (Thomas), an IAD Sergeant and a congresswoman. 
Both of their spouses are cheating on them when the adulterer's plane crashes
in the Chesapeake Bay.  This is twenty minutes into the movie.  The next two
hours are spent in the midst of a frizzled romance between the two.
Besides this, several subplots including Kay Chandler's running against a
religious fanatic and Dutch's attempts to secure charges on a corrupt cop
waste time during this film.
I try to be nice.  I try to say a few good words about every movie, if only
in the spirit of optimism.  But Random Hearts does not lend itself to this
chivalry.  Instead, Random Hearts bores the audience.  Here are some examples
of how:
The entire movie is dialogue based and the dialogue is terrible.  The style
lends itself towards a slow pace (slow conversation, slow plot, slow pans,
slow transitions).  Harrison Ford proves that he has lost whatever acting
talent he ever had, and Kristin Scott Thomas has made a major fall from grace
since her 1996 Oscar Nomination for The English Patient.
The flaw in this movie lies in so many places.  In the acting it would be in
providing a British actress with an American role.  Kristin Scott Thomas
handles the part so badly that she cannot even lose the accent, let alone
adopt the body language of an American.  She seems too reserved, too proper. 
Add to this Charles Dutton (normally an interesting character actor) in a bit
part that just annoys, and you have what amounts to a terrible ensemble cast.
I cannot say something kind about this movie.  There is nothing kind to say. 
What I can do is simply be nice enough to it to not go on because I could sit
here insulting this film for hours.
MovieKritic2000: Reviews for the Generation of a New Millenium
http://www.geocities.com/moviekritic2000/
Help support MK2K, become a member of http://www.epinions.com/.  It's free and
you can post opinions on books, movies, music, travel, software, and just
about anything else under the sun.
To subscribe, email MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To email the critic, email MK2K@usa.net


Author
Mac VerStandig
The tagline on Random Hearts reads "In a perfect world, they never would 
have met." In a perfect world, I never would have seen this movie. The 
biggest flaw is that 20 minutes into this film, Kay Chandler (Kristin 
Scott Thomas) and Dutch Van Den Broeck (Harrison Ford) are the only two 
major characters alive; resulting in little doubt that they will end up 
together at some point during the laborious two-hours-and-then-some 
production.
Dutch is a sergeant in Internal Affairs at the District of Columbia 
police department. Kay is a congresswoman from New Hampshire. Although 
they both think they are happily married, their spouses are cheating 
with each other behind their backs. Dutch and Kay are soon widowed when 
a plane goes down carrying their partners; they subsequently discover 
the affair. The rest of the film is the pointless, unrealistic and 
often-times boring story of their researching the sexual relationship 
that they were blind to, and getting to know each other in the process.
Two sub plots are of little help to the already problematic film. Dutch 
is trying to arrest a fellow officer, a task that seems rather ordinary 
for Hollywood fare. All the great stereotypes get pulled, including my 
personal favorite of the key witness that makes bail and is murdered 
soon thereafter. Kay's distraction from the film's primary focus is her 
campaign for re-election and attempts to shield her 15 year old daughter 
from the truth about the father she put on a pedestal. These sub plots 
could have made for semi-interesting points, but the film seems afraid 
to explore politics or mother-daughter relations in depth, and 
consequently suffers.
Random Hearts' two primary characters seem to live in shells. Although 
both Kay and Dutch are given their own sub plots, they seem to never 
deal with anyone other than themselves or each other. There is plenty of 
opportunity, Dutch having a partner and Kay having close friends and her 
daughter, but the movie shies away from exploring these relationships. 
Veteran actor and director of this film Sydney Pollack, and critically 
acclaimed up-and-comer Dylan Baker both have cameo roles, but be careful 
not to blink too much or you will miss them both.
Other than its weak plot, it is hard to criticize Random Hearts. 
However, it is also hard to compliment it. Had the film taken some small 
risks and more fully explored its extra characters and plots it may have 
tasted more like a well frosted cake, rather than the dry one that 
equates to be.

Author
James Sanford
         Just in time for the first frost of the season comes "Random
Hearts," a romance between two ice cubes that moves at the speed of a
glacier.
 Screenwriters have reportedly struggled for years to develop
Warren Adler's novel into a workable script, and the final version,
penned by Kurt Luedtke ("Out of Africa"), shows why the story has taken
so long to get to the cinema. It's much easier to cover a character's
transition from distraught, mournful soul to upbeat survivor in a
300-page book than in a two-hour movie. The challenge flummoxes not only
Luedtke, but also the usually unflappable Harrison Ford and Kristin
Scott Thomas, both of whom move self-consciously through most of the
film.
 But if "Hearts" is a dramatic fizzle, Sydney Pollack's
direction and the sumptuous photography of Philippe Rousselot ensure
it's still watchable. The A-list supporting cast (Charles Dutton, Bonnie
Hunt, Dylan Baker, etc.) is well-utilized and everything looks glorious,
from the magnificently colored Maryland forests to the pricey bottles of
wine served at a political fundraiser. Production designer Barbara Ling
has engineered such an eye-pleasing series of locations for the drama
that even a backwoods cabin looks as if it was personally decorated by
Martha Stewart.
 All this glamor, however, surrounds a pair of very cold fish.
William "Dutch" Van Den Broeck (Ford) is a tight-lipped Washington D.C.
internal affairs sergeant, while Kay Chandler (Thomas) is a New
Hampshire Congresswoman embroiled in a tough re-election campaign. Both
are utterly absorbed in their work, so it's no wonder their respective
spouses Peyton (Susanna Thompson) and Cullen (Peter Coyote) manage to
sneak off together and carry on an affair. Besides, don't people with
names like Cullen and Peyton always wind up together after all?
 When the lovebirds' flight to Miami crashes and Dutch drops
everything to investigate, all is revealed. The movie's strongest scenes
come in this early stretch, as Pollock and Ford do an expert job of
capturing the desperation and raw emotions that lead up to that
wrenching moment when all Dutch's worst fears are realized.
 For reasons never made particularly clear, Dutch feels
compelled to track down kay and confront her with the evidence he's
found. At first, she's aloof -- "First class isn't what it used to be. I
don't think it's worth the money," Kay blithely informs him when told
Cullen and Peyton were sitting together in 3A and 3B -- but eventually
she becomes angry and resentful. Dutch, for his part, continues to be
resolutely morose.
 Is shared grief a fertile ground for romance? Most would argue
it's not, but "Hearts" plows forward nevertheless, determined to build
something meaningful on this fragile foundation. The rambling plot is
punctuated with stony silences, vodka-soaked confessions and accusing
looks, all of which we can assume are meant to suggest smoldering
passion.
 Instead, these things serve as a lead-in to a bedroom scene in
which you half-expect to see the lover's breath. Dutch can barely manage
an interested look at Kay, and as Republican women go, she has the
unbridled sensuality of Nancy Reagan. Ford and Thomas have scored as
romantic leads with other partners in the past, but as a couple they
generate next to nothing.
 "Sooner or later, everybody knows everything," Dutch muses at
one point, and in practically no time at all viewers will realize
"Random Hearts" is simply an elegantly appointed igloo. James Sanford

Author
Greg King
RANDOM HEARTS (M).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Sydney Pollack
Stars: Harrison Ford, Kristin Scott Thomas, Charles S Dutton, Bonnie
Hunt, Richard Jenkins, Sydney Pollack, Paul Guilfoyle, Peter Coyote,
Dylan Baker, Susanna Thompson, Susan Floyd, Lynne Thigpen, Kate Mara,
Ariana Thomas, Bill Cobbs
Running time: 131 minutes.
It was obviously the clout of Oscar winning director Sydney
Pollack (Out Of Africa, Tootsie, etc) that got this rather predictable
and unconvincing romantic drama a green light from the studios after
several years in pre-production and numerous script rewrites.  It was
obviously the presence of Harrison Ford, the box office star of the
century, that has given this tired drama legs at the box office.
However, it will be poor word of mouth that will kill it within a
couple of weeks.
Despite his impressive string of box office hits, even Ford
occasionally picks a project that fails to live up to expectations.
Random Hearts is a disappointment, particularly given the calibre of
creative personnel involved.
The film centres around two people from different social
environments who are brought together in the aftermath of a plane
crash that kills their respective spouses.  Dutch Van Der Broek (Ford)
is a tough, no-nonsense internal affairs officer with the Washington
DC police department.  When his wife is killed in a tragic plane
crash, Van Der Broek learns that his wife had been deceiving him.  She
had been travelling under an alias with a married man with whom she
was having an affair.  Driven both by his personal sense of betrayal
and his policeman's instincts, Van Der Broek pursues his own personal
investigation into his wife's life, trying to piece together details
of her affair.
He finally uncovers the identity of her illicit lover, and
learns that he is the husband of Kay Chandler (Kristin Scott Thomas),
a congresswoman running for re-election.  Kay, on the other hand, is
aware of the potential damage that could result from the affair
becoming public, and tries to squash the investigation.  But sparks
soon fly between the pair, and they attempt to deal with their
confused emotions and sense of hurt and betrayal.
Unfortunately, the two leads lack any real chemistry, and
their romance lacks any genuine sense of passion.  Ford gives a rather
tired, almost bored performance here, and he lacks the dynamism of
earlier films.  Thomas is a veteran of epic romances (The English
Patient, The Horse Whisperer, etc), and her usual cold and aloof
persona is perfectly suited to her role here.  She gives the stronger
performance of the two leads, although even she lacks any real depth.
Pollack has also wasted a strong ensemble cast in dull, mainly one
dimensional supporting roles.
Pollack's direction has rarely been as pedestrian or as
uninspired as it is here.  The film is a good half hour too long for
its rather slim scenario, and the pace is often a little sluggish.
The rather clichéd subplot concerning Ford's investigation of a
rather sticky murder and a corrupt cop jars with the romance.  It
seems tacked on almost as an afterthought, a desperate attempt to beef
up a thin plot that is clearly struggling to sustain interest.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Random Hearts is a frustrating experience, because the initial premise
behind it is more than interesting enough to warrant two hours of
thought-provoking material. Unfortunately, due to a mishandled approach
by director Sydney Pollack and an elementary screenplay by Kurt Luedtke,
the film becomes a tedious exercise in unlikely romance. Despite a few
exceptional features to note, Random Hearts is a needlessly drawn-out
and altogether painful experience.
The set-up of Random Hearts is absorbing, enticing the viewer with just
the right dosage of intrigue and suspense. Pollack introduces us to the
main characters with natural ease, and although during the first twenty
minutes his palette is full of meaty plot details, he handles everything
with refreshing efficiency. We meet Dutch Van Den Broeck (Harrison
Ford), a Washington DC police officer in the Internal Affairs division,
and Kay Chandler (Kristin Scott Thomas), a congresswoman in the wake of
running for office. What do these two unlikely souls have in common?
Well, their spouses are having a secret affair, and both are about to
slip away for a romantic getaway in Miami.
The flight that Mrs. Van Den Broeck and Mr. Chandler are on crashes.
This tragedy is unbeknownst to Dutch and Kay, who were informed of a
different destination. After a detailed investigation, Dutch realizes
that his wife was not off at a catalogue shoot as she had led on. One
discovery leads to another, and soon he ascertains that she was on the
flight, and seated next to a male companion (Mr. Chandler, of course).
Confronting Kay with this evidence, Dutch insists on learning how the
affair began. The congresswoman, however, doesn't want to have her
reputation scarred by these accusations involving her husband.
Random Hearts is about finding love during a time of great loss. We know
with certainty that Dutch and Kay are going to hit it off, despite their
awkward position. That's no surprise. What is a glaring surprise is that
their romance is poorly structured, rushed and completely unconvincing.
The single moment in which the film loses it's balance completely occurs
when Dutch and Kay hop into a car, and, after a few brief seconds of
vented anger, begin to suck each other's faces like two lovesick octopi.
All believability is immediately discarded in favor of staging an
implausible romance. The audience is supposed to relate, but they rarely
do.
The 2nd act of this hapless production is filled with ludicrous dialogue
and sloppy romantic exchanges. You have to look very deep into the
characters of Dutch and Kay to find any affable reason or remorse that
would normally revolve around the situation. Ford does some solid work
here, but sadly, important details of Dutch's personal life are left
untouched. It's difficult to show even remote interest in him. Scott
Thomas' character resembles an unfeeling piece of plastic, until Kay
finally begins to come around and reveal a discernible personality. The
stars try and try willingly to save Random Hearts from the black hole it
seems destined for, but have little success. In supporting roles,
Charles S. Dutton and Dennis Haysbeart are reliable, but neither is used
often enough to register.
During a few crucial moments in Random Hearts, I felt as if I would slip
into a coma. Pollack meanders endlessly around the central issues of the
script, managing to keep the viewer at an arm's length throughout. This
creates a difficult task: how do you become engaged in the story when
the director prohibits it? The film, which clocks in at a lengthy 2
hours, 20 minutes, could have been shortened by a healthy half-hour.
I enjoyed bits and pieces of the romance, including a surprisingly
genuine ending that felt much sunnier than most of the garbage that
preceeded it. I only wish Random Hearts would have been a different,
more intelligent and involving movie. Dedicated romantics may find
something to like here - but most, I'm afraid, will be exiting the
theater in random disgust.
Comments Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 How would you react to your mate's adultery? And how much
more agonizing would it be if your spouse's accidental death prevented
you from asking the agonizing question: Why? That's the premise of
Sydney Pollack's romantic drama, adapted from Warren Adler's novel by
Darryl Ponicsan with a screenplay by Kurt Luedtke. And the concept is
intriguing. Harrison Ford plays a detective in the Internal Affairs
Division of the Washington, D.C. police department and Kristin Scott
Thomas is a well-bred New Hampshire congresswoman running for
re-election. They're strangers until his wife and her husband are
killed in a plane crash and it's discovered that the deceased were
lovers, secretly traveling as "Mr. and Mrs." to a tryst in
Miami. Grief-stricken, the survivors are thrown together as they
attempt to come to terms with their mutual betrayal. He's
masochistically determined to investigate every sordid detail, while
she's deep into denial. "Sooner or later, everybody knows everything,"
he informs her. And that scandal is what terrifies her. Then abruptly,
inexplicably, they desperately start groping each other. Inevitably,
they're soon in bed, as if the answers to the emotional questions
they're struggling to understand were hidden beneath the
sheets. Looking scruffy, wearing an ear stud and sporting the world's
worst haircut, Harrison Ford is sincere, earnest and stoic, while
Kristin Scott Thomas's chilly demeanor fails to ignite this
restrained, ultimately dull, rebound romance - even though Sydney
Pollack delivers a strong performance as a media strategist. And
there's a forgettable subplot involving gunplay with two corrupt
cops. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Random Hearts" is a
well-crafted but emotionally distant 5. Let's put it this way - it's
not exactly a date movie.

Author
Scott Renshaw
RANDOM HEARTS
(Columbia)
Starring:  Harrison Ford, Kristin Scott Thomas, Charles S. Dutton, Bonnie
Hunt, Dennis Haysbert, Sydney Pollack.
Screenplay:  Kurt Luedtke, from Darryl Ponsican's adaptation of the novel
by Warren Adler.
Producers:  Sydney Pollack and Marykay Powell.
Director:  Sydney Pollack.
MPAA Rating:  R (adult themes, profanity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  131 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For a romantic drama, RANDOM HEARTS sure doesn't begin the way you
would expect.  The film eases us into the worlds of its two principal
characters, Washington D.C. internal affairs cop William "Dutch" Van Den
Broeck (Harrison Ford) and New Hampshire Congresswoman Kay Chandler
(Kristin Scott Thomas).  Their lives run parallel for nearly an hour of
screen time, with Dutch investigating a pair of crooked cops and Kay
preparing for a tough re-election campaign.  Drifting through the
background is the event that will bring them together: an airline crash
that claims the lives of Dutch's wife Peyton (Susanna Thompson) and Kay's
husband Cullen (Peter Coyote).  With a languid silkiness, director Sydney
Pollack lets the characters develop independently before Dutch's suspicion
that Peyton and Cullen were having an affair sets Dutch and Kay on a
collision course.  The pacing may be slow, but the set-up is engrossing
and effective.
     Then, something horrible happens:  Dutch and Kay actually get
together.
     To understand what's so dreadful about the romantic story in RANDOM
HEARTS, you have to understand the laughter.  After a day together in
Miami exploring the possible scene of their spouses' infidelity, Dutch and
Kay return home exchanging portentous glances throughout their plane trip.
Finally, in Kay's car at the airport, they surrender to an angry, clumsy
clinch ... and the audience starts howling.  You could argue that they
were responding to the awkwardness of the moment, but I'm not sure I'd buy
it.  In a matter of seconds, it was obvious that people weren't buying
that relationship.  In a matter of seconds, RANDOM HEARTS had plummeted to
earth faster than the downed jet that brought Dutch and Kay together.
     Doomed romanced between wounded, grieving souls are nothing new in
dramatic cinema -- case in point: LAST TANGO IN PARIS -- but such films
generally focus on the essential emptiness at the center of the
relationship.  RANDOM HEARTS has too old-time-Hollywood a sensibility to
delve into that kind of psychological pain.  Scenes between Dutch and Kay
keep suggesting the potential for genuine affection between them,
something besides the mutual despair and betrayal that connected them in
the first place.  As a result, RANDOM HEARTS feels consistently and
resolutely false as soon as they start to go at it in the front seat of
Kay's car.  Pollack and company keep trying to transplant the heart of a
1940's weeper into the body of a European art film.
     It doesn't help that the story doesn't even make the best case for
the base emotions that first link Dutch and Kay.  On Dutch's side, it
makes more sense, as the top trained to look for corruption feels like a
fool when he discovers infidelity he never suspected for a moment.  The
transference of his anger at Kay's husband to sleeping with Kay works
thematically; Kay is another matter entirely.  She is almost unsurprised
to learn of Cullen's philandering, her absence of shock and rage
diminishing her motivation.  Scott Thomas tries to wring some plausibility
from Kay's actions, but it's hard to accept them as anything but plot
machinations.  When Harrison Ford -- looking a bit silly in his stud
earring -- says to her, "I was thinking about your mouth," you have to
believe Kay would have laughed in his face.
     Of course people in Hollywood love stories are always saying
ridiculously purple things to one another, and audiences roll with it all
the time.  It can only work, however, if the story is builty on one of
those sweeping archetypal premises in which soulmates are inspired to
rhapsodic poetry.  RANDOM HEARTS shouldn't have had the faintest whiff of
soulmates to it, not when the hook is the visceral response of two people
to an affair between their spouses.  Pollack is too polished and
professional a film-maker to produce an unwatchable product; he's also too
polished and professional a film-maker to delve into those dark places
where the film needed to live.  For nearly an hour, he has it all working,
using the character development to build a case for incompatibility.  By
the time the smiling, optimistic denouement rolls around, you know the
audience was right when their gut response to this relationship was to
laugh out loud.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
RANDOM HEARTS (1999) **  Directed by Sydney Pollack. Written by Kurt
Luedtke and adapted by Darryl Ponicsan, based on the novel (1984) by 
Warren Adler. Photography, Philippe Rousselot. Editing, William 
Steinkamp. Production design, Barbara Ling. Music. Dave Grusin. Cast: 
Harrison Ford (Dutch Van Den Broeck), Kristin Scott Thomas (Kay 
Chandler), Charles S. Dutton (Alcee), Kate Mara (Jessica Chandler), 
Bonnie Hunt (Wendy Judd), Dennis Haysbert (Detective George 
Beaufort), Edie Falco (Janice), Lynne Thigpen (Phyllis Bonaparte), 
Brooke Smith (Sarah), Richard Jenkins (Truman Trainor), Paul 
Guilfoyle (Dick Montoya), Susanna Thompson (Peyton Van Den Broeck), 
Peter Coyote (Cullen Chandler) et al.  Produced by Pollack and 
Marykay Powell. A Columbia release. 131 minutes. R (sex and violence)
Yes, Virginia, there are differences among social classes. More about 
this later. For now, the sad news that Random Hearts is a 
disappointment.
It starts with the title which is sappy, terribly old-fashioned, like 
one of those paperback romances of yore and of now. Everyone who has 
even the minimum of information about movies knows already the 
subject.
He is Sergeant "Dutch," of the Internal Affairs division of the 
Washington, D.C. police. He has a young, pretty wife, Peyton, a 
fashion consultant at Saks Fifth Avenue. No children. She is Kay 
Chandler, a Congresswoman for New Hampshire and the wife of lawyer 
Cullen. They have a 15-year old daughter, Jessica (well played).
The two families don't know each other, but Peyton and Cullen have 
been having an affair. Peyton tells Dutch that she's flying to Miami 
for a  Saks catalogue photo-shoot. Cullen pretends he's going to New 
York on business. In fact the two get on a plane to Miami to have 
some fun in the sun, and out of it too. The plane crashes shortly 
after take-off. The couple is among the many dead.
It takes time and searches for Dutch to become aware of the 
infidelity and death of his wife. Kay finds out in simpler ways. 
Dutch and Kay meet some 45 minutes into the movie. They fall in love.
Before Dutch and Kay meet the film is interesting in events 
(including  airline's after-crash procedures) and in characters. It 
is elaborate, with impressive big- budget cinematography, and often 
functional editing: when Dutch makes an urgent phone call, he dials 
only the first two digits before we cut to the call proper. Good 
economy of means, especially since phones and answering machines play 
a major role. By far the most affecting sections come as 
shell-shocked Dutch pieces together bit by bit  the awful truth of 
his wife's affair. .
But after this go-go-go tempo, the elaborate shifts to laborious, the 
story slows down while its lining of semi-irrelevancies increases. In 
the hallowed tradition of using more than one narrative paths (which 
can be good, but also bad when using is not followed by fusing) the 
plot is murkily padded by Dutch going after some drug-dealers and 
their corrupt police associates. Too much cliché cop-stuff.
In the long second part, the best thing  is a terrific scene at a 
Miami place where couples dancing the tango generate infinitely more 
eroticism than the main story
Why make the main characters a policeman and a Congresswoman running 
for re-election? Because of the TV and movie "glamor" of gun-action 
and politics, and of course sex. Forgotten, as in too many gimmicky 
"love" stories, is the lesson of  Brief Encounter (UK, 1945), that 
paragon of classically simple sentimental tales: two ordinary people 
in ordinary circumstances can move you immensely. Period.
The process of bringing the protagonists "really" together, travels 
through corpses, posh hotels and restaurants and is fairly 
convoluted. It reaches an unconvincing peak after the Dutch and Kay, 
back from their separate (discrete but not discreet) visits to 
confirm to themselves, needlessly and masochistically, the reality, 
the scene and the betrayals of their spouses. They return to D.C. on 
the same plane. At the Washington parking-lot, in Kay's car, there is 
(OUCH!!!) sudden,  startling, logic-defying wild kissing and groping.
The affair that follows, complete with bucolic settings, soupy 
dialogue, some revelations, and both parties' obsessive need to know 
more about their dead spouses, shows only one thing: that the movie 
doesn't know what to do with itself. Well, what do you expect from a 
work which started its planning fifteen years ago with a novel, and 
whose script and "adaptation" have different authors.
Now, Virginia, back to social differences. The main actors are nicely 
matched physically. They are mature, Ford, 57, Scott Thomas, 39, yet 
visually give no impression of a June-November couple. But no matter 
how youthful and vigorous Ford, the likelihood of the pairing is 
strained. She is the patrician daughter of a millionaire who was 
(is?) a political force. And a New England Republican.
The policeman, named  "Dutch" Van Den Broeck -- perhaps to remind 
subliminally a few viewers of aristocratic Dutch-American families -- 
is a commoner who drinks beer from the bottle.  Perhaps a Democrat, 
since, in a good touch, he sports an earring that may denote 
non-conservatism.
This hybrid movie gets increasingly uninvolving. It seems predicated 
on a 100% belief in monogamy. What hypocrisy, when showbiz people are 
notoriously polygamous, megagamous or even gigagamous.
The most affecting sections come in the first part, with 
shell-shocked Dutch learning bit by bit of his wife's affair. There 
is also excellent photography, including a terrific scene at a Miami 
place where couples dancing the tango generate infinitely more 
eroticism than the main story.
Director Sydney Pollack plays  very well Kay's politically savvy 
spinmeister. Pollack is no mean film-maker. He does what he can here 
but has an overall clumsy script to contend with.
