Title
Review for Message to Love: The Isle of Wight Festival (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
MESSAGE TO LOVE: THE ISLE OF WIGHT FESTIVAL
(director/writer/cinematographer: Murray Lerner; 1997-U.K.)
What a concert! An artistic success-but a financial and spiritual
failure. Consider who was at this 5-day summer tribal gathering at the
Isle of Wight from this list of performers and judge for yourself if it
was worth the price of admission:The Doors, Donovan, The Moody Blues,
Leonard Cohen, Kris Kristofferson, Joni Mitchell, Miles Davis, Emerson
Lake and Palmer, John Sebastien, Tiny Tim, Jimi Hendrix, Joan Baez,
Free, Taste, Ten Years After, Jethro Tull and The Who.
600,000 rock fans, in 1970, voyaged by boat to the remote Isle of Wight
off the southern coast of England and were ready to see the last great
"rock" music festival. The problem the promoters had was that only
50,000 people paid the three pounds (approximately $7.50 in American
money) required to see the concert, the others crashed the double
corrugated-iron fences, with the local police holding guard dogs to
prevent the non-paying crowd from gate crashing. The scene was an utter
mess, with bad vibes prevailing, as many of the inarticulate and stoned
hippies claiming that this was turning out to be merely a commercial
venture and refused to pay, saying the concert should be free, setting
up a tent city on a slope overlooking the site, calling it desolation
row (a Bob Dylan record plays that song as the the credits for the
film's end rolls on).
The artists refused to perform without getting paid first, leaving a bad
taste in the mouth of the audience. Tiny Tim went out and sang a lame
"There'll Always Be An England" only after insisting he gets paid first.
Jimi Hendrix was too stoned to adequately perform "Foxy Lady." Kris
Kristofferson got into a snit as desolation row pounded on the metal
fences and walked off stage before he could finish "Me and Bobby McGee."
A bloated Jim Morrison of The Doors, who along with Hendrix, performed
their last stage concerts ever, seemed to be musically flat. An intruder
rushes the stage during Joni Mitchell's "Woodstock" number and rattles
her so much that her voice is quivering, as she attempts to talk to the
crowd like a substitute teacher would to an unruly class. Joan Baez,
looking out-of-place with this generation of hippies, tells the
interviewer she cannot be forced into giving a free concert by the
crowd. The obnoxious announcer, Rikki Farr, goes so far as calling the
crowd "pigs," wavering back and forth between conjoling and chiding
them, with neither strategy doing anything but creating more bad
feelings. The promoters were amateurs, not knowing how to control the
crowd or financially run a concert, and to the bargain, were sending off
a contradictory message, for a concert that was supposed to manifest
"love" and "peace."
The crowd shots showed rampant hashish smoke and psychedelic drugs being
ingested, nudity, the potential for a riot, and talk among the concert
goers that this was a just a "money" thing, as the feelings of idealism
or another Woodstock, which was only one year earlier, seemed like
ancient history. One of the outlandish comments from a stoned concert
goer was "This is a psychedelic concentration camp."
The director of this film had to wait 25 years after the concert to
release the movie, as the promoters went belly-up over the concert. What
is suprisingly good is the sound of the film and the high quality of the
music. This film was no Woodstock, but it had a charm of its own, and is
certainly worth seeing not only for the music but for the history of the
period.
An opposite reaction to most of the views heard, is from the local
police who seem to detest the crowd, and a character who says he is a
retired commodore in British intelligence, as he proves that he probably
was that, as he babbles foolishly on saying that he hates to see the
youth of the country wasting away and that "Behind the hippie movement
is Black Power and behind them is Communism."
The following are some of the things that went right with the concert:
Emerson, Lake, and Palmer put on a fireworks display on stage (the stage
nearly burnt down), as they were really into it as they performed
"Pictures at an Exhibition." John Sebastien had the hippie drug culture
mood down pat, as he related well to the crowd, singing "Red Eye
Express." The Moody Blues sang a great rendition of "White Satin."
Leonard Cohen was his usual sardonic and sobering poetic self, as he
sang "Suzanne." All this in a concert that signaled the end of an era
and the dark Nixon days that lie ahead, with the Viet Nam War continuing
and the mood of the youthful generations of both Great Britain and
America, becoming even more polarized with the older generation.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In 1970, a year after WOODSTOCK, 600,000 rock fans ventured by
boat to the remote Isle of Wight off the southern coast of England.
They went to see what was called the last great music festival.
     MESSAGE TO LOVE: THE ISLE OF WIGHT FESTIVAL, is a new documentary
about the festival that works both as a concert film and as a series of
mini-dramas.  Since only 60,000 paid, will the promoters go broke?
Will the festival's barricades fall?  Is there going to be a riot?
Which drugged-out anarchist from the audience will demand to be heard
next?
     Although both parts of the film are fascinating, I was more
energized by the music than interested in the festival's logistics and
nightmares.  Since I was at grad school in Berkeley at the time, the
music possessed images of dreamy nostalgia for me.  Although the
artists were top-notch, their performances at The Isle of Wight
Festival were generally subpar.  Jim Morrison of The Doors, for
example, gives a lethargic rendition of "When the Music's Over" and of
"The End."  Even if the movie is no WOODSTOCK, it still possesses a
charm all its own.  With performances by The Doors, The Who, Miles
Davis, Donovan, Jimi Hendrix, Kris Kristofferson, Joni Mitchell, and,
drum roll, Tiny Tim, MESSAGE TO LOVE would be a hard film to dislike.
     Although the camera spends too much time concentrating on the
performers midriffs and other close-ups, the music's power dominates.
The sound track's quality is quite good, which might not be expected
given the age of the film stock.
     Director Murray Lerner's favorite part seems to be the back stage
melodrama, which manages to work its way on stage more than once.  One
drugged-out hippie grabs the microphone to complain that, "This
festival business is becoming a psychedelic concentration camp."
Lerner manages to find a single individual, "The Commodore," to
counterbalance the blather of the festival's fringe elements with his
own balderdash.  "It is not just hippie fun," he explains.  "Behind it
is Black Power and behind it is Communism."  Other than Jim Hendrix, I
did not see a single black at the festival, which made The Commodore's
charges all the more bizarre.
     The performers are disgusted with the promoters' inability to
control the crowds and to handle the finances.  Tiny Tim demands to be
paid in cash before going on stage to sing a patriotic British anthem.
And Kris Kristofferson finally loses it and walks out while singing "Me
and Bobby McGee."
     The general festival goers' complaints were that the artists
should perform for free and the attendees should not have to pay the
small fee of three pounds for a five day festival.  "I'm not going to
be forced to give a free concert -- that doesn't make any sense,"
complains Joni Mitchell.
     Most of the audience was so stoned that their thoughts were
gibberish.  "Commercial music is co-opting our vegetables," carped one
gatecrasher.  A young man and his six-year-old provide easily the
saddest scene in the picture.  The man explains how his son smokes dope
with him, but it's all right since "he doesn't inhale."  He brags that
his son has also dropped some acid, and the father goes on to extol the
virtues of drugs.
     The show ends as it began with a big transvestite called "The
Baroness."  As the show draws to a close he gives what could be termed
the motto of the festival crowd.  "Live and let live," The Baroness
says.  "You worried?  I'm not."
     MESSAGE TO LOVE: THE ISLE OF WIGHT FESTIVAL runs 2:10.  It is
rated R for full frontal female nudity, drug usage, and profanity.
Given the pro-drug message expounded by some in the film, I would want
to talk to my teenagers before I let them see the film or, better yet,
take them if they wanted to go.  I enjoyed the music and was fascinated
by the outrageous beliefs of the crowd so I give the documentary a
thumbs up and ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
