Title
Review for Shiloh 2: Shiloh Season (1999)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark O'Hara
It's a sure bet the family will enjoy 'Shiloh 2', the film based Phyllis 
Reynolds Naylor's 'Shiloh Season', the second book of the 'Shiloh' trilogy.
Young Marty Preston (Zachary Browne) has saved the beagle Shiloh from the 
clutches of a ne'er-do-well neighbor, Judd Travers (Scott Wilson).  But Judd 
resurfaces, his drunkenness and bad temper escalating.  Marty's father Ray 
(Michael Moriarty) believes Judd is hunting without permission on Preston 
land, and to make things worse, Judd makes overtures toward reclaiming 
Shiloh.  At one point Judd's dogs run loose, and one of Marty's sisters is 
bitten on the leg.  Clearly, Judd is a threatening presence.
Then something happens to Judd Travers.  Lassie-like, Shiloh leads Marty to 
Judd's overturned truck, saving the man's life.  Will Judd ever lose his 
apparent hatred?  Marty sets out trying to befriend him, following the 
example of his loving dog Shiloh.
As Marty, Zachary Browne is mostly convincing;  he is even endearing during 
his confrontations with Judd Travers, Browne's eyes full of sincerity and 
fear.
As Ray Preston, Michael Moriarty turns in an average performance.  His 
acting skills are apparent, yet he plays the role with little or no 
expression:  too low-key are his replies and  warnings in conversations with 
other characters.  His wife Louise, played by Ann Dowd, is much stronger in 
her portrayal of a concerned parent.  In one scene, protecting her daughter 
and other children from the vicious dog, Mrs. Preston swings a broom with 
frantic protectiveness.  Just as she is believable in her disdain of Judd, 
her husband Ray acts unbelievably laid-back toward the main who seems to 
pose a threat to the family.
Rod Steiger plays Doc Wallace, the wise mentor to many of the area children. 
  Steiger's experience is visible in his natural manner, even in his expert 
blocking:  the scenes in which he appears are very watchable and 
well-directed.
Scott Wilson sketches Judd Travers with convincing hatefulness.  His drunken 
staggers are not overdone (although his frequent drunk driving without a 
sheriff giving chase is inexcusable).  Even when the script gives him too 
little to say, Judd maintains a sour face and convinces us he is a hard nut 
to crack.
What is not so well done is the portrayal of seventh graders.  One scene has 
all the children on a school bus, talking civilly and woodenly about the dog 
attack.  The kids in Marty's class are entirely too quiet and cooperative 
with their new teacher, Miss Talbot.
As one might expect, there are many opportunities for sentiment in the 
story.  But in general, director Dale Rosenbloom keeps the tone from 
becoming too sickly sweet.
Music by Joel Goldsmith assists the story unobtrusively, and a theme song by 
Rita Coolidge does a nice job of closing the narrative.
A warm-hearted story with an all-important message, 'Shiloh 2: Shiloh 
Season' will capture the fondness of any viewer.  With a story that only 
seems simple, the film is a solid bet for family enjoyment.  In an age in 
which so many filmmakers refuse to target children, 'Shiloh 2' captivates 
with a mixture of fun and intelligence.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Legacy Releasing
 Director:  Sandy Tung
 Writer:  Dale Rosenbloom, novel by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
 Cast: Frannie, Michael Moriarty, Scott Wilson, Zachary
Browne, Ann Dowd, Rod Steiger
   Extravagant sentimentality is acceptable in only one kind of
movie: any family film dealing with dogs.  Just thinking about
the best doggie movie ever made, Fred M. Wilcox's "Lassie
Come Home" (1943), sets my tears rolling.  With the late
great Roddy McDowall as the young boy whose poor family
has to sell its beloved collie (played winningly by
Pal), "Lassie Come Home" emerged as what critic Leonard
Maltin constructively called "a tearjerker of the first order."
   Neither "Shiloh" installment can match up to The Great
One but the first episode in this series about a beloved
beagle tossed out a question in ethics suitable for Harvard
majors studying Kant and Kierkegaard.  If a dog, owned by a
man who abuses it, runs away into the arms of an adorable
11-year-old kid, should that kid have the moral right to keep
it?  In the Dale Rosenbloom tale, the lad's father says no.  A
mailman who is barely getting by financially, dad explains that
the dog is the legal property of a creep named Judd--and,
going by the book, dad returns the small hunting dog to its
owner.  Marty is declared to be a thief by his own dad. Is he?
Yep.  But Like Mahatma Gandhi, Marty follows a higher law,
his own conscience, in putting the dog's basic, uh, human
rights above the rights of its abusive legal owner, Judd
Travers.
   This second installment, subtitled "Shiloh Season," is the
inevitable follow-up to that glowing first film.  Welcome back,
Shiloh!  You're already an old friend.  This time the emphasis
is not on saving a dog but on redeeming a nasty human
being.  Essentially, director Sandy Tung makes good use of
Dale Rosenbloom's adaptation of the Newberry-award-
winning novel by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor, which posits the
question, Can you teach an old dog new tricks?  The old
"dog," though, is the villainous 60-something Judd Travers,
once again played by the marvelous Scott Wilson.  Judd, who
is hated by literally every man, woman and beast in the rural
community, had made an agreement with 11-year-old Marty
Preston (whose role has been appropriated this time by
Zachary Brone).  In return for Marty's services around Judd's
shack, the eponymous beagle, Shiloh (Frannie), would be
legally the kid's. But Judd is not about to keep his part of the
agreement.  How do we know?  We know because Judd
keeps a can of beer attached firmly to his lips as though the
brew were his chewing gum, he frequently spits (though he
has not adopted the habit of chewing tobacco), and he
laughingly shoots squirrels right off the nearby telephone poll
with the same glee that Goeth took pot shots at inmates in
Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List."  Here's a guy that all in
town have given up on, and Judd seems not to care a whit
for their companionship. (We later learn what caused him to
be so callous.)  Only 12-year-old Marty Preston, who has
good reason to keep his distance from the evil old fella,
thinks he can personally rehabilitate Judd--just a spoonful of
sugar makes the medicine go down.  He knows he can do it
because he asks the family vet whether a bad dog can be
salvaged with kindness and gets the nod.
   "Shiloh 2" rewards us with the usual disarming cast of the
previous work.  Michael Moriarty is the kindly daddy, Ray
Preston, the town's mailman' and Ann Dowd as the local
manicurist, Louise, provides the maternal warmth that keeps
this Brady Bunch a clean-living quintet.  Rod Steiger is back
in a much kinder role than he played in his tour de force
engagement for "The Pawnbroker"--he's still the local family
doctor who makes ends meet by keeping a general store and
sending his wife out as a visiting nurse.
     Like 95% of sequels, "Shiloh 2" is not as trenchant as the
original, perhaps because we are already familiar with the
family setup.  This time the household laughs when the
youngest daughter, Becky (Rachel David) says that her
spinach looks like poop, whereas just two years ago Marty
was chastised for using the word "pee."  In my review of the
original, I had said that "you'll have to work out a lump in
your throat after seeing this remarkable movie, plainly and
intelligently told."  Though the sequel is related in the same
unadorned manner, with Troy Smith's camera capturing the
Thoreauvian simplicity of a village that seems to have sprung
out of the '40's, the poignant edge of the original is just not
there.  If this is your first experience with the Preston family,
however, you may indeed get the buzz that a good animal-
centered film should provide. "Shiloh 2" is an antidote to the
frantically hyped "The General's Daughter" which probably
cost about thirty times as much to turn out.

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Zachary Browne, Michael Moriarty, Rod Steiger, Scott Wilson.
Rated PG.
Have parents not complained about the current lack of wholesome family
entertainment? Have critics not bashed the film industry for not putting
out movies that can entertain children without bombarding them with
high-tech special effects? They have, making the fact that Shiloh 2:
Shiloh Season wasn't a box office hit all the more a surprise. It went
nowhere during its admittedly limited theatrical release which signifies
a certain hypocrisy on the part of some parents: how can they rant that
there isn't anything good for their children to watch and then when
something good hits the screens not seek it out?
Shiloh Season is based on the novel of the same name by Phyllis Reynolds
Naylor and it is a sequel to Shiloh, likewise both a novel and a movie.
The first film had little Marty Preston attempting to save a mistreated
beagle from Judd Travers, its cruel owner and the town drunk. He managed
to get the dog and keep it but Judd isn't over it yet. He wants revenge
and he wants the dog back.
Marty, I suspect, would rather give away his little sister than his
beloved beagle so to him, giving the dog back to Judd to avoid trouble
is out of the question. He blatantly refuses and his father (Michael
Moriarty) supports him. But Judd isn't ready to give up so easily. He
begins to blame Marty for various things that mysteriously happen around
his residence, such as his mailbox being knocked over, his truck getting
scratched and his dogs being set loose and biting Marty's sister. Marty
insists that he didn't do any of those things; we, along with his
parents, believe him.
Marty wants to see if he can change Judd; make him a better person by
being nice to him. That's a refreshingly simple concept: here is a
person deeply scarred by events of his childhood, so what better way is
there to change him than to show him compassion? A little kindness, as
opposed to a lot of therapy, goes a long way.
Inspector Gadget this ain't. In fact, Shiloh Season has an almost
frustratingly no-frills attitude; in part, I'm sure, because of its
limited budget but also because it is interested in emphasizing good
values rather than cool effects. That's not to say that it doesn't
entertain in the process: kids will love it and adults who allow
themselves to be won over by it should not be squirming in their seats.
It's a family film, not a kid flick; a movie that might be targeted at
the young ones but can be enjoyed by the parents as well.
What this isn't is the story of a boy and his dog; it's a part of the
plot but a minor one. You'll be hard-pressed to find a moment where
director Sandy Tung tries to get an "Aaaaaaw" out of the audience with
Shiloh's cuteness. Instead, it's a simple but sincere exploration of
human nature. What makes "bad" people? Can we change them? If we can,
how? These are questions that Shiloh Season tries to answer for kids
while leaving enough open for discussions with parents. It's a fun
movie, but it's also, in its own right, an important one.
Unfortunately, with all the big-budget "family" films around, not a lot
of kids want to see stuff like this, and in accordance to the laws of
supply and demand, not a lot of it is released. That is a reason why,
now that Shiloh Season is on video, you should rent it. Don't deny
yourself or your kids the experience of a moral, wholesome family film;
now a rare breed.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Shiloh, a sad but lovable little beagle and one of the cutest dogs
around, is back for his second movie in SHILOH 2: SHILOH SEASON, a
direct-to-video sequel to SHILOH, a movie that two years ago garnered so
much critical acclaim.  The new story about the power of "a little bit
of kindness" is full of old-fashioned values and homespun wisdom.  It
tries hard to teach without being preachy.
Some of the cast is back from the original, but many are new.  Zachary
Browne replaces Blake Heron as Marty Preston, Shiloh's now 12-year-old
owner.  Browne is best known for his recurring role on TV's "ER."  Dale
Rosenbloom again writes the script, this time based on the second in
Phyllis Reynolds Naylor's Shiloh trilogy, which means that we can
probably expect a SHILOH 3.
Marty is still having run-ins with Judd Travers (Scott Wilson), "a plain
bad apple" who lives nearby.  Judd is a mean alcoholic who drinks even
when hunting or driving.  He abuses any animals unlucky enough to cross
his path, and, in the original, he owned and mistreated adorable little
Shiloh.  He's also a tobacco spitter, which can be pretty gross on the
screen and thoroughly defines his character.
Judd threatens Marty every chance he gets.  Whereas most kids' movies
suffer from having villains that aren't real, Judd, a wiry loner, is
exactly the explosive type of individual who is so scary in real life.
With hunting season coming and Judd drinking heavily, the threats seem
more ominous than ever.  Judd has taken to drinking and hunting on the
Preston land, which is especially dangerous because Marty's two younger
sisters play there.
Marty's father, Ray (Michael Moriarty), the local mailman, does his best
to try to calm down emotions and get along as one has to in a small
town.  He's a good father and a good listener.  But even Ray has his
limits of tolerance.  "Some people never change, and Judd's one of
them," he decides at one point, tired of trying hard to be kind to Judd
without receiving any positive response from him.
As the small town's honorable sage, Doc Wallace, Rod Steiger plays a
big-hearted character from whom Marty seeks advice on how to deal with
Judd.  Generally, adults populate the story to provide prepackaged bits
of wisdom for Marty to ponder and act upon.  "Sometimes you get a streak
of bad luck that you can't do anything about, and sometimes you get a
streak of bad luck that's your own fault," Doc tells Marty about the
troubles Judd has had to face in his life.  Judd, he explains, is the
product of an abusive father much like Judd himself.
"Truth is always important, but gossip can sometimes be more
interesting," Marty's teacher (Dawn McMillan) lectures her students.
She tries to show them that even the lowest of the low, like Judd,
should be judged only on what they know for sure and certain and have
seen with their own eyes.  Of course, Marty has personally witnessed how
wicked Judd can be, but the teacher's point is a good one nevertheless.
The movie, which plays like a good episode of a television series, is
filled with strong moral lessons if not as much action or interest as it
needs.  (Small but irritating production mistakes mar its presentation.
One of the key nighttime scenes, for example, is lit as bright as day.)
Predictable but honest, it just doesn't pack the emotional wallop of the
original.  Still, for a pleasant family film with likeable characters
and a moral message around every corner, SHILOH 2 fills the bill.
SHILOH 2: SHILOH SEASON runs 1:36.  It is rated PG for mild thematic
elements and would be fine for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, called it "such a sweet little movie" and gave
it *** 1/2.  Normally quiet during a movie, he kept speaking up during
this one to say how good it was.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
Getting lost amid all the gross-out humor, sexual innuendo, and
potty-mouthed characters which fill our theaters and pass for modern day
entertainment, are the wholesome, family-oriented films the likes of
SHILOH 2.  This is a pity.  Families need and deserve films such as these
to help establish the qualities of morality, integrity, honesty, kindness,
and forgiveness that we'd like to think parents are teaching their
children.
Based on the award winning series of books by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor,
SHILOH 2 continues the telling of a simple story about a boy and his dog,
and the mean-spirited neighbor who threatens to come between them.
Whereas the first movie dealt with Marty's attempts to save Shiloh, a
precious, floppy-eared beagle, from his abusive owner, its sequel deals
with Marty's attempts to save Shiloh's former owner from himself.  Judd
Travers is an ill-tempered, antisocial man angered further by losing his
best hunting dog to Marty.  He is drinking heavily, driving erratically,
and generally terrorizing the surrounding community which gives him a wide
berth.
Marty begins to ask the question which becomes the dominant theme for the
film: "Can a person change?  If he is mean, is he mean forever?"
Writer Dale Rosenblum, who wrote the screenplay for the first SHILOH
movie, and director Sandy Tung (CONFESSIONS OF A SEXIST PIG) have brought
back most of the cast of the 1997 original film, including Michael
Moriarty as Ray Preston, Rod Steiger as kindly Doc Wallace, and Scott
Wilson as the ornery Judd Travers.
The younger cast members playing the roles of the Preston children have
been replaced.  Zachary Browne (TV's ER) takes over the role of Marty
Preston, the 12 year old owner of the most familiar beagle since Snoopy.
Most of the acting is adequate for the story, the standout exception
being Mr. Wilson's performance.  His realistic portrayal of the backwoods
curmudgeon gives the movie's message a depth of meaning that many other
moralistic films do not achieve.  Judd is not a stereotypical bad man.  He
is a bitter, unhappy, lonely soul who has never had a friend and has
little prospect of ever making one.
Some of the dialogue admittedly contains a few "groaners."  Marty, after
seeing Judd shoot a squirrel, indicating his lack of respect for the
hunting season, worriedly asks, "What if he makes it Shiloh season?"  The
movie also takes a while to get its legs under itself.  But once Marty
makes it his task to find out if Judd could ever stop being mean, the
story finds its pace and our interest.
Shiloh is no Lassie or Rin Tin Tin.  Those heroic dogs are often featured
as the most intelligent character appearing on their respective screens.
The dog in this film is less of a super-powered canine that saves the day
and more of a catalyst for the actions of the humans with whom he lives.
Thankfully, the filmmakers also refrained from churning out an
unrealistic fable where a bad man is miraculously made good overnight.
Judd initially rebukes Marty's intentions, and later ignores his further
attempts of friendship.  It is going to take a great deal of perseverance
and a gargantuan effort on Marty's part to break through Judd's crusty
shell and inspire a behavioral change.
It will be hard... But it is not impossible.  All of us are asked to
change on a daily basis.  We are to continually "put off" our "old man
nature" and renew ourselves according to the standard of righteousness.
"You were taught, with regard to your former way of life, to put off your
old self, which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires; be made new
in the attitude of your minds; to put on the new self." Ephesians 4:22-24a
[NIV]
As Marty learns, this is not something that happens overnight.  It takes
a great deal of commitment, perseverance, and an unwillingness to settle
for less.  It requires a daily decision to change bad or spiritually
unhealthy habits by adopting new and godly habits to take their place.
We could all use some of Marty's driving determination at times in order
to be successful.  Or perhaps we just need to have a love for someone
other than ourselves to motivate us to be better.

Author
Dustin Putman
The original 1997 film, "Shiloh," was a small family movie that went 
undetected in theaters but became a hit on video and was praised by several 
notable critics. It remains unseen by me, and after viewing the 
well-intentioned, but painfully sappy sequel, "Shiloh 2: Shiloh Season," it 
probably will remain just that way: unseen. Practically a carbon-copy of most 
other "dog" movies, the film tells the story of 12-year-old Marty (Zachary 
Browne), who loves his faithful dog, Shiloh, just about as much as anyone 
could love a pet, but he finds their happiness put in jeopardy when the 
alcoholic, bitter Judd (Scott Wilson), Shiloh's abusive former owner, demands 
for him back. "Shiloh 2" may be acceptable for undiscriminating young 
viewers, and is certainly a few steps up from the awful "Inspector Gadget," 
but the movie has not an ounce of originality and mostly plays like a corny 
episode of the old television show, "Lassie." If only families were as 
perfect and happy as the one shown in this film, the world would be a better 
place, indeed.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
