Title
Review for True Believer (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
     For the last ten year's James Woods' character in TRUE BELIEVER has been
on the emotional skids.  He's one of the most famous 1960s lawyers, who made a
name for himself defending "the little people" against companies and
governments.  But over the years, fewer and fewer of the people he defended
were innocent, so that when a young lawyer (played by Robert Downey Jr.)  who
has come to New York with the intention of making Woods' his mentor, he finds a
jaded, disillusioned man with much of the skill but little of the idealism of
his glory days, making a living defending drug dealers.
     Two things happen which begin to wake Woods out of his stupor; one is
Downey's character, who is becoming a something of a Jimminy Cricket conscience
to him, while the other is the case of a convict (played by Yuji Okumoto) who
says he was sentenced for a murder he never committed.  Woods is initially
cynical, but begins to see parallels between his client's eight years of
imprisonment and his own decline.  But is his client telling the truth?  There
are some rather inexplicable mysteries about the gang shooting that sent
Okumoto's character to prison, and (ironically for Woods, who has been using
"conspiracy" as a plea for his clients for years) an organized resistance to
releasing his client from prison, centering on the Manhattan District
Attorney's decision to prosecute the reopening of the case (the D.A. is played
by Kurtwood Smith, one of the more popular heavies these days, so you *know*
he's up to something).
     What the film boils down to is an old-fashioned mystery that is
suspenseful and has its share of good twists along the way.  All of this is
spiced with Woods' growing surety that he is defending an innocent man, and
fighting a good fight; his excitement in uncovering the mysteries surrounding
the case are contagious.  The script is excellent, and keeps things moving at
all times; Woods and Downey make a good team, assisted by an upscale P.I.
[private investigator] (played by Margaret Colin, who is getting typecast in
this role) who knew Woods in his radical days.  I will admit that there is a
certain amount of Hollywood Courtroom Hokiness, but it's not at objectionable
levels.  And Woods, one of the best character actors around, keeps the high
energy that has become his trademark under control, unleashing it in the
courtroom finale where it really sparks.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  James Woods is great at playing
     characters who are just a little slimy and self-serving.  As
     a not-very-choosy civil liberties lawyer he finds for once he
     wants to believe his client is innocent.  James Woods' usual
     realistic performance matched with a plot as complex as an
     Agatha Christie make TRUE BELIEVER one of Woods' better
     films.  Rating: low +2.
     James Woods is one of those actors like Harry Dean Stanton and Richard
Farnsworth who have been around for a long time as character actors and who
have built up a small following.  He will probably never see his name in big
letters over Times Square, but when he shows up in a coming attraction, a
lot of people, myself included, make a careful mental note of the film's
title.  Woods, with a pock-marked face and a voice that is just this side of
being actually gravelly, generally plays slimeballs very effectively.  For
me the films that come to mind when I think of Woods are VIDEODROME,
SALVADORE, and ONCE UPON A TIME IN AMERICA.  It is not that he is in such
good films: TRUE BELIEVER is in third crime film in a row, the other being
BEST SELLER and COP, neither bad but neither very good either.  By a wide
margin TRUE BELIEVER is the best of the three and may well have the best
script of any of his films.
     Eddie Dodd (played by Woods with a ponytail) made a reputation for
himself in the 1960s as a great civil liberties lawyer.  He tells himself he
is in the same civil liberties fight today, but his clients are almost
exclusively drug dealers entrapped by the police and deep down it bothers
him that while fighting for a constitutional principle he is also freeing a
lot of guilty clients.  Then he is shaken from this routine by a new
assistant (played by Robert Downey, Jr.) and a case defending a Korean who
was convicted eight years earlier of a Chinatown gang killing and is now
accused of a second killing in prison.  Dodd decides to see if he can
overturn the original conviction.  In spite of Shu Kai Kim's lack of
cooperation, Woods wants desperately to believe Kim was innocent of the
original killing.  So begins a complicated investigation involving neo-
Nazis, drug dealers, and possible police corruption.
     TRUE BELIEVER has a puzzle of a plot with clues slipped to the viewer
at unexpected moments.  But like an Agatha Christie, everything makes sense
by the end of the film.  The byplay between Dodd and his new assistant is
often witty and often angry, but unlike so many other crime films, it never
seems artificial or set up.  Director Joseph Ruben, who previously directed
DREAMSCAPE and THE STEPFATHER, needs good actors and a good script.  Woods
is a good actor but he also needs a good script.  Wesley Strick gave them a
good script and they made a good, solid crime mystery.  I rate it a low +2
on the -4 to +4 scale.
