Title
Review for Hitlerjunge Salomon (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
Europe, and it is something that very few Americans really relate to, has
been terribly damaged from the World Wars.  Not only were countries totally
decimated, so were complete family trees, specially the one relating to the
Jewish faith.
In the past forty years, many films have depicted this destruction, and the
human suffering which it had caused.  Be it an Italian film like THE
BICYCLE THIEF, or later, the polish film KNIFE IN THE WATER, and the ability
of many film makers to begin expressing themselves through the film medium,
the main theme was always someone's incredible journey of survival against
some incredible odds.  Aside from the more unusual films about the war, like
THE TIN DRUM, almost all of them, stand up for the defense of the faith,
indeed any faith, that was oppressed.
Today, there are some people who lived in those days as youngsters, and some
of them, have finally out lived their fears, to be able to tell a horrific
story, and while they still have a sense of religious piety, they more often
than not have yet, a larger sense of self, than most.
Solomon Perel, was just such a person, who basically along the way, got a
bit lucky, and was able to survive because he went to a few schools and
learned a language or two, which as it turns out, was his saving grace.  The
struggle for survival takes many turns.  But as almost all of them  around
him fall by wayside ( they all display an over emotional response,  by the
way ) he manages to hold his head together long enough to keep himself alive
until the war ends, or his freedom, if he can find a way.  Solomon
Perel was luckier than most, he escaped to Palestine, and now lives in
Israel.
This film is more about the indoctrination of the younger ones, than it is
about anything else.  The Germans spent a lot of effort educating their
future generation of Aryans to rule the world.  And the Russians spent a lot
of time convincing many that their atheistic view point was more valid than
the opposing view point.  And of course, the Jews in the film, merely remain
faithful to their creed, imposing some rules on the young ( no
different there ), but at least, it is on a more acceptable mode.   Except
for one thing which the young man has to hide during his youth, and is a bit
of a problem in the German schools.  He is circumcised, and it came close to
costing him his life.
The film moves along very well, and is not predictable at all, which is very
similar, I'm sure to what the young Solomon had to go through.  It doesn't
have boring moments, and even includes some flights of fancy by the young
man, who has a bit if a sense of humor, even if subtle.
NICE FILM. SHOULD BE SEEN BY CONSCIENTIOUS FILM VIEWERS.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
Frank Maloney
     EUROPA, EUROPA is a film by Agnieszka Holland.  Rated R due to
nudity and violence.
     EUROPA, EUROPA (released in Europe as SOLOMON HITLERJUGEND) is the
true story of Solomon Perel who traveled not only through the geography
of central and eastern Europe in war but more importantly through the
ideological minefields of its competing systems -- Nazism and its war on
Jews, Communism at war with Hitler.  Solek joins every side, and
successfully hides his Jewishness and his circumcision for years.  He
survives to find finally an identity.  He is the ultimate chameleon, but
he is a charmed one.  He is a very cute boy and his physical
attractiveness make him acceptable to every group.  He is almost too
lucky--one has to be reminded that Holland's script is based on the
autobiography of the real Solomon Perel, a man alive in Israel
today--the level of coincidences, breaks, and miracles is almost too
high to work.
     But it is Holland's script and her sure-handed direction that yield
up a a delightful, horrifying, funny, intensely human movie.  There are
many excellently drawn characters who pass through Solek's bizarre
adventure: the gay German actor who discovers the secret of Solek's
circumcision and who becomes a beloved friend.  There is an hilarious
Nazi functionary who has her way with the new hero of the Fatherland.
There is the sweet and chilling Leni who wants to bear a baby for Hitler
and to slice Jewish throats.  And there are telling moments, little
epiphanies like Solek practicing his Hitler salute which becomes a
little jazz dance step.
     This is a brilliant, biting, funny, disturbing, threatening,
affirming film.  It has been playing in the Seattle area since last June
28 and is still drawing crowds.  Germany declined to make this its
official entry in the Oscar competition for a variety of bogus reason.
Obviously, EUROPA, EUROPA hits the wrong buttons in today's unified
Germany.
     I regret I hadn't gotten around to seeing it before today.  I
recommend you see it as soon as possible.  It is worth full price at the
box office.

Author
palmer2@vaxr.sscl.uwo.ca (The Econoclast)
     Benny's got this boss he used to work for, David, who thinks he's
the greatest thing since indoor plumbing.  He works in an office, so
he's the kind of guy who showers before he goes to work instead of
afterwards, like us regular guys out on the line.  Also, he blathers way
too much about all the boring cultural stuff he does.
     The other day, David was going on and on about this great foreign
"flick," as he called it, he had a video of and how we simply had to see
it.  To be honest, I hate foreign films: they're always filled with
misery and agony, and the subtitles are often hard to read.  I'd much
rather see movies that relax and entertain me, where I don't have to
think, and I don't feel bad at the end.
     Anyways, David kept insisting that we just had to see this movie,
and so finally we agreed to bring the wives over to his place to sip
some soda water and white wine, to gah-gah over his corkscrew
collection, and to watch the show.
     It really needed subtitles.  It was in German, Polish, Yiddish, and
Russian.  I guess with all them languages, it made sense it was called
Europa, Europa.  It was about Solomon, this young Jewish kid during
Hitler's time, who was afraid people'd see he'd been snipped and finger
him as Jewish.  He had a tough time hiding it, especially when he
started getting hot and heavy with this ultra-Nazi girl.  He really used
his smarts, though, and managed to get out of some pretty sticky
situations.  He was lucky, too.
     I thought lots of the stuff was made up.  I couldn't imagine anyone
would get by with all the stunts he pulled.  But it turns out Solomon
really existed and these things really happened to him.  They even had
the real guy in the movie at the end.
     Even though I don't usually like foreign films, I gotta say this
one was real good.  It gave us a new slant on the constant stress and
fears of being a Jew back then, and yet it had some light touches, too,
to ease the sheer horror of it all.  I'm not convinced they needed the
sex parts of the show, but I did notice this: it's one of the few films
I know of that shows men's "things" but not women's.
     Also, it gave me some new respect for Benny's former boss.  Not
only was David right about the film, but, you see, it turns out he and
his parents had gone through some of that stuff over in Poland back then
themselves.
-- 
John Palmer      London, Ontario     Voice: (519) 661-3533     FAX: 672-4976
reply to palmer2@vaxr.sscl.uwo.ca    The Economics Institute for Journalists
.

