Title
Review for Chain Camera (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
What happens when you give a high school student a video camera and tell
them to go play, with the single condition that the camera must document
his life for a week?  You expect the worst.  The turmoil, the pain, the
"nobody understands me!"  Or a load of made-up garbage from someone
starving for attention.  Maybe something even worse.
But Kirby Dick has found some gems by doing just this.  In April of
1999, he gave ten video cameras to ten students for a week.  At the end
of the week, those cameras were given to the next ten students.  The
stories accrued until the end of the school term.  He sifted 16 diaries
from them to create a collage of the perpetually unknown:  the mind of
adolescence.
It's not all as serious as it sounds.  The sole purpose of Leo's footage
is to have the camera watch him fake a piss, a rubber toy painted with a
face sticking out of his pants.  He not only talks for it, but beats the
camera with it as well.  It's only about a minute long, but it's just
the laugh you need after watching Stephanie worry about her overweight
father and his heart.
Bracketed by slow motion environmental images, each individual is
introduced with their first name.  With plenty of footage to choose
from, Dick is able to switch emotional tones with finesse, and without a
judgmental eye.  He has a knack for cutting to the next person before a
student gets monotonous.  The time allotted varies per teen, and this
aids the pace further.
Just as the world takes all types of creatures, Dick works with a
microcosm of the 41 different ethnic groups at Hollywood-area John
Marshall High School.  Luckily, this doesn't come across as trying to be
politically correct, but an attempt at trying to paint a full picture of
teenagers from one environment.  Just because all these kids go to
school near Hollywood doesn't mean they're rich and have fake body
parts.
The stories range as much as is possible, from an Asian runaway bulimic
that aspires to become a stripper to a normal white guy who just wants
to find a nice girl to the first American generation born of an Armenian
family who can't uphold tradition because of societal gaps to the
lesbian who shocked her mother after her first date with a girl.  But
oddly, though the individuals chosen are so different, their tales don't
always feel original.  This doesn't mean their emotions aren't valid;
it's just that the pressures of growing up lose flavor in repetition.
On the whole, Chain Camera surprises in how it manages to mix
entertainment and personal journeys.  The result is a talking head
video, but due to ever-changing narrative styles and subjects, it's
never boring.  Take that, Britney.
Director: Kirby Dick
Producer: Eddie Schmidt, Dody Dorn
Starring: Ethan Adagio, Silva Arzunyan, Leo Diaz, Timothy Docherty, Amy
Hattemer, Cinammon Hunter, Mena Mulat, Victor Naranjo, Jesse Ramon,
Manuel Ramírez, Lisa Reyes, Fernando Santillana, Rosemary To, Shannon
Whitmore, Winfred Wilson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
