Title
Review for Nurse Betty (2000)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Nurse Betty (2000)
Renee Zellweger, Morgan Freeman, Chris Rock, Greg Kinnear, Aaron
Eckhart, Tia Texada, Crispin Glover, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Allison
Janney, Kathleen Wilhoite, Harriet Sanson Harris, Laird Macintosh.
Screenplay by John C. Richards and James Flamberg, based on a story by
Richards. Directed by Neil LaBute. 112 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
With his first two films, "In the Company of Men" and "Your Friends &
Neighbors," writer/director Neil LaBute explored corporate and sexual
politics with a searing eye that thrilled many viewers, while sending
others racing for the exits. This time around, Fort Wayne, Indiana's
most noted provocateur ventures a little closer to the mainstream,
albeit a mainstream with some choppy waters and the occasional acidic
eddy.
"Nurse Betty" is a skewed fairy tale, a loopy road movie that shifts in
tone from whimsical to soothing to shocking and back again. With a
(mostly) crackerjack cast and a plot that zags every time you expect it
to zig, the production is a welcome relief after weeks and weeks of
lousy flicks.
The story, which earned John C. Richards and James Flamberg a Best
Screenplay award at this year's Cannes Film Festival, chronicles a
pivotal period in the life of Betty (Renee Zellweger), a coffee shop
waitress and ardent soap opera fan in Fair Oaks, Kansas. Although her
smarmy car-salesman husband, Del (Aaron Eckhart), has forgotten her
birthday, Betty plans to celebrate in style, borrowing a car from her
hubby's lot for a night on the town with a girlfriend.
But matters go terribly wrong. After watching a tape of her favorite
serial, "A Reason to Love," and swooning when the show's most popular
character, Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear) intones "I know there's
someone special out there for me," Betty glances into her living room
and witnesses a horrific sight. Husband Del is frantically negotiating
with hit men Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock), when an
ugly exchange leads his being scalped and then shot to death (sensitive
viewers should be ready to avert their eyes several times during the
film). The shock throws Betty into a fugue state, marked by a
combination of amnesia and physical fright. The suddenly psychotic
woman, who always dreamed of being a nurse, hops into the 1997 Buick
LaSabre and heads towards Los Angeles for a romantic "reunion" with her
beloved Dr. Ravell.
Among the many things Betty doesn't know is that the car's trunk holds
the very cache of drugs that prompted Del's visit from the hit men.
Charlie and Wesley set out after Betty, determined to recover the
narcotics and wipe out the witness to their work.
"Nurse Betty" is one of those rare films able to reference numerous
other movies ("The Wizard of Oz," "Thelma and Louise" "The Purple Rose
of Cairo," "Being There" and "Pulp Fiction," to name but a few), while
still feeling like a true original. LaBute, whose previous movies were
marked by inventive, but minimalist camera movements, proves adroit at
fluid filmmaking. As always, he brings out the best from his performers.
Renee Zellweger, so terrific in "Jerry Maguire," does her best work to
date here, making a remarkably smooth transition from sweet, mousy
housewife to whacked-out adventurer. But her best moments come when the
fugue state cracks, plunging the woman into an alien reality. Despite
her massive, understandable confusion, she displays a grand air of
strength and personal resolve while sorting things out.
Morgan Freeman is equally impressive as senior hit man Charlie. Freeman,
one of the best actors working today, creates a complex persona that
somehow manages to remain sympathetic despite his deadly occupation.
Greg Kinnear is solid and likable in the dual roles of a soap opera
character and a "real life" actor, while the wonderful Allison Janney
gracefully steals scenes as the producer of "A Reason to Love."
On the down side, Aaron Eckhart is wasted in a brief, cartoonish turn as
Betty's piggish husband. Eckhart, who starred in both of LaBute's other
films and won a wide audience as Julia Roberts' boyfriend in "Erin
Brokovich," deserves more than a glorified cameo appearance. And then
there's Chris Rock. Yes, I know he has legions of fans. Yes, his
abrasive behavior fits that of junior assassin Wesley. But Rock's loud,
whiny style is pure, fingernails-on-the-blackboard annoying to me. I
look forward to the day when he becomes seasoned enough to deliver his
high quality jokes in a less screechy fashion.
Still, "Nurse Betty" is a corker. The highlight of the film is
unquestionably Betty's cocktail party exchange with key members of "A
Reason to Love," where her psychosis is mistaken as a Method Acting
audition, but what happens soon after is even more admirable. I won't
spoil it for you. Suffice to say that the screenwriters recognized the
perfect moment for Betty's fugue state to end, allowing her journey to
move from fantasy to substance. Following a summer where most film
characters were depicted spinning in circles, it's gratifying to watch
someone grow as a person. It's gratifying to watch the enormously gifted
Neil Labute's filmmaking growth as well.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Neil LaBute. Screenplay by John Richards, from a story by
Richards and James Flamberg. Starring Renee Zellweger, Morgan Freeman,
Chris Rock. Running time: 110 minutes. Rated AA for offensive language by
the MFCB. Reviewed on September 17th, 2000.
The Summer 2000 movie season was characterised by a startling absence of
creativity. Film after film -- from "Gone In 60 Seconds" to "Hollow
Man" -- revealed themselves as tired retreads of timeworn formulas. Some
were at least made watchable by a nice performance, or good direction. Too
many, however, were entirely undistinguished, resulting in one of the most
disappointing theatrical summers I've ever endured.
Now, though, it's autumn (in the cinema world, if not the calendar), a
time when the industry traditionally moves away from big-budget,
mass-appeal movies to quieter, often more ambitious fare. Leading the way
this year is "Nurse Betty", which in some respects bridges the gap between
the summer and fall, inasmuch as it closely adheres to one of the most
popular cinematic traditions: the road movie.
All the usual plot points are here. The lead character is inspired to set
out on an unusual journey; has encounters en route which help to redefine
her purpose; and finally reaches her goal, only to discover that the road
she set out on is not the one she still travels. What makes "Nurse 
Betty" so different from other pictures of its ilk, however, is the sheer
cleverness exhibited by the John Richards and James Flamberg's screenplay
-- aided and abetted by terrific casting and solid direction by Neil
LaBute. "Nurse Betty" does not settle for being just a road movie. It uses
the familiar set-up to tell a story that is laudably different, yet
undeniably appealing.
Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) is a good person trapped in a lousy
life. She is married to the sleazy Del (Aaron Eckhart), a car salesman who
is having an affair and trafficking drugs behind her back. Betty's only
happiness comes from a soap opera, "A Reason To Love", and especially its
main character, Dr David Ravell (Greg Kinnear). One night, Del's sordid
misdeeds finally catch up to him when a pair of enforcers named Charlie
and Wesley come calling. Charlie (Morgan Freeman) is a sagacious veteran
of the trade; Wesley (Chris Rock) is a hothead up-and-comer.
Del ends up being scalped and killed by Charlie and Wesley. Unbeknownst to
them, Betty watches from another room. The event is so traumatic that, as
a defense mechanism, she blocks out her husband's death and comes to
believe that she is the ex-fiancee of "David Ravell". Determined to "win
him back", Betty sets out for California, not realising that Del has
hidden his stash in the car she's driving. Soon Charlie and Wesley are in
hot pursuit.
What is most interesting about "Nurse Betty" is that it is really two
conventional road movies put together, one mirroring the other. Obviously,
there is Betty and her search for "David Ravell" (actually an actor named
George McCord). In her delusion, Betty has conceived a mental image of the
man as her perfect paramour. By the same token, Charlie begins to develop
a crush on Betty. He envisions her as a symbol of all the loveliness he
forsook when he became a killer for hire. "Betty wouldn't come to a place
like this," he tells Wesley when they arrive at a roadside tavern.
Nonetheless, Betty had been there, and this is indicative of how Charlie's
fantasies about Betty are as imprecise as Betty's fantasies about "David".
Both Betty and Charlie are seeking deliverance from their undesirable
regular lives through an imaginary ideal love. They even begin to
fantasise in parallel: Betty imagines that "David" proposed to her at the
Grand Canyon and later, Charlie envisions Betty and he dancing at the same
spot. It is a dual reflection of how we, as a society, seek escape both
through entertainment and through those we love. The reality is that,
although these are helpful vehicles, neither is a perfect solution. We
have to make our own happiness, not rely on other people (or other
things) to deliver it to us.
Offsetting the more reflective tone of "Nurse Betty", Richards and 
Flamberg have gifted their screenplay with a great deal of humor. Some of
it will appeal to anyone; some of it is specifically targetted at those
familiar with Hollywood. For example, when Betty finally meets George
McCord and the producers of "A Reason To Love", they think she's method
acting, not deranged, and offer her a role in the soap opera.
Great acting abounds in "Nurse Betty". Zellweger delivers a performance
that should establish her as more than capable of headlining a film. Her
Betty is sweet but not saccharine, deluded without being crazy. Also
splendid is Freeman, who continues to quietly demonstrate why he is one of
the best actors of the past quarter-century. He brings a gentle dignity
and wisdom to his role, but does not forget that Charlie is, above all, a
hardened criminal. Charlie is a character tinged with sadness; he is a man
who clearly could have done much with his life, but has long since gone
down the wrong path.
Rock has a less substantial role, but is very funny and for the most part
manages to rein in the excesses he sometimes demonstrates in his stand-up
act. Between "Nurse Betty" and "Lethal Weapon 4", Rock has shown that he
is an actor as well as a comedian, and I look forward to seeing him take
on meatier roles in the future. Kinnear, meanwhile, is left in the rather
uncomfortable position of effectively playing two roles, neither of them
much more than caricatures. Excellent in supporting roles are Allison
Janney ("The West Wing) as McCord's self-assured producer, and Crispin
Glover, who plays Betty's nerdy reporter friend and, maybe, potential love
interest.
"Nurse Betty" hits all the right notes. It's well-made from any 
perspective and appeals on two important levels: as a hilarious dark
comedy for those in search of mere levity, and as a thoughtful parable
about the nature of perception and happiness for those wanting something a
little deeper. "Nurse Betty" gets the Fall 2000 movie season off to a
promising start.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/NurseBetty.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Chad Polenz
Critics like me tend to complain about comedies when they use humor and 
situations similar to those of a sitcom. I've always wondered what would 
happen if someone made an entire movie in that style of comedy and "Nurse 
Betty" appears to be the answer. It's a story that isn't really believable 
but takes place in such a seemingly innocent world with characters who are 
always in the right (or wrong) places at the right time.
Renee Zellweger stars as Betty, a simple-minded (but not ditzy) Kansas 
waitress whose husband is a crooked used car dealer who does something to get 
him in trouble with the local drug pipeline and is offed by two hitmen. Betty 
witnesses the murder and is so shocked she goes into a state of denial so far 
removed from reality it borders on insanity. She believes she is a nurse on 
her favorite soap opera and decides to trek from Kansas to Los Angeles to 
find her "long lost love" - the dashing heart surgeon "Dr. David Rivell."
If this story sounds familiar don't be surprised, it's been used many times 
over the years in sitcoms and usually doesn't work well. However, "Friends" 
was able to pull it off the season Joey became a regular on "Days Of Our 
Lives." He played a brain surgeon and Brooke Shields was his obsessed admirer 
who doesn't know it's just a TV show (instead of running from the nutty 
stalker Joey dates her but it turns out to be more than he can handle). 
That's a good premise for a half-hour show but somehow the makers of this 
movie are able to expand it to nearly two hours without filling up the 
running time with mindless guffaws, one-liners and slapstick. It's actually 
quite witty and satirical and seems to show even more promise than what it 
actually delivers.
As Betty makes her way to L.A. she meets strangers along the way and quickly 
befriends them with her story of her hope to reunite with her old flame. 
Zellweger is so darn cute and charming you almost get a cavity watching her! 
She practically a 5-year-old girl  trapped in the body of a full grown woman. 
It's a cartoony characteristic and it works well because Zellweger acts so 
well. I can't really picture anyone else pulling off this character.
Little does Betty know she's being tailed by the same two hitmen who killed 
her husband. They didn't realize she witnessed the event and need to silence 
her, plus the fact the car she's driving is carrying their drug booty in the 
trunk. Morgan Freeman and Chris Rock co-star as the father and son hired 
guns. Both actors are fantastic in their respective roles because their 
characters have most of the same qualities and mannerisms as those they've 
played in their previous films. To say they've been typecast is an 
understatement. Freeman is the wise father trying to give his hyperactive, 
loud-mouth son a lesson in manners, patience, history and even ethics. Rock 
is often hysterical with his constant wise-cracks and quips about his 
father's behavior and  old fashioned beliefs. There's a scene where the two 
stop at the Grand Canyon at night that totally defines them. Freeman marvels 
at the beauty and significance of the Canyon while Rock chides him for 
wanting to see a big hole in the ground at night ("You can't even see it!" he 
exclaims). It's a rare scene of perfect comic timing and chemistry.
Most of the screenplay involves Betty's search for her dream man and the 
unexpected encounters she runs into once she reaches L.A. It's told in a 
lighthearted manner, so much so that at some points it's just silly. Betty 
runs into one strange coincidence and unexplainable situation after another 
that you rarely see in feature films because they work better on the small 
screen. For example, she runs to the aid of a gunshot victim and tries to 
save his life using a technique she's seen on her hospital soap opera. She 
really believes she's a nurse and just acts on instinct. This leads to a 
domino effect of lucky chances in which she gets a nursing job and a roommate 
in the same day.
Where I have to take issue with "Nurse Betty" is with its storyline from here 
on out. It's clear to us Betty needs help but when the supporting characters 
realize she's not of sound mind they don't really do anything about it. This 
comes to a boiling point when she actually meets the actor in person who 
plays the doctor she's in love with from television and talks to him as if he 
were the character. The actor (played by Greg Kinnear with good use of 
vanity) thinks she's just an actress trying to get a spot on his show and 
plays along, almost mesmerised by how great her "performance" is. It's a 
sub-plot difficult to buy despite the great acting. As adorable as Betty is, 
it's difficult to believe how long they wait to tell her to "quit fooling 
around and be serious."
I didn't like the ending, it's a little too bleak for what had been such an 
enjoyable, fluffy, feel-good movie. It could have been handled better without 
the attempt at seriousness. The film's not a black comedy, it's a cute satire 
and the extremities are unnecessary. In fact, the film might have been even 
better had it spread the lightness of it all on even thicker. There's a PG 
movie in here, the R movie it turned out to be is fine, but it's just the 
slightest bit forced.
Despite the flaws to "Nurse Betty" there's still a lot to like. The 
performances by Zellweger, Rock and Freeman are excellent and might be 
Oscar-worthy come winter. The story is so enjoyable to follow you feel like 
you're a kid watching a Disney movie.
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!
Get paid to surf the web! More than $25,000,000 
Already Paid to Members -- Join AllAdvantage today! 

Author
Steve Rhodes
Nurse Betty (Renée Zellweger) goes in search of her ex-fiancé, Dr. David 
Ravell (Greg Kinnear), in Neil LaBute's sweetly romantic, fairytale 
comedy for adults, NURSE BETTY.  David lost his wife last year in a 
tragic decapitation during a car accident.  Of course, since they've 
never located her head, the exact circumstances of the event are still 
in question, especially since his wife had been having an affair with a 
mobster.
Actually Betty isn't a real nurse at all, although she's been busy 
impersonating one at a Los Angeles hospital where David works.  She left 
Kansas for the first time to come and find him.  
Did I mention that she has never really met David, except, that is, on 
television?
You see, David isn't real either.  He is just the lead character in the 
popular soap opera, "A Reason to Love."  Delightful playing bad soap 
star George McCord, Kinnear is equally charming as George's television 
character, David.  Even when Kinnear is the villain, as he was recently 
in LOSER, he is always so likable that you end up secretly rooting for 
him.  Here we want Betty and David, I mean George, to get together since 
both are so appealing.
It all starts way back in Kansas, where Betty works as a waitress at the 
Tip Top Diner.  Whenever David is on the tube at the diner, Betty's eyes 
become transfixed, and she dishes out coffee like a robot.  On her 
birthday, her coworkers give her the perfect present, a cardboard cutout 
of her hero.
Betty's home life is no picnic.  She ignores her cheating husband (Aaron 
Eckhart, star of IN THE COMPANY OF MEN) for her own dream world with 
David.  When a couple of bad guys, played with great evil comedic charm 
by Morgan Freeman and Chris Rock, violently kill her husband in the 
kitchen, she snaps and heads west looking for her dreamboat.  After all, 
David said on the television that "I just know that there's something 
really special out there for me," and she knows that he must have been 
speaking about her.
Zellweger (JERRY MAGUIRE) delivers the best and sweetest performance of 
her career in NURSE BETTY.  She is wacky but wonderful, a crazed fan 
with an unshakable belief in life's infinite possibilities.  With a huge 
smile, Betty has a childlike innocence.  As George says to her, "your 
dedication scares me."  Her infatuation ends up sweeping him off his 
feet.  The surprising scene when they first meet is the most brightly 
written one in a script bursting with wonderfully imaginative scenes.  
The screenplay by John C. Richards and James Flamberg won the award as 
the best screenplay at this year's Cannes International Film Festival.
Director LaBute, known for his demonic dramas (IN THE COMPANY OF MEN) 
and caustic comedies (YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS), is one of my personal 
favorites.  This, his third film, is the first time that he has worked 
from someone else's script.  Here, he proves, in case there was any 
doubt, that he's just as brilliant a director as he is a writer.  And 
this being a LaBute film, there is an undercurrent of danger, as well as 
a bit of pathos.  Nevertheless, the film is an amazingly good-spirited 
one, especially for someone known for exploring people's darkest 
impulses.
The cheerful cinematography by Jean-Yves Escoffier (GOOD WILL HUNTING) 
with its bright colors adds to the story's upbeat ambiance.  The strong 
supporting cast has so many terrific performances that it is hard to 
pick a favorite, but mine might be Allison Janney (AMERICAN BEAUTY) as 
the soap's hard-nosed producer.  She is perfectly willing to kill off 
the character of David if George doesn't do what she wants.
Traditional fairytales end with a simple, "they lived happily ever 
after."  I won't give away how NURSE BETTY ends, but I thought it was 
perfect, especially its little epilog, which was icing on the cake.
NURSE BETTY runs 1:52.  It is rated R for strong violence, pervasive 
language and a scene of sexuality and would be acceptable for older 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
NURSE BETTY
(USA Films)
Starring:  Renee Zellweger, Morgan Freeman, Chris Rock, Greg Kinnear,
Aaron Eckhart, Tia Texada, Allison Janney.
Screenplay:  John Richards and James Flamberg.
Producers:  Steve Golin and Gail Mutrux.
Director:  Neil LaBute.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, sexual situations)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There's something particularly delightful -- and subversive -- about
a high-concept comedy that turns into something resonant. GROUNDHOG DAY
could have been ridiculous and repetitive, but it charmed you with an
unexpectedly touching romance; BEING JOHN MALKOVICH could have been a
simplistic tale of misguided celebrity worship, but it turned into an
absurdist existential fantasy worthy of Ionesco. Hollywood excels at
selling stories in a single sentence, and we come to expect that we know
all there is to know about the film from that sentence. When it becomes
evident that there's more to a film than its marketing-savvy premise, it's
a heart-warming experience indeed.
     NURSE BETTY isn't as thematically rich as either GROUNDHOG DAY or
BEING JOHN MALKOVICH, and it's certainly not as thematically rich as
director Neil LaBute's dazzling debut IN THE COMPANY OF MEN. It is,
however, a peculiarly entertaining comedy that sticks in the brain for a
while longer than you expect. The high concept involves a Kansas waitress
named Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) whose dreary life and joyless
marriage to used car salesman Del (Aaron Eckhart) are balanced by her
intense devotion to her favorite soap opera, "A Reason to Love." One
night, she witnesses a murder committed by hired killers Charlie (Morgan
Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock), and something inside Betty snaps. She
escapes into a fantasy world where she was once the fiancee of "A Reason
to Love's" dashing Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear), and hits the road for
Los Angeles to find him. Meanwhile, Charlie and Wesley are on her trail,
searching for the witness to their crime.
     It's entirely possible that NURSE BETTY could have succeeded as a
comedy strictly on the basis of its wild premise. LaBute directs with
effective comic short-hand -- a scene portraying Del in the middle of an
affair with his secretary shows wear marks on the wall to emphasize his
recidivist philandering -- and paces his showpiece sequences with a flair
you might not expect from the misanthropic mind behind IN THE COMPANY OF
MEN. There are sharp visual gags like Betty's perky look in her bloody
nurse's outfit after performing an impromptu medical procedure, and slick
exchanges of dialogue between Charley and Wesley. The performances are not
uniformly appealing -- Rock yells without doing much acting, and Eckhart's
mullet-headed lout of a husband is as broad a stereotype as you'll find -
but the work by Zellweger, Freeman and Kinnear more than takes up the
slack. It's simply a funny comedy.
     Simply funny, but far from simplistic. NURSE BETTY takes the somewhat
trite notion of soap operas as vicarious life for those with unhappy lives
and twists it  into provocative knots. Zellweger's performance never once
romanticizes Betty's instability, turning her into the logically illogical
extreme of a woman whose fantasy world becomes necessary for her to cope
with her present. She's also not alone in that respect. Charlie -- played
with perfect dignity by the incomparable Freeman -- comes to idealize
Betty as the paragon of human goodness waiting for him at the end of his
last job as a killer; the short-fused Wesley, also a fan of "A Reason to
Love," turns his simple assignment into a "statement" so it has more
meaning, and rationalizes his killing by comparing himself to God. Even
George McCord, the actor who plays David Ravell, comes to love playing his
part off-screen with Betty (whom he believes to be just a really committed
Method actress looking for a job on the show). The resolution may come to
some obvious conclusions about the need to face reality, but along the way
it shows a respect for the complexity of our coping mechanisms, whatever
form they may take.
     With so much strong stuff at the center, it's a shame that NURSE
BETTY gets flabby around the edges. The late re-appearance of Crispin
Glover and Pruitt Taylor Vince (as a reporter and sheriff from Betty's
home town, respectively) adds little to the already dense plot but the
presence of two actors whose quirkiness can be distracting. The attempts
at entertainment industry satire don't always mesh with the edgier stuff,
and the tone shifts from intense to playful on a dime. In fact, by all
rights it should be just another affably mediocre piece of Hollywood
joke-mongering. Yet even with its bumps and scrapes, NURSE BETTY feels
like more. There's something at stake, something recognizably human,
something you don't often find in high-concept comedy. Thanks to
Zellweger, Freeman and (of all people) Neil LaBute, there's a heart here,
and a brain, too. It's an approach that takes a high concept just a bit
higher.

Author
Laura Clifford
Betty Sizemore's (Renie Zellweger, "Me, Myself & Irene") nursing dreams
were dashed by her boorish car-salesman husband Del (Aaron Eckhart, "Erin 
Brokovich").  She spends her days waitressing at the local Tip Top
diner and losing herself in 'A Reason to Love,' the hospital set soap
whose lead character, Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear, "As Good As It Gets") 
gives Betty a reason to live.  When Betty witnesses two hitmen kill her
husband, she totally loses her grip with reality and travels to LA to
find her true love in "Nurse Betty."
We first meet Betty on her birthday, where she impresses out-of-towner
Charlie (Morgan Freeman, "Kiss the Girls") with her ability to pour coffee
without peeling her eyes off her soap.  Her coworkers present her with
a lifesize cardboard cutout of her hero along with a birthday cupcake (which
Del scoffs later).  Her celebratory plans with best friend Sue Ann (Kathleen 
Wilhoite, "Drowning Mona") are first challenged when Del refuses to lend her a 
Le Sabre, insisting she take a Corsica instead (Betty switches the key Del's 
secretary/mistress gives her anyway), then dashed when Sue Ann's unable to get 
a babysitter.
Betty returns home and holes herself up in the den to watch her soap on
video, ignoring Del when he returns to do business with the two men Betty
served earlier, Charlie and Wesley (Chris Rock, "Lethal Weapon IV").  They're
really out to retrieve stolen drugs that Del's gotten himself mixed up in
and Del ends up dead when Wesley overacts and attempts to scalp(!) him.
Betty waltzes out while town Sheriff Ballard (Pruitt Taylor Vince, "Heavy") 
and local reporter Roy (Crispin Glover, downplaying his usual weirdness 
quotient) stand aghast in the crime scene.  Her disappearance raises suspicion 
with Charlie and Wesley, who are ordered to take her out.
Betty journeys from Kansas to LA and secures a job as a nurse and a place to
stay with the thankful Rosa (Tia Texada, "Paulie") after acting quickly during 
a shootout/kidnapping in front of the hospital which had just turned her away.  
Then Rosa gets her into a charity event where actor George McCord is making an 
appearance and Betty's rapturous greeting to her beloved 'ex-fiance, David 
Ravell' impresses him and the show's producer/writer Lyla (Allison Janney, 
"Drop Dead Gorgeous") as improvisational acting.  Betty's in heaven, Rosa's 
perplexed, George and Lyla are revamping their show.  Back home Roy, Ballard 
and Sue Ann are putting the pieces together to track her down, but Charlie and 
Wesley are two steps ahead of them and already heading west.
Zellweger buries memories of her last two unsuccessful flicks to triumph
as a good-hearted, if delusional, small town girl.  Betty's sweetness
personified, but never cloying, and her ability to waft from one dream
to the next is utterly convincing.  Freeman and Rock are an inspired pairing
with the calm, philosophical elder keeping the young firebrand on a short
leash (until his own delusions take the story on yet another twist).
There's a little bit of "Fargo" in these two mismatched hitmen who end up
inside small town weirdness neither of them anticipated.  Kinnear is
well suited to the soap star looking for a new sensation to jack up his
ratings, and plays his soap scenes with satirically grave intensity.
Once again Eckhart amazes with his chameleonic abilities, impressing in
a small role as the loathsome, mullet-haired Del.
First time screenwriters John C. Richards (also 'story by') and James
Flamberg have created a memorably original world whose characters follow
surprising paths.  The compassion and humor in the script makes
it one of the year's best.  Director Neil LaBute has made a wise decision
stepping away from his own nihilistic writing, showcasing his talents
in this far sunnier (albeit still sometimes blackly humorous) space.
He and cinematographer Jean-Yves Escoffier ("Cradle Will Rock") amusingly
begin to block their shots in the 'real' world just like their heroine's
television fantasy.
"Nurse Betty" is a rich film that always has another surprise around the
corner.  If some climatic occurrences don't play quite as neatly as they
should, one can still take immense pleasure from the imaginative filmmaking
here that can bind Betty's character to Charlie's with the star on her
tee shirt.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christian Pyle
Well, when your husband's brutally murdered in front of you, what can you do 
but drive halfway across the country in search of a soap opera character?  At 
least that's the reaction of Betty Sizemore (Renée Zellweger) in "Nurse 
Betty," the latest entry in the cinema of quirk.
Betty waits tables at the Tip Top Diner in a small town in Kansas and dreams 
of being a nurse.  Del (Aaron Eckhart), her jerk of a husband, sells cars, 
boffs his secretary, and deals stolen cocaine.  The last enterprise brings 
hitmen Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock) to his door.  They 
murder Del but don't know that Betty is watching from the next room.  Betty 
has a "dissociative reaction" that causes her to lapse into the fantasy that 
Dr. David Ravell, a character that George McCord (Greg Kinnear) plays on the 
soap "A Reason to Love," is her ex-fiance.  Betty packs up the car she'd 
borrowed from her husband's lot and headed for LA unaware that ten kilos of 
stolen dope are hidden in her trunk.  Since Charlie and Wesley need to find 
the drugs and eliminate the witness, they follow Betty into the desert.  
Along the way, Charlie begins to fall in love with Betty.
Charlie's love for Betty parallels Betty's love for Dr. Ravell in that both 
fall in love with fantasy figures rather than real people.  That irony 
produces most of the laughs in this movie that unashamedly mixes light comedy 
and film noir tension, as if "Soapdish" collided with "Blood Simple."  
However, the filmmakers never sacrifice the illusion of realism for cheap 
laughs or overly contrived plot twists.  "Nurse Betty" is the least 
predictable film I've seen in ages because it refuses to follow generic 
conventions.
Despite its strengths, John Richards and James Flamberg's script is thin and 
what makes "Betty" work is the excellent cast.  Zellweger gives Betty a 
refreshing combination of starry-eyed innocence and steel-willed 
determination.  A character who might otherwise have seemed pathetic becomes 
instead a heroine.  Freeman offers us a disarmingly sensitive hitman, and the 
angry sarcasm of Rock provides a hilarious counterpoint.  Kinnear is quite 
good in "Betty" as well, but considering his amazing performance in "As Good 
As It Gets" I wish he would take on more substantial roles.
The ghost of the Blair Witch continues to haunt internet marketing.  USA 
Films has set up an official site for "A Reason to Love" 
(http://www.areasontolove.com/) and a wonderfully tacky fan site for Dr. 
Ravell (http://www.nurse-betty.com/drravell/). 
Bottom line:  Quirky fun but not for the squeamish.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Michael Dequina
        Neil LaBute, writer-director of the cynical (and brilliant)
bile-fests _In_the_Company_of_Men_ and _Your_Friends_&_Neighbors_, would
be the last person one would expect to bring a fairy tale story to the
screen, but that's exactly what he has done with _Nurse_Betty_.  But this
being LaBute, this is an atypical fairy tale story made even more so
through the filter of a decidedly dark lens--and the film would not be
quite the subversively funny and all-around memorable entertainment that
it is without him.
        Given the lightness at the heart of _Nurse_Betty_, it's not
surprising that this is the first LaBute film to not have a screenplay
credited to him.  The scribes responsible are John C. Richards and James
Flamberg, and what a deliciously delirious story they weave in their
Cannes Fest-winning screenplay.  To give too much away would be criminal,
so I'll leave the synopsis simple.  When we first meet Betty Sizemore
(Renée Zellweger), she is a waitress and loyal viewer of the soap opera
_A_Reason_to_Love_.  After witnessing a traumatic event, Betty, under the
delusion that she is a nurse, hits the road toward Los Angeles to find
her true love, Loma Vista Hospital's Dr. David
Ravell--_A_Reason_to_Love_'s resident heartthrob doc, played by actor
George McCord (Greg Kinnear).  Did I also mention that in hot pursuit of
Betty are hitmen Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock)?
        This just sets the stage for even wilder twists, which point up
the irony of the film: as Betty actively pursues life in a soap, the real
life she ignores becomes just as, if not more, outrageous than one.  But
even for a film as plot-heavy as _Nurse_Betty_, characters, not story
points, are what's to be savored the most, and the actors effortlessly
navigate their roles' often bizarre evolutions.  Betty's
transformation--which really isn't one so much as a shift from one side
of her personality to another--is fluidly handled by Zellweger, and she
is mirrored by the more subtle, gradual change that overcomes Freeman's
Charlie the closer he gets to his prey.
        With this fascinating pair at the center of the film, it would
seem to follow that supporting players get the short shrift, but each
role, regardless of how small, is nailed by their respective portrayer. 
Kinnear's usual smarmy charm bit gets a new freshness within the wildly
creative context; Rock, while tossing off the expected profane
one-liners, is rather shocking in his portrayal of his ferocious hothead
character.  Also lending most welcome flavor and zing to the picture are
Tia Texada as Betty's bewildered L.A. roommate, Alison Janney as the
producer of _A_Reason_to_Love_, and LaBute regular Aaron Eckhart as
Betty's sleazy car salesman husband.
        Lest you think that _Nurse_Betty_ is all wacky zaniness, don't
think LaBute's naturally dark sensibilities never enter the picture--they
do, and in the form of some graphic violence.  Other critics have
criticized the film because of it, but the bloodshed--and the sometimes
excessive nature of it--provides a necessary contrast that keeps the
audience off-kilter; one never knows when Betty's fantasy world could
take a hairpin turn back into brutal reality.  That unpredictability and
tension, as further carried out by the top-notch performances and
writing, give _Nurse_Betty_ the drive to carry the audience past any
lingering disbelief and into some silly, smart, and strange cinematic
heights.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Susan Granger
Irresistible Renee Zellweger stars in this darkly comedic
romantic fable as Betty Sizemore, a soap-opera obsessed Kansas
housewife caught between fantasy and reality. She's a plucky,
small-town waitress whose philandering, abusive husband is brutally
scalped and shot in their dining-room by two professional hitmen when
a shady drug deal goes sour. Cowering in an adjoining den, she's
emotionally traumatized by witnessing the violence. Her reaction is to
enter a fugue state, defined by the American Psychiatric Assoc. as "a
combination of amnesia and physical fright," impelling the individual
to flee from customary surroundings, assuming a new identity. So, in
her delusion, she becomes Nurse Betty, a character on "A Reason to
Love," who adores Dr. David Ravell whom she jilted six years
ago. Determined to right this wrong, she takes off for Los Angeles,
not knowing that the hitmen's drugs are stashed in her Buick. Inspired
by "Being There," "Purple Rose of Cairo" and "Pulp Fiction," the
clever, twist-filled script by John C. Richards & James Flamberg
should cop an Oscar nomination, and Neil LaBute's farcical direction
contrasts with the bitter bleakness of "Your Friends & Neighbors" and
"In the Company of Men." Renee Zellweger exudes enough wacky,
guileless, sweet innocence to emerge as a beguiling Oscar contender,
yet it's Morgan Freeman who
 astonishes as the elder, courtly hitman who does a dream dance sequence on the edge of the Grand Canyon at night. Chris Rock is hilarious as his acerbic, hard-headed, excitable protege with Greg Kinnear, Aaron Eckhart and Allison Janney delivering shimmering supporting gems. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Nurse Betty" is a weird, deliriously funny 8, a crazed, playful, defiantly twisted collision of alternate realities.

Author
Ron Small
Screenplay: John C. Richards, James Flamberg
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Renee Zellweger, Chris Rock, Greg Kinnear, Aaron 
Eckhart, Crispin Glover, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Alison Janney, Tia Texada, 
Kathleen Wilhoite
The summer of 00' wasn't a very good one for devout cinephiles. It offered no 
BLAIR WITCHES or SIXTH SENSES; the best big budget Hollywood could do was an 
efficient X-MEN adaptation and a flawed but entertaining SHAFT update. NURSE 
BETTY signals the unofficial end of that dreadful summer movie season and the 
commencement of a potentially brighter fall movie season, that 
battery-charging (at least for critics who have to sit through every piece o' 
shit that moseys into multiplexes) time of year when all those Oscar 
Contenders (read: "quality" films) compete for audiences. Alas BETTY has the 
dubious distinction of being the first overpraised junk heap of the new 
season. It's also indie director Neil LaBute's first attempt at something 
resembling a mainstream picture, and I'm sad to report it's a resounding 
failure (at least on this web site), a mess that's as hopelessly saccharine 
as people have accused LaBute's previous films of being unrelentingly 
masochistic.
I went in expecting something decent, for BETTY was gleefully praised, it's 
screenplay even winning an award at CANNES, but I exited shaking my noggin in 
bewilderment. Are critics so desperate for something unique that they're 
blind to how derivative the particular brand of "uniqueness" BETTY dolls out 
is? For the first time LaBute is working from a script he has not written, 
and he seems unsure of how to handle the material. BETTY tries to be hip like 
PULP FICTION (this is another flick featuring a pair of strangely bright and 
articulate hit men), enchanting like THE WIZARD OF OZ (of which this film 
makes several allusions to) and heartwarming like [stick in your favorite 
loveable misfit movie], but by the end it left me cold with its calculated 
desperation. It's LaBute's half hearted attempt to make a crowd pleaser and 
he doesn't even seem to have half that heart in it.
NURSE BETTY concerns a soap opera addict, Betty (brilliantly played by Renee 
Zellweger), who witnesses the killing of her husband, Del (Aaron Eckhart 
playing the most casually loutish husband since Richard Benjamin in DIARY OF 
A MAD HOUSEWIFE) by two hit men (Morgan Freeman and Chris Rock). She happens 
to have her most beloved soap on in the background and somehow merges the two 
realities. She's blocked out her husband's death and thinks she's a character 
in her favorite soap, A REASON TO LOVE. Betty sets out on the road to LA 
(with some drugs unknowingly stashed in her car trunk) searching for her soap 
boyfriend Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear) while the two bickering hit men 
follow in not so close pursuit.
The LaBute who birthed the extraordinary IN THE COMPANY OF MEN, slipped a bit 
(but not much) with his sophomore effort, YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS, then 
fell straight on his ass with BASH, a play he penned that was recently aired 
on SHOWTIME. The play demonstrated no forward movement as an artist, only 
LaBute's persistence in wallowing in the horrid things "average" people do to 
each other, usually with out realizing how horrid they themselves are. In the 
play, Paul Rudd, as an obnoxious jock, delivers a monologue detailing how he 
once followed a gay man into a bathroom and beat him maybe to death, while 
his clueless girlfriend essentially regards his sadistic behaviors as 
something along the old maxim "boys will be boys". Another character, 
schlubby businessman reacts to the loss of his job by actually killing his 
own baby! What was once so powerful about LaBute's work, the casual, 
nonchalant cruelty and selfishness (often elements we all have in us 
amplified to a disgusting degree) had become so over the top it was 
borderline comic. Obviously, at this point, LaBute could use a dose of some 
different kind of material before he pigeon holes himself further, but NURSE 
BETTY isn't it. He clearly has little passion for what he's doing here, 
instead replacing his mojo with strained quirks (one of the hit men is a huge 
soap fan, and the character of Betty would be little more than a one joke 
gimmick if Zelllweger hadn't managed to transcend that) tailor made to appeal 
to the widest possible audience.
Nearly every scene between Chris Rock and Morgan Freeman fatally slows the 
picture down, as the two are made to enact soft-boiled Tarantino-esque 
dialogue. They evince little chemistry, with Rock constantly in over the top 
rant mode, acting more like an angry comic than any thing resembling a hit 
man (an occupation that's represented far too frequently in movies nowadays). 
I think Rock is a great comic yet he hasn't been able to bring his feral 
intelligence to movies, whenever he acts, and no matter the part, it's like 
he's doing the damn CHRIS ROCK SHOW. Surprisingly (at least considering her 
work in ME, MYSELF AND IRENE) Renee Zellweger gives a revelatory performance, 
building on her baby faced, apple pie looks. That wide-open face and helium 
voiced earnestness suggests a little girl not fully grown into her 
thirty-year-old body. It's the best work she's ever done.
Freeman is effective as always, though his performance nonetheless suffers 
because it seems at odds with where the movie wants to take it. The actor 
plays the role in his usual calm, collected manner, though the flick tries to 
insinuate a symbolic kinship between his character and Betty's, suggesting 
that both are controlled by their fantasies rather than reality. That's 
interesting but the movie doesn't do anything with it other than crash land 
the sub-theme into a labored speech in the midst of a badly staged gun battle.
The film has good moments (many of the scenes involving a very good Greg 
Kinnear, especially his confrontation with Zellweger), an almost soothing, 
lyrical score (and you know a movie's in trouble when the score sticks out as 
one of the best things about it) but nothing jells, it's parts, good or bad, 
are so disparate as to be opposing. The film might have worked had it settled 
on being one type of film, a mainstream, female FORREST GUMP or an oddball 
art film, but as both if it falls as flat as Diet Coke. BETTY's screenplay 
makes the mistake of relying too much on concurrence, without which Betty 
wouldn't make any progress in the film. NURSE BETTY is a film driven by 
coincidence rather than charter, like how Betty becomes a nurse in the film, 
a job that she takes in order to get closer to her imaginary lover; she 
happens to be at the hospital at the exact moment that a drive by shooting 
takes place and miraculously knows how to take care of the victim's wound 
because she happened to see how on TV, which leads to her being offered a 
room with the victim's girlfriend who eventually gets Betty into a party 
where she meets KinnearâŚ a little too tidy, don'tcha think.
BETTY has an interesting theme, though it doesn't even seem aware of this. 
The current state of TV has been leaning towards reality television what with 
the enormous success of SURVIVOR and moderate success of BIG BROTHER, with 
more on the way. This is a film about a women so deluded as to think that her 
favorite soap opera is reality (ironically real-life SURVIVOR Sean Kennif has 
taken a part as a doctor on the soap opera GUIDING LIGHT). Instead of 
exploring this timely matter in a way relating to the current TV craze (since 
the film does largely appear to be a satire of Television, albeit one that 
would feel more appropriate in the '80s than the '00s), the film simply uses 
Betty's delusions as a plot device to get her from point A to B. No progress 
is made and little is unearthed except that maybe LaBute could use a bit of 
rest and a lot of contemplation.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
John Beachem
Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) is a waitress obsessed with a soap opera 
called "A Reason to Love". Who can blame her for dreaming of another life 
when she's stuck with a dead-end job and a husband, Del (Aaron Eckhart), who 
couldn't care less about her? One evening, her husband comes home with two 
associates, Wesley and Charlie (Chris Rock, Morgan Freeman), not knowing 
that Betty is still in the house. It turns out these associates are actually 
there to reclaim stolen drugs from Del. After Del is killed, and Betty 
witnesses the event, she becomes so traumatized that her mind convinces her 
she is actually living in the world of her soap opera, and she is engaged to 
the lead character, Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear). So she leaves a message 
for Del, telling him she had to leave (her brain refuses to admit he's 
dead), and heads for Los Angeles, where Dr. Ravell works at Loma Vista 
hospital. Of course, Dr. David Ravell is actually an actor named George 
McCord, and Loma Vista hospital is only a set, but Betty's traumatized mind 
has no idea. Meanwhile, Charlie and Wesley find out that Betty saw 
everything, and they head after her. Wesley just wants the job over with, 
but Charlie's mind soon becomes as warped as Betty's, and he becomes 
convinced she is really the perfect woman for him.
After a summer filled with useless movies, "Nurse Betty" is like a breath of 
fresh air. Just as I was getting ready to write 2000 off as the worst year 
for comic movies (actually, for movies in general) ever, along comes this 
little gem. Big surprise, it came from USA Films; the same company that 
brought us "Being John Malkovich". While the film certainly isn't your 
traditional comedy, it has a nice blend of laugh out loud bits and a great 
many chuckles. Now, you have to like your humor a little on the unusual side 
to enjoy this movie. In fact, throughout the film, all I could think about 
was how much it felt like a Coen brothers movie. Just like the Coens' 
excellent "The Big Lebowski", this is a movie made great and entertaining by 
its sheer variety of eccentric characters. Is it as funny as the Coens' 
film? No, but the dude is a tough act to follow. Yet in its own way, "Nurse 
Betty" succeeds admirably. By the way, if you love gross-out humor you're 
going to the wrong movie. This is one that's made for the rest of us 
(finally). In other words, it's fairly intelligent fluff that probably won't 
win many major awards, but it'll sure entertain.
One of the greatest strengths to "Nurse Betty" is the excellent cast. Renee 
Zellweger ("Me, Myself, and Irene"), who I really wasn't too sure about, 
proves herself here. As the slightly ditzy, very confused Betty, she is 
simply too endearing for words. She manages to keep a smile plastered on her 
face without making it look phony, and it only slips when a situation arises 
to really confuse her (this happens a lot less often than you'd think, she's 
so caught up in her fantasy world). Greg Kinnear ("Mystery Men") is perfect 
as Betty's obsession, going from decent guy to sleaze ball and back again 
without missing a beat. I have to hand it to Kinnear, the man does baffled 
almost as well as Zellweger. I normally don't care for Chris Rock's 
("Dogma") particular brand of acting, which seems to involve him yelling a 
lot. While he uses this same acting style throughout "Nurse Betty", it works 
since he is counter balanced by the eternally calm Morgan Freeman. Speaking 
of that great actor, if he doesn't get an Oscar nomination for this 
performance heads are going to role. His turn as Charlie, the hit-man one 
job away from retirement, is simply brilliant. It's a shame Freeman doesn't 
get more of these kinds of roles, because his comic timing is impeccable.
There are several scenes in this movie that are, quite frankly, comic gold. 
The first meeting between Betty and George is absolutely priceless. The two 
play off each other so well, the entire scene almost feels improvised. 
Another great scene is one where Charlie and Wesley take a slight detour to 
visit the grand canyon (Wesley calls it the bland canyon), and Charlie 
starts dancing with a hallucination of Betty. Yet the movie is, above all 
else, a black comedy. If you can't laugh at detestable people getting 
exactly what they deserve, you're better off seeing something else. For 
example, the scene where Charlie and Wesley kill the hapless Del is 
horrifying, but the aftermath is quite funny if you can bring yourself to 
laugh after watching someone get scalped. Neil LaBute (who also directed the 
very disturbing "In the Company of Men") keeps the film running along quite 
nicely, and this is a big boon. This was one of those rare movies (at least 
this year) where I wasn't just waiting for it to end. In fact, I wouldn't 
have minded in the slightest if it had run a touch longer; maybe have 
explored a few subplots (more on that next paragraph) that never develop. Oh 
well, that's just me for you, impossible to satisfy.
My complaints with the movie are few, but rather significant. Foremost among 
them being that there are a few little sub-plots which sadly never get 
developed. For example, one involves Betty getting hired on at the hospital 
after saving a man's life. After the head nurse hires her to work in the 
pharmacy, and warns her against messing with the patients, you expect this 
to go somewhere and it never does. The film also starts off a little slowly 
(I was starting to think, "oh no, not another dud."), but once it gets going 
it really goes. There were a few points during the movie where I couldn't 
breath I was laughing so hard. The real priceless scene is near the end, 
when Charlie and Betty finally meet up. The dialogue in this scene is 
absolutely perfect, and Freeman and Zellweger have some great on-screen 
chemistry. The soundtrack features a great new score from composer Rolfe 
Kent ("Election"), and the cinematography by Jean-Yves Escoffier 
("Rounders") is really quite beautiful (his shots of the western countryside 
belong in a travel magazine somewhere). The movie runs 112 minutes, but it 
won't feel half that long. I'd recommend it to those who like their humor a 
little on the dark side, and to fans of Morgan Freeman and Renee Zellweger 
since both really shine here. I give the movie four out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad? or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
NURSE BETTY (2000) *** Directed by Neil LaBute. Written by John C. 
Richards and James Flamberg, based on a story by Richards. 
Photography, Jean Yves Escoffier. Editing, Joel Plotch and Steven 
Weisberg. Production design, Charles Breen. Music, Rolfe Kent. 
Produced by Gail Mutrux and Steve Golin. Cast: Renée Zellweger 
(Betty), Morgan Freeman (Charlie), Chris Rock (Wesley), Greg Kinnear 
(Dr. David Ravell/George McCord), Aaron Eckhart (Del), Tia Texada 
(Rosa), Crispin Glover (Roy), Pruitt Taylor Vince (Ballard) Allison 
Janney (Lyla), et al. A USA Films release. 112 minutes. R (violence 
and language)
After a mostly dismal summer of films made mostly by pea brains for 
culture dropouts, "Nurse Betty" (NB from now on) may (or not) be 
marking a turning. It premiered in May at the Cannes Festival where 
it won the Best Screenplay award. I saw it then and I just saw it 
again. It's a good film that goes in several directions while keeping 
its focus on the charming, next-door pretty Renee Zellweger as Betty.
Sixty-one years after The Wizard of Oz,  Betty, like Dorothy, is a 
Kansan who leaves her state.  Although she is not transported to a 
magic land, like Dorothy, she does so in a way. She takes off in a 
Buick, drives to La-la Land in Southern California to make her dream 
come true.  In Fair Oaks, Kansas, Betty is a a sweet, apple-cheeked, 
apple-cheeked, liked-by-all waitress in a diner. She is married to 
scummy used-car dealer Del who does not appreciate her, cheats on 
her, acts like a creep and is into very shady non-car deals.
Betty in a TVholic who watches (and tapes) incessantly the soaper "A 
Reason to Love." In it actor George McCord plays the super-duper 
surgeon and heartthrob Dr.David Ravell. Betty is so much in love with 
the Doctor character that he has become real to her. She's rushes 
home to catch the next episode. A closed door separates her from the 
living room in which Del brings two men, older Charlie and the 
latter's young sidekick Wesley. They have an underworld deal with Del 
who has done something unkosher. He gets killed, but in an unexpected 
(and yes, funny) way that involves his badmouthing native Americans, 
the guests' shocked reaction at Del's racism, a scalping and a gun.
Putting it briefly, Betty plunges deeper and deeper into the fiction 
of the soap opera, reinvents herself as a nurse who some years ago 
had an affair with Dr. David, and travels to L.A. to meet the good 
Doctor. She keeps quoting to herself a kind of mantra, David's  words 
in the soap: " I know there's someone special out there for me." 
Betty is convinced that she is that someone
The film rapidly becomes a road movie (and quite an original one) in 
which encounters flirt with the picaresque. Charlie and Welsley are 
after her. In the process, the older man idealizes her while Wesley 
thinks his companion is crazy.  Eventually, and through the wildest 
(and funniest) of developments, Betty is taken for a nurse, meets 
actor George McCord, persists in calling him David and in acting as 
though she were really David's old flame and a real nurse. George 
gets convinced that it is all a game on her part in order to be hired 
in the soaper.
The whole thing is delightful, humorous, funny and comical, yet also 
sad, and quite (but clearly) complicated in its para-Pirandellesque 
way. There's no way to assign the movie to a genre, and in this it 
will recall  many of the non-genre or mixed-genre films of the French 
New Wave, which also echo here through several references to movies.
It is a fantasy which is impossible, even incoherent, but lack of 
logic is no defect in this case. It is a black comedy. It is a hybrid 
--in a positive way, as in hybrid roses. It is literally a crazy 
quilt whose components are handled with legerdemain, like a shell 
game. It works-- except  for the tacked on happy ending--a minor 
weakness.
In this screwball (but non-slapsticky) picture whose heroine has a 
screw loose there is no message. To say that it is a comic critique 
of television's sway on people would be an oversimplification.  The 
closest I can come to finding kissin' cousins in today's American 
cinema is the Coen Brothers, with touches of Tarantino.
The acting by all is bull's eye class, except for the annoying, 
two-expressions playing by Chris Rock and his repeated ad nauseam 
f-word and s-word. His only virtue is that he underlines, by 
contrast, the excellent, even subtle performance by Morgan Freeman 
whose character gets increasingly complex.

Author
FilmFan16@aol.com
Directed by Neil LaBute.
Cast: Renee Zellweger, Morgan Freeman, Chris Rock, Greg Kinnear, Crispin 
Glover, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Allison Janey, Aaron Eckhart, Kathleen Wilhoite.
2000 - 112 minutes
Rated R (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 9, 2000.
For director Neil LaBute's first two pictures, 1997's "In the Company of the 
Men" and 1998's "Your Friends & Neighbors," he showed an affinity for 
ruthless, acid-minded characters who primarily are only out for the 
well-being of themselves, and no one else. His views of the human condition 
were at once startling, yet grim--bravura looks into the darker corners of 
the world. For LaBute's third effort, "Nurse Betty," he has adapted the 
highly original screenplay by John C. Richards and James Flamberg into a 
motion picture that is as sweet as could possibly be, with the title 
character being one of the most lovable heroines in many a moon. While not 
without a few shocking moments of bloodshed and murder, "Nurse Betty" is a 
profoundly earnest and charming film, not to mention LaBute's strongest, to 
date.
As Betty Sizemore, the lovely Renee Zellweger has found a wonderfully layered 
role that she was undoubtedly born to play. A coffeehouse waitress in Kansas 
who is stuck in a dead-end marriage with her no-good, philandering husband 
Del (Aaron Eckhart), Betty is enamored with the soap opera, "A Reason to 
Love," as well as the strikingly handsome Dr. David Ravell, played by actor 
George McCord (Greg Kinnear), and dreams of going to nursing school. She has 
always wanted to help people, you see, and it wasn't until she got married 
that she found her future grow cloudy and uncertain.
One night, as Betty quietly watches a recording of the day's episode of "A 
Reason to Love," she hears noises out in the living room and eavesdrops on 
Del being threatened by two men, Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris 
Rock), hired killers who subsequently scalp and shoot him to death. The 
post-traumatic shock of seeing him getting murdered in cold blood sends Betty 
into a dissociative fugue in which she believes that the characters on "A 
Reason to Love" are real people. So she sets off for the fictional Luna Vista 
Hospital in Los Angeles to find Dr. David Ravell, the man she just knows she 
was meant to be with, in a borrowed 1997 LeSabre that is, unbeknownst to 
Betty, carrying drugs in the trunk. 
After a summer overflowing with special effects-laden disaster pics and 
tiresome big-budget retreads, you can always tell when the Fall movie season 
has arrived with the release of the first great film. "Nurse Betty" is a true 
American original, high-spirited and giddily entertaining, with a potentially 
overblown fantasy of a storyline that, through the assured filmmaking touch 
of LaBute, never strays far from the bounds of realism. The premise may 
appear to be in danger of growing preposterous at any minute, but it never 
does, and you follow the film closely and care about what happens so much 
because of one major factor: the seminally written and performed character of 
Betty.
Mere written praise cannot, and does not, possibly do justice to how very 
good Renee Zellweger is as Betty, but to give you an idea, she was able to 
generate such likability right away that she does something within the first 
five minutes that was so genuinely touching and heartfelt, it nearly caused 
me to tear up. With 2000's "Me, Myself & Irene" and, most prominently, here, 
Zellweger has also proven herself to be quite a funny actress, able to 
generate huge guffaw laughs simply from an expression or the delivery of a 
single line of dialogue. Sorely passed up for an Academy Award nomination for 
her impressive turn in 1996's "Jerry Maguire," Zellweger's time to shine in 
Oscar's glory may finally, and deservedly, have arrived with her brilliantly 
nuanced work in "Nurse Betty."
Also a standout is Morgan Freeman, who hasn't been given such an opportune 
chance to really show his talent as an actor in quite some time. As the 
worn-out romantic Charlie, who is getting ready to retire from the profession 
of being a hired killer and who forms an indirect close bond with Betty, 
Freeman puts his many years of being a performer into his role, successfully 
conveying wisdom and honesty. 
In supporting roles, Chris Rock is surprisingly restrained as Charlie's 
apprentice, Wesley; Aaron Eckhart appears briefly and effectively as the 
loser Del; Crispin Glover and Pruitt Taylor Vince are humorous and 
sweet-natured as two of Betty's friends from Kansas who set out to find her 
themselves; and Greg Kinnear is excellent as the charming Dr. David Ravell 
and the vain, self-important George McCord.
"Nurse Betty" is a masterful human comedy and a sincere drama, as imaginative 
as it is unpredictable. Without giving anything away, the film does not sell 
out and go for the obvious, too-neat conclusion, but stays true to the main 
character and ends the only possible truthful way that it could. "Nurse 
Betty" is a pure heartwarmer from the first frame to the last, an uncynical 
motion picture that proves, yes, dreams surely do come true.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NURSE BETTY (director: Neil LaBute; screenwriter: John C. Richards/James
Flamberg/ based on a story by Richards; cinematographer: Jean Yves
Escoffier; editor: Joel Plotch/Steven Weisberg; cast: Morgan Freeman
(Charlie), Renée Zellweger (Betty Sizemore), Chris Rock (Wesley), Greg
Kinnear (Dr. David Ravell), Aaron Eckhart (Del Sizemore), Tia Texada
(Rosa), Crispin Glover (Roy), Pruitt Taylor Vince (Sheriff Ballard),
Allison Janney (Lyla); Runtime: 112; USA Films; 2000)
A bitter-sweet fantasy, in the form of a black comedy. It is about day
dreaming and wish fulfillment, as directed by Neil LaBute (In the
Company of Men/Your Friends and Neighbors). This is the first film he's
done that's not written by him, as it was scripted by John C.
Richards/James Flamberg. It is another heartless stab by the director
aimed at the heart of mankind, showing them at their stupidest and
cruelest moments, one that tweaks the sensibilities about American pop
culture and its whimsical effect on the population. It uses the
ridiculous banal plot of a soap opera called 'A Reason to Love' and
manages to get a story that runs parallel. This modern adult fairy tale,
told in the style of the "Wizard of Oz," is also set in Kansas and has
the heroine, ala Dorothy, leaving that rational state for one of
fantasy. The humor comes in how the characters actually fall for the
fantasy they are spoon fed by TV.
Betty (Renée Zellweger) is a naive, rosy-cheeked, cute blonde waitress,
and is married to a philandering used-car dealer Del (Aaron). She is a
fanatical enthusiast of her favorite soap opera, having fallen in love
with the character of Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear), who is played by
an actor named George McCord. She never misses an episode and identifies
solely with a nurse Chloe, even knowing the nurse's lines by heart. As a
positive, the show has motivated her to want to go to nursing school and
keeps her dreaming about a perfect life, something her life is far from.
While watching a videotape of her favorite soap opera's afternoon show
in her room, her husband is involved with a drug deal with a black
father-son hit men team, Charley (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris
Rock), which is going down in their living room. She witnesses the
bloody scalping and murder of her husband, but gets traumatized by what
she sees and develops amnesia. It would take a suspension of disbelief
to take in what ensued after the murder and not question it.
Betty gets into the character of the soap opera and fantasizes that the
dreamboat David Ravell is her real lover she gave up six years ago to
marry the slob Del. The time has come, she decides, for her to leave
Fair Oaks, Kansas and to go to Los Angeles to meet her ex-fiancée again.
She takes a 1997 Buick LeSabre from her dead husband's used-car lot
which, unbeknownst to her, has the missing drugs the hit men want
stashed in the trunk. The film now plays like a road movie, with the
deadly hit men trying to locate her, on a wild goose chase across the
country.
The sweetness that is supposed to be derived from the film, is to come
from the dull-witted but generous characterization of Betty, a people
person, wanting to help everybody, whose dream life is about to merge
with the actual danger she is in, as she lands in Hollywood, looking for
work not as an actress but as a nurse at the same hospital her soap
opera doctor works. Her chance to become a nurse comes about accidently
when she saves the life of an Hispanic who gets shot in front of the
emergency room and she uses the same procedure on the victim as she saw
on one of the episodes. The grateful girlfriend of the victim, Rosa
(Tia), takes her in as a roommate, and the hospital hires her to work in
the pharmacy until they can check her credentials and let her work with
patients.
She meets David and his soap opera honchos at a publicity gathering and
lives out her fantasy dream by having a whirlwind fling with him while
staying in soap opera character all the time. Besides being flattered by
the attention he receives from her, he sees this meeting with her as an
opportunity for him to expand his career and direct an episode with her
playing a nurse, ignoring his belief that she is either a soap opera
groupie or a lunatic, preferring to think of her as an actress from the
Stella Adler Method acting school, who is staying in character just to
get the part. While, she can't see him as the egotist he is, but can
only see him as the talented surgeon, interested in saving lives and
finding only true love.
While she is settling into Hollywood, living out her fantasy dream, the
hit men relentlessly search for her, flashing phony police badges to get
a lead on her whereabouts, waving snap shots of Betty around to
unsuspecting friends of hers, and picking up her trail in Hollywood by
beating the information out of a bar owner. The hit man father has
developed a fantasy about who Betty is and is stuck on the fantasy of
her representing what is good and pure about America, enduring the loud
insults coming from his angry, sociopath son, who savagely rants at him
about his going daffy over a dream. Charlie is at the twilight of his
career as a professional hit man, thinking that this is his last job
before retirement, and he has grown weary-eyed about his life, as often
there is seen sparkles of wisdom coming from his tired expression, as
when he speaks in a soft and sensitive voice, letting go of his cunning
and ruthless nature for a brief respite, forlornly saying that "he's a
garbage man of the human condition."
The film has another gory murder scene, as it breaks the mood of fantasy
and returns to a reality that is even more absurd than the fantasy
world. The hit men find Betty in Rosa's apartment and hold them hostage,
but from her hometown, Sheriff Ballard (Pruitt) and a reporter, Roy
(Crispin), come to Rosa's place in search of the missing Betty. A bloody
shootout occurs and everything that can get straightened out does as a
result of that. Then the film tries for the impossible, to return the
film to a sweet and gentle ending, by having Betty realize that both her
fantasy and real world are able to co-exist. She is invited to appear on
the soap opera for 63 episodes, where the TV show gets all the publicity
they can muster from her celebrity status following the murder story
headlines, and she saves the money earned on the show to go to nursing
school and a trip to Europe. But it was not possible for me to believe
anything about this tale, especially the purported sweet ending tried
for.
This tale was spiced with too much human depravity and insanity, making
Betty to be anything but another Dorothy Gale, but more like a crazy
person or an idiot. I found this adult fairy tale to be one that was
trapped in its own mixture of cynicism and delusions. The director could
never quite decide on what he wanted Betty to be like, so I was left
with the impression that she was a cartoon-like character, not able to
distinguish what was real or fantasy.
I don't think the film has come up with some earth shattering things to
say about pop culture, except to imply that if you want to be a moron
and forego taste, then join the middle-brow masses and get absorbed in
soap operas and forego any kind of art that makes you think for
yourself. If you do, the director is saying, that is not the worst thing
that can happen to you, it doesn't have to kill you. The question for
Betty becomes one of living out her childish dreams. She realizes her
dreams: of meeting her imagined lover and appearing on his show, of
going to Europe, of leaving Kansas for the first time, and of becoming a
nurse. But it is never clear what LaBute thinks of this, that is, after
smashing the middle-class dream of America as something that is drab. Is
he further saying that it is better to have some dream no matter how
futile it is than no dream at all? If his other two nihilistic films are
examples of his thinking, then I think he is trying to bring that same
message into this work, even though it might not have been intended in
this script and doesn't exactly jive with the sweet ending tried for. I
just think it seemed like old hat material recycled.
What the film had going for it was some marvelous performances,
especially by Morgan Freeman, who touched the soul of his complicated
character, a wickedly carnal performance from Chris Rock, and from Greg
Kinnear, who caught the subtlety needed for his role, to swing back and
forth between TV actor and real character. As for Renée Zellweger's
performance, it was good, that is, as good as any on the soaps.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A soap-opera addict goes delusional after witnessing a traumatic event take
place before her very eyes and scoots off to Hollywood in order to find her
ex-fiance, a character on her favorite TV show, whom she believes to be a
real person. On her tail are the two bad guys responsible for causing the
"traumatic event", now bent on finding the woman before she comes back to
reality and remembers the crime which they committed.
CRITIQUE:
An original modern-day black comedy based in fantasy that delivers a great
cast, fun undertones a la WIZARD OF OZ and a terrific performance from Renee
Zellweger. Admittedly, this movie took some time to ingratiate itself to me.
Frankly, I was a little letdown by its first half, and only began
appreciating its many diverse characters, its wacky story and its humor
after the midway point of the film. Now don't get me wrong, I was never
bored or unhappy with the movie, but it just wasn't doing much for me until
cute l'il nurse Betty got to L.A. and started living our her complete
"fantasy" world. At that point, all bets were off and I was hooked. I
especially enjoyed all of the scenes featuring Zellweger and Kinnear's
characters playing off one another. These scenes featured some of the better
double-entendres that I've heard in a while. And I just love those! One
person talking about one thing, while the other person believes them to be
talking about something entirely different. Pretty funny and extremely
well-written and acted in this case. The rest of the film wasn't necessarily
funny for me and definitely not laugh-out loud ha-ha! It was clever and
certainly interesting enough as a modern-day fable, but the laughs didn't
start a-coming 'till a little after the halfway mark. Mind you, others have
deduced deeper issues beneath this film's surface.
Zellweger and Freeman's characters are apparent mirrors to one another in
the sense that each of their respective personalities has imagined a
delusional fantasy love for themselves, based on an ideal which they cannot
attain in real life. A love, which in either case is oblivious to their
respective existence. Now that may all be good and true, but I must admit to
not catching any of that the first time around. Thinking about it now, it
does all seem to have a deeper meaning, and I certainly wouldn't be opposed
to watching this film again in order to fulfill that level of "depth" which
I seemed to have missed. But let's stick to the stuff above the surface for
now. The film is definitely one to catch just to see some of the better
performances of the year. Aaron Eckhart is asshole-perfect as the husband,
as is Kinnear as the arrogant actor. Morgan Freeman and Chris Rock work
beautifully off one another, while Renee Zellweger delivers a new kind of
performance for herself. I've generally seen her as the cute, romantic type
in most films, but in this one she manages to play an excellent unhinged
individual with an adorable smile and a sensitive nature. She has to ride a
fine line with this part, never going over the top kooky and having us
believe that she really _believes_ that what she's doing is "real", and she
does so in perfect form. See it for her, see it for the original fantasy
tale, see it for all of the other cool characters, see it for its deeper
connections, or see it for the re-emergence of Crispin Glover as an actor
(where has he been?). Either way, it's safe to say that this film definitely
"ain't in Kansas any more!" The year of film mediocrity seems to have hit a
little bump.

Author
Homer Yen
Betty (adorable Renee Zellweger, who could charm the
Grinch) is a woman who would be better off living any
kind of fantasy.  But the closest she comes to it is
by being an avid watcher of the sudsy "A Reason to
Live," a "General Hospital"-esque soap opera.  She is
so enrapt in its story that not only can she recite
many of its lines, she is moved to become a nurse
herself.  But her bullying, mullet-headed husband
quickly squashes any dreams that she may have.  This
louse of a partner cheats on her behind her back,
never remembers her birthday, and ridicules her for
watching soaps.  "It's only people with no lives that
watch other people's fake lives," he disdainfully
says.  This is the kind of guy that every woman can do
without.
The husband is not only a cheat, but he's also a
thief.  And when he double-crosses one of his business
ties, two hitmen come to town to kill him.  Betty
witnesses this horrible act of violence, and as a
result, slips into a state of dementia.  She enters
her ultimate fantasy by living her life within the
realm of her favorite soap.  She packs her things and
heads off to Southern California in search of the
heartthrob doctor (Greg Kinnear) that heads the cast
of "A Reason to Live" believing that she once jilted
him and now wants to make amends.  She's a mixture of
glee and delusion
This is the part of the story that is the most
farcical and interesting.  Arriving in L.A. in a
nursing uniform that makes her look more like a
Halloween party-goer rather than a functional nurse,
compassion and dumb luck gains her employment at a
local hospital.  She even manages to meet her
fictional doctor.  And when they do, she talks as if
she is on the show.  Instead of laughing at her, the
actor thinks that she is a talented method actress,
projecting a Doris-Day-thing and improvising an
audition.  He is flattered and her fantasy continues.
But all is not heaven for our heroine.  A darker side
to this film emerges as the two hitmen (courtly Morgan
Freeman and Chris Rock, who seems to have his squelch
volume stuck at maximum), try to track her down.  Not
only is Betty a witness to the murder, but the car in
which she has driven contains something that these two
are trying to retrieve.  
"Nurse Betty" thus becomes something of a twisted
Cinderella story.  There is an inventiveness that the
writers achieve in which the magical realism of
Zellwegger's world is countered against the
no-nonsense world of Rock's.  But, the plot lacks the
charisma that is needed to maintain the weekend
moviegoer's attention.  The tone also seemed a bit
unbalanced.  It brims with sweetness when the story
focuses on Betty's fabled world, but the 'hitmen'
angle injects a sour feeling, especially since Rock
curses like it was as involuntary as his breathing
process.  As a whole, the film did have its moments. 
It had some original ideas.  And, it may have won a
writing award at this year's Cannes International Film
Festival.  But it's questionable as to whether this
dark fable will win over your approval.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Nurse Betty" is one nutty wild ride - a tour de force road comedy that has enough loose screws to drive anyone bonkers. Its trappings may recall the Coen Brothers mixed with a zany Tarantino streak, but it is so unpredictable and filled with so many surprises, both candid and subtle, that it becomes a sublime cinematic marvel. This is no typical road movie or typical movie for that matter. 
Renee Zellweger is Betty, a Fair Oaks, Kansas waitress obsessed with a soap opera called "A Reason to Love." Betty is a sincere, understanding, affectionate woman, almost saintly in her attitudes and naivete. Unfortunately, she is married to a lousy, terribly obnoxious car salesman (Aaron Eckhart), who treats her like cold fish and has an affair with his secretary. He is a nightmarish configuration of Ralph Kramden and Eckhart's own soulless character in "In the Company of Men" - he is nervy enough to eat his wife's birthday cupcake and then orders her to clean up the kitchen table. Surely such human beings deserve imminent death, right? 
Well, one night, Betty watches in horror as her husband is practically scalped to death by two hit men, Charlie and Wesley (Morgan Freeman and Chris Rock) who are looking for a stash of drugs hidden in one of the salesman's automobiles. The problem is that Betty is getting ready to go on a trip of her own, and is taking the very car that is being sought. This places Betty, unbeknownst to her, in a dangerous situation. She also has her own fantastic agenda - she is headed to Los Angeles, specifically the fictitious Loma Vista hospital, to find Dr. David Ravell, a fictitious character in the soap opera she loves, who is of course an actor named George McCord (played by Greg Kinnear). The fact that her husband had just been murdered doesn't even faze her - she is in her fugue state, a journey of freedom and independence. 
The two hit men, wonderfully played by Freeman and Rock, have their own agenda - to kill the one witness to the crime, Betty. The problem is Charlie is after Betty for other reasons - he has become enamored by someone so sweetly innocent and harmless. He dreams of dancing with her by the Grand Canyon, and keeps a torn picture of her in his car. What he can't believe is that she went to L.A. to look for something that does not exist. One of the best scenes in the film is when Charlie asks for coffee at the cafe (prior to the vicious murder), and Betty stares at the TV monitor (which is playing her favorite soap opera) as she pours a cup for him without spilling a drop. Charlie is transfixed by her from the beginning. His partner, Wesley, is only a smart-ass, cocky tough guy who can't believe his older partner's lovestruck stance.
I refuse to divulge any of the other numerous surprises in the film except to say that just when you think you know where it is headed, "Nurse Betty" literally throws you off course. There is a viciously ugly murder in the film that is as messy and realistic in ways few other similar films could have handled. There are also moments of sheer beauty and ridicule followed by perfectly timed moments of comedic hilarity. Many of the comedic moments come from scenes between Betty and George the actor, who is convinced her own lovestruck agenda is an audition for a role in the show! Zellweger and Kinnear play these precious moments to the hilt, culminating in a well-written scene where he badgers her for not playing to the camera during a taped show. 
The extraordinary cast play their roles with a nicely precarious balance between comedy and rage. Zellweger plays the most sympathetic, confused, emotionally unbalanced female character in a long time, at least since Hilary Swank's performance in last year's harrowing "Boys Don't Cry." One cannot forget to mention Morgan Freeman's delicately portrayed Charlie, an intense yet gentle man of principle - his controlled rage and his amiable tone are thrilling to watch. I also liked Chris Rock's volatile Wesley, who has a number of good one-liners; Aaron Eckhart's loathsome salesman; Kinnear's ego-centered George aka Dr. Ravell; and there is nifty support from Pruitt Taylor Vince as a Kansas sheriff and Crispin Glover as a former high-school friend of Betty's. 
"Nurse Betty" is basically about finding your dreams and fulfilling them by overcoming all obstacles. Betty has her dream and nearly loses it, while the sagelike Charlie finds that his dream is looking for beauty and fulfillment, and finding it in Betty's soul. Director Neil LaBute ("In the Company of Men") and writers John C. Richards and James Flamberg throw all caution to the winds, culminating in a beautifully reflective moment of peace for our dear, misguided heroine Betty. She makes us feel that such dreams are within our grasp, as long as we are persistent enough to pursue them. Do yourself a favor: pursue the wild, wacky, infectious "Nurse Betty."
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Neil LaBute, best known for his ultra-dark comedies In the Company
of Men and Your Friends and Neighbors, breaks from his traditional mold
and lightens up a tad with Nurse Betty, which -- again -- isn't going to
win any awards for sensitivity.
     For the first time, LaBute is not directing from his own script,
which might explain why, if I didn't know better, I would have sworn I
was watching a Coen brothers movie.  Who else would put a fantasy
dancing sequence on the edge of the Grand Canyon at night?
     The new Neil LaBute, that's who.  But lest you think you're getting
a kinder, gentler Neil, rest assured that Nurse Betty is really quite
gruesome in its depiction of the human soul as essentially empty. 
There's even a scalping thrown in for good measure.
     Nurse Betty, played by Renée Zellweger, is actually a small-town
Kansas waitress trapped in a loveless marriage to the local car dealer
(Aaron Eckhart).  Betty has one passion in life: The soap opera A Reason
to Love, starring George McCord (Greg Kinnear) as famous heart surgeon
Dr. David Ravell.  When Betty's husband gets mixed up in a drug deal
gone wrong, Betty witnesses his gruesome demise and mentally breaks
down.  Poof!  She's convinced David Ravell is a real person, and she is
his long-lost love.
     If this sounds like a premise from a sitcom, that's because it is
-- Brooke Shields played the Betty role against Matt LeBlanc's soap doc
in a recent episode of Friends.  But the similarities end there.  Nurse
Betty quickly becomes an epic farce, with Betty (now convinced she is a
nurse) trekking to L.A. in one of her husband's Buicks... and little
does she know there's a load of heroin in the trunk.
     Undoubtedly the best part of the film is the team of Morgan Freeman
and Chris Rock playing a father-son hit squad out to recover the drugs. 
Freeman plays the straight man to Rock's acerbic son who wants nothing
more than to get their cross-country road trip in search of Betty over
with.  All the while, Freeman owns his scenes by trying to play Columbo
and read Betty's mind while staring at a photograph of her.  These guys
are simply unstoppable when they're on the screen.
     So is Miss Zellweger, after this and My, Myself & Irene, going to
make a living out of playing half-deranged nuts?  With Bridget Jones'
Diary in the works, it certainly looks like it.  Zellweger is in fine
form here, even if Freeman and Rock steal the show.
     Nurse Betty isn't LaBute's masterpiece, but it's definitely a
solid, funny, and unique film, the likes of which you won't see again
this year.  If your tastes run to the truly eccentric, this should tide
you over until the real Coen brothers movie, O Brother, Where Art Thou?,
comes out later this year.
Director: Neil LaBute
Producer: Steve Golin, Gail Mutrux
Writer: John C. Richards, James Flamberg
Starring: Renée Zellweger, Morgan Freeman, Chris Rock, Greg Kinnear,
Aaron Eckhart, Tia Texada, Crispin Glover, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Allison
Janney
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Bob Bloom
 Nurse Betty (2000) 4 stars out of 4. Starring Renee Zellweger, Morgan
Freeman, Greg Kinnear and Chris Rock. Screenplay by John C. Richards &
James Flamberg. Story by Richards. Directed by Neil LaBute. Rated R.
 Sometimes a movie comes along that is so special, so out of the
ordinary that you want to embrace it as tightly as a long-lost relative.
 Such a film is "Nurse Betty," a whimsical fairy tale as fragile and
spunky as its heroine. It is a movie with Oscar contender stamped all
over it.
 Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) is a sweet, young woman, a waitress in
the Tip Top, a small restaurant in Fair Oaks, Kan. She is married to
Del, a used car dealer with all the stereotypical vices associated with
those in that maligned profession.
 Betty's one vice is her addiction to the soap opera "A Reason to Love,"
and her devotion to its hero, Dr. David Ravell.
 One night, while in another part of the house watching a tape of her
soap, Del is in the living room negotiating a shady business deal with
two men, Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock). The pair turn
out to be hitmen who dispatch Del because he stole a package belonging
to their employer.
 The brutality of the situations sends Betty into a fantasy world in
which she believes she is the long-lost fiancé of famous heart surgeon
Dr. David Ravell, and she decides to drive to Los Angeles to find him
and rekindle their relationship.
 So, Betty packs her bags and hops into a Buick LeSabre taken from her
late husband's car lot and drives off. Coincidentally, and unknown by
Betty, the item Charlie and Wesley seek is secreted in the car.
 Thus, while Betty begins her odyssey to L.A., Charlie and Wesley set
forth on one of their own seeking clues to the whereabouts of the
elusive woman.
 Once in the land of dreams, Betty transforms herself into Nurse Betty,
gets a job at a hospital, makes a friend and acquires a roommate at the
same time, and begins her quest to find her Dr. David.
 Fate is kind, and Betty comes face to face with her dream lover. In a
scene reminiscent of Peter Sellers' "Being There," Betty begins quoting
dialogue from old episodes of "A Reason to Love" to Dr. David, actually
actor George McCord (Greg Kinnear), who believing she is a determined
actress seeking a role on the soap, plays along as Dr. David.
 That is about as much of the plot as I care to reveal without spoiling
the rest of this Capraesque story. Let us just say that Betty fulfills
her dreams.
 One of the ironies of "Nurse Betty" is that it is directed by Neil
LaBute, who helmed such cynical offerings as "In the Company of Men" and
"Your Friends & Neighbors." "Nurse Betty" does not quite seem the
material for a director who has such a bleak outlook on the human
condition.
 But LaBute pulls it off. He treats Betty with love and respect, neither
mocking nor criticizing her mental state.
 This is not to say the movie is light fare. It has an edge and LaBute
stages some harrowing scenes of violence.
 As Betty, Zellweger gives an outstanding performance. Within the
parameters of her manufactured world she acts rationally, sanely and
with utter conviction. She tightropes that thin line between sanity and
psychosis with the aplomb of a veteran acrobat. I rooted for her,
wanting to see her achieve happiness.
 Zellweger's performance is charming. It is a turn that could - and
should - bring her an Academy Award nomination if not the statue itself.
 Freeman's performance is wonderfully smart and controlled. As a veteran
hit man who takes pride in his work, he gradually falls in love with
Betty as he tracks her across the country.
 Freeman is one of those actors who elevates weak material merely by his
presence. Presented with well-written material as in "Nurse Betty," his
work is stellar, whether it be lecturing his partner, Wesley, about the
lack of work ethic in the country, or musing about Betty and wondering
what kind of woman she really is. This is another possible Oscar
contender.
 Kinnear also does sterling work as the soap opera star caught up in
Betty's fantasy. Kinnear has the difficult task of playing an actor
acting on a soap opera. And, when with Betty, he must, as George, act in
character as David. He captures the self-centeredness of the actor
perfectly.
 Rock is all hair-trigger impatience and attitude as Wesley. He spews
some funny, biting lines, yet despite his overall violent nature, he is
a rather impulsive, but likable character.
 "Nurse Betty's" script, with a screenplay by John C. Richards and James
Flamberg, based on a story by Richards, is delicious with its double
meanings and cultural insights.
 "Nurse Betty" is like an oasis in a cinematic desert. Finally, finally,
a movie that I can recommend without hesitation has reached the
theaters. "Nurse Betty" is a must-see experience, a winning trifecta of
acting, writing and directing.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Reviews by Bloom can be found posted on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
NURSE BETTY (2000)
Rated R; running time 112 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0171580
Official site: http://www.nurse-betty.com/
Written by: John C. Richards, James Flamberg
Directed by: Neil LaBute
Cast: Morgan Freeman, Renee Zellweger, Chris Rock, Greg Kinnear,
Pruitt Taylor Vince, Tia Texada, Crispin Glover, Harriet Sansom Harris,
Aaron Eckhart, Kathleen Wilhoite (Sue Ann), Sheila Kelley (Joyce),
Allison Janney (Lyla), Sung Hi Lee (Jasmine), Laird Mackintosh
(Dr. Lonnie Walsh)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsnurse.html
Have you ever found yourself watching a movie that you know you're
"supposed" to like, but it just fails to grab you like you thought it
would?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) is stuck somewhere between Wonderland
and Oz.
A stone soap opera junkie living and breathing the serial "A Reason To
Live", waitress Betty is unable to cope with reality when she sees her
rotten car salesman husband Del (Aaron Eckhart) scalped by wired hitman
Wesley (Chris Rock) and his much more Zen accomplice, Charlie (Morgan
Freeman).  So Betty creates her own reality: her mind convinces her that
she is the ex-fiancee of Dr. David Ravell, a fictional soap opera
character played by George McCord (played by Greg Kinnear).  Betty so
believes she is destined to be with Dr. David - remember, the fictional
soap opera character played by a fictional actor played by a real [I
suppose] actor - that she takes off from Neverneverland, Kansas, to
pursue her dream man, much to the dismay of local yokel Sheriff Ballard
(Pruitt Taylor Vince) and reporter Roy (Crispin Glover), who wonder just
how involved Betty was in Del's death.
And following Betty in hot pursuit are Wesley and Charlie, who want
something Betty may not know she has...
The Upshot:
All the signs were there.  I should've loved this movie.  It's my kind
of flick: weird in a RAISING ARIZONA kinda way, filled with great
acting, and one that avoided the easy out of making the local yokels
look butt-dumb (as witnessed by Charlie's opening conversation with
Del).  With all of that going for it, you might think I'd be tickled
pink after watching NURSE BETTY.  I wasn't.
To be sure, it had its good points.  Through "Betty", I gained a whole
new level of respect for Renee Zellweger.  Rarely has an actor been more
perfectly cast; she had Space Cadet down.  I've loathed Zellweger in
previous movies [THE BACHELOR especially, though I can't blame her
entirely for ME, MYSELF, AND IRENE.  There's more than enough blame to
go around for that one], but she shined brightly as Betty in "Betty".
Equally good was Morgan Freeman, though I always have to contend with
the fact that he reminds me of my mama's preacher, Rev. Isaac [except
for the cussin'.  By Mr. Freeman, not Rev. Isaac.  uh...] when I watch
Freeman on screen.  Still, Freeman is always a joy to watch; he classes
up the joint in most every movie he's in.
The balance of the surrounding, supporting cast also defies my
relatively low-rating of "Betty".  Rarely have I enjoyed most of the
supporters of a main story the way I did in this movie; from Greg
Kinnear's surprisingly light touch with David/George (more of a
sarcastic actor in his previous turns, Kinnear's performance here might
go unfairly unnoticed.  Bammer sez notice it) to Crispin Glover's (for
once) not-over-the-top Roy, to Tia Texada's out-of-the-blue-friend Rosa,
to Harriet Sansom Harris as Ellen the world-weary bartender (hard to
believe she plays Bebe on NBC's FRASIER, eh?), the people living in
Betty's Neighborhood were a fun bunch o' folks.
With all that, why'd I give NURSE BETTY the cautionary flashing
yellowlight?  It's simple, really, having had a little something to do
with the nosebleed my Disbelief got from having to be Suspended for far
too long at far too great a height.  The aforementioned RAISING ARIZONA
was farce at its finest, and though it did stretch the imagination, I
could easily see its situations play themselves out.  But never, not for
one second, did I even *begin* to believe that Charlie, Zen hitman
though he might have been, would go gaga for Betty the way he did.
That, combined with "Betty"'s lack of a strong voice on either side of
the comedy scale - it wasn't broad enough to be good farce, nor dark
enough to be a great black comedy - diminished my enjoyment of the tale.
And once my Disbelief got an altitude migraine, that was all she wrote.
Everything went downhill from there.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I started to not even included the BF here; after all, NURSE BETTY never
directly dealt with it (much to its credit, says I), so...why me, why
here, why now?  Alas, it has more to do with what I read about the movie
before it came out, than the movie itself.
I received a forwarded email message from one of 3BC's readers that
described the characters of Wesley and Charlie as "drug dealers" instead
of the hitmen they clearly portray in this movie.  While on the one
hand, I probably shouldn't trip over such things, and on the other a
thug is a thug is a thug, I got my Dander up over the description.
After all, the Hitman Profession is a time-honored calling in Show
Bidness (witness THE GODFATHER, GOODFELLAS, THE SOPRANOS, et al) - but
nobody loves a drug dealer (NEW JACK CITY), eh?  Well, maybe except for
an older White British female drug dealer (SAVING GRACE).  Hmmm...
Took a while for my Dander to recover from that little faux pas, it did.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Not for nuthin', but the Governor of the Great State Of Michigan -
Republican stalwart John Engler - was in my NURSE BETTY audience
yesterday.  I wonder what Gov. Engler thinks of a comedy in which two
Black guys scalp a White guy, wax philosophic about the honorable nature
of murder, and almost come out as sympathetic characters.
But I should leave him alone: after all, stalwart Republican Governors
deserve a night on the town, too - even if it is to enjoy depictions of
the Hollywood Violence they claim to detest.  Hmmm...
NURSE BETTY (rating: flashing yellowlight):
This flick could've stood a transfusion of Wacky Hilarity, or Dark
Pathos.  The middling ground it seemed content to stand on, was its
ultimate undoing.

Author
Robin Clifford
Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) is a waitress at a little diner in
Kansas City.  She's married to an abusive bully named Del (Aaron
Eckhart) who sells used cars and is involved in some pretty shady
dealings. It's no wonder that the highlight of Betty's day is to watch
the videotape of her favorite soap opera, "A Reason to Love" each
evening. While watching her show one night, she witnesses the murder
of her husband by two strangers over a drug deal. The killers don't
see her and Betty goes into a kind of amnesiac state, forgetting her
real life and suddenly believes she is the ex-fiance of the fictional
Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear) from her television story. She leaves
Kansas for LA in search of her beloved (in her mind) doctor, not
knowing she has two very upset hit men on her trail in director Neil
LaBute's "Nurse Betty."
Neil LaBute is not known for his bouts of lighthearted whimsy - if you
witnessed his previous films, "In the Company of Men" and "Your
Friends and Neighbors," you'll know what I mean. "Nurse Betty" hardly
seems the kind of story the more darkly natured director would take on
for his third work. But, it is a good decision and marks LaBute as a
multitalented up and comer in the industry.
The rather conventional concept of the heroine going on the lam to
escape the vengeful bad guys is skewed 180 degrees, in the script by
newcomer James Flanberg, with the intro of Betty's unusual amnesia,
triggered by Del's untimely, violent (though not entirely undeserved)
death. The sudden shock to the system propels her to fall under the
delusion that "A Reason to Love" is real life and that she jilted
Dr. David a year and a half before. Realizing the error of her ways,
in her confused mind, she packs her stuff up and heads to LA to make
things right with her handsome ex-fiance.
Meanwhile, the two hit men, Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris
Rock), are frantic when they realize that both Betty and a Buick
loaded with their drugs are gone. They, too, head across country
looking for clues as to where Betty will show up. Charlie, at first,
thinks that Betty is a "cunning, ruthless woman" who coldly took off
with the drugs that were the cause of Del's death. As he and his
cynical partner Wes try to find her trail, Charlie begins to fall for
the pretty Betty as he gazes at her photo and builds an image of her
in his mind as they cross the country. By the time the pair hit LA,
Charlie is thoroughly smitten by the idea that he has fallen for
Betty.
Just when I was wondering how the heck the upcoming collision between
Betty and the boys would be handled, the charming, darkly funny
screenplay by Flanberg takes a twisty turn when Betty performs a
heroic act while searching for her beloved Dr. David. (This is where
the "nurse" in "Nurse Betty" comes into play.) The real fun of the
film is watching this part of the story unfold, so I'm not going to
discuss it. Let it be said that LaBute and his team of filmmakers - on
both sides of the camera - make the twists work in a way that is
funny, sad, entertaining and, in the end, extremely satisfying.
Renee Zellweger is an interesting actress who made a successful splash
with "Jerry Maguire," but hasn't had a chance, since, to show her
acting talent in a larger venue. With "Nurse Betty," this
changes. Zellweger shows the comedic talent to hold the lead of the
film and acquits herself in both the funny and dramatic bits. Morgan
Freeman, one of America's finest actors, hasn't had the chance to
really show his acting chops for quite a while. (Of course, the great
actor always gives his best to his films, even if the films themselves
don't.) Here, he gets the chance to create an interesting, sympathetic
character - who happens to kill people for a living. As Freeman goes
from the tough, deadly businessman to the romantic, smitten "suitor"
of Betty, you can see why he is one of the best in the business. The
rest of the cast is first rate, too. Chris Rock, as the acerbic,
cynical Wesley has an inherent mean streak that gives his no-nonsense
killer an edginess that lingers right to the end. The comedic
background of the actor helps to lend a dark funniness to the edge.
Crispin Glover ("Wild at Heart"), as Kansas reporter Roy, and Pruitt
Taylor Vince ("Heavy") as Sheriff Eldon Ballard have small, but
significant roles - displaying good humor, too - especially in the
film's shoot 'em up finale. Greg Kinnear gives the right note to his
dual perf as soap star George McCord and his TV doctor
persona. Allison Janney, as George's producer, helps flesh out the
background with a tight, funny performance. Tia Texada ("Paulie") is
both bright and sassy as the Hispanic women who befriends Betty
(remember the heroic act I mentioned?) after "Nurse" Betty saves her
boy friend.
The production team behind the camera complements the telling of this
offbeat tale with a nice harmony. Veteran cinematographer Jean-Yves
Escoffier ("Cradle Will Rock") gives a unique and interesting look to
each locale the characters visit in their separate journeys. Costume,
by Lynette Meyer ("Your Friends & Neighbors"), is sometimes kitschy,
especially with Betty dressed in her waitress outfit looking like
Dorothy from "The Wizard of Oz." (To reinforce the Kansas image, Betty
is called "Dorothy" at one point.) Helmer LaBute moves the story and
its characters right along with nary a moment wasted.
If you're looking for a dark, funny, sometimes caustic, comedy that is
a challenge to the mind - something the summer film fling doesn't
often allow - make tracks to the theater and ask to see "Nurse Betty."
It will be the right prescription. I give it an A-.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 USA Films/Gramercy Films
 Director: Neil LaBute 
 Writer:  John C. Richards, James Flamberg, story by John
C. Richards
 Cast: Renee Zellweger, Morgan Freeman, Chris Rock, Greg
Kinnear, Aaron Eckhart, Tia Texada, Crispin Glover, Pruitt
Taylor Vince, Allison Janney, Kathleen Wilhoite, Harriet
Sanson Harris, Laird Macintosh
   Some people say that actor Ronald Reagan couldn't tell the
difference between real life and the movies when he was in
the Oval Office, so that when he said with a smile, "We bomb
Russia in 5 minutes," maybe he wasn't joking.  His
administration seems to have revived the whole issue of the
influence of movies on regular people, with the idea that a
great many of us are susceptible to Reaganitis.  We take
what's on the screen for reality while at the same time we
consider any aspect of real life that's not on the screen to be
irrelevant.  What an incredible theme for a movie or a TV
drama, and indeed we have had no small number of filmed
dramas taking off on that motif.  
   In Woody Allen's coldly clever comedy-fantasy "The Purple
Rose of Cairo," a Depression-era movie fan's latest idol walks
off the screen and into her life.  In Gary Ross's
"Pleasantville," a brother and sister are transported into their
TV set right into a black-and-white sitcom from the 1950s. 
They infiltrate the stodgy fifties types with their more worldly
sensibilities--just as some actors from a soap opera invade
the banal life of Neil LaBute's eponymous Nurse Betty in a
dark comedy that has absolutely everything going for it.  I'm a
fan of LaBute and went into the screening groaning that the
brilliant satirist had not scripted the story instead of being at
the helm, but I left stunned by the movie's perfect
combination of crackerjack acting, clever writing, sharp cross-
cutting of scenes, and a photographer's imagination that turns
the picture increasingly more colorful as the principal
character enriches her previously insipid life.
   What could the judges at the last Cannes film festival have
been thinking when they justifiably gave scripters John C.
Richards and James Flamberg top honors but passed over
the awesome performances of a top ensemble of thesps
acting out the most memorable comedy of the year?
   Though "Nurse Betty" is darkly comic, the film in no way
embraces the bitter, biting, satiric touch of LaBute as a writer
of overly-theatrical but mind-blowing parodies of human
relationships like "In the Company of Men" and "Your Friends
& Neighbors."  With LaBute in the director's chair, the film is
opened up, situated not in a nameless, abstract locale but in
specific areas of America, principally Kansas, Arizona, and
L.A., each location acting as a character in itself to give
added resonance to the scenes.  While in Kansas, Betty
Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) is a coffee-shop waitress whose
dreams do not allow her to be the sort that would slobber
over customers and garner big tips to bring home to her
abusive husband Del (LaBute regular Aaron Eckhart).  For
her, real life is the TV screen that looks down upon the
eatery, particularly when broadcasting a daily soap opera
called "A Reason to Love," starring Dr. David Ravell (Greg
Kinnear), a master surgeon whose wife had died during the
previous year.  Resisting the seductive charms of his latest
beautiful date, Ravell looks at the moon and chants, "I know
there's someone special out there for me." That's enough to
make Betty reach out like "The Wizard of Oz"'s Dorothy
beyond her home state of Kansas.  When she witnesses the
brutal scalping and murder of her thuggish husband by two
hit men, Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock),
she goes into traumatic shock and fully believes that TV's Dr.
David Ravell is a real person in a real hospital and not an
actor named George McCord.
   LaBute shifts to a road movie as Betty takes off in the very
Buick that happens to have a stash of drugs in the trunk,
making the hit men believe that she is a criminal who is in on
the felonious doings of her late husband.  As
cinematographer Jean Yves Escoffier captures some of the
great natural beauty of the U.S., particularly the Grand
Canyon and the red rocks of Utah, and editors Joel Plotch
and Steven Weisberg cross-cut furiously between Betty's
adventures, those of the two gangsters hot on her heels, and
the characters in the soap, we in the audience cannot help
rooting for Betty's getaway.  We instinctively want her to
attain her dream, her desire to say with full honesty, "I don't
think I'm in Kansas any more."  It doesn't hurt that Betty is
actually America's fondest girl-next-door, Renee Zellweger,
who captivates whether the starry-eyed groupie in Cameron
Crowe's "Jerry Maguire" or the conflicted rebel in Boaz
Yakin's "A Price Above Rubies."  Ironically we also cheer for
the gangsters, not the least reason that they are played by
the glorious Morgan Freeman who lights up every role and
the hilarious Chris Rock, this time as Freeman's younger and
more frenzied cynic.
   The standout aspect of the film is LaBute's way with
capturing couples.  In one marvelous fantasy scene, Charlie,
who is supposedly chasing down Betty with the aim of killing
her, imagines her standing next to him on a romantic evening
while overlooking the Grand Canyon (which Wesley scoffingly
calls "The Bland Canyon") and engaging her in a prolonged
kiss.  Betty also has a swell time rooming in L.A. with Rosa
(Tia Texada), who encourages her to find this man of her
dreams, while Betty's scenes with "Dr. David Ravell"--who at
first believes she is improvising a role to get a job in his
soap--later realizes with wide eyes that she has fashioned her
role into an actual person.  In another set of side roles that
mimics the action of the gangsters, Sheriff Ballard (Pruitt
Taylor Vince) acts the Don Quixote to the impressionable
journalist Roy (Crispin Glover) who follows him across the
country searching for the runaway "nurse."
   With "Nurse Betty" Neil LaBute exploits John C. Richards
and James Flamberg's clever and often exuberant script to
poke fun at our obsession with the soaps, with TV and, yes,
even movies in general, and does so without the malice that
had regularly been displayed by LaBute the writer.  We leave
with smiles on our faces.
Rated R.  Running time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Rarely is any movie such a director and actor triumph. The overall theme of Nu
rse Betty is taking risks, traveling the open road, and discovering the 
person you really are. This applies to both the characters in the movie, and 
the actors playing them. For director Neil LaBute, this film shows he's 
equally skilled at directing material that isn't his own. Screenwriters James 
Flamberg and John C. Richards get a chance to show off their superior wit and 
skill. The screenplay also provides a comic breath of fresh air for each of 
the lead actors. This thing is just ablaze with talent.
Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) lives in the small town of Fair Oaks, Kansas 
with her abusive dimwit husband Del (Aaron Eckhart). Betty's life revolves 
around a hospital soap opera called A Reason to Love that stars George McCord 
(Greg Kinnear) as dashing lead doctor David Ravell. In addition to committing 
adultery, Del's involved in a drug deal with Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and 
Wesley (Chris Rock). One night Del invites the men home for a business 
discussion. He is unaware that Betty is watching a tape of her favorite show 
in the next room. Since Del hasn't delivered some promised heroin, Charlie 
and Wesley assume he's keeping it for himself. So they kill him, and Betty 
witnesses the whole thing. She goes into a state of shock. When she hears Dr. 
Ravell on television saying, "There must be something special out there for 
me," Betty assumes he must be talking about her. She heads to Los Angeles in 
hopes of finding her "ex-fiancee," and starts accepting the show as truth. 
What she doesn't know is that her car has that missing heroin in the trunk. 
It's about time that Renee Zellweger received a good comic role. Both The 
Bachelor and Me, Myself & Irene saw her humor opportunities limited by a bad 
leading man. This film hands her many chances to shine, and she gives a 
brilliant performance. The whole picture rides on her shoulders, and she 
makes a very good leading lady. Thank casting directors Heidi Levitt and 
Monika Mikkelsen for the appearance of Morgan Freeman. Like Steve Martin, he 
is one of America's most outstanding, but underused actors. The job he does 
here, and the chemistry he has with the Chris Rock character, steals the 
whole movie. Rock is good too, if a bit familiar. They are best when 
together. Greg Kinnear, after a string of flops, shows why he became such a 
big actor. His biting work exemplifies some of Hollywood's crueler 
personalities. 
The screenplay has a steady pace and creates room for small, memorable 
characters. At the same time, it generates outrageously hilarious scenes that 
are just priceless. Betty is a perfectly established persona, and since 
everyone in the film is so quirky no individual's actions seem random and 
without meaning. Movement between the various locales is surprisingly fluid 
thanks to dexterous directing and editing. However, all things are not 
completely rosy in Fair Oaks or Los Angeles. There is quite a bit of violence 
that doesn't fit the tone of the movie. While nothing overly graphic takes 
place, the scalping and shoot-outs didn't need to be as bloody as they were. 
The film dips ever-so-briefly into some sex humor that's not required. Beyond 
that material, few jokes ever fail.
Everything about this movie is different. That may be why USA Films is 
releasing Nurse Betty, which is at its heart an independent film, to 
multiplexes. They're probably trying to create another comedy sleeper like 
last year's Being John Malkovich, which they also released. This movie isn't 
quite that unique, but is considerably less dark, and no less inspired. See 
this movie, tell a friend about it, and have a good time. It is the antidote 
to a summer of boring and predictable flicks.
