Title
Review for Midsummer Night's Dream, A (1935)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Reviewing a movie that came out in the 30's can be a difficult task. First
off, to fairly view the film, one must attempt to transport themselves back
in time. If you critique the film using today's standards, most films would
get zero stars. Technology has come a very long way in the past sixty years,
and even acting and writing styles have changed. Keeping that in mind, I
tried to the best of my ability to watch A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
objectionably, forgetting for two hours that when it was released, my
GRANDparents hadn't even married yet.
MIDSUMMER is, of course, based on the William Shakespeare play by the same
name. It's just one of about 17 or so versions of the play that have been
done for movie or TV. This version stars, most notably, James Cagney as
Bottom, the actor who winds up with a donkey head, and a young Mickey Rooney,
playing the mischievous sprite Puck. It's a love story, granted a bizarre and
comedic love story, focusing on four characters: Lysander (Dick Powell),
 Demetrius (Ross Alexander), Hermia (Olivia De Havilland), and Helena (Jean
Muir). Lysander and Hermia are in love, but Demetrius also loves the
beautiful Hermia. This is heartbreaking to sweet, unloved Helena, who has
loved Demetrius for quite some time without the returning of such feelings.
Off in the forest dwells the fairies. Oberon (Victor Jory), king of the
fairies, instructs his servant Puck to make Demetrius fall in love with
Helena so that all may be well. In a case of mistaken identity, Puck actually
has Lysander falling in love with Helena. Eventually he gets Demetrius to
fall in love with Helena too! So here we have four characters. The men are
fighting over a woman still, just a different one. Helena, who's never been
the object of a man's fancy, believes that it must all be a cruel joke at her
expense. And lovely Hermia simply doesn't know what the hell is going on.
(Not Shakespeare's words, but mine).
Another little story is going on during all this. Puck loves to cause
trouble. In something no more than a "prank", Puck turns Nick Bottom's head
into that of a donkeys. Bottom is part of an acting group that are going to
put on a play for the marriage of Theseus (Ian Hunter) and Hippolyta (Verree
Teasdale). Then Oberon has Puck putt a spell on Titania (Anita Louise), the
queen of the fairies, to have her fall in love with Bottom so he can still
the Indian baby she has stolen. Confusing enough? Well, it was for me too,
and I'm not completely sure if I even have all of this right, but when you're
watching the film, it flows well enough that you don't have to get too
concerned.
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM is actually quite good, and, not that I really
know, but the effects seemed pretty good for coming from the 1930's. It is
difficult a lot of times to tell what the people are saying, and it's very
confusing at first, but when you get into it, it's fun. The last half an hour
or so got kind of slow and boring, but the middle of the film makes it
worthwhile. James Cagney is great, and Dick Powell is quite fun in a sappy
way. The most annoying thing here by far is Mickey Rooney. It's hard not to
cringe every time he squeals or shrivels up his face. He's almost unbearable
to watch and is definitely the biggest complaint about the film.
Over sixty years old, this film might be hard to come by. I don't really know
how popular a version this is. Just to make note, this film was nominated for
the Best Picture Oscar in 1936, but didn't win. It did pick up two other
Oscars - for film editing and cinematography. This is a recommendable film,
but if you're really one for modern technology you'll probably find it
unbearable. Especially Mickey Rooney!!!
