Title
Review for Nuovo cinema Paradiso (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Philippe Noiret, Salvatore Cascio, Marco Leonardi, Jacques Perrin, 
      Antonella Attili, Pupella Maggio, Agnese Nano, Leopoldo Trieste
Director: Giuseppe Tornatore
Producers: Franco Cristaldi, Giovanna Romagnoli
Screenplay: Giuseppe Tornatore
Cinematography: Blasco Giurato
Music: Ennio Morricone
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
In Italian with subtitles
     If you love movies, it's impossible not to appreciate CINEMA 
PARADISO, Giuseppe Tornatore's heartwarming, nostalgic look at one man's 
love affair with film, and the story of a very special friendship.  
Affecting (but not cloying) and sentimental (but not sappy), CINEMA 
PARADISO is the kind of motion picture that can brighten up a gloomy day 
and bring a smile to the lips of the most taciturn individual.  Light 
and romantic, this fantasy is tinged with just enough realism to make us 
believe in its magic, even as we are enraptured by its spell.
     Most of CINEMA PARADISO is told through flashbacks.  As the film 
opens, we meet Salvatore (Jacques Perrin), a famous director, who has 
just received the news that an old friend has died.  Before departing 
for his home village of Giancaldo the next morning to attend the 
funeral, he reminisces about his childhood and adolescence, thinking 
back to places and people he hasn't seen for decades.
     As a fatherless child, Salvatore (Salvatore Cascio) loved the 
movies.  He would abscond with the milk money to buy admission to a 
matinee showing at the local theater, a small place called the Cinema 
Paradiso.  Raised on an eclectic fare that included offerings from such 
diverse sources as Akira Kurosawa, Jean Renoir, John Wayne, and Charlie 
Chaplin, Salvatore grew to appreciate all kinds of film.  The Paradiso 
became his home, and the movies, his parents.  Eventually, he developed 
a friendship with the projectionist, Alfredo (Philippe Noiret), a lively 
middle-aged man who offered advice on life, romance, and how to run a 
movie theater.  Salvatore worked as Alfredo's unpaid apprentice until 
the day the Paradiso burned down.  When a new cinema was erected on the 
same site, an adolescent Salvatore (Marco Leonardi) became the 
projectionist.  But Alfredo, now blind because of injuries sustained in 
the fire, remained in the background, filling the role of confidante and 
mentor to the boy he loved like a son.
     CINEMA PARADISO's first half, with Salvatore Cascio playing the 
young protagonist, is the superior portion.  The boy's experiences in 
the theater, watching movies and listening to Alfredo's stories, form a 
kind of journey of discovery.  As Salvatore cultivates his love of 
movies, those in the audience are prodded to recall the personal meaning 
of film.  It's an evocative and powerful experience that will touch 
lovers of motion pictures more deeply than it will casual movie-goers.
     Once Salvatore has grown into his teens, CINEMA PARADISO shifts 
from being a nostalgic celebration of movies to a traditional coming-of-
age drama, complete with romantic disappointment and elation.  Salvatore 
falls for a girl named Elena (Agnese Nano), but his deeply-felt passion 
isn't reciprocated.  So he agonizes over the situation, seeks out 
Alfredo's advice, then makes a bold decision:  he will stand outside of 
Elena's window every night until she relents.  In the end, love wins 
out, but Salvatore's joy is eventually replaced by sadness as Elena 
vanishes forever from his life.
     The Screen Kiss is important to CINEMA PARADISO.  Early in the 
film, the local priest previews each movie before it is available for 
public consumption, using the power of his office to demand that all 
scenes of kissing be edited out.  By the time the new Paradiso opens, 
however, things have changed.  The priest no longer goes to the movies 
and kisses aren't censored.  Much later, following the funeral near the 
end of CINEMA PARADISO, Salvatore receives his bequest from Alfredo:  a 
film reel containing all of the kisses removed from the movies shown at 
the Paradiso over the years.  It's perhaps the greatest montage of 
motion picture kisses ever assembled, and, as Salvatore watches it, 
tears come to his eyes.  The deluge of concentrated ardor acts as a 
forceful reminder of the simple-yet-profound passion that has been 
absent from his life since he lost touch with his one true love, Elena.  
It's a profoundly moving moment -- one of many that CINEMA PARADISO 
offers.
     Is CINEMA PARADISO manipulative?  Manifestly so, but Tornatore 
displays such skill in the way he excites our emotions that we don't 
care.  This film is sometimes funny, sometimes joyful, and sometimes 
poignant, but it's always warm, wonderful, and satisfying.  CINEMA 
PARADISO affects us on many levels, but its strongest connection is with 
our memories.  We relate to Salvatore's story not just because he's a 
likable character, but because we relive our own childhood movie 
experiences through him.  Who doesn't remember the first time they sat 
in a theater, eagerly awaiting the lights to dim?  There has always been 
a certain magic associated with the simple act of projecting a movie on 
a screen.  Tornatore taps into this mystique, and that, more than 
anything else, is why CINEMA PARADISO is a great motion picture.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
Anyone who loves films and film-making will want to see Cinema
Paradiso.  Loosely based on the life of its director, it captures his
love for films when, at about 9 years old, he begins to visit the
projection room of the Paradiso Cinema in his small town in Sicily.
Philippe Noiret (it's a joint Italian-French film) is the projectionist
who teaches the young Toto how to run a projection machine.
Paramount to the story and belly-laughing funny, are the film previews
by the priest who sits in the otherwise empty theater to censor any
"pornography."  Anytime anyone on screen kisses, he rings the bell he
holds in his hand so that the projectionist can excise that part of the
film.
All the flavor of this small town is brought out, as is the people's
love for the cinema, the town's only entertainment.  The villagers
sometimes know the words by heart, having seen the film over and over,
frequently in one sitting.
Clips of old films abound in this movie; from Valentino thru Gary
Cooper and Clark Gable...and Ingrid Bergman, Greta Garbo, and Jean
Arthur.
A very satisfying and charming film starring Philippe Noiret, Jacques
Perrin, Salvatore Cascio and Marco Leonardi.
Winner of the Oscar for Best Foreign Film of 1989.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is just after World War II in Giancaldo, a small town in Sicily.
Life is hard, troubles are large, and most pleasures are small.  One
pleasure is big, bigger than the richest man in town.  It is the big screen
down at the Cinema Paradiso.  The big screen tells big stories, stories of
tortured love, action stories, musicals with big production numbers.  And in
front of the big screen is a small boy, Toto.  To Toto there is school,
there is sleep, there is work, there is food, and there are movies.  The
first four are mundane and leave Toto in Giancaldo.  Movies are magical and
can take him any place in the world, from the houses of the rich to the Wild
West.  To Toto not just the stories are magical but the theater is also,
with its bright beam coming from a sculptured lion's mouth.  Toto has even
sneaked a look at the machine that makes the picture and at old Alfredo, the
irritable man who runs the machine that makes the movies.  For Toto to get
closer to the movies he will have to make friends with Alfredo and maybe
learn how Alfredo runs the projector.
     Thus begins a life-long friendship between young Salvatore--called
Toto--and Alfredo the poor projectionist.  And the friendship is built
around the love both have for the movies.  Set against the backdrop of the
Sicilian peasant village the story shows Salvatore himself become a
projectionist; we see him grow up and fall in love.  The story is told in
flashback as it is remembered by the adult Salvatore on the night that he
has heard of Alfredo's death.
     CINEMA PARADISO, directed and written by Giuseppe Tornetore, is full of
loving detail about the post-war movie exhibition business and has many
endearing portraits of the Sicilian peasants who mob the theater to get a
touch of something that transcends their unglamorous lives.  Ennio Morricone
scored this film, originally three hours in length, shown in Italy at two
and a half hours in 1988, and cut to about two hours for American audiences.
This is a sentimental and endearing film that will be well remembered.  I
rate it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     (Note for those who have seen the film, spoiler for those who have not:
The following is a quote from the VARIETY 11/23/88 review of the film, then
called NUOVO CINEMA PARADISO.  It reveals an important plot twist edited out
of the version released in this country.  "[Salvatore] returns to Sicily for
Alfredo's funeral and finds his long lost love, now played by Brigitte
Fossey.  Amid many tears, Salvatore learns it was his blind friend who broke
up this one, true romance of his life."  In fact, it was a weakness of the
film that that loose end was never tied up.  Apparently the American
distributor did not want Alfredo to be made less sympathetic, though anybody
who steals pieces of films is not particularly sympathetic as far as I am
concerned.)

Author
Rui Sadio
The reason why this review will be very synthetized is because sometimes 
there are things which can not be described or explained by words.
Well, I think CINEMA PARADISO is in this conditions.
First of all, I must say that CINEMA PARADISO is, in my opinion, the most 
beautifull movie I ever saw in my all life and I'm sure that it will be 
difficult to see another movie as good as it in the next years.
CINEMA PARADISO is a great homage to the cinema; it's a story (perhaps a 
lesson) of love and friendship between people; it's a very particular view 
about life and dreams.
Everybody who sees CINEMA PARADISO can not be indifferent to the 
simplicity and, at the same time, the power of its message.
I congratulate Giuseppe Tornatore for his magnificent work, as well as 
Philippe Noiret and Salvatore Cascio, whose performances as Alfredo and 
Toto will be saved, forever, in the golden pages of Cinema History.
CINEMA PARADISO is more than a film to be seen, it's a film to be felt by 
our heart.
