Title
Review for Conversation, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Francis Ford Coppola /
Screenplay: Francis Ford Coppola /
Stars: Gene Hackman (Harry Caul), John Cazale
(Stan), Allen Garfield (William P. "Bernie"
Moran), Frederic Forrest (Mark), Cindy Williams
(Ann), Michael Higgins (Paul), Elizabeth MacRae
(Meredith), Teri Garr (Amy), Harrison Ford (Martin
Stett) /
MPAA Rating: R /
Review: **** (out of ****)
As "The Conversation" slowly weaves its absorbing
and intricate web, it works its way under your
skin, drawing you into its sense of paranoia,
until you are sharing the same feelings as the
protagonist, who in this case is a man named Harry
Caul (Gene Hackman).
Caul's profession is surveillance -- watching and
recording other people. Even one of Caul's
fiercest competitors (Allen Garfield) admits that
he is "the best bugger on the West Coast." He is a
private contractor, and will work for anyone,
including rich businessmen or even the government.
When the film opens, Caul and his assistant, Stan
(John Cazale), are in the middle of a difficult
assignment. A mysterious man known only as The
Director has paid Caul $15,000 to record a
conversation between his wife (Cindy Williams) and
another man (Michael Higgins) as they walk in
circles in a park in the middle of downtown San
Francisco during crowded lunchtime.
Caul completes the assignment by using three
recording devices: one in a shopping bag carried
by a man following them, and two parabolic
microphones of his own design positioned over two
hundred yards away. Of course, none of these three
recordings is complete, but back in his studio,
Caul works carefully to assemble the raw footage
into a complete conversation. The scenes depicting
Caul at work reminded me of Antonini's "Blowup"
and Brian De Palma's "Blow Out." Like those
movies, "The Conversation" invites the viewer to
watch over Caul's shoulder as he puts the pieces
together, slowly deciphering what was said.
The conflict comes when Caul breaks his strict
rule of not getting personally involved in his
work when he realizes that when he turns the tape
over to the Director, a murder might ensue. He
doesn't know for sure, but several years ago he
was involved in another assignment that resulted
in three deaths, and he doesn't want to live
through it again. Of course, his job is to listen
to conversations, not to hear them. When Stan
shows curiosity at what the conversation is about,
Caul snaps back this his profession is to not be
curious. "I don't care what's being said," he
says. "I just want a good recording."
Hackman plays Caul as a tightly-strung, paranoid,
and intensely personal man who is incapable of
being involved in human relationships. Early on we
see him with a semi-girlfriend (Teri Garr), but
the relationship sours because he hates being
asked questions, even simple ones like "Where do
you work?" His unrelenting privacy blocks him off
from the rest of the world, so much that he
becomes distraught when he learns that his
landlady has a key to his apartment.
In this way, "The Conversation" is an affecting
tragedy. Although it is a brilliantly written and
expertly-paced mystery with some fantastic twists
and scenes that might make Hitchcock proud, it is
also a finely-tuned character study, mostly due to
Hackman's outstanding performance. It also
incorporates a running theme of how privacy is
slowly being eroded by society and, more
specifically, technology. Caul is paranoid simply
because he knows that any person can be recorded
at any time in any place. He knows because he's
the expert, and even though he is one of the best,
there are others out there.
"The Conversation" was written and directed by
Francis Ford Coppola when he was at the height of
his talent. He had just won Best Picture in 1972
for "The Godfather," and even though "The
Conversation" was nominated for Best Picture in
1974, it lost out to his own "The Godfather Part
II."
But unlike the sprawling "Godfather Saga," "The
Conversation" utilizes Coppola's striking ability
to create a closed sense of claustrophobia and
suspicion. He successfully taps into the primal
fear that we can never be alone, that someone is
always watching. This is one of the few films that
might be more relevant today than it was
twenty-three years ago, because in the age of the
Internet, global telecommunications, and satellite
cameras, the threat of invaded privacy is more
real than ever, and always getting worse.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CONVERSATION, THE (director/writer: Francis Ford Coppola;
cinematographer: Bill Butler; cast: Gene Hackman (Harry Caul), John
Cazale (Stanley), Allen Garfield (William P. "Bernie" Moran), Frederic
Forrest (Mark), Cindy Williams (Ann), Teri Garr (Amy), Harrison Ford
(Martin Stett), Robert Duvall (The Director), Michael Higgins (Paul),
Elizabeth MacRae (Meredith), 1974)
A precious and unnerving thriller, one that never fails to offer some
kind of Hitchcockian surprise, as the film is unpredictable throughout.
Gene Hackman is brilliant as the loner "electronic surveillance expert,"
who through a slow-process comes to realize that what he is doing isn't
impersonal but has great consequences on both him and the people he
bugs. Hackman, as Harry Caul, lives a very private life, interested only
in his work. He is diligent at his craft, to the point where he is
considered the best in the business. But his view of life has a cold
ring to it, as he believes that human nature and curiosity are not part
of the business. He is first seen on a case, where he has set up
elaborate devices to take pictures from far off and eavesdrop on a
couple, by using two parabolic microphones he himself created, which are
positioned some distance away and a third bugging device carried by Paul
(Higgings), who follows the strolling couple through San Francisco's
crowded Union Square, during noontime, with a shopping bag on his arm
and wearing a hearing aid.
Harry becomes irritated with the quality of work, as he listens to the
tapes from the back of a specially rigged van, trying to block out the
music and din from the lunchtime crowd. His assistant wants to know what
this assignment is about, and Harry responds by telling Stanley
(Cazale), "I don't care what they are talking about, all I want is a
nice fat recording."
The director (Duval) of an unnamed big business has offered to pay Harry
$15,000 to record a conversation between his wife, Ann (Cindy Williams),
and a man named Mark (Forrest), who is apparently her lover. Harry has
no idea what the purpose of the tape is and says he doesn't care.
Concluding the taping of the conversation, as Ann spots Paul following
the couple around. Harry then calls his client from an outside phone,
because he doesn't have a phone at home. He is told by his assistant to
deliver the tapes tomorrow afternoon and returns to his scantily
decorated but heavily alarmed apartment, only to find that the landlord
left a bottle of wine on the floor, for his birthday, by getting into
the apartment with the spare key, something Harry had no knowledge the
landlord had. This upsets Harry more than he is grateful for the gift.
He visits his girlfriend Amy (Garr), by quietly slipping the key in the
door and throwing the door open, entering her abode like he is on a
case. She doesn't even know it's his birthday, as he opens the wine he
just got as a gift. She is glad to see him and starts asking him
personal questions about himself, which makes him feel very
uncomfortable, causing him to leave the warmth of her bed and tell her
he is going, but not before he gives her money for the month's rent.
The secretive Harry is at peace only when he is working. Returning to
his workplace, located in a dinghy warehouse basement, where he keeps
his state-of-the-art equipment. He is at ease again, as he replays the
tapes from the afternoon with Stan, picking up bits and pieces of the
couple's conversation. He is alarmed to hear the couple think that they
might be murdered if her husband got the chance. This troubles Harry,
because he got on tape the liaison they set for Sunday in the hotel,
including room number and time of date.
When he goes to deliver the tapes to the director, he isn't in, but his
assistant Martin Stett (Harrison) is there, and pays Harry off. But
Harry is troubled by this and refuses to release the tapes to anyone but
the director. Leaving the office, he notices on separate floors the
couple he was following.
The story is chilling, creating doubts in Harry's mind, as he recalls
that previously his tapes resulted in the murder of three innocent
people, upsetting him so much, that he left New York. He is an obediant
Catholic and feels troubled about what is churning inside him, seeking
solace in the confession booth. He confesses that he is afraid people
could get hurt by his work and seems perplexed about what to do.
At a convention for surveillance technology people, he meets his peers
in the field, feeling proud that he is superior to them in his
knowledge, but for the first time, it is beginning to sink into him that
he is on the same amoral playing field as they are. This comes about as
he meets one of his competitors, a slimy, overbearing braggart, "Bernie"
Moran (Garfield), who engages Harry in false flattery, trying to get him
to be a partner. Harry has nothing but contempt for him, but he goes
along with him and his own crew, as they meet some women and bring them
over to Harry's workplace. Meredith (MacRae) shows an interest in him
and in his troubled quiet way, he tries to relate to her, expressing
some true feelings to her. To his hurt, it turns out that Moran gave him
a pen, and that was the device used to bug the intimate conversation he
had with Meredith. After he kicks them out, he sleeps with her, but
restlessly tosses in his sleep, as he has a nightmare vision of the
couple being murdered because of him. When he awakens, he finds that
Meredith is gone, along with the tapes.
He is told by Stett that the director has the tapes and will pay him his
money. The murder that takes place doesn't happen as he pictured it and
to the bargain, his soul has been violated and his lifetime of striving
for perfection in his field is questioned, and if that wasn't enough,
someone has outfoxed the master surveillance expert, by planting a bug
in his apartment that even he can't locate where it is. His only solace,
is to sit in his sparse apartment and play the sax.
This somber thriller is a beauty, projecting a maddening character
study, and infiltrating a secretive and cold world, where the
protagonist, a private wire-tapper, has lost his sense of direction,
knowing that one's privacy can so easily be exposed by expert
technicians like himself and be used for any purpose. The acting was
magnificent on all parts, the story was grippingly told, and its
denouement, is the equal of the best thrillers ever made. A unique film,
whose great sound track by Walter Murch, is essential to the plot, as
the technology in the film was the key element in setting-up the very
eerie atmosphere and bleakness associated with a technology used so
despairingly. The film is even more relevant today than it was back in
the 1970s, as the world has become even more so of a place where it is
possible for technology to invade the privacy of any citizen.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Gene Hackman; John Cazale; Allen Garfield & Frederic Forrest
If the conversation is not the worst film ever made, it comes real close.
Which is strange, considering it was directed by Francis Coppola, and it
starred Gene Hackman and a young Harrison Ford.
This snoozer starts to go bad from the opening credits. During a long drawn
out surveillance operation, we see a couple having a conversation but can
only here bits and pieces, and really annoying sound effects in between. The
only reason this was included was so that Coppola could show everyone what a
brilliant filmmaker he is. Guess what Francis? It didn't work
Hackman plays Harry Caul, a master surveillance expert. On one of his jobs,
Harry overhears a conversation that could have serious repercussions to
those involved. Harry then has to wrestle with his conscience about whether
to turn the tape over to his employers or not.
That's the plot in a nutshell. The idea for the movie itself is not a bad
one, if done properly. It might have made a good episode of a half hour TV
show, but not a full length feature film. It's just too long, and for no
good reason. The movie ends up being a character study of Caul, and a bad
one at that. We don't really know that much more about Caul at the end of
the movie than at the beginning. For that matter, we really don't want to
either. Harry Caul is one strange dude, not strange in the funny way but
strange in a very distasteful way. This guy is WEIRD. Although he fits in
well, everyone in the film seems to be a few cards short of a full deck.
I'd say something about the lousy acting in the film, but the blame is less
on the actors and more on Coppola's lousy script. The only thing that the
actors should be questioned about is their judgment, as to why they got
involved with this turkey to begin with. As for Francis Coppola, he should
stick to directing and leave the writing to someone who has a clue how to
write a good script.
I don't know how this film could have gotten any worse.
Quite possibly the worst film ever made  0/10

Author
Brian Koller
It is ironic that "The Conversation" was released the same year
that Nixon resigned.  Nixon was forced out of office largely
because he was caught committing crimes on tape.  And "The
Conversation" is about the consequences of bugging.
Gene Hackman plays a professional wiretapper.  He is well-paid
getting the scoop on others, but is very secretive, to the
point of paranoia, about guarding his own personal life.
He tapes a young couple's conversation, and begins to worry
about what may happen to them.  The man says to the woman,
"they'll kill us if they can."
Hackman refuses to turn the tapes in to his client, despite
increasing pressure from a young Harrison Ford, who is a
cheerless bad guy.  In fact, everyone in this movie is cheerless.
It is also slow, which is good for character development,
except the only character getting screen attention is
Hackman, and he doesn't reveal very much.
Women seem to want Hackman.  This seems odd, given that
he is middle-aged, nerdy, secretive, and withdrawn.
He also spies on them.  And others spy on him.
The theme of everyone under surveillance was better
developed, with more humor, in "The Anderson Tapes" (1971)
although "The Conversation" has the better cinematography.
John Cazale has a supporting role.  The only other movies I've 
seen him in are the Godfather films, "The Deer Hunter" (1979)
and "Dog Day Afternoon" (1975).  He sure found his way into 
good films.  I guess his goofy looks kept him from being cast
in insipid romantic comedies.
Look fast for Robert Duvall as the shadowy, well-guarded Director.
An interesting film, and a chance to see Shirley (Cindy Williams)
without Laverne, and Ford as a laconic villian (rather than a 
laconic hero).  Nominated for best picture, "The Conversation" is 
a bit overrated.  Towards the end it is hard to tell what's real 
and what's not, but then the surrealist moments are the best 
in the film.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
