Title
Review for Wavelength (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Kevin Patterson
Michael Snow's WAVELENGTH is definitely one of the stranger things I have seen
projected on a silver screen over the years. It begins with a wide shot of two
people leaving a largely empty room which appears to be on the second or third
floor of a building. Later, someone comes in, listens to the Beatles'
"Strawberry Fields" on the radio, then leaves. The camera slowly starts to
zoom in on the far wall as a high-pitched whirring sound begins in the
background. There are occasionally bright flashes of light and changes in the
color scheme: the shot changes from brownish floorboards and walls and daytime
showing through the windows to white walls, grey floorboards, and the lights
of nighttime traffic visible from the outside. A man enters the room, lies
down on the floor, and apparently does. A woman enters, picks up the
telephone, calls someone to report the death, then also leaves. In an
interesting effect, we see her "ghost image" shortly after this, entering and
moving in the exact same places in the frame, only she is slightly out of sync
with the room, since the camera has continued zooming in since she left. The
whirring grows louder and higher-pitched as the zoom continues, until finally
we see what the camera has been approaching: a painting of the ocean on the
far side of the wall.
The problem is that this takes forty-five minutes. I have literally described
everything that "happens" in this film: most of the time, the audience is left
staring at an empty room. Yes, the empty room changes colors once in a while,
but it's still the same empty room. Those who admire WAVELENGTH (including my
film professor, who recently screened it--that's how I managed to see this in
the first place, in case you're wondering) have described it as a meditation
on the subjective nature of cinema and on the ways in which new zooming and
lense technology that had recently been invented could add to this subjectivity.
This claim seems to be partially backed up by comments from Snow himself, who
said he wanted to explore "aesthetic ideas," among other things, in this film.
What I don't understand is why it had to take forty-five minutes, or why Snow
wanted to explore these largely academic and technical subjects in the medium
of avant-garde film. This sort of thing is best suited for instructional film
(I know that I myself got a lot more out of watching clips of the film in
lecture the next day, with the professor explaining the technology behind the
various shots, than I did out of seeing the film itself) or for the written
word. Snow may have hoped for an emotional response as well, as his comments
on the film indicate that he hoped to explore religious experience and the
nature of sight itself in addition to the more technical issues.
Unfortunately, the slow pacing and lack of variety in the images renders the
film inaccessible at most levels other than the most esoteric and drastically
reduces the possibility of the sort of intuitive, expressionistic sensations
which are generated by the best abstract films. Even those who recognize the
issues of human consciousness present in the film are, in my opinion, probably
appreciating them intellectually rather than sensing any connection or
parallel to their own experiences in consciousness.
I don't deny that there is a certain intelligence and craft behind
WAVELENGTH (and in fact, many film experts consider it a masterpiece, so my
opinion should probably be taken with a grain of salt anyway). If it had only
been ten or fifteen minutes long, it might have been a nice little piece of
scratch-your-head abstraction that might also have provoked the sort of deeply
intuitive sensations that are evoked by the best avant-garde films and thus
would have demonstrated the artistic power of the new technology with which
Snow was experimenting. The slow pacing, however, emphasizes the technical and
downplays the human: WAVELENGTH becomes a film about film and little else.
I can't really call it a failure, since it succeeds at being a film about
film, as much as an idea ill-suited to the medium. WAVELENGTH is not available
on video and, needless to say, doesn't play in the theaters very often, so it
may be hard to find even if you do want to see it. If you're highly interested
in an exploration of the technical aspects of filmmaking in and of themselves,
you might want to see it if you get the chance. Otherwise, don't waste your
time trying to track it down.
