Title
Review for Firm, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Now, I would give the firm 2 1/2 stars.  Only if you have NOT read
the book, would I recommend the movie; otherwise, I would say skip it.
     I found the movie simple and easy to follow.  I thought the
casting was just about perfect in that everyone in the show reminded me
of the characters from the book.  Although granted there were some
changes, I thought overall the movie was a good subset of the book.  I
thought the movie was well directed and edited.  The visuals and the
sound were nothing special but were okay.
     Now, why if I loved the book and I thought this was very similar
to the book would I give it only a so-so review? The reason the book
was so great was the suspense and the page-turner writing style.  After
reading the book, there were no surprises.  A big ho-hum.
     If you have not read the book, you might just love this show.  If
I had not read the book, I think it might have gotten as high as 3 to 3
1/2 stars from me.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jon A Webb
     Tom Cruise plays a poor young man who has just graduated with the
highest honors from Harvard Law School. He is recruited by a Southern
law firm that gives him a high salary, a new house and car, etc. It
turns out that they are corrupt, and he has to find a way out.  He
can't just resign, since the last four people who tried that are dead.
     I thought the direction in this film was unfocussed.  E.g., the
scenes between Gene Hackman and Cruise's wife (whose name I can't
remember) are supposed to establish his sexual interest in her, but
don't.  Similarly the first scene between Cruise and David Strathairn
are supposed to convey Strathairn's desperation, but don't.  It's this
limpness of direction that makes "The Firm" boring at times and
generally mediocre.  For much of the movie, it is far easier to think
of funny endings for scenes or the movie in general (e.g., "It's the
right thing to do") than to concentrate on the somewhat convoluted
plot.
     Tom Cruise's acting, though, really brings the film along.  I
liked in particular his scene with the Mafia guys at the end.  It's
quite striking how he can take a part like this, which is not
demanding, really not much more than a cartoon-character young
ambitious lawyer, and make it really fun.
     The movie has several actors playing small but interesting roles.
Holly Hunter has been mentioned in other reviews as making her minor
part into something that will revive her career. I liked her very much
in her first scene, where she delivers a line that at simultaneously
establishes her stupidity and weirdness with deadpan seriousness. She's
also bouncing slightly through the whole film -- you get the feeling
that there's a lot more going on there than she's allowed to depict in
this film.
     David Strathairn also has a fine small part.  As always, it is a
thrill to watch him.  Gary Busey is also good in a small part.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  6/30/93
Running Length:  2:34
Rated:  R (Language, mature themes, sexual situations, violence)
Starring:  Tom Cruise, Gene Hackman, Jeanne Tripplehorn, 
           Hal Holbrook, Ed Harris, Holly Hunter, Wilford Brimley
Director:  Sydney Pollack
Producers:  Scott Rudin, John Davis, and Syndey Pollack
Screenplay:  David Rabe, Robert Towne, and David Rayfiel based on the 
             book by John Grisham
Music:  Dave Grusin
Released by Paramount Pictures
     Mitchell Y. McDeere (Tom Cruise) has just graduated in the top
five of his class from Harvard Law School.  With a record like his,
there are understandably a lot of people interested in employing him.
Offers abound from the large, the prestigious, and the desirable, but
eventually it's a small firm from Memphis that snares Mitch's
services.  Bendini, Lambert, and Locke make the terms of his joining
them so enticing that the deal is impossible to turn down--a starting
salary near $100,000, a low-interest mortgage so he can buy a house,
free use of a Mercedes, and repayment of his college loans.  At first,
Mitch and his wife Abby (Jeanne Tripplehorn) eagerly celebrate their
new life and home, but it doesn't take long for the euphoria to wear
thin.  Two members of the Firm die under suspicious circumstances and
soon Mitch begins to wonder what secrets lie behind the locked doors of
Bendini, Lambert, and Locke.
     John Grisham's novel THE FIRM is a furious page-turner, the kind
of book that you don't want to put down once you've started reading
it.  The characters are well-rounded and developed in such a way that
the reader cares about their fates.  The fascinating setup (roughly the
first 100 pages) is perhaps the novel's greatest strength and, even
though the eventual resolution lacks punch, few would deny that THE
FIRM is an entertaining read.
     Sydney Pollack's film THE FIRM is the kind of movie that almost
anyone could walk out on without feeling that they've missed much,
regardless of whether they've read the book or not.  Very little of
what made the written version so enjoyable has made it to the screen
and what we're left with instead is an overly-long (two hours and
thirty-four minutes, to be exact), pedantic thriller that, at best, can
be described as average.
     The producer/director has been quoted as saying that he wants his
movie to stand on its own, apart from the book.  That's a good idea,
because the film THE FIRM doesn't come close to reaching the level of
intensity achieved by the novel of the same name.  Comparisons are
inevitable, of course, but it isn't necessary to have read the written
version to be disappointed by the visual adaptation.
     The plot is a good place to start the discussion.  This was the
book's weakest element and, if anything, it's worse in the movie.
While the final "twist" to the movie's story (which in no way resembles
what happens in the novel) is clever, it is also difficult to accept.
Let's not forget the forces that Mitch is up against.  Is it reasonable
to believe everything that happens in the pivotal climactic scenes?  I
doubt it.  While I applaud the screenwriters for coming up with a
unique way to conclude the film, their inept execution of the concept
causes the ending to seem cheap and contrived.
     The unfortunate tone of the movie is set during the first hour.
The film spends quite a bit of time using short, often-disjointed
scenes in an attempt to recapture the near-perfect mood of Grisham's
setup.  This would have worked nicely if those various snippets had
successfully conveyed the allure of the Firm to Mitch and Abby, but
things rush by so quickly and everything is so out-of-sync that the
result is to make the first quarter of the movie long and tedious.
     There are many differences between motion picture and novel.  With
numerous expected, mostly-minor cuts and changes, the first half of the
film stays reasonably close to its written counterpart.  After that,
however, the differences become progressively larger until only the
names of the characters and certain general events remain the same.
Not all of the changes are bad--some, at least in their intent, are
intriguing.  Unfortunately, the script writers appear not to have
thought things through all the way--a fault that Grisham's novel is
rarely guilty of.
     On the surface, Tom Cruise and Jeanne Tripplehorn might seem like
acceptable choices to play the roles of Mitch and Abby McDeere.  That
is, until they start to "act".  Cruise has at times been good in front
of the camera (in pictures such as BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY), while
in other instances he has done little more than show off his good looks
(DAYS OF THUNDER).  In the case of THE FIRM, which demands range and
ability, the star falls solidly in the second category.  Not until the
last act does he give anything resembling a feeling performance,
managing to effectively sabotage Mitch in the process.  By the time
things get interesting in THE FIRM, we don't care what happens to the
protagonist, because the actor playing him has failed to capture our
sympathy.
     Jeanne Tripplehorn is worse, playing Abby with as much enthusiasm
and energy as a zombie.  Even as I was apathetic towards Mitch because
of Cruise, I began to actively dislike Abby as a result of
Tripplehorn's unimaginative performance.  Consider for a moment someone
of Emma Thompson's caliber in this part and you'll want to break into
tears of frustration.
     Fortunately for the film, the supporting cast is uniformly
strong.  Especially worthy of mention are Ed Harris as FBI agent
Tarrance and Wilford Brimley as De Vasher, the Firm's security strong
man.  Both of these actors steal many of the scenes that they're in.
     As impressive as these two, if not more so, is Gene Hackman's
Avery Tolar.  Softened in the movie from his counterpart in the book,
this Avery becomes the only completely real--and sympathetic--character
in the film.  Hackman's performance is more than half the reason why.
In the hands of a lesser actor, Avery could have become sappy, silly,
or stupid, but not in this case.  By the closing scenes of THE FIRM, he
was the only one I really cared about.
     I dislike bashing movies simply because they differ from the books
that spawned them.  The mediums of entertainment are different, after
all, and should be treated as such.  No film can do a perfect
adaptation of a novel.  In the case of THE FIRM, however, the problems
have little to do with the changes made to the story.  Putting aside
the issue of its source, this is not a good movie.  If there's a reason
to go, and I don't think there is, it's to see Gene Hackman's
performance.  Unfortunately, given his amount of screen time, there's a
lot of other garbage that will have to be endured along the way.
     In the past, I've enjoyed many of Syndey Pollack's projects (OUT
OF AFRICA and TOOTSIE in particular), but this film got derailed early
and even this talented director proved unable to get it back on
course.  I suppose it's a difficult task to try to please both admirers
of the novel and the casual movie-goer who has never read it.  In
attempting that, Pollack has made a mess of everything--plot,
characterization, and pacing.  Even the music, by Dave Grusin, is
inappropriate.
     Fans of John Grisham's novel will see THE FIRM regardless of what
reviews it gets, so to them, and to others, I offer a cautionary
warning to be wary.  THE FIRM had a lot of potential but the production
team found numerous ways to mess it up.  This isn't an awful film, nor
is it unwatchable, but I'd think twice before spending time and money
in a darkened theater with telling of Mitch McDeere's struggles.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When I was in the Galapagos I was on a boat of about a hundred people
and I was reading the newly published HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  I noticed that
about four other people were reading the same novel at the same time.  Out
of a population of a hundred people that is a surprisingly high percentage
of people reading the same novel.  That sort of popularity rarely happens
unless there is a film imminent.  (I saw a lot of people reading JURASSIC
PARK just before the film came out, but that film had a lot of hype.)  The
only other book I remember seeing that so many people seemed to be reading
at once was John Grisham's novel FIRM.  Now nuclear-powered submarines and
Cold War warfare is a subject with natural appeal, but the story of a yuppie
lawyer and a law firm does not have the same trappings to entice people so I
guessed it must be a pretty good thriller.  Now THE FIRM, like THE HUNT FOR
RED OCTOBER, has made it to the screen.
     There is an old rule of business that a deal that sounds too good to be
true probably is.  That is what young lawyer Mitch McDeere (played by Tom
Cruise) and his wife Abby (played by Jeanne Tripplehorn) discover when Mitch
is choosing a firm for employment.  One company in Memphis offers Mitch a
package that sounds too sweet to turn down.  His salary will be 20% higher
than the next best offer, and he gets a beautiful home and a free Mercedes.
The company just force-feeds Mitch one Perquisite after another.  Bendini,
Lambert, and Locke is just one big family, Mitch is told, but Abby balks
when she sees how strongly the firm wants to run both Mitch's life and her
own.  And there have been some mysterious deaths of young lawyers at the new
company.  Then there are two mysterious strangers who are not with the firm
but seem to know a little too much about the company and about Mitch.  And,
like the law firm, they too seem to have targeted Matich for something
unknown to him.  Mitch is a clever lawyer but he will need all his skill
just to stay alive when he is caught between his own unscrupulous law firm
and the government.
     What made people want to read the book is the question, "What is
*really* going on?"  The same question will probably intrigue movie
audiences, but the answer is disappointingly prosaic.  In the book the
answer makes some sense, but there were major revisions in the film and it
does not make quite as much sense.  (More on this in a heavy spoiler at the
end of the review.  Don't worry; I will flag it.)
     This is a long film--more than two and a half hours long--and it feels
like a long film, mostly because it is tightly packed with a lot happening
throughout.  But it is still a carefully crafted thriller.  Much of the cost
of the production had to be in the casting.  This film has a powerhouse
cast.  Cruise is, of course, box-office gold and just recently played a
lawyer in A FEW GOOD MEN.  His skills are improving with time until he is a
respectable actor now, though his range is limited.  Tripplehorn also gets
some chance to take part in the action and is adequate.  But the two leads
are not the most interesting casting.  For members if the sinister law firm,
David Rubin cast people who have generally played gentle, nice-guy roles,
people of some integrity, the sort of actors who are chosen to do voice-
overs for commercials.  We have Gene Hackman, Hal Holbrook, and Wilford
Brimley--people you naturally feel are friendly.  It makes them seem all the
more sinister when their real natures are covered with this air of pleasant
control.  Then you have the grungies, the people who have less gentility and
who cannot get away with it when they break the law.  Here we have Gary
Busey and a character actor I have been pointing out for years, David
Strathairn.  And cast against type is Holly Hunter, playing a gum-chewing
tartish secretary.  Playing government agents are Ed Harris (who plays
straight arrows occasionally with sinister sides, as he did in UNDER FIRE),
and Stephen Hill (who headed the IMF in the first season of MISSION
IMPOSSIBLE).
     THE FIRM is a thriller that does not cover tremendously new territory,
nor does it have a lot of substance, but it is well made and exciting.  And
its thrills come from human interactions, not from explosions or martial
arts or car chases.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     First, I cannot claim actually to have read the book.  This comment is
based on a three-hour abridgement on audio tape.  But in the book, the
reason the firm could make such generous offers was that it actually was the
Mafia.  They desperately needed the best lawyers they could get and were
willing to spend whatever it took to get them.  When Mitch decided to betray
the firm, he was going head-to-head with the Mafia.  It seems to me that the
novel glosses over the question of how you can be a Mafia lawyer without
realizing that your clients are all in the syndicate, but perhaps that is
possible.
     In the film, Bendini, Lambert, and Locke is not the Mafia, though it
does work for them.  This introduces a logical problem.  There is nothing
intrinsically against the law about being the legal counsel for the Mafia.
In fact, the Constitution guarantees even the Mafia the right to legal
counsel.  So then what really is the nature of Bendini, Lambert, and Locke's
villainy in the film>  They try to control their staff's lives to the point
of killing them when they want to leave.  And they overbill by about 25% in
the example we see.  Both actions probably help the bottom line.  And they
probably do some illegal work for their clients.  But none of this seems
profitable enough to explain their very bizarre way of doing business.  By
making Bendini, Lambert, and Locke the villain rather than the Mafia, there
is more that is left unexplained.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     "I want the truth!" demands hotshot lawyer Tom Cruise in last
year's military drama, A FEW GOOD MEN.  And in his new film, THE FIRM,
Cruise once again plays a hotshot lawyer who's searching for the
truth.  Talk about a stretch!  Actually, Cruise's character Mitchell
McDeere stumbles upon the truth fairly quickly in the film.  But
unfortunately for him and THE FIRM, dealing with the unsavory aspects
of that truth produces more fizzle than sizzle.
     Okay.  So Tom's this red-hot Harvard Law School grad who, as the
film opens, is being courted by all these prestigious law firms.  But
Cruise's Mitch is astute and won't take any old offer.  He wants the
best.  He's got a mother in a trailer park and an estranged brother in
the county lockup so he's got something to prove.  And he wants to give
his adoring wife Abby (the cozy bathrobe-sporting Jeanne Tripplehorn)
more than a mere hand-to-mouth existence.  They are young, beautiful
people after all.  Surely they deserve better than that?
     So when the small but prosperous Memphis law firm Bendini, Lambert
& Locke make him an offer he can't refuse, well, he can't refuse it.
     So.  Mitch and Abby U-Haul it down to picture postcard-perfect
Tennessee where they're wined and dined by the Firm.  Their house is
beautiful; it's furnished, carries a low-interest mortgage, and even
has a Mercedes in the driveway.  But what's most important is that the
Firm doesn't forbid its lawyers' wives to work and "encourages
children."  "How *exactly* do they do that?" questions Abby, with
keen-eyed skepticism.
     As idyllic as home life should be, the workplace is tough as
hell.  Nobody's ever failed the bar exam Mitch is told once, twice, one
hundred times in a zany montage of mounting legal tomes and dwindling
desk space.  But before the film gets bogged down in legal
pen-pushing...  Bang!  There's an explosion aboard a yacht in the Grand
Caymans where two of the Firm's associates were vacationing.  Both
killed.  "That's four dead lawyers in under ten years," comments a total
stranger in a greasy spoon late one night.  One of the guys, played by
Ed Harris, has a bald head and thick-rimmed glasses and looks like a
Fed.  "Who are you guys?" asks Mitch, inquiringly, but they've ordered
their steak sandwiches *to go*!
     Before long, Mitch and his assigned mentor Avery Tolar (Gene
Hackman, who's name is inexplicably missing from the film's
advertisements) whip down to those treacherous, attorney-claiming
islands to bully a client.  Because Mitch is a hotshot lawyer, you know
it won't be long before he starts getting suspicious.  I mean, those
boxes of files in Avery's closet with the names of the dead lawyers on
them and stuff?  Something is definitely up.  But Mitch goes overboard
on the rum punches one night and partakes of one local delicacy too
many, so to speak.  Eight-by-ten glossies in a brown manila envelope to
follow.
     In the nation's capital, Agent Tarrance (Harris) pops up again and
we get the low-down on Mitch's employers.  (C'mon...  All that's
missing from the film's title is the word "unscrupulous.")  But what
the government needs is proof.  Incriminating evidence of the
documentary kind.  What they need is for some hotshot lawyer to make
photocopies and stuff so that they can put the whole lousy stinking
operation away for a long, long time.  Mitch says "No way!"  But he
sleeps on it and comes up with a scam involving $1.5 million, a Swiss
bank account, and the early release of his brother-the-convict.  Takes
a real hotshot to rip off the Federal Bureau of Investigation!
     THE FIRM is never boring (even at almost 2 hours and 40 minutes)
but it never really sparkles either.  Sure there's some tension, but
McDeere's plan to bring the Firm to its knees (which even his *wife*
doesn't want to hear about) isn't exactly awe-inspiring.  And the
denouement, which was changed from novelist John Grisham's original
ending, requires a humongous stretch of the imagination.
     The acting, much as you would expect from this cast, is uniformly
solid.  Gary Busey plays private eye Eddie Lomax who buys it with
style.  Blam!  Pow!  Holly Hunter plays his gum-chewing secretary Tammy
Hemphill who was under the table giving him a "pedicure."  David
Strathairn sensitively portrays Mitch's incarcerated brother, Ray.  Hal
Holbrook is the Firm's senior partner Oliver Lambert, and Wilford
Brimley its tough head of security who's "paid to be suspicious."
     Similarly, Sydney Pollack's direction is competent and
workmanlike.  The script, adapted from Grisham's bestseller, was pulled
together by David Rabe, Robert Towne (who wrote CHINATOWN), and David
Rayfiel.  But the feeling you get from all their efforts is just one
more humdrum movie-going experience.
     If the thought of another Tom Cruise hotshot still turns you on,
then THE FIRM is definitely for you.  But if you're more interested in
a slick, engrossing tale of corporate corruption, read the hardcopy
version instead.

