Title
Review for Grifters, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
"The Grifters" is a lurid, tense film that explores
the lives of three con artists and their relationships
to each other.  While the violence, language, and
sexual situations may offend some people, it does not
detract from the film's message, which is that crime
doesn't pay.  The life of a grifter may be eventful,
but it is ultimately dismal.
"The Grifters" stars Roy (John Cusack) as a young
grifter, working 'short cons' on innocents such as
bartenders and sailors.  His mother Lilly (Anjelica
Huston) works the racetracks for a sadistic mobster
(Pat Hingle).  Mother and son have an uncomfortable
relationship, partly due to Roy's need for independence,
but mostly due to his unresolved Oedipus complex.
Roy's girlfriend is Myra (Annette Bening), a ruthless
and manipulative con artist, who sees Roy as a potential
partner for her specialty, 'long cons' to be perpetrated
on desperate businessmen.  Myra and Lilly soon take
a dislike to each other, and tensions are further
increased by Roy's mistrust of Myra.
The character of Myra was the most interesting for me.
She really is a monster, and the more evil an action
is, the more she seems to enjoy it.  Roy is so independent
and mistrustful that he tries to convince Myra and Lilly
that he is a salesman, but he doesn't fool either of them.
Lilly is the film's shrewdest character, but she is
undermined by her avarice and her love for her son.
The complex relationships of these three con artists
creates tense and unpredictable plot developments.
"The Grifters" has several excellent supporting roles
for veteran character actors.  Pat Hingle plays a crafty,
sinister mobster, Henry Jones is a know-it-all motel
clerk, and Eddie Jones is the grifter who makes Roy his
apprentice.  Stephen Tobolowsky plays a jeweler who is
perhaps the film's only honest character.
"The Grifters" received several Academy Award nominations:
Best Actress (Huston), Best Supporting Actress (Bening),
Best Director (Stephen Frears), and Best Adapted
Screenplay (Donald Westlake).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A lot of impressive names cooperated to
     create a surprisingly unimpressive film noir crime story.
     This film pulls its punches by throwing in absurdities at the
     wrong moment and has at least one surprisingly vicious scene.
     Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     A "grifter" is a con-man (nobody calls them "con-persons"), someone who
makes a living by fraud.  There are little cons and big cons.  A small con
will net pocket change and maybe a busted jaw.  A big con can net in the
millions and can get you killed.  Con men have been portrayed as likable in
THE FLIM FLAM MAN and THE STING.  They are seen with a kind of dark awe in
HOUSE OF GAMES.  Perhaps the most realistic view and by far one of the
dirtiest is in THE GRIFTERS, anew film with a superb pedigree that still
disappoints.  What is the pedigree?  It was a novel by Jim Thompson, a
crime-story writer who is only now, after his death, reaching his greatest
popularity.  The film adaptation of his AFTER DARK, MY SWEET is also in
current release.  Thompson also occasionally did screen work, co-scripting
one of the great films of all time, Kubrick's PATHS OF GLORY.  Thompson's
GRIFTERS was adapted for the screen by Donald Westlake, himself a popular
crime novelist and author of books such as BANK SHOT.  The film was produced
by Martin Scorsese, who directed film noir crime films such as MEAN STREETS
and TAXI DRIVER, and directed by Stephen Frears, who also directed MY
BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE, SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID, and DANGEROUS LIAISONS.  As
close as it would be possible to have a spectacular film noir film, this is
it.  Still, this turns out to be just an adequate crime story, little more.
     The film concerns three grifters.  First there is 25-year-old Roy
Dillon (played limply by John Cusack).  Then there is his 39-year-old mother
Lily Dillon (played by the oddly mis-cast Anjelica Huston).  Unusually mis-
castings have a pretty person cast where someone grittier is needed.  Here
it may be the reverse.  Lily looks old enough to be Roy's mother.  The story
calls for her to be Roy's mother without looking it.  She is supposed to
look young and attractive, and while Ms. Huston really is the right age for
the role--she was born in 1952--she looks too old for the role and dressing
her in a sexy dress and stiletto heels does not do it.  The third vertex of
this dark triangle is Myra (played by Annette Bening), a bouncy young
grifter with a background for big grifts.  Often her bounces are out of her
clothes and onto a bed, particularly when big money is involved.  She wants
to partner up with Roy in more ways than one, but she and Lily are just too
similar and know too much about each other to get along.
     (I will try to avoid spoilers in what follows but there will be minor
spoilers.)
     What is wrong with this story?  Why is this only an adequate crime
story?  First, the plotting is less complex than you would expect.  You have
three devious characters and one would expect a really devious plot, but it
fails to materialize.  There are no big surprises in the plotting.  The
viewer never really feels grifted by the script.  Second, parts of this film
really do not make sense.  The climax of the film is contrived and if it is
not a physical impossibility, it is a very strong physical improbability.
In another incident, a bullet is fired and the police conclusion about the
incident seems completely inconsistent with what would have been the
trajectory of the bullet.  It is almost comical to imagine the incident as
the police must be picturing it to create the required trajectory.  While
the previous problem in physics is probably from the novel, the trajectory
problem seems to be Frears not thinking out the scene ahead of time and
could have been avoided.
     This is not a bad film, it just fails to  materialize into a very good
one.  The scenes that should carry the dramatic impact lose it because of
small absurdities.  In my opinion, this film has been over-rated.  It would
have made a decent black-and-white in the 1940s and it still is just about
that good.  My rating is +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
GRIFTERS, THE (director: Stephen Frears; screenwriter: from a book by Jim
Thompson/Donald E. Westlake; cinematographer: Oliver Stapleton; editor: Mick
Audsley; cast: John Cusack (Roy Dillon), Anjelica Huston (Lilly Dillon), Annette
Bening (Myra Langtry), Pat Hingle (Bobo Justus), Henry Jones (Simms), Michael
Laskin (Irv), J.T. Walsh (Cole), Ed Jones (Mintz), Charles Napier (Hebbing),
Stephen Tobolowsky (Jeweler); Runtime: 114; Miramax Films; 1990) 
A love triangle among grifters (con artists), that plays out as a film noir
morality tale. It is adapted from Jim Thompson's hard-boiled 1950s book, as the
British director Stephen Frears (Dangerous Liaisons) sets the action in
contemporary Los Angeles. It follows the trail of three grifters. The main story
is about 25-year-old Roy Dillon (Cusack), who is a small-time con man who does
nickel-and-dime jobs but saves his money and has built up a large nest egg. He
is the one the two women fight over, and is the only one who is worth saving.
His 39-year-old mother, Lilly (Anjelica Huston), is someone who has been a
terrible mother. She works for the Mob in Baltimore by pulling a playback scheme
at the racetrack--which involves manipulating the odds so that the bookies will
maintain a profit no matter which horse wins. She also would like to leave the
Mob, but can't. Her tough demeanor and artful ability to survive, are what keep
her going. Roy's sexy but dangerous girlfriend is Myra Langtry (Bening), who for
ten years worked as a sex lure for businessmen in a deadly broker scam in Texas
and is now looking for that type of bigger action again. These three can't trust
one another, as they are thrown together by strange circumstances and are
reduced to trying to hustle each other. 
This modern film noir story turns out to be a forceful and dark look at how evil
all the grifters are, as they go from crimes of cheating to killing. The film is
marvelously acted by Anjelica Huston, who received an Oscar nomination for Best
Actress. It also has a tight script by Donald E. Westlake. 
In the opening scenes, Roy gets punched in the stomach by a bartender who
catches him working a money changing scam. He gets change for a $20 bill and
then switches to a ten dollar bill. At the same time, Lilly has been sent by her
nasty boss Bobo (Hingle) to work the Los Angeles track. When she shows up at
Roy's fleabag hotel to see what he's been up to after being estranged for many
years, as he went to live on his own when he was just 17, she meets Myra there
and the two instantly hate each other. She is not fooled by his talk of being a
salesman, and lectures him on the negatives of being a grifter: "You either go
up or down, sooner or later. Usually down." She also notices how badly hurt he
is and rushes him to a hospital just in time for emergency treatment to save his
life. 
At the hospital she meets Myra again, and the two go into a war mode for the
attention of Roy. Roy has been so damaged by his callous upbringing, that he
treats both women with contempt. Firstly, refusing Lilly's offers of help with
money and maternal advice. Secondly, turning down Myra's bid for him to go
partners with her in the stock scam. He views them both as being alike. Myra is
desperate for another partner, as her other partner, the one who taught her the
ropes, Cole (J.T. Walsh), has cracked and is now in the mental ward of a prison.
The story builds in violence and perversion and shocks, and by the climactic
scene the untalented grifter Roy, who believes he can leave the business any
time he wants to, has to face his crafty mother in an Oedipal situation. He's no
match for the mother who never wanted a kid, but raised him when she was only a
kid herself at 14. What she now exerts over him is a dominating will, and their
relationship doesn't provide much meaning but it is absorbing to watch. It's a
film that doesn't leave you with much to think about afterwards, but while it
played its grit and pulp qualities shine in the darkness. The film could have
been better served with a more spirited actress than Bening, who's best asset is
her body. While Cusack seemed to not fit what a noir character should be like,
as he seemed to be more like a guy who was just trying to be a good grifter. He
looked like he would have fit more into a sports film than this one. But the
film still works as a modern film noir vehicle, as the script didn't have depth
but it provided a full blast of cynicism and shocks that played into the dark
plot rather well. If it's a dark, sleazy film, that is well-crafted that you are
in the mood for, then this one should be right up your alley. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
