Title
Review for Freeway (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

FREEWAY (director/writer: Matthew Bright; cinematography: John Thomas;
editor: Maysie Hoy; cast: Reese Witherspoon (Vanessa Lutz), Kiefer
Sutherland
(Bob Wolverton), Brooke Shields (Mimi Wolverton), Amanda Plummer
(Ramona), Dan Hedaya (Detective Wallace), Wolfgang Bodison (Detective
Breer), Bokeem Woodbine (Chopper), Michael T. Weiss (Larry (stepdad)),
1996)
An amusingly exploitive "B" movie by writer-director Matthew Bright
(Guncrazy screenwriter) about a white trash family and their abused
teenage daughter, Vanessa Lutz (Reese Witherspoon), who goes on the run
rather than go back to a foster-care shelter when her mother and
stepfather are arrested.
"Freeway" plays with the "Little Red Riding Hood" fairy tale motif to
make it fit into modern-day California and its plethora of dysfunctional
families. Little Red Riding Hood is none other than the resourceful
Reese who is up against a serial killer wolf (Keifer Sutherland as Bob
Wolverton), while going to see a grandma she has never met and doesn't
know that she is coming to see her, who lives north of Reese in
Stockton. Grandma represents an ideal for the troubled girl, who has a
long juvenile arrest record and faces a bleak present, never mind her
bleak future.
The film opens as Vanessa is in her special education class and
pathetically can't read the sentence on the board "The cat drinks
milk."She kisses her black boyfriend Chopper (Bokeem) after class and
when she arrives home the police come into her parents' motel room and
inform her that her mother (Amanda Plummer) has been arrested for
prostitution and possession of drugs. Soon her stepfather (Michael T.
Weiss) is arrested for parole violation because of the drugs in the
apartment. Rather than go back to the children's shelter, she cuffs the
welfare care worker, assigned to her case, by the ankles to the bed,
steals her car, says goodbye to Chopper and gets a gun from him as a
parting gift, and heads for the freeway and grandma's house.
On the freeway her car breaks down. Bob stops to help her and by not
showing her his sharp teeth, he seems to come off as being a nice man.
He tells her the car she's in has had it, and offers her a ride to Los
Angeles, while telling her that he is a counselor for emotionally
disturbed boys and willingly listens to her tale of woe. She likes him
and even tells him that she trusts him completely, telling him her whole
life story. Evidently, no one has ever listened to her before and she
feels good until Bob starts wanting to know about the explicit sex she
had with her stepfather, and she smells a wolf. Bob turns out to be a
serial killer, who has been in the local news, wanted for killing a
number of prostitutes on the freeway, where he is known as the I-5
killer. After he pulls a razor blade on her and cuts her ponytail and
calls her the kind of slut that he must kill, she pulls a gun on him and
when he tells her to let him go but take his money, that no one would
believe her word over his, she gives him one more chance to redeem
himself. But, he refuses to take Jesus as his Lord and personal Savior,
as she requests, so she sprays him with bullets.
She is arrested for attempted murder when she enters the diner all
covered in blood and the diner staff call the police. The disfigured Bob
makes it barely alive to the hospital and fingers her as the culprit,
when the police question him. He becomes the source of parody, as the
doctors piece him back together, whereby he can't talk clearly, looks
grotesque, and has holes in his throat so that when he smokes, the smoke
can be seen coming out of his throat.
She tells the two detectives who question her exactly what happened.
But, of course, they do not believe her. When she calls Chopper, she
finds out that he had been shot by drug dealers. So, she enters a
juvenile detention facility, accepting what happened to her without any
noticeable signs of depression, even laughing at the victim during her
absurd trial. A trial that makes chop-suey of how the establishment
conducts their business, where usually the best story heard in a case
wins the decision. She didn't come up with the best story -- that takes
money and a smart but sleazy lawyer to handle the case.
The prison scenes were over-the-top, trashy, and fun to watch, as the
director did not care a damn about drama or plot. The film shoots for
tongue-in-cheek humor in the interactions between characters and also it
aims to cast some black humor on the social hypocrisies of the welfare,
judicial, and penal systems. As satire, this film is tops. It was
excessive, but it had enough bite in it to do some damage. Reese
Witherspoon's performance was contagious, watching her cut-up,
act-tough, be vulnerable, and drop comic lines with a natural ease, and
all the time, the film had the feel of being noir, even though it was
really satire. It had enough toughness in it to be viewed as a thought
provoking film, when the action cleared and the cartoonish-type of
laughs emanating from the veggie-like characters died down.
The film had a lot of little things going for it, that added up to big
plusses. The film's opening credits had the Grimm fairy tale story of
Little Red Riding Hood depicted in its cartoon drawings. The Brooke
Shield's role of the righteously indignant wife of the killer, was a
satisfying part for "The Blue Lagoon" girl, as she shows how she has
matured as an actress. It should also be noted, that the detective
partners, one white (Dan Hedaya) and the other black (Wolfgang Bodison),
show how prejudicial they can be when investigating a crime. It is not
until after the black officer finds that Reese is a coal-burner (one who
goes out with blacks), that he goes out to the scene of the crime and
investigates the case the way he is supposed to.
Freeway has the look of a crazed fable, as bulky onscreen figures are
made to look less imposing at each impending scene and the vulnerable
ones either die or get stronger just by surviving amidst such violent
chaos.The film draws to its inevitable conclusion- of blood and gore,
despair and muted hope, and the irrelevancy of the 1990s in trendy
California, which can be seen as a failed center-piece for social
change. The film's sordid family scenario, leaves its sensationalized
news stories mockingly imprinted on the airwaves, depicting how sad life
is and how cartoon-like are the players, left to their own vanities,
frolicking in an artificial landscape of alienation and violent
gestures. This is the imperfect teenager fairy tale for the 1990s, for
those living out their pop culture dream without weighing what that
culture means, and where for the young bored-with-life students, reading
and writing cannot replace loud music and drugs.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 8/23/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:42
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Reese Witherspoon, Kiefer Sutherland, Brooke Shields, 
      Amanda Plummer, Dan Hedaya, Wolfgang Bodison, Bokeem Woodbine, 
      Michael T. Weiss
Director: Matthew Bright
Producers: Chris Hanley, Richard Rutowski, Brad Wyman
Screenplay: Matthew Bright
Cinematography: John Thomas
Music: Danny Elfman, Tito Larriva
U.S. Distributor: Republic Pictures
     What happens when you cross The Brothers Grimm with David Lynch, 
and throw in a little Quentin Tarantino for good measure?  The result, 
or something very much like it, can be found in Matthew Bright's 
brilliant, incisive satire, FREEWAY, which updates the children's story 
"Little Red Riding Hood" in new, surprising, and very adult ways.  
Anyone who never appreciated this fable may revise their opinion after 
watching FREEWAY.
     The film works -- and does so manifestly -- because its intentions 
are clearly delineated.  Using black humor, blood, and a pair of 
tremendous performances, FREEWAY hones in on its targets and 
calculatedly skewers them one-by-one.  First up is America's welfare 
system.  Then the judicial system.  Then the penal system.  And, when 
you put all the pieces together, you realize that FREEWAY is making a 
penetrating statement about the general populace's endless fascination 
with the lurid and violent.  And, unlike Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN 
KILLERS, which was torpedoed by interference from the director's ego, 
FREEWAY drives home the point effectively.  This movie is both grimly 
funny and thought-provoking.  
     Reese Witherspoon plays a modern-day, white trash Red Riding Hood 
by the name of Vanessa.  She has what might be termed "domestic 
problems."  Her mother (Amanda Plummer) is a prostitute and her 
stepfather (Michael T. Weiss) is a drug addict.  When the cops bust both 
of them, Vanessa faces another round of foster care.  So, instead, she 
runs off to find her paternal grandmother, who lives in Northern 
California.  Her boyfriend (Bokeem Woodbine) gives her a gun as a going-
away present.  Shortly after she gets on I-5,  her clunker of a car 
breaks down.  A passing motorist by the name of Bob Wolverton (Kiefer 
Sutherland, the wolf -- or Wolverton -- in sheepish clothing) gives her 
a lift.  As they drive north, she starts opening up to him, relating her 
sad life's story.  His intentions are anything but altruistic, however, 
and their little trip leads to a violent off-highway confrontation.  
This critical event takes place well before FREEWAY's halfway point, and 
opens the door for a number of surprising plot developments.
     As incisive as FREEWAY's story is, the film wouldn't be nearly as 
successful without terrific turns by the two leads.  Reese Witherspoon, 
a young actress with a few impressive performances behind her (THE MAN 
IN THE MOON, A FARAWAY PLACE), displays an aptitude for acting naturally 
and believably, no matter how outrageous her circumstances are.  She 
captivates with her nonstop energy, culling our sympathy and enabling us 
to see the world through Vanessa's eyes.  No less effective is Kiefer 
Sutherland, playing a truly creepy villain with a pitch that is perfect 
for this kind of off-kilter motion picture.  There's no doubt that he's 
the big, bad wolf.
     FREEWAY contains several great moments, many of which work equally 
well as social commentary and comedy.  For example, one particular black 
cop (Wolfgang Bodison) is out to get Vanessa until he realizes that her 
boyfriend is black.  Thereafter, he's her staunchest defender.  Then 
there are the supposedly-upright people in this film -- Wolverton, his 
wife (played by Brooke Shields), a prison matron, and others -- all of 
whom hide at least one twisted, dark secret.  This cynical view of human 
nature is what fuels the films of David Lynch and the Coen brothers, and 
it's very much in evidence here in Bright's directorial debut.
     Red Riding Hood references abound, from the opening credits (which 
depict the Grimm story in drawings) and a TV cartoon to one of the 
film's last lines ("what big teeth you have").  In addition to already-
noted differences between the fairy tale and FREEWAY, there's one other 
factor that deserves mentioning.  In this "Little Red Riding Hood", the 
wolf makes one huge mistake -- he picks a girl who certainly doesn't 
need a woodcutter to do her butt-kicking for her.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Kiefer Sutherland; Reese Witherspoon & Bokeem Woodbine
I used to think that The Conversation was the worse film I had ever seen.
Freeway is giving me second thoughts. Freeway is a modern retelling of
Little Red Riding Hood. Only in the nineties, Little Red Riding Hood is a
foul-mouthed juvenile delinquent played by Reese Witherspoon, and the Big
Bad Wolf is a serial killer (Keifer Sutherland). To top that pathetic
premise off -- Reese goes to visit Granny and you'll never guess who's
waiting under the cover's in Granny's bed.
Keifer Sutherland is one of Hollywoods most talented, yet underrated
actors, and Reese Witherspoon is exceptionally talented and will most likely
become a major star. So what are they doing in this movie? After seeing the
end result, undoubtedly they are both asking themselves the same question.
You might be asking yourself why this is such a short review. The answer is
quite simple -- I dont want to waste any more of my time writing or
thinking about this movie than absolutely necessary. I wasted enough of my
time just sitting through it.
Note to Keifer: You wonder why you aren't a bigger star in Hollywood?
Because you keep making movies like this. Note to Reese: You were great in
Fear, what happened this time? Note to both: Don't worry about it too much,
no one saw this movie anyway.
Bottom line -- I'm still shaking my head. Don't waste your time on this
turkey. If you want to see a great Keifer Sutherland movie, go rent
Flatliners or Young Guns. Reese Witherspoon's abundant acting talents are
used to their full potential in Fear, a great thriller. Do yourself a favor
and rent one of these movies -- but stay as far away from Freeway as you
possibly can.
