Title
Review for Miss Julie (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/5ce2185d91dd24d3882568e800799457?OpenDocument
After single handedly crafting the worst film of 1999, the unbearably
heavy handed art house rubbish The Loss of Sexual Innocence, jazzy
auteur Mike Figgis brings his experimental eye to an adaptation of
August Strindberg's Miss Julie.
It's a brilliant play, one which observes naturalistic behavior and
flawed, complex characters without judgment. It's filled with
beautifully written scenes of emotional conviction. Naturally, Figgis is
so hell bent on his radical tinkering with form and content that the
story becomes a muddle of sensual implications taken straight from
fashion magazine perfume ads.
Indeed, he casts former model and current girlfriend Saffron Burrows in
the title role as Julie – a challenge for even the most experienced
actor. Julie slowly breaks down on the evening after her marriage has
fallen to pieces. She will ultimately return to a family structure which
will stifle her, and struggles willfully with her passions and appetites
embodied in the form of a robust servant (Peter Mullan).
Burrows gave sulky, shallow performances in Figgis' Sexual Innocence and
in Renny Harlin's Deep Blue Sea (the audience I was with cheered when
the sharks pursued her with bared teeth.) Her performances in those
films were remarkably similar to her work here. She does wear her hair
in slightly different curls and perhaps uses some blond highlights, but
her emotional range remains the same, haughtily demanding to be waited
on or entertained, occasionally allowing her lips to part for wet kisses
and chafing tongues. Would this be a Figgis film without smutty groping
and breast fondling every ten minutes?
When we first glimpse Miss Julie, she enters the large kitchen space. It
resembles the crumbling theater used in Louis Malle's superior Vanya on
42nd Street. Julie stares at a bird in a cage. Figgis can't resist
hammering the point home by shooting Julie through the bars. After that
image, there's hardly any point to watching the rest of the film, which
is her last gasp of inflicting her will on the macho, belligerent and
self righteous servant, who continually mutters that she on her pedestal
can never understand the lives of those below. She allows herself to be
ravished on her own terms (`kiss my foot'), with the inevitable regret,
guilt and sadness which surely follow. She is, after all, merely `a
fragile woman' full of dew.
If Burrows had a commanding screen presence, some shred of integrity or
glimmer of intellect – Cate Blanchett would have been perfect – one
would feel Strindberg's sense of all too human tragedy which comes hand
in hand with female oppression. Instead, we are presented with Figgis
posturing artistically and, shooting her brooding face in the soft
sunlight, sexually objectifying her.
Figgis has a penchant for hand-held photography on the mobile super-16mm
camera, which makes free use of the space and puts us on the same level
of his characters. This does manage to break through the stodgy barrier
of making a highbrow, affected period film, which all too often
degenerates into costume drama waxwork displays and loses all passion
and vigor.
However, he neglects to make it as `human' as this technique might
imply, still overly fixated on hyperreal, gauzy lighting and formal
devices over content, even making fade out ellipses feel heavy handed.
He's in love with long, adoring close ups of Burrows vacant good looks,
or of Mullen staring at her obsessively. His performance is so rigid he
might as well be wearing a corset.
His most indulgent choice is editing a sex scene from two angles running
parallel in a split framed sequence, which reeks of being experimental
for its own sake and a prelude for Time Code, which tells its story in
four panels simultaneously (one in each corner of the screen.) If Miss
Julie is any indication, it's a device which serves to increase the
artificiality and, thus, the ridiculousness of his scenario.
Mike Figgis is not without prowess or enormous technical skill, and I
admire his adventurous spirit. If only he didn't get high on the fumes
of his own highbrow artistic flatulence, he's become a filmmaker of
serious consideration. Until that time, he remains merely a curious
dilettante.
Director: Mike Figgis
Producer: Mike Figgis, Helen Cruickshank
Writer: Helen Cooper (from the play by August Strindberg)
Starring: Saffron Burrows, Peter Mullan, Maria Doyle Kennedy, Heathcote
Williams
http://www.mgm.com/missjulie/index.html
---
Jeremiah Kipp - kipp@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 United Artists/Moonstone Entertainment
 Director: Mike Figgis
 Writer: Helen Cooper, Mike Figgis, play by August Strindberg
 Cast: Saffron Burrows, Peter Mullan, Maria Doyle Kennedy
   Since conflict is the quintessential aspect of novels, theater
and movies, it makes sense that some of the most intriguing
tales put people of two different worlds into the same room
and watch them try to mesh--inevitably to fail.  Such stories
do not necessarily have the bloodshed endemic to yarns
about people of the same class who battle each other--
Hamlet vs. his uncle; Clytemnestra vs. Agamemnon; Richard
III vs. his own family.  But they can make for absorbing
melodrama.  Consider the two recent examples. In "Mansfield
Park," a girl brought up in poverty is placed into the
eponymous Mansfield Park and is shunned by most of her
fabulously wealthy relatives.  In "Cotton Mary," a woman who
is half Indian, half British, looks with scorn on those who are
full-bloodied East Indians.
   Similarly, August Strindberg's play, "Miss Julie," pits two
self-destructive people against each other in an ambivalent
relationship, both using their partners for their own neurotic
and selfish ends.  The conclusion is inevitably melodramatic. 
But one wonders why Mike Figgis, best known for the
wonderfully imaginative fall-of-grace movie "The Loss and
Sexual Innocence" and the compelling tale of an alcoholic
determined to commit suicide via the bottle, "Leaving Las
Vegas," would dedicate himself to the Strindberg work.  True,
"Julie" and "Vegas" have similar themes, but "Miss Julie"'s
stage origins are so manifest in this production, so restricting
(and yet so necessary to bring out the vigor of the text), that
the project comes across to a movie audience as static. 
Nowadays I suspect that productions of the play are the
domain of college repertory companies, community groups
and of some commercial stages such as those off-off-
Broadway.  While the Figgis version is not marred so much
by a period-piece atmosphere, it is impaired by a
claustrophobic aura.  Most of the action takes place in a
kitchen, and the one outside vista looks like a production
design rather than a natural habitat.  More important, the
story, written by Strindberg in 1884, should not expect to
have much impact on a contemporary audience
notwithstanding the free translation from the Swedish given it
by Helen Cooper.
   Essentially a two-character drama, an extended
conversation between people who are both sympathetic and
off-putting, "Miss Julie" centers on a neurotic bond
established during a festive summer holiday between the
daughter of a wealthy count and a footman who is one of the
count's servants.  While the owner of the estate is away,
Julie takes advantage of the particular holiday in which
servants are encouraged to socialize and dance freely with
their employers to begin her own dance of seduction. 
Under the disapproving eye of the cook, Christine (Maria
Doyle Kennedy), who is the fiance of the footman, Jean
(Peter Mullan), Julie (Saffron Burrows) flirts openly with Jean,
forcing him to dance repeatedly with her.  She thereby
stimulates gossip among the servants about an alleged
mutual attraction and, in one instance, the domestics dance
about singing an obscene ditty about their house mistress. 
Jean, born into poverty-stricken family of ten, has contempt
for his "betters" while he is determined to rise above his
station.  He is intent on persuading Julie to steal her father's
money so that he and Julie and Christine can escape from
the stifling estate and become partners in a hotel around
Lake Como.  For her part Julie, the product of a cold, man-
hating mother, has become incapable of relating to others in
a healthy way and, while striving to keep her independence,
is bent on running away with Jean--whom she considers a
strong male figure.  As Julie and Jean spill out more than
they should about their childhoods, they are forced at one
point to hide, at which time they physically consummate their
desires in a swift, brutal sexual union.  While Jean then
taunts the mistress, calling her a whore, Julie becomes
increasingly suicidal.  The story plays out as a testimonial to
the destruction that can be wrought when impossible dreams
clash with an impervious reality.
   While the performances of the three principals are
satisfactory, with Saffron Burrows alternately weeping,
cajoling, and expressing her anxieties with wide eyes while
the handsome and dignified Peter Mullan drives her on
toward destruction, the movie fails to make Strindberg's dated
play come to life on the screen.  It's not that the subject
matter is obsolete.  Class distinctions are a nasty reality even
in democratic states like the U.S. today and naive, stubborn
maidens are led astray throughout the world every day of the
year.  But the particular way in which the story is translated
to the screen is relatively inert notwithstanding the use of two
handheld 16mm cameras to give the production a grainy
edgy look and the use of a split screen technique during
some of Jean and Julie's most intimate moments.  Nor does
Figgis's rendition contribute much that is new or in any way
superior to the 1972 film of the same name starring Helen
Mirren in the title role.
