Title
Review for Frosh: Nine Months in a Freshman Dorm (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
Filmed and directed by Dan Geller and Dayna Goldfine.
     In the summer of 1990, eighty incoming Stanford University
freshman received a letter informing them of a unique opportunity.
Documentary filmmakers Dan Geller and Dayna Goldfine were planning to
record their all-freshman dorm for the year, and anyone who would feel
uncomfortable with that arrangement was invited to switch to a
different dorm.  None so chose.  The next nine months of their lives
were saved for posterity as FROSH, an attempt to document a year when
pupate human beings become adults.  Unfortunately, it's not
particularly successful.  FROSH captures moments, but due to its overly
large canvas it doesn't capture enough growth.
     FROSH focuses its attention on nine of the eighty 1990-91
residents of Stanford's Trancos House.  Shayne, a white Catholic woman,
struggles to reconcile her religion with her budding feminism.  Cheng,
a first generation Chinese-American, quips about Stanford's liberal
bias while coping with academic difficulties.  Brandi, a middle-class
African-American who admits early on that she's "never really had black
friends," becomes friends with Monique, an African-American with a
very different background.  There's also Nick, an activist who's openly
bisexual; Debbie, a woman from a conservative religious background;
Gerardo, suspected by his dormmates of being gay; Scott, a perceptive
and sharp-witted African-American; and Sam, a conservative white male
who often finds himself at the center of controversy.
     I should preface my comments by stating that I spent three years,
in various capacities, living in freshman dorms at Stanford.  I wasn't
expecting to see anything I'd never seen before; what I was expecting
was a film that highlighted real growing experiences, and allowed
viewers to watch the first tentative steps of kids into adulthood.  A
few such moments in FROSH work extremely well, particularly Shayne's
emotional discussion with a few friends about why she's considering
leaving the Catholic Church.  Another scene highlights Monique
describing her troubled home life, prompting one young man to ask in
amazement, "You mean your mom and dad were never married?"  But there
aren't enough of these moments.  FROSH seems more interested in being a
kind of rapidly edited video yearbook, and like most yearbooks it's
only going to be really significant to those who lived the moments.
     Part of the problem with FROSH is that even the nine-student focus
is too large.  FROSH will uncover an issue in one of their lives, but
doesn't take the time to show us the resolution.  We never learn, for
example, if at the end of the year Shayne is still a Church-going
Catholic; we never learn how Cheng recovers from his disappointing
first-quarter grades.  When it's all said and done, FROSH comes off as
an interesting anthropological footnote, but not a particularly deep or
insightful look at why the freshman year at a residential university is
so significant.
     My primary bone of contention is that in its attempt to keep its
brow relatively high, FROSH almost completely ignores two of the most
challenging issues of the freshman year: romantic relationships and
substance use.  There is one look at a blind date, but little more.  No
one in FROSH forms an in-dorm couple; no one is shown locked out by an
"occupied" roommate; no one is shown breaking up with a high school
sweetheart.  These events are as formative as any late night
discussion, but FROSH adopts a hands-off attitude.  Similarly, while we
witness a dorm party and a few subsequent hangovers, we see no one
dealing with the pressures to drink, no one getting stoned for the
first time.  Perhaps out of fear of scaring off their subjects, Geller
and Goldfine have excised most material parents wouldn't want to know.
     FROSH does a nice job of capturing freshman in all their bombast
and naivete.  In one scene, a professor tells Debbie as she attempts to
describe a term paper topic, "You're babbling"; in another, one
dormmate asks Shayne, "If there was no, like, racism or sexism, what
would you talk about?"  Where it comes up short is as an examination of
how much an individual can change in these nine pivotal months.  Trust
me ... I was there.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, let me clear up a little confusion.  There are now two
movies in release in the US with almost the same names: FRESH and
FROSH.  The movie I saw is a documentary about the lives of a dozen
freshmen in a dorm at Stanford.  It is called FROSH and not FRESH
(which is another of the life in the 'hood shows).  Moreover, FROSH has
the official subtitle of NINE MONTHS IN A FRESHMAN DORM.  Clearly, it
has the unofficial title of Academic Freedom Today--Believe and Say
Anything You Want Provided It Is Official Politically Correct Dogma,
but more on that latter.
     In my opinion, documentaries are one of the highest cinematic art
forms.  They cover a wide spectrum of beliefs from TRIUMPH OF THE WILL
to ROGER AND ME.  The purpose of a documentary is to allow you to
vicariously live in another world, but in the case of a documentary, it
is a real world--full of warts, bad grammar, and bad hair days.  A
documentary, if it is good, will frequently enrage you.  At a minimum,
it should make you think.  Three of my absolute favorite movies I have
ever seen are documentaries: 28 UP, 35 UP, and SHERMAN'S MARCH.  This
documentary, although poorly made and constructed, nevertheless, is a
full fledged descendent of this art form for it did enrage me, and it
certainly made me think.
     The directing, cinematography, and just about everything in the
production of this documentary was done by Daniel Geller and Danya
Goldfine.  As far as the technical merits of the show, it was
amateurish in parts.  The camera was held fairly steady, but only one
camera was used and hence there was too much panning and zooming.  The
colors were hopelessly faded.  They needed a better camera, better
processing or something.  The editing was a little loose and although
scenes had labels, they were pretty arbitrary and overall the
documentary was not well organized and constructed.
     The reason to see this movie has nothing to do with the above
technical aspects.  You want to see it for the content.  In the rest of
the review I will cover some of the high points to give you a flavor.
     It starts and ends with the speech given to the freshmen on their
first day at the school.  They are told always to respect each other's
opinions no matter if it differs from their own and that they will
encounter a wide range of differing opinions while they are at
Stanford.  Based on what was presented in the documentary, the previous
statement was a bold face lie.  We find kids who almost all think
exactly alike, total PC.  Those who have even mildly differing opinions
are put down until they give up and agree with the official norm.  The
parallels with this and the book "1984" are chilling.
     We learn that Aristotle was evil.  He was a "sexist pig" and that
if he was black, they would not have been able to study him.  The males
are constantly put down by the women.  Ditto the whites by the blacks.
Interracial dating is also put down.
     Two people go to church.  We learn in detail from one how sexist
the church is and how she is going to stop going soon.  The other still
believes in God, but he is constantly ridiculed by his peers until he
finally relents and says, Okay, okay, you people are right, what can I
say?
     What do these kids believe in?  Very little.  One says that he has
rejected religion as has everyone he knows, and that he thinks
everyone's philosophy these days is "enjoy yourself and do as little as
possible to hurt others."  The only consistent value they have seems to
be heavy drinking contests, some dope smoking, or lots of hanging
around the dorm arguing what is PC and what isn't.  I should point out
that the term politically correct is never mentioned explicitly in the
movie, but the philosophy is all over the place.
     One girl talks about how certain thoughts and speech "must be
suppressed."  Her friend does muse aloud about who is going to make
that determination.  Reading the constitution, especially the Bill of
Rights, does not appear to be part of the curriculum.
     Studying is not high on the priority list for them.  One girl on a
financial scholarship keeps getting her grades reduced because she
forgets to turn in her homework.  She is also the chief motor mouth in
the dorm.  Walking over and turning in papers are not high on her
personal priority queue.
     On the surface the kids seem bonded to each other, but if you
think about it for a minute you realize that there are almost no scenes
where they do any actions that show they really care for each other.
On the other hand, when they go home for Christmas break and meet their
parents, with the exception of the one religious boy, they seemed
totally unbonded to their parents.
     One girl tells her mom she is switching majors to feminist studies
and will be going to Washington to take a job as a political activist
for minimal pay after college.  Her mom advises she think about her
future and says she knows of "no 52-year-old hippies".  The girl thinks
her mom is terminally stupid for telling her this.
     The movie has no MPAA rating.  For the drug use and the frequent
use of F word, I would assume it would be rated R, but who knows.  I
would take my teenager to see it and discuss it with him or her about
it afterwards.  I rate this a MUST SEE for anyone with kids anywhere
near or at college age.  I recommend it to everyone and give it ***.
It runs a bit too long at 1:33.  Finally, I would love to see a sequel
with the same people in their first real job in life.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 10, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
