Title
Review for White Man's Burden (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
     What would happen if race roles in America were reversed?  What if
blacks had all the power, and whites had to fight prejudice and racism at
every turn?  Such is the setting of writer/director Desmond Nakano's
brilliant new film, WHITE MAN'S BURDEN.
     The movie is a tightly constructed drama about Louis Pinnock (John
Travolta), a reliable blue collar man who works in a factory owned by
high-society elitist Thaddeus Thomas (Harry Belafonte).  At home, Louis
has to deal with a rough neighborhood, gang violence, and trying to
provide for his wife (Kelly Lynch) and two kids.
     Just when things are looking up for the Pinnocks, Louis is suddenly
fired from his job, beaten by police after "fitting the description," and
then evicted from his home.  Desperate, he tries to get Thaddeus to hear
his case for reinstatement.  When he won't listen, Louis kidnaps him, and
the story *really* starts to take off.
     What follows is a compelling, thought-provoking study of racism and
the frightening economic and societal realities it can create.  Nakano's
script is masterful at challenging every preconceived notion we have, and
Oscar-deserving performances by Travolta and Belafonte really bring his
words to life.  The pair have an incredible chemistry on screen, as
Travolta finally shakes his slick, pompous stereotyping for a much meatier
part.  The comic relief is very well-done, also, and the film never
wallows into the hopeless despair that other "victim of circumstance"
stories tend to do.
     I was initially skeptical that WHITE MAN'S BURDEN would be any good,
but Nakano's unique vision proved me very wrong.  While he stops a little
short on pushing the film to its limit, it's still a nearly flawless
example of how modern cinema ought to be done, unadulterated by Hollywood
glitz and driving its message home with a hammer.
     I continue to think about one of Thaddeus's biting remarks early in
the film, where he implies that whites are genetically inferior and
"beyond being helped."  I also think about the four rowdy skinhead punks
(who somehow managed to get passes) sitting behind me, ashamed that the
message was lost on these cretins.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Ben Hoffman
     About twenty minutes into the movie it became clear what point
writer/director Desmond Nakano wished to make:  What if black people
changed places with white?  What if everything were reversed and the
blacks owned the factories, that racist black cops beat up whites as
the white police did with Rodney King?   What if all the indignities
blacks frequently suffer at the hands of many whites were reversed?
     Once having gotten that understanding and, because I have always
been a fighter for racial and religious equality, I did not need a
movie to bring it into focus for me.   More importantly, would those
who are racist go see such a movie or would word of mouth tell them the
film is heavy-handed and then not go see it?  I'm inclined to think
that would be the case ... which is a pity.
     Director Nakano says that if "white Man's Burden" can jar viewers
out of their usual polarized complacency and provoke genuine dialogue
on race, then it will have succeeded in its intent.  This film is very
unlikely to accomplish that, however honorable and worthy its
intentions.
     Louis (John Travolta) works in a factory where all the employees
are white, the one exception being the executive who runs the place.
Louis is a hard worker; he does more than is expected.  When a package
has to be delivered to the factory's owner, Thaddeus Thomas (Harry
Belafonte), he volunteers to do it.  Arriving at the gated entrance to
the estate, the maid, via phone, tells him to bring the package around
to the side of the house.
     Inside the house, the family and friends, all elegantly attired,
and served by a white maid, are departing after dinner.  This is one
very rich, high society family.   As Louis is standing, package in
hand, waiting for someone to come and accept it, Thomas' wife has just
finished with her shower and is taking off her towel while standing at
an open window, at which point Thomas sees Louis and assumes he is a
Peeping Tom.  When the maid had told Louis to go to the side of the
house, she meant the other side.
     The package is accepted by the maid.  Louis, next day, approaches
his black manager and asks if he could become a foreman as the current
foreman is leaving, and "as you know, I have been a hard worker for
nine years here."  Instead, he is fired.  The explanation which Louis
ekes out is that the boss does not want Peeping Toms employed at his
plant.
     Louis is desperate.  He has not ever earned enough to support his
wife and two children and now he is being canned.  In the evening, in
despair, he goes for a walk.  He sits at the curb.  A police car with two
black policemen jump out of their car and command him to raise his
hands.  When he asks what that is all about they begin to club him even
while he is lying on the ground covering his bloody head with his
hands.  (A robbery had recently occurred and the description of the
robber fit Louis.)  [All whites look alike?]  When the police discover
he is not the robber, they say "Sorry about that" and take off in their
patrol car.
     Attempts by Louis to meet with Mr. Thomas and explain meets with
rejection.  Mr. Thomas does not want to talk with him. At this point,
the desperate Louis points a gun at Mr. Thomas in order to force him to
listen  and get his job back.  What follows is a kidnapping.
     It is quite obvious that the movie has a real, and important story
to tell but I do not think this film is the one to do it.
     Tom Bower plays Louis' homeless friend who does not want to get
involved with the kidnaping.  Kelly Lynch has the role of Louis' wife
trying to make ends meet.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Black is white and white is black.  It's a clever gimmick, but,
ultimately, as depicted in WHITE MAN'S BURDEN, that's all it is.  Once
the premise is set, writer/director Desmond Nakano doesn't know what to
do with it.  Added to that is the consideration that the basic story was
developed in a screenplay written thirty years ago, when the entire
concept would have seemed a lot more radical and original.  Nowadays,
seeing a prosperous black man isn't at all unusual.  Likewise, it
doesn't take much searching to uncover underprivileged whites.
     In order to make it clear what's going on--that the blacks are
the "haves" and the whites are the "have nots"--WHITE MAN'S BURDEN
falls into a pattern of gross stereotyping and oversimplification.
Indeed, without painting characters and situations in the broadest
possible manner, there wouldn't be a concrete way to recognize the role
reversal.  Yet it's this reliance upon archetypes and cliches that
undercuts the film's message.  Something a little more subtle is needed
than a group of black cops beating a white man with night sticks.
     The situation set forth in WHITE MAN'S BURDEN naturally raises a
lot of background questions, none of which are answered.  Are whites a
racial minority, or have they simply been reduced to the lowest rung on
the economic ladder (a sort of South Africa in reverse)?  Were whites
once slaves and blacks plantation owners?  What is the country's
political structure like?  What color is the indigenous population of
Africa?  When you enter the Twilight Zone of an alternate reality, these
are the kinds of things people are interested in, yet this film
sidesteps them all.
     There isn't much of a story in WHITE MAN'S BURDEN.  John Travolta,
virtually duplicating his PULP FICTION personae, decides to kidnap black
CEO Thaddeus Thomas (Harry Belafonte).  Travolta's Louis Pinnock, who
used to work for Thaddeus' candy-making company, was fired as a result
of a mistake by his bosses.  So, in order to pay the rent and keep his
family together, Louis decides to take matters into his own hands by
demanding his lost wages from the man at the top of the corporate heap.
     The idea of a relationship developing between a kidnapper and his
victim is nothing new, and not much of interest is added here.
Ultimately, however, in WHITE MAN'S BURDEN, the race reversal gimmick
overshadows everything.  The director is so busy pointing to skin color
that he loses sight of the characters under the pigmentation.  There's
nothing compelling about either of the leads.  They never connect with
each other or the audience.  Sure, there are some nice touches, like the
scene where Louis teaches Thaddeus the best way to put salt on his
French fries, but there aren't enough moments like that.  It often seems
that there's a good story trying to break free, but WHITE MAN'S BURDEN
is so loaded down by contrivances and the need to get its message across
that it smothers creativity.
     After playing three similar characters in a row (see PULP FICTION
and GET SHORTY), Travolta can probably do this kind of role in his
sleep.  And, of everything the actor has accomplished since Quentin
Tarantino brought him back into the spotlight, this is the least
impressive of his performances.  Harry Belafonte, who has been largely
absent from the screen for the better part of two decades, has chosen an
odd movie for a comeback attempt.  He's okay here, but this isn't the
kind of part that will earn him raves.
     The plot of WHITE MAN'S BURDEN is capable of holding an audience's
attention for most of its running time.  Based on the premise, however,
viewers have a right to expect more than they get.  Skin color swapping
and facile assumptions about the relationship between race and economics
are used more as cheap plot devices than as a basis for a probing
examination of real issues.  While it's the film makers' task to form
something solid and meaningful out of their alternate reality, in this
case, the burden appears to have been too great.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
