Title
Review for Dead Zone, The (1983)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mike Merrin
"The Dead Zone" is an interesting film in David Cronenberg's career
because it seems to have opened up a new avenue for him in his
work. With this adaptation of Stephen King's best novel, he invented a
new genre, which I can only describe as Romantic Tragic Horror. Other
film makers have dabbled in this - Roeg's "Don't Look Now" and
DePalma's "Carrie" are similar - but Cronenberg developed it in a
trilogy of films which become increasingly emotional in their
impact. "The Fly" is perhaps the first gore-film which is primarily a
love story, and "Dead Ringers" achieves an emotional wipe-out that is
only matched in recent years by Lars Von Trier's "Breaking the Waves".
At the centre of "The Dead Zone" is the question of what you would do
if you lost five years of your life. In the case of Johnny Smith,
played to perfection by Christopher Walken, he wakes up to find his
life has disintegrated, and in trying to build a new one he is
constantly hindered by a "second sight" that seems to be connected to
his coma. There is a big ellipsis here, because the audience is never
told precisely how and why this power developed. Fortunately, Walken
is convincing enough to get around this, and we come to accept it as
part of his illness, much as we come to accept Marilyn Chambers'
phallic appendage in "Rabid", or Samantha Eggar's children of rage in
"The Brood".
Christopher Walken has always had a slightly distracted quality that
serves him well in this role.  It also allows him to underplay some
incredibly emotional moments, which ironically heightens their
impact. Time and again, Cronenberg pulls off scenes that in other
hands would have become grossly sentimental. He seems to have enjoyed
having a hero who is uncompromisingly good - it's a big development
from "Scanners" where the good-evil conflict was fatally weakened by
the awful performance of Stephen Lack. Perhaps Cronenberg had simply
got better with actors - there are no bad performances in this film,
and actors like Herbert Lom and Anthony Zerbe, both prone to hamming
it up, are restrained and very effective.
The love story in the film is effectively played down, with a
beautiful "if only" scene when Brooke Adams comes to visit Johnny
after he learns to walk again. There are no big confrontation scenes
between Adams and Walken, just quiet resignation and sadness; the
final scene with Adams holding Walken's dead body is very touching,
again because it is underplayed, and speaks for itself. In "The Fly",
the romance would be put at the heart of the film, and there are big
emotional scenes that work very well, but there's nothing as poignant
as the scene before the crash, when Johnny refuses to stay the night.
The film tends to be rather episodic, as is the book, and after the
crash and the recovery, it focuses on the hunt for the Castle Rock
killer. Again, Cronenberg gets his points across with a subtlety that
other directors could learn from. We see a murder in brief, simple
details; the blow to the head, the undressing and the scissors coming
down. Quick and shocking, it's a great bit of film-making, as is the
later suicide of the killer. The actual death is, again, not shown,
but we see the horrific aftermath, in the only gratuitous gore in the
whole film. The suicide is almost like Cronenberg apologising to his
fans, and offering them some gory stuff, albeit very briefly.
Virtually all of the film is seen from the perspective of Johnny
Smith, which is very effective.  There is then a bizarre, and
completely unnecessary, cutaway to a scene where the crooked
politician, Greg Stillson, is blackmailing a newspaper editor. It gets
a point across about Stillson's corrupt ways, but we already knew
about that from a conversation between Walken and Anthony Zerbe. It
would have been better for Johnny to have had a flash of this
blackmailing, perhaps after touching the badge that he's given by
Stillson at Zerbe's house. As it is, it disrupts the flow of the
second half of the film. Two things hold it together; the force of
Walken's performance, and the great caricature of a corrupt politico
by Martin Sheen. Sheen manages to make us understand why Stillson is
so popular, and why he's so dangerous.
By the end of the film, Johnny has died heroically, and has found a
reason for his "gift", which he decides is not a curse but a
blessing. Except, of course, that it has led him to his inevitable
death with the inexorable force of a classic tragedy. In a way,
though, Johnny has been dead ever since the night of the crash, and he
seems to welcome death as a release from the burden of knowledge and
responsibility.
I think this is a very good film, although at the time, it seemed a
real disappointment. After the glory of "Videodrome" and its
extraordinary images and ideas, I thought Cronenberg had sold out by
filming a King story. This was at the time when everyone and his wife
was making films based on Stephen King's stories. The worst, by a long
chalk, was "Firestarter", but I think "The Dead Zone" has turned out
to be the best of that cycle.  It doesn't stick rigidly to King's
story, but it respects it and turns it into something very
moving. Looking at the film with the benefit of hindsight, it seems
clear that this was the film in which Cronenberg began reaching for
something that would later serve him well. I think he wanted to be
more than just a clever director with a talent for icky special
effects. In "The Dead Zone" he goes all out for emotion, and he
succeeds pretty well. This success was built upon by "The Fly", where
all the gore couldn't disguise that he was making his own "Love
Story", and ultimately by "Dead Ringers" where the gore was almost
non-existent and the focus was completely on the characters and the
impossibility of love ever working out the way it's meant to.
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"

Author
Chris Loar
Starring Christopher Walken (Johnny Smith), Brooke Adams (Sarah
Bracknell), Tom Skerritt (Sheriff Bannerman), Herbert Lom (Dr.
Sam Weizak), Anthony Zerbe (Roger Stuart), Colleen Dewhurst
(Henrietta Dodd), Martin Sheen (Greg Stillson)
_The Dead Zone_ is an entertaining bit of fluff from the normally
rather more controversial David Cronenberg.  It's taken from a novel
by Stephen King, but it's not the King novel I'd have suggested that
Cronenberg direct; he could have done much more with something a
bit more visceral -- _Salem's Lot_, perhaps.  From what I remember
of it, King's novel is pretty low-key, an effort at something more
internal and psychological; Cronenberg, on the other hand, is anything
but low-key, and the ill-conceived match here yields a film that,
while not exactly bad, isn't terribly compelling, either.
The story is rather faithful to the novel, and revolves around Johnny
Smith (Christopher Walken) who, following a serious injury, spends five
years in a coma and emerges with psychic powers -- the ability to see
the future.  Unfortunately, Johnny doesn't get to see any of the good
stuff that might happen -- he only sees tragedy, impending doom, death,
despair, catastrophe -- that sort of thing.  Johnny, not surprisingly,
isn't entirely happy about all this, and since his visions are
intensified by human contact, he becomes increasingly reclusive and
antisocial, hoping to rid himself of the agony of everyone's eventual
death.  He's is brought partially out of his shell by a young man who
he's hired to tutor; and, before long, he's pried out the rest of the
way by a premonition of world war -- a war that might be brought about
by a Perot-esque politician, Greg Stillson (Martin Sheen).  Johnny takes
decisive action for perhaps the first time in his life, and ends up (I
don't think I'm giving away too much here) saving the world, quite
literally.
_The Dead Zone_ is, as I mentioned, a bit of a stretch for Cronenberg;
it's not especially gory and it's not particularly provocative.  There's
no sign of Cronenberg's usual distortions and transformations of the
human body, and it's visually uninspired -- just another Hollywood
knockoff of a Stephen King novel, when it comes down to it.  There's
nothing especially wrong with that, of course, and Cronenberg does it
as well as anyone; _Dead Zone_ is a competent thriller with a few
frightening moments.
But no one involved in the production is at their peak.  Christopher   
Walken
is convincingly passive when he needs to be, and he manages to look
appropriately twitchy when he's in the throes of one of his "episodes,"
but he hasn't yet developed that signature creepyness that makes him so
much fun to watch in films like _True Romance_ and _Last Man Standing_.
Martin Sheen is, of course, convincingly charismatic, but he's never   
quite
as terrifying as he needs to be.  And cinematographer Mark Irwin (fresh
from _Videodrome_ himself) doesn't seem to have any ideas to spruce   
things
up; there are a few nicely claustrophobic shots, but nothing remarkable.
It's a film to see if you love Stephen King, or are intent on seeing
Cronenberg's entire body of work, or get a special charge out of stories
about clairvoyants.  Otherwise, you can safely give it a miss.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Works of Stephen King are the clearest examples of good
literature being basis for bad or mediocre movies. Most
popular and influential contemporary horror writer in
America had seen almost all of his works adapted either for
films or for television. But in most cases, all those works
were mediocre, disappointing at best, or sometimes even
downright awful. Not even the talents of reputed directors
like Carpenter could save King's work. One of those talents
was David Cronenberg, Canadian director who had made
reputation with his inventive, yet disturbing and extremely
gory horrors in 1970s and early 1980s. THE DEAD ZONE, his
1983 adaptation of Stephen King's novel represents one of
his first departure from the horror genre.
The plot revolves around Johnny Smith (played by Christopher
Walken), mild- mannered English teacher that lives a normal
life and is just to be married to his beautiful girlfriend
Sarah (played by Brooke Adams). His life is shattered to
pieces when he becomes a victim of a terrible traffic
accident. Awaken from coma after five years, he finds that
he had lost his job, girlfriend and ability to walk without
a limp. But he gained something else in return - psychic
ability to have visions about someone's past and future. At
first it looks like a gift, but Johnny soon realizes that
all his visions concern death, violence, pain and misery.
Johnny shields himself from world, unsuccessfully trying to
get his old life back as a home tutor. In the meantime, Greg
Stillson (played by Martin Sheen), ambitious politician,
shows no scruples in his unstoppable campaign for U.S.
Senate.
On the surface, THE DEAD ZONE looks like a very good film,
one of the better Stephen King's adaptations. The story is
interesting, pace is good and Cronenberg is this time more
interested in characters and settings than blood or gore.
The atmosphere is also fine, with a clear contrast between
snowy, fairytale American Northeast and dark secrets that
lie within their inhabitants (the exception is sometimes too
monotonous musical score by Michael Kamen). Unfortunately,
what this film lack is coherence. Instead of clear plot we
have whole bunch of subplots patched together. The result
looks like a multi-part mini-series being edited into
feature film. The subplot that had the potential to be most
intriguing comes too late - somewhere in the last third of
the film. Until then viewer had been exposed to many
interesting storylines, all of them being dealt adequately,
but not enough to gather our attention. Interesting
characters, played by small army of very capable actors,
come and go without an apparent reason. One of those
storylines, for examples, is subplot dealing with serial
killer - its implausible, yet on the other hand predictable
resolution is probably the weakest part of the film; it also
provided some really gratutitous nudity and violence.
The actors in this film are rather good. Christopher Walken,
one of the most prolific character actors in contemporary
American cinema, is here in rare opportunity to play not
only the lead, but a good guy too. His minimalistic approach
is perfect for the role of the normal man who is constantly
tormened, first by the loss of his previous life, than by
the powers that force him to abandon human contact, and,
finally, with the greatest responsibility someone has to
imagine. His talent sometimes helps us to forget some of the
really dreadful lines provided by not too inspired
screenwriter Jeffrey Boam. On the other side is Martin Sheen
that sometimes goes too far playing the role of egomaniac
without scruples. Tom Skerrit as Sheriff Bannerman is good,
but he spends too little time on screen. Same is with
Herbert Lom as Doctor Weizak, who is very impressive and who
happens to deliver the most effective dialogue in the movie.
With an impressive atmosphere, good acting and some rather
interesting issues raised in the last segment, THE DEAD ZONE
still remains very good film. Unfortunately, it also leaves
the viewer with the impression that it could have been much
better. But, considering the really bad record with Stephen
King's adaptations, sometimes we must satisfy ourselves with
the less than stellar material.
(Special note to x-philes: William B. Davis, who later
became household name with his portrayal of Cigarette
Smoking Man in THE X-FILES, could be seen in this film in a
small role of ambulance driver.)
