Title
Review for Super Mario Bros. (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mathew Tschirgi
Movies have been based on novels for a while.  Even old TV-shows and comic 
books.  But only recently have movies been based on video games.  The 
following are short reviews of some recent movies based on video games.
Enjoy.  Send any comments/critiques/flames to magus@mindspring.com (me).
Enjoy!!
SUPER MARIO BROS.: THE MOVIE (1994)
Starring: Dennis Hopper and John Leguizamo
This movie is based off the wildly popular video-game series of the same name. 
 Before this film, the game had a few spin-off cartoons- which were OK.  But 
the idea of doing a movie is insane.  It should have been animated, if it 
should have been done at all.  Instead the people do the best they can with a 
talented cast.  Yet it still fails.
The plot is completely different from the game's plot- I'm not complaining 
about that.  The story involves the Mario Bros. having a plumbing business in 
Brooklyn and having to compete with a rival company.  Eventually they find a 
construction site by their nemesis, which happens to be enviromentally 
un-safe.  So, due to Luigi's (John Leguizamo) girlfriend - Princess Daisy - 
they go and investigate.  They get transported to a Blade Runner-esque world 
lead by King Koopa (Dennis Hopper).  Somehow a plot dealing with all the 
dinosaurs being mutated and transported to an alternate futuristic mega-city 
jumbles in.  The plot is fine- better than the movie deserves.
The acting is OK.  This seems to be more of a visual film.  The special 
effects are good, especially on the robotic Yoshi.  However the film drags and 
is no fun.  And it leaves itself open to a sequel, which probably won't ever 
be made.  This movie begins sort of promising, but ends up leaving a weird 
taste in your mouth.  So if you want to watch a sort of odd movie starring the 
excellent Dennis Hopper, then watch SUPER MARIO BROS.: THE MOVIE.  You could 
do worse.  But you could definitely do better...
*1/2 out of ****.
STREET FIGHTER: THE MOVIE (1995)
Starring: Raul Julia and Jean Claude Van-Damme
This movie was based off of a series of never ending sequels to a game called 
Street Fighter 2.  It has all the characters from the game in a reasonable 
plot.  It is more like a "movie" than it should be.  Yes, it's watchable.  
Raul Julia does a good job, considering this was his final film.  While the 
game had non-stop fighting sequences, this movie is a hodge-podge of action 
scenes and flashy sets and costumes while trying to show off a plot at the 
same time.  Does it work?  Sort of...
The plot involves the evil Shadowloo Organization run by M. Bison (Raul 
Julia).  Guile (Jean Claude Van-Damme) takes his troops to attack Bison's main 
base in an attempt to liberate the innocent villages he has taken over.  In a 
short amount of time, the movie introduces several characters well.  It 
catches your attention.  But it ultimately seems like a showcase for fans of 
the game so you can point out things like "There's Chun Li!!" or "Look at that 
Fire-Ball Ryu did at Vega".  It hits the bases by presenting the characters in 
a plot with good sets, but goes no further.
This movie needed more action in the first place.  The action scenes that are 
here are short and not very exciting.  If you like light-hearted action 
flicks, or if you liked the game, watch this one.  It is even worth watching 
if you want to see Raul Julia's last performance, or if you can't get enough 
of Van Damme.  Other than that, you could find better action flicks.
** out of ****.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Bob Hoskins, John Leguizamo, Dennis Hopper, 
           Samantha Mathis, Fisher Stevens, Richard Edson
Directors:  Rocky Morton and Annabel Jankel
Producers:  Jake Eberts and Roland Joffe
Screenplay:  Parker Bennett, Terry Runte, and Ed Solomon
Music:  Alan Silvestri
Released by Hollywood Pictures
     65 million years ago, when an asteroid crashed into the Earth and
obliterated the dinosaurs, a parallel dimension was created in which
dinosaurs evolved into the dominant creature.  Now, millennia later,
King Koopa (Dennis Hopper) of Dinohatten wants to fuse the two
dimensions together so that he can expand his domain (and increase the
food supply).  There are two elements necessary to his plan:  a small
chip of the asteroid broken off upon impact and Princess Daisy
(Samantha Mathis), who lives in the other dimension and,
coincidentally, wears the asteroid chip as a necklace.  Koopa sends his
incompetent cousins Iggy (Fisher Stevens) and Spike (Richard Edson)
through the bridge between worlds to capture Daisy, who is in the
process of falling for Luigi Mario (John Leguizamo), an apprentice
plumber.  When, after numerous mistakes, Iggy and Spike finally capture
her and take her back to their dimension, Luigi and his brother Mario
Mario (Bob Hoskins) go to her rescue.
     Describing the story of SUPER MARIO BROTHERS is a difficult chore,
considering how little intelligible plot there is.  I suppose it's only
natural to expect this, considering the source material for the movie.
As we all know, arcade-style diversions are not known for strong,
original storylines or well-developed characters.  In that sense, this
film is worthy of its inspiration.
     The fun of playing the video game is that you're involved--you
control what the little figure on the screen does.  With the movie, on
the other hand, you're a bystander, sitting in a seat watching a bunch
of actors run around getting absolutely nothing done and speaking
dialogue that could have been written by a precocious five-year old.
Following an unnecessarily long opening sequence (which is actually the
best part of the movie), SUPER MARIO BROTHERS is ninety-odd minutes of
pointless action sequences which serve little purpose other than to
keep the motion picture faithful to the spirit of the game.  In doing
so, however, they commit the cardinal sin of boring the audience.  With
no genuine sense of danger, there's no excitement.
     Some interesting casting choices were made.  Bob Hoskins, who
suddenly appears willing to lend his respected name to ventures of
dubious quality, gives a solid-if-unspectacular performance as the
older of the Mario brothers.  John Leguizamo, on the other hand, is not
good; earnestness doesn't compensate for lack of ability.  Samantha
Mathis, who has shown her skill in films such as PUMP UP THE VOLUME and
THIS IS MY LIFE, plays an appealing, if somewhat gawky, college-aged
princess.  Dennis Hopper is disappointing.  His role as King Koopa
cries out for an over-the-top performance but, for some inexplicable
reason, Hopper plays him straight, creating a dull and uncharismatic
villain.  This guy is so boring that we find it difficult to root
against him--that is, when we can unravel enough of the murky plot to
figure out why we're not supposed to like him.
     Admittedly, the visual effects are nice, but it's a poor movie
these days that can't have that said about it.  There isn't anything
new or revolutionary here.  Back in 1979, STAR TREK:  THE MOTION
PICTURE proved that special effects alone, no matter how impressive,
cannot sustain the interest of an audience.  What was true then remains
so today.  SUPER MARIO BROTHERS is all glitz and no substance, and
makes for a pretty poor time at the movies.  If you crave excitement
and action, see CLIFFHANGER.
     Kids will probably love this film but, to be frank, most children
aren't that discriminating (apologies to the few who are).  There's
nothing in the film that's reprehensible (although some may find the
concept of a one-hundred-five-minute commercial for a game offensive
in itself), but I find it hard to believe that many adults accompanying
their youngsters will be entertained.
     In general, about the best recommendation I can come up with
regarding this movie is to turn on the Nintendo and play a game
yourself.  You'll have more fun, spend less money, and it will be over
a whole lot faster.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Baumgarten
     Kiddie films are doomed to be dismissed by us professional film
critics almost regardless of how good they actually are.  And because
it's so easy to categorize a kiddie film as something that couldn't
possibly be worth seeing -- regardless of what the critics say -- a
vicious circle is set up: because you don't see it, you don't recommend
it to your friends, who themselves haven't seen and recommended it to
you.  So I expect that no one but eleven-year-old boys will wind up
seeing this summer's first big-budget kiddie film, SUPER MARIO BROS.
     As it happens, I'm entirely undiscriminating when it comes to
films that might, in some way, prove entertaining.  After all, I"m a
horror buff, and I've learned to sit through dozens of lousy horror
films on the off-chance that one of them might prove worth watching.
This is the "panning-for-gold" theory of movie-going, a technique
responsible for the success of an appalling number of truly awful
films.  How otherwise can we understand the success of the obviously
lousy film SLIVER, if not because people assume it will be just like
BASIC INSTINCT and so probably worth taking a chance on?  When it comes
to Hollywood films, far too many of us are willing to take our chances,
critics be damned.
     Yet whereas most people are willing to take a chance on a film
that's similar to one they've seen before, they're resolutely unwilling
to consider one that doesn't seem "suitable."  We want the "right" kind
of action, violence, sex, and story lines, so while we warmly embrace
insanely violent and graphic films like TOTAL RECALL and soft-core
exploitation films like BASIC INSTINCT, we'd never go see a really good
horror film.  And while CLIFFHANGER opened to a $20+ million box office
its first weekend, SUPER MARIO BROS. managed only $8 million, much of
which I suspect was tendered in nickels and dimes from smashed piggy
banks and horded allowances.
     But the eleven-year-olds have the right idea -- sometimes it's
best to be a little undiscriminating and take a chance on a movie that
might prove entertaining in a thoroughly unpredictable way.  As SUPER
MARIO BROS. does, consistently, with good humor, intelligence and wit.
It is as well-made, thoughtful, and respectful of its audience's
intelligence as CLIFFHANGER and SLIVER are mechanically assembled and
insulting -- and yet it is, first and foremost, a film for
eleven-year-olds.
     Quite a trick, and one rarely seen in the world of live-action
kiddie films.  But it's not as unusual as you might think: after all,
it's only recently that Disney has been making (and, more important,
marketing) their cartoons for an adult audience.  Before THE LITTLE
MERMAID, only animation fanatics suggested a trip to the cinema to see
SLEEPING BEAUTY or DUMBO; yet today no adult would bat an eye at such a
suggestion, and truth be told, most of us over the age of eleven await
the next Disney cartoon almost as eagerly as those who still get carded
at lemonade stands.
     That no one but the Nintendo-set was eagerly awaiting SUPER MARIO
BROS. made it all the more amazing to find that a silly, sloppy, poorly
made kiddie film was nowhere to be found.  In its place is a
well-directed and -edited film, featuring a top-drawer score by Alan
Silvestri; the best production design since BATMAN; enough special
effects to keep any eleven-year-old's (or even thirty-year-old's)
attention; and a truly goofy story line that's backed up with enough
Bullwinkle-style humor to keep everyone smiling.
     The story has little to do with the film's video game namesake;
although the instantly recognizable name reportedly cost the filmmakers
$2 million, it's obvious that the license was picked up purely for
marketing reasons.  The "Super Mario" name is enough of a hook to
attract attention and draw in the film's target audience, but beyond
that it doesn't play an important role in the film.  (In fact, Bob
Hoskins -- who plays Mario Mario -- claims not to have known what Super
Mario Bros. was before one of his children pointed to a squat,
mustachioed animated character jumping around on his television screen
and exclaimed "Dad!  That's you!".)  It's probably just as well, given
how limiting such a literal translation would be; instead, the
filmmakers felt free enough to devise their own story, and to a great
extent, their own world.  And it's this that makes SUPER MARIO BROS.
so successful and such a consistent joy to watch.
     Let me run through a few of the things I liked a whole lot about
this film.  First and foremost, the storyline has a certain resonance
for me.  It starts with a short prologue and the tag line "Brooklyn --
65 Million Years Ago"; in no time at all we've heard about the meteor
that crashed to earth and caused it to split into two dimensions: one
in which the dinosaurs became extinct and man eventually evolved to
take their place as rulers of the world; and another where the
dinosaurs themselves evolved into human-like form and run their own
slightly off-kilter society.  As a long-time resident of Brooklyn, I
found this to be entirely plausible -- I personally don't understand
why some critics found the storyline incomprehensible.  It's all very
well explained as the film goes along, and at the very least it's
internally consistent -- once you buy the premise, everything makes
sense.  (Contrast this with a film like CLIFFHANGER, which has a
premise only slightly more plausible, but doesn't make a whole lot of
sense once things get going.  At least once you've convinced yourself
that there might in fact be a parallel dimension ruled by the
descendants of dinosaurs -- and by Dennis Hopper in particular -- SUPER
MARIO BROS. doesn't insult your intelligence.  Even eleven-year-olds
have their self-respect, though Sylvester Stallone may not.)
     Hopper, who seems to be having an immense amount of fun in his
role as King Koopa, the ruler of the alternate dimension, is bent on
getting his claws on Princess Daisy and her magic amulet, which
contains a piece of the meteor that originally caused the split.  Once
the meteor is made whole again, the dimensions will be rejoined and
he'll be able to achieve his dream of total world domination.  (And let
me tell you:  if he decides to start by running for New York City
Council, he'll have no problem at all getting himself elected this
year.)  Standing between him and the culmination of his life-long dream
is Bob Hoskins as Mario Mario and John Leguizamo as Luigi Mario, two
small-time Brooklyn plumbers who -- just by the purest of coincidences,
mind you -- get to know Daisy and then do what they can to save her
when she's taken captive by Koopa's exceedingly silly henchmen.
     There's plenty more plot in this film, but what surprised me is
how the film itself only rarely got bogged down in the mechanical
aspects of moving the plot forward.  From beginning to end, this film
flows very smoothly from one entirely implausible situation to the
next, and it's rare that the filmmakers content themselves with a
generic chase scene, filmed over a backdrop of generic pop music.
Often the backdrops themselves are more diverting than the action in
the foreground: from the alternate Brooklyn, which is obviously a fond
take-off of BLADE RUNNER's Los Angeles; to Koopa's reelection posters
(Koopa on the environment: "Don't worry -- we'll get more."); to the
police cars involved in many of the film's chase scenes -- all powered
by an overhead electric grid.  It took me a while to realize that the
police cars were little more than glorified bumper cars, straight out
of an amusement park, and as such represented for eleven-year-olds the
coolest possible design for police cars you could have in an alternate
dimension.  Small touches like this either make or break a film;
putting aside SUPER MARIO BROS.' always striking production design (by
David Snyder), it's obvious that the police cars could have been
designed as little more than the kind of souped-up police cars you'd
expect to see in any city, regardless of dimension.  That someone sat
down and thought about what kind of police car would be absolutely
*right* for this city impresses me no end.
     The film deftly avoids any serious violence; likewise, there
aren't any cloying or maudlin scenes to suffer through.  Both Hopper
and Hoskins revel in their roles, and each manages to make what might
have been an ordinary villain or hero into a truly memorable character
(I particularly liked Hopper's attention to detail -- look carefully at
how he holds his hands as he walks around to see clearly the influence
of his great-grandfather the Tyranosaurus Rex).  I found it heartening
to see the very large number of alarmingly goofy touches scattered
throughout the production, from the exceedingly small-headed security
guards (the aptly named "Goombas") who chase the Mario brothers but
aren't too mean-spirited to get all silly and start dancing when they
hear the love theme from DR. ZHIVAGO; to Hopper's evolution /
de-evolution machine that can turn people into Einsteins or balls of
slime at the flick of a lever; to the mistakenly kidnapped Brooklyn
girls who, confined as they are in a sub-basement, sit around, smoke,
do their nails, and in every way act in perfect, stereotypical Brooklyn
girl fashion; to Koopa's henchmen, who trade lines like "You tried five
times and failed five times -- what percentage is that?"; to the street
food of choice, salamanders-on-a-stick.
     As a physical production, SUPER MARIO BROS. benefits greatly from
Alan Silvestri's outstanding score -- something missing from all too
many "adult" films these days; excellent 6-track Dolby sound design;
and some of the best special effects I've seen in a while, including
the much-maligned "morphing" process, which here isn't nearly as
annoying and trite as I expected it to be.  There's also the matter of
Yossi, Koopa's pet dinosaur, which is rendered through a combination of
stop- motion model, puppet, and computer-enhanced special effect well
enough to satisfy the dinosaur-lover in all of us.
     I can only think of one other kiddie film that had significant
appeal for adults: Mike Hodges' FLASH GORDON, which also featured a
striking production design, a fine score (by Queen), and a good amount
of tongue-in-cheek action.  But FLASH GORDON, fun as it was, played
every scene for maximum irony; the genius of SUPER MARIO BROS.  is in
its ability to play everything straight -- on the surface.  But it only
takes a moment or two to realize how much intelligence and wit are
backing up such a straight-faced production.  As Mario Mario says to
his brother Luigi: "Sure there were dinosaurs in Brooklyn.  There were
even Dodgers in Brooklyn."
     I fully intend to see this film again; my feeling is that for
every three sly references and witty asides I caught, there was
probably one I missed.  If you think any film with a name like SUPER
MARIO BROS. is beneath your adult sensibilities, all I can say is that
while when it comes to Hollywood films, it's usually "something
ventured, nothing gained", in this case it's just the opposite.  Much
to my surprise, I found this film to be one of the most enjoyable I've
seen all year, and I especially recommend it as an "antidote" to the
predictable, intelligence-insulting, mean-spirited and overly violent
CLIFFHANGER.  If you must see that film, see it first, then see SUPER
MARIO BROS.; you'll find that you enjoyed CLIFFHANGER a lot less in
retrospect, but at least you'll have seen one thoughtful and finely
crafted film out of two.
