Title
Review for Varsity Blues (1999)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Matt Lawrence
        What makes a good football movie?  God knows it's been done
before.  I don't think there's anything left to be done.  Necessary
Roughness, North Dallas Forty, even this year's Waterboy are all
basically the same.  The only thing left to do is to make them as good
as the others.  I'm tired of seeing the final tackle in slow motion
while the team looks on in anguish.  I'm tired of hearing the dramatic
music that's a dead giveaway that someone's about to get injured.  I'm
tired of the fact that writers think that it's suspenseful to watch a
field goal being kicked with 2 seconds to go.  I'm tired of the same
stuff been done!
        In Varsity Blues, James Van Der Beek stars as Jonathan Moxon,
a second string quarterback who never gets any playing time because of
the star quarterback of a small town in Texas.  This town is obsessed
with football and treats like a second religion.  For two hours we are
treated to the adventures of Moxon who has to deal with his football
hating girlfriend, an evil legendary coach (Jon Voight) and other
teenage challenges.  And to be honest, it's a little boring.
        Why does every football movie have a really heated halftime
scene from the locker room?  Can't they express their feelings before
the game?  After?  The movie isn't that bad but don't expect to see
anything new.  Van Der Beek's accent is one of the phoniest I've ever
heard.  Voight surprisingly doesn't over-act, but the character is too
evil for a common small town.  Gee, do you think Jon Voight has been
typecast?  If Oscar night rolls around and Blues doesn't win any,
don't be surprised.
Starring: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Scott Caan, Amy Smart and
Paul Walker 
Director: Brian Robbins 
Written by: John Gatins and W. Peter Iliff
Producer: Elysa Koplovitz, Tova Laiter, Brian Robbins and Michael Tollin
http://www.varsitybluesmovie.com

Author
Matt Williams
The high pressure world of high school football is the subject of
Varsity Blues, a comedy with the ambition to be a drama, but without the
necessary substance.
The story takes place in the small town of West Canaan, Texas, where
high school football is the local religion.  No one in town is more
revered than Coach Kilmer (Jon Voight), who has brought home 22 Division
Championships, and 2 State Championships.  This season, he'll stop at
nothing to get his hands on yet another one.
His star this year is Quarterback Lance Harbor (Paul Walker), who just
might collect that championship title singlehandedly. In Lance's shadow
is the academic-minded second-string QB, Jonathan "Mox" Moxon (James Van
Der Beek).  Though equally as talented as Lance, Mox is perfectly
willing to let his friend take all the glory (after all, he's dating
Lance's sister (Amy Smart)).
Mox loves the game, but senses that something just isn't right.  The
parents of the players are more interested in the games than their
children's lives.  Players are encouraged (and even expected) to play
hurt. Even the dangerous exploits of players are laughed off by the
townsfolk and local authorities.  Mox realizes that everyone's
priorities are out of whack, but he's willing to simply coast along and
enjoy the ride.
The tone of Varsity Blues is severely disjointed.  There are several
moments throughout the film that feel realistic, as if we are being
treated to an expose of the dark side of high school athletics.  These
scenes are clumsily mixed with the wildly implausible antics of the
players and townsfolk of West Canaan.
Simultaneously condemning yet celebrating the culture of high school
football, Varsity Blues tries to have it both ways.  In the end, any
statement the film may have been trying to make is lost in its overall
phoniness of the movie.  It is also difficult to merely enjoy the movie
as a comedy, since the film's constant references to the dramatic
elements is like a thorn in the side.
Jon Voight delivers yet another hammy over-the-top villain in the rabid
Coach Kilmer.  He might have been a more interesting antagonist if he
wasn't so one-dimensional.  James Van Der Beek is sympathetic as the kid
who's not only physically talented, but smart and wise to boot. Most of
the other characters (such as Ron Lester's Billy Bob, or Scott Caan's
Tweeder) are played purely for laughs.
Still, though it is flawed, Varsity Blues makes a strong case that a
very good movie could be made about high school football.  Varsity Blues
is just not that movie.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Good ol' Texan kid suddenly gets to play first-string quarterback on his
high school team's football team, in a town where football is considered
religion. The coach is just about the biggest A-hole you'd ever want to
meet, who will do practically anything to win. The good ol' Texan boy does
not approve of said man's methods.
CRITIQUE:
A fun football movie. This film was obviously geared towards the teen
market, with MTV behind its production, a big TV star actor in the lead
role, rockin' hip music galore, and plenty of T&A. Having said that, I
enjoyed the look and feel of the movie, thought James Van Der Beek gave a
solid performance, loved the slick sounds, and yup , loved
that T&A! I actually thought this was a comedy going in, but overall, it
plays more towards the dramatic, than a comedy. I also enjoyed Jon Voight's
performance as the stubborn dick coach, as well as many of the other
character players on the team. This is not a classic film by any stretch of
the imagination, but it might teach some kids the hard lessons behind the
"fun" game of football, or just allow them to have a good time for about an
hour and forty-five minutes in the movie theatre (Or in the comfort of their
own home, depending on where you watch this stuff.) All in all, I would
definitely watch this movie if you like football, play football or want your
kid to succeed in high school football. You could also watch it if you like
teen flicks with a lot of cute guys and girls running around doing their
stuff.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
James Van Der Beek actually started acting after a concussion stopped him
from playing football in real life. He is the oldest of three children, and
his father is a cellular phone salesman while his mom runs a gymnastics
studio. He's born in Connecticut and received $200,000 for his role in this
film.
Actor Scott Caan, who plays football player "Tweeder" in this film, is the
son of famed actor James Caan in real life. That's right, he's Sonny's son!
Actress Amy Smart, who plays Van Der Beek's girlfriend in this movie, also
played the main star's girl in the 1999 film OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE (6.5/10).
Screenwriter W. Peter Iliff also had a part in writing the screenplays for
the 1992 Harrison Ford film, PATRIOT GAMES, and the Keanu Reeves surfing
flick, POINT BREAK.
Director Brian Robbins might be best remembered as the "cool dude" from the
TV series "Head of the Class". His name was Eric Mandrian and he generally
wore a long, black trench coat on the show.
The book Mox (James Van Der Beek) is reading on the sidelines in this movie,
hidden inside the team's playbook, is "Slaughterhouse-Five" by Kurt
Vonnegut, Jr.
The high school fight song played at the pep rally is the Texas A&M War
Hymn.

Author
David N. Butterworth
If you're a teenaged girl, then "Varsity Blues," which stars "Dawson's 
Creek" mega-heartthrob James Van Der Beek, might well be the greatest 
film ever made.
If you've never seen a high school football drama before, you're likely 
to enjoy it too, since the film packs in just about every ingredient of 
the genre, including all those tight ends and late-breaking touchdowns.  
Middle-aged men who've already caught "All the Right Moves" and its many 
imitators on late-night television aren't going to find a whole lot in 
"Varsity Blues" to recommend it.  But the film is a pleasant enough 
diversion, highlighted by some well-choreographed gridiron sequences and 
a handful of intelligent performances, James! (as the teen rags refer to 
him) included.
Van Der Beek stars as Jonathan "Mox" Moxon, second-string quarterback 
for the Coyotes of West Canaan, a small Texan community that lives and 
breathes their commitment to varsity football.  The Coyotes' coach is 
the-win-at-all-costs Bud Kilmer, played with permanent gum-chewing 
ferocity by Jon Voight.
The veteran star of such acclaimed films as "Midnight Cowboy" and 
"Coming Home," Voight has taken to playing one-dimensional unsavory 
characters in recent years, and his Bud Kilmer is no exception.  
Voight's performance might not be subtle, but his take-no-prisoners 
approach to the character gives the high-spirited "Varsity Blues" much 
of its drama.
With a spectacular record of 22 division championships under his belt, 
Coach Kilmer isn't going to let a little thing like an injured player 
jeopardize number 23.  That's what painkillers are for, after all.
Mox, on the other hand, is one of the few people in town who has his 
sights set on something higher than winning the state pennant: an Ivy 
League education.  As smart as he is cute, the brains-before-brawn 
quarterback challenges Coach Kilmer's unethical tactics, which leads to 
a lot of shouting in the locker room and some creative disrespect on the 
field.
In addition to the Mean Coach, the film has its fair share of Underage 
Drunks, Horny Jocks, Frisky Cheerleaders, Funny Fat Guys, Quirky Little 
Brothers, and Dimwitted Parents.  Plus, in this particular case, there's 
that man James! to drool over if you're so inclined.
Truth be told the film makes no excuses in catering to the talents of 
the "Dawson's Creek" regular; he's virtually in every scene.  With that 
kind of pressure, the 21-year-old handles himself surprisingly well, 
especially when going head-to-head with the far more experienced Voight.  
Van Der Beek gives Mox a vulnerable side too; the scenes between him and 
his girlfriend Jules (Amy Smart) are especially well played.
Some scenes come across as contrived, of course, most notably the sex 
ed class in which Van Der Beek offers a litany of colloquialisms for the 
male "condition" (I bet those adoring fans just died during that one!).  
And if you can't predict the outcome of the closing Big Game five 
minutes into the film, well... perhaps you wandered into "Hilary and 
Jackie" by mistake.
"Varsity Blues" isn't likely to win any awards, but as a star vehicle 
for the up-and-coming James Van Der Beek, it goes the whole ten yards.


Author
Walter Frith
The MTV generation have movies of their own while others have theirs. 
It's nice, however, when we can trade off and occasionally enjoy each
other's product.  'Varsity Blues' is the type of movie that teenagers
can enjoy for showing themselves what they're capable of, both
positively and negatively.  Certainly, it is frivolous in many scenes --
a rather mindless barrage of high school pranks with shock waves felt
today by the cultural impact of 'National Lampoon's Animal House' and
'Fast Times at Ridgemont High'. Entertaining to be sure but rather
forgettable otherwise.
Jon Voight has become the quintessential movie bad guy in recent years. 
'Mission Impossible', 'Anaconda', 'The Rainmaker', 'Enemy of the State'
and now 'Varsity Blues', put Voight in the spotlight of railroading the
good side of human behaviour in favour of the self serving movie
villain.  He pulls it off sharply with squinting looks of evil that
prove that in many ways the villain is the true test of an actor. 
Perhaps that's why Voight has an Oscar in his collection for Best Actor
for 1978's 'Coming Home'.  Although his performance was that of a
Vietnam veteran made a paraplegic by the most unjust war of the 20th
century, his performance was one of strength and you really felt pride
for one of the movie's true good guys.  Although Voight is only a
supporting player in 'Varsity Blues', he gets first mention because it's
really him that propels me to give this film a marginal recommendation.
James Van Der Beek of television's 'Dawson Creek' plays John Moxen, the
back up quarterback of a varsity high school football team who gets a
chance to prove himself when the more than capable starter gets hurt. 
His aloof friend Billy Bob (Ron Lester) is responsible in a way for the
starting quarterback's injuries and vows not to let anything happen to
the new replacement.  They play football in a small town in West Canaan,
Texas...where football isn't just a game or a way of life, but is a form
of religion.
There are the usual plot sidelines such as the girls in their lives. 
The other players, some of whom exhibit criminal behaviour, and the win
at all costs attitude of Coach Kilmer (Jon Voight).  This includes
injecting players with painkillers when he knows they could be severely
injured later on.  His racist tendencies in failing to give the ball
when necessary to the film's talented star running back who is black is
a further measure in lowering the team's morale and his blackmail of one
of the players that will prevent him from obtaining a full academic
scholarship are just some of the coach's other personality traits.
What's refreshing about this movie is the way it highlights the film's
important moments and never treats them as trifle, overplayed or silly
-- like the team sticking together in rejecting the coach's tactics, the
scene where Moxen is put to the test to see if he will cheat on his
girlfriend and how the players showcase their submission to a team
leader capable of bringing them back from the brink of losing with
disgraced feelings.
The film is directed by Brian Robbins ('Good Burger').  His aptitude in
filming and editing the impact of the gridiron is impressive and ranks
up there with 1993's 'The Program' as some of the best football scenes
put on film since 1974's 'The Longest Yard'.  I would rather have seen
'Varsity Blues' as a television network movie of the week because it's
overall feeling is more like a field goal than a touchdown but the drive
is still successful nevertheless.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
There aren't many things that can match the allure of Friday Night 
High School Football. Twenty two young men who have been made 
mythical heroes by their school pouring their guts out in front of 
the bright lights. Many of them playing for a future, most playing 
for pride. In small Texas towns like West Canaan, the allure is even 
greater. The town lives and dies by it's football teams. 1983's All 
the Right Moves, which instead focused on football in small 
Pennsylvania steel towns, did a good job of capturing this feeling. 
Varsity Blues captures this feeling too, but where it fails and All 
the Right Moves succeeded, is in it's basic human drama.
In the past 30 years, West Canaan head coach Bud Kilmer has won 22 
district titles. He plans on doing whatever he can to get that 23rd. 
Unfortunately, when the teams starting quarterback, a schoolboy 
legend, goes down with a season ending injury, that title appears to 
be slipping away. The coach must turn to backup quarterback Jonathan 
"Mox" Moxon. 
Mox doesn't really buy into the sleep, eat, breath football ideals of 
the town. He's working for a scholarship to Brown university. He's 
been playing football since he was young, not because he enjoyed it 
necessarily, but because of the pressure he faced from his father. 
But when he finally gets his chance to play, things begin to change. 
Suddenly Mox gets wrapped up in all the hype and glory.
Mox also begins a bitter war with Kilmer, who despite his success, is 
a mean-spirited sadist. Voight plays this character with snarling, 
colorful, over the top enthusiasm. Been there, done that. This 
particular section of the film I did not care for. Kilmer's character 
is way too one dimensional and the attempt to humanize him comes way 
too late. The family drama is also poorly played out. Mox's father is 
as one-dimensional as the coach and his mother is given absolutely 
nothing to do.
The film also attempts to document the wild behavior of the players, 
and the extent to which they can get away with anything. It goes way 
too far over the top here. In one scene, a player steals a cop car 
and rides around with naked girls in it. In another, the boys go to a 
strip bar, where they are shocked to discover their sex-ed teacher is 
a stripper. Neither of these scenes are funny, or beleivable.
Despite all of this, I did enjoy Varsity Blues. Van Der Beek is solid 
as Mox, able to show his character's admirable traits alongside his 
flaws, but careful not to overplay either (maybe he should give 
Voight lessons). Ron Lester has a very good role as Billy Bob, the 
massively overweight lineman who has been playing football since the 
pee wee level and wonders if any of it was actually enjoyable. Ali 
Larter also has a nice role as a cheerleader who comes on to Mox 
since she has to date the starting quarterback. One scene she finds 
some very creative use for whip cream in her attempt to win over Mox. 
Now that WAS funny, if still not beleivable. 
Brian Robbins does a surprisingly good job staging the football 
scenes. Everything is easy to follow. I particularly liked one 
segment where a breakdown in blocking leads to disaster. I also 
enjoyed the debate of philosophies (Kilmer's control the clock 
conservative style versus Mox's five wideout aerial assault ideas). 
And yes, the film does fall back on the predictable formula of the 
big game finale. And the final play of the game is set up much 
earlier in the film, so we know the screenwriters know their Syd 
Field. These complaints might matter one iota to me if the film 
wasn't so successful in executing it's formula here. The final game, 
and the final play, are both very exciting. I guess that's the allure 
of high school football.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Author
Matt Prigge
Starring: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voigt, Paul Walker, Ron Lester, Scott 
Caan, Richard Lineback, Ali Larter, Amy Smart, Eliel Swinton, Thomas F. 
Duffy, Jll Parker Jones, Joe Pichler, Tonie Perensky
The plot, structure, and even many of the jokes of "Varsity Blues" hail 
all the way back to 80s teen movies and sports movies spanning the 
entire length of cinematic history: it's part team tries to win despite 
adversity, part teenagers trying to overcome pressure from adult 
would-be role models. I've seen this way too many times before, as you 
probably have as well if you grew up in the heyday of the 80s, viewing 
films by John Hughes on a bi-weekly basis and intaking sports molds like 
"Major League," like I did, a time I know I at least have numerous 
regrets about. But every now and then, I almost get suckered into liking 
a formulaic film like this, for whatever reason that is. "Varsity 
Blues," in particular, has a freshness I can't quite figure out. It's 
not exactly about either being a downtrodden teen or a sports team 
trying to succeed, and because it's not really much of anything may be 
what's so nice about it. There's not a ton of bad jokes, the more 
sentimental moments (the oft-joked-about "I don't want your life" scene) 
don't feel absolutely wretched, and the lead role is played by an actor 
who, while probably never capable of an Ian McKellen-like performance 
(just to name one superb thespian), is really likable, if not really 
quite good. Hell, even the cinematography is nice, accenting the blues 
of the football jerseys nicely.
And instead of being completely off-put with this film, as I was with a 
couple teen-targeted flicks of late ("Can't Hardly Wait" and "Disturbing 
Behavior," just to name two that made my worst-of-98 list), I was 
instead mildly pleased. The story, about a southern town that is 
devoutly married to high-school football, is yes, a little lame (it's 
blatantly borrowed from an undertone in "The Last Picture Show"), and 
even occasionally mishandled to ridiculous proportions (I just can't 
believe they actually had football coach Jon Voigt hold his hand up in a 
Hitler-esque heil, not once, but thrice). And the story of John Moxon, 
the film's protagonist, and his battle with not wanting to play football 
past high school though showing an extraordinary talent for it at the 
time (and becoming the star quarterback when the original quarterback 
suffers an injury), is at the very least tiresome and unfelt, but it's 
only so in theory, as is the rest of this film's entities. This film 
really should be a crap film that makes a minute impact on the box 
office then goes off to Comedy Central Mid-day Hell, but it has so many 
slightly positive aspects to it that I just couldn't help but be 
enjoying myself for at least some of it.
For just one example, the resident fat-guy subplot, usually the weak 
link of a film like this, is handled with a surprising amount of 
compassion. The said character (played by Ron Lester) is occasionally 
the subject of lame weight ridicule, but is later actually developed as 
a character, and in a scene late in the film where he sits in a 
depressed state with hard liquor and a shotgun actually has some feeling 
behind it. Even the lead character has development: instead of resorting 
to the stardom gimmick that this film almost goes for, it allows him to 
deal with these emotions himself, and when his current girlfriend nearly 
gives up on him, he wrestles with turning to the cliche and sleeping 
with the girlfriend of a friend/ex-quarterback who has been making 
none-too-subtle advances towards him. It's not Shakespeare, or even Neil 
Simon, but it shows that maybe there will be a teenage film that 
actually delves into the emotions of its characters in an intelligent 
fashion someday.
Even James Van Der Beek's performance shows something of a future 
promise. Currently the star of the heavily-discussed "Dawson' Creek," he 
puts not only some depth into his character, but perhaps more 
importantly for this kind of movie, a lot of charisma. He's good at 
making otherwise cheap emotions into genuine ones, and he's completely 
at-ease in front of a camera, and he defines his character so well that 
he nearly makes the film work just by being completely sympathetic. 
There are many a thing to like about this film to those who are willing 
to abandon any dramatic credibility at the door, but then again, this 
isn't THAT good. For all that I liked about it, there's still the many 
things I didn't like about it. Voigt, for one, though good, is saddled 
with a character that the film isn't sure what to do with. I guess he's 
a villain, but if so, what gives with the start-and-stop attempts to 
deepen his character (a saddened scene where he's looking over trophies, 
symbolizing his past successes and his frustration with the present) 
when the proverbial rug will be pulled from underneath anyway? Same goes 
with his father, who is at once shown as a hard-ruling father, ordering 
his son to do his will, then other times as a poor old guy who can't get 
any respect, not from his friends or his son (who ends up pegging him in 
the nose with a football, a scene of such conflicting emotions that the 
film isn't prepared to deal with it).
Just add to the pot the extreme fake-ness of several of the situations, 
the use of half-assed small-town and high school football satire, and a 
couple other major detractors, and this film does not exactly get a 
sure-fire recommendation for your's truly. It's more of a mixed bag of a 
film, with parts I did like and parts I didn't like, but nothing I was 
totally enthused about. But, as I said, it does have promise for future 
movies, especially with the success of the film at the boxoffice, which 
has been nothing short of stunning (especially for a film boasting a 
member of the "Dawson's Creek" gang, a show I admit to watching a couple 
time and admit to actually enjoying). Maybe it's the R-rating that helps 
this film: it's more loose-necked, less-fake, and occasionally funnier 
(a subplot involving a stripping teacher is not exactly good, but it's 
amusing). I'd like to see a teen film that managed to take what was good 
about this film and then expanded on it. Imagine a teen film you weren't 
ashamed to say that you at least sorta liked, but actually liked. And 
maybe it should star Van Der Beek. Yeah, sounds like a good idea.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Paramount Pictures/MTV Films
 Director:  Brian Robbins
 Writer:  W. Peter Iliff
 Cast: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Paul Walker, Ron
Lester, Scott Caan, Amy Smart, Ali Larter, Eliel Swinton
   If this year's films about life in high school are all going to
be like "Jawbreaker" and "Varsity Blues," we're in for trouble. 
These are not bad or unwatchable movies, simply
mediocrities.  "Jawbreaker," about the kidnapping of a
beautiful, sweet high-school girl who accidentally dies of
asphyxiation, is meant to be a of the satiric, horror-comedy
genre, but satirizes nothing, is unfunny and has not a slasher
in sight. "Varsity Blues," which has a mishmash of floundering
themes, hasn't an original bone in its rib-crushing body. 
What's more even "Waterboy" is more believable.  Would you
believe, for example, that a high-school teacher in a small
Texas town would moonlight as a stripper in a nearby bar--
where, even if everyone under 21 were denied entrance,
surely the parents of the kids she teaches could be her
audience?  And can you accept the fact that a razzle-dazzle,
tough-as-nails guy whose statue overlooks the football field
can coach a small-town high-school team to twenty-two
annual division championships without being picked up by a
big-name college?  How about going with two separate
scenes involving the a trainer's illegal injecting of a pain-
killing substance into the knees of two seriously injured 
athletes while leaving the door ajar? (The massive rebellion
that climaxes the film could not have taken place had coach
Bud Kilmer simply turned the lock.)
   The major flaw of "Varsity Blues" is its lack of singularity. 
Like dozens of similar movies about young jocks and their
adoring women, Brian Robbins' saga, utilizing a script by
John Gatins and W. Peter Iliff, takes us inside a high school
West Canaan, Texas, where the town's entertainment is
drinking, girls and football.  Lance Harbor, the star
quarterback (played by the Brad Pitt-like Paul Walker) enjoys
the reverence of the citizenry, but his fame lasts only until he
is sidelined for good with a bruising knee injury.  His place is
taken by second-stringer John Moxon (played by the
charismatic James Van Der Beek of the TV show "Dawson's
Creek"), a scholarly, squeaky-clean fellow who has whiled
away his bench time reading Kurt Vonnegut.  The town's
reverence transfers to him instantly, including the
allegiance of Lance's girl friend Darcy (Ali Larter) while
he incurs the denunciation of his own sweetie-pie, Julie (Amy
Smart).  As Moxon smarts increasingly from the demands of
dictatorial, hell-raising, victory-obsessed Coach Bud Kilmer
(Jon Voight), he leads his team to a new realization of their
exploitation while gaining further insight into his very soul.
   "Varsity Blues" features some excellent slow-motion shots
of the fellows in action on the field, scenes which would
persuade any responsible adult to forbid his kid from
competitively playing The Great American Sport. Athletes
propel themselves against one another with the ferocity of a
missile launched against Baghdad while the fans sit safely in
the stands admiring the mini-skirted cheerleaders and
boosting the transcendent home team.  Jon Voight turns in
his usual performance as town villain, the sort of role that
propelled films like "Enemy of the State," "The Rainmaker"
and "Anaconda" to box office success in recent years.  It's
simply difficult to accept he's mentoring a mere team of 17-
and 18-year-olds, the way he curses and pummels them
when they are behind and especially when their hero, Moxon,
alters his instructions to set up plays of his own choosing. 
Kilmer brings to mind Nick Nolte's Colonel Tall of Terrence
Malick's "The Thin Red Line," with his utter disregard of the
well-being of the troops and his feeling that victory is
everything. The boys look more like college seniors or even
pro players than pimply adolescents, but perhaps that's the
way the macho Lone Star State turns 'em out.  

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
There's not much to say about "Varsity Blues", the latest
insignificant entry into the teen movie field, other than the fact
that it's another clunker from MTV Films. "Dawson's Creek" heartthrob
James Van Der Beek plays John Moxon, or "Mox", a second-string
quarterback on his high school football team; a team playing in the
football-obsessed West Canaan, Texas. When the star quarterback gets
injured, Mox finds himself in the spotlight as West Canaan's new
hero. But Mox would rather stay home reading Kurt Vonnegut than play
for his legendary hard-ass coach, Bud Kilmer(Jon Voight).  Mox decides
that if his team is going to win the championship, it'll be for them,
not for the coach.  Sounds like high aspirations for a film that is
actually a frat-boy movie filled with gratuitous nudity, beer-drinking
and football. That Van Der Beek and Voight manage to give decent
performances is a wonder considering that W. Peter Iliff's screenplay
is nothing but a bunch of stereotypes. "Varsity Blues" is watchable
when it doesn't take itself too seriously, but more often than not, it
does.
a video capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Luke Buckmaster
VARSITY BLUES
Cast: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Amy Smart, Paul Walker, Scott
Caan, Ali Larter, Ron Lester, Eliel Swinton
Director: Brian Robbins
Screenplay: John Gatins, W. Peter Iliff
Australian theatrical release: April 1, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 stars
It helps to enjoy some films if you have a passion for their subject
matter, whilst it is crucial for others.  Varsity Blues falls into the
later category.  I openly admit that I have little interest in American
Football, and had this film been centered around, say, basketball,
chances are I would have enjoyed it a lot more.  James "Dawson" Van Der
Beek stars as a man thrust into fame, and his transformation from
cynical bench warmer to a town icon is never entirely believable nor
very inspiring.  At some stages in the film it appears as though his
character will spiral out of control as he experiences a new world of
fame, only to have him grounded time and time again by director Brian
Robbins.  Not only does this reduce our interest; it also strips Moxon
of personality.
The West Canaan Coyotes are a fierce and omnipotent Football team for a
small Texas town.  Led by unrelenting coach Bud Kilmer (Jon Voight), the
team is on their way to winning their 23rd division title.  However,
star quarterback Lance Harbor (Paul Walker) suffers a season-ending
injury, and the underestimated Jonathon Moxon (James Van Der Beek) is
unwillingly thrust into filling his important place in the team.  Moxon
soon becomes a town icon, whilst him and the rest of the team struggle
to perform up to Kilmer's tough standards.
James Van Der Beek is an acceptable performer who acts slow and steady.
If you like him in TV's Dawson's Creek, chances are you'll like him
here - if you take away "Dawson's" complex dialogue, this is the kind of
role that you will expect.  Jon Voight has landed on nasty territory in
his part as a vicious and uncaring coach (very much like Nick Nolte in
Blue Chips). It is a pity that it takes almost the entire film's running
time for Voight's character to convey any emotion; the image of the
coach's sorrowful face reflecting through a football award is quite a
profound moment and says piles more than   any of his rambling speeches.
Aside from this scene, Varsity Blues is a fairly meaningless
experience - its occasional examinations of the pressure mounted on
football players fall on uninterested ears (especially in my case).
The football games themselves are built from the cliches we've come to
expect - the team's best player suffers a career ending injury, the team
play really really badly after an all night drinking binge and, of
course, the final game is a "thrilling" buzzer beater.  There was only
one sports scene that I genuinely enjoyed - a head banging, body
smashing moment performed to the tune of the Foo Fighters' "My Hero."
Overall, Varsity Blues is a film with some strong performances but a
script ridden with sports cliches and a dramatic side that never steps
into second gear.  Still, if you like American Football, Varsity
Snooze - sorry, Blues - might be worth warming to.


Author
Justin Felix
VARSITY BLUES (1999)
A film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1999 Justin Felix.  
This review also appears in the Shrubbery at
http://www.theshrubbery.prohosting.com/0399/movie2.html
All of my film reviews are achived at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix 
Written by W. Peter Iliff.  
Directed by Brian Robbins.  
Starring James Van Der Beek and Jon Voight.  
Rated R (contains violence, profanity, nudity, and drug abuse)  104 mins.  
Synopsis:  Back-up quarterback Moxxon becomes starting quarterback midway
through his senior year of high school, even though he'd rather read
"Slaughterhouse Five" than the playbook.  Evil football coach Kilmer throws
away Moxxon's book, though, while the evil team physician injects
painkillers into the players.  In the meantime, Moxxon's kid brother forms a
cult, and a bubblegum-blond cheerleader smears whip cream on herself to
seduce the new star quarterback.  
Comments:  Since I usually review horror and science fiction films, I feel a
little out of my league discussing this teen football movie.  (Pun intended.
Thank you!)  VARSITY BLUES was produced by MTV, and it really shows.
Several extended scenes allow for a continual soundtrack of mediocre pop
songs meant to appeal to the adolescent male audience this crap was intended
for.  The teenagers all have reasons for their melodramatic angst.  The
adults all have problems, of course, and, as one-dimensional characters,
they are all fanatically obssessed with how their local high school football
team performs.
Yes, this movie represents high school life in MTV-Land.  This is a land
where your health teacher is also a part-time stripper, your ice cream store
attendant girlfriend wears an Egyptian Ankh around her neck, your kid
brother forms a "cute" cult, your football coach is an uncaring, obssessive
madman, and your friends' lives consist of nothing but getting laid and
driving around in cop cars naked.  All you, as the main character, want to
do, however, is read "Slaughterhouse Five" and attend Brown University in
the Fall.  Well, at least this is a little more realistic than MTV's "The
Real World."  
VARSITY BLUES stars James Van Der Beek, this week's teen TV star making the
leap to the big screen.  He plays the hick Moxxon adequately, though some of
his emotional dialogue will make people chuckle.  ("You dawn't own mah
life!"  Who would want to?)  Jon Voight, the stock evil guy in countless
other movies, is, surprise, the stock evil guy here.  But is he really evil,
or is he a product of society?  After all, everybody, young and old, in this
movie has no life whatsoever and do nothing but obssess over high school
football.  Maybe the pressures of the 90 screaming fans at the football
field drove evil coach Kilmer evil.  The film's screenplay never answers
this burning question.  At times, Iliff's story does show glimmers of
touching or humorous scenes, but, before the audience gets their hopes up
that there might be something redeeming in this movie, they get trashed with
another lengthy party sequence or overwrought football game.  The movie's
pacing is slow, and the plot turns are mindnumbingly obvious from start to
finish.
I suppose I'm being a little hard on VARSITY BLUES.  Maybe I'm just a little
miffed that I had to pay 3 bucks to see it, even though it was dollar night
at the cinema.  Something about a request from the studio made the theater
charge more money.  I found the film oftentimes ludicrous and boring.  Three
guys in front of us smuggled beer into the the theater.  I wished I had
thought of that.  Alcohol, lots of it, may have helped the viewing experience.  

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: January 15, 1999
Starring: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Scott Caan, Ron Larter, Eliel
Swinton, Ali Larter, Amy Smart, Paul Walker
Directed by: Brian Robbins
Distributed by: Paramount Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (strong language throughout, sexuality and nudity, some
substance abuse)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/varsity.htm
There's something to be said for reality, and MTV Productions' latest
movie, VARSITY BLUES, proves it beyond a doubt. Even the most flawed
movies -- those filled with bad acting, poor direction, horrible
writing, and misguided photography -- can salvage some dignity by
clinging to reality. But when any real-world sense is thrown out the
window, as in VARSITY BLUES, the product becomes a 100-minute travel
along a downward spiral. Directed by GOOD BURGER helmer Brian Robbins,
VARSITY BLUES is easily bottom-of-the-barrel entertainment. 
As with any Gen-X MTV movie (like last year's DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS), the
movie is marketed for a primarily male audience as indicated by its main
selling points: sex and football. Those two items, wrapped in a
guilty-pleasure package, are sure to snare a sizeable box office chunk
initially, but sales will decline for two reasons. First, the football
sequences are nothing new, nor can they be; the sports genre isn't
mainstream and it's been retread to death. Second, the sex is just bad.
Despite the appearance of a whipped cream bikini or the all-night
strip-club party, there's nothing even remotely tantalizing. 
The acting is mostly mediocre, not including the fantastic Jon Voight.
Cultivating his usual sliminess, Voight gives an unexpectedly standout
performance as West Canaan Coyotes head coach Bud Kilmer. Kilmer is the
driving force behind the Coyotes' twenty-two conference championships
and two state titles in thirty years; this year he plans to make it
twenty-three. Unfortunately, when his star quarterback, Lance Harbor
(Paul Walker), goes down for the count, he's got to rely on the
unreliable abilities of backup John Moxon (James Van Der Beek). Moxon
leads the team through its last four games, and then must cope with his
newfound stardom, the effect it has on his relationship with girlfriend
Julie (Amy Smart), and other temptations that abound in football-crazy
West Canaan. 
Most regions of the country are not nearly as football-crazy as Texas,
and so the atmosphere is likely to be lost on most. Similarly, the set
design is wrong for a high school setting: the teams are decked out with
sparkling uniforms, radio headsets (which never seem to work, however,
and instead require coaches to signal plays manually), and even a giant
bronze statue of Coach Kilmer. These elements (as well as the heavy
drinking and carousing) might be more appropriate on a college campus --
but MTV's core audience is the high school demographic. This focus is
further emphasized by the casting: James Van Der Beek, of TV's "Dawson's
Creek," is an understandable choice for the reluctant hero, although he
never manages to do anything with the role. Other stars are similarly
young and unmemorable. 
There's not much that goes right about VARSITY BLUES, and there's not
much to like about it, either. Everything herein has already been done,
and if it hasn't, the movie manages to botch it one way or another. This
is certainly missable.

Author
Michael Dequina
Anyone who misses the heyday of the afterschool special will certainly
enjoy this banal tale of self-fulfillment, juiced up with enough alcohol
and sleaze to earn an R rating.  James Van Der Beek, he of
_Dawson's_Creek_ fame, plays John "Mox" Moxon, a benchwarming high school
football player in West Canaan, Texas who becomes a reluctant star after
the star quarterback (Paul Walker) is sidelined with an injury.  But Mox
doesn't want to be a star; in fact, he doesn't really want to be a
football player, either, reading novels instead of playbooks, which draws
the evil eye of the maniacal coach, Bud Kilmer (Jon Voight), who will
stop at nothing to secure another division championship.
Watching _Varsity_Blues_, I was reminded of the Mariah Carey song
"Hero," one of whose passages goes, "When you feel like hope is gone/Look
inside you and be strong/Then you'll finally see the truth/That a hero
lies in you."  That's exactly the arc Mox goes through, as he overcomes a
threat to his dream of attending Brown University by looking inside
himself and finding his heroic nature.  If that weren't cornball enough,
there's everything else that surrounds the main story.  Most
ridiculously, there's the town's obsession with high school football; it
seems that everyone's life--male, female, young, old, all points in
between--revolves around the doings of the team.  The one possible
exception is Mox's younger brother, who, in the film's lamest subplot, is
constantly trying on new religions.  The film's most insulting subplot
revolves Mox's fellow player Wendell (Eliel Swinton).  Apparently, he's
the only African-American in the entire lily-white town, which can only
mean one thing--yep, a token racism thread, used to make the already
blatantly bad Coach Kilmer appear even worse.
This is Van Der Beek's first film role after achieving stardom as
Dawson, and the most I can say for his work in this film is that his
shorter, darker hairdo makes his head appear less box-shaped.  Still,
that's more than I can say for everyone else in the accent-challenged
cast or the crew.
Michael Dequina
Chat Forum Host, The Official Michael Jordan Web Site
http://jordan.sportsline.com
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown


Author
Scott Renshaw
VARSITY BLUES
(Paramount)
Starring:  James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Ron Lester, Paul Walker, Eliel
Swinton, Scott Caan, Amy Smart, Ali Larter.
Screenplay:  W. Peter Iliff.
Producers:  Tova Laiter, Mike Tollin and Brian Robbins.
Director:  Mike Robbins.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  103 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It would be trite to compare West Texas high school football to a
religion.  It would also be inaccurate -- religious faithful generally
demonstrate some sense of proportion.  A cult would be more analagous,
with thousands of people connecting their happiness to the achievements of
mere mortals to whom greater powers are ascribed.  Or perhaps rudimentary
tribal warfare is more appropriate.  Or even basic psychological child
abuse.  In short, the singular phenomenon that is West Texas high school
football is the stuff of which great American stories could be made.
     Or, VARSITY BLUES could be made.  This glossy youth melodrama stars
"Dawson's Creek" poster boy James Van Der Beek as Jonathan "Mox" Moxon, a
bookish senior backup quarterback for the West Canaan (TX) Coyotes.  Mox
plays football because it's what you're expected to do in West Canaan, but
he's content to remain in the shadow of his best friend, star quarterback
Lance Harbor (Paul Walker), while waiting for admission to Brown
University.  Then a season-ending knee injury sidelines Lance, forcing the
capable and creative Mox into the spotlight -- and into the line of fire
of autocratic, revered and feared Coyote coach Bud Kilmer (Jon Voight).
     The bulk of the film involves Mox's response to the adulation his new
role as star brings him -- will Mox be true to himself and his girlfriend
Julie (Amy Smart), or will he be seduced by fame, football, and head
cheerleader Darcy (Ali Larter)?  As the exceedingly pleasant Van Der Beek
plays him, there's never much question at all.  Mox is a Boy Scout whose
only lapse in judgment occurs in an effort at another good deed, bringing
Lance out to a strip club to cheer him up.  He's a broad strokes hero like
Kilmer -- who's not only a martinet, but a racist just for good measure --
is a broad strokes villain.  At least a couple of the supporting 
characters (notably Scott Caan as the team wild man and Ron Lester as a
massive lineman) show sparks of life.  Dramatically, Mox is a flatline.
     That inconsequential plot progression wastes plenty of potentially
compelling conflict.  Mox's father (Thomas Duffy), himself a former
Coyote, is proud of his straight-A student son for the first time when Mox
becomes a football star, yet that relationship is played only for laughs
or speeches.  The emotional center of VARSITY BLUES should have been the
pressure and twisted values that make high school kids believe nothing
they ever do will be as valuable, a sentiment expressed in Kilmer's pep
talk that the big game is "48 minutes for the next 48 years of your
lives."  Though director Brian Robbins (making a dramatic leap from GOOD
BURGER) nails the atmosphere of abandoned Friday night streets, W. Peter
Iliff's script uses it mostly as scenery for a typical teen soap opera.
It's as though they went to the Amish country, then decided to make
"Dawson's Creek - The Movie."
     Of course, the intended audience for VARSITY BLUES is the same as the
audience for "Dawson's Creek":  high school students themselves, little
interested in studies of small town sociology.  It's worth noting that
Robbins and Ilif include at least a few insightful scenes -- including one
player's rage against how much he's always hated the game -- between the
obligatory T&A and party-hearty scenes.  This isn't THE LAST PICTURE SHOW
we're talking about, nor was it ever likely to be, but it could have aimed
for something slightly more ambitious than a climax where all that matters
is whether the Coyotes can win the big game.  That's not just uninspired
-- given the setting, it's painfully ironic.

Author
Susan Granger
Teenybopper idol James Van Der Beek of TV's "Dawson's Creek"
gets a big screen break in this football flick. Its strength is that
examines the pressures placed on high school athletes by their parents
and coaches. Its weakness is that it reduces a serious topic into all
the shamelessly predictable cliches of teenage comedy that are
liberally dished out by writer W. Peter Iliff. "Football is a way of
life," Van Der Beek explains as a second-string quarterback in rural
Texas, where devotion to high-school football attains a religious
fervor. "You never question the sanctity of the coaches," he adds. Jon
Voight plays Bud Kilmer who has coached his West Canaan, Texas, AAA
team to two state championships and 22 district championships in his
35-year tenure. There's a big bronze statue of Coach Kilmer right
outside of the stadium which is named for him. The story revolves
around Van Der Beek and his girl friend (Amy Smart) who rebel against
the football mania gripping everyone around them. They're aware of the
Coach's tenacity to force ill or injured players to continue in the
game and appalled by his racist tendency to ignore black players when
it comes to scoring touchdowns.  Understandably, the Coach doesn't
like him much but, when the star of the team wrecks his knee with five
games to go in a winning season, Van Der Beek's pushed up front and
center. His chances of an academic scholarship to Brown rest on his
performance.  The cheerleader subplot is stupefying, as is having a
sex education instructor make students chant the common names for sex
organs in unison. Not too surprising for her character, though, since
she turns out to be a stripper in her off-hours. Unevenly directed by
Brian Robbins, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Varsity Blues"
is fumbling 5. It's V for vulgar.

Author
Steve Rhodes
VARSITY BLUES cannot make up its mind what kind of movie it wants to be.
At its core, it contains an honest examination of the pressures placed
on high school athletes by their parents and coaches.  Produced jointly
by MTV Films and Paramount Pictures, the movie completely buries its
dramatic side with a laughless and cliched teenage comedy.
In the one notable piece of acting in the film, a serious Jon Voight
plays Coach Bud Kilmer.  Coach Kilmer has coached his West Canaan, Texas
AAA football team to 2 state championships and 22 district championships
in his 35 years as head coach.  Having played for another high school
football team (Garland) when we won two AAAA state championships in a
row, I can certainly identify with the pressures and rewards of living
in a small, football-obsessed town.
Director Brian Robbins manages to get all of the small-town, football
rituals right, although they may be somewhat dated.  In the gym, the
charged student body listens with enthusiasm as the coach and the star
quarterback brag in advance about their upcoming victory over this
week's rival team.  On the practice field, the coach grabs the players'
facemasks and screams obscenities at them when they don't do precisely
what he demands.  The director gets the quieter moments right as well.
Before the game, the team bows their heads in a sincere rendition of the
Lord's Prayer.
"Football is a way of life," the second-string quarterback, John "Mox"
Moxon, explains in the film's narration to the viewers, who may not
realize that Texas high-school football for many is a cross between a
religious cult and a dictatorship.  "You never question the sanctity of
the coaches," Mox adds later.
Savor the film's few serious moments, and perhaps they can sustain you
through the lame comedy by writers John Gatins and W. Peter Iliff that
so dominates the movie.
With a pretty boy smile but little depth, James Van Der Beek plays Mox.
Mox is a bench warmer until the first-string quarterback, Lance Harbor
(Paul Walker), is sacked and injured.  This incident is caused by the
coach's forcing a dangerously ill, offensive guard to play when he
shouldn't.  When the offensive guard passes out, the defensive guard
crushes Lance.  With its recurring theme about coaches abusing players,
the movie asks some challenging questions, but it quickly reverts back
to bad slapstick before the audience has a chance to ponder the issues.
VARSITY BLUES is the type of movie in which the height of comedy
consists of casting a 400 pound actor, Ron Lester, to play the team's
dumb guard, Billy Bob, and giving the guard a pet pig to ride next to
him in his big pick-up.
A typically unbelievable series of incidents involves the school's sex
education teacher.  She's a bimbo who makes the students chant in unison
the common names for sex organs.  Later, in an all-night boozing session
at a strip bar, the high school football players recognize their
teacher, who is the most attractive stripper there.  Not at all shocked,
she goes to their table to drink with them.
The story's depictions of alcohol abuse have to be its low points.  The
parents and the kids seem to be regular, heavy drinkers.  A drunken
party, in which the team gets wasted, follows every game.  One scene has
Billy Bob puking in the washing machine as a couple has sex on the dryer
next to it.  When the cops show up at the party, no one is arrested.
The cops just admonish the underage drinkers not to drink and drive, a
warning they promptly ignore.  Teens watching this movie will learn many
lessons, and few of them will be good.
The movie has a subtheme of girls, especially cheerleaders, needing the
boys as their only ticket out of town.  And the accepted way shown is
for them to use sex as an enticement to the boys.  The extremely
attractive Darcy (Ali Larter), for example, starts taking her clothes
off for Mox, who is shocked, as soon as he becomes a starter.  She was
once Lance's girl, but an injured Lance doesn't have the earnings
potential she feels she needs.
And finally in its attempt to cover all the stereotypes, the story gives
the team a token African-American player named Brown, who is the star
running back.  The coach, who would probably run over his own mother to
win a game, is such a racist that he tries to keep Brown from scoring
touchdowns.
For all of its faults, the movie does come up with a nice twist in the
obligatory big game finale.  The twist, however, isn't worth waiting
for, so if you feel the urge to walk out sooner, don't resist.
VARSITY BLUES runs 1:40.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, profanity and
alcohol abuse.  The movie might be acceptable for older teenagers, but
watch out for the messages they will be getting.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Greg King
Dawson's Creek resident hunk James Van Der Beek goes from
playing a sensitive school kid tackling some of life's riddles on the
small screen to a sensitive kid tackling some of life's ironies on the
big screen in his first major feature film role.
On the surface Varsity Blues is another movie about football
and the pressures of competing. However, director Brian Robbins (Good
Burger, etc) and writer W Peter Iliff (Patriot Games, Point Break,
etc) give the film a more human aspect that will appeal to those not
normally attracted towards sports oriented movies.  Varsity Blues also
deals with teenage angst, the problems of parental expectations, and
the decisions they are often forced to make that will shape their
lives forever.
Everything in the small Texan town of West Canaan revolves
around the local high school team.  Disillusioned fathers live
vicariously through their son's achievements on the football field,
while the whole town basks in the glory of their triumphs.  Even the
town sheriff overlooks many of their high-spirited pranks.
However, for Jon Moxon (Van Der Beek), football has lost that
element of pure fun that he and his team mates enjoyed as children.
He doesn't buy into the football as a metaphor for life angle espoused
by ruthless coach Bud Kimble (Jon Voight).  Kimble is a legend in the
town for his on field success, although that has come at a high price.
Mox believes that there is life beyond football, and that winning is
not everything.  Of course, Mox's indifference towards football brings
him into conflict with the arrogant Kimble.  We don't learn much about
Kimble's personal life, as we only see him in his office, cluttered
with trophies, and on the field.  Then we realise, somewhat sadly,
that, for him, football and coaching is his life.
While reluctantly warming the bench awaiting his chance to
play, he reads Kurt Vonnegut.  Kimble's star players are forced to use
pain killing injections to prolong their time of the field.  After
Lance breaks a leg after a fierce tackle, Mox is promoted to
quarterback, and becomes the new star of the team.
At first, he has trouble coping with the instant fame and
adulation, and loses direction for a while.  His new found fame also
threatens his relationship with Julie (Amy Smart), who doesn't like
football jocks.  Eventually, Mox manages to put everything back into
perspective and attempts to remain true to his own values.
Varsity Blues has plenty of bone crunching football action,
but it is Mox's off field struggle with some of life's complex
questions that will sustain the interest.  The hunky Van Der Beek will
obviously be one of the main attractions for audiences.  However,
veteran Voight weighs in with another intense, oily performance as the
obsessed and driven coach, and brings some bite to the clichd
part.  Relative newcomers Scott Caan and Paul Walker are also solid as
two of Mox's team mates.  Ron Lester (from Good Burger) brings a
poignant touch to his role as the overweight but genial giant Billy
Bob.
Varsity Blues is a strong and unusually sophisticated film for
adolescents that delivers some important messages.  It also proves
that teen movies are capable of more than just ribald comedies and
slasher flicks.

Author
Geoff Berkshire
Cast: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Paul Walker, Scott Caan, Ron Lester, Amy
Smart, Ali Larter.
One of the first films of 1999 is this MTV Pictures release which marks the
first leading feature role for James Van Der Beek, the star of The WB's runaway
hit Dawson's Creek.  Following in the foot steps of MTV's two other live action
films, Joe's Apartment (1996) and Dead Man On Campus (1998), Varsity Blues is a
bad film and is unlikely to cause much of a sensation in the marketplace.
Set in West Cannan, Texas, the film examines the small town obsession with high
school football through the eyes of second string quarterback John "Mox" Moxon
(Van Der Beek).  We know he's smart because he reads Kurt Vonnegut instead of
the playbook.  Coach Bud Kilmer (Jon Voight) has been around so long there is
actually a bronze statue commemorating him.  The star quarterback, Lance Harbor
(Paul Walker), is a handsome, blonde, hero who has his own billboard in his
front yard and dates the sexy head cheerleader, Darcy (Ali Larter).  Also on
the team are an enormous guy (Ron Lester) with some health problems and the
token African-American team member (Eliel Swinton) whose only real dialogue
scene deals directly with the color of his skin.
When Lance is seriously injured, Mox gets his chance to shine and he runs with
it, undermining Kilmer with his unusual playing strategies.  His relationship
with his dutiful girlfriend, Jules (Amy Smart), is threatened and there's a big
game at the end.  Guess who wins?
Nothing about Varsity Blues is inspired and the whole film simply moves through
the sort of conventional motions that Coach Kilmer would love.  There's a
chance for some smart satire on small town obsessions but the humor here is
decidedly lowbrow.
Van Der Beek does a decent job of carrying his first film although a silly
accent trips him up sometimes.  Also, the role isn't very much of a stretch
from his Dawson Leary character.  He's still a pseudo-intellectual, whiny, nice
guy, except here he also happens to be a jock.
Voight is a terror as he chews up every single piece of scenery and spits it
out.  The other adults are all notably awful while the younger performers don't
fare much better.
On the positive side, Walker is a charismatic actor who is due for a breakout
role following this and his supporting turn in Pleasantville (1998).  Scott
(son of James) Caan has some lively moments as Tweeder, the team's wild man. 
Larter, as a gorgeous seductress looking for a one way ticket out of Texas,
gets to show off the film's most interesting costumes, including a very
eye-opening "whipped cream bikini."
It's interesting to note that the film definitely earns its R-rating with a lot
of harsh language, alcohol abuse and an unusually high amount of nudity
(including a gratuitous trip to a strip bar that reveals a not very surprising
surprise).  All this is likely to come as a shock to the young female fan base
of Dawson's Creek, presumably the target audience for the picture.
Director Brian Robbins previously helmed the kids feature Good Burger (from
Nickelodeon Films, a sister company of MTV) and changes directions here a bit
but still fails to make much of an impression.  The look of the movie is as
bland as the town and characters who populate it.  The football scenes are
generally unexciting and the entire film looks a bit washed out.
There's an ok soundtrack featuring music from Collective Soul, Foo Fighters,
Green Day and Aaliyah but it's not as impressive as one would expect from a MTV
film.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Varsity Blues (1999)
James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Paul Walker, Ron Lester, Scott Caan, 
Richard Lineback, Tiffany C. Love, Amy Smart, Eliel Swinton, Thomas F. 
Duffy, Jill Parker Jones, Joe Pichler, Tonie Perensky, Ali Larter. 
Screenplay by John Gatins, W. Peter Iliff. Directed by Brian Robbins. 104 
minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Varsity Blues" is an utterly formulaic teen sports, sex and suds 
potboiler that flirts with serious issues, only to dive back to the 
comforting safety of clichs. Aimed at young, uncritical audiences, the 
film dutifully trots out everything you'd expect from a hack exploitation 
movie. There's the idealistic hero, complete with a devoted girlfriend, a 
gorgeous temptress, and parents who just don't understand. There's the 
standard-issue football team, comprised of one all-American quarterback 
to be worshipped by all, one muscular party monster to whoop it up and 
bare his ass, one fat guy to be comical and sad, one black guy to suffer 
nobly, and, of course, the big, bad coach, a thundering racist bully who 
badgers injured players into taking steroid injections. Finally, there's 
the plot, which... well, suffice to say it all builds up to THE BIG GAME. 
Ain't Hollywood grand?
Rather than trudging through the usual review formalities, I'll just 
share a few minor observations about "Varsity Blues." SPOILER ALERT: The 
following contains references to key plot points. 
1.  I understand the Hollywood convention of having actors play 
characters considerably younger than their actual age, but there is no 
way on Earth that any of this film's stars could pass themselves off as 
high school students. In fact, several of them look more like high school 
teachers.
2.  Because "Varsity Blues" is set in a small Texas town, some cast 
members strive for authenticity by adopting Southern accents ranging from 
a fairly credible drawl to twangs straight out of "The Beverly 
Hillbillies." As is the cinematic norm, most of the actors periodically 
forget their accents, only to recall them later. Other performers skip 
the accents entirely, sounding like their characters just moved to West 
Canaan from Santa Monica.
3.  In "Dawson's Creek," James Van Der Beek's head appears far too big 
for his body, but it looks almost normal here. Whatever you're doing, 
James, keep it up!
4.  Who in the world chose Ron Lester to play the team's obligatory fat 
guy? The young actor is so morbidly obese that I doubt if he could carry 
a sack of groceries up a flight of stairs without getting winded, let 
alone play a football game. It was hard to enjoy Lester's scenes because 
I caught myself fearing for his health - - and I am not joking. 
5.  You're a young, strong, intelligent black student being verbally 
abused and physically endangered by an authority figure. What should you 
do? Why, wait passively until a white student comes to the rescue! Oh, 
the wonderful messages Hollywood sends to teenagers.
6.  One of the film's subplots involves several team players visiting a 
strip bar, where they discover their sex-ed teacher moonlighting as a 
dancer. When she leaves the stage, she pleads with the boys to "keep her 
secret." Keep her secret?! Unless every other male in a 50 mile radius of 
the bar is gay, I'm betting word of her "secret" just might have already 
leaked out.
7.  Speaking of logic, here's a brief memo to Coach Kilmer: if you're 
going to illegally inject steroids into the leg of a seriously injured 
player... close the damn door.
8.  A bit more about the Coach. Here we have a guy with an unbelievable 
winning streak, a man so beloved that that town has built a statue of him.
 So why is he still coaching in Hooterville?
9.  A note to Jon Voight: For the love of Pete, would you please play a 
good guy for a change? And while you're at it, hold out for a better part 
next time.
10.  Finally, if you are trying to inspire your fellow players that the 
"winning is everything" philosophy is wrong, you'd be well advised to 
avoid urging them to "go out there and play like gods."
The bottom line is this. Formula movies don't have to be bad. "Hoosiers" 
used every genre convention in the book, but the film came splendidly to 
life because the filmmakers created an absolutely authentic feel and 
invested the story with genuine passion. As long as video stores stock 
"Hoosiers," there is no reason to watch pap like "Varsity Blues."

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Varsity Blues is just another high school sports movie.  Most of them aren't
very good, but Varsity Blues is different.  The key in Varsity Blues was
casting.  James Van Der Beek and Jon Voight lead the cast of Varsity Blues. 
The two play enemies- James Van Der Beek plays Jonathan Moxon, second string
football player, and Jon Voight plays the extremely mean football coach at
Canaan High School, Bud Kilmer.  Bud has coached football there for a number of
years.  He has mis treated many his players every year.  He doesn't care about
them at all, he just wants the championship.  He makes them play in sickness,
pain, or sadness.  He always takes his team to the championship, and he expects
to do it again this year.
He relies on star quarterback Lance Harbor, played by Paul Walker. Lance is the
typical movie sports star.  He is the best on the team, and he is always the
hero during the games.  The talent isn't all natural for Lance though,
considering that he takes steroids.  Jonathan, or Mox, (his nickname) discovers
that the coach is doing this.  This is your typical sports movie- the star of
the team is pet to the coach and the man who is better than the star is
absolutely hated by the coach.  Although it is unoriginal, Varsity Blues is
still a winner.  There are a lot of funny sequences, and there are well played
out dramatic sequences as well.  When Lance is sustains an injury that may put
him out of football for life, Mox is the teams only hope.  Coach Kilmer is
reluctant to play Mox, but has no choice.  Mox goes out there and shows coach
how it is done.  The football sequences that were filmed were done very nicely.
 They looked very realistic, and were put together very well.  It looked like
the cast was actually playing the game, and it wasn't coordinated.
Mox continues to win game after game for the Coyotes.  He likes being a star
now, but is very upset with the way Coach Kilmer treats the team.  His dad
(Thomas Duffy) is very proud of him.  He was a star in high school football as
well, and wants his two sons to do the same.  When Mox gets an academic
scholarship to Brown University, his dad is very upset.  He wants Mox to play
football all of his life.  Mox doesn't want to take after his dad, he wants to
live his own life.  James Van Der Beek gives an impressive acting performance
in these arguments with his father.  He made you believe the tough position
that Mox was in at that moment.
Mox's girlfriend, Julie, played by Amy Smart, isn't in to the whole football
craze.  She doesn't care about who wins or who loses or anything like that. 
Since Mox has become a football star, she has noticed a huge change in him.  He
is thinking more about himself than anyone else.  Amy Smart has not done many
movies, but in her role in Varsity Blues, she does a great job of dramatic
acting.  While all this drama is going on, Mox continues to win many games for
the Coyotes.  Coach Kilmer is very proud when Mox takes the team all the way to
the championship game.  During the game, Mox is very reluctant to play.  He
doesn't want to play for his dad and Kilmer.  He is sick of being controlled by
others.  The entire team agrees with what Mox is saying to them about Kilmer.
Varsity Blues is a teenager movie.  Most adults will probably dislike this
movie.  Laughs mixed with sad moments in Varsity Blues make it score big with
the teen audience.  Jon Voight gives a wonderful performance as Coach Kilmer. 
He did a great job of seeming evil, not caring about anyone but himself.  James
Van Der Beek tells us with Varsity Blues that he can handle the lead in a movie
as well as the lead on a hit television show.  Some of Varsity Blues wasn't all
that great, and that's the reason that adults won't like it.  It may not be the
type of movie that will win awards or anything close to it, but it was
certainly enjoyable, and that's enough for me.
The Bottom Line- The typical sports movie with some changes makes for a fun
time.

Author
James Brundage
 Why do people do such stupid things?  Why do we marry people we hate,
divorce people we like, and, above all, why the hell would MTV want to try
to be dramatic?
 Yes, you heard my right, Music Television Productions has decided all of a
sudden that there is something serious about gangster rap and N'Sync and
Backstreet Boys and all of these other bubble-gum teeny-bob-wanna-screw-'em
bands.  It's bad enough that the degraded the once moderately intelligent
real world into a cheap soap opera, but, come on, do they have to make
football dramatic?
 Well, I guess someone thought they did, because someone set down to
creating the cheapest possible storyline about a team trying to win their
23rd Division Championships.  And of course the team is helmed by the coach
from hell, played by Jon Voight, displaying all of the collective charm of
Adolph Hitler (we he quiets the audience in the beginning, I swore to God
that he would say "Se Keil").
 Of course they decided to helm the actual cast of the movie with James Van
Der Beek, teen idol and girls' drool tool from "Dawson's Creek".  And he
plays the same moderately innocent idealistic youth.  In Varsity Blues,
being a writer is all he wants and he spends his time reading Kurt Vonnegut.
In "Dawson's Creek", all he wants is to be a director and he spends his time
watching Spielburg.
 As far as storyline goes, there really isn't one.  There really isn't a
plot or a point, either.  But I forgot to tell you: If you're more of a
football fan than a moviegoer, by all means, enjoy the mainstream crap that
Paramount decided to dish you.  I'm not blaming you.  I'm blaming them.
 As more of a movie critic than a football fan, I can say that the only
thing about Varsity Blues that I actually enjoyed were the moderately
well-directed football games.  If they filmed football like that on TV, damn
right I'd be sitting there every Sunday Afternoon and Monday Night.
 But it isn't and I'm not.  Varsity Blues isn't enjoyable to the
non-football fan.  It doesn't even much deliver on the promise of nothing
but "sex and football".  On the James Brundage
how-much-did-they-unnecessarily-screw meter, it scored a 1 out of 10.
 I'm not telling you not to see it due to a lack of redeeming value.  God
knows I love action movies like True Lies and Blade that couldn't care less
about message.  But, for Christ's sake, why do I have to watch a one hour,
forty minute pseudodrama about a sport that should stay on the field and off
the movie set.
 I don't know why people do such stupid things.  I can't offer any answers,
only advice.  And the advice I offer you is direct, simple, and to the
point.  Don't do another stupid thing by paying anything to see "Varsity
Blues".

Author
James Sanford
 "Varsity Blues" is not so much a fully developed film as it is a crazy
quilt made up of dumb-jock jokes, adolescent sex fantasies,
generation-gap drama and sometimes dazzling gridiron action, all of
which screenwriter W. Peter Iliff tries desperately to stitch together.
The loose ends show and the final product ultimately doesn't hang
together, but "Varsity" is still a better picture than you might expect,
given that it was produced by MTV Pictures (who created last year's
debacle "Dead Man On Campus") and directed by Brian Robbins, the man who
previously brought "Good Burger" to the screen. "Varsity" also marks a
modestly auspicious screen debut for "Dawson's Creek" star James Van Der
Beek, who does a thoroughly respectable job -- and manages to pull off a
decent Southwestern accent -- as a second-string high school quarterback
reluctantly shoved into the spotlight.
 The movie is set in a Texas hamlet called West Canaan where football is
an all-consuming obsession; in one of the script's more novel touches,
the adults in town seem even more caught up in the competition than the
kids do. For example, even though he's one of the West Canaan Coyotes,
Jonathan "Mox" Moxon (Van Der Beek) would rather read "Slaughterhouse
Five" on the sidelines and prepare for an Ivy League education than
fully throw himself into the game, a mind-set that baffles coach Bud
Kilmer (Jon Voight, frighteningly true-to-life), a dictatorial type who
will do literally anything to ensure his team has a chance at the state
championship.
 In its strongest scenes "Varsity" addresses such issues as parents
trying to live vicariously through their children and the misguided
practice of patching up players with pain-killers and sending them back
out on the field instead of to the emergency room. Iliff also puts
across the sad but true notion that for some of these kids football (or,
for young women, snagging a football player) is one of the few ways to
escape spending your life in a dead-end town. The clash between the
over-zealous Kilmer and his quietly rebellious new star is equally
well-dramatized.
 But just when it looks like "Varsity" may turn into a sort of
"Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner" for the pigskin crowd, Iliff
feels compelled to throw in an excess of boozy teen free-for-alls, as
well as a ridiculous, unfunny subplot involving a dowdy sex-ed teacher
who moonlights as a stripper. These useless diversions seem to have less
to do with enhancing the story than they do with making the film
attractive to the party-hearty set, and credibility goes rapidly down
the drain as convenience store clerks give Mox free six-packs and the
team whoops it up in a topless bar where nobody bats an eye at the sight
of a bunch of 17-year-olds downing shots.
 Luckily, the movie regains its footing in time for a finale that
features some genuinely exciting plays and a fairly novel twist on the
hackneyed "big game" set-up. "Varsity Blues" fumbles too often to
qualify as a particularly good film, but in its better moments it does
have something valuable to say about its subject. James Sanford

Author
Jamie Peck
VARSITY BLUES
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
At least there are worthwhile messages about self-confidence and winning 
not being everything buried amongst all the raunchy goings-on, but such 
morals will likely be lost on the movie's core audience of fratboys, 
users of Noxeema and avid "Teen Beat" readers. That last group will 
happily plunk down the admission price to watch "Dawson's Creek" hunk du 
jour James Van Der Beek literally tackle his first big-screen role, a 
high school football player whose moment to shine comes when his Texas 
team's star quarterback ("Pleasantville"'s Paul Walker) suffers an 
on-field injury. Think of Van Der Beek's dull Jonathan "Mox" Moxon as 
the anti-Dawson. 
Not exactly hot off the newfound fame, Mox clashes with a coach (Jon 
Voight) who'll do _anything_ to ensure the 23rd consecutive win of the 
state championships. That's the main storyline, but "Varsity Blues" 
veers off course on matters risque and ribald enough to ensure it 
doesn't flop like dissimilar gridiron flicks "Rudy" or "The Program." 
Mox's obese, good ol' boy pal Billy Bob (Ron Lester) dips pancakes in 
butter, guzzles maple syrup straight from the bottle and can't hold down 
booze! Mox's sexy biology instructor turns out to be a stripper who 
bumps and grinds to Van Halen's "Hot for Teacher" at a local strip club! 
Mox goes to a wild party where a couple does the nasty atop a vibrating 
washing machine! 
Mox is also lusted after by his ailing friend's girlfriend (Ali Larter), 
but this character seems to exist solely so "Varsity Blues" can stage a 
seduction scene complete with French kisses and Cool Whip. Sure, pretty 
Larter looks beguiling in her strategically-placed cream bikini, but a 
romantic temptation subplot is the last thing this movie needs, 
especially when it apparently doesn't have time or the creativity to 
resolve earlier ones (like a forgotten-about illness for Billy Bob and a 
black teammate who's trotted out only when a race card needs to be 
played). As you can probably guess, everything boils down to a 
testosterone-fueled big game where the stakes are high and the tension 
is non-existent. 
See, we know everything will turn out alright, mainly because "Varsity 
Blues" amounts to little more than a cinematic rendition of the ultimate 
male fantasy - jocks, chicks, Coors and scores of multiple varieties. 
It's nicely shot and well-performed by a mostly fresh-faced cast, but 
these assets go to waste because the movie's ambitions rarely amount to 
anything more than a "Porky's"-esque parade of boobs and liquor, liquor 
and boobs. (The most challenging shot prominently features both.) 
Perhaps there'd be nothing wrong with this were "Varsity Blues"' heart 
in the right place, but it's conflicted between body parts a foot above 
and a foot below.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Many a film have been showing us the different aspect's of what high schools
are in all different parts of the U.S. Whether is be four guys trying to loose
their virginity, the ugly duckling turning into a swan, or the longtime love of
Dawson and Joey, filmmakers are finding more ways to showcase this four year
portion of our lives. 
But this is West Canaan, Texas. Football rules all, the coach is evil, and the
police are stupid. Lance Harbor (Paul Walker) star quarterback for the Coyotes
(he has a huge billboard that says that in front of his house) is being pushed
by the venomous coach Kilmer (Voight, who's performance here should go right
next to his in Anaconda) to play even though he's letting off scar tissue by
the minute. He permanently damages his leg during the middle of the game.
The replacement is Johnathan Moxon (Van Der Beek) he's more interested in
reading Slaughterhouse Five than he is looking through the football plays. He
has a couple of plays of his own and he decides to try them out, besides he's
not going to play football ever again anyway. Kilmer doesn't like the fact that
he's not listening to him and tries to jeopardize his scholarship to Brown. It
all leads up to the big game, will they win, will they lose? (Yawn..).
The movie starts out as if it could be a well-drawn out thoughtful look at high
school sports, however this couldn't happen because MTV Productions is on the
label and the director is the co-creator of Kenan & Kel and All That. So they
fill in the cracks with countless scenes of uneeded nudity and profanity. While
the first half provides incredible insight, the second is a predictable sports
movie. So for that I give it *** stars.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring James Van Der Beek; Jon Voight; Paul Walker; Ron Lester & Scott
Caan
I didn't go into Varsity Blues expecting a whole lot. I'll have to admit
that I'm not the biggest football fan in the world, so the whole premise of
the movie wasn't at the top of my list as far as appealing story lines go.
Having said that, I am a fan of Jon Voight, and I think James Van Der Beek
is one of the more talented actors on television on one of the best shows on
television (Dawson's Creek). So I wasn't real surprised that I enjoyed the
performances of Voight and Van Der Beek, although Van Der Beek could use
some serious practice on his southern accent. The part that did surprise me
was that I actually enjoyed the rest of the movie. The fact that it included
a scene in a strip bar and another scene with a girl wearing nothing other
than whip cream probably didn't hurt. But the supporting cast was good, and
the story line, while revolving around football, had enough extras to keep
even those of us who avoid football telecasts at all costs something to
enjoy.
The basic premise goes something like this. The movie is set in typical
small town Midwest America. The town is crazy over the high school football
team, and even crazier over the local coach (Jon Voight), who the townsfolk
consider to be a legend, even though he is the meanest S.O.B. to ever put a
whistle around his neck. Van Der Beek plays a second string quarterback who
never gets playing time and who takes the brunt of the coach's abuse. Like
all good formula sports movies, the all-star quarterback suffers a season
ending injury and Van Der Beek is called upon to lead the team into the
state finals. Coach and new starting quarterback still don't like each
other, which is where most of the conflict in this movie arises from. Thrown
in for good measure are the teams off the field antics in what comes off as
a rip off of Porky's with a higher budget.
As I already alluded to, Voight and Van Der Beek do a good job in their
roles. Voight is perfectly cast as the coach who only cares about winning no
matter what the personal cost to his players. Van Der Beek, aside from the
lousy accent, shows that his great performances on Dawson's Creek are not
just a result of working with a talented cast and creative genius Kevin
Williamson. Van Der Beek really stands out in this movie. It is a credit as
much to his performance as to the decent supporting cast surrounding him. If
Van Der Beek's performance in this film is any indication, he may be well on
his way to a very successful career as a leading man in Hollywood. Let's
face it Kevin Costner's missing in action english accent in Robin Hood:
Prince Of Thieves certainly never hurt his career. As long as Van Der Beek
can avoid roles in movies involving post-apocalyptic postal carriers, or
post-apocalyptic flooded continents, he should do OK. The supporting cast
does their job fairly solidly, but none leap out as being overly
outstanding.
The interaction between Voight and his players and Van Der Beek's rise to
become the town VIP and the problems that that cause him more than give the
non-sports minded something to latch on to, even with all of the football.
Add to that the performances of Van Der Beek and Voight, and you have a
fairly entertaining couple of hours.

Author
Mac VerStandig
Varsity Blues is neither a good film nor a bad one, but rather a 
mediocre production that had the potential to be far better, but could 
have slipped even lower as well. In some areas it was masterful, and 
other were equivalently pathetic to put it frankly. The outcome is 
interesting, odd and unique, but not necessarily worth the trip unless 
you are a teenage James Van Der Beek heartthrob or have some other 
obsession with one of the cult aspects of this film.
In a small town in Texas high school football is a way of life. It is 
the heritage, it is the society, and it is the community's favorite 
topic. Bud Kilmer (Jon Voight) has coached the high school squad since 
his current team's parents were playing. Over that time he has brought 
home 2 state titles and 22 division titles. Grasped by immortality, he 
can do no wrong.
Leading this year's squad is quarterback Lance Harbor (Paul Walker) and 
lineman Billy Bob, (Ron Lester) who, as you can figure out early on, is 
a stereotype right out of a Jeff Foxworthy book. Then, as only Hollywood 
would have it, through corruption, illegal drinking, and a whole lot of 
other stuff that ATF doesn't like, Billy Bob misses a block and Lance 
goes down. Of course, this is where our hero enters. Jonathan Moxon 
seems about as perfect you can get, a scholarship to Brown, a great 
girlfriend, and a steady life. But all that must change when he becomes 
the starting quarterback of a football team that is a way of life.
Varsity Blues tries to explore several proven aspects of film making by 
putting them all together into one film. Parts of the film resemble such 
child favorites as Angels in the Outfield and others with a fairy tale 
plot and overly predictable ending. But much of the film is about sex, 
drinking, and life in strip bars; thus making it a far cry from kiddy 
material. I suppose the goal is to settle on a teenage audience 
somewhere in-between, but I have reservations as to just how anyone 
could sit through these 90 minutes of contrast and be truly entertained. 
One saving grace, however, is the acting. Jon Voight is absolutely 
stellar and offers a reminder to the world that he is one of the most 
underrated actors in Hollywood. In his freshman performance, James Van 
Der Beek is great as well. He seems to step beyond the typical teenage 
role and gives his part some meaning that few others could add to the 
film. And most of the supporting cast fairs well also, but nothing 
brilliant will come out of a bunch people playing drunk high school 
students.
Overall, this film does have it's moments of glory, but they are matched 
with shame. The plot isn't very original, but the combination of plots 
within is an unprecedented theory. However, I get the feeling that there 
is a good reason why no one had dared to do so before: it just doesn't 
work. So, although I tip my cap to the acting, I just don't see a 
quality film here.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Brian Robbins.
Cast: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Paul Walker, Ron Lester, Amy 
Smart, Ali Larter, Scott Caan.
1999 - 104 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed January 9, 1999.
"Varsity Blues" is the best film of 1999 thus far. Unfortunately, it is 
also the first film I have seen from 1999. It is another one of those 
small-town sports movies that involves a flawed, but good-heartedfrom 
1999. It is another one of those small-town sports movies that involves 
a flawed, but good-hearted protagonist; a rough and meanspirited coach; 
and the "big game." By the end, will the underdog overcome great odds 
and triumph? Will everyone in the town turn against the coach? Will the team
win the climactic game? Do cats bathe themselves regularly?
The so-called "hero" in question is John Moxin (James Van Der Beek), a 
senior at West Canaan High School who plays for the varsity football 
team, but is really just hoping to get a scholarship at Brown University 
so that he can get out of the dead-end town. At least he's got the right 
idea, since West Canaan, Texas is portrayed in the film as, frankly, 
pathetic, with the whole town treating the weekly football games as the 
Second Coming. Heck, in one scene, the front page of the town's 
newspaper is proclaiming about the West Canaan Badgers' big win the 
night before. When the team's star quarterback is severely injured, 
tearing the ligaments in his leg, John finds himself taking over as the 
team's leader, but his few minutes of glory do not last long, as he 
begins to have problems with his girlfriend (Amy Smart) when she 
discovers he spent an evening with another girl (Ali Larter). And after 
staying out all night with his drinking buddies at a strip joint (all of 
the teenagers in the film are portrayed as raging alcoholics), the team 
loses their second-to-last game, putting John at feuds with the coach 
(Jon Voight who, like Gary Oldman, is overstaying his welcome in the 
typecasted role as the "bad guy"). Worse yet, the coach is threatening 
to ruin John's scholarship chances if the Badgers don't win their final 
game.
The plotting of "Varsity Blues" is as old as the hills, and contains 
every cliche in the book. Admittedly, I was never exactly bored while I 
was watching it, but I hasten to add that I was rarely ever entertained. 
Throughout, all I could really think of is how virtually the same exact 
story had been filmed with a great deal more thoughtfulness and maturity 
in 1983's "All the Right Moves."
One of the biggest problems I had with the film is how little of 
interest any of the characters actually were, least of all certainly not 
John, who, played by Van Der Beek (of TV's "Dawson's Creek"), is pretty 
much a bore without any engaging qualities. While I probably shouldn't 
blame this on Van Der Beek, since the inauspicious and "by-the-numbers" 
screenplay by W. Peter Iliff isn't of any help, he is still certainly 
not in the league of Tom Cruise in "All the Right Moves." The story 
revolving around John, meanwhile, is extemely thin throughout, 
particularly for its 104-minute running time, and it alternates between 
uninspired comic relief (as in when the students see their sex education 
teacher working as a stripper at the club) and heavy-handed melodrama. 
The romance between John and his girlfriend had the potential to be an 
adequate subplot, but we also learned very little about her, which is 
unfortunate since Amy Smart, whom I don't think I've seen before in past 
films, is probably the only character written with any sort of 
intelligence. Smart does not allow her character to become the "passive 
girlfriend," instead coming off as a young woman with her own ideas and 
opinions. It's too bad the camera didn't linger on her long enough so we 
could hear some of those thoughts.
The adult characters probably fare the worse of any, since they all must 
play residents of a dim-witted town that cares about nothing but 
football. John's relationship with his parents can also be telegraphed 
far in advance. His father is set on him becoming a football player at a 
university, but John doesn't want any part of that. His mother stands 
beside her "big, strong husband" and is a passive female. Finally, Jon 
Voight plays the stock bully coach character and he does nothing to make 
the thankless role any more than one-dimensional.
Saving "Varsity Blues" from being a total washout are a few amusing 
sequences, including one set in the sex education class, which did get a 
laugh out of me. The scenes of playing football were well-shot and 
thankfully didn't overstay their welcome, as many sports films fall 
victim to. But leaving the theater, the question I had in my mind was 
why did this film need to be made? I seem to be asking this question 
quite a lot lately, since the same old stories seem to be cranking out 
of Hollywood. Do we really need another high-school sports film? No, we 
don't, and certainly not one of this low-caliber, which felt like a 
cut-and-paste job of spare parts from much better, but similar, films. 
"Varsity Blues," no doubt is the first one, however, to include an 
earnest scene in which one of the characters is only wearing whipped 
cream on their private parts.
       - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
         Dustin
Putman's Film Haven >
