Title
Review for 8MM (1999)
Number of Reviews
39

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Towards the end of "8MM", a detective named Tom Welles (Nicholas Cage) comes
face-to-face with a small group of men who have produced a snuff film -- the
filmed record of the murder of a girl, for money.  "Why?" he asks them, which
is all any sane man would say.  To which they answer: "Because we could."
Unlike so many other movies about human depravity, "8MM" confronts
unflinchingly the possibility of absolute evil in the world.  Instead of
being one of those by-the-numbers jobs about a Nice Guy who gets pushed into
being a one-man army of vengeance while the audience cheers, it makes the
"hero" into a figure almost as tragic as the men he's trying to convince
himself to punish.
In the abstract, "8MM" is a thriller.  Welles is a highly-pedigreed PI who is
hired by a wealthy widower.  He's a family man; the work that he does hardly
seems to touch his real life, and his biggest vice is that he smokes and tries
to lie about it to his wife.  When he takes the case, all he thinks about is
how it'll pay for his daughter's college tuition.
The case doesn't even seem all that disturbing to begin with.  The widower
presents Welles with a reel of 8mm film that was among her late husband's
possessions -- the aforementioned snuff reel.  Welles isn't convinced it's
authentic; he recites the police litany about snuff films being urban legends.
But she's paying, and he needs the dough, so off he goes.
The first half-hour of the film is dogged detective work, which we see in
detail.  Welles fixates on the girl in the film and decides to treat this as
a missing-persons case.  He eventually identifies the girl -- she'd been
reported missing quite a while back -- and poses as a government agent to
speak to her mother (Amy Morton).  The scenes between Welles and the mother
are some of the best moments in the movie.  She has been saving birthday
gifts for her daughter, stacked up on the endtable, in the event she comes
home, but Welles cannot tell her what he fears to be the truth.
Welles eventually finds himself in Hollywood, tracking the girl through any
number of sleazy dives.  He hooks up with a porno-store salesman named Max
California (Joaquim Phoenix), who becomes his Virgil to Welles's Dante in the
hell of underground porn.  The film observes with cold-eyed horror as they
push their way into ugly, dank clubs littered with people who seem only human
by volition, and spend appalling amounts of money for what are allegedly
films of Filipino women being raped, tortured and slaughtered.        But in one of
the story's best reversals, they find the same girl in several of the
"murder" movies.  More fakery.        Another dead end.
Welles keeps digging.  He finds a low-rent porno-movie producer, Eddie Poole
(the greasy James Gandolfini), who apparently knows more than he's letting on,
and from him Welles learns about Dino Velvet (Peter Stormare), a director of
high-art S&M porn productions.  Welles theorizes that a regular of Velvet's
movies, Machine (Chris Bauer), a leather-masked slab of muscle, may be the
murderer in the snuff film, and tries to set up a trap for all of them.
What happens next I will not reveal, of course, but the movie knows better
than to simply roll the credits when the last bad guy has been shot dead. 
Instead, we are pushed closer and closer to the real horror -- the
understanding that there are people who are simply evil.  Not "sick", not
insane, but evil by choice, because they know nothing stands in their way. 
Welles, confronted with all this, collapses.  There is a scene where he has
the chance to take revenge, but cannot, and instead picks up the phone and
tries to get someone to talk him into doing it.
Many critics hated "8MM" for WHAT it showed -- the fact that it was about
sleazy, ugly subjects.  I think to criticize a film like "8MM" for what it
shows, and to ignore the fact that HOW it shows it is enlightening and
revealing, is to completely miss the point.  If there are in fact people like
Dino Velvet, and Machine -- and Tom Welles -- then perhaps we only fool
ourselves by blaming the bearer of the bad news.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Justin Felix
8 MM (1999)
A film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1999 Justin Felix.  
Any comments about this review?  Contact me at justinfelix@yahoo.com  
This review also appears in The Shrubbery at
http://www.theshrubbery.prohosting.com/0499/movie1.html  
All of my film reviews are archived at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix 
Written by Andrew Kevin Walker.  
Directed by Joel Shumacher.  
Starring Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, and Peter Stormare.  
Rated R (contains intense graphic violence, nudity, and profanity)  123 mins.  
Synopsis:  Private detective Tom Welles is hired by a wealthy widow to
uncover the origins of a snuff film owned by her late husband.  After
uncovering the authenticity of the film, Welles descends into an underground
world of perverse pornographers seeking vigilante revenge on the filmmakers.  
Comments:  8 MM is one of the more disturbing mainstream movies I have seen
in a long time.  Though it doesn't present a snuff film (a movie which
documents a person's murder for real, usually during or after some form of
sexual act) as explicitly as the cult classic MUTE WITNESS and violence as
shockingly as, say, NATURAL BORN KILLERS, 8 MM stays in your head long after
you see it.  It is not fun to watch; see something else if you get upset by
realistic, sadistic violence.  This film's violence and perverse sexuality
skirts closely into NC-17 territory.  For those with strong stomachs,
however, 8 MM is an intelligent, worthwhile thriller, especially during its
second hour.
Nicolas Cage, after a couple ho-hum movies, returns to material which allows
him to utilize his strong acting abilities.  As Tom Welles, a private
detective and caring family man to a wife and newly-born daughter, Cage
skillfully and convincingly portrays a decent man whose unwavering energy
slowly transforms into obssession and violence as he is pulled into a
nightmarish world of underground pornographers and brutal sexual deviants.
Serving as a guide to this world is Joaquin Phoenix, who plays a struggling
songwriter named Max California.  California, despite his name, is a
surprisingly intelligent and complex character, and Phoenix does a very good
job at slowly pulling the audience to sympathy for the character.  The real
star of the movie, though, must be Peter Stormare.  Stormare played the
"really, really evil guy" in FARGO, and his character, Dino Velvet, in this
movie seems about ten times more evil and unpredictable.  His performance is
very chilling.  
8 MM's success may hardly be surprising.  It was directed by Joel
Schumacher, who, hopefully, saw this film as an apology for the absolutely
dreadful BATMAN AND ROBIN.  Before directing the last two BATMAN duds,
however, Schumacher was responsible for several well-made horror flicks:
LOST BOYS, FLATLINERS, and FALLING DOWN.  8 MM certainly joins the rank of
these minor classics and is perhaps most reminiscent of FALLING DOWN in that
both films present an average man who self-destructs before the audience's
eyes.  8 MM was written by Andrew Kevin Walker, who also penned the Academy
Award-winning thriller SEVEN a few years back.  Like SEVEN, 8 MM is full of
dialogue which haunts you well after leaving the theater.  Welles is
searching for answers.  How could anyone possibly drug and then slowly,
methodically, sadistically kill a teenaged girl to make a film?  When
confronting one of the perpretrators at the end, the murderer responds that
there are no reasons.  He just enjoys it.  That, Walker seems to suggest, is
where the real terror lays: not in the crime itself but in the fact that
rational motives do not exist.  
A couple minor faults led me to my four-star rating (five stars is the
highest rating I give).  One, I found it a little difficult, early on, to
accept the fact that a hardened private detective would get physically
disgusted when first seeing a snuff film.  Yes, snuff is a horrible thing,
but a detective of Welles' caliber has probably encountered awful things
before.  Second, some of the clues Welles gathers are too convenient.  He
discovers, for example, the victim's diary in her private bathroom, despite
the fact the the police, the FBI, and her own mother have all investigated
the room before.  Finally, the closing scene seemed trite and improbable
considering the rest of the film.  
Despite the above criticisms, 8 MM is an engrossing story.  One of the best
scenes in the film occurs toward the end as a crazed Welles, who no longer
seems like a hero, brutally beats one of the pornographers responsible for
the snuff film.  He pulls a gun on the man and, for a relatively long amount
of time, struggles to decide whether or not to kill him.  He then leaves the
building and calls the victim's mother, in the middle of the night, to
basically see if she would support the action.  The entire scene is tense,
unpredictable, and emotionally charged.  Rarely, anymore, do horror films or
thrillers provoke suspense in me as 8 MM, with scenes like this, did.  
8 MM is most certainly not for the faint of heart.  This is a graphic,
oftentimes unflinching, look into the darkness which resides in both
ordinary and extraordinary people.  If you're prepared for a film of this
nature, I give it an enthusiastic recommendation.

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
What's to like about the world of extremely violent trash
pornography--ie. the garbage known as "snuff" films? Nothing,
right? What's to like about a film chronicling the world of
violent trash pornography? Well...nothing. So, why make it,
Hollywood? There's no reason why the average, sane movie-goer
will be interested in such a topic. No one is going to enrich
their life or have a good time by watching material such as this.
The lack of quality filmmaking in "8MM" (from technical to
acting) stands out even more when you consider the star, writer,
and supporting cast--all reputable. But Joel Schumacher and his
brand of unlikable filmmaking strikes again! Like Paul Schrader,
Schumacher has his moments, but they're few and far (FAR!)
between. Basically, this picture is crap and NO ONE should pay to
see it. Why not walk out? Well, this wouldn't be a thorough
review about a thoroughly bad movie. Here's why you should spend
your money on dog food or gum instead of "8MM"...
First thing--if you don't heed my advice, then understand what
you're about to see before you even THINK about paying good money
for this crud. It's not easy to watch. I didn't know the details
of the story beforehand, but at least my ignorance can help
others now. The (HA!) plot revolves around Tom Welles (Nicolas
Cage) as a surveillance expert and Private Investigator. A rich
old woman discovers a "snuff" film in her late husband's safe.
She calls Welles and hires him to try and find out if the young
girl (it had to be a young girl, didn't it, Schumacher!) who
appears to be murdered in the film really is dead. She's
horrified that her husband would have owned such a film (in 8mm,
of course) and just wants Welles to snoop around without police
interference to see what he can find. Family-man Welles agrees
against better judgement or any concrete leads even after
cringing and grimacing at the sight of the grotesque "murder".
Let me backtrack for a moment. See, "snuff" films are pornos with
a violent twist--people are tortured in very sick ways and end up
dead. However, the deaths are often staged and, in those cases,
special effects and "good" acting make all the difference. Very
sick people enjoy and pay top dollar for these hard-to-find
movies. The thought of this "industry" makes me want to throw my
computer out the window and stop this review, but I'll swallow my
bile and move on.
Welles follows clues to Hollywood and the porn industry. You'd
think he's Sherlock Holmes the way clues drop so easily for him!
He comes across smut clerk Max (Joaquin Phoenix) who knows
everyone and everything in the underground business of sleaze.
After a lot of digging and bribing, Welles finds the men who are
responsible for making this, and other, "snuff" films. Skip
ahead, skip ahead, skip ahead... Led by Dino Velvet (Peter
Stormare in an uncharacteristically terrible performance) and
star-torturer "Machine" (Christopher Bauer), they have a big
showdown with Welles where death and mayhem ensue. The movie
doesn't end there, unfortunately, because Welles has to do what
all heroes in Schumacher films do--become a vigilante.
This film doesn't draw you in. It keeps you about 700 miles away
from it and who in their right mind would want to get close? It
IS possible to like a film that focuses on grime and sick
behaviour (ie. "Se7en"), but it takes a large measure of
restraint (Schumacher has none) and a larger amount of talent
(Schumacher has little). By those jabs, I'm not only referring to
his stylish destruction of the "Batman" franchise, but "A Time To
Kill" was an immensely overrated disappointment. For a guy who
gets so much studio money, his track record of making rather bad
movies is unparalleled.
A good screenwriter and a good director can make you hypnotically
watch even disgusting subject matter. Writer Andrew Kevin Walker
didn't recapture the smarts of the fascinating script he authored
for '95s twisted thriller, "Se7en". Director Schumacher doesn't
have that innate ability to make you watch things you don't
really want to see like better directors are capable of doing. He
must not have believed Hitchcock who espoused the theory that
what we don't see is more frightening than what we do (especially
when it's a scene where young girl is supposed to be murdered).
However, gratuitous is Joel's middle name.
He must think that not flaunting a hard-core act of violent sex
is showing plenty of tactful restraint. No, he doesn't go THAT
far, but we see enough unpleasantness. He doesn't leave much to
the imagination. It's manipulating to hurt (or kill) young girls
just to get the audience on the side of a murderous vigilante.
The script and acting should be what gets us to believe in these
characters, yet Schumacher has no subtlety in his (HA HA!) craft.
Case in point, a shot of a Christian Fellowship bus (good,
right?) drives away to reveal one of the villains (bad, right?).
See...no subtlety. Does Joel think we're stupid or that we need
to be held by the hand to comprehend the contrasting imagery? Who
do we root for in this mess? Is there anybody out there?
It's not all the director's fault, though. Why did the actors
sign up for this? Nicolas Cage is an Oscar-winner, for cryin' out
loud! If he claims to do films to challenge himself and for the
artistic merit rather than the money, what was he smoking when
this script dropped on his veranda? What is Cage supposed to be
in this movie--a whispering Batman without the charisma and
pointed ears? Villainous Peter Stormare is five steps past hammy.
And what is James Gandolfini doing in this trash? He was so solid
as a concerned father in "A Civil Action". I guess ol' Nic, Pete,
and Jim were promised a mountain of money...or they're suckers.
Or they just don't care.
There ARE moments (albeit brief ones) where this rises above the
wasteland. Catherine Keener is good (although too quick to
threaten divorce) as Mrs. Wells. Baby Cindy is obviously cute and
Wells' devout love of his daughter is sweet. The mother (Amy
Norton) of the girl in the infamous 8mm film is not too bad as a
woman dealing with the uncertain loss of her runaway daughter.
This film has an appropriate blue-toned, washed-out look like
"Payback" (which was a MUCH better movie). The editing is okay in
scenes of no dialogue, but at other times it's rough. During some
conversations, close-ups and wide shots are not cut very well,
making it look to be editted by someone whose instincts aren't
good and whose timing was a half-second off. Such a technical
error indeed stands out. Speaking of standing out, don't believe
the misleading trailers. There's not much action here.
Occasionally, yes, but not as often as your TV will have you
believe.
After seeing "8MM", I may not be interested in ever watching ANY
kind of porn again. Is that a positive? Well, if making me almost
ill at the thought of glimpsing a dirty movie again is their
motive, they've done a swell job here. It'll be a long time
before I give a Schumacher film another chance--unless I lose my
mind and become seriously depraved. But today I'm not depraved,
so I ask, why does this film preach that this garbage is out
there and that society should be worried about it? I'm sure that
somewhere right now there's some pretty sick crap going on, but
that doesn't mean I need to know about it. Yes, Mr. Walker, your
script tells us that there are some screwed-up folks out there.
Yes, Mr. Walker, the proverbial monster doesn't look like we
expect him to. You said all that in 1995. Move on.
This film serves no purpose. It doesn't entertain, it doesn't
teach us anything, it doesn't make a statement beyond the obvious
"this stuff is bad" approach. Only if this film awakens the
authorities to find a way to abolish these types of horrors would
it ever do someting truly worthwhile. That's not likely to
happen, though, so "8MM" is indeed a scummy waste of money. Orson
Welles said years ago in a tribute to film, "To movies...to good
movies". If only Joel Schumacher and the producers had listened
and told Andrew Kevin Walker to bury this crud deep in a hole.
Like "snuff" films, "8MM" should never have been made. Now,
excuse me while I go try to forget I ever saw it.
USELESS TRIVIA--Joel Schumacher loves the vigilante theme. He
used it in "Batman Forever", in "Batman & Robin", in "A Time To
Kill", in "Falling Down", and it's rumoured that Joel himself
will play the vigilante at his breakfast table tomorrow...


Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: February 26, 1999
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter
Stormare, Christopher Bauer, Catherine Keener, Amy Morton
Directed by: Joel Schumacher
Distributed by: Columbia Pictures / Sony Pictures Entertainment
MPAA Rating: R (strong perverse sexuality and violence, strong language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/8mm.htm 
Graphically intense movies can be thrillers and they can be exposés, but
8MM is neither and therein lies its problem. There's too much fiction
for 8MM to deliver any sort of social message about the underground
world of pornography; and there's no sense of intense storytelling for
8MM to be considered a successful thriller. Instead, the latest film
from BATMAN AND ROBIN director Joel Schumacher is a run-of-the-mill
detective story with darkly ambitious overtones. 
The movie is dark to the point of repulsion, and in this respect it is
most successful. Advance word from critics and the MPAA's reasons for
certification trumpeted tales of a very raw and very edgy movie;
instead, Schumacher plays up the movie with smoke and mirrors. Given the
horrific nature of the tale, it's a testament to Schumacher's brief
moments of genius that he actually shows very little substance. Much is
assumed in 8MM. 
What isn't assumed are the story's basic facts, which never really
change throughout the course of the movie -- destroying any hope for
suspenseful thrillerism. Nicolas Cage stars as private investigator Tom
Welles, who is called upon the recently widowed Mrs. Christian (Myra
Carter) to investigate the contents of her dead husband's private safe.
Of particular concern is an ominous reel of eight millimeter film which
contains a pornographic movie that ends with a brutal murder. Mrs.
Christian asks Tom to find out if the film is real, and more
importantly, if the girl is still alive. 
All of this is laid out in the film's opening scenes, and so the
audience is not left to ask any questions. Within moments, Tom has
several solid leads, one of which takes him to Los Angeles where he
meets up with streetwise porn dealer Max California (Joaquin Phoenix).
Max provides the movie's dark comedy, and to great effect. The Andrew
Kevin Walker script handles supporting characters like Max awkwardly,
thus resulting in the movie's muddled nature. It does not do well to
reject the character of Max, one of the audience's only sympathetic ties
to the plot, and it makes much ado about the identity of the masked man,
which has no bearing on the plot's outcome. 
The rest of the movie is standard fare. Nicolas Cage sleepwalks through
his role and provides little entertainment benefit other than the
guaranteed box office minimum for Columbia Pictures. And, despite
seventeen films and twenty-five years in the film industry, it's still
hard to call Joel Schumacher's work anything but goofy. For most, this
will not be an essential film to see. 

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Joel Schumacher
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter Stormare,
Christopher Bauer, Anthony Heald, Catherine Keener
Screenplay: Andrew Kevin Walker
Producers: Judy Hofflund, Gavin Polone
Runtime: 124 min.
US Distribution: Columbia
Rated R: Strong violence, sex, language
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
About four years ago, Andrew Kevin Walker wrote the intelligent and
subtle script for Seven, which is easily one of the best films ever
made.  Walker writes about normal people who go face-to-face with evil
forces they can't possibly understand.  His script for 8mm is nearly as
good as that of Seven, but Seven had David Fincher in the director's
chair.  8mm has Joel Schumacher, who was responsible for the ludicrous
failure of Batman & Robin.  Indeed, 8mm is not as good as it could have
been:  I constantly got the feeling that Walker and Schumacher wanted to
tell different stories.
Walker wants to tell the story of an average guy confronted with moral
decisions so deep and disturbing that he nearly loses his mind.  This
kind of conflict, while slightly contrived, is still immensely
interesting if handled with care.  But Schumacher is more interested in
mood than in characters, and often handles scenes in ridiculous and
unbelievable ways.  There are moments when the writer and director are
in sync, and those are the best in the film.  And, as a suspense
picture, the movie works more often than it doesn't.  I just can't help
but think that 8mm could have been an existential thriller with the same
force and conviction as Seven.  
The likable Nicolas Cage stars as Tom Welles, a private investigator
who is commissioned by an elderly lady to determine the authenticity of
an 8mm film she finds in the safe of her dead husband.  The film is
referred to as "snuff" pornography -- pornography in which a woman is
raped and murdered in the movie.  Welles initially believes that "snuff"
is an urban myth -- the movies that do exist are all phonies.  But he
watches the film, and sees a teenage girl get hacked to death by a giant
man in a leather mask.  The movie looks real, but he can't tell, and so
he goes searching.
His searches lead him all over the country, from Cleveland to Hollywood
to New York, and back again.  While Tom is roaming all over the country,
his wife (Catherine Keener) is left in the dark as to his whereabouts. 
While searching through missing children files, he stumbles across the
girl's true identity.  Later, he meets Max California (Joaquin Phoenix),
a adult bookstore clerk who leads him down a strange and twisted path
through the underworld of illegal pornography.  
Walker is better at writing thrillers than most other screenwriters who
specialize in the genre, simply because he knows how to characterize,
and how to integrate character with the turns of the story.  The film
opens with development of Tom's marriage, and we immediately take a
liking to both him and his wife.  This sets us up for the rest of the
film because we care about Tom -- we want him to succeed.  Too many
films abandon character and story in favor of spectacle, but Walker
knows how to construct a good script.  It also helps that Cage is in the
main role; he's such a powerful, believable actor, and he brings the
necessary desperation to Tom without going over-the-top.  The other
actors all fill their roles nicely, with standout performances from
Phoenix and Peter Stormare (as a nutty porn-god).
But the emotional center of 8mm is what rings true; the way this dirty,
disgusting world affects Tom is a truly interesting conflict.  He
develops an attachment to the young girl in the movie, and fights for
her, even when no one else does.  He doesn't understand what makes these
people do what they do, why they're willing to destroy young women to
make a buck.  And there's one scene towards the end of the film that
truly moved me:  Tom is on the verge of killing a man, but he can't do
it.  He's not a murderer.  He goes to his car and calls the girl's
mother, saying, "Tell me how much you loved her."  That he needs the
girl's mother to give him permission is a perfect, subtle comment on his
character, and gives a moral side to the film that is both meaningful
and moving.
But I just didn't get the feeling that Schumacher was as interested in
the characters as in the mood.  Atmosphere is definitely important in a
film like this; 8mm is a dark movie, but it looks great, and Mychael
Danna's musical score underlines the eerie visuals smoothly.  But the
film frequently falls head-first into absurdity:  one scene, which
features three psycho porn-freaks and a crossbow, is particularly silly,
and I could have done without a climactic stabbing in the rain.  I also
think Schumacher takes the wrong tone with a lot of the material:  he
often seems a little too fascinated with the porn stuff, and so the film
often comes across as exploitative.
I don't know if Walker worked directly with Schumacher, but their
intentions don't seem to  correspond.  At the heart of 8mm is an
exceptionally well-conceived conflict, a situation in which a real
character is confronted with terrible things and is forced to do
terrible things himself.  But Schumacher almost drowns out the substance
with his style, and so the film misses the mark.  8mm is a thriller
worth seeing, but I can't shake the thought that it could have been the
truly disturbing experience Walker wanted it to be.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
Like a marathon runner, Joel Schumacher's 8MM dazzles its spectators
with its intense dedication and integrity as it stays focused on its
goal of creating a taut suspense thriller.  Then, as it rounds the bend
for the last third of the race, it breaks its stride and strolls over
for a snack of the cinematic equivalent of junk food, the unnecessary
gore of an old slasher flick.  After that, it never regains its
momentum.  Worst of all, the viewers may begin to boo their own hero as
the film loses all credibility through ridiculous and cliched scenes
that should have been left on the cutting room floor.  (Is the killer in
the dark house behind door number 1, door number 2 or door number 3?)
When the movie crosses the finish line, what are we to think of it?  Do
we remember its flawless execution in the majority of the movie?  Or do
we forever hold the pathetic final 45 minutes against it?  Has the
exhilaration of the intelligent suspense of the first part been negated
by the schlock of the ending?
There is a scene in which the lead does something so unbelievable that
the audience begins to cry out in ridicule.  If you were to leave about
5 minutes before that, you would likely be extremely disappointed that
you missed seeing the ending of such a breathtakingly marvelous
thriller.  On the other hand, if you came in late and missed the first
two thirds, you would likely think you found a candidate for your worst
of the year list.
8MM opens to sinister gray skies and heavy, foreboding music.  We meet
our protagonist, a family man and private investigator named Tom Welles,
played with great gusto by Nicolas Cage.  Tom majored in finance at Penn
but switched to surveillance since he claims it's the future.
In a highly nuanced performance, Cage illustrates the grime and drudgery
of detective work.  With grimacing eyes, he shows his vulnerability
while the intellect of his mind is never hidden.  He does his best to
make the believable and the unbelievable equally credible, no small feat
in the laughable last act.  In contrast, the normally reliable Catherine
Keener, from YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS, is given a cliched role as his
steadfast wife, which she manages to make even worse than it's written.
One day, Tom is offered the most challenging assignment of his career.
A rich widow who lives in what appears to be Bruce Wayne's mansion --
perhaps the director borrowed it from his BATMAN movies -- asks Tom to
look into an 8MM tape that she found in her husband's private safe.  The
6-year-old tape is a snuff film, one in which a girl is killed by a
hooded sadomasochist.
The unanswered questions are almost endless.  First, and foremost, is
whether the tape is genuine and whether the girl is still alive?  (As
Tom later finds out, many such snuff films have the same girl "killed"
since they are hoaxes.)  Who is the girl?  Who commissioned the film and
why?  What role, if any, did the rich woman's husband play?  Is the old
lady honest with Tom or is this assignment a ruse?  Why choose Tom
rather than someone else?  What will she do with the information that
Tom uncovers?  And then there is the fundamental conundrum of who is
telling the truth and who isn't.
The beauty of the first two thirds of the movie is that these and many
other questions are resolved slowly and carefully.  Too many movies rush
the investigation phase so they can cut to the action.  The story has
you literally on the edge of your seat during all of Tom's detective
work.  Moreover, the movie is tamer than you might expect during this
part, showing the horror of the 8mm tape mainly through the shock in
Tom's eyes.
To help him with his research, Tom hires an "expert" in the field, a
porn video store clerk named Max, played for some great humor by Joaquin
Phoenix with the worst haircut imaginable.  Max treats the whole porn
industry with a comical disdain, except, that is, for the really
hard-core S&M types who create illegal videos.  Max warns Tom against
getting in too deep.  "You dance with the devil," he admonishes Tom,
"the devil doesn't change.  The devil changes you."
Not too long after this the movie loses all credibility.  The early
tension in the audience, which is palpable, turns to derision.  Many of
the particularly ridiculous and offensive scenes could easily have been
deleted without harm to the consistency of the storyline.  Surely the
test screening audiences must have hated them, so why are they still
there?  As the ending credits roll, your reaction is likely to be, "why
did they mess up such a promising movie?"
8MM runs 2:03.  It is rated R for strong violence, perverse sex, nudity,
and profanity.  It is not a movie for those under 18.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chris Rose
    Everybody at work talking about how good this movie looks from the
trailer? They should be. Nicholas Cage has set himself apart as one of THE
top action/thriller actors with films like Face/Off, Snake Eyes, Con-Air and
now 8MM.
    Cage plays Tom Welles, a private detective living in Pennsylvania with a
smallish practice serving clients with simple, mundane detective work, until
he's approached by a wealthy woman looking to find out about an 8MM film
found in her dead husbands bank vault.
     The film is disturbing to say the least. Its a snuff film. A
pornographic rape that ends in the murder of the victim, a young runaway
girl. The director, Joel Shumacher, spares us the viewing of the entire film
but gives us enough of it to chill us. It has a deeper effect on Cage. He
becomes obsessed with finding the producers of the film and perpetrators of
the murder.
     The movie takes us into the dark world, and its filmed that way. Most
of the film is a gritty, dark picture and it gives you that feeling of
creepiness. That's a good thing in this picture because that's what its all
about when making a thriller. We want to be pulled in, we want to be
shocked, we want to be scared. It's not a horror film, but a journey into
the underworld of porn and murder, and the writer, director, and actors,
especially Cage, do a wonderful job of  almost, but not qute, sickening us
at what type of people are really out there.
     Cage's performance of Tom Welles is amazing. You follow along with him
as he searches and eventually finds the people who are reponsible. Each step
of the way you go in deeper with him. When it starts to get to him mentally,
you feel it. Possibly one of his best performances as far as the action
films go.
     The Co-Stars of the film also do a good job of setting the feel of the
film. Joaquin Phoenix plays Max, the clerk at a porn shop in Los Angeles who
helps Cage track down the poeple responsible. Catherine Keeners plays Welles
' wife Amy, who has to deal with Welle's downward spiral and the effects it
causes on the family. And James Gandolfini and Pete Stormare do a wonderful
job as the evil people behind the film.
    How good is it? Extremely good. Cage can pull off the mentally breaking
down, on the edge of collape, emotionally unstable detective better than
anyone. The story grabs you and continues to pull you in til the end. The
action isn't as intense as say Face/Off but at times the movie just rocks
on. Go see it, tell your co-workers on Monday how good it was.
Read this and other reviews at : http://start.at/net-hip
Reviews for the normal people!

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joel Schumacher.
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Catherine Keener, 
Peter Stormare, Anthony Heald, Amy Morton, Myra Carter.
1999 - 125 minutes.
Rated R (for extreme violence, sexual situations, nudity, and 
profanity).
Reviewed February 27, 1999.
Who could have possibly predicted that the antichrist director who all 
but buried the "Batman" franchise with the last two installments, Joel 
Schumacher, could strike back triumphantly and almost fully redeem 
himself with "8mm," which is perhaps his best film to date. Of course, 
Schumacher has been good before (1990's "Flatliners," 1993's "Falling 
Down," 1996's "A Time to Kill"), but nothing he has made has quite been 
this dark, intelligent, and disturbing, as it delves deeply into the 
world of S&M, porn, and the infamous myth of snuff films.
Every time Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage), a surveillance expert, comes home 
to his loving wife, Amy (Catherine Keener), and baby girl, it seems that 
he always has to leave again to carry out another job. Amy cares for 
him, and knows that the large amount of money he makes is going to help 
them out a great deal, and as their baby's college money, but hates when 
he leaves them alone. At the start of "8mm," Tom is hired by the 
recently widowed, elderly Mrs. Christian (Myra Carter), after she finds 
a ghastly Super-8 snuff film in her husband's safe that allegedly shows 
a solemn teenage girl being brutally murdered by a large man dressed in 
black leathered S&M garb. "I want to know if this atrocity is true," 
Mrs. Christian says, and offering him an enormous sum of money, Tom, who 
is equally upset and outraged at what is on the film, leaves his family 
again to go in search of the girl on the film, and to find out if she 
was actually killed, or if it was staged. The first thing Tom discovers 
is that the brand of film it was made on has been out of manufacturing 
since 1992, and while searching through the millions of missing persons 
reports at the police station, Tom, to his amazement, finds the 
information about the girl, named Mary Ann. This revelation leads him to 
the girl's lonely, depressed mother (Amy Morton), and after finding Mary 
Ann's hidden diary in which she last wrote to her mother about running 
away and going to Hollywood, Tom sets off to L.A. and into the world of 
adult films, where he meets Max California (Joaquin Phoenix), a helpful, 
smarter-than-expected young man who works at one of the porno shops and 
offers to help him out.
Written by Andrew Kevin Walker (who wrote the equally downbeat "Se7en"), 
it is rare for a decidedly big-budget mainstream film to have the 
courage to delve deeply and thoughtfully into such risky and unsettling 
territory, but that is exactly what "8mm" does. There is no doubt many 
people who will be completely turned off by this superb, unconventional 
motion picture, and that it actually recieved an R-rating by the usually 
strict MPAA is particularly surprising. There isn't much in the way of 
gore, but the movie is very, very violent, and at times is almost too
 difficult to take because of the somber, controversial subject matter.
"8mm" is probably the smartest film I have seen that deals with the sick 
nature of S&M and snuff, and although at times graphic, director 
Schumacher thankfully does not exploit the goings-on, but instead, is 
wise to deal with it in a ruminant manner, unveiling the very 
frightening and unstable minds of certain people's psyche. Adding 
another thought-provoking layer to the story involves the central 
character of Tom who is a caring family man at the start, but as he 
becomes involved more and more in this "other" shady world, ultimately 
finds himself being pushed to the limit, even having to contemplate 
murder himself, and somewhat unsure if he can ever return to the life he 
once knew.
There is one scene, in particular, in "8mm" that must rank as one of the 
most nail-bitingly suspenseful film moments in recent memory, a 
seemingly endless and scary scene played exclusively to the repetitive, 
atmospheric sound of a record player's hand repeatedly running over the 
rough grooves at the end of a record. Director Schumacher milks this 
sequence for all its worth, as he does on several other occassions, and 
thus helps to make "8mm" all the more effective and tense. Also helping 
immeasurably is the odd, marvelously orchestrated music score by Mychael 
Danna. Strangely enough, while watching the film, due to where certain 
things take place, it actually reminded me off watching an actual snuff 
movie, and I have unfortunately seen one, a feature film entitled 
"Snuff" from the 1970s that was banned in several countries and depicted 
a woman being butchered in the dispicable final reel (this "murder" was 
later decided to be a fake, albeit realistic, reenactment). 
The performances are all rather memorable, with Nicolas Cage once again 
acting as the likable, if flawed, character that we follow throughout. 
Also notable are Phoenix, in a role that is easily more satisfying and 
fully-developed than some of his recent ventures, such as in "U-Turn" 
and "Clay Pigeons;" James Gandolfini as a seedy porn producer; and Amy 
Morton, who has a touching turn as the victim's grieving mother. 
Catherine Keener, outstanding in all of her independent film, such as 
1996's "Walking and Talking," 1998's "The Real Blonde," and 1998's "Your 
Friends & Neighbors," helps to breathe unexpected life into the 
relatively thankless role of Tom's wife (although she is given a few 
moving moments in the latter section).
As far as I am concerned, "8mm" has only one noticable flaw and that is 
the slightly disappointing climax set in a cemetary during a rain storm. 
By choosing to go this route, the film suddenly moves into cliched 
thriller territory, but is preserved, thanks to the perfect concluding 
scenes that are nothing short of satisfying. Not only is "8mm" 
Schumacher's best film, but it is Cage's most assured work since his 
Oscar-winning role in "Leaving Las Vegas," and the screenplay by Walker 
is brave and astute, turning what could have been a cheap-thrills freak 
show into what will most likely go down as one of the most daring and 
attentive films of the year.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "8 MM" (Columbia Pictures)
The "MM" stands for millimeter, as in film, but it could also
mean murky melodrama because that's what this is. The plot, written by
Andrew Kevin Walker ("Seven") and directed by Joel Schumacher ("Batman
and Robin"), revolves around the sordid world of violent, sexual
pornography.  Nicolas Cage, who often specializes in weird, off-beat
characters ("Face/Off," "Wild at Heart," "Leaving Las Vegas"), plays a
low-key family man, a "surveillance specialist"or private detective,
from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, who becomes involved with the estate of
a rich, recently deceased tycoon when the man's widow finds a
mysterious reel of film in her husband's safe. It appears to be an
illegal snuff film - that is, the lurid, brutal slaughter of a
teenage-girl by a man wearing a leather mask and wielding a
machete. (You only see a brief glimpse of the actual snuff footage
since the movie initially received an NC-17 rating and had to be
trimmed for a more acceptable R-rating.) Cage's job is to investigate
and a porn-store clerk - that's Joaquin Phoenix - becomes his guide to
the dark, sleazy underworld. Dark is an operative word here because
most of the film is dimly lit.  Not only is the subject matter
distasteful and depressing, but there is nothing original about the
way the film is presented. The way Cage reacts while watching the
horrifying snuff film parallels George C. Scott's reaction in
"Hardcore" (1979) and film buffs will spot subsequent resemblances to
"Taxi Driver," and "Seven."  The bizarre characters are implausible,
undeveloped, and unintentionally funny at times. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "8 MM" is a kinky, grisly 1. Unsavory and
unpleasant: violence against women is not entertainment.

Author
Scott Renshaw
8MM
(Columbia)
Starring:  Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter
Stormare, Anthony Heald, Catherine Keener.
Screenplay:  Andrew Kevin Walker.
Producers:  Judy Hofflund, Gavin Polone and Joel Schumacher.
Director:  Joel Schumacher.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, violence, nudity)
Running Time:  121 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I don't think I want to know what Andrew Kevin Walker dreams about.
As to Joel Schumacher's dreams, I think I can venture a pretty good guess.
Walker is the scribe responsible for the monumentally disturbing SEVEN, a
writer who seems far too fascinated with the horrifying outer limits of
human depravity; Schumacher is a pop filmmaker who has served up glossy
pseudo-character studies on vigilantism (FALLING DOWN, A TIME TO KILL) and
fetishized beefcake (the two most recent BATMAN extravaganzas).  It would
seem that the creative sensibilities of these two men couldn't be farther
apart, which is one of the reasons 8MM feels like an edgy, intriguing
missed opportunity.  Every time Walker tries to drive the narrative into
the realm of the unnerving, Schumacher drags it back into the merely
kinky.
     The premise for 8MM involves that most enduring of pornographic urban
legends, the snuff film.  Private investigator Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage)
is hired by the widow of a recently deceased billionaire industrialist
regarding one unpleasant item from his wall safe.  It's a single reel of
8mm film, a film in which a teenage girl appears to be knifed to death by
a man in a black leather hood.  Charged by his employer to find out
whether or not the film is authentic, Welles begins to delve into the
Hollywood pornography underworld with a book store clerk named Max
(Joaquin Phoenix) as his guide.  Soon he discovers that there is always
someone willing to cater to almost every sexual taste, and that there are
people in the world capable of things he never imagined.
     Cage is a great choice for a character like Tom Welles -- the
capacity for lunatic action always seems to hide just behind his placid
features -- but the character himself is something of a puzzle.  Much is
made in the opening minutes of Tom's happy marriage to his wife (Catherine
Keener) and his love for his infant daughter, which makes it a bit too
obvious that his quest for the snuff film's possible victim is really all
about his own little girl.  At times, however, it seems that Walker and
Schumacher are playing with the idea that Welles is recognizing some of
his own darker desires through his experience.  Is 8MM a story of a man
discovering the evil in society, or the evil in himself?  If that question
had been answered more effectively, 8MM might have struck a more resonant
chord.
     As it stands, it's still a pretty gripping little thriller at times.
The first hour pokes along at something of a crawl, which somehow works
more often than it doesn't, perhaps because it's indicative of Welles'
tenacity.  The supporting performances are solid, with Joaquin Phoenix
making a savvy sidekick for Welles, and Peter Stormare seething sleaze as
a porn film director.  The deliberate pacing eventually gives way to some
tense showdowns as the film builds to its climax, including a search for a
killer in which the driving sound of thrash metal music suddenly becomes
the eerie metronome of the runout groove.  8MM is rarely a bore, and often
finds the slick energy of the most effective dark action films.
     It's too bad that slickness works against 8MM nearly as often as it
works for it.  The bleak triumph of SEVEN came not primarily through
Walker's fairly straightforward serial killer script, but through director
David Fincher's brilliantly subliminal direction; the violence lurked at
the edges of the frame, where our minds put gruesome pieces together.
Joel Schumacher is a more grandiose sort of filmmaker, one who has no
problem thrusting the details of an S&M film into the dead center of the
screen.  His version of the smoky basements where the hardcore deviants
lurk is too literal, and indeed there's something about Tom Welles' entire
journey that is too literal.  The director isn't exactly trying to
titillate the audience, but he's not helping the writer's study of how one
man responds to the destruction of innocence.  It may be enough that 8MM
is just a decently constructed thriller.  It's just not a gut-rattler,
more the sort of thing you get when the director of BATMAN & ROBIN tries
to do apocalyptic menace.

Author
Kota Yamaguchi
Nicholas Cage plays Tom Welles, the P.I. looking for the killer of the
girl in the mystery 8mm reel. The reel was found in the safe of a
millionaire(billionaire?), and the widow wants to know for sure if the
murder is authentic or not. Tom takes up the case after concluding
that the murder is real. He is given free reign over the budget to
find the perpetuators. He travels to Hollywood after finding a secret
note in the girls house, then to New York City to stalk the killer. On
his stop in Hollywood, he befriends a porn store clerk. Max(Joaquin
Phoenix) brings a welcome bit of lightness to an otherwise morose
film.
8MM is a prototypical Schumacher film, as Joel bends over backwards to
let us know that Snuff Films are bad. The mistake he made in "A Time
Kill", and he repeats here, is that he tries too hard to make bad guys
look evil to justify the ensuing vengeance.  There is also a tedious
subplot between Tom and his wife which should have been cut. I applaud
Nicholas Cage and Joel Schumacher for tackling such a taboo subject,
but the finished work is unconvincing as a study of someone who takes
the law into his own hands.

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Nicholas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, Michael Stormare. Rated R.
Director Joel Schumacher must be a very hated man. He is, after all,
responsible for single-handedly destroying the whole Batman franchise
with the embarrassing Batman & Robin. Is it fair, for Batman fans
everywhere, to say that Schumacher redeems himself with 8MM? Well,
perhaps not. And I suppose there is no form of redemption for making an
awful movie; that'll stay with you forever. But in its own right, the
new Nicolas Cage thriller 8MM is an excellent film.
The ordinary-man-suddenly-thrown-into-oblivion story has been told over
and over, both by excellent films (Enemy of the State, A Simple Plan,
The Man Who Knew Too Much) and not-so-excellent ones (In Dreams, etc.).
And, I suppose, 8MM is another of these films, but instead of it being
the whole movie, it uses that general storyline framework as a set-up
for bigger and better things. Cage plays Private Detective Tom Welles, a
loving husband dedicated to his profession, who spends most of his time
following around various adulterers and other such scum. So, it is
rather surprising to him when he is called in by the wife of a recently
deceased millionare. It seems that she has found a film in her husband's
safe that seems to depict a girl being brutally raped and murdered.
Welles' mission, which he chooses to accept, is to find out whether that
girl was really killed in that film.
He tackles the problem head-on by going to Cleveland and by visiting a
part of that city known as an adult entertainment heaven. He enlists the
help of an intelligent but destitute porn store clerk, Max, to acquaint
him with the dark world of hard-core pornography. He begins to dig deep,
and finds out that "snuff" films, a sort of "urban legend" in the porn
world really do exist. For the uninitiated (God, I hope there are many
of you out there), a "snuff" film is an unproffesionally made porno
where one of the stars is beaten and killed.
>From a technical perspective, this is a fine achievement. Filmed in
bleak, dark tones, 8MM is a beautifully moody picture, even if it
doesn't present any original concept in cinematography (and it didn't
have to, either). The movie's general style resembles that of last
year's A Perfect Murder in camerawork, lighting and tone.
As Welles submerges himself in this insane world, he begins to wrestle
with murderous instincts. But he is not a killer. At one point, in a
very powerful scene, he has to call a family member of one of the
victims to literally talk him into killing one of the villains.
Schumacher tries to touch on many philosophical concepts in 8MM. Some
work, some don't, but his movie is really notable for many very
suspenseful scenes, compelling action, and for building up a steady
rhythm that really draws the audience in. Cage gives a none-too-subtle
but still riveting performance as Welles, but his performance gets is
quite overstated if you watch closely.
8MM is quite graphic in terms of depiction of these "snuff" films, but
it manages not to stray into NC-17 category. Still, I would guess that
many people would find much of this film disturbing, and some might even
think of it as repulsive. But try and look beyond the violence. Welles'
reaction to everything he sees is quite real. The villains' motives as
depicted here are rather thought-provoking. When you really look, 8MM is
quite a restrained, even timid picture when you think about what it
could have been. Had it been an "exploitation" movie, much like the porn
that it's about, my reaction would have certainly been different.
Nor is this a preachy "porn is bad" movie, as a matter of fact 8MM does
not seem to be too concerned with porn. It seems to be trying to get a
message through our heads that has to do with criminality in general.
The notion that all criminals have a troubled past is what Schumacher
seems to be trying to disprove ("I do these things because I want to.
Because I like them"). Like last year's Enemy of the State, 8MM uses
action and violence for something other than simply displaying action
and violence.
This is Schumacher's breakthrough film, his first good one since Falling
Down. It's a comlpex achievement; exciting, sad and profound at the same
time. It's also one of the year's first pleasant surprises.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Bill Chambers
8MM **˝ (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers ( 8mm@filmfreakcentral.net )
starring Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, Catherine Keener, James
Gandolfini
screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker
directed by Joel Schumacher
Last summer, I was slipped a copy of Andrew Kevin Walker's 8MM
screenplay. As someone who considers David Fincher's Se7en (also
penned by Walker) one of the most important films of the 1990s, I
couldn't resist opening the yellow covers of "eight millimeter" and
spoiling the eventual film that would come of it. What I read
essentially made it to the screen intact-but 8MM is brought to you by
Joel "Batman and Robin" Schumacher, a director not known for subtlety
or restraint.
Cage stars as private dick Tom Welles, an educated husband and father
who is summoned to a stately manor one night to meet with Mrs.
Christian (Myra Carter), the wealthy widow of a steel investor. She
felt at liberty to open her late husband's secret safe; inside it sat
a reel of eight millimeter film depicting a young woman's brutal
murder. Mrs. Christian needs to know if this "snuff" film is the real
thing; she hopes to preserve her husband's good name.
Welles' investigation takes him to the underbelly of Los Angeles. He
learns the (possibly) snuffed woman's name and last known address. He
also hooks up with a porn shop employee named Max California (Phoenix)
to ascertain what kind of mooncalfs would manufacture such depravity.
For a considerable amount of dough, the intelligent and bored Max
provides Welles with sufficient leads. So sufficient they may just get
Welles killed: Welles has stirred sleeping dogs Eddie Poole
(Gandolfini), a hothead producer, Dino Velvet (an over-the-top
Stormare), a crossbow-wielding director, and rubber-masked Machine
(Chris Bauer), a notorious star of S&M videos who lives for torture.
Because I have the unique critical perspective of someone who read the
screenplay before seeing the film, I cannot resist noting two crucial
differences between the written word and the final cut. In Walker's
5/06/97 draft, Max delivers a powerful monologue regarding the
desensitization experienced by hard-core porn watchers-he 
hypothesizes that the snuff film is the next logical evolutionary step
for the industry. It's a disheartening speech, but one that (further)
elevates 8MM beyond schlock. Schumacher chose to remove it for reasons
unknown. Walker also stated that we never see Machine's face, but
Schuamcher can't resist the urge and shows Bauer in mask-less 
close-up, thereby deflating the line "You were expecting a monster?"
Still, there is a lot to admire in 8MM, particularly the Cimmerian
lighting designs of cinematographer Robert Elswit and Canadian
composer Mychael Danna's melancholy, sitar-laced score. Schumacher and
his team have also crafted some puissant individual sequences;
although I realized I was watching the umpteenth variation on Taxi 
Driver, Welles' inevitable vigilante rampage is an unbearably sad
sight. (Aside: 8MM is also, at times, unbearably suspenseful.) The
politics of 8MM are vaguely right wing-its general attitude is
reminiscent of Schumacher's other decent picture, Falling Down-and
un-hip, but Welles' (un-PC) reactions to the vile stimuli around him
are honest and somewhat comforting. It's not that Welles becomes the
ultimate Boy Scout; on the contrary, he has a selfish need for
justice, a desire to "unsee" the horrors he has witnessed and cleanse
his soul.
A few things nagged at me as I watched 8MM in the darkened theatre:
Catherine Keener, unparalleled at portraying icy career women (most
recently in Your Friends and Neighbors), is miscast as Cage's
housewife, though it's nice to see her find work in studio pictures at
last; the pacing is off-the first half could use tightening; and Max
California's abrupt exit from the film is a directorial misstep.
Overall, however, Schumacher proves that he's capable of crafting an
absorbing film so long as the source material is not generated by
Akiva Goldsman. 8MM's best scene is shown briefly in the trailer: with
only the clickety-clackety motor of the projector on the soundtrack,
Welles sits in a blackened room, viewing a grainy, possibly faked
murder of a teenage runaway, overcome by grief and terror. And I
stared back at him, sharing his pain, thankful I'm not a sick puppy.
Neither is Schumacher.

Author
Walter Frith
How typical!  Joel Schumacher, who is currently destabilizing,
dismantling, and destroying the Batman franchise, has taken a different
turn, definitely not for the better with his latest effort (ha!)
entitled '8MM'.  Once again Schumacher (who should be relegated to
directing t.v. commercials and music videos) pushes us away instead, and
instead of drawing us in, he makes the fatal mistake of handing the
audience a movie that has too much literal meaning and not enough space
to let the audience digest one course before he crams another down our
throats.  It would have been a pleasant experience to see this film use
violence, pornography and psychotic lunatics as a metaphor for a missing
persons case that had great potential contained within its story line.
But instead, Schumacher and writer Andrew Kevin Walker ('Seven'), have
given us a movie that is as pleasant as going through a fun house with
actual booby traps rigged to literally kill you.
Nicolas Cage stars as a Pittsburgh private investigator who takes a case
offered to him by a wealthy widow and her business manager/attorney
(Anthony Heald).  The woman's husband was an industrial czar. Upon
settling his estate a strange 8MM film exists that was in his possession
that basically turns out to be a sadistic porno film where a young woman
is sexually tortured.  It's not certain that she was murdered which is
the thrust of the case: to find out if she was.  Cage finds the girl's
mother (Amy Morton) who wants answers in the disappearance of her
daughter.  His investigation of the case takes him to Los Angeles where
he meets a porno shop employee (Joaquin Phoenix) who helps Cage find
disruptive and illegal material in porno's sickest places where the
young woman in question may have been photographed.  Cage's search also
takes him to New York where he encounters some seedy and unspeakably
evil porno peddlers (James Gandolfini and Peter Stormare) who turn out
to be killers in disguise.
1989's 'Field of Dreams' is not a baseball film.  It used baseball as a
poetic metaphor to help a man "ease his pain" and redeem himself.  It's
probably the best film in the last decade to find a subject like
baseball, and use it as a metaphor to project the image of good story
telling.  '8MM' goes right for the jugular in all the wrong ways and
looks a lot like a big budget porno film and can be described as a movie
becoming a victim of its own subject matter that wallows in the excess
of its own seediness and has little room for the audience to react in
anything more than standard fashion.  The film at times just seems to be
going through the motions with wooden direction, a bland performance by
Cage and a clandestine feeling of being trapped --- already experienced
by 1995's 'Seven'.
Another problem with this film is its editing.  It's too static at times
and too quick at other times and comes across as very sloppy and
uneven.  Some of the situations and dialogue are also absurd.  We see
that Cage has a wife (Catherine Keener) and baby daughter and his wife
is constantly showing her faithful traits towards her husband and
supports him in his career and later in the film, she threatens to leave
him if his work continues to dominate his life.  A bit much after
showing her support earlier in the film.  It seems totally out of
character for her and a contradiction on the writer's part.
Big, brooding, and unpleasant without making you feel entertained are
just some ways to describe '8MM' which is artificial entertainment
disguised as a wannabe thriller that had audiences I saw with it, bolt
for the door upon the first closing credit on the screen.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
For browsers without java enhancement or if you experience problems with
the above link, go to:
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/mainpage.htm

Author
Ron Small
Author: iysmall@aol.com (Ron Small)
8MM (1999)
Grade: D+
Director: Joel Schumacher
Screenplay: Andrew Kevin Walker
Starring: Nicholas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter Stormare,
Anthony Heald, Catherine Keener, Myra Carter, Christopher Bauer
 
The subject matter that is dealt with (and I use that term lightly) in 8MM is
an undeniably sensational one. It's too bad that its filmmaker's seem less
interested in the film's lurid topic then in the simplistic conventions of the
action genre. 8MM is ostensibly a private eye flick that aims for something
more, though ends up with something less.
Tom Welles (a morose Nicholas Cage) is a young private investigator searching
for a case that will propel his career to the level ofâŚSam Spade, I guess.
Such a case is presented, and he jumps at the chance to solve what might be a
murder filmed on 8mm film. The reel was discovered in the vault of a recently
deceased socialite, and Welles has been hired by the socialite's unsuspecting
widow to determine if the "killing" is the real thing.
The existence of snuff films (the definition of "snuff film" being a film in
which a real murder occurs) is the stuff of urban legends. I have actually met
people who claim to know someone, who dated someone, whose grandmother viewed a
snuff film (or something along those lines). Yeah whatever, and Elvis lives. As
far as I've been able to gauge within my twenty years of experience on this
planet, there is no market for this sort of thing. But it doesn't seem entirely
impossible, does it, what with FACES OF DEATH (a collection of "accidental"
deaths captured on videotape and packaged for your entertainment) readily
available in many video stores.
What a completely compelling subject matter for a film to explore, right? A
topic that is in touch with the most sadistic portions of the social zeitgeist
and contains a built in sensationalistic lure. This is the stuff of great pulp
thrillers. And the opening led me to believe that for once Schumacher (the
imbecile who ran the BATMAN franchise into the ground) was on the right track.
The first ten minutes are appropriately ominous; the colors stylishly muted,
and the score an extraneous, Arabic sounding something or other that fits
nicely with the proceedings. As it turns out, 8MM isn't so much an
investigation into snuff, as it is a full-length feature film version of one of
those crime reenactments regularly staged on AMERICA'S MOST WANTED.
The imagery we are shown is dark and garish, but it's equally over done and
fallacious, like a Hollywood set that calls too much attention to itself. I was
reminded of Julie Salamon's book THE DEVIL'S CANDY, which was a guide to the
production of the adaptation of Tom Wolfe's masterful novel, THE BONFIRE OF
VANITIES. One passage recounts how the film crew littered the streets of the
Bronx with extras dressed as stereotypical pimps, hookers, and drug dealers to
fill out the scenery, and generate fear within the white middle class audience
wherein the film was aimed. They even included burning cars for additional
hyperbole, as if it was needed. Shumaker does something similar. When Tom
Welles contacts Max, an adult video store clerk (played with maximum quirkiness
by Joaquin Phoneix), he is eventually led into an underground porno ring. The
set looks like a dungeon straight out of A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET, with dingy,
florescent lights barely illuminating the nightmare. The film later implies
that this dungeon is supposed to be spooky, yet somewhat stimulating as well.
It only succeeds at the former; the movie fails to show us how any of this
stuff could be any thing more then revolting.
The porn dealers, are presented as a ravaged bunch, who hardly speak a word,
and when they do speak, its so damn creepy we wish they'd stop. They are the
Hollywoodized vision of porn dealers, miles from the real thing. I suspect the
real guys would be just as scary, but in the way that that egomaniac Quentin
Tarantino is scary, rather than the quietly menacing figures 8MM gives us.
Welles and Max explore bondage clubs that look like HBO's REAL SEX series meets
HELLRAISER complete with Euro trash porn dealers decked out in ebony latex.
However the primary villains are depicted as conventionally evil louts who
wouldn't be out of place in a LETHAL WEAPON movie. That especially goes for
Peter Stormare, who plays the main antagonist in such a laughable, over the top
manner he could be auditioning for the role of lead villain in DIE HARD 4.
This wouldn't be as grating if it were put to the service of a typical action
romp, but Schumaker is supposedly charting new out territory with a subject
matter that is indeed, deeply disturbing; so disturbing that it's maddening to
see it given such a "commercial" treatment.
The film draws you into its satiated web, but for all the wrong reasons: It
trots out an abundance of home video recorded "killings", that are graphically
realized for no purpose. 8MM obviously isn't interested in exploring the topic
in a serious manner, so why present us with torturous scenes of grisly violence
if it's at the service of such an ordinary Hollywood crime thriller. (THE
GENERAL'S DAUGHTER tried the same thing to the exact same effect).
The detective portion of the story is comparatively weak: Characters are
identified by tattoos, and Cage stumbles upon a diary that the cops should have
found a year earlier.
Ahh Cage, what happened to that Nicholas Cage? He was so charismatic in FACE
OFF, but so dull in everything since. He continues that backward trend,
appearing drowsy and delivering all his lines in a tone as flat as diet coke.
But since this is a Schumacher film, he at least looks cool in a fully black
ensemble that gives him the appearance of death freezed over. For most of the
movie his character is a detached bore who, towards the end, abruptly
transforms into a psychotic nut case. In visual terms that means that Cage
contorts his face like Jim Carrey's evil twin brother while breathlessly
muttering things like "It's gonna be okay, it's gonna be okay". But never mind
that, the incongruous switch in character makes no sense. Nothing that preceded
it suggests any monumental change is coming; it just happens. I suspect the
switch has more to do with Schumacher's desire to further pander to his
audience's blood lust rather than genuine character motivation. Following the
transformation, in an incredibly bullying denouement, Cage appoints himself as
an Angel of Death executing every one guilty of wrongdoing. The repulsive
crimes committed by the villains give us reason to cheer for Cage as he coldly
dispatches them ("I will never get tired of hurting you, Eddie") with less care
then Charles Bronson in DEATH WISH. Schumacher makes his bad guys so
un-redeemably evil that they laugh when they feel pain, and challenge Cage to
"do it already". We crave for them to die horribly, and the movie indulges in
our reactionary fantasies.
Should this film be lauded because it looks as a good as a commercial for
grime, and pushes all the right buttons? I don't think so. The meat of the
movie could be called entertaining, but in the same way it might be
entertaining to watch those lurid FOX "shocumentaries".
Some have criticized me for lauding movies like SEVEN and THE FIGHT CLUB,
claiming that they are cut from the same cloth as 8MM. I disagree. Both of
those films offered insight into the horrifying violence that they presented.
Schumacher may think he's doing that, but I doubt he could ever make a truly
gritty film without commercializing it (see FALLING DOWN). His nihilism is just
as stylized as the candy colored cartoon world of BATMAN AND ROBIN; it's also
just as phony. Like the extreme porn that is the subject of 8MM, the film
itself is an extreme, sexualized violent fantasy filmed like the most
conventional potboiler  
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98  (Ron's Movie Reviews)

Author
Vince Yim
Someone please tell me why David Fincher didn't direct this one.
8 MM stars Nicolas Cage as a Tom Watts, a private investigator who is
called in after an elderly woman discovers her late husband owned an 8mm
film depicting a teenage girl being raped and murdered. While such
footage can easily be staged, Watts' task is twofold: to find out if the
footage is real, and to find out who is responsible if the footage is
real. To do this, Watts must delve into the world of underground porn
where moving images of any deviant sexual act can be obtained for the
right price. While Watts' task is difficult, maintaining his grip on his
morals and sanity will be even harder.
The film has a lot of promise, mostly due to the clout achieved by the
screenwriter, Andrew Kevin Walker, who is best known for his
collaboration with director David Fincher for the dark and disturbing
Se7en. Both films feature the protagonist facing off against really sick
and twisted individuals, being completely morally annihilated at each of
the films' conclusions. As well, 8 MM features Nicolas Cage, a very
capable actor.
However, with director Joel Schumacher at the helm, anything can happen.
While many are still stinging from the atrocity known as Batman and
Robin, Schumacher has proven himself to be a capable film director, with
such inventive films as The Lost Boys and Falling Down.  But after
watching this film, the opening question remains: why wasn't David
Fincher selected to direct this film?
Fincher's harrowing style was especially suited to the dark and
disturbing nature of Walker's screenplay in Se7en. The end result was a
powerful psychological thriller that had an extremely unsettling effect
on the audience. Unfortunately, one would be hard pressed to find that
in 8 MM.
While the dark atmosphere of 8 MM is firmly established, the film is
ultimately a haphazardly paced, with a lot of storyline elements that
are practically tacked on. The serial killer depicted in the film comes
off as very unthreatening when revealed at the end, the characters leave
the audience emotionally detached, and some of the dialogue makes for
many unintentionally humorous moments. At least one Hollywood insider
report states that Walker was displeased with the direction of the film
and wished for his name to be taken off the credits. Unfortunately for
him, that never happened.
Admittedly, the film does have its moments. Joaquin Phoenix shines as
Max, an adult bookstore employee and Watts' guide into the underground
world of pornography. The film also has a few intentionally humorous
moments and a few cringe-inducing scenes reminiscent of Se7en.
Unfortunately, as a whole, they aren't enough to save the film.
I wanted to enjoy this movie. I really did. Unfortunately, the film
fails to match up with the high standards left with Walker's screenplay
in Se7en. While 8 MM isn't completely unwatchable, the film isn't
memorable either. Save your money and wait for the video.
Rating: 5/10
-- 

Author
Jamey Hughton
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
8MM is not going to enlighten your day. It's a dark, grimy and
disturbing portrait of underworld snuff films and filled with excessive
violence. Not only do you need the stomach to make it through this
bloated mess, you'll require a lot of patience as well.
Nicolas Cage seems to be doing quite a bit of overacting as of late. He
wore a bizarre get-up and did a lot of yelling in the terminally awful
Snake Eyes, and here he attempts a performance that can relate to
someone completely losing their grip on reality. Cage plays Private
Investigator Tom Welles, praised for his secrecy and reliability. At
home, Welles is a family man, with a wife (Catherine Keener) and a small
daughter to take care of. His new assignment is a bizarre one: the wife
of a formally deceased millionaire has hired him to solve a mystery
regarding a film found  in her husband's safe. The film appears to be
some kind of cheap pornography involving a teenage girl and a masked
man, until the girl is brutally murdered. Or so it seems.
Welles, of course, begins to burrow deeper and deeper to uncover the
truth. And the more he becomes involved in this disturbing case, the
more he gets in over his head. He hires an adult book store clerk named
Max California (Joaquin Phoenix) to be his guide through the ugly
underworld of pornography. Max knows what Welles is getting himself
into, and explains, `you dance with the devil, the devil don't change.
The devil changes you.' These turn out to be very wise words.
8MM has a premise that begs for a better execution. The set-up is slick
and well played, as Cage uncovers the identity of the girl and travels
to Hollywood to locate her. This is where everything goes awry. Although
director Joel Schumacher succeeds in frightening us with his grotesque
portrait of the `real world', he forgot to inject any interest or
excitement to the formula. Everything about the movie becomes dull and
lifeless, repelling the viewer like the effect of bug spray to insects.
Although it had enormous potential, the third act of 8MM is a total
bust, leaving intrigued audiences in a baffling state of extreme
disappointment as the proceedings spiral out of control.
Cage is the film's sole flame of energy. His performance is actually
believable, but soon the director's demands start to weigh heavily on
his shoulder and he begins stumbling along in desperation. Still, you've
got to give him credit for holding this project together as long as he
did, for that is no easy feat when you consider the problems at hand.
Welles' trail soon leads him to a bizarre filmmaker (played convincingly
by Peter Stormare) who is notorious for the hardest-hitting snuff films
in the industry. This is where Cage goes over the edge into a serial
killer-like phase, in which he must take revenge on all those who
murdered the innocent girl in the film. He tracks down the masked man
responsible for the killing (Chris Bauer), and they have a bloody brawl
in the local cemetery, a fight sequence that would look more at home in
a Schwarzenegger movie. Written by Andrew Kevin Walker, 8MM dissipates
into a poor man's Seven, with all the violence but little of the
effectiveness that made the latter such a chilling masterpiece.
Furthermore, what has become of Joel Schumacher? The director has
recently experienced a major drought, slumming in the depths of dismal
flop after flop (Batman and Robin, anyone?). This putrid thriller is
certainly not going to revive his career, so perhaps Schumacher should
start exploring his lighter side.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
.......................

Author
Luke Buckmaster
8MM
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter Stormare,
Christopher Bauer, Anthony Heald, Catherine Keener
Director: Joel Schumacher
Screenplay: Andrew Kevin Walker
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 stars
If you're not sickened by Nicholas Cage's dark journey into the realms
of the hardcore porn industry, chances are you'll be intrigued by it.
Bit by bit, an authentic version of this illegitimate world is brought
to life with kinky detail by talented hack director Joel Schumacher.
Schumacher's last two films were the muddled messes Batman Forever and
Batman & Robin, but here he has at least proven himself capable of
following a structured story and making it entertaining.  With a script
from a writer of such gritty wit as Andrew Kevin Walker (who penned
Se7en), it would be hard not to make 8MM a success.
Unfortunately, Schumacher's direction sometimes flinches.  Whereas
Walker realizes the capacity for a disturbing but profound film,
Schumacher simply makes a thriller that is edgy enough to warrant a
sitting.  Although this film is a good example of why a director and
writer need to be on the same level, 8MM is nonetheless an amusing
full-throttle journey into places and characters that are rarely looked
at in movies.
"Dance with the devil and the devil doesn't change; the devil changes
you," a character tells Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage), who really should
have listened.  Welles is a private investigator who lives a normal
existence with a wife (Catherine Keener) and a baby daughter.  Welles is
called in by a billionaire widow to investigate the origin of an 8MM
pornographic film that depicts the killing of a young teenager.  His
task is to find out whether the film is real or not.  The case finds
Welles in society's darkest corners, and he is guided by Max (Joaquin
Phoenix), a streetwise adult bookstore clerk.  As the two become closer
to finding out who made the film and why, their lives are jeopardized as
they find themselves deep in a web of conspiracies and hidden truths.
Welles is a reasonable and caring man for a reason - he serves as a
contrast from the decent to the indecent.  When evil eventually comes
knocking on Welles' door, he desperately tries to find meaning in evil
acts, all the while surrounded by people who couldn't care less. One
despicable character answers Welles' question of "why" by stating "the
things I do - I do them because I like them. Because I want to...I
wasn't beaten as a child. I didn't hate my parents.''  His search for
meaning in evil is cleverly written by Walker, who doesn't fall into the
trap of making anything that he does seem acceptable (Payback, anyone?).
Evil corrupts, and as Welles searches for answers, he is ultimately led
to commit deeds similar to the ones he has been disgusted by.
Fascinating stuff, that's for sure.  What then would inspire the
producers to hand the directing reigns over to Joel Schumacher - a man
whose best attempts to illustrate psychological images is to portray
visual ones?  8MM looks dark and scary, but rarely feels it.  For every
bit of intrigue that Walker generates, Schumacher limits its success,
and regularly turns potentially disturbing scenes into merely sleazy
scenes.  It's a trade-off that isn't very fair, that's for sure - one
can't help but feel that David Fincher (Se7en, The Game) or even Brian
De Palma (Mission: Impossible, Snake Eyes) would have been more suited
to direct.  Still, with the help of the animated presence of Nicholas
Cage, Schumacher has made an admirable thriller despite what he has
missed out on.


Author
James Sanford
No director in recent memory has been as villified as Joel Schumacher,
the man responsible for the universally reviled "Batman and Robin." In
truth, Schumacher has made some stylish entertainments in his day,
including "Flatliners," "The Lost Boys," "Cousins" and "The Client,"
but to read some of the criticisms leveled against him on various Web
sites, you'd think he was responsible for genocide rather than for
killing off a movie franchise.
Faced with such derision, Schumacher might have seen "8mm" as a chance
to restore his artistic credibility.  Instead, the movie turns out to
be an even bigger embarrassment than "Batman and Robin"; it's far more
pretentious and self-important, and displays almost no hint of
Schumacher's usually dead-on visual sense.
In terms of its content, "8mm" is closer to the infamous howler
"Hardcore," in which George C. Scott plays a Grand Rapids Bible-beater
who cruises Hollywood looking for his trampy daughter, than to "Boogie
Nights." Even the setup borders on the ridiculous as private eye Tom
Welles (Nicolas Cage, in his dullest performance since "Zandalee") is
hired by a rich widow - named Mrs.  Christian, just to make sure we
all get the point - to determine whether or not a film she found in
her late husband's vault features a genuine sex slaying.
Why's she so concerned? Who knows? The request is just an excuse to
send Welles into a seamy underworld of sex for sale, where he teams up
with streetwise Max (Joaquin Phoenix) to find the sinister sleaze
merchants responsible for the movie. Andrew Kevin Walker's lethargic
screenplay has to throw in such cliches as a secret diary and a fight
to the death in a graveyard just to move its plot forward.
The second half of "8mm" turns into a sort of "Pornman and Robin" as
our intrepid heroes are manhandled, handcuffed to beds, tied to
crosses and threatened with all manner of debauchery. Meanwhile,
Welles' wife Amy (Catherine Keener) drops in occasionally to bleat
such time-honored standards as "why didn't you call me?" and "I can't
go on like this!" offering some credence to Tom's heterosexuality as
Schumacher routinely - and teasingly - makes it seem as if Tom and Max
are moments away from wrinkling the sheets together.
Despite numerous shots of bondage gear and women in chains, "8mm" has
little information to reveal about the S&M culture, and what
information it does present is served up with sanctimony. Making a
yawn-inducing movie about erotica is quite a trick, but Schumacher has
somehow managed to pull it off.
Come back, Mr. Freeze and Poison Ivy. All is forgiven. 

Author
Jamie Peck
8MM (EIGHT MILLIMETER)
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Like a recipe assembled from scraps of other dishes, "8mm" is less than 
the sum of its parts, delicious to fans of the dark and brooding though 
they may be. But, oh, does this two-hour-plus ode to unpleasantness make 
good on its engaging creative pairing, while a further boost is given by 
the casting of Nicolas Cage in the lead, one of those progressively 
unhinged roles the Oscar-winner excels at playing. The hot-button 
subject matter - pornography - should determine whether uncertain 
potential viewers will love it or leave it early, though you can 
probably already tell from this description alone if this is your kind 
of movie. 
That Cage stars as a private dick in a film that heavily incorporates 
the adult entertainment industry is worth a small chuckle, but this 
possible in-joke is close to the extent of "8mm"'s humor quotient. Like 
"Seven," the story is played with almost no comic relief, yet another 
cause of probable diminishing audience appreciation. (Then again, that 
didn't stop "Seven" from being a $100 million hit, but that movie only 
fleetingly relied on sexual violence.) Those seeking cheap, explicit 
thrills are better off visiting a seedy video store somewhere, however, 
because Schumacher knows that the unseen is far more terrifying than 
what's in plain view. 
Cage's professional sleuth goes by the name Tom Welles and has just 
accepted a case from the widow (Myra Carter) of a recently deceased and 
immensely wealthy steel tycoon. While going through his private things, 
she located a reel of eight millimeter stock on which a young girl is 
raped and murdered by a creep wearing a leather mask. Yowza. But is it 
an actual snuff film or something feigned to give perverts their 
jollies? And how did it come to be in this rich guy's belongings? Those 
are the questions Welles gets bankrolled to answer, and he starts by 
identifying the alleged victim and tracing her back to her hometown. 
There, he meets her mother (Amy Morton) but not her, and these scenes, 
perfectly handled by Schumacher, are a powerful reminder that every 
missing child is more than just a statistic. This'll have to do - and it 
does - for "8mm"'s emotional content, because Welles' relationship with 
his wife (nice work from Catherine Keener) and his new baby are somewhat 
ill-defined. That flaw hardly matters, though, because "8mm" devotes 
much of its attention on Welles' unfolding, engrossing search for the 
truth, and if you can make it through some of the early scenes without 
the need to exit the theatre, you'll be OK for the long run. 
Without giving away too much, Welles' trail leads him into the seamy 
world of underground sleaze, and needless to say, it isn't a pretty 
place. The seedy ground he covers with a porn clerk (game Joaquin 
Phoenix), his only ally, begins to transform him, though it's no fair to 
say in what ways. Plot twists are guaranteed; some are predictable, some 
are not, and an example of the latter is a disturbing climax (one of 
several) that takes place in a rain-soaked graveyard, complete with 
vivid flashes of lightning. Perhaps Schumacher's gorgeously gaudy 
"Batman" takes prove he isn't one for restraint, but the stylish 
overkill of "8mm" works more often than it doesn't. 
He does, however, treat the whole porn/snuff area with moderation - and 
thankfully so. We're treated only to fleeting glimpses (the worst 
depicts a "nurse" preparing to do something to a "patient" that probably 
isn't covered on his HMO), but we get a strong enough reading of their 
explicit content from Cage's bountiful terrified - but eventually 
desensitized - reaction shots. Those who appreciate this dissection of 
humanity's dark side can wonder what sort of dreams Andrew Kevin Walker 
has while they wait for his next screenplay. This much appears to be a 
given: It'll be solemn, it'll be somber, and it'll have some form of the 
number nine in its title.

Author
Michael Redman
People do weird stuff. This is one of the few indisputable facts about
human beings.
Your electrician builds altars to small furry woodland animals. Your son's
teacher dresses in an outlandish costume and screams with a frantic rock and
roll band. Your waiter is preparing for the end of civilization. No matter
where you are, some of your neighbors are involved in practices most people
would consider bizarre if they only knew about them.
Most of these are harmless. Some are even beneficial. But then, there's that
rich industrialist on the other side of town who's making snuff films.
Private investigator Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) runs into that situation when a
wealthy just-widowed woman hires him. She's found a reel of film in her
husband's secret safe that seemingly depicts the actual killing of a young
girl. She wants to know if it's real and what it's doing there.
This begins Tom's journey into the seamy world of hard-core fetish porn. He
hires Max California (Joaquin Phoenix), an adult bookstore clerk who reads
Norman Mailer hidden behind an X-rated novel, as a guide through the strange land.
Snuff films are the urban legend of pornography. Extreme S&M movies, they end
with the authentic death of one of the participants. Rumored to exist for
decades, not a single genuine example has ever been found. The one Tom is
investigating appears to be the real McCoy.
Each stop on the tour of the grotesque takes him one step closer to the
producers of the depravity. And one step closer to total obsession with
avenging the girl he's never met. Even after learning of the extreme danger
he's in, he can't give up the case.
Director Joel Schumacher takes the term "noir" literally. Not only is this a
very gloomy story, it's an extremely dark screen. The predominate color in
every scene is black. At times the dimly lighted film resembles the garish
grainy film stock of its title.
Although his life with his wife and infant daughter presumably illustrate
Tom's "normal" side, you wouldn't be surprised to find Hannibal Lecter behind
the bedroom door. Like the rest of the film, even Tom calmly raking leaves in
his front yard feels creepy.
His supposedly loving relationship with his wife is an odd one. He limps in
bleeding from a head wound, having narrowly escaped being murdered, and her
first reaction is "How can you treat me like this?" If his home life is Tom's
reason to live, it's no wonder he spends most of his time at work.
The highly stylized episodes searching for the killers fare better. When Tom
and Max voyage into the underground basement flea market of vendors selling
"Way beyond XXX" wares, the scenes could have come from Fellini's "Satyricon".
There's so much going on that it's difficult to take it all in.
When the investigator finally tracks down the director of the film in a
decrepit warehouse, the images are some of the most disturbing since "Blue
Velvet". This is not a "feel-good" movie. It may even define the tiny genre of
"anti-date film".
As well-crafted as the visuals are, the film has some problems. Tom's
character isn't very defined and some of his actions seem out of place. For
some reason, there are two different times where the suspense depends upon him
straining to get to a gun out of reach.
Cage is well-casted as the placid detective with obsession just below the
surface. He has a reputation for playing offbeat characters and can add Tom to
the list. It's certainly not one of his more recent action hero roles.
Phoenix adds a needed comedic touch to a film that otherwise might have
drowned in its own bleakness. James Gandolfini and Peter Stormare are
stand-outs as the vile but fascinating smut producers. Watching them is like
driving by the proverbial car wreck.
I don't think I'll ever want to see this film again. It's an ugly depressing
movie that makes you feel like taking a long shower to wash off the scum. It
is worth a viewing if you want to deal with it. Sometimes art isn't pretty.
(Michael Redman has written this column for two and three-tenths decades. He
took two showers and slept with the light on. Email your secret activities to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 3/4/99 "Bloomington Independent, Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
Bob Bloom
8mm (1999) 1 star out of 4. Starring Nicolas Cage and Joaquin Phoenix.
 You come out of some movies scratching your head, wondering what the
studio was thinking by green-lighting the project or what possessed an
actor to sign on with such a fiasco.
 This new thriller, starring Nicolas Cage, is overlong, slow, violent,
nasty and unredeeming.
 8mm sputters along, nearly running out of steam before it even gets started.
 Cage plays Tom Welles, a private investigator hired by the widow of a
recently deceased industrialist to discover the truth behind a snuff film
found among her late husband's effects.
 The investigation leads Welles, a devoted family man with a wife and baby
daughter, into the darkest, scummiest corners of the pornography
underground.
Once there, Welles must use all his will to overcome the obstacles thrown
in his path as well as keep from drifting away from what he holds most
dear.
 Cage, at least through the first three-quarters of 8mm, seems catatonic.
He is passive and languid, rarely showing any spark.
 It is only when the movie shifts mode from a mystery to a revenge
melodrama that Cage shows some life. But it is not enough to lift this
yawner out of its doldrums.
 Only Joaquin Phoenix as the streetwise Max, who introduces Welles to the
squalor and horror of the porno underground, shows any flashes of character
and humor. But, again, it is not enough to compensate for the film's
malaise.
 Director Joel Schumacher can't seem to do anything with the material. But
that is what one can expect from the individual who nearly destroyed the
Batman franchise. Working from a script by Andrew Kevin Walker, Schumacher
fails to bring any originality or verve to the proceedings.
 8mm chugs along like an overloaded freight trying to climb a steep grade.
 Unfortunately, we have to come along for the ride.
 8mm is a movie destined for a quick video transfer.
 Bob Bloom the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Matt Williams
Have you been dying to know just how sick, twisted and decayed the human
soul can become?  Well, look no further.  8MM is a prime example of
bleak vérité.  But, though it has bleakness in spades, 8MM lacks
anything worthwhile to be engaging.
Detective Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) is in over his head.  He has been
hired by a rich widow (Myra Carter) who has discovered what she believes
to be a snuff film in her late husband's belongings.  Upset over the
atrocity, she wants Detective Welles to ascertain whether the film is
authentic or merely a disturbing hoax.
Stumbling upon one incredulously lucky break after another, Welles
follows the trail to Hollywood.  There, he meets up with Max
California(Joaquin Phoenix), an adult bookstore clerk who takes him on a
tour of the seamy world of illegal pornography.
As the depravities Welles encounters get worse and worse, his case turns
into a personal quest.  He needs to understand the pivotal question:
why?  Why is pure evil allowed to exist?  But will understanding the
answer to that question cost him his own sanity?
Many of the conclusions drawn by 8MM were also made by screenwriter
Andrew Kevin Walker's superior 1995 effort, Seven.  However, not only
does 8MM lack the earlier film's strong characterizations and sense of
structure, but 8MM director Joel Schumacher isn't able to create a
visual style anywhere near comparison.
Nicolas Cage has the misfortune to play an everyman character whose most
sympathetic trait is the fact that, well, he's being played by Nic
Cage.  He is never able to connect with the audience, even though he is
intended to be their guide to the underworld.
Joaquin Phoenix' Max California at least has a few character quirks that
he can play upon, whereas Cage is given only one (he pretends he doesn't
smoke, although he does).  But, then again, Phoenix exists primarily as
a way to take the movie deeper and deeper into the world of porn.
(Though it works structurally, it doesn't really make much sense in the
movie.  Since Detective Welles is looking for some highly illegal stuff,
why doesn't he simply start with the bottom dwellers instead of working
his way down?)
8MM is the type of movie that, though not particularly poorly made,
makes you seriously wonder, "why am I watching this?"  It's not merely
that the movie is depressing and/or sordid (though it is).  But there
has to be something that engages you among the depressive sordidness...
and that crucial part is missing from 8MM.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Joel Schumacher's "8mm" is film noir of a grand tradition, a
chilling descent into the seedy underworld of the pornographic
industry.
Filmed almost entirely in shadow, the movie allows us a merciless
glimpse into a culture comprised of darkness, money, violence, and the
unquenchable thirst for sex which drives mankind.  There's
authenticity
to the presentation, and "8mm" makes us squirm uncomfortably in our
seats, simultaneously appalled and intrigued.
        Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) is a private investigator who
operates discretely, a trait which allows him to work with many
high-profile clients.  ("I've been privilaged to provide services for
people I admire," he allows.)  When the widow of a much loved bank
president asks him to investigate a strange item found in her late
husband's vault, Welles agrees... not knowing that the case will come
to consume his every thought.
        The item in question is a short reel of Super 8 film, which
appears at first glance to be nothing more than a typical home movie.
But upon screening the footage, Welles is aghast at what he sees: a
teenage girl being raped and brutally murdered-- a so-called "snuff
film."  The confused widow wants to know what this hideous item
is doing in her husband's possession, as she knew him as a kind,
sweet man.  Welles, horrified, vows to uncover the origin of the film.
        Welles gets assistance in his investigation from a friendly
porn
dealer named Max (Joaquin Phoenix), who hides Truman Captoe novels
behind phony porn dustjackets, so he can read "real" books at work
without raising his customers' eyebrows.  This tells us a good deal
about Max, a bright young man who hates the way he makes his living,
but doesn't know any other way to survive.  The interplay between
Welles and his sidekick punctuates the landscape of "8mm" with
surprising warmth and humor-- quite a feat considering the subject
matter we're dealing with.
        The photography of "8mm" is flat, drab, and almost completely
devoid of color; it seems to be an intentional attempt to recreate the
underlit feel so common in Super 8 movies, as well as the shadowy
intrigue of past film noirs.  The musical score seems to stalk the
audience, and is as drenched in shadow and mystery as the photo-
graphy itself.  It adds a great deal of atmosphere to a movie already
overflowing with it.
        "8mm" is clever in the way it handles its pornographic
elements,
opting to tease us with the images from the snuff film rather than
shoving them in our faces.  It wisely leaves most of the action and
violence off-screen.  This is the correct approach to take-- as Max
himself points out, this type of imagery gets in one's head.  ("Once
you
see some of this stuff, you can't unsee it.")
        1997's "Batman and Robin," also helmed by Schumacher, proved
that the director knew how to construct pretty pictures of a city in
turmoil, even if the story repeatedly fell flat on its face.  (Earlier
this year, British comic book fans named it the worst movie ever
made about a comic book character.)  But "8mm" proves what I have
long since suspected: "Batman and Robin's" problems stemmed not
from Schumacher's inability to make a compelling film, but from
Akiva Goldsman's insultingly bad script.  Schumacher has a more
talented scribe this time around: Andrew Kevin Walker, the author
of "Seven," one of the finest thrillers of the past decade.  "8mm"
is an impressive rebound for Schumacher, and a fine continuation of
a strong track record for Walker.
        That doesn't mean they've achieved perfection, however.  The
story runs a tad too long, a small flaw which could have been fixed
with a little more attention to editing and pacing.  And Catherine
Keener is basically wasted in her role as Welles's wife, Amy; she
does little but whine, seemingly unconcerned with the case her
husband is working on.  I bristled nearly every time she came on
the screen.
        Much more interesting is the character of Janet
Matthews, the mother of the girl in the movie, who becomes
Welles's unwitting ally in the quest for the snuff film's origin.
In a lesser film, a romantic interest would develop between
these two characters, who have numerous scenes alone together.
"8mm" is smarter than that, however, and keeps their relation-
ship on a professional level, although Welles clearly grows fond
of her.  He is able to draw strength from Janet's love for her
daughter in one chilling climactic scene, the exact details of
which I won't spoil.
        This is a work of remarkable vision.  "8mm," like
"Seven" and "Silence of the Lambs," is eerie, dark, and
disturbing.  If you dislike films of this genre, you probably
won't have a great time.  But for those who enjoy a good
thriller, I recommend this particular walk on the wild side.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Ulrich.Schreglmann
"Tell me," the sidekick from inside the porn scene asks the hero played by
Nicholas Cage after they've watched a couple of really UGLY movies together
in the line of duty, "were you turned on by these?"  "No.  No I wasn't,"
Cage replies.  "But you weren't exactly turned off, either, were you?
Devil's changing you already."
It is hard to believe he wasn't turned off.  I was.  Big time.  Even
literally turned away.  Whenever the films in film became too ghastly to
look at they probably wouldn't show them on the big screen anyway, but I
wasn't going to chance it.  And I'm certainly not going to go into that
flick a second time to find out.  In a way the movie was so horrible because
we don't see the violence but Cage's reaction to whatever it supposedly is
he's seeing, and his face distorted in disgust may have been a lot more
effective than anything we could have witnessed ourselves.  Inspiring so
much confidence, Cage is unbelievably good at conveying any emotion to the
viewer with just a few facial muscles.
That movie was extreme for something in or close to mainstream--so extreme
in fact it's actually slipping beyond the threshold of the plausible.
That's mainly because it's in its moodiness so revolting it actually FORCES
you to take a step back and think about what you're seeing.
And WHEN you think about it you can't help pondering that this is a little
TOO dirty for actual underground porn scene.  Not "dirty" as in "Naughty,
naughty!" but dirty as in literally expecting the rats and the cockroaches
to crawl out of the linoleum there.  While parts of the world may actually
look like that the fact that you see nothing but this level for what seems
to be well over two hours makes it appear more like the world through the
eyes of a vigilante idealist guardian of mores gone gaga.
Many of the elements are classic film noir--decent professional private
investigator with clientele among the high and the mighty and the filthy
rich is hired by an industry magnate's widow to find out whether her
powerful and revered late husband was actually a monster under his facade
of, well, intimidating callous high-roller.  Of course he was, it turns out.
And of course his lawyer, who looks like Geraldo Rivera, was knowingly
devil's advocate.  When would they ever turn out not to be.
Just like the average movie shows you only the beautiful vistas of town this
movie specializes in the ugly, shot through shutter a little too dark with
filters letting mainly cold colors pass, to make you especially depressed.
Bleah!  In fact the whole movie is literally so dark throughout that when at
but one instant there is a sweeping vista of L.A. basking in midday sunlight
hitting your eyes without warning you're actually blinded for a moment.
Cage's detective is a decent boy, Phillip Marlowe type, though happily
married with child--the idealist family values aspect.  He's being called to
investigate whether a so-called "snuff movie" found in the aforementioned
late industry czar's personal vault--an S&M porn movie in which the victim
is actually being killed--is real or fake.  His widow would like to know
whether the man she loved for most of her life was merely a forgivable
pervert or an actual monstrous menace to society.
In the course of his investigations Cage, P.I. descends into an exaggerated
world of evil and ugliness your run-of-the-mill idealist seems to be
fascinated by.  As for me, after an agonizing couple of minutes my disbelief
just snapped in two from too much suspension.  We see rows of shelves where
kiddie porn photos are being sold and duly have your "Ugh!"-button pushed
but can't help noticing that the place looks SO much like you ought to put a
torch to it--not because of what is available there but because of what the
place looks like anyway--that you go straight through revulsion and out the
other end.
He finds the people who did the movie and hires them with his client's money
in order to find out who they are and to expose them.  Alas, they're on to
him, because the decent old lady's late husband's attourney turns out to
have been in on the making of the movie and to have warned the other bad
guys.  Apparently--in good old noir tradition--he never expected our dutiful
young investigator to get this far in the first place and is now in the act
of damage containment.  This is when the film changes from
bottom-of-an-inkwell depressiveness to an actual suspenseful thriller for
just a few minutes, when action is required of our hero to survive, only to
then descend into a "lone avenger" bit leaving me strangely cold; but that's
possibly just me.
If this review sounds overly negative I'm not sure whether that is what I've
intended to convey.  The movie is a bitter, bitter, bitter pill, but it's
meant to be.  If you can stomach it it's certainly worth watching once.
There are even two or three scenes deliberately hilariously funny, like the
scene where the porn paraphernalia sales dude is seen reading some schmaltzy
novel under the cover of erotic literature in order not to "embarrass
yourself in front of your fellow perverts," or when he tells a guy,
mercifully off-screen, that "this place is like a gas station.  You pay
before you pump."  (There was also some rather shameless product placement
in that flick.  Now I want me one of'em battery operated vaginas!  Just
kidding.)
On a final note I can only say that if I'm naive and that flick was actually
a REALISITC depicition of the underground porn scene I prefer to remain
naive and ignorant, thankyouverymuch!  ("Whataworldwhataworldwhataworld..."
*Mutter, mutter, mutter!*)
(C)OOL mcmxcix
"There's nothing good--unless you do't."  (Erich Kästner)

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
What do you get when you slap together the writer of one of the best
thrillers to come out in the last ten years, SEVEN (9/10), the cheezy
director of the awful BATMAN & ROBIN, and the acting talents of Nicolas
"Gimme some tights and I can play Superman" Cage? You get a mediocre
checkmark on the blackboard of gripping thrillers.
PLOT:
A discreet private investigator gets hired by an aging widow of a rich guy,
after she finds a snuff film in his wall-safe, and wants to know if the girl
killed on the grainy movie, was killed for real. The private dick slowly
delves into the sick, perverted world of underground porn, and slowly
uncovers the secrets behind the disgusting film.
CRITIQUE:
Dark, gritty thriller that starts off with a great premise, but loses you
with its snails pace, awful soundtrack and somewhat predictable and weak
conclusion. The film seems to have two endings, one which is quite
see-through and anti-climactic, and another longer, drawn-out finish, which
does score some points for daring, but not enough to make up for the film's
overall laggard inclination. The actors are all very good in their roles,
with Cage coming through as the man progressively being torn apart inside,
and Joaquin Phoenix as the wise-cracking, porn-shop-clerking, side-kick from
hell! Peter Stormare also turns in a fun role as Dino Velvet, one of the
film's more seedier characters. And yes, there are quite a few seedy
characters in this one, but not as many as I anticipated. In fact, for a
film that deals with murder, porn and the Hollywood underground, I didn't
find much to be shocked about. Some interesting scenes, but nothing overly
appalling or horrific. But then again, maybe I watch too much porn myself :)
I guess that if you're the type of person that enjoys lazy-paced films, with
a tinge of character development, then you might enjoy this one, despite its
impotent conclusion. But if you check into this film looking for a
fast-paced thrill-ride, you will be mightily disappointed, because the hop
of this film is not as swift as the mighty rabbit. Having said that, the
cinematography of the film is perfect, with the smell of the underground
practically carrying you out of your seat and literal darkness choking us
all around. But overall, the film doesn't generate enough real thrills,
tension or a full-filling conclusion, to be judged a recommendable thriller.
Rent SEVEN again, or wait for this SEVEN-lite to come out on video, so that
you could sit down with a beer in one hand, a remote in the other, and a
pillow nestled plumply behind your fat head.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Joel Schumacher has also directed several music videos, including
"Devil Inside" by INXS, "Kiss From a Rose" by Seal and "The End is the
Beginning is the End" by The Smashing Pumpkins. He has also written several
screenplays including the 1976 comedy CAR WASH and 1985's Brat-Pack hit,
ST-ELMO'S FIRE. He started his career as an art director for television
commercials, before becoming costume designer for such notable films as
Woody Allen's SLEEPER and INTERIORS.
Despite being born Joaquin Raphael Phoenix, at the age of four Joaquin
decided that he wanted a more earthy name, like his elder siblings River and
Rain. So while he was raking leaves with his father he decided on Leaf. In
the early '90's he would take back his birth name.
Actor James Gandolfini was born in Westwood, New Jersey. He graduated from
Rutgers University before beginning his acting career in New York theatre.
He made his Broadway debut in the 1992 revival of "A Streetcar named Desire"
with Alec Baldwin and Jessica Lange. He currently resides in New York.
Along with his success in the United States, actor Peter Stormare continues
to work in his native country of Sweden. He starred in the title role of the
Scandinavian thriller HAMILTON, also featuring Mark Hamill and Leno Olin,
which broke box-office records in Sweden and Norway.
Chris Bauer, the man who plays "The Machine" in this feature, is a graduate
of the Yale School of Drama, where he appeared in such productions as
Othello, The Tempest and MacBeth.

Author
Christian Pyle
After 1993's "Falling Down," I hoped that Joel Schumacher would mature into a
great director.  Since then he has offered us two so-so adaptations of John
Grisham novels ("The Client" and "A Time to Kill") and two Batman movies that
lowered the standards of that franchise.  Although these disappointments
dampened my enthusiasm for Schumacher's potential, the publicity for his latest
release, "8MM," raised new hope.  It promised to be something unusual.  It
wasn't.
The plot goes like this:  Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) is a private eye who is
hired by a wealthy woman, allegorically named Mrs. Christian (Myra Carter), to
investigate an 8mm movie found among her late husband's belongings.  The movie
appears to be a snuff film in which a teenage girl is raped and murdered by a
man in a leather mask (who reminds me of Bane in Schumacher's "Batman &
Robin").  Because murders can be realistically simulated in movies, Mrs.
Christian wants Tom to discover if the girl is alive or dead.  By combing
through missing persons reports, Tom finds the girl's name and tracks her to
Los Angeles.  With the aid of Max California (Joaquin Phoenix), a video store
clerk (and another symbolic name), Tom wanders through the underworld of
pornography in search of snuff.
The plot bears an obvious resemblance to Paul Schrader's "Hardcore," in which
a father goes deeper and deeper into the industries of porn and sex to find his
missing daughter.  Both films are modeled on Dante's "The Inferno," of course;
"8MM" makes that connection overly obvious by casting Max as Virgil and having
him constantly tell Tom that they were heading toward a meeting with the devil.
 "Hardcore" is a much more subtle and meaningful film.
"8MM" had a lot of promise.  In its better moments it's an examination of
violence as entertainment and of the beast within even a nice guy like Tom. 
One moment of the first sort:  when we first meet Max he's reading Truman
Capote's "In Cold Blood" underneath the cover of a porn novel.  "In Cold Blood"
was the father of the true-crime genre, which is the literary equivalent of
snuff films.
Max promises that we will see examples of the second theme when he tells Tom,
"Dance with the devil and the devil don't change; the devil changes you."  Tom
does change-I'll let you discover the specifics for yourself-but not
permanently. Schumacher and screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker didn't have the
guts to take Tom so far down the dark tunnel that he couldn't come back. 
(Walker's "Seven" did a much better job on that theme by refusing to
compromise).
Cage tries hard to pull it off, but the script doesn't give him enough to work
with.  Phoenix walks away with the movie-he's smart, charming, and funny. 
Other cast members include "Fargo"'s Peter Stormare camping it up as porn
auteur Dino Velvet and "The Sopranos"'s James Gandolfini as a soulless porn
merchant who pushes Tom too far.
In the last analysis, since "8MM" falls short of its pretensions and its
promise, its just another private eye story in the Raymond Chandler/Ross
Macdonald tradition of having the detective uncover the depravity behind the
glossy facade of wealth and privilege.  However, unlike other predictable fare
in the genre-last year's "Twilight," for example-"8MM" is especially
disappointing because it could have been much more than it is.

Author
Mac VerStandig
What is pornography? Is it the showing of forbidden areas on a human 
body? Do they need to be shown in a sexual fashion to constitute 
pornography? Does the goal of the exploitation have to be sexual 
gratification for the viewer? The Supreme Court of the United States of 
America once spoke of pornography, and gave the explanation "You know it 
when you see it." After seeing 8MM, the latest film from director Joel 
Schumacher, I am convinced that the Supreme Court was absolutely 
correct.
A multi-millionaire widow discovers an 8mm film in her husband's safe, 
in which a young girl appears to raped and murdered in a most violent 
fashion. So, her and her attorney hire private detective Tom Welles 
(Nicholas Cage) to look into the authenticity of the film, and determine 
whether or not this could be a real snuff film, or if the murder is 
faked. Welles assures her that the film must be fake, saying that snuff 
films are "basically an urban legend--makeup, special effects" 
However, nonetheless, he agrees to look into it. He decides that the 
most effective way would be to treat the girl in the film like a missing 
person, and see what turns up.
He soon finds the girl and discovers that she is, indeed missing, and 
had run away to Los Angeles, where she found a home in the underground 
porn industry. So Welles makes his way into this dark, sick, and 
disgusting underground world with the help of Max California (Joaquin 
Phoenix), a clerk at a porn store. And that is what this film deals 
with, the underground porn world, and the people involved with it. It 
introduces characters that star in and make these various S/M films 
which feature everything from the mild beatings and whippings, to lewd 
images of children in those acts, to bestiality. His goal is to find the 
people that dealt with this girl, and what happened to her.
He also finds the girl's mother, which becomes an interesting side 
plot to the story. The film deals with her coping with the loss of her 
only child for no apparent explanation. She becomes one of the films 
most intriguing characters, because her and Welles are the only people 
in this movie that average persons can relate to. And they are opposites 
of each other. She is dealing with the loss of a child and husband that 
has left her. He is a new father with a wife that is just starting to 
detect marriage problems due to his work.
At one point, Max California tells Welles that he will "see things you 
can't unsee." That is a drastic understatement, as Schumacher chose to 
allow the audience to view almost everything that Welles does. And some 
of the images are absolutely haunting. You, the audience member, ask 
yourself the questions that Welles is asking the people behind these 
films, namely "why?" It is incomprehensible to me how some of these 
people could exist in the real world, or how some of them could be sick 
enough to engage in these behaviors, and yet that is the most 
frightening element of this film, that people like those doe really 
exist.
With that said, my largest gripe with this film is it's rating. 
Probably due to the big names behind it, 8MM was issued an R rating by 
the MPAA. The first realization that I came to is that 8MM is not 
pornography in any way shape or form. It contains scenes and images that 
would, without question, constitute pornography, but it itself is not. 
What it is is a frighteningly real and intense film that audiences 
won't enjoy as much as be shocked by. And, as it is warned, you cannot 
unsee some of the things in this film, they just don't go away. For 
that reason, 8MM is more than deserving of an NC-17 rating, as films 
like Showgirls, Orgazmo, and Kids look like a humorous family films when 
in comparison.
Nicholas Cage is absolutely phenomenal in his role. He acts like your 
tour guide through this deep, dark underground world, and is masterful 
in doing so. At one point he holds a sick, twisted, murderer at his 
mercy, but cannot come to execute him. So he calls the victim's family 
and requests permission to do so. That is one of his moments of pure 
humanity. At other times he comes closer to insanity. Another scene 
features him with a different murderer, just muttering the question 
"why?" over and over. The response is chilling as he snaps "The things 
I do - I do them because I like them. Because I want to." That is what 
this film is about.
Director Joel Schumacher has once again created a dark film that is 
truly dark. Literally, less than 10 minutes of this film are in well-lit 
areas. That adds a creepy and intense feel to the film, which is backed 
up by a frightening score throughout the film, which is only substituted 
for an eerie silence. Quite literally, from the first scene, you find 
yourself on the edge of your seat, not because you don't know what 
will happen next, but rather because you are too scared to sit back.
When all is said and done, 8MM is a frightening, dark, intense movie 
that will stay with you for a long time. It has it's flaws in that 
some of the acting is less than ideal, and there may just be such a 
thing as too much darkness for one movie. But it is good in principal, 
and features a wonderful performance by Nicholas Cage, and one of the 
most amazing character studies since Hannibal Lector in The Silence of 
the Lambs. I only warn that "you see things you can't unsee."

Author
Ken Pierce
The following review is supplied by www.dvdfuture.com
Director: Joel Schumacher
Producor: Gavin Polone, Judy Hofflund, Joel Schumacher
Writer: Andrew Kevin Walker
Review: I was originally going to write a review of the new Joel
Schumacher/Nicolas Cage flick 8MM, but determined it was too short to carry
itself, so I'll include it here as a part of a larger overall editorial.
If Joel Schumacher wanted to make a movie about snuff films, he started out on
the right track. What he should have done though, is set up a camera, then
given some poor hapless viewer a gun, one bullet, and a copy of this movie.
Voila! Instant snuff.
Now, I'm not saying that 8MM was a bad film, it was terrible! From the
terrible shots, to the terrible editing, to the bland lighting (there's a
scene in a bedroom where a light switch behind Cage is turned on...only
there's no light!) to the boring sound mix. This film just reeks of bad.
The blame here lies squarely on the shoulders of Joel Schumacher, who hasn't
made a worthwhile film since 1987 (The Lost Boys), and has never made a film
which has had a large social impact (unless you count the negative impact of
Batman & Robin).
Schumacher took Andrew Kevin Walker's (Seven) script, and homogenized it to
the point where Walker left the picture. Walker's take on the new version of
the script? "If you can't say something nice, don't say anything at all."
Now, anyone who's ever watched a movie knows that great movies start with a
great script. Schumacher has managed to screw up more great scripts than
anyone in Hollywood history. Don't believe me? Let's look at a list of his
film work:
His career in film work started with The Incredible Shrinking Woman in 1981
starring Lily Tomlin. Mediocre at best. This segued into D.C. Cab in 1983.
Again, mediocre. We then have Schumacher's first genuine "hit", St. Elmo's
Fire (1985). Lots of people absolutely love this movie. I found it bland,
boring and pretentious. This is followed by The Lost Boys (1987), which I
enjoyed, but would hardly call a classic like some people. He followed
probably his two most popular movies with Cousins (1989) starring Ted Danson
and Isabella Rossellini. Great...a flick about wife-swapping. He then went on
to make Flatliners (1990), which could have been fantastic. Of course,
Schumacher screwed it up. He decided the best way to follow up a film about
death was with another film about...death...this time starring Julia Robers
and Campbell Scott, Dying Young (1991). A movie which absolutely failed in
its effort to bring emotion to the screen because of its absolute desire to
be as dark and depressing as possible. Note to Schumacher: people with
terminal illnesses still know how to have fun sometimes, and if you would've
showed that the dark moments would've had more emotional impact. If
everything is depressing all time, nobody knows what to relate to. Schumacher
then created what is probably one of his most controversial films, Falling
Down (1993). Michael Douglas carried this film. His performance was
outstanding. Schumacher's direction was far from special (go back and watch
it again, you'll see exactly what I mean). Schumacher then proceeded to screw
up The Client (1994) by making it too preachy. After that, some drunken fool
at Warner Brothers gave Schumacher the Batman franchise and he wasted no time
in driving it into the ground. First by letting Jim Carrey do all the work in
Batman Forever (1995). I felt sorry for Carrey, because it has to be hard to
be the only good thing in a film. Then he put the final nails in the Batman
coffin with Batman & Robin (1997). In between his two Batman "films",
Schumacher had time to screw up another Grisham novel, A Time to Kill (1996).
Samuel L. Jackson carried the film this time (but he wasn't in it enough to
actually save it). That brings us to the present, and the ever- excellent
Cage in the incredibly bad 8MM. Not exactly a stellar record.
This brings me to the point. Schumacher is directing a new film now,
Flawless. This film is due sometime later this year. Once again he has
somehow managed to con a great cast (led by Robert DeNiro), and I'm sure the
film will have a fantastic marketing campaign (as all his films do). I think
I've finally had enough. I'll be skipping this one. I'm a huge DeNiro fan,
but Schumacher is just too much of a hack to make it work. I'm skipping it,
and his next one, and his next one. Maybe if enough people do this, someone
will force Schumacher to stop making films.
Until next time, go see a movie (not 8MM!).
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Michael Dequina
As his follow-up to the candy-colored camp catastrophe that was
_Batman_&_Robin_, director Joel Schumacher has gone to the opposite extreme
with the lurid thriller _8MM_.  Schumacher obviously intended this
down-and-dirty film to cleanse his artistic soul, and while _8MM_ certainly
is better than that infamous franchise killer (then again, what wouldn't
be?), the film is grainy and unfocused as the object at the center of the
plot.
That object is a so-called "snuff" film, a pornographic work in which the
woman is killed.  The film is found in the safe of a recently deceased
millionaire, and private detective Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) is hired by
the millionaire's widow (Myra Carter) to investigate its origin and track
down the family of the young girl who was brutally killed in it.
The mystery is just a perfunctory device for screenwriter Andrew Kevin
Walker to get to his main concern, which is the psychological effects Tom
feels takes when he becomes immersed in the seedy world of underground
porn.  But did it have to be so perfunctory?  Walker doesn't even bother to
hide the fact that it is a mere device.  The mystery is more or less
resolved in an overblown sequence that comes at the end of act two, and the
revelations are contrived and incredibly underwhelming.  While that may be
some sort of sly in-joke on Walker's part, to the viewer, it is simply an
unsatisfying cheat.
But once the mystery is out of the way, and Walker frees himself to zero
in on Tom's psyche, the movie does get better, and it finally gives Cage
something meaty to work with.  The pain and anguish of his downward spiral
are acutely felt through Cage's chillingly convincing performance.  But by
this point, the movie is nearly over, with two-thirds of it having been
spent on characters plot mechanics that, for the most part, bear little to
no weight in the end.
_8MM_ is a competent attempt by Schumacher to reclaim his directorial
voice after suffering the grind of a blockbuster studio franchise.  Yet
while a directorial voice does rings throughout _8MM_, it is not
Schumacher's--rather, it's that of David Fincher, helmer of Walker's
_Se7en_; Schumacher apes his style from the ample rain to the deliberate
pacing.  _8MM_ may indeed be a step up from Schumacher's last film, but he
still has a few more steps to go before recapturing his own artistic identity.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

8MM (director: Joel Schumacher; screenwriter: Andrew Kevin Walker;
cinematographer: Robert Elswit; cast: Nicolas Cage (Tom Welles), Joaquin
Phoenix (Max California), Catherine Keener (Amy Welles), James
Gandolfini (Eddie Poole), Peter Stormare (Dino Velvet), Chris Bauer
(Machine), Anthony Heald (Longdale), Amy Morton (Mrs. Mathews), Myra
Carter (Mrs. Christian), Jenny Powell (Mary Anne Mathews), 1999)
Joel Schumacher's "8 MM" jumps into the underworld of pornography,
focusing on the makers of "snuff" films, those who are so vile that they
make the ones in the regular porno business seem like angels in
comparison. Nicolas Cage as Tom Welles, an ambitious career, family man
from Harrisburg, Pa., whose father was a coal miner but he went to
college on an academic scholarship, choosing to do surveillance work
because that's where the big money is at. Slowly building up a
repetition in the field because of his discretion, he gets his break
when a coal factory tycoon dies and his widow, Mrs. Christian (Myra), on
her lawyer's (Heald) recommendation chooses him to find out if the
"snuff film" she found in her husband's safe, actually happened. She
wants to know if the girl is alive or dead.
Tom kisses his loving wife Amy (Keener) and his baby daughter goodbye,
and tells them don't ask questions, I'm doing this so we can all live
better. Catherine Keener, a normally interesting actress, has nothing to
do in this role but whine and act drab. All the Charles Bronson-like
heroics are reserved for Cage, in a role that is more incredulous than
believable, and less introspective than ridiculous, as he heads for
Cleveland after tracking down who the missing girl is through the
computer files of the missing persons records and identifies the girl as
Mary Anne Matthews. In Cleveland he talks with her mother (Morton) and
is able to track the white-thrash 16-year-old girl's next destination as
Hollywood. Cage, at all times seems wooden, never relaxed in the role.
It makes one nervous just watching him trying to act a role he can't
seem to get the handle on.
All his reactions against the evil people he is up against, are
knee-jerk reactions, whereas nothing feels hearfelt. It seems as if it
is a set-up for the middle-class audience, the one the film hopes to
attract, so they will get some vicarious feelings of revenge as Tom acts
as a surrogate for them, who will enforce the law vigilante-style from
his nebulous position of highly paid private investigator. What the
director thought he was getting, was Tom searching for the evil in
himself, where this straight-arrow becomes capable of taking the law
into his own hands by dancing with the devil and becoming like the
devil. It just never came off that way, and for a number of reasons, not
the least of them being, was that Cage wasn't right for the part and
that he was never seen in a reflective moment undergoing a life change.
The dramatics here seemed misplaced, as if they were intended more for
one of the director's Batman flicks, something the director brought more
life to than he did with this film.
The writer is Andrew Kevin Walker, who wrote ''Seven,''as he toiled at
his day job as a clerk in a New York City Tower Records store. He again
has a protagonist who looks at evil and is amazed by it. But this time
the look seems artificial and not well-placed, as Cage is not really an
introspective person, he is just someone trying to make a better life
for himself at a job he is good at. And that is the main problem with
the film, it has a false gritty noir look to it. This film is not the
real deal, it's ersatz. Therefore it never works on the intellect,
instead it attacks the emotions and cheapens its efforts by pretending
to delve into Cage's angst. Even the credible camera work, which seems
too sharp-edged for the film, works against it, because it is so much
better than the story and the weak acting, that it highlights even more,
how artificial the film seems.
The film seems most comfortable when it is in the middle of its soft
porn scenes, as Tom reaches the sleazy streets of Hollywood and watches
some porno films in his motel room. He finds an adult book store and
befriends the clerk, Max California (Phoenix), into helping him get
around in the porn world, a world Tom makes faces at, showing us how
nice a guy he is by not liking this sleazy form of sex.
We know Max is a good-guy because he is reading Truman Capote, not some
porn novel, while working behind the cash register. Tom is so impressed
with Max, that he hires him to locate the maker of the snuff film he is
looking for, and the two become soul mates, sort of telling us they both
do what they do because they have to make a living and are blind to the
consequences of their work. Max once had ambitions to be a musician, but
in Los Angeles, the sex trade is such an easy lure, that it takes many
an aspiring artist down its sleazy path, as they think there is no other
way for them to make a living.
The heavies of the film are all personifications of pure evil. There is
nothing good about them. They belong to the underworld of porn. Machine
(Bauer), Eddie Poole (Gandolfini), and Dino Velvet (Stormare), are the
ones Tom must come up against to find his answer if the girl is still
alive. There is one other mystery evil man, the producer of the film,
the one who pocketed most of the money for the film, cheating his trio
of partners. Machine is the masked one in the films, the one who knifes
the girl to death. Poole is the contact and distributor of the film.
Velvet is the tacky artist; he makes the films. Velvet is considered to
be the Jim Jarmusch of S&M films. His creepy studio of torture devices
and knives and whips, will be the place where Tom takes these perverts
on and seeks revenge for the girl he completely identifies with.
The results are as gratituous as any found in a myriad of cheap
adventure films that appeal to a ready made audience, not looking for a
thinking picture. The box office mistake of this film, is that it took
itself seriously, somehow believing itself a thinking picture, and
thereby lost both types of audiences. Because those who enjoy the
exploitive gore films, must have found something lacking here also, like
just enough thinking to turn them off from the film.
The film had perhaps one line in it that didn't seem phony, when the
masked killer is unmasked and says, " The things I do--I do them because
I like them. Because I want to. I wasn't abused as a child. I don't hate
my parents.'' At last, the writer and director have located where the
evil comes from that they are looking for. It is everywhere. The film's
saving grace is that it had a morality to it, one that the viewer might
have trouble reconciling in his mind, as the handcuffed to the bed
private investigator fights his way out of the porno studio and has to
call the victim's mother to see if she loved her daughter and thinks her
killers should die, before he can take his revenge on them. That dilemma
might have worked as a morality play, if the acting and the story didn't
seem so wooden and phony.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Alex Fung
8MM (Columbia - 1999)
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter Stormare
Screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker
Produced by Gavin Polone, Judy Hofflund and Joel Schumacher
Directed by Joel Schumacher
Running time: 119 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   A film revolving around subject matter as morally repugnant as the
   mythic snuff movie is not one which will exactly inspire a lot of
   affection; not only will many find the material so thoroughly
   distasteful that a typical knee-jerk reaction is to reject the entire
   project outright, but even the more tolerant will find themselves
   immersed in a harrowing world of debauchery.  Equally contentious is
   that the vague undercurrent of hypocrisy involved in condemning
   sadistic voyeurs while neglecting to indict the audience's own
   complicity in partaking this inherently voyeuristic tale.  In short,
   this is the sort of edgy, unpalatable material which one would expect
   to find tackled in a more daring independent film, not addressed in a
   big-budget studio production starring Nicolas Cage. However, despite
   giddy overtures to the contrary, it eventually becomes clear that
   8MM, a picture which finds detective Tom Welles (Cage) and newfound
   sidekick Max California (Joaquin Phoenix) in search of a teenage girl
   seemingly murdered in an old 8mm reel, is unwilling to explore the
   iniquitous subject head-on and instead uses it as a basis for rote
   thriller sequences.
   8MM is the newest entry in an oeuvre of mostly unfortunate vigilante
   pictures by the Internet's most-maligned director, Joel Schumacher,
   whose effectively provocative FALLING DOWN was more than offset by A
   TIME TO KILL and his notorious BATMAN films.  (There's some irony in
   that 8MM, with Cage's grim, obsessive leather-clad hero and Phoenix's
   brash, wisecracking sidekick, captures the ethos of the Dark Knight
   legend far better than either of his two pictures in the Warner Bros.
   franchise.)  While it's difficult to defend his recent track record,
   it should be accounted for that Schumacher was working from
   screenplays by longtime collaborator Akiva Goldsman -- not the most
   promising of starting points.  (I'm not sure that even the greatest
   director alive could've made anything worthwhile out of the insipid
   BATMAN AND ROBIN screenplay.)
   In this picture, Schumacher instead works from a script from SE7EN
   scribe Andrew Kevin Walker, and while many comparisons can be drawn
   between the David Fincher picture and this one (in particular,
   Walker's morbid fascination with the grotesque), from a narrative
   standpoint 8MM is largely indebted to Paul Schrader's HARDCORE, which
   followed George C. Scott in a father's dogged search of his daughter
   into the depths of the underground sex world; similarly, in the
   Schumacher film Welles finds himself delving into the seedy
   underground pornography scene in order to track down the elusive girl
   in the dated film footage.  There's less of a personal tie here --
   Welles is essentially a mercenary figure -- but the story is given a
   paternal angle through an affecting performance by Amy Morton as the
   missing girl's mother, and imbued with emotional shadings through
   Welles' transformation into an avenging angel.
   The film's early sequences depicting Welles as an adoring family man
   with wife Amy (Catherine Keener) and a baby daughter carry immediate
   significance -- 8MM is less interested in establishing a background
   of normalcy than it is setting up his downfall, hence the cuddling,
   kissing and I-love-yous give way to uncomfortable silences and
   increasingly infrequent phone calls from the road as the film
   progresses.  With Amy as his metaphoric lifeline, Welles' deepening
   disaffection and hardening is revealed by his cold and distant manner
   as he spirals into the nightmarish abyss.  It's not very profound nor
   particularly subtle -- there are even overly explicit lines of
   dialogue like "There are things that you're gonna see that you can't
   unsee: they get in your head and stay there" and "If you dance with
   the devil, the devil don't change, the devil changes you" -- but it's
   nonetheless effective to contrast the stony-faced Welles blankly
   staring at lurid acts of sexual torture with the one whose loathing
   of violence is so pronounced that his screening of the girl's filmed
   slaughter prompts exaggerated cringing and horrified shudders.
   Curiously, Welles' screening of the snuff film, clearly one of 8MM's
   most crucial sequences, is far less effective than it ought to be,
   largely due to the failure to build an ominous mood of dread leading
   into the scene.  It's also not helped by Mychael Danna's percussive
   predilection -- if ever there was a picture which cried out for a
   moody Howard Shore score, it would be this.
   While the procedural vignettes which follow are competent if
   unconvincing -- Welles doesn't come off as nearly resourceful enough
   to trace the girl's path so handily, though clues and breaks in the
   case clearly pop up in order to expedite the storyline -- the
   picture hits its stride when it shifts locales to Hollywood and links
   Welles up with Max, a punky adult store clerk who guides him through
   the Los Angeles underground sex scene.  The film's strength is in its
   seedy, revulsive depiction of this shadowy world, in no small part
   due to the sets and lighting; in stark contrast to the almost
   wholesome, cheerful version of the mainstream pornographic world
   drawn out in bright colors in BOOGIE NIGHTS, 8MM uncovers the flip
   aspect of its hidden, seamier side, taking the film into damp, dark
   basements bathed in cold, clinical neon light.  There's a palatable
   sense of danger in these gritty scenes, and the frequent glimpses of
   miscellaneous S&M footage (surprisingly graphic for a studio picture,
   though no moreso than in, say, David Cronenberg's VIDEODROME) in
   conjunction with the bombardment of disturbing perversions help to
   create a thoroughly unsettling ambiance fraught with tension.  While
   Schumacher does not capture the same atmosphere of helplessness and
   despair as Fincher in SE7EN, this film is even more consistently
   gloomy -- it may not be perpetually overcast, but it's not nearly as
   jokey and only sporadically dabbles in humour.  During its
   exploration of this depraved underworld, the relentlessly bleak
   imagery of 8MM is effectively disquieting.
   Unfortunately, the picture slips gears shortly thereafter as it seems
   to lose its nerve and transforms into a fairly routine thriller,
   employing standard chase and fight scenes in a disappointing move
   which feels like a commercial concession.  Aside from an overbroad
   performance by Peter Stormare as "the Jim Jarmusch of porn" and the
   Scooby Doo-like revelation of a surprise villain, it's mostly solidly
   staged -- there's a sequence which momentarily rivals Clarice
   Starling's breach into Buffalo Bill's lair in THE SILENCE OF THE
   LAMBS for tension, and another which momentously hinges upon a
   decision, similar to the climax of SE7EN -- but it squanders the
   sordid tone in favour of familiar cathartic slam-bam heroics and
   vengeance.  The inclusion of self-psychoanalysis by the villains was
   also an unwelcome choice; while occasionally gripping (the villain's
   rant in the Fincher picture worked on sheer acting prowess), it's
   usually just goofy, and in 8MM's case, unintentionally laughable --
   when one unmasked villain meaningfully readjusted his appearance and
   launched into a speech about the banality of evil, I almost groaned
   aloud.  When Welles screamed "Why?" at his tormentors, I wasn't
   counting on such an elaborate and detailed explanation.
   Though 8MM's conventional latter half is substantially less
   enthralling than the scenes leading into it, the strong visual work
   of the picture is still reasonably successful in evoking a creepy and
   foreboding atmosphere.  Ultimately, the most disturbing thing about
   the film is how close it comes to becoming something truly memorable
   before veering back into safer territory.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them
 in on the whole conspiracy.  Half the time I have no idea what they're
 talking about." - Martin Landau

Author
Mr Q. Z. Diablo
Mr Diablo found himself at rather a loose end on Sunday afternoon and
decided, by default, to go to the pictures.  After examining the
newspaper he found that the only vaguely acceptable choice was Joel
Shumacher's 8MM.  The local art-house cinema was showing a number of
films of little interest so he shrugged his shoulders and ambled down to
the multiplex in order to view hollywood product.
Mr Shumacher is responsible for a number of films which Mr Diablo has
placed in his "pet hate" category.  He has not seen, and does not intend
to see BATMAN AND ROBIN but is still jarred by the unaccountable
popularity of the asinine THE LOST BOYS.  He intended not to dwell on
the distant past as he walked into the darkened cinema but to assess the
film on its merits and will attempt to keep his personal biases under
control as he writes this review.
8MM is an exploitation film.  The genre has given audiences such "gems"
as BASIC INSTINCT and thus, being forewarned by virtue of having read a
number of reviews beforehand, Mr Diablo was looking forward to scenes of
gratuitous prurience, no small amount of violence and, perhaps, a poorly
executed nightclub scene.  8MM was, sadly, nightclubless but boasted an
impressive array of scenes set in underground pornography dealerships;
perhaps by way of consolation.
The plot is quite simple.  An unexpectedly stiff-upper-lip private
investigator, Tom Welles (Nicholas Cage in an unnecessarily overwrought
performance) is called in to determine the authenticity of a supposed
snuff film found in the personal safe of a defunct tycoon.  He is
convinced that it is real and is asked to determine the source of the
material.  Mr Diablo is an absolute sucker for urban folklore and such a
premise was potentially enthralling, especially when the matter was
examined by Andrew Kevin Walker, the scriptwriter of the excellent
SE7EN.  He was disappointed to find that the best laid plans of mice and
men had gone sadly awry.
This problem initially became apparent within the first half hour of the
film in a series of vignettes of Mr Cage's initial investigations of the
seamy side of hollywood.  Multiple dissolves and the use of not-quite
voice over diminish the immediacy of the goings-on to the extent that Mr
Diablo was feeling decidedly restless by the film's halfway point.
Given that 8MM is largely exposition, with the violent payoffs occurring
towards the end of the film, Mr Diablo could have expected better.  He
is a fan of films which develop slowly and, in the best of all possible
worlds, logically.  8MM develops slowly, yes; logically, reasonably.  Mr
Walker's script, however, never rises above the level of thick-eared
private eye hokum, requiring the cast to labour over occasionally
ludicrous dialogue as well as frequently (and unnecessarily) segueing
into a sub-plot concerning Welles' marriage and private life.  This
sub-plot is couched in terms of a theme relating to Welles' loss of
innocence but themes seem decidedly out of place in a film which,
despite its dark visuals, remains determinedly lightweight.  8MM is a
mystery that fails to be mysterious and a thriller that fails to thrill.
The visuals almost have something to recommend them but, thanks to
Shumacher's unerringly heavy-handed touch, they manage to give the film
a merely sleazy feel where a sense of mystery was required.  Evidently,
this is the director's attempt at style over content (of which there is,
regrettably, little) and Mr Diablo is an avowed fan of the
aforementioned (he is unwavering in his dedication to the films of Dario
Argento, for example) but Shumacher is no stylist.  Attempts to contrast
scenes rich in colour with the washed-out look which pervades the
sequences that are relevant to the plot are extremely misplaced devices
in a films that is attempting to ride on the strength of its script. 
Stabs made at attention to detail simply end up as so much visual
clutter and the final sequence set in a cramped and dimly-lit house
features a ludicrously mobile camera.
Mr Diablo was not convinced that he would witness acting of any
particular standard but was pleasantly surprised by the performance of
Joaquin Phoenix as Max California, a porn merchant who aids Welles in
his quest for the truth.  Peter Stormare turns in an enjoyably
scenery-munching exhibition as the maker of the snuff film but the
remaining members of the cast manage to be boring at best and ludicrous
at worst.
8MM is a mess.  Worse still, it's an only intermittently entertaining
mess.  Mr Diablo has only ever walked out on one film but 8MM came close
on a number of occasions.  Mind you, this may have been a combination of
the innate tedium of the film and the innate stupidity and excessive
volume of Sunday afternoon multiplex-goers.  He still awaits with keen
anticipation the next horror outing that makes it to the big screen in
the backwater that he calls home.  In the meantime, 8MM returned little
for the $10 investment save an unusual premise and some unpleasant violence.

Author
David Wilcock
8mm, written by Seven scribe Andrew Kevin Walker, has an interesting idea
which is ruined by Hollywood formula to become a bog standard murder
mystery. Nicolas Cage plays family man detective Tom Welles, who is asked by
upper class toff Mrs. Christian (Myra Carter) to investigate an movie found
in her recently deceased husbands safe. The movie happens to be an mythical
'snuff movie', where the girl featured in the film appears to get brutally
slashed. All Mrs. Christian wants to know if the girl in the film was killed
or not. Welles agrees, and soon gets pulled into the seedy underworld of
porn movies, with video clerk Max California (Phoenix) as his guide.
Although the 'snuff' industry hasn't really been examined in mainstream
cinema, 8mm still makes a rather plodding thriller which just seems to be a
bit sicker than most. The snuff movie within the movie is certainly
disturbing, although the jerky camera angles and grainy image takes some of
the shock away. 8mm has the problem of not wanting to shock too much, and
apart from a few moments, most of the action in the film is nothing you
haven't seen from another standard thriller.
The cast help towards the entertainment, apart from an hideous performance
by the increasingly lazy Nicolas Cage. While he was fun and breezy in
earlier films such as Raising Arizona (1987), ever since Leaving Las Vegas
(1995), Cage has lost much of his acting talent and appears to be on
autopilot, such as in the terrible Snake Eyes (1998.) Here, in 8mm, he's
boring, uninteresting and has a dull monotonous voice. And in this overlong
thriller, these virtues do not help keep the suspense up. Only when Cage is
onscreen with the excellent Phoenix does the film start moving, as Phoenix
is a true talent. His performance is a great break away from the gloom, and
he's just purely enjoyable to watch. Catherine Keener is completely wasted
as Cage's wife, although she delivers a far better performance than her
character deserves. Her character, though, is hugely underwritten, one of
the most wasted characters of the year. Also fun is Fargo's Peter Stormare
as the wildly over the top snuff film director.
As this film is written by the person behind Seven, 8mm is filled with doom
and gloom, and no-one appears to know how to use an light switch. Unlike
Seven, 8mm isn't too clever, and the twist is pathetic and startlingly
obvious when it arrives. Lacking the strong characters Seven featured, 8mm
ultimately becomes uninvolving plot wise, and relies on the graphic scenes
to provide any entertainment. But director Joel Schumacher, the completely
wrong guy for the job, puts style over content, and while the direction and
look are good, it's just not very disturbing. Schumacher also has no idea
how to shock and audience, and though we are meant to be looking at the
'dark belly' of the porn industry, it doesn't exactly leave an haunting
impression on the viewers mind, which misses the point. Also, the last 20
minutes are so hackneyed, so cliched, it's amazing to think it's the same
film you're watching.
8mm is far from an success, a 'snuffed' opportunity. With a boring lead
character, 'controversial' scenes that manage not to be controversial, and a
director obsessed with looks, what could have been one of the most shocking
films of the year is a dumb thriller. Ultimately, 8mm is probably worth
renting on home video, unless your desperate to see what the snuff film
within the film looks like. And trust me, the rest of the 2 hours are not
worth it.

Author
Kevin Patterson
8MM ventures about as far into the sleazy underbelly of America as any film
I can remember. The plot, if you haven't heard, revolves around a private
detective named Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) who is hired by a wealthy widow
who discovers what appears to be a snuff film in her husband's private safe
after his death. Understandably disturbed, she hopes that Welles can prove
that it's a fake and that the woman apparently murdered in the film is
actually still alive. Welles's investigation inevitably leads him into the
world of underground pornography, where anonymous dealers congregate in
back alleys and abandoned buildings to sell illegal hardcore videos that
depict pedophilia, bestiality, rape, and other forms of depravity.
Some will undoubtedly be outraged over the film's graphic content. While
director Joel Schumacher thankfully spares us the most disturbing images
(he mostly keeps his camera on Welles's horrified reaction during his
screening of the snuff film, for example), we certainly see enough brief
clips of the hardcore films that even the most seasoned viewer will feel
genuinely shocked, if not downright repulsed, at least a few times during
8MM. The film was reportedly trimmed down after initially receiving an
NC-17 rating, and all I have to say about that is this is one case in which
the distributor should probably pass on a "director's cut." Still, I can
comfortably acquit Schumacher and screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker of any
charges of exploitation. The film's content is never sensationalized, and
most of it is shot in a murky gloom that lends an appropriately ugly feel
to the kind of human behavior on display here.
Unfortunately, I can't acquit them of the charge of telling a pretty
mediocre story: it certainly isn't boring, but there isn't much in the way
of real substance. What 8MM  should have done, I think, was to explore the
psychology that leads people down these dark paths in the first place.
Instead, it mostly proceeds according to typical Hollywood thriller
conventions and without much character insight. Take, for example, Max
California (Joaquin Phoenix), the adult bookstore clerk that Welles enlists
to point him in the right directions as he tries to trace the snuff film's
origin. Max is smarter than the people he works for (apparently the porn
clerk position was the best job he could get in L.A.), which is why Welles
latches onto him: at heart, he's a regular guy who recognizes this
perversity for what it is. Obviously, I don't know a whole lot about Max's
line of work, but it seems unlikely that someone like him would make a lot
of connections in the illegal porn business. I think he'd probably come to
work in the morning, take his paycheck, and go home. Of course, if that
were the case, then Welles wouldn't be able to have a Trustworthy
Wisecracking Sidekick (TM). Later, they meet a fringe S&M pornographer
named Dino Velvet (Peter Stormare), who is frightening, but in an overly
stylized way (he transfers his hardcore movies from film to video and is
therefore considered the "Jim Jarmusch of S&M") that prevents the audience
from taking him, or what he represents, too seriously. Yes, he's twisted
and sadistic, but like Max, he only makes sense as a movie character and
not as a real person.
The filmmakers flirt with the dark psychology a little bit, but in a way
that's just marginally effective. At one point, Max warns Welles, "You
dance with the devil, and the devil don't change: the devil changes you."
Those of us who have seen screenwriter Walker's SE7EN can see where this is
going: eventually, Welles gets to the stage where he feels he is justified
in taking the law into his own hands against the people who made the snuff
movie. But since most of the film is occupied with the details of the
investigation rather than Welles's reactions to what he is discovering, we
don't really identify with his character, and his transformation into a
vigilante seems to happen only because the screenplay says so. What we end
up with is a final half-hour that seems only loosely related to everything
that preceded it. I could rationalize Welles's behavior, but I didn't find
him sympathetic, unlike Brad Pitt's character in SE7EN, whose fall from
grace I could understand even as I hated the fateful choice that he made.
Granted, some unsettling but worthwhile insights can actually be found in
the final half-hour, as the callous disrespect for human life that led to
the girl's murder is finally verbalized by those responsible for it.
Perhaps the most chilling moment, at least for me, is a pornographer's
description of how they slapped her around and pumped her full of drugs to
get her to calm down as they prepared to kill her. Unfortunately, these
confessions occur within the setup of yet another annoying Hollywood
formula, where the bad guy is held at gunpoint and arrogantly proclaims his
evil-ness and lack of remorse, even daring the good guy to pull the
trigger. I've never understood why someone would behave like this. I mean,
no matter how vile and depraved these people may be, wouldn't simple
self-preservationism kick in at some point and make them shut their mouths?
Sitting on the bus on the way back from the movie theater, I looked out the
window at an apartment building. Briefly, the thought crossed my mind: what
if, in some back room of that building or in an alley behind it, a band of
perverts were selling illegal child porn, or making a hardcore S&M torture
movie, or even a snuff film? At that moment, I felt more disturbed than I
did at any time during 8MM. How is it, after all, that most of us lead
fairly "normal," everyday lives, yet we inhabit the same world with the
twisted individuals who view the brutalization and murder of other human
beings as entertaining and even sexually arousing? This, I think, is why
these things are so horrifying, and this is also the point which 8MM
explores only fleetingly. There are moments when I honestly empathized with
Welles, such as when he can't bring himself to explain to his wife what
he's been doing for the past few weeks and why he seems so sad and
withdrawn, and I wish there had been more of them. The filmmakers could
have crafted a compelling human drama about a man who journeys into the
darkest corners of the psyche and becomes alienated from the life he had
previously taken for granted, but instead they send Welles back out the
door to play vigilante.
In the absence of much legitimate emotion or psychological commentary, 8MM
is little more than a serviceable but unexceptional thriller that, along
the way, takes something that most of us were probably aware of at some
level and shows it to us in all its repellent sickness. The problem is not
the content per se as the fact that the filmmakers seem don't seem to have
anything interesting to say about it. What exactly are we supposed to take
away from this film? That people who like the most extreme forms of porn
are more than a little messed up in the head and that snuff films, if they
do really exist, are a horrifyingly evil thing? Thanks guys, but I kinda
knew that already.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Greg King
This violent, confronting and unrelentingly sleazy crime
thriller ultimately seems like Hardcore crossed with the more violent
elements of Death Wish.
Pennsylvania based private investigator Tom Welles (Nicolas
Cage) is hired to investigate a spool of 8mm film that turns up in the
belongings of a dead industrialist.  The film is a "snuff" movie, in
which a young girl is brutally murdered on camera by a man in a
leather mask.  Welles is hired to trace the movie's origins, and
determine whether the girl was actually murdered or not.
What begins as a seemingly conventional detective thriller
soon descends into a heart of darkness as Welles is drawn into the
unfamiliar, sordid pornographic underworld of Los Angeles and New
York.  This is a world where teenage runaways and hopeful starlets
become the innocent prey of amoral predators, and indecently wealthy
and powerful businessmen can afford to have snuff films made purely
for their own vicarious pleasure.
The more Welles learns about this amoral world, the further he
finds himself drifting away from his comfortable domestic life with
his wife (Catherine Keener) and baby daughter.  He feels that the only
way he can cleanse himself of this grubby environment is through
killing the pornographers themselves.  The fact that Welles can only
find redemption for his lost soul by becoming a vigilante raises a
number of dubious moral issues.  However, unlike the controversial
Lolita, which at least makes an effort to explore tricky moral issues,
8MM steadfastly remains a blank page, almost as though it lacks the
courage of its convictions.
Even though 8MM is undeniably and hypnotically compelling,
despite its repellent subject matter, it certainly does not make for
an entertaining time at the movies.  But then again, we wouldn't
expect something light from Andrew Kevin Walker, who previously wrote
the gritty thriller Seven.  Walker seems to have a predilection for
exploring moral corruption and twisted psychopaths.
          This is an uncharacteristically dark and disturbing thriller
from Joel Schumacher, whose previous films (The Client, Batman
Forever, etc) have always had a glossy surface and a slick,
accomplished feel.  8MM is deliberately shot in dark tones by
cinematographer Robert Elswit, creating an even more oppressive and
sinister atmosphere.
Cage brings an intensity to his role here, and does a quite
convincing job of portraying Welles' growing sense of anger and
outrage.  Joaquim Phoenix brings a welcome touch of comic relief to
the film as Max, the punkish adult book store clerk, who becomes
Welles' guide into the sordid back streets inhabited by the illicit
porno dealers.
8MM is not pleasant viewing, and it leaves a nasty aftertaste 
that takes a long while to disappear.

Author
David N. Butterworth
So ask yourself what "8MM" ("Eight Millimeter") is really all about.
Is it about a wholesome surveillance man who loses sight of his values 
after becoming enmeshed in the seedy, sleazy underworld of hardcore 
pornography?
Is it about the business itself, how, bubbling just beneath the surface 
of big-town Americana, there's a sordid world of sick and depraved 
people who won't necessarily stop short of murder in order to satisfy 
their sick and twisted desires?
Or is it about those who can, those who are in a position to influence 
the making of the kinds of films sick and demented people want to see?  
I'm not talking about snuff films, supposed "documentaries" of victims 
being brutalized and killed on camera.  I'm talking about films like 
"8MM" and its director, Joel Schumacher.  With a recent run of big 
budget movies to his credit--"Batman & Robin," "A Time to Kill," "Batman 
Forever," "The Client"--Schumacher certainly has that kind of influence.
Is "8MM" something you really want to see?  Probably not.
The first two-thirds of "8MM" unwind as a fairly conventional missing 
persons drama, albeit with a particularly unsavory core.  Then, as it's 
been threatening all along, the film explodes into violence.  And just 
when you think it's finally over, Schumacher tags on a ridiculous 
self-righteous finale that drags the whole unpleasant experience down 
even further.
Trust me.  There are better ways to waste two hours of your life.
Nicolas '"Snake Eyes"' Cage plays private investigator Tom Welles who 
is hired by a wealthy Philadelphia widow to determine whether a reel of 
film found in her late husband's safe documents a young girl's murder.  
Welles goes about his assignment rather matter-of-factly, and the pieces 
of the puzzle fall into place rather neatly, almost as if you don't need 
any specialized skills or training to do this.  Welles certainly makes 
it look easy.  And cops, obviously, never look in toilet tanks for 
clues.
The deeper Welles digs into his investigation the more obsessed he 
becomes, like George C. Scott in Paul Schrader's "Hardcore."  
Occasionally, a little flickering sound whirs in his head like sprockets 
winding through a film projector, reminding him of his unpleasant task.
There are hints that this is taking its toll on his lovely wife, played 
by Catherine Keener, who is frustrated by her husband spending all of 
his time in Cleveland rather than in their ugly split-level home in 
Harrisburg, PA.
"8MM" doesn't condemn or condone its subject matter, it just exploits 
it.  The irony, of course, is that Schumacher and "Seven" scribe Andrew 
Kevin Walker's vision of life in the snuff lane is limited by what they 
can show in an R-rated, first-run Hollywood product.  So we only see 
snippets of snuff, and a lot more footage of Nicolas Cage covering his 
face in horror.  Later it's the turn of Joaquin Phoenix (who's quite 
good and by far the film's most interesting character as adult bookstore 
flunky Max California ) to cover his face as the horrid thing is 
screened over and over again.
All this to get to the familiar yet offensive "revelation" that sexual 
deviants are not, indeed, monsters but everyday people like you and me.  
Neither Super nor Standard, "8MM" is shocking only in its banality.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures
 Director:  Joel Schumacher
 Writer:  Andrew Kevin Walker
 Cast: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini,
Peter Stomare, Anthony Heald, Catherine Keener
   If you found a porno tape discarded in the trash, would you
take it home and screen it?  Destroy it so that no one could
do so? Would you instead take it right to the police?   Would
you simply pass it by?  The chances are that whatever you
answer, you could not justifiably be labeled a pervert for your
curiosity.  But now take another situation.  You see in the
trash what looks like a snuff film.  What would you do?  For
the more pristine among us, let it be known that a snuff film
takes s&m to its extreme.  Such a work depicts the actual
brutalization and murder of a woman at the hands of one or
more sadistic men.  From what I hear, the vast majority and
perhaps all snuff films in existence are fakes.  Given the
ability of today's movie technology to do just about anything
you want it to, it would be no difficult matter to feign a
sadistic killing and to pay the "victim" for her role.  After all,
why show the real thing if nobody can really take a fake from
the McCoy?  Simple: there are people out there willing to pay
big bucks to witness actual murders close up, and then to
pocket the film for future viewing.
   After you see this new psychological thriller featuring
Nicolas Cage and directed by Joel Schumacher ("The Client,"
"A Time to Kill"), you could not be blamed if you decided to
do absolutely nothing but to get as far away from a snuff clip
as you can.  Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage), a private
investigator, chose otherwise, and got himself and a number
of others into a heap of trouble, almost destroying his
marriage and losing his life in the bargain.  Though he
emerges a hero, he treads way over the line of duty.  Any
rational person in his shoes would have turned his situation
over to the police, but in this taut story penned by Andrew
Kevin Walker ("Seven"), Welles becomes obsessed with what
is easily the most exotic and dangerous case he has handled.
   The first person who should have let sleeping dogs lie is
the fabulously wealthy Mrs. Christian (Myra Carter) who upon
her husband's death discovers a small reel of 8 millimeter
film in his wall safe.  The film depicts the violent death of a
16-old-girl by a masked sadist, who beats her and then
plunges a knife into her chest in order to capture the girl's
look of absolute terror at the moment of impact.  (Yes,
Virginia, apparently there are people who get off on this sort
of thing.)  The wheelchair-bound widow hasn't the foggiest
idea what the film is doing in her late husband's possession,
and hires Welles to find out whether the murder was actual or
simulated.  Treating the situation as a missing persons case,
Welles discovers the identity of the victim, interviews the girl's
mother, Mrs. Mathews (Amy Morton), travels from his
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania home to the runaway teen's
Hollywood destination, and becomes immersed in every
level of the porno industry.  He buddies up with a smart, adult
bookstore clerk, Max California (Joaquin Phoenix), and
ultimately exchanges details of the case with some of the
sleaziest individuals seen on the screen since scripter
Andrew Kevin Walker's depravity-bathed movie "Seven."
   "8mm" starts calmly as though Tom Welles were a modern
Perry Mason rationally investigating a predicament, but
director Joel Schumacher steadily turns on the tension as the
obsessed Welles sinks deeply into the muck of the
underground porn distributors.  As Welles meets such dirt
bags as Dino Velvet (Peter Stomare), the artistic director of
the snuff works; Eddie Poole (James Gandolfini), whose
studio deals in the films; and Machine (Chris Bauer), a black-
hooded individual who performs the alleged murders--we in
the audience are left to ponder Welles' motivation for risking
his neck over a complete stranger who may not even be
dead.  Does he see his own baby daughter, or even his
concerned and frightened wife  Amy (Catherine Keener) as a
potential victim of these vermin?  Or does he become himself
turned on by the intrigue of the seedy industry?  
   "8mm" is for an audience that relished David Fincher's
1995 movie "Seven," which featured a striking cast including
Brad Pitt, Morgan Freeman, Kevin Spacey and Gwyneth
Paltrow.  "8mm" s not as well crafted as screenwriter
Walker's previous film, which was exceptionally  organized as
a search for a serial killer out to punish those who commit
one or more of the seven deadly sins.  But it's virtually as
unsettling, considerably more violent, and likewise appears to
wallow in human depravity.  Nicolas Cage, whose career took
off after portrayals of eccentric characters in offbeat movies
like "Raising Arizona" and "Moonstruck," is appropriately
called one of the great actors of his generation (he's 34). 
Said to have had two of his teeth pulled for his role in "Birdy,"
swallowed a live cockroach for his part in "Vampire's Kills,"
and slashed his arm while preparing to take on "Racing with
the Moon," he is the ideal choice to portray the intensity of a
man obsessed with finding a killer and making the
acquaintance of men on whose sight you'd not hesitate to
cross the street.  He is ably paired with the California porn
industry's only good-guy, played by Joaquim Phoenix as a
guy who reluctantly takes a gig selling sleaze but who reads
Truman Capote disguised within a porno paperback cover.  
   Cage becomes as violent as Mel Gibson's Porter in Brian
Helgeland's "Payback," and features one off-the-wall
filmmaker played by Peter Stomare (an expert with the
crossbow who takes pride in directing teen murder) and the
owner of a film company played by James Gandolfini who
self-destructively curses a man bent on revenge, daring him
to pull the trigger.  As though the on-screen violence is
insufficient to get the audience juices flowing, Mychael Danna
raises the intensity with an unusual score featuring Middle
Eastern music at one point.  Photographer Robert Elswit
keeps us in the dark a good deal of the time, particularly
when demonstrating the nitty gritty, but puts outdoor
Hollywood in a coarse light to signal its spunkier side. 
   Those of us who want to see a major statement
promulgated by the film will point to the latest incidents of
man's inhumanity to man--in Kosovo, in Bosnia, in Sierra
Leone--butchery that appears to be done for its own sake, for
the pleasure it brings to the killers.  Others will see "8mm" as
a popcorn flick, yet another effective and furious product from
Hollywood's dream factory.  In either case, consider leaving
grandma home this time around.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter Stormare,
Anthony Heald
Written by: Andrew Kevin Walker
Directed by: Joel Schumacher
Running Time: 124 minutes
**The following review contains spoilers**
"Please someone stop Joel Schumacher before he vomits into a film
canister again and tries to pass it off as a movie."
-- Chuck Dowling, The Jacksonville Film Journal
I wrote the above sentence in my review for 1997's Batman and Robin.
Apparently, no one heard my words.  Oh, how I wish you had heard them.
Oh how I wish someone had stopped him...  because he's done it again.
The plot of 8MM is similar to the 1977 Paul Schrader film Hardcore, a
surprisingly decent and engrossing tale.  In fact, it was everything
that 8MM is not.  In the opening minutes of 8MM, we see private
detective Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) working on a case for a
prestigious member of the U.S.  Government.  Keep this fact in mind,
Cage is trusted with an important case, which he solves.  He returns
home to his wife and new daughter, and even finds time to rake his
yard (keep that in mind too, it's important as well).
He's hired by a rich elderly woman to solve a mystery.  After her
husband's death she comes across a film in his private safe.  It
appears to be snuff film, a sort of urban legend of the pornography
industry in which someone is actually brutally murdered for the
camera.  The woman wants Welles to locate the young girl in the film,
hopefully to disprove that it is in fact a snuff film.  So he sets off
on a journey into the sordid underworld of sleaze to discover the
truth about the film.
The main problem with 8MM is that the whole film is completely
pointless.  Welles is actually selected for the case by the old
woman's lawyer (Anthony Heald, an actor who always plays the same type
of character, that being a bad guy).  When you first see him, your
first instinct is that he's behind the whole thing.  The choice of
casting does the film in.  Then, as Welles begins his investigation,
at times we will see a shadowy figure following him.  The only person
it could possibly be is the lawyer (or someone sent by the lawyer)
because no one knows Welles is even investigating anything yet.  So
your first instinct has now been confirmed.  Then, when it is in fact
revealed that the lawyer is a part of the whole thing, he tells Welles
that he was chosen for the case because he was young and inexperienced
(in one of those ridiculous "since we're going to kill you anyway, why
not tell you the whole thing" moments).  But earlier when we see
Welles being hired for the case he's told that he was hired because he
comes highly recommended.  Huh?  Also, when the lawyer reveals himself
to be a part of the whole thing, his main goal is to get the film
back.  SO WHY DID HE GIVE IT UP IN THE FIRST PLACE?!  The lawyer had
the film the whole time, then gave it away to the private detective
thinking that he would just give up on the case and return the film?!
It's totally absurd... and this is the screenwriter of Seven?
Late in the film there's a confrontation between all the main
characters, and after a struggle one of the character's guns ends up
underneath a car.  Cage, who has been handcuffed to a bed, is rapidly
trying to get to his gun, which is on a table.  James Gandolfini's
character goes for the gun under the car in what is supposed to be a
scene of "suspense".  You see, the gun is just slightly out of reach
from the side of the car he's trying to reach it from, and so instead
of going around the car to the other side (where he can easily reach
it) he just keeps stretching.  GO AROUND TO THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
CAR!!  This goes on for minutes.  Then, after Cage gets his gun,
Gandolfini then decides it would be best to go around to the other
side of the car.  Boy, Schumacher is really really getting on my
nerves.  I think the final straw would be when Cage returns home,
devastated by everything that he's seen on this case, and then IS NO
LONGER ABLE TO RAKE HIS LAWN!  We actually see a shot of him
pathetically poking at leaves in his yard.
Other things that bugged me about 8MM: One would be the music, if you
can call it that.  Whenever the score starts up, it sounds like techno
music, and then this awful Indian or middle eastern type music will
accompany it.  Awful decision there Joel.  Another is Cage's
performance.  At this point he's capable of a wide range of
performances, either good or bad.  For 8MM, he delivers a very wooden
one, and only shines when he's interacting with Joaquin Phoenix (who
gives a great performance as a porn shop clerk with a heart of gold
who helps Cage with his case).  You're capable of much better
Mr. Cage.  Now as for you Mr.  Schumacher... I'm starting to doubt if
you're capable of anything else besides urinating onto the institution
of American cinema.  [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.
