Title
Review for All Access: Front Row. Backstage. Live! (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger: "IMAX: ALL ACCESS. FRONT ROW. BACKSTAGE. LIVE!"
           It's the dream of every rock fan to weave your way through the arena parking lot, filled with tour buses, semis and performers' limousines, and be waved through the Artists' Entrance door with an "All Access" pass that identifies you as a VIP. You're escorted by a security guard through the winding corridors beneath the stage and into a prime viewing area. You watch the sound engineers in front of their mixing boards, electricians adjusting speakers and musicians tuning their instruments. Then there's the backstage visit with your favorite musician who is preparing for a mega-concert.
             Fantasy? No. It's reality at this new 63-minute IMAX presentation which combines the intense visuality of the giant screen with up-close-and-personal views of performances by some of the greatest multi-platinum acts in music. The charismatic Sting leads off with "Desert Rose" accompanied by rai singer Cheb Mami. Not that this European star is introduced or even identified. He's just there singing with Sting, adding a Middle Eastern flavor - and, as a fan, you're supposed to be able to recognize him. But the camera work's terrific - with Sting reminiscing, "I saw Jimi Hendrix in Newcastle, and I'd never seen anyone play the way he played" -  in front of a mirror, creating an intriguing double reflection.
               After that, without transition or explanation, there's the Godfather of Funk George Clinton with his rainbow-colored hair, along with Mary J. Blige, shimmering in an ankle-length silver leather coat. The unpredictable Kid Rock explodes with his signature anthem "Bawitdaba," and sultry Sheryl Crow croons a plaintive "If It Makes You Happy," seated alone on a rehearsal stage. Legendary bluesman B.B. King, hip-hop group The Roots and Phish guitarist/vocalist Trey Anastasio combine forces in King's classic, "Rock Me Baby." R&B soul singer Macy Gray performs "I Can't Wait to Meetchu," shaking her black feather boa. Carlos Santana and Rob Thomas of Matchbox Twenty jam with "Smooth." Soul singer Al Green and the Dave Matthews Band render "Take Me To the River," and Moby does "Porcelain."
            Admittedly, the music is terrific and it's all very entertaining but - without sub-titles or a scorecard - you don't know who the players are. Being over 40, I brought a savvy teenager with me, hoping he could ID them, but even he was at a loss with many. Only having the press kit notes saved me from the bewildering ignorance which ran rampant among others in the audience.
             Also, the commentary by the various musicians is banal: "Music is a totally infectious thing that just grabs you." "I think the point of rock 'n' roll is rebellion." "Music has no age limit."   "Music soothes the savage beast and I guess I've got a lot of beast in me because it soothes me." If you're a die-hard rock fan, perhaps you're gonna love this concert film. For others, I wonder.
One final cautionary note from management: your local IMAX theater is not responsible for broken eardrums.
