Title
Review for In the Bedroom (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When a young person dies prematurely, particularly as the
result of an accident or a homicide, the parents more often
than not will break up.  While accepting the statistic that fifty
percent of American marriages are broken up by divorce, I've
often wondered why couples who in my way of thinking should be
brought closer together by the death of a son or daughter are so
likely to split.  Todd Field's film "In the Bedroom," scripted by
the director and Rob Festinger from a story by the late Andre
Dubus, provides an answer.  
   The film, which was shown at the 2001 Sundance Festival
where it picked up a Special Jury Prize for acting, is already
being touted as a sure Oscar nomination for Sissy Spacek and
Tom Wilkinson, who performs in the role of a middle-aged
married couple, Ruth and Matt Fowler.  The Fowlers live with
their teenage son Frank (Nick Stahl) in a small town in Maine
where canning and lobster fishing are the chief industries.  Matt
is a physician, a general practitioner who treats most elderly
patients, while Ruth teaches music in the local high school where
she excels as the director of a choral group rehearsing Balkan
songs for a forthcoming Labor Day concert.  Frank is pursuing
a hot summer romance with an older woman,  Natalie Strout
(Marisa Tomei), who has filed for divorce against her husband
Richard (William Mapother).  Frank is conflicted about whether to
seek a college education and become a professional like his
dad or  to making a career as lobstering which he enjoys greatly. 
When he is not courting Natalie or out on a boat, he joins his
father playing cards with the locals, including Willis Grinnel
(William Wise), who is his dad's best friend.  When Frank dies
tragically, the pleasant, pastoral life of his parents is changed
radically.
   This is the sort of tale that would be milked for melodrama by
Hollywood studios or drenched in overwrought emotions by the
TV soaps.  If fellow Maine resident Stephen King had penned the
yarn, Frank's ghost would appear prominently--though in this film
the specter of the young man remains present only
metaphorically.  Instead, Todd Field treats the people of the town
of Camden with an especially loving touch, moving the narrative
forward ever so slowly without capricious camera pans or showy,
unnatural colors.  He takes his time to show us in the audience,
especially those of us who live in big cities, the rhythm of rural
New England life where professionals like Matt take long,
relaxing lunches with friends, play cards with fishermen at night,
and guide their kids toward appropriate choices without undue
pressure.  We watch a high school choral group sing obscure
southeast European songs as though hip-hop to them were
meaningless words notable only as an example of alliteration and
voluntarily piercing one's tongue or naval would seem an
ludicrous option.  
   Through the marvelous acting of Sissy Spacek and Tom
Wilkinson--with, notably, Marisa Tomei in a deadly serious role--
we see a couple who appear to be wholly compatible only to
have the rug pulled out from under us when in the latter half of
the story grievances pour out between them.  "In the Bedroom"
has been called by some a serious "American Beauty," but it can
be likened at least peripherally to a film like Atom Egoyan's "The
Sweet Hereafter," which embraces the grief of parents whose
children have tragically died.  By underplaying their roles, making
the silences tell more about their connection than their words,
Sissy Spacek and Tom Wilkinson turn in the best performances
of the year to date.
Rated R.  Running time: 130 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
