Title
Review for Hellraiser III: Hell on Earth (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     The owner of a popular punk club finds a statue with Pinhead's face
in the center.  He finds out that Pinhead is in the statue and releases
him (stupid man).  Reporter Farrell is contacted by a ghost and told
about the death and destruction that Pinhead will raise (starting with
the schmuck that released him).  Farrell is the only person who knows
enough to stop Pinhead.
     I enjoyed HELLRAISER 3: HELL ON EARTH very much and am glad that I
saw it in the theater.  I felt that it was worth  the money to see it on
the big screen.  The only people who I feel will like this film are big
fans of the genre.  For those who think that they will enjoy seeing this
film, I suggest the big screen.  For those who are dubious, may I
suggest that you wait for the video cassette.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give HELLRAISER 3 a four.  HELLRAISER 3 is rated R for explicit
language, graphic violence, and adult situations.
     The special effects for the film are great.  The "cenobites" look
great.  I have heard that HELLRAISER 3 is nothing more than a rehash of
HELLRAISER and HELLBOUND - HELLRAISER 2.  I have not yet seen either of
the earlier films, so I can't confirm it, although I do plan on seeing
them when I get a chance.  I wanted to see this film before it left the
theaters, so I decided that I could watch the earlier ones later.  The
actors all do a reasonably good job, although that is not hard to do in
a horror film.  There are a few things in the film that don't make sense
to me.  However, they may have been explained in parts one or two.
     I was a little upset to see that Clive Barker was only the
executive producer.  I am a fan of his writing and had hoped that he had
written this one.  He wrote and directed HELLRAISER and he may have
written HELLBOUND - HELLRAISER 2, but I am not sure.  Oh well, it was
still a good movie.
     By the way: Did anyone else see the series of six continuing skits
during the MTV Music Awards with David Spade, Pinhead, Andrew Dice Clay,
and Ringo Starr?  If you missed it, you might try to find a friend who
taped the awards so that you can see it.  It is worth it.  There are
three skits during the program (the first with Dice, the second with
Pinhead, and the third with Starr) and three during the end credits.
                                 --------
     I also got to see two previews of upcoming horror films that look
great.  One is INNOCENT BLOOD (which just opened in theaters), by John
Landis, and the other is DRACULA (which is going to be released around
Thanksgiving), by Francis Ford Coppola.

Author
Andreas Kutschera
     Well, I seldom get the chance to view a film *before* the US
release, so I'll grab the chance and try to do a review of HELLRAISER
III.  No spoilers before the ^L, I promise.
     One-line-summary: Very little continuation, rather boring.
     Judging from the title, HELLRAISER III, is supposed to be a movie
that fits into the storyline of the other two Hellraiser movies.  Having
watched all three of them in a row, I must say that the most "hell-like"
aspect of it was that I watched it in a theatre without air conditioning
on one of the hottest days in August.  Other than that, the movie fails
to live up to its promise.
     Yes, the Pleasure Cube is back (it still seems to be the only way
to open the dimensional door).
     So, essentially the story follows the same line as did HELLRAISER I
and II.  But while HELLRAISER II managed to evolve the storyline further
(i.e., tell us more about the characters we already knew), part III only
gives us lots of new characters we don't know and who I don't really
care about.  This, of course, gives the authors an excuse to tell us
the same old story we have already seen, the same special effects we
have already seen and to keep it at a superficial level.
     But, what's even worse, in parts I and II, the main characters had
a really strong motive for what they did.  These people actually
*wanted* something out of life (or out of the Cube).  In part III, none
of the characters really wants something, so everything that happens,
just happens accidentally, almost by coincidence, and the characters
only _re_act (instead of *act*).
     While I liked HELLRAISER I, because it introduced a new concept to
me, and also because I get this chill down my spine when pleasure and
pain are mixed (that's all I'll add to the "Barker: Sex & Horror"
discussion), and I also liked part II, because the characters were still
motivated and the film went deeper into the history of the Cenobites,
part III didn't show me anything new.
     So what I recommend is, if you want a good story with character
development and also some good special effects, go see HELLRAISER I and
II (again, if necessary), and wait for III to come out on video.  If you
can't wait, try to see it for as little money as possible.
     Now, there will be a few *mild* spoilers to prove my point about a
weak storyline, but don't worry, you'll probably figure out most of it
yourself by the first ten minutes of the movie...:
     At the beginning of the movie, there is a statue, which is a
leftover from a psychiatric hospital.  The statue looks like a complex
meld of bodies, I-dunno-what and a cute Cube.  Viewers of HELLRAISER I
and II will probably instantly make the connection between the statue
and what it contains.
The answer to these questions follows the other ^L :-)
     Since I told you that it was a bad movie, the answer to all the
above questions is: YES (just as you would expect).
