Title
Review for Quick (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Matt Simmons
     Teri Polo stars as a hitwoman who is living with a cop.  While on
what is supposed to be her last hit, various circumstances cause her to
run off with her intended target.  Her target has stolen $3 million
from a drug dealer, and they spend the rest of the movie trying to get
it.
     As Teri Polo is my favorite actress, the rest of this review will
concentrate on her.
     Now, on the outside, this file seems to be in the same genre as
RESERVOIR DOGS and TRUE ROMANCE.  Like the two, there is a sense of
timelessness, in that predominantly 70s clothing is intermingled with
90s automobiles and car phones, for example.  Secondly, there is a
tendency to kill everybody but the hero(s).  TRUE ROMANCE differed from
RESERVOIR DOGS in that it had a female costar in it.  As a natural
extension of the violence in RESERVOIR DOGS, the sex between Christian
Slater and Patricia Arquette was shown to be somewhat less than gentle,
but it avoided showing too much (I don't remember seeing Arquette's
breasts, for example).  QUICK is like TRUE ROMANCE with the violence
and the sex, but it (unfortunately) goes a little farther.  In fact,
QUICK is almost identical to TRUE ROMANCE: couple come together
unexpectedly (though in QUICK, she doesn't fall in love with him
immediately) and are pursued by people intent to kill them as they
attempt to get a large sum of money.
     I had always respected Teri Polo for a trait she shared with Julia
Roberts:  Never to show her breasts completely naked.  However, that
changes in QUICK.  The sex is quite a bit more explicit and violent
than in TRUE ROMANCE.  In the first sex scene, she is depicted as being
forced to endure domination from her boyfriend in what could be doggy
style or anal sex.  All that is shown is her naked rear end, as then the
camera jumps to her face where we get to watch her pained expression.
I don't think this counts as exploitive in that there is nothing
sensual or erotic in this scene.  It is depicted as dirty and
perverted.  The other sex scene in the movie has the tempo of the sex
scene from MOTORAMA.  It also shows just that much.  The final instance
of skin occurs between the first and second sex scenes and is not
portrayed as sexual.  It is also not frivolous as it helps to reinforce
her character.
     All in all, I found this to be a rather mediocre movie.  Some of
the plot seems rather contrived, and a couple things pop out of
nowhere.  However, like ASPEN EXTREME, she is the highlight of the
film.
