Title
Review for When Saturday Comes (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Sue Roberts
Directed by Maria Guise
Starring Sean Bean, Emily Lloyd, Pete Postlethwaite, Craig Kelly.
Written by James Daly and Maria Giese
A fun film about Northern life in general and football in particular. 
Sean Bean,playing Jimmy Muir, turns in a performance that's 100% Blade 
as a local lad gets a chance to try out for his home side of Sheffield 
United.
I love baseball movies, but it made a really nice change to see s film 
about the English national game. A  soccer movie seems such an obvious 
choice of subject that one wonders why there's been so long a gap since 
THE GREAT ESCAPE!
This story is also an escape, of someone from a background with little 
expectation. Jimmy Muir failed as a boy to realise his dream of 
representing his town by playing in their team. He is held back by his 
family environment until a new wages clerk Annie, played by Emily Lloyd, 
starts work at the same place and turns the key to his heart.
The theme of the piece is about getting a second chance at something you 
really want to do. Fascinating to see an American angle on British life. 
However, for anyone who has ever lived north of "Watford Gap", it's a 
memory of home. The kids seemed nervous with accent as the piece opened, 
but in no time at all, whole cast were well into it.
For a tale set against an industrial environment, Maria Guise managed to 
convey the humour and friendship of life in the area. The impression the 
writers put across was not one of lack of opportunity, but rather an 
inability take the things on offer when the pub beckons. The difficulty 
of choosing to be individual when you've always been part of a crowd.
One was amused by the their desire to show the male in his habitat, I'd 
never seen the inside of a betting shop before.
The striking use of vibrant colour in the photography gave the picture 
an upbeat quality even during the most emotional moments.
Such a nice change to see a UK film where the women weren't still 
wearing corsets, (not even the stripper!) Even at its most "over the 
top" this movie felt closer to real life than anything we'd seen in 
ages. Bags of life and atmosphere-Makes you want to rush out and see a 
football match right away!
