Title
Review for George Washington (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Written & Directed by David Gordon Green
      First off, let's be clear: this movie is not about George 
Washington.  Expect no powdered wigs, no wooden teeth, no dollars across 
the Potomac.  It is a movie about the end of childhood, the end of 
innocence, but despite one shocking tragedy, it is an innocence that 
trails off under the weight of its own inevitability.
     The movie centers around a group of pre-teens in a small, decaying 
southern town.  Most of them are black, but it's a racially mixed 
society.  The narrator is Nasia (Candace Evanofski), a self-possessed 
12-year-old who has just broken up with Buddy (Curtis Cotton III) 
because, as she tells their older friend Vernon (Damien Jewan Lee), he's 
too immature.  "He's thirteen, you're twelve," says the exasperated 
Vernon, "you're supposed to be little kids!"  Nasia has transferred her 
affections to George (Donald Holden), pretty much without George's 
participation or consent.  Buddy sighs "I miss having her to talk to 
about my feelings," which doesn't sound all that immature.
     Aside from the tragedy, nothing much happens.  This movie has 
little to do with story.  It has to do with moments.  It's 
impressionistic, bits of light captured with short strokes, the languor 
of everyday life reflected in a defiantly uneventful style, beautifully 
photographed by Tim Orr (on film, not digital, an unusual pleasure in a 
contemporary no-budget picture.)  Girls brush each other's hair and talk 
about boys and kissing.  Boys roughhouse and splash in the public 
swimming pool.  George adopts a stray dog, which he has to keep hidden 
because his Uncle Damascus (Eddie Rouse) hates animals.
     Perhaps as much as anything it's about dreaming.  Vernon and his 
nine-year-old white girlfriend Sonya (Rachael Handy) dream of getting 
away together, and abortively steal a car.  Buddy dreams of getting 
Nasia back; he also dons a rubber dragon mask to change his identity.  
Nasia dreams of what a great man George will be.  And George dreams of 
being a superhero.  "I want to be the strongest man in the world," he 
says.  George is soft in the head, both figuratively and literally - he 
has to wear a helmet. After he's acclaimed a hero for saving a boy from 
drowning, despite the fact that he's not supposed to go in the water 
because of his fragile head, he dons a superhero's cape and tights for 
the rest of the picture. 
     First feature director David Gordon Green has assembled a cast of 
non-actors, and they're wonderful.  As a general rule, the younger they 
are the better they are; only some of the young adult men show a visible 
self-consciousness in front of the camera. 
     Evanofski's narrative voice is reminiscent of Terence Malick's Days 
of Heaven, and so is the sleepy semi-pastoral style.  "I like to go to 
beautiful places," she says, "where there's waterfalls and empty 
fields." 

Author
Steve Rhodes
Let's start by clearing up one point.  First-time writer/director David 
Gordon Green's GEORGE WASHINGTON is not about the father of our country.  
In fact, the movie isn't about much of anything, which you will find out 
if you can manage to stay awake.  With its minimal plot and acting, 
there aren't any characters worth caring much about even though the 
director tries hard to pull on our heart-strings with some contrived 
tragedies.  Although one can assume that the production had a written 
script, it feels like something from a junior college improvisational 
group.   
Set in a graffiti-filled, rural South that looks like an inner city 
ghetto, the story wants badly to be the next STAND BY ME.  As the 
story's enigmatic lead, 12-year-old George, Donald Holden delivers an 
exceptionally bland performance.  George has a baby-like head, so he 
wears a football helmet since an accidental blow to the head might kill 
him.  
The central and only substantial incident occurs in a bathroom where one 
of the kids slips and cracks his skull during some innocent horseplay.  
Incongruously, the other kids just stare at him.  They don't appear 
upset, and they don't take him for medical help.  Eventually, they 
decide to move the dead body but do a terrible job of hiding it.  This 
is all so unbelievably written and acted that it is almost impossible to 
have much sympathy or concern for the kids, even the dead one.  Watching 
it is like observing some little children play acting on the street.
The movie's saving grace, to the extent that it has one, is Tim Orr's 
vibrant, rust-colored cinematography.  At its best, it evokes the lush 
sort of images found in THE THIN RED LINE.
Declining an offer to come to a girl's house, George tells her, "I just 
ain't got nothing to say."  And neither does the movie.  
GEORGE WASHINGTON runs a long 1:29.  It is not rated but might be PG-13 
for mature themes and violent images and would be acceptable for 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     What astonishes is not that George Washington is a good film, it's
that the movie can tell such a powerful and complicated story in just 89
minutes.  Its length is a telling reminder that length does not equal
gravity.  In fact, thinking over the last year or so of 2 1/2-hour-plus
epics that never got around to saying much of anything, I'm inclined to
believe that the opposite is true.
     Recalling Days of Heaven and Sling Blade, George Washington takes
us on a tour of the Deep South, centering on a preteen African-American
named George (Richardson, not Washington -- played by Donald Holden), a
boy whose skull bones have never fully developed.  With his soft head,
he wears a helmet wherever he goes and isn't allowed to go swimming, as
the water would in some way soak into his brain, causing extreme pain.
     George and his friends live the idle lives of teens on a
near-permanent summer vacation, goofing off in the woods, breaking into
abandoned buildings, stealing cars, and what have you.  One day, the
adventures get a little rough, and one of the children end up dead. 
Without really thinking about it, George and his friends simply cover it
up, staging an accident and leaving the body to rot where it won't be
found.  And they go on with their lives.
     But something changes within George, and he slowly begins assuming
the role of a superhero.  After risking his own life to save a drowning
boy, he eventually dons a cape and dog-skin cap to direct traffic
through his Podunk town.  George's life gets ever more mysterious, and
still the film's title is not explained.
     It's a slow burn and harrowing ride through what would otherwise be
a standard coming of age flick.  Partly scripted and partly improvised
following David Gordon Green's amazing direction (this is his first
film), the junkyard panoramas and organ music that punctuate the movie
belie a sophistication you wouldn't otherwise expect from a movie like
this.  George Washington will not be a film for all tastes (and a
cryptic, pedestrian title won't have 'em rushing to the theaters), but
the film is simply so urgent it's hard to ignore.  Worth looking around
for.
Director: David Gordon Green
Producer: David Gordon Green, Sacha W. Mueller, Lisa Muskat
Writer: David Gordon Green
Starring: Candace Evanofski, Donald Holden, Curtis Cotton III, Eddie
Rouse, Paul Schneider, Damian Jewan Lee, Rachael Handy, Jonathan
Davidson, Janet Taylor
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Scott Renshaw
GEORGE WASHINGTON
(Cowboy Booking)
Starring:  Candace Evanofski, Donald Holden, Curtis Cotton III, Damian
Jewan Lee, Rachael Handy, Eddie Rouse, Paul Schneider.
Screenplay:  David Gordon Green.
Producers:  David Gordon Green, Sacha W. Mueller and Lisa Muskat.
Director:  David Gordon Green.
MPAA Rating:  Unrated (could be PG-13 for violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  89 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw
     In David Gordon Green's haunting feature debut GEORGE WASHINGTON,
there is no real story to speak of. Set in an unnamed town in the rural
American South, it's a quintessentially episodic film that follows a group
of adolescents and a few token adults over several summer days. The
narrator, Nasia (Candace Evanofski), is a 12-year-old African-American
girl who has just broken up with her 13-year-old boyfriend Buddy (Curtis
Cotton III) because she's looking for someone more mature. That someone
may be Buddy's friend George (Donald Holden), an introverted boy with a
congenitally soft skull that requires him to wear a helmet. In various
permutations, they hang out with their friends Vernon (Damian Jewan Lee)
and Sonya (Rachael Handy), as well as the workers at the local railyard
including Rico (Paul Schneider). They talk. They play. They argue.
     Actually, it's not accurate to say there's no story in GEORGE
WASHINGTON. It's more accurate to say there's no plot, because its story
is one of the year's most compelling, even when it occasionally lapses
into heavy-handedness. It has become something of a national pastime
trying to figure out what's wrong with American teens in the era of
Columbine, and plenty of films from RIVER'S EDGE to KIDS and onward have
tried to capture the aimlessness, amorality and anarchy of contemporary
adolescence. I don't think any one of them has captured the soul of
America's confused youth as effectively -- or with as much compassion --
as GEORGE WASHINGTON. It's the story of kids trying to find a moral
compass in a time when their childhood is becoming shorter and shorter.
     If such subject matter sounds like it could turn into pretentious
filmmaking, fear not. Though Green's early slow-motion shots may raise
fears that he's trying to make a Big Statement, he ultimately depends on
small statements. His cast of young non-professional actors, often
improvising around general story points, finds the truth of these
characters in dialogue so casual that its profundity comes as an
aftershock. A teenage girl comments that she want to get pregnant simply
because "she wants to be someone's mom;" Buddy talks about Nasia with a
precocious, almost ridiculous poetry; Nico converses with Buddy as though
they were peers, despite the boy's need for adult guidance. Even Nasia's
occasionally florid voice-over narration feels just right, the attempts of
a little girl to convey her worldliness. In its rambling,
no-particular-place-to-go rhythm, it's hypnotic viewing.
     It's also the most beautifully photographed film you're likely to see
this year. Tim Ott's cinematography captures the characters mostly
outdoors against the landscape, in both the lushness of local greenery and
the decay of abandoned industrial shells. Virtually every scene seems to
have been shot in some otherworldly twilight, so golden that they almost
hurt the eyes. The rare scenes shot indoors capture the grimness of the
characters' domestic lives, and one dark public restroom becomes the
film's unique vision of hell. When you're not busy wondering at the
naturalistic splendor of the performances, you'll be busy wondering at the
carefully constructed splendor of the visuals.
     GEORGE WASHINGTON's final half hour takes a turn toward other
thematic elements, as George attempts to re-define himself after a tragic
development. The transition isn't particularly smooth, but Green doesn't
appear particularly concerned with making his film a smooth experience.
Indeed, some of his editing and dialogue choices are so off-beat (like the
complete absence of profanity from its teenage characters) you can't help
but just let him carry you wherever he leads. Where he's leading is a
place hinted at in the film's title, a place where children are forced to
look backward for their heroes because there aren't any in their own
lives. Yes, indeed, GEORGE WASHINGTON does tell a story. If only more
films with plots could tell stories like this.
