Title
Review for Truly Madly Deeply (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     (Contains minor spoilers important to explaining the premise.)
     A perennial fantasy film subject is that of ghosts coming back to
affect the lives of the living.  I don't mean the horrific approach of THE
UNINVITED, THE HAUNTING, or THE LEGEND OF HELL HOUSE.  The films I am
talking about have spirits walking among us relatively benignly.  TOPPER is
a good example; so is BEETLEJUICE and DONA FLOR'S TWO HUSBANDS.  The success
of GHOST will probably spawn several more examples in the next year or two.
However, because of timing it seems likely we can ascribe to coincidence the
similarities between GHOST and the BBC film TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY, though in
some ways the two are quite similar.
     Jamie (played by Alan Rickman) has been dead for a while now, but Nina
(played by Juliet Stevenson) refuses to close that chapter in her life and
get on with the business of living.  She imagines Jamie is still around
giving her advice.  Nina sleepwalks through a life that is shattered and
crumbles more day by day.  Then a spectral Jamie does return and takes up
residence as Nina's secret live-in (if "live" is the right word) lover.  He
explains his presence by quoting Dylan Thomas saying, "And death shall have
no dominion."
     If the plot of TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY resembles that of GHOST, in style
the two are very different.  There is a lot that GHOST tries to do that
TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY does not.  The British film is far more sad, slow, and
introspective.  GHOST throws in a major sub-plot of a crime story; it has a
comedy sub-plot with Whoopi Goldberg; it stops and closely examines just
what powers a ghost would and would not have.  It also has its sad and
introspective moments, but they do not last too long.  To pack so much into
a film may be of dubious value, but it is all there.  TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY
clearly has different priorities and very different pacing.  It takes its
time to build Nina's character, but it glosses over the metaphysics and
there seem to be notable inconsistencies in the nature of ghosts (e.g., at
times the ghosts seem to take care that they cannot be overheard; at other
times it does not seem to bother them).  There is some whimsy, some warm
comedy, and one character who is well-observed, but overall this is a rather
slight film and a disappointment.  I would give it a 0 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Moderator's note: I am splitting these reviews up by country, because I
have to split them up some way.  I am not trying to be provincial. -ecl]
TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY (Britain, 1990):
Top-notch comedy/drama about a woman who is having a very hard time
getting over the death of her husband.  So, one weekend -- he comes
back!  Nice plot (I like the ending particularly), very funny dialogue
at times, and a number of good actors (Alan Rickman as the dead
husband, Michael Maloney, Bill Paterson) completely dwarfed by Juliet
Stevenson's wonderful performance as the lead -- she is enormously
engaging and sympathetic, and has the sort of personality that the
screen can barely contain.
[Rickman appeared after the film; he has worked with Stevenson in the
Royal Shakespeare Company, and spent most of the time praising her
performance.  Liked his comment about his role in the new Costner
ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES, as the Sheriff of Nottingham: "I
haven't seen the film yet.  I suspect what you'll see of me on the
screen will be me -- but somewhat louder."]
Beautifully-shot film of passion, religious tension and scandal in
rural Ireland at the turn of the century.  Dialogue is generally
substituted for many heavy, passionate looks between the principals
(an independent woman and the two brothers who she serves);
unfortunately, they're not *that* good at staring, so it's basically a
washout.  Pretty to look at, though.
DROWNING BY NUMBERS (Britain, 1988):
When leaving the theater after seeing this Peter Greenaway film, I
turned to my friend Rob and said, "Greenaway must be a genius, because
I wouldn't have stood for this shit from anything less."  DROWNING BY
NUMBERS is a visually and symbolically stunning film; the characters
circle around the plot like satellites in their own erratic orbits,
tied to the events and settings of the story by some fatalistic sense
of gravity.  It is surreal in the extreme, with various elements (of
both the plot and visual variety) crisscrossing with one another
throughout the length of the film.
The characters themselves have all the humanity of Delphic oracles;
they're there to say things, and to symbolize things, and to act as
figures in the painting.  DROWNING BY NUMBERS is more of a series of
sequential paintings than a movie; it has the mathematical precision
of a Bach orchestral suite, and slightly less humanity.  It's
precisely the sort of film that normally annoys the hell out of me --
character development sacrificed for form, and meaning and message
superseded for the visual quality.  But whatever pretensions DROWNING
BY NUMBERS has are blotted out by Greenaway's amazing skills in
cinematography and image composition.  Simply put, Greenaway gets away
with it.  Why?  Because it works.  Because I never lost interest in
it.  Because.
If you can put up with this sort of thing, it shouldn't be missed;
most people, I think, won't like it -- I would only recommend it to
particular acquaintances.  It tells a story (of a series of women who
murder their husbands, by the way), but the story isn't the point of
the film.  For me, DROWNING BY NUMBERS was the most technically and
visually impressive film of the festival, and probably the one that
gave my brain the most grist for the mill.  A film completely for the
head, and completely absent from the heart.  Approach with caution,
but if so inclined, jump in.  You may get in over your head, and you
may not.
I'd put this in the higher end of teenage
coming-of-age/romance/sex-comedy films.  Danny has two goals in life:
his own Jaguar, and a date with a beautiful girl in his school.
Nothing new for the genre, but it's nicely done, with some pleasantly
odd performances by supporting cast members (particularly those
playing Danny's parents) and some well-timed farce in the second half.
It builds towards the end, and turns out to be a lot more entertaining
than you'd credit it could be during the first half hour.
PRISONERS OF THE SUN (Australia, 1990):
A docu-drama, based on the war trial where a number of Japanese POW
camp officials were tried for war crimes after World War II.  Bryan
Brown plays the prosecuting attorney, trying to find links between the
murder of several Australian airmen and a high military official
(George Takei) who ran the camp, and is now valuable to the Americans
as a leader in the post-war Japanese government.  There's nothing
wrong with the film, but as a story there are no surprises, the pace
is rather leaden and there's a certain feeling of inevitability to the
whole thing.  Not something to complain about in a documentary, but in
a drama...  The US cinema produced waves of films like this in the
late 70s and early 80s, and I (and, I suspect, many others) have
become sort of burned out on them.
STAN AND GEORGE'S NEW LIFE (Australia, 1990):
This is one of those films that you really want to like -- the premise
is good, the actors are well-cast and engaging, and yet... it never
really gets off the ground.  Stan is a shy, middle-aged barber (for
you comix fans, Rob pointed out to me that the actor playing Stan
looks like Reid Fleming, the World's Toughest Milkman, on qualudes)
who decides to go out and change his life; he goes to work for the
weather service.  There he meets George, a quiet, cheerful woman who
keeps the meteorological data collected and reported by the farmers.
The two of them are charming together, but their relationship becomes
overshadowed during the last half of the film by a semi-comic
conspiracy within the department to cover up incorrect data.  You end
up feeling cheated that you didn't spend more time with the two
principals, and not their odd relatives or co-workers.
STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY (Canada, 1990):
If I'm a lucky sod, I'll see a dozen films at the festival that are
good through and through; enjoyable to watch for any number of
reasons, if not, perhaps, a complete success on the part of the
filmmakers.  But if the cinematic dice are really rolling out a
winning streak, I'll see a film where it becomes obvious very early on
that the person in the driver's seat knows exactly what s/he's up to,
and that I'm in for a damn fine show.  There were two of them this
year: Greenaway's DROWNING BY NUMBERS, and Cynthia Scott's STRANGERS
IN GOOD COMPANY.  (*NOT* to be confused with the recent Christopher
Walken film, THE COMPANY OF STRANGERS.)  The films couldn't be more
different (thank God -- I'm not sure the world is ready for two Peter
Greenaways), but there is not an iota less exactness in Scott's film
than in DROWNING BY NUMBERS.
STRANGERS works on a simple premise: a busload of elderly women are
travelling in backwoods British Columbia when their bus breaks down.
They are stranded in a remote, abandoned farmhouse, and must dust off
and unite their various skills while waiting to return home.  No, this
does *not* take a turn into suspense, battle for survival, etc.  As
these women spend time waiting for rescue, each is slowly, patiently
revealed to us, in conversation with one another, and as they explore
the beautiful countryside around them.  It is a cliche to say that
everyone is extraordinary, if you look closely enough; but the cliche
is borne out here.  Perhaps it is particularly enlightening, because
so many of these women have the appearances (and in some case,
mannerisms) we commonly attribute to elderly; with no sense of rushing
or hurry, Scott brings out their remarkable lives and personalities.
Scott's previous films have all been documentaries, and while
STRANGERS could be considered a documentary in its characters, if not
its plot, it is obvious that the director has learned how to use the
camera to give a feeling of reality and -- more importantly --
sincerity.
As we grow older, those loved ones who are older still become easily
isolated and categorized in our minds.  We move away from home; our
own lives take center stage for us, and (unless we are lucky or
persistent or inordinately considerate) loved ones who were woven
throughout our daily pattern are relegated to memory, or touchstones
to memory; encounters are spent remembering one's past with them,
while their present condition becomes more and more of an icon -- the
loved one is substituted by an "elderly person".  STRANGERS IN GOOD
COMPANY reminds us -- it reminds me, anyway -- that the people we
strive to see through the wrinkles are still there; and maybe, if we
dig just a little, someone even more remarkable that we never had the
chance to meet when we were younger.  Not a chance to throw away.
Cynthia Scott didn't; I think you'll be very glad of that if you see
this film.
ISABELLE EBERHARDT (France/Australia, 1991 (World Premiere)):
Ah, time again for one of those continental stories of tragic heroines
running around turn-of-the-century Europe, innocent and courageous and
hard-drinking and chock-full of integrity as all get-out.  Eberhardt
goes to Algiers to examine the French occupation of the Arab
territories as a reporter.  She is thwarted at every turn by the
authorities, particularly a nasty Lt. who likes to tie her up and
imprison her in a frightfully Victorian manner; but she manages to
make friends with the Arabs and report the story at the Risk of Her
Own Life.  (Amazing, as I would imagine her choice of clothing,
particularly the lack of a veil, would keep a solitary woman from
getting much attention from the leadership of an Arab camp.  However,
my ignorance of Arab customs is boundless, so I bow to the experts.)
In between all this, she throws herself at a ragged young French
soldier, who seems rather surprised (probably because she comes out of
three-day treks through the desert looking like she just doused
herself in Chanel #5 and prepared for a Premiere magazine photo
shoot.)
This being a European tragic semi-documentary, the couple quarrel a
lot about their relationship, and end up with a consumptive disease at
the end.  (Though that's not how Eberhardt buys it; suffice it to say
that while it's a nice effect, I burst out laughing.)  Isabelle
Eberhardt was apparently a real person; the director tried to convince
us after the screening that, while much of the film was based on
periods of Eberhardt's life which are undocumented, the events here
"could have" occurred.  (Much as if Eberhardt "could have" been
visited by space aliens or Elvis in the desert.)  The production
values are good, the photography excellent, and you get to see Peter
O'Toole ride through the desert again, though not on a camel.  (All it
did was make me long for Maurice Jarre's soundtrack.)  Lots of
unintentional humor, but not enough to get you out to see it. Pfft.
THE WHITE ROOM (Canada, 1990 (US Premiere)):
THE WHITE ROOM is an engaging little fable about true love, voyeurism,
the world's view of celebrities, shyness, murder and rock music.
Sound interesting?  It is, and except for a rather weak ending, it's a
fascinating little movie, hovering between suspense and comedy.  The
fable format, with the narrator, is an excellent way to unfold the
story, which deals with a young man who's voyeurism into a rock singer
(Margot Kidder's) apartment makes him a witness to a brutal murder.
Shaken up by this, he leaves home to find his way in the Big City;
here, he uncovers several links to the murders, and meets a mysterious
woman in black.
The director, Patricia Rozema, previously made I'VE HEARD THE MERMAIDS
SINGING; from the descriptions, this film is quite a bit different
than that one.  One comes to care for the main characters, though (and
despise one of them), and while the ending seems a bit of a band-aid
to being painted into a plot corner, it's not too objectionable.  If
you like rather odd fairy tales (but not too odd), try this out.

Author
Robert Biddle
Screenplay and Direction by Anthony Minghella, United Kingdom 1990
     Jamie is dead, and Nina is devastated.  She keeps up, just, with
everyday life -- her job, her house, her sister -- but inside her heart
has stopped; she feels abandoned, lonely, miserable, angry.  She
recounts to a psychologist that sometimes she feels Jamie's presence,
watching over her, looking out for her.  Then one day at home -- in
between visits of her acquisitive sister, an amorous neighbour, and the
rat exterminator -- Jamie is back.  There are few explanations, and Nina
is hesitant to believe, but soon the funny silly domestic happiness of
life together has warmed the whole house.  Again they play silly word
games, again he plays the cello and she the piano.  It's not quite real,
but it is perfect.  But does reality have an edge even perfection cannot
match?
     The true concern of the film is the connection between love and
magic, and it is very successful at evoking empathy for this experience.
The sincerity touched me, and I was not alone in the audience in this
respect.  People cried.  I am writing this review a few weeks after
seeing the film, and am now more detached.  But memory has a problem
with emotional intensity, too easily recalled and it derails normal
life: another point of the film.
     The greatest strength of the film is the acting.  Nina is played by
Juliet Stevenson with disarmingly real feeling.  The setting also works
well, I thought.  Nina lives in a collapsing house in the suburbs of
London, and works as a linguist for a half-baked private translations
agency.  The film is very reminiscent of the British "television play"
genre:  unpretentious but honest -- so very different from the American
"made-for-tv movie" genre.
     My review would probably conclude about here if it weren't for the
comparisons that cry out to be made with some other recent films.  In
the past year I have seen three films that centre about the a lover's
death, and subsequent return as a ghost: the British TRULY, MADLY,
DEEPLY, and American GHOST, and the New Zealand LINDA'S BODY, by
performance group "The Front Lawn."  These are all successful films, but
each is very different from the others.
     LINDA'S BODY is a surreal story of everyday life in slow motion
turned upside down, inside out, and set to music.  Typical Front Lawn,
it's main concern is the way in which the everyday and the magic world
are interwoven.  GHOST is a romantic-comedy-thriller, reminiscent of
French cinema success at that mix.  The main concern with the magical in
GHOST is the exploration of newly discovered state's mechanics and
logic.  TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY is about love, not romance.  About magic,
not logic.  It is about the *real* world, and has something to say.
     Another important difference is in the role of the people in each
of the films.  LINDA'S BODY is like an extended music video: the story,
music, and characters are all connected, but somehow detached, and there
is a clear addressing of the audience.  As I've mentioned, I thought
highly of the acting in TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY.  While watching the film,
I recall wondering what would happen should Demi Moore and Patrick
Swayze see this film: would they suddenly wonder why *they* were paid so
well?  Since then, it has occurred to me that Moore and Swayze in fact
perform very well in GHOST, but that their performance is less like
acting, and more like modelling.
     TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY has flaws, mostly in the form of loose ends.
However, it concerns some important subjects -- love, death, and  magic
-- and does so with humour, warmth, and great sincerity.   I think it's
well worth seeing.
Footnote:  The last role I saw Juliet Stevenson in was that of Rosalind
Franklin in LIFE STORY (discovery of structure of DNA).  I've often
wondered why this film isn't better known.  Did it have a different
title in North America?  Acting by Stevenson and by Jeff Goldblum is
very good, direction is acute and fast-paced, and the result is one of
the best films I know about real Science.  The film seems to have been
made for the BBC television series HORIZON, "in association with the
Arts and Entertainment Network."
