Title
Review for Madness of King George, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Put this one at the top of your list of films.  Nigel Hawthorne as
the mad King George III is a lesson in how a great actor performs.  The
many moods, the raving, the sobbing,  the regal, the prisoner and the
befuddled are all portrayed in Hawthorne's face and gestures to where
you forget you are watching a movie.  This is *real* acting.
     Everything about the film speaks "Class," with an attention to
detail in costume, sets, and especially the story and the actors all
working together to make this a movie you will not soon forget.  Even
the music lends beautifully to the enjoyment of the film with the music
adapted
     It is about the year 1788, some five years after George III has
lost the Colonies. For some 30 years as monarch of all he surveyed;
as kings go (or went), he was a good king, a family man with a good
wife, Queen Charlotte, (Helen Mirren) who bore him fifteen children.
Now, he has begun to change, his moods varying rapidly with very odd
and unkingly behavior.  Doctors are called to find out what has caused
this sudden, unpredictable change.  But the doctors' prescriptions have
no favorable result.  Word leaks out as words have a way of doing and
pretty soon the whole country is worried about their government.
     Behind the scenes, there is his son, the Prince of Wales (Rupert
Everett), who would like to see his father declared insane so that the
Prince could become regent. Based on the stage  play by Alan Bennett,
(called "The Madness of George III") , the story of King George is a
winner, with fine support from Ian Holm, Amanda Donohoe, Rupert Graves
and those already mentioned above.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Nigel Hawthorne, Helen Mirren, Ian Holm, Amanda Donohoe, 
          Rupert Graves, Rupert Everett 
Director: Nicholas Hytner 
Producer: Stephen Evans and David Parfitt 
Screenplay: Alan Bennett based on his stage play 
            THE MADNESS OF GEORGE III 
Cinematography: Andrew Dunn 
Music: G. F. Handel, arranged by George Fenton 
Released by The Samuel Goldwyn Company 
     If the score of IMMORTAL BELOVED is remarkable, that of THE
MADNESS OF KING GEORGE is no less so.  With the clear strains of
Handel's "Water Music" and "Zadok the Priest" in the background, THE
MADNESS OF KING GEORGE ascends to a level that it might never have
attained using a modern composer.  The musical selections (made by
George Fenton) are so perfectly and expertly interwoven into the film
that one might easily assume the score had been specifically written
for Nicholas Hytner's production.
     Opening in 1788, more than five years after England lost her North
American colonies, THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE relates a dark episode in
the king's reign.  Bothered by increasingly painful abdominal pains,
George (Nigel Hawthorne) begins to act irrationally and belligerently.
The doctors--mostly a bunch of jumped-up quacks--do nothing for
him.  His eldest son and heir, the Prince of Wales (Rupert Everett) is
eager to see his father declared mad so he can take over as regent.
Ministers, retainers, and others at court begin to scheme how to get
the most out of the king's indisposition.  At last, when all appears
lost, Prime Minister Pitt (Julian Wadham), aided by Queen Charlotte
(Helen Mirren); her Mistress of the Robes, Lady Pembroke (Amanda
Donohoe); and Greville (Rupert Graves), one of the king's aides; sends
for Dr. Willis (Ian Holm), a doctor of the mind with a reputation for
curing dementia.
     THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE is much more than a simple study of one
man's descent into insanity.  With a style that's more tongue-in-cheek
than melodramatic, the film is always witty and occasionally
satirical.  The characterizations are flawless (as well as historically
accurate), and the political wrangling of the Tories and Whigs (led by
PM Pitt and Charles Fox, respectively) provide a deliciously complex
backdrop.
     Medical historians are generally agreed that the cause of George's
madness was something called porphyria, an acute, intermittent,
hereditary disease that is physical (rather than mental) in nature. The
king's symptoms, including blue urine and gastric crises, match those
of porphyria, although some have postulated that there may have been a
secondary affliction, such as manic-depression, involved.  Whatever the
case, as this film illustrates, it's clear that there were times when
George was unfit to rule.
     Anyone who dislikes being poked by and prodded at by doctors will
find some amusement in the petty disagreements within the small corps
of physicians attending the king.  One insists that blistering the skin
is the only way to extract the bad humours that cause the madness.
Another constantly takes the king's pulse.  A third advocates examining
the royal chamberpots--the stool being "more eloquent than the
pulse."  Only Dr.  Willis, with his hypnotic gaze, gives the impression
of competence.
     Without exception, the acting is top-notch.  The four
principles--Hawthorne, Mirren, Holm, and Everett--do fine jobs.
Hawthorne's performance is especially noteworthy, allowing us to
understand, and occasionally even sympathize, with a decidedly arrogant
and dislikable personality.  The supporting players, which include such
recognizable faces as Amanda Donohoe and Jim Carter (as Charles Fox),
are of equal quality.
     Despite allusions to KING LEAR, this movie's strength is in its
story breadth, not its depth.  A lot happens here, but few of the
themes take root beyond their surface meaning.  Adapted from the play
THE MADNESS OF GEORGE III, the film trims copious portions of dialogue,
leaving behind a tightly-paced picture that has the feel of something
created for the screen rather than for the stage.  Certain subplots are
watered down or eliminated, but what survives is more than enough to
keep KING GEORGE a source of solid entertainment.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delpi.com) 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Nigel Hawthorne, Helen Mirren, Ian Holm, Rupert Everett,
Julian Woodham, Amanda Donohoe, Jim Carter, Rupert Graves.
Screenplay:  Alan Bennett.
Director:  Nicholas Hytner.
     How do you market a stage-originated historical drama to an
American viewing public which forced a change in the film's title
when they struggled with the concept that THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE
III was not a sequel?  You could tell them that, like medicine or
"Masterpiece Theater," it was good for them, an approach which
rarely works.  Or you could try this truth:  THE MADNESS OF KING
GEORGE is thoughtful, funny, spectacularly staged and richly
performed.  Nigel Hawthorne's complex performance as George III
brings the humanity to the role necessary to raise Alan Bennett's
story of monarchy in decline to a work of rare insight.
     THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE opens in 1788, with the King
(Hawthorne) still bitter over the loss of the American colonies.
Always something of an eccentric, George soon appears to be growing
more and more unstable, a situation with profound political
ramifications.  The King's supporters, led by Prime Minister William
Pitt (Julian Wadham), realize that their fortunes are tied to his,
and try to keep him out of sight.  Meanwhile, the Prince of Wales
(Rupert Everett), bored with a life of "nothing to do," seeks to
have his father declared incompetent and himself named as regent,
and allies himself with Pitt's rival Charles James Fox (Jim Carter).
As support for Fox's bill grows, the King's supporters bring in
Willis (Ian Holm), an unorthodox "doctor" who intends to cure the
King's madness by any means necessary.
     Perhaps more than anything else, THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE is
about the dissolution of monarchy.  It takes place on the eve of the
French Revolution, during a time of social change throughout the
Western world, and presents in George III a king confronted for
perhaps the first time with his own humanity.  As he is subjected to
every possible indignity (including incontinence and the barbaric
treatments prescribed by his buffoonish cadre of doctors), George
III desperately and persistently pronounces his place as God's
annointed one.  Finally, as Willis straps him to a chair, his
statement that "I am the King" is greeted by a simple "No...you are
the patient."  From the opening sequence, which shows the King being
adorned for an a public appearance, it becomes clear that we will
see him stripped down to nothing, to the simple, sick man that he
is.
     If it appears from this description that Alan Bennett, who
adapted his own stage play for the screen, is baldly anti-royalty,
that isn't entirely the case.  He makes George a remarkably
sympathetic character, and casts an even darker eye on the
machinations of those whose only concerns about his well-being are
political.  Much of the credit for the success of King George as a
character goes to Nigel Hawthorne, who also played the role on
stage.  He is by turns comic, petulant, tender and infuriating,
crafting a performance so vivid that it is easy to forget that he is
playing a king.  His scenes of his private relationship with Queen
Charlotte (Helen Mirren) show a gentle and devoted husband who
refers to his wife as "Mrs. King," and they are quite affecting, but
his finest moment may be a scene with no dialogue.  With little more
than a lowering of his eyes and a swallow, he becomes a thoroughly
beaten man who has lost the last shred of his royal dignity.
     The most pleasant surprise in THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE may be
that stage director Nicholas Hytner, in his first screen directing
effort, demonstrates such an instinctive understanding of what makes
the two media different.  He opens up the play, taking advantage of
Ken Adam's superb production design, and he uses close-ups to
marvelous effect.  In fact, the only things wrong with the film
might be a few lackluster supporting performances and references
which require a bit too much knowledge of British political history
(notably a pun on "Pitt the elder and Pitt the younger").  As a
whole, however, THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE is a wonderfully realized
story of a turning point in the history of the world, when the head
that wore the crown became just the head of another man with very
human frailties.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE is a movie based on the play titled THE
MADNESS OF GEORGE III.  It tells a little known story of King George
III of England during the time (1789) right after he had "lost the
Colonies."  (I have been told it was retitled for the US because
American audiences during the test marketing thought it was a sequel
and wondered what happened in parts I and II, but I think that is just
probably just another urban legend.)
     The king (Nigel Hawthorne) is a strong-headed man who seems to
those around him to be acting stranger and stranger.  His estranged
first son (Rupert Everett) seizes upon this and decides to try to get
his old man declared insane in which case he would get to be Prince
Regent.  This would effectively make him king, and, most important of
all, he would then get all of the king's vast income and wealth.   
     The loyal queen (Helen Mirren) stands by her man.  Meanwhile
Parliament splits on who to back with both sides caring only about
politics and not a wit about the king or the prince.  The king's side
turns to a doctor played by Ian Holm.  Finally, Amanda Plummer plays a
loyal lady-in-waiting to the Queen who is willing to do absolutely
anything to help her queen.  Many twists and turns from there with an
ending you may have some trouble predicting if you are not up on your
British history of that era.
     The historical story is fascinating and is the only reason to see
the movie.  The period costumes are well done, and the sets are
carefully chosen.  The acting is earnest, and Hawthorne does try
awfully hard to present a believable madman.
     On the bad side, the movie is extremely tedious and pedantic.  For
example, I lost count of how many times the scriptwriter had us hear
about the color of the king's "water" and "stool."  Moreover, we had to
have numerous didactic lectures from doctors about the exact color of
the king's "water" and much speculation on what the color meant.  The
best doctors in the land were also treated as nothing but quacks. 
Perhaps they were, but I wonder about the historical accuracy of this
caricature.  Finally, although the actors tried to give their best
performances, I found that I did not care about any of the characters
as written, and this comes from a guy who has taken seven vacations to
Britain and who knows a lot of English history.
     THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE runs an overly long 1:50.  It has no
MPAA rating, but it is clearly a PG-13 show for a little profanity and
for adult themes.  This movie would be fine for any teenager.  Other
than British historians, I do not recommend this movie to anyone, and I
award it * 1/2 solely for the history I learned by watching it.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: January 27, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Nigel Hawthorne, Helen Mirren, Ian Holm, Amanda Donohoe, Rupert
Graves, Rupert Everett Director: Nicholas Hytner Screenplay: Alan
Bennett based on his stage play THE MADNESS OF GEORGE III
They say 'Royal blood is blue', but how does one react to a mad king who
is pissing blue urine with as much self control as running about the
English countryside in his 'Jammys'. First, a quiet snigger is in order.
After all, one does not laugh aloud at the King of England. We are
referring to the 'infallible' British Monarchy, the oldest of the royal
families, where everything is spoken in hushed whispers and behind
closed doors. Here daily life is governed by minuscule laws and court
etiquette, bound by centuries of tiresome tradition and refined customs.
Just when the stuffiness of Royalty becomes unbearable, it's refreshing
to see a king of the longest lineage go temporarily mad. Not that it's
all that spectacular by today's standards. I mean with Charles and
Camilla, the tampons; Diana, Captain Hewitt, the rugby player and now
the ex-play boy billionaire - it all but makes 'The Madness of King
George' seem mild and inconsequential. God, I hope Di is OK - she was
when I wrote this review pre paparazzi car chase.
Nevertheless, this tale of unfortunate genetics - 'Porphyria' a
hereditary disease which makes the urine go blue and the brain batty
(temporarily), must be told. Fascinating performances by Nigel Hawthorne
as the mad king who is forced to behave himself by the 'body
restraining-mouth gagging' techniques of Dr Willis (Ian Holm). The rest
of the cast give noteworthy performances, but it's this mad, foul mouth,
flatulent king and his bulky, firm stools which gets the most attention.
