Title
Review for Olive, the Other Reindeer (1999) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Norm Schrager
One of the best-ever names for a holiday special (sure as hell beats
Frosty Returns) hits home video a year after its TV premiere, in this
animated production from Simpsons creator Matt Groening.  Based on a
book by J. Otto Seibold and Vivian Walsh, Olive's a hip dash of
Christmas humor and fun amidst specials that have just made little kids
cry all these years.
See, Olive's not really a reindeer - she's a dog.  A strange dog. 
Voiced by Drew Barrymore, she speaks English to her owner Tim (Jay
Mohr), doesn't dig for bones, and won't chase cars.  While listening to
the radio on Christmas Eve, she hears that Santa may cancel his
delivery, as Blitzen is injured.  He announces (in a 90's soundbite),
that he'll just have to rely on "all of the other reindeer."
Olive is so caught up in the holidays, she thinks Santa is talking about
her.  Even her pet flea can't believe it.
Once it's set that she's really a lonely misfit -- a holiday story
staple -- she's off to the North Pole with a shifty penguin named
Martini (The Matrix's Joe Pantoliano).  They catch a "Mauvehound Bus"
driven by a weirdo named Richard Stands (SNL's Tim Meadows), who once
thought the Pledge of Allegiance was for him (say it out loud).  But
it's not just an easy bus trip that'll get Olive to Santaland.
Our villain is a demented mailman (Simpsons veteran Dan Castellaneta)
who just goes postal during the holiday season due to the weight of the
all his deliveries.  He'd love for Santa's cancellation to hold up, so
he's on his own quest to stop Olive and company.
As with any good Simpsons episode, Groening's writer -- Simpsons and
David Letterman staffer Steve Young -- fills the story and landscape
with bad puns and inside visuals that welcome the adults into the action
just as much as the kids.  The laughs don't have the stinging irony of
The Simpsons, but they are certainly playful enough to hold most
viewers' interest.
As is the animation, a freaky mix of multi-dimensional backgrounds and
flat characters.  It looks like a strange combination of a kid's video
game and a set of Colorforms, giving it a splashy, original look.
There are a few musical numbers that whiz by, most notably The Postman's
lament about delivering the mail (the best lyrics in the feature), and a
ditty headed by REM's Michael Stipe, singing as Schnitzel the Reindeer.
Just a few minutes into Olive, I wondered why Drew Barrymore was voicing
our hero.  She's not really a voice actor, and doesn't sound too
expressive.  Then I read that she and partner Nancy Juvonen are also
executive producers on this special.  Drew may want to audition a few
others next time.
But, like most of Olive, Drew's voice grew on me.  This is a special
that's hard not to enjoy, and it thankfully avoids any sappy finale.  It
may not enter the pantheon of holiday classics, but it's just too damn
cute not to watch once a year.  Especially when Olive wags that little
tail.  That's great.
Director: Oscar Moore
Producers: Keith Alcorn, Alex Johns, Michael Stipe
Writer: Steve Young
Starring:  Drew Barrymore, Dan Castellaneta, Joe Pantoliano, Edward
Asner, Peter MacNicol, Tim Meadows, Jay Mohr, Michael Stipe, Diedrich
Bader, David Herman
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
