Title
Review for Barcelona (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Berardinelli
     "BARCELONA had its inception in 1983.... It was while editing
METROPOLITAN that I started reconsidering.... I found myself losing
interest in METROPOLITAN's nominal protagonist, the male-ingenue Tom,
and wanting to see more of the characters Taylor Nichols and Chris
Eigeman played...I had written METROPOLITAN under the conviction that
life is essentially an eventless affair and to make a movie full plot
and incident would be a false and unauthentic repetition of genre movie
cliches.  In the interval between the two scripts I changed my mind:
life does have its melodramatic turns, and, while melodramatic events
might not seem especially interesting in themselves, they could provide
another prism to examine the lives of the characters affected."
          - Whit Stillman, writer/director/producer of BARCELONA
     In BARCELONA, nothing goes quite as you expect it to.  In a broad
sense, certain things are played out as anticipated, but there are
always little quirks to be aware of.  Filtered through a somewhat
detached and ironic perspective, this film is the distillation of an
intriguing blend of romantic comedy, satire, drama, and philosophy.
     Whit Stillman's sophomore film seems a little like what one might
expect if British director Mike Newell and French filmmaker Eric Rohmer
combined on a project.  BARCELONA is replete with the loaded, pithy
dialogue that Rohmer is known for, as well as the dry wit which has
marked Newell's more recent pictures.  In fact, elements of the
epilogue are oddly similar to the fourth act of FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL, including the careful veiling of the bride's identity.
     The first half of this movie races past at a frantic pace, its
momentum gained more through its nearly-constant dialogue than because
of any significant plot development.  Things happen, to be sure, but
everything is on a small scale.  During the "last decade of the Cold
War," we're introduced to Ted Boynton (Taylor Nichols), an American
salesman based in Barcelona, and his obnoxious cousin Fred (Chris
Eigeman), a Navy officer.  Fred drops in on Ted unexpectedly,
announcing that he intends to stay for a while.  Ted, too much the
gentleman to say "no" to family, endures the unwanted intrusion.
Despite a fair bit of friction, the two manage to coexist, going out on
the town in search of love (in Ted's case) and sex (in Fred's).  What
they find is a group of attractive trade-fair girls and a match for
each of them--or so it seems.
     The best moments in BARCELONA involve snippets of offbeat
conversations about mundane facets of life.  Some of these--like
Fred's musings about the "correct" way to shave--are completely
facetious, but others are designed to provoke a moment's genuine
thought, such as Ted and Ramon's opposing views on the importance of
physical beauty.
     Unfortunately, the second half of the movie can't match the level
of what preceded it.  As the plot gains prominence, some of BARCELONA's
unique freshness dissipates.  For the last thirty minutes, the script
settles into a fairly routine dramatic pattern.
     The acting is done mostly by low-profile performers.  Taylor
Nichols and Chris Eigeman both appeared in Stillman's METROPOLITAN and
Mira Sorvino (the daughter of Paul Sorvino) had her screen debut in
AMONGST FRIENDS.  Their work is consistently strong, especially that of
the two leads, who manage to bring life to a modern-day ODD COUPLE.
     BARCELONA is one of those movies that contains just about
everything (and a lot of it) except action.  The plot is a vehicle for
the characters (and their intelligently-scripted dialogue)--a method,
as Stillman says, of viewing different aspects of Ted and Fred's
lives.  However, while the film's initial charm may lie in its humorous
perspective of this pair of mismatched cousins, its lasting impression
(for men at least) may involve wondering exactly how to hold the
razor.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Walt Stillman
Starring: Taylor Nichols, Christopher Eigeman, Tushka Bergen, Mira
Sorvino, Pep Munne
In last year's "Swingers," the film was plotless, but dealt with a
clique who were all comfortable with eachother, and ended up doing
almost nothing but talk for an hour and a half.  Earlier, Quentin
Tarantino showed us that a film where the characters had little action,
some plot, but talked a lot about internation cuisine, pop culture, and
about how uncomfortable silences are annoying, and still made it more
fascinating than watching some Sly Stallone incarnation try to blow up
stuff and make out with Sharon Stone.  "Barcelona" is part of this kind
of sub-genre of films - the talking film - which is probably more
entertaining and more worthwhile in the end than some other less
talkative films.  By the way, I'm not busting on the silent films.
The two protagonists in "Barcelona" are cousins - Ted and Fred (Taylor
Nichols and Christopher Eigeman, respectively) - who are living together
in Barceloa, Spain over an unsaid course of time, which apparently isn't
that long.  Ted's a businessman, and a very satisfied one at that, or so
he says.  He owns a gorgoeus flat in the city, and begins sharing it
with his navy cousin, Fred, when he shows up out of the blue, gives him
an impromptu phonecall, and then says he'll only be a couple of days.
The characters in this are pretty much thrust together by nepotism,
rather than having anything else in common or being friends at all.  In
fact, they both get on eachother's nerves with their individual
neuroses.  Ted is kind of soft-spoken, and doesn't have much to say,
other than to seemingly repeat numerous books to make him sound very
intellectual.  Fred's more easy-going and sometimes babbles on bizarre
subjects in awkward places.
They also, of course, pursue spanish women, one of them being Mira
Sorvino in one of her earlier roles (also equipped with a very
authentic, and extremely sexy spanish accent), who was a brunette at the
time.  The women are not really given much to do.  Sometimes they seem
rather shallow.  The one who both of them really like, Moserrat (Tushka
Bergen), has very little to say.  However, the guys in this film pursue
these women because they are part of the Trade Fair, which means they
travel and whatnot, and they might be very culturally interesting.  And
of course, they probably speak English.  But when they try to talk to
them about this, they seem rather dazed and confused, and really don't
care that much.
Other than talkng about sex and relationships throughout the film,
there's also a political side to this.  This takes place in the early
80s (the subtitle at the beginning says "the last decade of the Cold
War"), and there's a lot of American hostility.  And, of course, Fred is
very proud of his country, and feels he has to wear his navy suit almost
everywhere.  He's easily offended when people start calling him a
"fascist," and even gets in some heated arguments with the ultimate
lady's man (Pep Munne) about some American consulat bombings in the
city.
What's interesting about "Barcelona" is how we get to see a group of
people we usually don't see in cinema.  Instead of the liberal,
artistic, neurotics of Woody Allen's films, we get conservative,
white-collar types who are still neurotic.  Instead of whining, they
seem to display their inner problems in a more monotonous way, and it
still comes across as funny and amusing.  And the script and acting is
excellent, supplying the little-known actors with some truly interesting
and some very classic dialogue.
"Barcelona" runs a tad over the Woody Allen average (which is about 93
minutes or so) and goes by smoothly, as it pulls you into its
interesting characters.  I'm much more interested in seeing characters
speak their minds than watch them just shoot their way out of
situations, so I'm always happy to see a film that embraces the former,
and in such a cool way.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, BARCELONA is NOT a foreign film regardless of the title and
the fact that it is playing at art houses along with foreign films.  It
is an American film with American and Spanish actors all speaking
English.  No subtitles and no dubbing which is good since this movie is
non-stop dialog.
     BARCELONA is MY DINNER WITH ANDRE but set in Spain "during the
last decade of the cold war" (80s) and with more than just two people
in the film.  Two cousins (Christopher Eigeman and Taylor Nichols) are
blood brothers who know each other well, and who constantly get on each
other nerves.  One is a soldier who is an unannounced house guest with
the other in his apartment in Barcelona.  The other cousin is salesman
who is not very good at selling but who reads lots of business
motivational books.
     The salesman has a self-declared "romance illusion" problem so he
decides to "date only homely girls" because that way he can look into
their eyes and see their souls.  He is no more successful at this than
he is at selling.
     The movie is filled with beautiful women who work at the trade
fair as guides.  Now that I reflect on it, the men were pretty handsome
too.  Both are in the movie, but the two cousins get 80% of the lines.
     What is right with this movie is the directing and the script
(both were done by Whit Stillman).  It is a talkative 2 hour movie with
all of the pauses taken out so that we are left with incessant
conversation for 1 hour and 41 minutes.  There is serious conversation
on the proper direction for a man to shave.  In other parts they
discuss how motivational books apply or not in certain situations.  It
is a comedy because the lines are funny, but they are delivered so
seriously and so rapidly that nobody laughed much in the theater, but
that was okay.
     The acting is either natural or amateurish - take your pick.  For
me it worked.  I suspect some people will walk out saying, what a lot
of drivel, who cares about these cousins? Others will rate it a classic
in the MY DINNER WITH ANDRE genre.  For me I am somewhere in-between.
I give it a thumbs up and rate it ** 1/2.
     Barcelona is rated PG-13, but there is no nudity or bad language.
There is a lot of smoking.  I guess the rating is about right in that
younger kids would probably not get it anyway.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the early 1980s Ted is a marketing executive posted to
Barcelona.  He is very serious, very dedicated, very straight-laced,
and takes trendy "marketing philosophy" just a bit too seriously.  In
his off hours he dates some of the beautiful women who act as
hostesses at the local trade show, but avoids getting closely attached
to the women and their anything-goes lifestyle.  One night on his
doorstep shows up his cousin Ted, a smooth talking but inconsiderate
navy officer who is a bit of a jerk.  Fred is in Barcelona playing
diplomat and paving the way for a visit of the U.S. Sixth Fleet.  This
gives Fred an opportunity to visit Ted, who is himself less than
enthused about the visit.  Fred enjoys inventing stories for Ted's girl
friends including claiming that Ted wears masochistic leather underwear
and is into sexual perversion.  The only thing that Fred seems serious
about is his love of the United States, but that can be a problem with
anti-US feeling running very high in Europe and even occasional
terrorist attacks against Americans.
     At first Fred seems to the viewer to have a sort of Auntie Mame
charm, playing his wild practical jokes.  But soon we begin to see why
Ted is less than pleased to have Fred around.  Fred's mishaving becomes
something less than endearing and eventually rather irritating.  Fred's
jokes take on a more serious tone, and his lack of diplomacy and
jingoist attitudes cause problems for others and himself.
     Whit Stillman, who wrote and directed 1990's METROPOLITAN, has
returned with another film about smooth-talking young intellectuals.
Taylor Nichols and Chris Eigenman--both from METROPOLITAN--are Ted and
Fred.  Stillman, who won an Oscar nomination for the previous film, has
taken much the same sort of dialog, but has woven into the story
politics sex and politics.  Stillman's screenplay, of course,
concentrates on good dialog.  In fact it is unrealistically good
dialog--it is doubtful that anybody really speaks this well off the
cuff and to some extent that makes the films less believable .  It is
difficult at times to believe that these are real people as eloquent as
Stillman's characters are.  The plot also has a number of nice ironies,
but the story line is a little thin.  Like Woody Allen's MANHATTAN this
is a film that make great visual use of the city in which it is set but
wears out any curiosity we might have about who is going to end up
living with whom. This film needs a little more than that to keep us
caring.  It needs a strong plot and there it falls down.  Much of the
film is about Ted's attitude toward Fred, and Fred just does not seem
worth us caring about him.  Nor is one sure how accurate is BARCELONA's
depiction of US-Spanish relations.
     In general the film is entertaining but not as rewarding as it
might be.  Parts almost fall into the level of fluff, and cliched fluff
at that.  My rating would be +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     BARCELONA is a film written, directed, and produced by Whit
Stillman.  It stars Taylor Nichols, Chris Eigeman, Tushka Bergen.
Rated PG-13 for sexual references.
     BARCELONA is from same auteur who also created METROPOLITAN, the
1990 art-house hit about of a group of preppies going through the
Christmas deb season in New York.  In fact, two of the actors from that
film are in this one, Chris Eigeman and Taylor Nichols.  METROPOLITAN
was a satirical comedy of manners, with a gentle, forgiving nature, a
cross between (as the pitch goes in THE PLAYER) THE RETURN OF THE
SECAUCUS SEVEN and MY DINNER WITH ANDRE.
     BARCELONA was made on a considerably larger shoestring than its
predecessor ($3.2 million as compared to $300,000).  Stillman's Spanish
wife used her family and connections to provide assistance with the
costumes, the local casting, and the flamenco sequence.  His backer,
Castle Rock, was owed a favor by Columbia, and so Stillman got to use
the costumes from LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES for the costume party
sequence.  He also got Tom Cruise's naval officer's uniform from A FEW
GOOD MEN for Chris Eigeman to wear, as the self-absorbed lieutenant
j.g. who is the catalyst for much of the story's action.  Stillman's
wife also contributed dialogue, including one of the funnier jokes,
where Ted's date sees him at the costume party in an old blue suit and
says, "I like your outfit -- very New Wave." In short, BARCELONA looks
like a more expensive film and provides us States-bound viewer with a
lot of wonderful Barcelona scenery and landmarks.
     As for the story, Ted (Taylor Nichols) is a sales rep in Barcelona
for a U.S. company.  The time is the late '70s; Franco has only recently
departed the Spanish scene, the Cold War is in high gear, the
long-suppressed Left as well as the Sexual Revolution have come on
strong.  Into this potent mix comes another innocent abroad Fred (Chris
Eigeman), Ted's cousin and enemy.  (When the U.S. consul tells Fred he
isn't supposed to wear his uniform in Barcelona, for fear of provoking
anti-American reactions, Fred says, "I thought that just applied to the
Army.  Good men fought and died in this uniform to free Europe from
fascism ...."  The consul asks, "You were ROTC, weren't you.")
     Fred is, for reasons forever murky, the Navy's advance man for the
arrival of the Mediterranean fleet and moves in on his cousin, over the
latter's protests. (Ted, asking Fred how long he plans to stay, reminds
him that fish and company stink after three days, to which Fred
replies, "I think you'll find I stink on the first day.")  Both men are
fussy, theoretical, sexually repressed, and eccentric; neither is a
very sympathetic character, at least at first, and critics have
complained that there's no one to give the audience a point of view.
But that is the point of Stillman's film, as well as METROPOLITAN,
namely, character development.  The characters are the story, and the
plot is largely a device to develop the characterizations.
     The two young Americans meet some local women, relationships
develop along the usual one-step-forward, two-steps-back line when men
and women are getting to know each other.  The story and its players
find a crisis when Fred, the clueless lt. j-g, is publicly accused of
being a CIA agent.  From this point everything and everyone take one
step sideways, until the film concludes is a scene that had me and the
rest of my audience roaring with laughter.
     Laughing out loud is not the norm through most of the film, even
though it is witty and insightful.  That would be like guffawing at a
NEW YORKER piece: not advised, one might miss the next precious mot.
Then, too, Fred or Ted, or both, are more embarrassing than hilarious,
Ted with his obsession with "selling as a culture" and that falling in
love with a woman just because she's beautiful is somehow wrong and
Fred with his "you can't do that, I'm an American" attitudes straddling
the gap between jingoism and naivete like some Colossus of Toads.
     I high recommend BARCELONA to you.  I note that in the Seattle
area, at least, the film has moved out from its original art-house
venues to several suburban multiplexes.  I take this to be a sign that
the film's sly charms and virtues have some appeal to general
audiences.  See it, even if you have to pay full fare; it is worth it.
     (By the way, Whit Stillman's next film, also from Castle Rock,
will be THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO.  He says, "It's set in the '70s, about
three young women, recent college grads, and their first jobs as
publicists, against the last days of Studio 54.  So, lots of night
shots.  The director of photography is going to have nightmares.")

Author
Ralph Benner
        In his 1968 Iberia, James Michener wrote, "To travel across Spain
and finally reach Barcelona is like drinking a respectable red wine and
finishing up with a bottle of champagne." From the late 80s, especially
since the Olympics of '92, and right up to the present, it's even truer:
Barcelona is the quintessential European metropolis, an optimum Paris on
the Mediterranean complete with its own Eiffel Tower -- Gaudi's
magnificently eclectic El Templo de la Sagrada Familia. Updating, Michener
would call Spain's intellectual and publishing center the Dom Perignon of
the continent. From atop the Muntanya de Montjuic, Barcelona is deceptive
in scale -- an urban Guanajuato. Traversing by foot or subway, it's so
continually a picturesque surprise of spacious, manicured boulevards,
centuries-old narrow-street neighborhoods, endless architectural delights
that you bemoan the egregious lack of movie maker appreciation. And anyone
who's been there knows that it deserves much better than what Whit
Stillman gives us in his BARCELONA. Putting it as mildly as I can:
Stillman should be required to rename it -- to BARFALONA. 
        BARCELONA isn't a movie about the city or its dwellers; it's about
two snot-nosed American cousins pretending to be Woody Allen Reaganites
foisting puffed-up, bogus Hemingway on any Barcelonan as Eurotrash who'll
consent to listen. Does director-writer Stillman have a case of the hates
against the city he claims to love? Rhetorical question: the city dwellers
in general are treated with contempt and the city is never photographed to
show its true metropolitan flavor, or show off, however fleetingly, its
renowned symbols: Las Ramblas and Gaudi's gaudy masterpieces. Shortly into
this yupchucker one of these two asinine Americans whines about the lack
of Barcelonian appreciation for Americans having died ridding Europe of
fascism. What Stillman never mentions is that while America -- along with
its allies, of course -- rid Europe of Hitler and Mussolini, Spain was
left in the grips of fascism until Franco's death in 1975. But Stillman,
who lived in Barcelona for several years and married a resident, has no
respect for his host's history: he repeatedly swacks Barcelonians over
their heads for their anti-Americanism, which he sees as insulting
ingratitude and uses it as a form of ersatz self-righteousness. Lovers of
Barcelona know where Stillman's head is -- up his a double s.
        The cousins are played as well as they're directed, which is to
say that there's no faulting how they perform the numbskulls Stillman
penned for them. (Is there any way to trust a writer who names one of his
characters Montserrat?) Taylor Nichols, as a salesman based in Barcelona,
has the cutie boy charm of Casper Weinberger, Orson Bean and Judith
Light's husband, actor Robert Desiderio. You don't believe a word he says
except about his fears of losing his job -- and the only reason you
believe that is because you don't buy for a minute he'd be an effective
salesman for anything. He does have one asset that not only betrays his
insecure character but is more European than anything else in the movie:
his seductive swagger of a walk. (He'd make a sensational aristocratic
misogynist.) His cousin, played by Chris Eigeman, is more closely related
to E!'s Michael Castner. You have to wonder how it could ever be that the
U.S. Navy would send this jerk to Barcelona as an advance man to test the
"welcome waters." Of course, the Navy wouldn't, but that's Stillman's
problem. Only once is there something about the character that rings true:
when he mimic's Benjamin's howls of "Elaine! Elaine!" from THE GRADUATE.
Clear and away the only amusing bit in the entire movie.
        BARCELONA is such a crock that Stillman postulates the city's
women became sexually revolutionized in the early 80s. Nonsense. The
liberalization of sexual mores actually began in the mid 60s, when German
and Swede Suecas came down to the sunny beaches of Spain's Costa del Sol
and bounced around topless to the delight of the Spanish male population.
Though it took Franco's death to unleash their own sexual assertiveness
and independence, Spanish women consented to sex without commitment or the
burdens of Catholic guilt long before it became publicly fashionable.
        Can you believe there are critics out there who, in one breath,
think Stillman has an attitudinal resemblance to Henry James, and in the
next breath claim he's a combo of Bunuel and wacky Almodovar? No
forgiveness for that. Speaking to a reporter, Stillman used the following
as his own excuse: "By being kind of square you can get into material that
isn't open to other people. I feel square -- insulated from the cool."
Detesting Stillman's prissified attitudes, vehemently objecting to his
indulgent insistence on confirming why there's a steady drumbeat of
anti-Americanism, isn't the same as calling him an incompetent numbers
cruncher: in fact, it takes a very competent economist to make a movie
that looks like BARCELONA for just over $3 million. That what's captured
is thoroughly inadequate to measure the city's romanticism and sensuous
grace (even his panoramas are too short to absorb the pleasures),
Stillman, if he doesn't sell out to Hollywood's money spending mania,
could help deflate the spiraling costs of movie making. That's the best I
can say about him, because, considering his Reaganesque context -- that
is, creating illusions by disposing of fact -- Stillman's the type who
would likely trick us into believing there's a nimbus of virtue
surrounding the Valley of the Fallen. (Just what Ronnie tried at Bitburg.)
As for Barcelona, well, it has two options: Sue Stillman for defamation or
deny him re-entry. Both should be exercised.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Taylor Nichols, Chris Eigeman, Tushka Bergen, Mira
Sorvino, Pep Munne.
Screenplay/Director:  Whit Stillman.
     I remember missing Whit Stillman's METROPOLITAN when it was in
theaters in 1990, and eagerly awaiting its video release.  I had heard
Stillman compared to Woody Allen, and I've always been a sucker for
urbane banter.  But I was disappointed with METROPOLITAN; pithy
dialogue only goes so far without any real story.  BARCELONA is a step
in the right direction, but just a step.  There is more substance
unifying Stillman's clever observations, but BARCELONA will still come
off as far too slow and talky for many viewers, a 100 minute long New
Yorker cartoon with a view.
     Set in "the last decade of the Cold War," BARCELONA focuses on two
Americans living in the Spanish city.  Ted (Taylor Nichols) is a sales
representative for an American motor company, wrestling with career and
romantic uncertainties; his cousin Fred (Chris Eigeman) is a cocky
naval officer sent as an advance scout and unlikely goodwill ambassador
for an upcoming fleet visit.  While Fred is visiting Ted, both men find
themselves in tricky situations.  Ted falls for Montserrat (Tushka
Bergen), a Spanish woman still living with another man; Fred finds
anti-American sentiment running high, fanned by Montserrat's journalist
boyfriend Ramon (Pep Munne).  The cousins make their way through the
city sharing their thoughts about love, sex, family and international
relations.
     Where METROPOLITAN suffered from too many characters too sketchily
drawn, BARCELONA wisely narrows its focus.  Taylor Nichols plays Ted as
the quintessential over-thinker, a man who rationalizes himself into
complete inaction over his job, his romances and his relationship with
Fred.  Chris Eigeman's Fred is a continuation of his delightfully
insufferable Nick from METROPOLITAN, and he launches into his role as
the ugly American abroad with tremendous enthusiasm.  Both performances
are extremely strong, but unfortunately both characters are a bit
annoying.  With significant stretches of BARCELONA consisting almost
entirely of conversations between Ted and Fred, their prep school
petulance grows tiresome, and you begin to wish for absolutely anything
to _happen_ to these guys.  When it does, it's a welcome change of
pace.
     If there is one thing Stillman does know how to do, it's how to
load his films with quotable lines.  Ted has a sharp little monologue
about why he has decided only to date "plain, or even rather homely"
women (a resolution he promptly breaks); Fred counters with
observations on his confusion over the correct way to shave, as well as
why American society is mis-perceived as more violent ("We're just
better shots").  There are a number of moments which prompt genuine
laughs, but Stillman doesn't seem to know how to incorporate them into
a plot.  Everything comes to a halt so that his characters can trade
bon mots, and it begins to seem as though Stillman has simply set up
his camera in front of an expatriate version of the Algonquin Round
Table.  When he does pull out some quirky, character-based physical
comedy, like Ted cutting a rug to "Pennsylvania 6-5000" while reading
the Bible, it's as though he's jolted the entire production to life
with a cattle prod.  Only eventually it settles back into wry
philosophizing.
     BARCELONA does manage some keen insights into European perceptions
about American society and politics, and when Stillman focuses his
attention on that theme he is frequently on target.  His most
perceptive observation connects the attitudes of Europeans towards
American tastes to the miserable quality of hamburgers abroad, and it
was one of those rare movie moments where I saw the world, if only
briefly, through different eyes.  That achievement alone warrants
praise, and a moderate recommendation.  But I sense there will be many
viewers who will grow restless waiting for Stillman's characters to get
a life.  BARCELONA is just clever enough to get by on its charm, but
Stillman really needs to stop wallowing in his own cleverness and start
telling stories.
