Title
Review for Addams Family Values (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Yes, it's time for another visit to the little house out in the middle
of nowhere, the Addams House.  Perhaps it is out in the middle of nowhere
because nobody could stand to move next to the Addams, or perhaps it was
once a thriving neighborhood before the darling Addams children were let
loose on it.  In either case, back are Gomez (Raoul Julia), Morticia
(Angelica Huston), Uncle Fester (Christopher Lloyd), Wednesday (Christina
Ricci), Thing (Francis Ingram), and the rest of the Addams clan.  The
characters are based on those of the television series which in turn were
inspired by the ghoulish New Yorker cartoons of Charles Addams.
Unfortunately that sums up the strengths and weaknesses of the new film and
its predecessor.  Magazine cartoons have no plot at all, just quick-punch
jokes.  Where the two Addams Family films are their strongest is in the
quick-punch jokes.  When the film tries to advance a plot it loses most of
its energy and humor, and tells a rather weak story.  It is only when the
story-telling comes to a full halt for the sake of a joke that the film is
really funny.
     This time around the Addams have a new baby and little Wednesday and
Pugsley decide to execute the little thing as ghoulishly as possible to
protect the status quo.  To keep peace in the family Gomez and Morticia hire
a nanny who turns out to be a Black Widow murderess (Joan Cusack) out to
marry and kill Uncle Fester for his fortune.  Did I miss something?  The
plot calls for Fester to be rich and famous.  I do not remember that ever
being part of the plot before this outing.  The story also calls for
Wednesday and Pugsley to go to Summer Camp.  So we flash back and forth
between the Addams at home, a married-to-a-killer subplot, and a Wednesday-
and-Pugsley-make-a-shambles-of-a-Summer-Camp subplot.  The two subplots have
been done better as full-length films in the past.  There is also an
equation of Wednesday's and Pugsley's eccentricities with positive political
correctness.  The latter really was a fiasco and threatens to torpedo the
whole spirit of the series.
     Still, when it is just showing little vignettes that could have come
from Addams cartoons, it is terrific.  We have very little impression of
what Addams characters are like between the little flashbulb glimpses we get
from the cartoons, so Huston's and Julia's performances are based on the
interpretations of John Astin and Carolyn Jones.  It is not easy to outdo an
actor at a popular role that actor created.  That is like trying to do
Inspector Clouseau better than Peter Sellers.  But Julia and Huston actually
outdo Astin and Jones at their own game.  This is a film with big ups and
big downs so overall it gets just a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  (My apologies
to Christopher Hart who did such a good job as Thing.  Attributing the part
to Ingram was something of an inside joke though I doubt that anyone will
recognize the reference to Francis Ingram.  Anyone want to try to identify
that name?)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Anjelica Huston, Raul Julia, Christopher Lloyd, Joan Cusack,
           Christina Ricci, Jimmy Workman.
Screenplay:  Paul Rudnick.
Director:  Barry Sonnenfeld.
     There were plenty of things surrounding the first ADDAMS FAMILY
film that I hated more than the film itself: its undeserved status as
blockbuster; the stupendously annoying theme song by Hammer; endless
iterations of the word "ooky" in print.  1991's THE ADDAMS FAMILY was
not a terrible film.  It was high-spirited and gleefully performed.  It
simply exhausted its premise after about fifteen minutes.  ADDAMS
FAMILY VALUES is lots more of the same, which means that its premise is
exhausted before it begins.  Yet it's both worse and better than its
predecessor, the latter the result of Christina Ricci's marvelously
morbid Wednesday.
     ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES opens with Morticia (Anjelica Huston) giving
birth to the newest Addams: baby Pubert, a mustachioed dead ringer for
papa Gomez (Raul Julia).  This development does not sit at all well
with Wednesday (Christina Ricci) and Pugsley (Jimmy Workman), who
believe that the arrival of a new child means an old one has to go.  To
help manage the children, the Addams Family hires nanny Debbie
Jellinsky (Joan Cusack), who turns out to be a homicidal golddigger out
for Uncle Fester's (Christopher Lloyd) money.  When the kids become
suspicious, Debbie has them sent away to an upscale summer camp,
leaving her to win over Fester and turn him agains the family.
     Like many recent megasequels, ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES meticulously
recreates the original, element for element.  Carol Kane replaces Judy
Malina as Granny, but the rest of the family cast is back in place.
The script is once again largely a collection of black-humored sight
gags and one-liners, and the theme song is again rap (a slightly
altered version of Tag Team's excruciating hit "Whoomp! (There It
Is)").  Even the title design is the same; "no surprises" is clearly
the motto in place.  The only real question is, is it funny, and as in
the case of THE ADDAMS FAMILY the answer is "sometimes."  There aren't
as many laughs as there were in the original, but the laughs that do
come are bigger.  There's a great photo among the shots of Debbie's
previous disguises, and the summer camp play is an anarchic riot.  What
almost never worked for me were the jokes in the "setup ... macabre
retort" format.  I kept wanting to yell out, "All right, they're weird,
I get the point."
     VALUES is broken into three almost entirely unrelated subplots
(not that plot is an issue here).  The Pubert plot is basically an
excuse for a series of elaborate attempts by Wednesday and Pugsley to
do away with the baby, and later for some "normal baby" jokes.  The
Debbie/Uncle Fester plot is extremely sluggish; Joan Cusack tries
gamely, but doesn't quite click as the villainous black widow.  The
biggest surprise may be that Gomez and Morticia play a very small role
in the proceedings.  They get a nice, goofy dance sequence, but for
most of the film Raul Julia only reacts, while Anjelica Huston spends
her time hitting lighting marks so that her eyes and cheekbones appear
translucent.
     The upside of the senior Addams' diminished role is that the
larger part is given to Christina Ricci.  The summer camp subplot is
far and away the best, and Ricci is a demonic delight.  She has a lot
to work with: a nerdy would-be boyfriend; the unbearably
up-with-everything camp counselors; a debutante rival (Mercedes McNab,
who played the Girl Scout in the first film).  Ricci spits out her
lines with comic venom, and provides most of VALUES' highlights.
     The easiest conclusion to reach about ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES is that
it will probably please those it was made to please, the same folks who
brought over $100 million to THE ADDAMS FAMILY.  If you didn't like the
original formula, there's little to inspire a change of heart the
second time around.  Cheers to Christina Ricci, but I hope her contract
doesn't demand another sequel.  She deserves better.

Author
James Berardinelli
     If you didn't have enough of them two years ago, the Addams family
is back with a movie that does little more than rehash the same
"spirit" and recycle the same jokes.  A few sparkling performances and
funny moments save this from being a waste of time, but it's not a
promising way to start the Thanksgiving/Christmas movie season.
     This time around, Morticia (Anjelica Huston) is having a baby.  In
answer to the inevitable question of whether it's a boy or a girl,
Gomez (Raul Julia) responds, "It's an Addams!"  However, all is not
sunny (or should that be gloomy?) in the household, because neither of
the previous Addams children likes their new baby brother, and they
spend hours devising ways to get rid of him.  Enter Debbie Jelinsky
(Joan Cusack), the new nanny, who has a thing for marrying wealthy men
then getting rid of them--and now she's set Fester (Christopher Lloyd)
in her sights.
     Much of what was valid about 1991's THE ADDAMS FAMILY is true of
this sequel.  In fact, I could just about regurgitate the review for
that film in this case.  The movies are more than similar, although
less than identical, and it's almost guaranteed that those who relished
part one will enjoy part two (unless they grow tired of hearing
variations on the same one-liners).
     Any movie that tries to be funny for an hour and a half is bound
to score from time-to-time, and this is true for ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES.
There are laughs to be had along the way, but not enough to cover up
the obvious lack of plot.  This film is a series of cartoons loosely
strung together, and too much of the humor is obvious.  With a
legitimate storyline, ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES might have been great fun,
but as it is, it's about twice as long as it needs to be.
     Why is it that the most impressive thing about these TV-to-movie
transformations seems to be the casting?  Not only is this true for THE
ADDAMS FAMILY, but THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES showed the same thing.  Raul
Julia and Anjelica Huston are as perfect as last time.  Christopher
Lloyd may be a bit annoying as Fester, but he gets the job done.  Joan
Cusack is wonderfully over-the-top as Debbie the psycho nanny, with her
primary functions being to snarl lines and expose cleavage.
     Even two years older, the most notable cast member is still
Christina Ricci, who turns in a beautifully deadpan performance as
Wednesday (and even gets an opportunity to smile).  There are times in
this movie when she's the only thing worth watching, and she saves the
"Wednesday and Pugsley go to summer camp" subplot from turning into an
agonizing viewing experience.
     Generally speaking, ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES delivers what its viewers
expect from it, and that makes it the simplest of films to review.  I
don't think it's worth a trip to the movies--there's not enough humor
or inventiveness for that--but doubtless many will disagree.  The box
office tally will determine if there's to be a third installment.  Of
course, it's still open to debate whether the second film was warranted
in the first place.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
