Title
Review for Julia (1977)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Julia" is a film about the relationship between two lifelong
friends, and the lengths that one will go to for a valued
friend.  The script is excellent and intelligent, and most of 
the characters are very well defined.
"Julia" takes place in the years leading to World War II.
Lillian Hellman (Jane Fonda) is an aspiring playwriter, 
living with retired novelist Dashiell Hammett (Jason Robards).
Lillian longs to visit childhood friend Julia (Vanessa Redgrave)
who is involved with espionage against the Nazis.  Lillian
is eventually involved in Julia's activities.  Their lives are
endangered.
"Julia" was showed with Academy Award nominations, including
Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actress and Best Script.
Redgrave and Robards copped supporting actor awards.
Redgrave's is particularly deserved.  Julia's passion
for life and fearless hatred of repression comes through.
There is also an excellent supporting role by
Maximilian Schell, playing one of Julia's contacts
in the resistance.  Also watch for Meryl Streep playing an 
affected socialite.  This was her screen debut.
One thing that bothered me about the film was that two
male supporting characters (played by Hal Holbrook and 
John Glover) are incredible drunken jerks.  Send them
first to a rehab center, then to charm school.
Jane Fonda was given a Best Actress Nomination, but something
seems to be missing in her that is needed for her character.
Lillian's emotional range is limited to nervous and angry.
Julia is almost a maternal figure to her.
Still, "Julia" is a very good movie, well plotted, 
with many moments of genuine suspense (and horror).
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen several times on Bravo in June 1998.
*Julia* is quite simply one of the most haunting films you might ever see.
Based on a true series of events in the life of playwright Lillian
Hellman, it is the story of the deep relationship between the writer and
her childhood friend Julia, the granddaughter  of superwealthy
industrialists. Julia, despite her upbringing, bristles at injustice and
social inequities, and in Vienna in the late 1930s, this places her in
great danger. She leaves behind her medical schooling to go underground,
helping various antifascist movements with her wealth.
The story is told via he memories of Lillian, as she struggles to write in
a beachfront cottage she shares with her lover Dashiell Hammett (Jason
Robards). The memories we see show why they are such close friends.
Vanessa Redgrave's portrayal of Julia is astounding. And as Lillian tells
us, she has one of the most beautiful faces we have ever seen. Julia, in
Redgrave's hands, is both passionate and sensitive, adding great depth to
her bravery, and her tragedy.
Jane Fonda is equally powerful as Lillian. Among the best scenes are when
she is frantically trying to find our what's happened to Julia after Julia
has been assaulted in Vienna by fascists, resulting in her losing a leg. 
Lillian goes to Vienna and demands  information from the tacit medical
staff.  A lot of this is repeated later when she tried to fulfill a final
promise to Julia.
Lillian does finally get her play written and it's a success. And when
she's in Europe, her friendship is put to the test when she suddenly finds
herself in the cloak-and-dagger world of smuggling money from Paris to
Berlin for Julia on her way to Moscow. The final meeting of the two women
is also riveting. Lillian wants to recapture the essence of the old days,
and Julia, out of necessity, has to maintain espionage vigilance and a
watchful eye. 
Director by Fred Zinnemann adds greatly to the film by making the
storyline nonlinear. Flashbacks are well placed. For example, as Lillian
in on her tense train ride, not knowing who she can trust, there are
memories of another journey where Lillian almost falls off a log into
rushing water and Julia is there to help her through it. It's subtle and
spellbinding. 
*Julia* was nominated for several awards and won Redgrave an
Oscar--resulting in her controversial acceptance speech that made her
persona non grata for many years. *Julia* is also notable for Meryl
Streep's accent-free debut.
Written by Alvin Sargent; based on Lillian Hellman's novel Pentimento.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
