Title
Review for Bed of Roses (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Mary Stuart Masterson, Christian Slater, Pamela Segall, Josh
Brolin, Brian Tarantina, Ally Walker Director: Michael Goldenberg
Screenplay: Michael Goldenberg
"Once upon a time there was a little girl of no consequence. Left alone,
deserted by her own blood's relation. Abandoned on the doorsteps of
providence, not knowing even when her true date of birth. No past, no
memories except for sorrowful woes. Can I be loved for who I am, she
asks herself? Will I ever find true love? Through darkened streets walks
a boy lost in his deepest thoughts. Looks up to see a single lightened
room, and to his amazement finds a weeping child, the lost girl of his
dreams. So come with me the boy asks the girl, and I'll show you a place
where sorrows never grow. Come with me to my hiding place, to the secret
garden of my love."
      From the 'Grimmish Book of Fairytales' by T.M.T. Voon
As modern Fairy-tales go this is pleasantly enchanting. Simple in it's
storytelling it doesn't attempt to drown it's audience with unnecessary
melodrama. Not pretentious in it's presentation, it uses its characters
wisely to tell a simple tale of love.
So if it's a Valentine, birthday, or anniversary gift you seek, remember
that wise old saying that 'Flowers speak the universal language of
love'.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BED OF ROSES is a wonderful fairy tale of a movie, at least the
first two thirds of the movie is, which is the movie's major, but not
quite fatal flaw.  It is not that the last third of the movie is bad,
it just does not exist at all!  It is a movie that promises much more
than it delivers, and yet it is a touching and romantic fable that
lifts your heart before it makes a fast exit for reasons that baffle
me.  I am glad I saw it, but I wish I could have gotten to know the two
lead characters much more.  I really care about these two sweet souls.
     Playing a character similar to the wonderful one he played in the
much better movie UNTAMED HEART, Christian Slater is Lewis Farrell.
Lewis is a young widower who is a flower delivery man by choice so that
he can see the joy in people's eyes when he gives them their flowers.
One day he delivers flowers from an anonymous giver to Lisa Walker
(Mary Stuart Masterson).
     Lisa is a successful but sad and young new VP at a Manhattan
company.  She has a mysterious and troubled childhood which has
prevented her from ever falling in love.  Her "boyfriend" Danny (Josh
Brolin) is just that, a friend.  They are intimate, but she does not
care for him much; he is just a convenience.  They are both workaholics
who sometimes fit each other into their busy schedules.
     When Lisa gets her flowers, she becomes obsessed with finding out
who sent them.  Although Lisa is upset by all of this, her best friend
Kim (Pamela Segall) loves it and tells her, "with a fantasy like this
who wants the truth?"  Kim tells Lisa her opinion of her current
boyfriend Danny, "He's the romantic equivalent of a night-light."
     In the straightforward but poetic script by writer and director
Michael Goldenberg, Lisa quickly finds out that, you guessed it, Lewis
sent the flowers.  He invites her to spent the day with him.  The day
turns out perfect which scares her.  Lewis tells her not to worry since
"every now and then everybody is entitled to too much perfection."
Shaken, Lisa tells Kim that night that "I don't have room in my life
for somebody this great.  I work for a living."
     Lisa's fears intensify as Lewis corners the market for roses in
The Big Apple and sends them all to her apartment.  He lost his first
wife during pregnancy, and he lives in mortal fear that he will lose
Lisa as well, hence the romantic overkill.
     Just when you get thoroughly hooked on this movie, it takes a
sharp turn left followed a couple of minute later by a sharp right and
then a few minutes later it abruptly ends.  I could not figure out if
the writer ran out of ideas or what.  Perhaps test screening audiences
did not like the last part so the editor (Jane Kurson) just cut it
entirely.  For whatever reason, the producers (Michael Haley, Allan
Mindel, and Denise Shaw) should have demanded the script be finished
properly before they released the film.  This is an enthralling film
transformed into a mediocre one because of this truncation.  I suspect
the cause is the editing because there were other parts, like her
abused childhood, that are hinted at somewhat obliquely and where you
are keep waiting for more explanations or flashbacks that never
materialize.  I think they exist on some cutting room floor.  The movie
feels more like a great work in progress than a completed film.
Perhaps not on the level of Mahler's tenth, but at least something
special that I wish had been fully developed.
     The acting by Masterson and Slater is marvelous.  She delivers a
compelling and complex performance.  Slater gives a genuinely tender
and touching one.  In one of many good scenes he takes her to listen to
children's stories at the library not because he has kids but because
the storyteller is so good.  The chemistry between them where he loves
her, but she is scared to love him is quite believable.  Pamela Segall
takes the minor role as the friend and makes it special.  I liked the
makeup where they had Kim look much prettier than Lisa making the
audience wonder whether Lewis would fall for Kim at some point in the
show, and if so when.
     The sets (Stephen McCabe), especially of Lewis's parents at their
large Normal Rockwell style house at Christmas, give a warm and
peaceful ambiance.  The cinematography (Adam Kimmel), particularly in
the use of lights and shadows, cast a melancholic overlay on top of an
outwardly happy show thus mirroring the trouble in Lisa's inner self.
     BED OF ROSES runs way too short at just 1:27.  It is rated PG for
a couple of bad words.  This romance would not offend anyone of any
age.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence of any kind.  There are a
few quite effective but simple kisses.  Nevertheless, this is one very
romantic movie.  Okay, two thirds of a romantic movie.  The movie is
strong enough that even though they amputated it, I still recommend it,
but I am unable to give it more than ** 1/2 because of this travesty.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mary Stuart Masterson, Christian Slater, Pamela Segall, 
      Josh Brolin, Brian Tarantina, Ally Walker
Director: Michael Goldenberg
Producers: Allan Mindel and Denise Shaw
Screenplay: Michael Goldenberg
Cinematography: Adam Kimmel
Music: Michael Convertino
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     While BED OF ROSES lacks the freshness of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY and 
the smart sensuality of BEFORE SUNRISE, it nevertheless possesses enough 
intelligence and energy to lift it into the upper echelon of 
"traditional" modern romances.  And, with so many of today's recent love 
stories originating from Jane Austen's pen, something like BED OF ROSES 
can offer a contemporary change of pace.  
     The film follows the expected pattern of a conventional romance:  
two characters meet and fall in love, complications arise, causing a 
breakup, then there's a reunion just in time for the end credits.  While 
BED OF ROSES offers few surprises in its formulaic progression of 
events, the tale is told with heartfelt tenderness, and, for once, the 
circumstances that threaten the pair's happiness have nothing to do with 
re-appearing old flames.
     In some romances, couples must cross a generational gap to be 
together.  Other times, the barrier may be cultural or racial.  In BED 
OF ROSES, each of the protagonists -- Lisa (Mary Stuart Masterson) and 
Lewis (Christian Slater) -- must overcome their own emotional 
dysfunctions in order to enter into a relationship.  As a result of 
tragic pasts, neither is confident about expressing feelings, and, while 
both are emotionally needy, they discover that receiving is often as 
hard as giving.
     Lewis was a happily married Wall Street mover and shaker when he 
lost both his wife and baby to childbirth.  Since then, he has devoted 
his life to his new job:  delivering flowers from the shop he owns.  He 
does it because he likes to see people's faces when they receive their 
arrangement.  In that way, he seeks solace through the ephemeral joy of 
others.
     Lisa had a sad, lonely childhood that she never recovered from. 
Now, to compensate for the emotional gulf in her life, she has thrown 
herself fully into her career.  With the exception of her best friend, 
Kim (the bubbly Pamela Segall), Lisa has no one to confide in or share 
with.  She's a workaholic for whom the concept of fun is "utterly beside 
the point."
     One night while Lewis is out for a walk, he looks up and sees Lisa 
standing by her window, crying.  Moved, and not understanding why, he 
sends her an anonymous flower arrangement.  Eventually, after being 
pressed for the sender's name, Lewis admits the truth, then follows up 
by inviting Lisa to spend the day with him, delivering flowers and 
watching people's faces.
     BED OF ROSES probably wants to be more literate than it succeeds at 
being.  The film belabors the symbolism of flowers, which, at one point 
or another, stand for everything from life and love to the fragility of 
emotions.  There are also messages about the importance of family and 
how the traumas of childhood affect a person's behavior as an adult.  
Not all these themes are effectively explored.  Better, however, for BED 
OF ROSES to be overambitious than for it to "dumb up" its script. 
     Among the movie's assets are the performances of leads Mary Stuart 
Masterson (FRIED GREEN TOMATOES) and Christian Slater (BROKEN ARROW).  
Not only do these two work effectively as a couple, but each manages to 
create a sympathetic individual.  Through the nuances of Masterson's 
performance, it's possible to feel Lisa's isolation.  Likewise, Slater's 
underplaying of Lewis makes him more accessible to the audience.
     Both Masterson and Slater have appeared in romances before -- he in 
UNTAMED HEART and she in BENNY AND JOON.  BED OF ROSES marks a step 
forward for both actors.  And, as 1996's undisputed Valentine's Day date 
picture, this film offers the mood that couples expect from a light 
drama about love in the '90s.  Although the overall story claims little 
in the way of originality, it at least approaches its material with 
charm, which is more than can be said of many so-called love stories.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
