Title
Review for Jacquot de Nantes (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

JACQUOT DE NANTES (director/writer: Agnčs Varda; screenwriter: based on
the memoirs of Jacques Demy; cinematographers: Patrick Blossier/Agnčs
Godard/Georges Strouve; cast: Jacques Demy (Himself), Daniel Dublet
(Raymond, Jacquot's Father), Philippe Maron (Jacquot 1), Edouard
Joubeaud (Jacquot 2), Laurent Monnier (Jacquot 3), Brigitte de Villepoix
(Marilou, la mere), 1991 - France)
Jacques Demy, the subject of this biography, was a great filmmaker; his
films were poetical visions, filled with music and fantasy and magic.
JACQUOT-- the title refers to the young Jacques' nickname, as he was
named after his grandfather, but lovingly called Jacquot by his mother.
He died in 1990.
 The French director was most acclaimed for his inventive 1964 musical
"The Umbrellas of Cherbourg." Demy, a seemingly gentle and reflective
soul, was married to Agnes Varda, a director herself, who bases this
film on her husband's unfinished memoirs. Before he died, he
collaborated and appeared in the film, offering insights into his
childhood experiences.
The movie is a look back at his most happy childhood and some of the
events that shaped his life. The pivotal point of the film revolves
around his use of imagination and how he was always inspired by it. The
film follows young Jacquot (played by a progression of actors) through
his Nantes boyhood as the eldest son of a working-class family, whose
father owned a garage and was a hard-working mechanic, while his loving
mother stayed in the kitchen and offered him full-support in his
yearnings to be a filmmaker. His childhood experiences included the
following: his first attraction to puppet shows (filmed in vivid color)
and then experimenting in animation, the songs he daily heard that later
became part of his films, his displeasure at being in a technical
school, the war and his reaction to the Nazi occupation of his town, and
his final departure to Paris and the start of a long career in films.
Varda is extremely cautious in the way she presents Jacquot, carefully
rooting out all the implied meanings in his life. His childhood
experiences are really trite but through her photographs of them in
black and white, employing the cinema verite method, his life is
meticulously examined as to his relations with friends, his father, and
his mother.
It was interesting to see how Varda interspersed his childhood memories
with the legendary films he was later on known for. Vargas, by showing
the "inspirational"
episode from his childhood and then his usage of it in films such as,
"Lola," "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg," "The Young Girls of Rochefort,"
"Donkey Skin, "or some other Demy work, has managed to tie the
director's early life into his life in films.
On some occasions she'll present a sentimental impression from his
childhood -- the small movie camera (Ercscam) with which he shot his
first stop-motion film. Scenes like that come off as being truly
genuine. Another such scene was from September 16, 1943- the horrors
from the war he will always remember, as his town was bombed and there
were heavy casualities. This made him a hater of war for the rest of his
life. The look in his saddened eyes, as he is being interviewed,
indicates how he still remembers that day.
But for all the niceties about him shown, and deservedly so, this
biography seemed somewhat sterile and unwilling to question a lot of
personal things about Demy's life. It seemed to be bent on being an
homage and final goodbye, without the benefit of being anything more
critical. So we learn nothing of the couple's relationship, the brain
tumor from which he was dying from, or the stories circulating that he
was bisexual. The film seems as if it was a guided museum tour given to
elementary school children, that will only show the director's
dedication to being a filmmaker and will reveal nothing about what is
inside the man.
The film begins and ends with Demy on the beach, looking out at the sea,
and envisioning his life as it turned out. It is a film about a boy who
knew what he loved to do in life and was fortunate to make a living
doing it. This film should inspire others to follow their own beliefs,
but does not have the magical qualities of a Demy film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Philippe Maron, Edouard Joubeaud, Laurent Monnier, 
           Brigitte de Villepoix, Daniel Dublet 
Director:  Agnes Varda
Screenplay:  Agnes Varda based on the memoirs of Jacques Demy
Music:  Joanna Bruzdowicz
Released by Sony Pictures Classics
In French with English subtitles
     JACQUOT is a tribute from one lover to another, a project that
started out as a collaboration but became a both an homage and a means
of saying farewell.
     French film maker Jacques Demy (who is best known for his
surrealistic, often-offbeat musicals) died in October 1990, when
production on JACQUOT was nearing an end.  A filmed chronicle of Demy's
childhood memoirs put together by Agnes Varda, his companion of more
than thirty years, JACQUOT (the title refers to the young Jacques'
nickname) is a look at how the influences of childhood steer a man's
creative spirit.  During the course of the film, we meet Demy and his
friends and family, see his love for the cinema, and observe his first
attempts at creating.
     JACQUOT succeeds in engaging the intellect, but is less triumphant
in touching the emotions.  Despite the detail and care with which
Demy's memories have been committed to film, there is a quality about
them that distances the audience.  We understand his desires, needs,
and the everyday difficulties of his life, but little about this film
is stirring.  For all that the story is about Jacquot, there's a
question of how much of the inner person we get to know.  The film
seems more concerned with presentation than identification.
     The most intriguing and enjoyable parts of the movie are, by far,
those that deal with the young Demy's early forays into movie-making.
A fair amount of time is spent chronicling the development of a couple
of animated shorts that Jacquot shows to his family in a home-made
theater.  In these scenes, we are given a peek at the creative genius
of Demy, and it is through them that JACQUOT attains its goal.
     It's always difficult to film someone else's memories without
either missing the mark entirely or waxing nostalgic.  JACQUOT falls
into both traps at times, even as it occasionally hits the mark.  Some
of the most historically important incidents, such as the Nazi
occupation of France and the subsequent bombing raids, fail to bring
out the horror and fear that Demy must have felt.  The truest moments
are often those that seem almost thrown in as an afterthought.
     Writer/director Agnes Varda uses color to supplement the normal
black-and-white in which JACQUOT is presented.  Several scenes explode
to life in a vivid display of hues, accenting a particular emotion or
highlighting a scene.  For the most part, it's an effective technique,
although one that is possibly a little overused.  Also in color are
numerous clips from Demy's films.  The inclusion of these works very
well, showing how incidents from the man's real life impacted the
movies he was to make.
     The acting is solid from top to bottom, with the three young
actors who play the growing Jacquot (Philippe Maron, Edouard Joubeaud,
and Laurent Monnier) giving consistent performances that make for a
smooth transition from one to the next.  The occasional appearances of
the real Jacques Demy on-screen lends JACQUOT a bittersweet quality
that it might not otherwise have had.  In some ways, the scenes with
him, lovingly filmed by Ms. Varda, are the most moving of the picture.
     The sense of period in JACQUOT is excellent, from the streets and
countryside of World War II France to the garage and attic of the Demy
house.  As mentioned, detail is crucial to this movie and, at least in
rolling back the years, such obvious care brings dividends.
     Even for those who, like me, have never seen anything by Demy, the
depiction of the relationship between his memories and work is a source
of fascination  The clips from eleven films help immeasurably in this
respect, yet even without them, there are enough moments in JACQUOT to
warrant it a look from those who don't lose patience with this kind of
simple, relaxed style.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
