Title
Review for Judgment Night (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is one of those movies that's not all good, all bad or 
all mediocre, it just trades off between the three. There are parts in 
JUDGMENT NIGHT that achieve real tension, real action and real 
dialogue, almost equally matched by the scenes that don't. I don't 
know if there's another movie I've reviewed that I have on tape, have 
watched multiple times and love the cast of but still don't really like. 
Maybe JOHNNY DANGEROUSLY and AIRPLANE 2: THE SEQUEL, 
but those are comedies.
        JUDGEMENT NIGHT is an action flick built around the 
mistrust between economic classes and the common fear of being 
surrounded by people but still being completely without help. It also 
features another common fear -- Emilio Estevez. If you've read some 
of my other reviews, you know I never considered him one of the best 
of the '80s, which prompted one person to e-mail me with the 
question, "Do you have a problem with Emilio Estevez, or just his 
films?"
        No, I don't have a problem with him, although from the way 
he's disappeared from the movie scene, Hollywood seems to. He's not a 
terrific actor but he's likeable, even if he did usually pick weak scripts. 
It's only in JUDGMENT NIGHT that he's called on to carry a movie 
almost entirely by himself and, I have to say, as an action hero, he's 
not. He kind of walks through the movie, and it's only by time that 
JUDGMENT NIGHT is now better viewed as an ensemble work rather 
than an Estevez vehicle.
        Estevez, as the ex-wild guy now domesticated, is the main 
character, but his three friends are much more interesting. There's 
Cuba Gooding Jr. who, as written, is just generic and ambiguous (and 
probably his only performance where race isn't mentioned at all), but 
his own charisma lights up the movie. Jeremy Piven is the unlikable 
friend, the superficial wheeler-dealer who thinks he can get what he 
wants, and Stephen Dorff plays Estevez's younger brother with 
impulsivity control problems. None of the characters are terribly 
original, but in all four cases, the actors provide the appeal.
        This goes double for the movie's villain, played by Denis 
Leary. In other hands, the character would have been a run-of-the-mill 
action movie villain. Here, it's a run-of-the-mill action movie villain 
played by Denis Leary, which means a lot of sarcastic rants. He comes 
off as a disgruntled, gun-wielding stand-up comic and, although it 
makes him and his gang bangers (including the House of Pain guy) 
seem much less threatening, it makes the movie that much more 
watchable. This is why, and Hollywood executives should take note of 
this, Leary is always better as the likeable heavy than as the unlikeable 
protagonist. That's one of the reasons TWO IF BY SEA sucked so hard.
        The premise is a simple one -- the four friends are soft, 
middle-class twentysomethings who head into the city for a boxing 
match and end up in a horrible neighborhood, watching Leary pop 
Michael de Lorenzo. Leary chases them for the next 80 minutes or so, 
through four long set pieces. First is the railyard, followed by the 
housing project, the sewer system and the empty department store. 
All of this is fairly routine and predictable, and that's why I almost 
hate this movie, but every time you're reading to hit the fast forward 
button, one of these actors will do something to remind you they're the 
ones getting the big bucks. That's why I almost like this movie.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Jon Ridge
       Somewhere between big-budget action films and small-budget
morality tales exists JUDGEMENT NIGHT, a constantly exciting, always
tense urban thriller about kids on the run.  And no matter how you feel
about foot-chase movies, or shoot-out movies (or even movies that
seldom show you the light of day), *this* movie is never less than
engaging at any time.
       We first meet Frank Wyatt, a family man whose wife thinks he
should stop hanging out with the guys who "have the hormones of
teenagers" and start being around adults more.  But Frank hasn't been
out of the house in a long while and he thinks he needs a breather.
So, he tells his wife he loves her, kisses his baby's head (just like
any devoted father and husband should), and is off with his best
friends for a night out.
       Next, are Mike, Ray, and Frank's brother (whom he never, ever
gets along with) John.  They all congregate in a van/bus, and are off
to watch boxing in downtown Chicago.  Wouldn't you know, traffic's too
damn slow, and Ray decides to get off the main highway for a short
detour.  And wouldn't you know, they find themselves in a part of town
none of them has ever seen before.  Ray is determined to get them to
the boxing match on time, but then a funny thing happens-- he hits some
guy on the run from bad guys.
       The guys try to help out this stranger they've nearly killed,
but before you know it the bad guys show up and retrieve the strange
man.  Enter Fallon (played by Denis Leary), a drug
kingpin/mobster/whatever who pulls a gun and murders the man in cold
blood.  "Rule number one:  Do not steal from me," Fallon states to his
band of henchmen.  "Rule number two, no witnesses."
       And so it goes, as this action-adventure is set into nonstop
motion.  Given the amount of time this film in on the screen, and the
number of long encounters which take place, not much time is allowed
for much character development.  So, there isn't any (except if you
count a whiner/wimp who only shows his true colors when it's too late).
Then again, developing characters who provide the grounds for a story
that just about leaves you breathless, and nothing more, would be a
waste of time, especially when the action is as good as it is here.  We
get fights in the sewers, on and off trains, in low-rent apartment
buildings, and even (the finale) in a small shopping mall downtown.
And each sequence has a distinct feel to it, and each is inventive
enough to make you feel as though you haven't seen any of this before.
       The script, by Lewis Colick, is extremely derivative in its ways
of executing action and suspense, and the score, by Alan Silvestri,
(when it can be heard through all the fantastic rap music) sets a nice
tone for what you see.  Director Stephen Hopkins, of PREDATOR II fame,
does what he couldn't do in that film with this one:  Make it credible
enough for us to want to continue watching.  True, this isn't a
classical piece of cinema, but it does just what it needs to:  Stay on
the screen as long as it needs to be there (no longer, and no less),
and excite us while we watch.

Author
James Berardinelli
It's night in Chicago and four good buddies - Frank (Emilio Estevez), 
Mike (Cuba Gooding Jr.), Ray (Jeremy Piven), and John (Stephen Dorff) - 
are headed for a boxing match in an oversized RV borrowed by Ray.  
However, when rush hour traffic halts their progress, they try a short 
cut (obviously not familiar with a similar situation in BONFIRE OF THE 
VANITIES), and end up trapped in one of the Windy City's seedier 
districts.  After finding an injured man by the roadside, they 
inadvertently become witnesses to a murder, and the crook behind the 
killing (Denis Leary) decides that he doesn't want any witnesses.
If you want a good chase movie, see THE FUGITIVE.  If you want a clinic 
on how not to put together an entry to the genre, take a look at JUDGMENT 
NIGHT, one of the most unbearably dull so-called thrillers of the year.  
This film plods along at an almost-unbearable pace, threatening to lull 
its audience to sleep with long stretches of inactivity followed by 
bursts of poorly-choreographed fights and flights.  Any suspense is 
generated purely in the mind of the action-starved viewer, because what's 
on screen is horribly predictable and poorly executed.
The movie is set up by a series of coincidences so convoluted and 
difficult to swallow that JUDGMENT NIGHT is in trouble from the start.  
And, believe me, it doesn't get any better.  Even during the most crucial 
sequences, there is neither energy nor excitement.  Often, scenes that 
are supposed to be tense with uncertainty are dragged out to the point 
where they become tedious.
It's refreshing to know that it's not just characters in horror films 
that are unredeemably dumb.  Everyone - the bad guys as well as the heros 
- acts as if he's been subjected to a frontal lobotomy.  If you're being 
pursued by a ruthless, psychotic killer, would you seriously try to 
negotiate your way out of the mess?  
JUDGMENT NIGHT also suffers from a split personality.  For a film that 
constantly preaches the virtues of non-violence and restraint, it has far 
too many shoot-outs for the message to ring anything but hollow.  There 
also seems to be some uncertainty about what makes a man macho:  having a 
gun and blowing someone's brains out, or running away.
The actors aren't given much in the way of characters, but their 
performances are far from Oscar-caliber.  Even Cuba Gooding Jr. is 
painfully inept.  Maybe he should consider a different agent.  Since BOYZ 
'N THE HOOD, his parts (which include the fun-but-brainless GLADIATOR and 
the anything-but-fun DAYBREAK) have generally gotten less challenging and 
more cliched.
Is there anyone out there who actually likes Denis Leary as an actor?  
Not only is this guy awful in his role as the evil Fallon, but he's 
obnoxious as well.  I wanted someone to put a bullet through his skull 
just to shut him up.  Why is it necessary to give this guy a scene where 
he can spout his trademark fast-talking nonsense?  This is supposed to be 
a movie, not the DENIS LEARY SHOW.
Most of the time, even painful chase movies can at least boast superior 
technical skills.  Not so in this case.  Director Stephen Hopkins, who 
foisted PREDATOR 2 on us, looks uncomfortably like a hack in this 
endeavor.  In addition, he lets this movie go on for far too long.  Had 
it been judiciously edited, it might not have been nearly as unpleasant.  
Then again, it might have taken a miracle to redeem JUDGMENT NIGHT.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
