Title
Review for Miss Firecracker (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        MISS FIRECRACKER is a dramatic comedy in which the comedy works
like a charm but the drama fizzles and never catches fire; in short, MISS
FIRECRACKER is a dramatic dud.  The movie represents Beth Henley's
adaptation of her 1984 off-Broadway play "The Miss Firecracker Contest."
Henley won the Pulitzer Prize in 1981 for "Crimes of the Heart," which she
also adapted for the big screen (her screenplay earned her an Oscar
nomination in 1986).
        The film is set (and was filmed on location) in Yazoo City,
Mississippi, a small town which celebrates the Fourth of the July each year
with its annual "Miss Firecracker" beauty pageant.  Holly Hunter stars as
Carnelle, one of the five finalists in the contest.  Carnelle is a flaky,
hyperactive, and spunky young woman who is desperately in need of
self-validation and social acceptance.  Carnelle's fragile self-esteem is
riding on the "Miss Firecracker" contest; she thinks winning it would not
only lift her reputation as "Miss Hot Tamale," the town trollop, but also
make her a respectable person.  And who knows?  Maybe it would even be her
ticket out of town.  Hunter gives a heartfelt and outrageously manic
performance as Carnelle, showing once again her ability to completely sink
into a character.
        MISS FIRECRACKER is full of strange and eccentric small town
characters, not the least of whom is Carnelle herself.  Carnelle's role
model is her prim, proper, and unbearably ostentatious cousin Elain, played
by Mary Steenburgen.  Elain won the Miss Firecracker Contest in 1972, and
life has been anticlimactic for her ever since.  She has returned to Yazoo
City for the 1988 pageant in order to deliver the keynote speech, "My Life
as a Beauty."  Steenburgen's performance as Elain is adequate, but her
character is so nauseating that you don't feel the least bit of sympathy
for her.
        In contrast, Tim Robbins' character is far more endearing.  He
gives a strong comic performance as Delmount, Elain's tormented and
short-tempered younger brother, who recently has been released from an
insane asylum.  He has returned home to Yazoo City to sell the old and
decrepit family homestead.  The most original character in MISS FIRECRACKER
is Popeye Jackson, Delmount's romantic interest and Carnelle's seamstress.
Popeye is an amateur dressmaker who sews clothing for bullfrogs and who
claims to hear voices through her eyeballs.  Alfre Woodard gives a
whimsical, tour de force performance as the cheerful and sweetly naive
seamstress.
        The eccentric characters in MISS FIRECRACKER are the prime reason
the film works as a comedy; in every scene an off-beat character does or
says something strange.  MISS FIRECRACKER revels in its weirdness, and as
the movie progresses, the weirdness escalates until it finally reaches a
peak during the beauty contest.  In the talent portion of the pageant, for
instance, a contestant with yellow teeth reenacts a scene from GONE WITH
THE WIND, and her atrocious acting evokes tears from the judges and
onlookers.
        Unfortunately, MISS FIRECRACKER falls flat on its face during its
attempts at drama.  The movie takes itself much too seriously, and its
credibility is sabotaged by Thomas Schlamme's heavy-handed direction, David
Mansfield's overbearing score, and Beth Henley's corny dialogue.  To make
matters worse, you really don't care about the characters, despite the
charming performances.
        MISS FIRECRACKER tries too hard and tries to do too much, and as a
result it winds up doing too little.  The film's moments of comic
inspiration are just not enough to compensate for the stale melodrama it
inflicts on us.  So unless you are a die-hard Holly Hunter fan (like
myself), you may be better off skipping MISS FIRECRACKER altogether and
getting your laughs from the real thing, the Miss America Beauty Pageant.
