Title
Review for Law of Enclosures, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by John Greyson. Screenplay by Greyson, based on the novel by
Dale Peck. Starring Sarah Polley, Brendan Fletcher, Diane Ladd. Running
time: 111 minutes. Rated AA for mature subject matter by the MFCB.
Reviewed on September 14th, 2001.
Synopsis: Sarnia, Ontario, 1991. Beatrice (Polley) and Henry (Fletcher) 
are a young couple newly fallen in love. Sarnia, Ontario, 1991. Bea (Ladd) 
and Hank (Sean McCann) are an older married couple, bitter and cold and 
full of loathing for each other. As the Gulf War rages in the background, 
we explore how Beatrice and Henry become Bea and Hank; and we witness the 
final effort of Bea and Hank to recover their beginnings as Beatrice and 
Henry.
Review: Initially slow and ponderous, "The Law Of Enclosures" gradually, 
almost imperceptibly, draws you in. Its structure is unusual, the 
characters comprising two groups of people living contemporaneously. One 
set is young and the other older, but apparently, impossibly, they are the 
same. The youthful group includes Beatrice, Henry, Myrah and Stanley; the 
elder consists of Bea, Hank, Myra and Stan. There's even a child 
Beatrice/Bea in a few scenes, also existing simultaneously. The point of 
this seemingly convoluted and heavily metaphorical set-up is to paint a 
cinematic palindrome: the dawn of Beatrice and Henry's relationship is 
mirrored by its twilight. Greyson includes several hints as to the nature 
of the movie; clocks get stuck, and numbers counted backward are a 
perennial feature. Also watch for reflected actions, particularly 
beautiful shots of lovemaking through a glazed window. The backdrop of the 
War, oil-rich Sarnia posing as a Western Kuwait and the relationship(s) as 
the arena of destruction, is effective but not overdone. Polley and 
Fletcher don't quite find the right note as Beatrice and Henry; they go 
through the motions of being in love, but it never quite feels genuine. 
Ladd and McCann, though, are spectacular, at first communicating a 
controlled animosity which beautifully transforms into something more. 
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/
