Title
Review for Senior Trip (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chad Polenz
z- [0] (out of 4 = beyond terrible)
1995, R, 91 minutes [1 hour, 31 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Matt Frewer (Principal Todd Moss), Valerie Mahaffery (Miss Tracy
Milford), Tommy Chong (Red), Jeremy Renner (Dags), written by Roger Kumble,
I. Marlene King, produced by Wendy Grean, directed by Kelly Makin.
It's really sad that movies as bad as "National Lampoon's Senior Trip" are
made, let alone thought up. I can't image what went on during the pitch for
this movie, maybe the executives were temporarialy insane to approve
something this ludicrous. Everything in Hollywood is ripped off of something
else, but how low does National Lampoon have to be to rip off itself?
Watching teenagers get drunk, stoned, and have sex isn't funny.
There really isn't a plot here, only a simple and extremely predictable
story about a group of cliche, idiotic, high school slackers who crash the
principal's house for a party, and then proceed to drive from Ohio to
Washington to meet the president to tell him the education system "sucks."
But this movie doesn't even try to be anything original. It is the epitome of
bad, raunchy, semi-pornographic B-movies that are shown on cable at 3 a.m.,
but in this case it's with high school students and that only makes it more
sick.
The road trip and the brat pack of teens is a staple for Hollywood comedy,
but this film goes beyond the realms of good taste and offers shock value
comedy, while at the same time delivering childish, cartoony humor and
antics. Of course all the students hate their anal, geeky, dumbfound
principal, Mr. Moss (Frewer). All they want to do is get drunk, stoned, and
have sex with each other.         
Of course we get all the token characters here: Dags (Renner), the cool
leader; the pothead; the fat guy who will eat anything; the computer geek;
the slut; the kiss-up; some lesbians; and an insane kid obsessed with "Star
Trek." But it's not enough to just have these characters present, the film
goes as far as to essentially label them with arrows by the sheer appearance
of the characters alone. There is absolutely no subtlety here.
I don't know what went through the writers' heads while scripting this. Are
we really supposed to think only sex, drugs, and alcohol are funny? Are we
supposed to be curious about these characters and wonder how they will
interact with each other? Are we supposed to think teenagers interacting with
debutantes and getting them drunk and having a massive orgy is funny? I
appreciate a lowbrow joke now and then, but this is so low it's enough to
make you sick. It could be considered obscene, not because of its substance,
but because of its attitude - that it actually presents itself as something
to take seriously.
I shouldn't even begin to nitpick at all the fallacies to "National
Lampoon's Senior Trip," let's just say whatever could be bad about it is. In
fact "bad" isn't even a strong enough word, only "terrible" or even "vile"
would really be accurate. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
