Title
Review for Out of the Past (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Seth Bookey
Creating a Place in the Present via the Past
Seen on 6 August 1998 for $8.50 with Byron at The Screening Room as part
of a double feature with *Dottie Gets Spanked*.
"To create a place in the present, there must be a place in the past." 
It's one of the ways we provide an edification for our own existence. For
centuries, the gay past remained hidden for gay men and lesbians. While
this is no longer the case, *Out of the Past* fulfills it's title by
bringing noteworthy and even prominent figures from the gay past out into
public consumption, giving them their long overdue recognition. 
Six figures are portrayed. Michael Wigglesworth, the repressed 17th
Century Puritan minister; the "Boston Marriage" of turn-of-the-Century
writers Sarah Orne Jewett and Annie Adams Fields; 1920s activist Henry
Gerber, Founder of the doomed Society for Human Rights; Bayard Rustin, the
gay black civil rights activist who got lost in the shuffle of history
while Martin Luther King became the prominent activist at his expense; and
Barbara Gittings, an early homophile leader who began her work in the
1950s and is the sole subject still living today. 
The stories that unfold are fascinating, and largely unknown even to gay
people. They are astounding; the bravery shown by Gerber and Rustin, the
open love of the "Boston marriage"; the nonviolent persistence of Barbara
Gittings from the 1960s through today.  To even try to tell them here
would do them no justice, so try to see it yourself. There's a lot to be
learned her for all audiences.
Contrasted to the stories of the historical figures is the tale of one
girl's quest for social justice in Utah; Kelli Peterson formed the
Gay-Straight Alliance at East High School in Utah. The school tried to
close down the club, and when told it was illegal to discriminate in this
manner, the school board surreptitiously voted to outlaw *all*
extracurricular clubs. All of them. This led to massive protests by *all*
students, and in the end the Gay-Straight Alliance retained their rights
to meet.
The 97-minute documentary is augmented by archival photos and film reels
(including the Stonewall Riots aftermath), and it won the Audience Award
and was nominated for the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival.
Linda Hunt is the narrator and voices for the historical characters were
as follows: Stephhen Spinella as Michael Wigglesworth; Gwyneth Paltrow as
Sarah Orne Jewett; Cherry Jones as Annie Adams Fields; Edward Norton (II)
as Henry Gerber; Leland Gantt as Bayard Rustin. 
Sad Footnote: One of the Utah youths shown with Kelli Peterson was Jacob
Lawrence Orosco, who killed himself by hanging shortly after the film was
complete, on 3 September 1997 Utah. See
http://www.xmission.com/~sam3915/jacob_orozco.html 
for obituaries and commentary. That kids are still driven to suicide in
this day and age because of their distress over sexual orientation is both
astounding and frightening. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
     People will probably misinterpret the documentary OUT OF THE PAST as
much as the controversial event which is at its center, which is irony
enough.  It would be even more ironic if they misinterpret it in exactly
the same way:  without any direct knowledge, because they are already
convinced they know what it's about.  Such tends to be the case when you
are dealing with the perpetually volatile subject of homosexuality.  It
happens even more frequently when the suggestion is proferred that gays
and lesbians are human beings with much to contribute to the world.
     That, and that alone, is the fierce conviction behind OUT OF THE
PAST.  The story which serves as its jumping-off point is the tale of
Kelli Peterson, an "out" lesbian who attempted during her 1995-96 senior
year at Salt Lake City's East High School to start a student club called
the Gay-Straight alliance.  Its purpose, according to Peterson, was
understanding -- understanding between gay students that they were not
going through the difficult experience alone, understanding between gay
and straight students that gays were not aliens to be feared or hated.
Local school board members, legislators and parents in conservative Utah,
however, believed the club was an unwholesome influence promoting the
lifestyle of homosexuality, and wanted the club eliminated.  Faced with
the federally-mandated choice between permitting all extra-curricular
clubs -- including the Gay-Straight Alliance -- and banning all clubs, the
school board opted for the latter.
     That story alone would be compelling enough to make for a solid piece
of documentary film-making.  Peterson emerges as a determined, remarkably
mature young woman with a surprisingly wry sense of humor about the uproar
she never meant to cause.  It's fascinating and entertaining simply
watching her calm determination in the face of parents who announce their
concerns in board meetings that exposure to homosexuality will be a
dangerous influence on impressionable teenagers.  The issue for the forces
in opposition to the Gay-Straight Alliance isn't just their undoubtedly
sincere belief in the immorality of homosexuality.  They desire nothing
less than the invisibility of homosexuals, believing perhaps that if no
one talks about them, they will simply go away.
     That widely-held societal belief drives even more fascinating
secondary story in OUT OF THE PAST -- a series of biographical vignettes
intertwined with Kelli Peterson's struggle.  The vignettes describe
individuals I was embarrassed and angry to discover that I had never heard
of, gay Americans who contributed to the arts, political thought and
social justice.  The most intriguing of these is Bayard Rustin, a member
of Martin Luther King Jr.'s inner circle of advisors who was the architect
of non-violent civil resistance and the primary organizer of the march on
Washington.  Rustin became a lighting rod for opposition, both from
segregationists like Strom Thurmond and from other black political
leaders.  Like many others, he has been excised from history books because
of his sexual orientation, contributing to the continued invisibility of
gay Americans as role models.
     Like many "talking head" documentaries, OUT OF THE PAST does have its
slow patches, and not all the biographical sketches are uniformly
enlightening.  Ultimately, however, the film does what it sets out to do:
it places Kelli Peterson in a historical context, validating the legacy
which she had been denied.  It was the societal denial of that legacy
which made a Gay-Straight Alliance necessary in the first place; it was
the search for heroes that turned Kelli Peterson into one.
