Title
Review for Green for Danger (1946)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Evan Beach
Plot:  Whodunit set in a British WWII war hospital.  Crumbling relationships
and wartime tension puts the nurses and doctors at odds with one another.  A
postman needing minor surgery dies mysteriously on the operating table, and
an inspector is called in for investigation.  Anyone could be responsible,
and everyone has a motive.  The body count rises as the inspector attempts
to make sense of the situation.
Review:  This movie was perhaps more exciting in 1946, since the wartime
setting probably hit more close to home.  Also, better medical thrillers
have since been made ("Coma" is probably my favorite).  I found the movie
mostly boring.  Most of the characters were unsympathetic.  Leo Genn as the
suave, womanizing Dr. Eden gives a bland, one-key performance.  Trevor
Howard was excellent as the unpersonable Dr. Barnes, but wasn't allowed many
good scenes.  All of the nurse characters existed only as pawns between the
men or just for plot.  I didn't exactly feel terrified for anyone when they
were in danger; I didn't care if they died.  Alastair Sim as the inspector
tries to be humorous but comes across as kind of a dickhead.  I enjoyed his
turn in Hitchcock's "Stage Fright" but found him irritating in this movie. 
At least he got his comeuppance at the end.  Cinematography by Wilkie
Cooper, who worked on a Hitchcock film or two, is good for the most part,
but some of the key suspense scenes are shot rather poorly in the dark. 
Gilliat's direction is just okay, nothing exceptional.  The operation scenes
are very well done, but the bulk of the film is just mediocre and
by-the-book.  Gilliat, who co-wrote a wonderful script for "The Lady
Vanishes", and partner Claude Guerney provide the characters with realistic
dialogue, which is a major plus.  As a whole, nothing really stands out
about this film.  It isn't particularly entertaining or suspenseful.  It
isn't predictable, but it isn't surprising or thrilling, either.  It's
watchable if you don't mind killing the time and fans of Alastair Sim may
enjoy it since he gets a lot of on-screen time.
