Title
Review for 12 Angry Men (1997) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Jack Lemmon, George C. Scott, Tony Danza, Edward James Olmos,
Ossie Davis, Hume Cronyn, Mykelti Williamson, Courtney B. Vance, Armin
Mueller Stahl, James Gandolfini, William Peterson
In 1957, a young man by the name of Sidney Lumet ventured into the world
of feature film directing with 12 Angry Men, a taught and involving
drama about the events that unfold while a jury of a dozen men from
different worlds delibertate in a murder trial.
40 years later, a second attempt at the film is made, and the only
question this viewer could manage was `why?'
William Friedkin, no doubt one of the finer directors around assembled
one of the most impressive casts in modern-day movie history,
particularly when you consider that this movie was made for HBO. But the
rehearsal for these fine men was obviously to watch the film that came
before it. Each somehow manages to give sub-par performances that look
like lame regurgitations of thier thespian colleagues' work of 40 years
earlier. 
In 1957, Sidney Lumet worked with Boris Kauffman, one of B&W cinema's
finest cinematographers, to develop a `style' for the film. As the tense
afternoon turned into evening, the room seemed tighter, and the lenses
changed. The camera was tighter on each character as we got deeper
inside their heads. Each character had his own motivation which was
beautifully conveyed. Here, Friedkin picks a seemingly arbitrary camera
plot, one in which the frame is either at some funky dutch angle or
rather a jerky steady-cam. (In a confined space?)
Another fault of the modern-day remake is the dialogue. As great as it
is, the banter worked better when taken in context. This was written
nearly 50 years ago, and the expressions sound like it. But the script
is redone ver batim, though a few brief dialogue scenes are added, and
none of them need to be. James Gandolfini asks Mykelti Williamson if he
was a `Nation of Islam guy'. Courtney B. Vance `modernizes' his story
about coaching a league championship football game in the rain, and then
starts to cry. A few jurors talk behind other's backs while in the
restroom. But none of it means anything. Each actor re-performs the work
of another great actor, only it is blatantly obvious.
The original film dealt with a cultural problem that is no longer an
issue today. There were no black men on the jury in the original, and in
the remake there are four. Mykelti Williamson is the oddest choice to
play juror number ten, and his character is the most changed from the
original. The juror is a bitter racist, but Williamson plays him that
way. He talks of latino's as lesser people and talks about scum from the
ghetto, while he doesn't make any attempt to hide his urban slang, nor
does he hide the fact that he is a mechanic. When Ed Beagly played the
role, it was very fitting that he was a white racist, but Williamson's
re-invented character is just a mystery here. His extreme hatred and
ignorance really takes away the power of the group dynamic. When the
climax is reached, it is now very unsatisfying, because of how
dominating his character was. The story really ends with juror number
three, and the transformation he makes. But because of Williamson's new
edge (no fault of the actor) he becomes the focal point, though he is
not involved in the climax.
The best thing HBO could have done last year would have been to put the
money from this budget into digitaly re-mastering the original film and
presenting it in widescreen format. It would have been fitting, since it
was the film's 40th anniversary. Instead, a boatload of talent is wasted
on one of the most completley pointless remakes of all time. Lemmon
can't outdo his old friend Fonda. Williamson's character is way over the
top and even the Great Scott can't perform with the power that Lee J.
Cobb could. (Though Danza gives Warden a run for his money in a
surprisingly good performance.) Rent 12 Angry Men 1997 ONLY if you've
seen the original masterpiece and want to compare.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Remakes, even faithful ones, are so often such pale imitations of
the original that they become little more that frustrating substitutes
for the genuine article.  12 ANGRY MEN from 1957 is the most insightful
film ever made about serving on a jury.  (The 1957 version was itself a
remake, see my previous review, of a 1954 STUDIO ONE production, but
that piece of cinematic trivia remains unknown to all but the most avid
movie fans.)
     The great director Sidney Lumet directed the 1957 version and the
star-studded cast included such luminaries as Henry Fonda, Lee J.
Cobb, Ed Begley, E. G. Marshall, Jack Warden, and Jack Klugman.  The
1997 remake produced by MGM and released on the Showtime cable network
has itself a superlative cast.  Directed by Academy Award winner
William Friedkin (THE FRENCH CONNECTION), the cast includes Hume
Cronyn, Tony Danza,  Ossie Davis, James Gandolfini, Dorian Harewood,
Jack Lemmon, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Edward James Olmos, William L.
Petersen, George C. Scott, Courtney B. Vance and Mykelti Williamson.
     The role of the reluctant juror who bravely votes not guilty when
everyone else votes otherwise is played by Jack Lemmon.  Henry Fonda in
one of his greatest roles played that part in the 1957 film.  Lemmon is
a great actor, but one who sometimes seems way past his prime as he did
last year in HAMLET.  In 12 ANGRY MEN, his old talent shines through,
but even so his performance is not in the same league as Fonda's or
Robert Cummings's, who played the part in 1954.
     At the heart of the story are the "facts" that are known by the
others but simply questioned by Lemmon.  "It's one of those open and
shut things," points out George C. Scott's character.  "They proved it
ten different ways."  But crying out as the lone voice of compassion,
Lemmon pleads, "Suppose we're wrong."
     The white racist from the 2 previous productions is replaced by a
black racist this time.  Mykelti Williamson, from FORREST GUMP and CON
AIR, wanted to get the part to show how universal racism can be.
Williamson even personally designed the role so that his character was
a ex-member of the Nation of Islam.  Although not fully explained,
apparently his character was too racist for the Black Muslims.  "I've
lived among them all my life," declares Williamson's venomous character
about the defendant and his race.  "They're born liars."  His hate is
complete and unadulterated by reason or any semblance of empathy.
     As the story unfolds, the sure and certain facts from the
courtroom turn out to be anything but.  And the jurors' closed minds
begin to open one by one.  Some, of course, resist mightily.  "Don't
give me those facts," complains Williamson's character.  "I'm sick and
tired of facts."
     The Academy Award nominated screenplay by Reginald Rose is little
changed from his original.  One of these changes has the extremely
minor role of the judge being given to a woman, Mary McDonnell.
Although McDonnell is a fine actor, her brief appearance smacks of
tokenism.  In other updates, references are thrown in about SECRETS AND
LIES and about the Tyson-Holyfield fight.  These serve no purpose and
are unable to make a highly relevant story any more so.
     The conclusion is inevitable, but, even if you've seen the 1957
version, this remake is worth viewing for the strength of the script
and the fine performances.  Every juror's vote change is a milestone
along a hard climb.  When they reach the summit, you may find yourself
as emotionally drained as the jurors.
     12 ANGRY MEN runs 1:57.  It is not rated but would be PG or PG-13
for mature themes and a little profanity.  The film would be fine for
kids say nine and up who are interested in such serious subjects.  I
recommend the film to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
