Title
Review for City of Joy (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Frank Maloney
     CITY OF JOY is a film directed by Roland Joffe and written by Mark
Medoff, from a book by Dominique Lapierre.  It stars Patrick Swayze,
Pauline Collins, Om Puri, Shabana Azmi, and Art Malik.  It is rated
PG-13 for violence, mature themes, mild profanity.
     CITY OF JOY is an earnest, well-intended film meant to praise those
who struggle against the odds.  Joffe is a kind of British Oliver Stone
in his heavy-handedness and self-righteousness, but he is the director
who brought us THE KILLING FIELDS, THE MISSION, and FAT MAN AND LITTLE
BOY.  He is not afraid of movies about ideas that he believes in.
Unfortunately, he is afraid of letting us think for ourselves.
     The script is freely adapted from Dominique Lapierre's 1985
best-seller.  Mark Medoff and Joffe have converted the Polish priest
laboring in the slums of Calcutta to an Irish nurse, played charmingly
by Pauline Collins.  The American doctor Max Lowe, an minor character in
the novel, has become the focus of the movie to accommodate the star
appeal of Patrick Swayze.  Further Hollywoodization comes in the form of
elaborate monsoons, rioting and fire bombs, and melodramatic and
sadistic heavies, especially the character by Art Malik.  Joffe is
constantly moving in the direction of epic, while the story strains to
pull back to the intimate concerns of the poor ricksha pullers, their
families, the lepers, and the others living on the bottom level of this
amazing city.  One cannot help but compare this glossy package with the
gritty, wise, and wonderful SALAAM BOMBAY, produced at a fraction of the
cost of this film and at many times the insight and power.
     This is not to say that CITY OF JOY is a contemptible film, merely
a specimen case of how even a well-intentioned big-budget film can lose
sight of what is important.  It is a problematic production, in any
case.  The first problem being the presence of Patrick Swayze, who is
said to have gone to great lengths to secure the part of Dr. Max.  At
best, we would have to conclude that Swayze is working here on the
extreme outer limit of his skills as an actor.  Angst barely eludes him,
although petulance does appear to be within his grasp.  The mere
presence of a Western man in this third-world story sets off alarums;
certainly, Joffe's MISSION suffered from the white-messiah syndrome, as
have most movies about apartheid in the last several years (although you
might look around for an black, South African film MAPANTSULA that was
circulating two years ago).  To be fair, Joffe and Medoff seem somewhat
aware of this and ensure that Swayze never wins a fight and that his
life is saved by an Indian.  Still he does tend to lecture the Indians
about standing up to the Godfather who rules their lives.
     The real satisfaction of this film comes from the excellent Indian
actors, especially Om Puri as the man whose life Swayze keeps
interfering in; Puri is nervous, weak, brave, hesitant, rash; he's no
Hollywood beauty, with his pock-marked nose, but he's a beautiful
performer.  Puri's character, Hasari, is the heart and soul of CITY OF
JOY, and with the contributions of Shabana Azmi who plays his wife,
embodies the nobility and dignity that Joffe would like to reduce to
manipulative sentimentality.
     Other strengths come in the cinematography of Peter Biziou and the
graceful music of Ennio Morricone, which together give CITY OF JOY much
of its power and appeal.

Author
Jyothi Rengarajan
     I sat through Roland Joffe's CITY OF JOY at Pittsburgh and felt
anger and irritation among other things.  It is, not surprisingly, a
condescending, patronising and self-important depiction, loosely based
on Lapiere's novel of the same name.
     The film was made with a glaring lack of sensitivity and
understanding of India.  It is sad that even after 500 years of contact
with our civilization, the western psyche cannot come to terms with an
iota of what makes up our subcontinent.  Joffe has made the not uncommon
blunder of earnestly believing that he understands poverty and
suffering, that he can feel the pulse of the "real" India, that he can
discern the hope and love and the human bonding that triumphs through
the murkiness of the, I quote from the film, "cesspool of a country."
He proceeds to tell his tale of love and woe through terrible
stereotypes, cliches and nauseating moralizing.  He romanticises poverty
and gives us a glimpse of the "purity" and "uplifting" qualities it
fosters.  The fact the the film appeared to have been shot largely in
the studio did not help in establishing credibility.
     Swayze as the young, dis-spirited American doctor who finds a
reason to live from experiencing life on the edge at the city of joy is
hopelessly miscast.  Collins, as the wonder-woman, dedicated to
uplifting the destitute and downtrodden, determined to change centuries
of tradition and superstition with amazing zeal is simply not
believable.  Her dialogues are ridden with cliches and dripping
sentiments.  Together, they help save the "passive" inhabitants of the
slum from the clutches of the evil godfather, played by Art Malik, who
goes around cutting up women's faces with a blade for fun.  And of
course there were the usual sub-plots about dowry and saving up every
possible paisa for the sweet beti.   
     Personally, I was surprised that Swayze was passable.  However, he
cannot help that he looks ridiculous in a "serious" role.  From his
recent interviews it is obvious that he considers himself to be quite a
hero to have survived India and the much publicised bomb-attack during
the protests in Calcutta.  The only real acting was displayed by the
various Indians of the cast.  Om Puri and Shabana Azmi maintained their
good standards.
    The film has all the ingredients of a good masala movie except that
it tries to make a *point*, you see.  About India, about Poverty, about
Love, Salvation, Hope, Inner Strength, about Adversity; about Good and
Evil, the former of course triumphing over the latter.  Hurrah for the
poor rickshaw puller Hasari and his brave little family!  Hurrah for the
lepers!  Hurrah for dear Joan and a BIG Hurrah for our dashing,
hot-blooded doctor who finds the meaning of life through all of the
above.  How deep, how profound.  We, as Indians should all be grateful
to Joffe for teaching us these important lessons about our country.

Author
Ralph Benner
     Dominique Lapierre's THE CITY OF JOY is a dense nonfiction (with
blessedly short chapters) that has the momentum of a novel written as a
collection of portraits of unimaginably joyous survivors of the worst
slums in all of India and probably the world -- those of Calcutta.
Starting out as a depressing travelogue, we quickly come to feel we're
going to know the city more than we might really want -- and come very
dangerously close to reeling in indigenous epigrams and platitudes: "Coal
doesn't change its color when you wash it. What can't be cured must be
endured"; "My memory is like camphor. It evaporates with time"; "Fishes
can't afford to live on bad terms with the crocodiles in the pool." By the
fifth chapter, Lapierre settles down and digs into Calcutta -- "a mirage
city to which in the course of one generation six million starving people
had come in the hope of feeding their families...(a) metropolis situated
at the heart of one of the world's richest yet at the same time most
ill-fated regions, an area of failing or devastating monsoons causing
either drought or biblical floods. This is an area of cyclones and
apocalyptic earthquakes, an area of political exoduses and religious wars
such as no other country's climate or history has perhaps ever
engendered...(one) earthquake in 1937 caused hundreds of thousands of
deaths ...six years later a famine killed three and a half million people
in Bengal alone...in 1965 a cyclone (hit India with the force of) ten
three megaton H-bombs...Calcutta condemn(s) its ten million inhabitants to
living on less than twelve square feet of space per person, while the four
or five million of them who squeeze into its slums have sometimes to make
do with barely three square feet each." You begin to feel you have to be a
masochist to go further, because the descriptions of the living conditions
in Calcutta's largest slum -- Anand Nagar, the City of Joy -- are
tummy-turning: the rot of the tin and cardboard shacks, the hunger, the
lepers, eunuchs and the scorching heat and pestilence match the revulsion
of the residents regularly wading through waste-high excrement that floods
through the slums when the rains come or the sewers get backed up because
of the endless strikes. Albeit upchucky, Lapierre's diary is absorbing and
in some cases you might even re-read passages again and again out of total
disbelief: your mind wanders in unspeakable directions when you come upon
lepers having sex, and it's indescribable your feelings when one leper
gives birth. (There are no precise numbers but it's estimated that India
has as many as five millions lepers.) Lapierre writes about the dwellers
of the City of Joy: "No amount of wretchedness, not even utter destitution
on a piece of pavement in Calcutta, could alter that they are the world's
cleanest people." And they do it with less than a pint of water for each
daily public bath.
     If you're a sinner like moi, you'll be absolved of all sins when
you finish the first half, and if you make it all the way through -- this
should be easy to do because you'll be hooked by then -- you're likely
going to be a candidate for sainthood. While there's mention of and a bit
of history about Mother Teresa, this isn't her story. It's about a real
Polish Catholic priest and (during the last third of the book) a real
American Jewish doctor who join forces to provide, with scant financial
resources, whatever medicinal comfort is feasible. It can't come as any
surprise to the reader that though their work is needed, admired and
honored, it is within these two outsiders that the City of Joy has its
ironic impact. (And it has impacted readers around the world: by October,
1986, Lapierre had received over 40,000 letters, many of them containing
donations, so moved were they by the emotionally wrenching stories. The
author has also donated one half of his royalties to Anand Nagar's
inhabitants.) Reading some copy about the movie version, the feature
writers are describing the book as "sentimental" but it's no such thing:
though immersed in awesome poverty, this book isn't schmaltzy
fictionalized pap -- it doesn't cheapen or romanticize or distort the
residents of the City of Joy. 
            I wish I could say the movie doesn't, either, but I can't:
director Roland Joffe and screenwriter Mark Medoff have indeed cheapened
the story in every way and worst of all is they have taken the good
American doctor -- played by Patrick Swayze -- and turned him into an
example of the pretensions of the "art" of dramatic writing right out of
Lajos Egri's college text. They've given him a false crisis, made his
character diametrically the opposite of what he is in Lapierre's book in
order put him into repeated conflicts that Loeb only rarely or never
encounters, made him inexplicably suicidal, and gave him a resolution
that, evidently satisfying to the members of the audience who don't know
how Lapierre ends his story, is simply hackneyed. The next worse things
they've done: they eliminated entirely the priest -- it's now Pauline
Collins as Sister (Saint) Joan -- and have created a super vicious slum
Mafiosi, played by Art Malik. Anyone who reads the book can see it as a
ready-made screenplay and all an honest director needs is a cast, a
Steadicam and a story editor who has respect for the material. There are
more scenes of real conflict, heartbreaking drama, spiritual wonderment
and impossible-to-believe-but-true vignettes in the book than a moviemaker
could ever hope to use -- for example, the young doctor amputating without
anesthesia a leprous arm and watching "a mangy dog carrying it off in its
mouth"  -- but why Joffe and Medoff had to go dreaming up new ones is
beyond the pale. In the book -- and his first appearance comes about half
way through and becomes focal only in the last third -- Miamian Max Loeb,
who's just about to get his medical degree from Tulane, has read all about
the selfless priest of Calcutta and decides, because he needs "a change of
air, to be of service," to join him. In the very first scenes of the
movie, he's Max Lowe -- changed to a less Jewish-sounding name because the
movie was being filmed during the Gulf War and there were constant
anti-American and anti-Israeli protests -- and already an established
doctor from Houston who abruptly decides to abandon his profession because
he lost a child-patient on the operating room table. (What drives him to
Calcutta specifically is never adequately explained except by the
all-purpose search for "enlightenment.") In the book Loeb, on his first
day in the slums, helps deliver a breeched baby to a leper couple. In the
movie, Lowe checks into a seedy hotel, entertains a prostie and is set up
to get drunk, beaten and robbed by local Mafia terrorizer Malik. And this
movie Max sort of stumbles onto the slums. (He eventually gets to that
leper's baby, though.) 
     Objecting to what Joffe has done to Lapierre's book might not have
been necessary had he at least been faithful to the atmospherics of the
slums even half way right. At first glance the faked City of Joy,
photographed approximating the color of diluted urine, appears wretched
and diseased, and when we see the blackened open trench that snakes its
way through the slums, we expect to get a dose of biological reality --
that is, shown how the dwellers poop. As we get into the book, we wait for
Lapierre to account for the disposal methods, since there are no bathrooms
as Westerners acknowledge the meaning. He doesn't disappoint; as horrific
and appearing-to-be lacking of dignity as it might seem, it's quite the
reverse, and a queer sense of admiration occurs within the reader when the
Polish priest says, "Before reaching the public conveniences, I had to
cross a veritable lake of excrement. This additional trial was a courtesy
of the cesspool emptiers, who had been on strike for five months. The
stench was so foul that I no longer knew which was the more unbearable:
the smell or the sight. That people could actually remain good humored in
the middle of so much abjection seemed quite sublime to me. They laughed
and joked -- especially the children who somehow brought the freshness and
gaiety of their games into that cesspool. I came back from that escapade
as groggy as a boxer knocked out in the first round." (And they don't use
any form of toilet paper -- only a tinful of water to wash up afterwards.)
Joffe not only avoids what has to be running through the minds of viewers
when they see that sewer, and avoids the common overspills of the sewer
into the homes, he also avoids the bathing practices which are even more
of a marvel. (The women are able to fully clean themselves while still in
their saris.) Part of the omission most likely has to do with the
persistent protests that occurred during the filming -- many Indians felt
that Joffe might be robbing residents of their self-respect if all aspects
of life in the City of Joy were documented. But in that Joffe faked his
city and flood, could he not fake the urges or baths elsewhere? And
perhaps do it in longshot? Readers will also note what other elements are
missing: cobras and infestations of rats and bugs; how the people use cow
dung cakes as fuel to cook their food (made ultra spicy because much of it
is rotten); and the ravages of the heat -- so hot that the bare feet of
the horses who pull the rickshaws would stick to the pavement of the
streets and the callous outer skin would peel off and the under skin would
become bloody and infected. 
     So what do we get in the movie version? Instead of endemic
cholera, there's frequent Mafia-administered punches into Max's stomach
and a stab into rickshaw puller Hasari (played by Om Puri), who also
suffers from a badly treated case of tuberculosis. When the monsoon
arrives and then the flood, instead of numerous bodies and dead rodents,
dogs and other animals floating through the alley streets of the slum,
there's Max nearly drowning after saving a leper and his baby. In the
book, Max is exasperated by a lack of medical supplies and though he's
often discouraged -- he periodically heads to one of Calcutta's grand
hotels for a little R&R -- he's faithful to Hippocrates; movie Max has to
be goaded into staying true to his oath. (One assumes that because Joffe
and scripter Medoff reversed Loeb at the start, they could redeem
themselves by having movie Max stay indefinitely in Anand Nagar, slyly
one-uping Loeb, who eventually returned to America, though he founded an
organization to supply the slum with medicines and equipment, and makes
regular return visits.) 
     Had Joffe only condensed the material, he might have provided
Patrick Swayze with the role he excitedly told Oprah and Larry King had
changed his life. You want to believe his humbleness when he said that
this is his best work so far as an actor, but if he could say this, and
tell us that when he first arrived in Calcutta Joffe sent him directly to
work with Mother Teresa before filming started, and that he's playing a
role of a doctor whose life has been fundamentally changed because of his
experiences in the City of Joy, it's not suspiciously disingenuous, it's a
little more like too sincere star-thumping. He's doing his own advance
work on his still unformulated humanatations. (He even admitted his
emotional discombobulation to King.) If Swayze had played his Max as he's 
promoting himself, he'd have been a sensation, and not coincidentally much
closer to the real Max. It's not Swayze's fault that the part is now about
a stereotypic angry young man, yet given the confines of such, he's far
from bad. In fact, what saves him is his own deportment -- his own sense
of agog; he's at once thrilled and yet disbelieving that he's playing so
life-changing a role. And there's something quite appealing about his
slightly Oriental face, which, perhaps because he fell ill for three weeks
during production, has finally lost its fattiness, and its repellent
grubbiness; in his Bugle Boys and sun-bleached hair, he's warm,
personable. (Even the real kids of Anand Nagar liked him enormously.) If
he can't redeem the awful scenes in which he's mouthing the silly, badly
written bitterness that's supposed to be telling us something about his
character, the fact is no one could (Joffe originally wanted Richard
Dreyfuss; Lapierre wanted Mel Gibson) because Medoff disemboweled the
book's Max, who was skeletal to begin with. (Two scenes from the thirty
minutes cut from the theatrical release include Max's attempted suicide,
which never happens in the book, and a seduction of Sister Joan; in the
book, Max has an Indian sexual outlet as part of his R&R.) Swayze does
affect us during a few of the movie's dramatic wallops, and in one I got
quite flushed with feelings and teary-eyed. The problem is, I can't
remember the exact moment anymore -- it has completely vanished from my
mind. This fleetness is central to Joffe's vamoosed vision; he's made not
a movie version of THE CITY OF JOY but one about The City of Vapors.
Everything that's genuinely moving about the book has been evaporated.
     Joffe is most faithful to the book's rickshaw puller Hasari, who
is the salt of Indian earth. Om Puri's performance is unquestionably the
movie's major asset, though you find yourself losing patience with his
mania for honor. (You could discreetly skim over his virtues in the book
but you're stuck enduring them in the theatre.) Pauline Collins is wasted
as an amalgam of the religious characters that Joffe thought could be
vacated without spiritual loss. (One of the small surprises of the book is
that even in the Anand Nagar Christian Christmas is celebrated.) This may
be, more than anything else, what tells us is so dummy-headed wrong with
the movie. It's maddeningly compromising when no dilution is necessary. So
what if Indians were protesting? When do they not? But you know why Joffe
phonied it up -- he's got one eye on the potentially huge box office of
India. (There's a funny line at the beginning when an Indian woman tells a
young child to keep away from the movie houses -- Indians being among the
world's most avid moviegoers.) What will rankle lovers of the book and
probably enrage fair-minded Indians about the movie THE CITY OF JOY is
that if this is the movie that Joffe really wanted to make, it's even more
insulting to the Indians he placated because it makes so many of them look
like the fools he and Medoff made of themselves.                          

Author
Shakil Waiz Ahmed
     One person has said, "Disappointed to see number of notes from
fellow desis praising CITY OF JOY as an accurate depiction of life in
Calcutta, must see, moving, etc.  While we are always grateful for any
such movie since we browns make it on screen in west so infrequently,
not all of it is so uplifting.  CITY OF JOY strikes me as the worst of
its kind of orientalist, exoticising pap."
     I just saw the movie and I am inclined to agree.  To begin with,
there is the standard stereotype of a white American hero going to show
the helpless Indians what they need to do.  There is an underlying theme
about the movie that bothered me.  It gives off the image that wealthy
Indians are leeches by default who take advantage of the poor masses.
The poor, of course, are good at heart, but are waiting for the big
American hero to go and lead them to rebel against the evil wealthy
Indians to bring the poor out of their misery.
     Om Puri has to marry off his daughter and has been saving for years
for her dowry.  When a young man from a well-to-do family develops a
liking for her, Om Puri approaches the father of the man on the question
of marriage of their children.  The father objects because Om Puri is a
rickshaw-wallah, not on the grounds that this breaks social norms, but
because the dowry is not high enough.  Indeed, when Om Puri puts up the
missing half ounce of gold for the required dowry, all problems
disappear, and the marriage is approved.  While the scene does highlight
the problems associated with dowries, it gives off a completely
distorted picture of real-life scenarios.
     There are numerous such scenes in the movie.  Patrick Swayzwe
arrives in Calcutta to seek "enlightenment," but he has no plans -- he
just *arrives* as if that is all he thought was necessary.  Why a young
American doctor would randomly pick Calcutta when he so obviously shuns
the very environment in early scenes, is never quite explained.  How he
expected to find "enlightenment" and what he planned to do to seek it,
is conveniently also omitted.  Instead, we find him check into an
un-air-conditioned hotel and complain that there is no mini-bar.  If a
mini-bar is what he was looking for, one wonders why he did not check
into any one of the many high class hotels that Calcutta does have to
offer?  Would he check into an el-cheapo hotel in the US and expect to
find the same?  Could an educated American doctor possibly be so naive
as to ask a roadside snack-seller in Calcutta for a "hamburger?"  Now
while I'm sure that many would argue that this pokes fun at the
stereotypical ignorant American, I would argue that it is equally
damaging to the image of Calcutta.  For most of us on this newsgroup,
the former may be the interpretation.  But what does the average
American with only very limited exposure to India see?
     There are some beautiful and touching scenes in the movie.  But the
underlying traditional theme of white hero going to save the helpless
brown masses fight against the evil rich brown bloodsuckers is an
orientalist theme that is getting old.  It disturbed me and the friends
I went to see it with.

Author
Jaideep Mukherjee
     There is no gainsaying the fact that looking at a society from a 
distance can often provide new insights into its underlying dynamics.
However, when a disproportionate amount of attention is paid to the
observer-observed interface, all too often, the messenger becomes more
important than the message.
     This is what happens in CITY OF JOY almost right from the word
"go."  Employing a footage that seems suspiciously contrived (smelt like
herring to me) to produce shock in a Western audience, Roland Joffe 
proceeds to tell a story of the triumph of Western optimism and 
enterprise over a thousand years' worth of superstition and passivity in
a "cesspool of a country."
     A Texas doctor (Patrick Swayze) chooses to seek the meaning of life
in a foreign land, after realising he can't handle death.  Having
reached his destination, Calcutta, he quickly learns that salvation does
not lie in winning speed drinking contests with teenage prostitutes
(okay, so she was 20) but in confronting the evils of destitution and 
hopelessness that seem to be endemic in this "City of Joy."  With a
little help from a British nurse (Pauline Collins), he manages to rescue
assorted poor people (rickshaw pullers, lepers, etc.) from the clutches
of the local don (Shyamanand Jalan) and his crony, played by Art Malik.
(Clearly not an idea as ridiculous, as say, the big B singlehandedly
liberating Goa from Portugese occupation, but this is not a Hindi Movie,
right :-) ).  
     The histrionic abilities of Swayze and Collins, if they exist, 
were carefully concealed from this viewer, thanks to a decidedly
underwhelming script.  The underutilization of an extremely talented
cast was a pity though.  Shabana Azmi, Om Puri, Shyamanand Jalan,
Rudraprasad Sengupta, Anjan Datta, Pavan Malhotra et al have all acted
in better productions than this one.
     I did not find the basic premise of the film disagreeable simply
because it attempts to reinforce the all too familiar stereotype of
white folks delivering coloured people from their collective misery.  In
many Indian films, and even in real life, one encounters this idea in a
different form.  Only there the operating premise seems to be that doing
away with poverty, inequality and exploitation involves shoving superior
morals down the unwilling throats of the huddled masses.  
     This point of view fails to recognize that people's values are,
up to a large measure, determined by objective economic conditions.
Based on similar economic situations, people tend to polarize into
self-contained societal pockets within which values are roughly
constant.  In my book a film, which pretends to deal with marginalized
people as its subject, is a success only when it  recognizes the above
dynamic.  By this yardstick, I would rate Susman and Mandi (both Shyam
Benegal) as examples of successful movies made in this category.
     I don't know why, but as I was walking out of the hall after seeing
this film, I found myself thinking that renaming that street with the
American Consulate after Uncle Ho wasn't such a bad thing, after all.
And by the way, before you proceed to flame me just because I haven't
found anything positive to say about the Hollywood people in this
venture, one need not infer from what I have written here that I hate
everything that comes out of Hollywood.
