Title
Review for Basketball Diaries, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Raymond Johnston
Directed by Scott Kalvert
Based on the memoir by Jim Carroll
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Bruno Kirby, Lorraine Bracco, Mark Wahlberg
     The motion picture camera just loves some people.  Leonardo
DiCaprio is one such person.  Put him in a scene, any scene, and he
becomes the center of attention.  You have to go back to James Dean or
the young Robert DeNiro to find somebody that had such an easy rappore
with the big screen.  In his first top-billed role, Leonardo DiCaprio
has come to the forefront of young American actors.
     Mark Wahlberg, the artist formerly known as Marky Mark, proves
himself to be a good character actor.  He catches a gritty, streetwise
flavor that lends a sorely needed sense of authenticity to THE
BASKETBALL DIARIES.  Wahlberg might have found his niche is punky tough
guy roles.  No doubt, he will be artfully reprising this kind of
character for years to come.
     Juliette Lewis is a more versatile actor.  She risks falling into
typecasting by doing another version of the white trash character that
she has done in her last several films.  These performances, along with
fine work by Bruno Kirby and Ernie Hudson are a few of the reasons to
see THE BASKETBALL DIARIES.  Unfortunately, the reasons not to see the
film are a much longer and more convincing list.
     Jim Carroll's classic novel of coming of age in the 1960s is
transposed into the 1990s.  All of the flavor of Carroll's novel gets
lost among a series of anachronisms.  One character finds a beat-up
revolver, and this makes him a tough guy on the street.  Much more
powerful weapons have been common for years among ever younger
criminals.  The teenagers get high on furniture polish, when in the
1990s real drugs are readily available everywhere in New York.  Current
urban problems like crack and AIDS are not mentioned in the film.  A
major scene takes place in a subway bathroom, when subway bathrooms
have been shuttered for over a decade.  Even the whole sense of the
young white Catholic schoolboys going around New York in his school
uniform has vanished through waves of white flight to the suburbs.  If
the story needed to be updated, a better job needed to be done.  It
seems as if the film makers were simply too cheap to paint over the
graffiti and rent the old cars for the street scenes.  Relocating the
story from the middle class north of Manhattan to the seedy Lower East
Side also didn't add anything more to the story except a bunch of
cliches.
     Those complaints aside, some of which perhaps would only annoy
native New Yorkers, the film stumbles badly in its overall structure.
Jim Carroll's book is a series of loosely related incidents.  The film
makers change it into a linear anti-drug story that is not really
faithful to the books irreverent and wistful tone.  Beautifully funny
scenes of teenagers causing trouble become turgid episodes in REEFER
MADNESS like anti-heroin cautionary tale.  A judgmental Reagan era
just-say-no feeling has been injected into the aimless and amoral
goings on of Carroll's life.  Anybody that saw the German film
CRISTIANE F. has seen this all before.
     Director Scott Kalvert's experience as a rock video director is
evident in a few disjointed scenes.  Narrative elements become filler
between psychedelic montages set to alternative rock music.  A scene of
a burning basketball hoop is a great image, but it seems forced into
the story just to create a good rock video effect.  Some of the music
comes from Jim Carroll's own band.  These images will probably wind up
in rock videos that will be better than the film.  The sound track album
is by far better than the film too.
    A better attempt at adapting an unadaptable novel about street
life in New York was done with LAST EXIT TO BROOKLYN featuring
Jennifer Jason Leigh.  Martin Scorcese's MEAN STREETS also creates a
much more coherent and authentic urban vision, using much of the same
cut-to-the-beat technique.  For an anti-drug film that manages to be
good cinema, Otto Preminger's THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN ARM is still tops
in the genre.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
     Adapting Jim Carroll's unappetizing memoir of a Catholic-school
boyhood gone very wrong was probably not a good idea; the book didn't
have very much to say in the first place except how bad it was to be
young and depressed and selling one's body for heroin. (Hubert Selby
Jr. and William Kennedy have explored the same kind of territory in
more penetrating detail, but this isn't a book review, it's a movie
review.)
     And so we come to the movie, which is, if anything, even less
insightful.  It's a foul-tasting, unconvincing story that depends about
half on cliche' Hollywood shorthand and half on puerile teen-age
angst.  What's sad is that in the middle of the movie's mess are some
very good performances.  Leonardo DiCaprio, as Carroll himself, does a
fine job with some truly terrible material, and it's not his fault that
in the end he comes out looking somewhat miscast, I guess.
     The movie wastes no time in showing us how, right from the start,
his options are limited and ugly.  Jim plays on the basketball team of
St. Vitus' high school in New York, a place painted in such
unappetizing detail that we are instantly certain the movie is stacking
the deck.  One particular element--the character of a priest--is
depicted so viciously that I wondered if we'll ever see a sympathetic
man of the cloth in a movie ever again.  Just wondering.
     Things start to sour (like they weren't already).  Jim starts
experimenting with homosexuality and drugs, and pretty soon his mother
(Lorraine Bracco, again very good despite the fact she's given no
character of any substance to portray) throws him out.  This is the
only thing in the movie that she does that shows she even exists.  The
movie only gets uglier and somehow also less interesting from there, as
Jim's downward slide gets the kind of sleazy treatment that crummy
Hollywood cops-and-vice movies typically only indulged in.  There are
also a whole plethora of sullen anti-establishment cliches, like the
scene where he saves a dying friend by liberating him from the hospital
(which got bad laughs from the audience I watched it with).
     The final stretch of the movie is also relentlessly predictable,
showing how Carroll is redeemed (if that's the word for it) with undue
haste, and then wastes no time in showing us how his art has benefited
because of said suffering.  On the basis of what we're offered, I was
hoping he'd pick up basketball again.
     There is a little-seen movie called CHRISTIANE F., made in
Germany, about a young girl who becomes hooked on heroin at the age of
fifteen and ultimately turns tricks to purchase it.  That movie had
genuine horror and a real sense of what it must be like to sell off
one's body and soul for drugs.  This movie doesn't have a clue.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Although historical examples and even some current events
provide plenty of examples in which violent acts are
inspired by various things, including ancient religious
texts, in 1990s Hollywood movies and other forms of popular
culture seemed to be the sole source of the violence in
American society. At least this was the impression given by
media crusade, inspired by the series of school shootings in
late 1990s America, for which the young perpetrators had
allegedly found inspiration in violent films from Hollywood.
Among various titles the one is particularly singled because
of the scene that actually featured one of such shootings -
THE BASKETBALL DIARIES, 1995 teen angst drama directed by
Scott Kalvert.
The shooting is nothing but the vision in the mind of the
film's protagonist Jimmy (played by Leonardo di Caprio),
16-year old boy who lives in Manhattan with his mother
(played by Lorraine Bracco). Jimmy is star of St. Vitus,
seemingly unbeatable high school basketball team, and
everyone expects that he would continue his stardom in NBA.
However, Jimmy, being rebellious teenager, has increasing
problems adapting to the repressive and hypocritical
atmosphere of Catholic high school, as well as dealing with
his own broken home and best friend Bobby (played by Michael
Imperioli) dying from leukemia. In order to escape from it
all Jimmy finds refuge in casual sex and drug use. The
latter proves to be his undoing - his basketball skills
quickly vanish, he leaves school and home and is soon forced
to leave on the street where he commits various crimes and
sells his body in order to pay for his heroin habit.
Based on the autobiographical novel by former heroin addict,
rocker and poet Jim Carroll, THE BASKETBALL DIARIES provide
uniquely naturalistic and explicit portrayal of the
destructive capabilities of heroin addiction. Leonardo di
Caprio, in its uncompromising and convincing portrayal of
promising teenager who ends up like a basket case would
forever silence all those who see him as nothing more than a
pretty boy. His strong performance is matched by equally
impressive supporting roles. Lorraine Bracco excels in the
role of Jim's mother, especially in one particularly moving
scene that feature final split-up of the family, while James
Kirby stands out with the extremely effective portrayal of
creepy basketball coach. Juliette Lewis is also very
convincing in the role of street junkie, and that role
becomes even more interesting when we know that the actress
had some real-life drug problems after the production of
this film.
THE BASKETBALL DIARIES had misfortune of being released in
the same year as two otherfilms that dealt with similar
subjects - Danny Boyle's TRAINSPOTTING and Larry Clark's
KIDS. While the former dealt with the dark world of heroin
addiction with much more details and style than THE
BASKETBALL DIARIES, the latter was much more convincing in
the depiction of modern teenager's alienation from society.
This is actually major problem of the film - script by Bryan
Goluboff (which set the plot in modern day instead of late
1960s like the novel) switches direction in the middle;
until that moment it is an honest and intriguing portrayal
of young man and his relationship with society; afterwards
it turns into sometimes oversimplistic anti-drug film.
Director Scott Kalvert also tends to show his videoclip
author's root too much. The happy ending also seems a little
bit cliched, although it owes more to real life than to the
filmmakers' lack of imagination. However, despite not being
among the best film that deal with this grim and disturbing
subjects, THE BASKETBALL DIARIES is nevertheless a
remarkable film that just had misfortune of getting wrong
reputation.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Steve Basile
[Note: This film premiered at the South By Southwest Film Festival, Austin 
Texas, on Monday, 13 March, 1995.  It opens in wide release this Friday,
21 April.  Some minor SPOILERS follow.]
     "You just got to see that junk is just another nine-to-five gig in
the end, only the hours are a bit more inclined toward shadows...."
     With these words, Jim Carroll wraps up a reading from his diaries,
the same diaries for which this new film, starring Leonardo DiCaprio is
named.  With these words we are led to believe he is, for the time
being anyway, redeemed, saved from the torments of addiction, and
worse.
     The movie may be a bit too neatly tied-up at times, but its story
is compelling, engaging and emotionally draining.  Ultimately, we enjoy
the same sort of thrill watching this film as we might get from reading
anyone's secret diary, more so as a result of this diarist's fluid
prose and stark, street-smart poetic insight.
     DiCaprio delivers a wonderful performance as Jim Carroll,
"Catholic Boy" gone bad, taking us on a poet's journey through a boy's
life: high-school round ball, tentative sexual encounters, hanging out
with the "wrong friends," and dabbling with a progression of drugs,
crime, death and eventual redemption.
     As in past roles, (What's Eating Gilbert Grape, This Boy's Life)
DiCaprio immerses himself to the point of disappearance in his role,
seemingly *becoming* Carroll, to the point that the real Jim Carroll
(who appears in a ghostly, skeletal cameo) appears a caricature of
himself.
     We want to *like* Jim, who seems to have so much going for him in
the early stages of the film.  He has a good, if overly disciplined
education, athletic ability, boyish good looks and friends who seem to
care.  We are worried when he begins to experiment with Carbona, and
glue, then with progressively harder drugs, and feel ourselves sinking
with him as his downfall progresses.
     Mark ("Don't Call Me Marky-Mark") Wahlberg vindicates himself
admirably, in an effective and unassuming portrayal of Carroll's friend
Mickey, showing little of the punk/rap bravado that early naysayers
were certain would mar his performance.  Lorraine Bracco is convincing
and inspires real sympathy as Carroll's mother, torn between her desire
to provide for her son and her worst fears that he is slipping away.
     But this is DiCaprio's film, and his remarkable transformation
into a dark and scheming junkie out for the next high is profound and
staggering.  Scenes with Ernie Hudson, his older, wiser and
street-toughened basketball rival, as Carroll attempts to ride out "the
cure" cold turkey are gruesome to watch, and filmed in quick snippets
of freeze-framed emotion, betraying director Kalvert's music video
past.  Elsewhere, his emotional reaction to the death of his best
friend is moving and real, and the twisted jubilance that follows
strangely jarring, yet coherent.
     The film is far from perfect, with musical set pieces a bit
jarring at times, especially when the real Jim Carroll's pop tunes from
the early 80's are introduced.  Some time settings are off (NY's Times
Square is only now undergoing the renovations seen in the film; at the
time in which the book was set it was as seedy and decaying as ever).
For some, the too-neat ending might smack of "deus ex machina" in its
too-tidy wrap-up of a decidedly untidy life.
     But these are small nits to pick.  Overall, this film presents a
richly woven swatch of a fabric many of us never feel, of life on the
streets seen through the eyes of one who can really tell us about it,
make us feel it, make us hurt. Visually slick, morally ambiguous,
possessed of a truly engaging tour guide, The Basketball Diaries is a
cinematic trip to a place most of us rarely visit, but will benefit
from having seen.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 4/21/95 
Running Length: 1:42 
MPAA Classification: R (Drug use, profanity, sexual themes, violence) 
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Mark Wahlberg, James Madio, Patrick McGaw, 
          Lorraine Bracco, Ernie Hudson, Bruno Kirby, Juliette Lewis 
Director: Scott Kalvert 
Producers: Liz Heller and John Bard Manulis 
Screenplay: Bryan Goluboff based on the novel by Jim Carroll 
Cinematography: David Phillips 
Music: Graeme Revell 
Released by New Line Cinema 
     The best anti-drug movies are the ones that eschew sermons.  
Nothing turns off an audience faster than a film that becomes pedantic.  
However, when a production gets the message across through a story that 
lacks even a trace of artifice, its effectiveness is indisputable.  Such 
is the case with THE BASKETBALL DIARIES, film maker Scott Kalvert's 
updating of Jim Caroll's autobiographical novel.  The tale related here 
isn't all that original, but the honest presentation lends impact to a 
wrenching scenario. 
     Jimmy Carroll (Leonardo DiCaprio) is a star basketball player on 
his New York City Catholic school team.  Fellow roundballers Mickey 
(Mark Wahlberg) and Neutron (Patrick McGaw) and unofficial cheerleader 
Pedro (James Madio) are Jimmy's closest friends, and whenever trouble 
stalks one, it invariably affects them all.  So, when the drug cycle 
starts, it quickly spreads to each of the four corners of the 
friendship.  What begins as casual use first becomes a weekend habit, 
then an everyday obsession.  Grades plummet, on-court performance 
becomes unreliable, and crime looms as the only means to pay for a 
seemingly-endless supply of uppers, downers, cocaine, and heroin. 
     There have been quite a few addiction movies, but most are surface 
melodramas, concerned with busting the bad guys or facilitating a 
Hollywood-style transformation from user to productive member of 
society.  Films like THE BASKETBALL DIARIES, which paint a stark, ugly 
portrait of drug abuse, are rare.  This is not the type of picture 
likely to draw big at the box office.  Much of what's shown is simply 
too raw for audiences out for a couple hours' entertainment. 
     In THIS BOY'S LIFE, Leonardo DiCaprio played a young man coming of 
age in the Pacific Northwest.  Here, though his character undergoes a 
far different change, the actor's performance is equally on-target.  
Because it demands so much range, the role of Jimmy Carroll requires 
more effort, but DiCaprio doesn't miss a beat. 
     The decay of the individual always makes for powerful drama.  Such 
was the case with Cyril Collard's SAVAGE NIGHTS, and it is no less true 
here.  The teen years -- an age of rebellion and uncertainty in the best 
of circumstances -- can be devastating when an individual loses control.  
THE BASKETBALL DIARIES captures this with brutal effectiveness.  Facile 
escapes are rejected, and the resolution is acceptable because we can 
believe it.  In fact, that's the reason this film works as well as it 
does:  credibility.  You won't need many fingers to count the times when 
scenes ring false.  By another name, call this HOOP NIGHTMARES.   
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
John Walker
My form of "rating": One test is how many times a film comes up in my mind
     afterward.  THE BASKETBALL DIARIES came up *lots* of times.  Arguably
     too many for comfort.
In brief: If you can take a film that tells a story and tells it well, I
     think you'll take BASKETBALL DIARIES.  I don't know whether you'll
     "like" it, but it will be worth the trip.
     But if you want explanations, if you want to know *why* somebody does
     something, BASKETBALL DIARIES will be much more problematical.
     Moreover, if you're tempted to lay explanations on facts that don't
     provide them, BASKETBALL DIARIES may provide you with too many
     temptations.  (See the "Comments requiring spoilers," at the end.)
     The story is simple: Here's a kid in parochial high school--Jim
Carroll (Leonardo DiCaprio) he's bright, non-stop wise-ass, not too
concerned about whether his recreational activities may be against the law.
He writes a diary all the time, he plays basketball, he drinks.  His best
friends don't write, but they do the rest.  The drinking will be augmented
by inhaling, the inhaling by injection, and all three by various other
forms of ingestion scattered here and there.
     Scratch school.  To pay the bills, the recreational activities will
turn to serious theft and body rental.
     Check out your high-school yearbooks.  You should be able to find at
least a couple of kids who took the same trips as Jim Carroll.  It's just
they didn't write, or else they didn't save their scribbled notes to write
a book like THE BASKETBALL DIARIES.
     Watching BASKETBALL DIARIES, I had the feeling of watching guys I'd
known--not well, not friends necessarily.  I might not have even trusted
them very much, but they were part of my world nonetheless.  What happened
to them?
     Maybe that's why the earlier part of BASKETBALL DIARIES had a
stronger, very unpleasant affect on me.  Jim is still in school, things are
still apparently all right.  His mother (Lorraine Bracco) nags a little,
but that's a mother's job.  Then she mentions he'll need a summer job --
for the "responsibility".  If he can't find anything else, he'll have to
work at the hotel where she works.
     Somehow that was acutely depressing.  Life is a long, dingy,
high-school corridor--leading absolutely nowhere except a nowhere job.
Charming.  Have another beer.
     When I was Jim's age, I kept my eyes resolutely averted from the end
of the corridor.  Besides, I knew, if no one else did, that the Navy would
come to the rescue.  Nonetheless, thinking about the future was not
advisable.  But without a faith that you could escape, and being too
cocksure to imagine taking one of those nowhere jobs, what then?
     When Jim finally goes too far, somehow BASKETBALL DIARIES became more
reassuring to me.  OK, he's a junkie.  He gets out of it, or he doesn't.
He lives, or he dies.  In a weird way, he's already escaped.  Besides,
being a junkie or a drunk is something other people do.  They're my
friends, but they're not me.
     But being in high school with nowhere to go--*that* is reality.
That's the razor's edge where *maybe* I could have gone the way Jim Carroll
and his friends went.
     One thing may be off-putting or just incomprehensible for some people.
     The settings are all right now--new cars, contemporary signs.
     But Jim and his mother live in a slum building.  Poor Irish in lower
Manhattan today?  The kid going to parochial school?  Even if it's true, it
doesn't fit our stereotypes.  Also, there is nothing of a recreational drug
scene.  He goes from beer to sniffing cleaning fluid to junk.  Well, it's
not that simple, but we see no clubs, no glamour scene.
     I wondered whether it had really been in the 50s.  Actually, it was
the 60s.  (I took a look at the book after finishing most of this review.)
The glamour scene isn't happening yet; to some lights, Jim was a shade
ahead of his time.  And if $40 sounds trifling, remember that this was when
starting wage was a dollar an hour.
     Some reviewers have disliked this ambiguity, the implicit
anachronisms.
     The reason for the ambiguity is apparently a mixture of economics and
a sort of truthfulness.  The film was reportedly done for less than $4
million.  To recreate the mid-60s in New York locations would, I take for
granted, have added megabucks to the total.  To change the story to make
it fit the 90s scene could have produced a perfectly good film, but it
would have had to be a different world from the one in Jim Carroll's book.
     Strangely, though, I sort of liked not being sure when it was.
There's an odd disjunction that fits well with going over the edge.  How
much of time and place do you retain when you're wrecked all the time?  A
90s world, bargain-basement, devoid of much of the visible drug scene is an
oddly science-fiction universe that seems to match its subject.
     If the folks who made BASKETBALL DIARIES did not waste money on
backdrops, they did not scrimp on acting talent.  Leonardo DiCaprio is
simply great, and the rest of the cast is admirable.
     DiCaprio makes makes Jim both appealing and real.  He goes from kid
racing along the edge, defiant, cocksure, all energy, to junkie trying hard
not to crash too hard, not really in the same world as the rest of us,
running on a very frayed tether.
     In playing Jim's best friend Mickey, Mark Wahlberg (yes, Marky Mark)
gives us a very nice street tough, not much morals, not much thought, but
goofy and a lot of fun if he's on your side.
     Patrick McGaw as Neutron looks more "conventionally" intelligent; he
seems to have his eye on the main chance; he seems more clinical and
detached and more under control than either Jim or Mickey could ever be.
     Those three are basketball players, jocks, good looking, aggressive.
Push comes to shove, James Madio as Pedro is probably a lot more like what
most of us would be if we had to survive on the streets: quieter, weaker,
making sure to stay in the company of the big guys.
     Potentially, all four guys could be stock characters.  But there's a
reason why characters become stock: We know people like them.  Unless you
went to a *very* selective high school, all four will be familiar.  In some
respects, I would want to be around them.  They're fun.  In other respects,
no way.  Jim has a screw slightly loose; Mickey kicks people when they're
down; Pedro is a sneak.  They all take larceny for granted.  I probably
couldn't bring myself to dislike them--unless I or someone close to me
got in their way.  But *trust* them?  Fat chance.
     As Jim's mother, Lorraine Bracco arguably has the toughest role.
She's not on screen very much.  She's just there, sort of.  After a while,
she's knows something's badly wrong, but knows she doesn't how to deal with
it.
     Ernie Hudson as Reggie, a black friend of Jim's who plays basketball
with him, is just good sense and good humor--but he can see what's going
on because he used to do drugs, himself.
     Bruno Kirby as Jim's coach, Swifty, is faintly but instantly
dislikable.  He's vague, sort of, continually hinting of meaning well but
being, let's say, unreliable.
     Altogether, a weird sense of reality in a drug-soaked film.  And even
Jim Carroll himself appears in an surreal cameo.
     Well, what are we to make of this?  I'm told BASKETBALL DIARIES is
good as an anti-drug film.  Well, it certainly gives us a good picture of
what one guy and his friends will do for their next fix.  But will that
persuade some kid who's dragged to it to see what happens to druggies?  I
can hear the reply: "I mean, hey, it's not for everybody.  Most people
can't handle it.  But me, I got it under control."
     I've also heard that the male prostitution thing is far from as clear
as it might be.  Jim is thoroughly heterosexual, what's the *effect* on him
beyond initial disgust?
     But I think all these things are beside the point.  To dwell on the
presumed effect, or to dwell on one particular aspect of the story is to
miss that it's a story about one kid and what happened to him.  The point
is not whether others will learn from it.
     The point is not about an aspect or a "problem" to be examined.  It's
about a *person*, a particular individual.
     The point is not that we should understand him or his problem.  The
point is that we should get to know him a bit.
     And there, of course, we can say that the book has been considerably
tidied up into a more straightforward story.  It's also been sanitized
somewhat.  Jim's not quite the amoral creep he can be in the book.  He was
also younger in real life; the book takes three years, and closes with him
at 16 in 1966.
     But how much of the book is true?  Reading it, my instinctive
suspicions arise.  The drugs are true; the larceny is true; the great sex
is highly suspect.  We've got a 13-to-16-year-old writing this stuff, after
all; teenagers are apt to embellish certain things, shall we say.
     Yet we are all big boys and girls now, and we might as well recognize
that it could all be true.  (Or none, for that matter.)  In any event,
we've got a character here.  A person.  Even if purely fictional, he still
*could* be someone we knew, someone we know.
     I will cheerfully admit I have a great deal of ambiguity about a
character like Jim Carroll, and about his friends.  I don't think
BASKETBALL DIARIES taught me anything about any of them, not about their
defects or strengths, not about what they've gone through.  I obtained no
new "data" from BASKETBALL DIARIES.  But the film brought him and them
alive again in my life.  I got to know them a bit better, or to renew the
acquaintance anyway.
     In brief, Jim gets clean, and the film closes with him giving a
reading/performance at a club of some sort--continuing the text from THE
BASKETBALL DIARIES that he's been saying from time to time over the film.
     Does that give some profound meaning to BASKETBALL DIARIES that it
wouldn't have had otherwise?  As I noted in "In brief": Are you tempted to
lay on explanations when the facts don't provide one?
     Well, reviewers aren't just tempted, they're driven.  And so I read a
number of folks who saw BASKETBALL DIARIES as a case of the old
Art-and-drugs thing.  Presumably, a) Jim Carroll's Art immunized him from
the worst effects of drugs; or b) the drugs added something to his Art.
     Without his Art, the drugs would have destroyed him.  Without his
drugs, his Art would not have been so great.  Choose one.  Say it
Meaningfully.
     Yes, this is a cute, 19th-century debate that has mesmerized whole
generations of artists, poets, drunks, and druggies.  Yes, some major
figures in the arts have been screwed up in particular ways that make one
position plausible or the other.
     The minimum that need be said is that it doesn't have much to do with
BASKETBALL DIARIES.  If you already take a position on the Art/Drugs issue,
you can see Jim's story as supporting you.  And there may be something to
the idea that *something* in an addict's personality--some passion or
drive--may provide the hidden resource than helps getting off the
chemical of choice.  But BASKETBALL DIARIES doesn't tell us that Jim's Art
led through the dark night and out into the light.  It certainly doesn't
give us any reason to think that his writing was somehow elevated because
of drugs.  (Although he is clearly the type that would write about
*anything* that presented itself, and life-and-death experiences make good
topics for writing about.)
     Perhaps Carroll has written something somewhere that gives rise to the
Art-and-drugs stuff.  But it doesn't show up in BASKETBALL DIARIES.
     Arguably, Jim Carroll's story would have been much the same if his
great passion had been rock or auto mechanics or computers or running or --
more to the point--basketball.
     These are, after all, THE *BASKETBALL* DIARIES.

Author
Brian Koller
"The Basketball Diaries" is a lurid and uncompromising study
of how drug addiction can destroy lives.  The film has been
ignored or underrated because many people would find it
unwatchable.  The protaganist's decline into the lowest of
society could hardly be made more graphic.
Leonardo DiCaprio stars as Jim Carroll, a Catholic high school 
student and basketball star.  He is also a would-be poet, 
scribbling essays in a journal that he jealously guards.  Jim's 
risk-taking, anti-social behaviour and drug abuse soon leads to 
the destruction of his life.  Quitting school and leaving home, 
he turns to hard-core criminal acts to get money for his next fix.
He has little understanding of his situation, no desire to 
overcome his habits, and the only question is will he end up 
in prison or in a morgue.
If you have the stomach for this sort of movie, you will be
rewarded.  There are many outstanding scenes, such as Jim
attempting to cheer up friend and leukemia patient Bobby,
and Jim trying to play basketball while on downers.
There is a Catholic priest in "The Basketball Diaries" who
serves as a harsh father figure for Jim.  Never smiling, he
seems to know what trouble Jim is getting into and is
determined to punish him for it.  Carroll later has a 
drug-induced fantasy where he stalks and shoots the
priest with an enormous rifle.  He also has a confession
scene with the priest where he learns that sins whether 
great or small carry the same number of "Hail Marys."
A great movie that is without a general audience, one can be
grateful for cable television so that it can be shown
uncensored and without compromise.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Christopher Null
     THE BASKETBALL DIARIES is a gritty new film chronicling the
adolescent years of poet/writer/musician Jim Carroll (played by Leonardo
DiCaprio).  Carroll was a star Catholic high school basketball player,
presumably headed for the NBA.  Unfortunately, his plans didn't quite work
out when young Jim fell into the cruel world of life on the street and
heavy drug abuse.  He kept a vivid journal of his life and times, hence
the title.
     This is not your typical coming-of-age story.  From the beginning,
the antics of Carroll and his exceptionally rude punk friends don't help
raise a lot of sympathy for their cause.  When the boys (including a
surprising performance by "Marky" Mark Wahlberg) get into trouble, mugging
elderly women and robbing New York shops, in order to raise money for
their drug habits, the temptation is to dismiss them as common hoodlums. 
But the powerfully realistic performance by DiCaprio, full of all the pain
and suffering that comes along with heroin addiction and withdrawal, makes
this film almost required viewing for any young person not exposed to the
drug culture.
     Carroll's early life reads like a textbook of what not to do.  The
film really gets under your skin and never pulls a punch, with Carroll
getting badly beaten, begging for drug money, haggling over the price of
dope, and violently shaking from D.T.'s.  The movie weaves between reality
and the drug-infused, nightmarish dreams of Carroll quite well, and
inevitably, pity for the boy win out over disgust for his habit.
     The filmmakers wants you to recognize that none of this is Carroll's
fault, and the vast majority of the movie is composed of various scenes of
the effects of the drugs:  over and over again.  The repetition, while
effective, gets a little tedious, having the impression more of a music
video rather than a movie.  Also, the preachiness of the film's theme
(Drugs are bad.) isn't exactly subtle, and the unavoidable happy ending
gives THE BASKETBALL DIARIES the flavor of a Public Service Announcement.
     Still, it's worthwhile.  This film won't encourage you to start that
heroin habit any time soon.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Mark Wahlberg, James Madio, Bruno Kirby,
           Lorraine Bracco, Ernie Hudson, Patrick McGaw.
Screenplay:  Bryan Goluboff.
Director:  Scott Kalvert.
     All feature film directors who cut their teeth on music videos,
please raise your hands.  Thank you for identifying yourselves; now
would you all please go away.  Your influence has to rank as one of
the most annoying trends in filmmaking in the last decade, and it
shows no sign of abating any time soon.  It isn't just the strobe
light quality of your twenty-cuts-per-minute editing, or the numbing
over-use of popular music artists on the soundtracks which makes me
suspicious of any film advertised "featuring the music of..."  No,
it is a kind of cynicism you have perfected, banking on the idea
that no one will care about the lack of a story if you include
enough bells and whistles.  Welcome to the club, Scott Kalvert.
Your adaptation of THE BASKETBALL DIARIES is loud and
one-dimensional, serving only as the vehicle for a performance by
Leonardo DiCaprio that is better in pieces than it is as a whole.
     DiCaprio stars as Jim Carroll, the New York poet/songwriter/
performer on whose autobiographical writings the film is based.  As
the film opens, Jim is a budding high school basketball star given
to petty thievery and getting drunk with buddies Mickey (Mark
Wahlberg), Pedro (James Madio) and Neutron (Patrick McGaw).  One
night, Jim graduates from inhalants to cocaine, and shortly
thereafter to heroin.  Jim's addiction to the drug starts him on a
downhill spiral, as he is kicked off the basketball team by his
coach (Bruno Kirby), kicked out of his home by his mother (Lorraine
Bracco), and drops out of school.  Along with Mickey and Pedro, Jim
becomes a victim of the street, living from fix to fix and sinking
lower and lower.
     THE BASKETBALL DIARIES has been bouncing around as a project
for years, but the sticking point has always been that Jim Carroll
as a character was too unsympathetic and too much a loner.
Screenwriter Bryan Goluboff created the three characters who act as
Carroll's posse, resulting in a Jim Carroll who is just as
unsympathetic, but now with equally unsympathetic friends.  As a
film, THE BASKETBALL DIARIES may be intended primarily as a
cautionary tale, a 100 minute long "Just Say No" public service
announcement, but as drama it is monumentally ineffective because it
is impossible to care much about anyone in the movie.  Jim is sort
of a jerk even before he becomes a junkie, but I suppose that his
pseudo-sensitive poetry and his devotion to his terminally ill
friend are intended to balance that out.  Perhaps we are expected to
see Jim as one of those "good kids who falls in with the wrong
crowd" that every parent believes his or her troubled child to be; I
saw him simply as part of the bad crowd.
     Without a character who changes in any appreciable way, THE
BASKETBALL DIARIES rapidly degenerates into a collection of crimes
committed by Jim and his strung-out cohorts, all choreographed to an
oppressively loud soundtrack.  Director Scott Kalvert doesn't have
many scenes with intrinsic dramatic impact with which to work, so he
substitutes silly slow-motion photography, self-consciously funky
camera angles and choppy editing.  On only one occasion, when a
steady pan around a room where Jim is trying to detox makes it
appear that the walls are closing in, are any of the gimmicks
effective.  Mostly, they just draw attention to how hollow the story
is.
     They also don't allow Leonardo DiCaprio's performance to be as
strong as it could have been.  For every impressive moment, like his
desperate attempt to get his mother to give him money, there is a
scene where Kalvert pulls too much of the focus to his own camera
theatrics.  DiCaprio is most effective when he is playing off other
actors, particularly a fine sequence featuring Ernie Hudson as an
ex-junkie who tries to help Jim straighten out, but Kalvert won't
let character interaction define this story.  He wants to turn
DiCaprio into a rock star, shooting him in dramatic fashion but
denying him the opportunity to do much acting.  At isolate moments,
THE BASKETBALL DIARIES is a fine showcase for DiCaprio's talents.
Far more frequently, it looks like Kalvert is trying to imagine what
a long form Velvet Underground video might have looked like.
