Title
Review for Urban Legends: Final Cut (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: John Ottman
WRITTEN BY: Paul Harris Boardman and Paul Harris Boardman
CAST: Jennifer Morrison, Matthew Davis, Hart Bochner, Loretta Devine
MPAA: Rated R for violence/gore, language and some sexuality
"Have you ever heard the one about a movie so bad that it made a guy run out of the theatre screaming?" 
Obviously the producers at Columbia Tristar did not think that we suffered enough from the first installment, and so to finish us utterly, they have now released "Urban Legends: Final Cut". 
This is another "Scream"-like feature, consisting merely from the recycled materials of rip-offs from the most pointless movies of all time. Amy (Jennifer Morrison) is a film student who is attending a film school filled with uninspired film students who do not have a clue about what to do. But just as she reaches the halfway mark of her final semester at prestigious University's film program -- where each year's best thesis production takes the coveted Hitchcock Prize, a virtual one-way ticket to Hollywood success -- she has a chance encounter with campus security guard Reese (Loretta Devine), whose tale of a series of murders based on urban legends at another university inspires Amy to try her hand at a fictional thriller organized along similar lines. Soon enough, fake -- and real -- blood starts to flow, and Amy is being chased around by scary killer, while her cast and crew get slain, one by one. Is the culprit the original Urban Legends murderer, just some random psycho,!
 a member of the faculty, one of her competitors for the Hitchcock, or is there something even more stupid going on? 
This is another one of those tiring, pointless teen slasher flicks: neither scary, funny, or interesting. It simply lacks the ability and the story to entertain. The body counts and screams continue to grow, as the weak level of intelligence sinks rapidly. In fact watching films like that after having watched "Scary Movie" is impossible keeping a serious face. Several times I tried to prevent myself from laughing, without succeeding. And then I realized that practically the whole theatre was laughing. 
It's the same thing that has been told and told and told over and over again as if it was the revelation of the century. How many times must we tolerate the same clichés that have haunted the slasher genre since its birth? It has been so many films about masked killers that most of us have developed an allergy for them. They are the most stupid, meaningless, predictable and soulless films in existence. However, director John Ottman manages to make "Urban Legends: Final Cut" into one of the worst achievements of this godforsaken genre. What was done with a sense of redemption for past failures and irony in "Scream", Ottman takes seriously. For that reason alone, it is worth a look, just to realize how bad a movie can be. It's tough to find comparisons for such an achievement, and we have to dig in ancient history to find a movie that would match its intellect. Even movies like "Lost in Space" and "Mission to Mars" seem spectacular in its shadow. We have not seen such waste of t!
ime and resources  since "Showgirls" (1995).
No matter how hard I tried to find positive elements in this so called production, I came up with nothing, except the way the killer was dressed. Here I feel that I have to compliment the costume designers Trysha Bakker and Marie-Sylvie Deveu, that have wisely replaced the well known Scream-mask with a very elegant fencing mask. Jennifer Morrison ("Stir of Echoes") is all right, and the other actors' best achievement is keeping a straight face when pronouncing the words from the script.
In fact the only thing that is terrifying about this film (with the exception of its screenplay) is its portray of film schools. If these graduates will be the directors of the future, then Hollywood's golden days are over. Rumors are already spreading through the internet that Columbia Tristar is already developing a third installment. Let's just hope and pray that it's just an urban legend. 

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/e70007c21d46af3d8825696100046fb9?OpenDocument
Words I thought I'd never write: the sequel to Urban Legend lacks the
grace, wit, and power of the original.
Put the gun to my head, pull the trigger, and put me out of my misery. 
Better yet, put the horror genre out of its misery.  When you've
finished watching Urban Legends: Final Cut, you'll share my same grim
point of view thanks to the horrible acting, terrible script, and
ridiculous directing which has become all too common today.
Urban Legends: Final Cut is a smorgasbord of stolen movie ideas (mainly
from The Blair Witch Project and Scream): Fabulous people with perfect
teeth and skin, one creepy film school, and a dog eating a freshly
removed kidney from one of the movie's hapless victims.  Urban Legends
delivers a story about a bunch of film students working on their thesis
films to win the coveted "Hitchcock Award" which guarantees the winner a
director deal in Hollywood.
One female filmmaker (Jennifer Morrison, the freaky dead girl from Stir
of Echoes) writes a fiction script based on a serial killer who kills
his victims according to "urban legend" tales.  Suddenly, her entire
crew starts getting bumped off with urban-legendary homicides, but the
bodies are always missing and she is often the only witness to the
killings.  The killer wears a fencing mask and a long black overcoat,
looking like a scorned Olympian out to avenge his defeat in Sydney.  Why
this is scary is never explained.
Of course, the golden rule of sequels is that there must be least one
recurring character for continuity's sake.  Urban Legends has one minor,
recurring character from the original who we never cared about anyway
(the security guard, of all people).  The other central problem is that
this character has already seen the urban legend killings once before,
but she's utterly clueless about what's going on around her.  Call it
suspension of disbelief.
This film is also a prime example of how horror films are now completely
dead in the water.  The last decent horror film was The Blair Witch
Project, and that seemed more like a snuff film than fiction.  The
stalking killer with crazy motivation has become a tired cliché, as
everyone seems to have forgotten: Real horror is not about what is seen
but about what is unknown.
Director: John Ottman
Writers: Paul Harris Boardman, Scott Derrickson
Producers: Gina Matthews, Neal Moritz
Starring: Jennifer Morrison, Matthew Davis, Joey Lawrence, Anson Mount,
Hart Bochner
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/urbanlegends/index.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Ottman.
Cast: Jennifer Morrison, Matthew Davis, Loretta Devine, Hart Bochner, Joseph 
Lawrence, Eva Mendez, Jessica Cauffiel, Anthony Anderson, Michael Bacall, 
Anson Mount, Marco Hofschneider, Chas Lawther.
2000 - 98 minutes
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 23, 2000.
1998's slasher thriller "Urban Legend" may have been disregarded by a lot of 
reviewers for following the same formula as 1996's groundbreaking "Scream," 
but it was, to me, the most stylishly made and cleverly written of all its 
so-called "clones." The idea of a killer murdering people based on urban 
legends--folk tales that have been passed down as true stories even though 
they never actually happened--was a novel one, and director Jamie Blanks 
succeeded in creating both heightened tension and a visceral mood. "Urban 
Legend" ultimately went on to gross $38-million, considerably more than its 
limited budget, and if there's one thing you should know about the horror 
genre, it's that any movie that makes money gets a sequel within the next two 
or three years. In the case of "Urban Legend," it took exactly two years--to 
the weekend.
"Urban Legends: Final Cut," the directorial debut of editor/music composer 
John Ottman (1995's "The Usual Suspects"), is predictably inferior to its 
predecessor, as almost all sequels are, but it prospers by going in an 
entirely new direction from the original and nailing out more than its fair 
share of fresh ideas. The movie is entertaining and atmospheric, and its blur 
between fantasy and reality is ingeniously executed, if similar in nature to 
2000's "Scream 3."
The movie is set at New England-based Alpine University, a prestigious film 
school that gives away the Hitchcock Award every year for the most 
outstanding student film, almost guaranteeing a shot at the big time in 
Hollywood. Amy Mayfield (Jennifer Morrison) is one of the determined 
hopefuls, a primarily documentary filmmaker who, after getting a ride to the 
library on a blustery, snowy evening from the school's security guard Reese 
(Loretta Devine), gets the inventive idea of making a horror movie about a 
killer whose murders are, indeed, based on urban legends. Reese insists that 
the ghastly murders that occurred at nearby Pendleton U several years before 
are true, but that, nonetheless, it would make a good movie.
As Amy's film progresses, she gradually grows suspicious when her classmates 
begin disappearing, not the least of when she witnesses an apparent snuff 
film of one of them being brutally murdered on the darkened, closed-down set 
of her movie. Someone is clearly out to not only sabotage Amy's dreams, but 
to do away with all of the people helping out on her crew.
Easily the most innovative twist in "Urban Legends: Final Cut" is the way the 
ill-fated characters become literal pawns in urban legends brought to life, 
all the while Amy's movie on the very same subject films on at the same time. 
Even more so than in "Scream 3," the way that reality and fiction intermix is 
extremely well done.
What the sequel lacks, however, is the memorable characters of the original, 
as well as the taut pacing that made the 1998 film so exciting and 
suspenseful. Screenwriters Paul Harris Boardman and Scott Derrickson have not 
constructed nearly as tightly written a script as Silvio Horta did, nor is 
Ottman quite as assured a first-time director as Blanks was. Meanwhile, the 
mystery involving who the killer is is not only unforeseen, but the amount of 
suspects and red herrings involved aids in adding much fun to the proceedings.
As the film's heroine Amy, Jennifer Morrison (1999's "Stir of Echoes") is a 
surprising choice for the lead since she is such a little-known actress, but 
as with the majority of the cast, their lack of general star power acts in 
showing off a bunch of new talent who are able to create believable 
characters, since there is no star baggage to go along with them. Morrison is 
likable, if not quite up to par with Alicia Witt's Natalie in the first film.
The supporting cast includes the rather bland Matthew Davis, playing the dual 
role of film student Travis and his brooding twin brother Trevor; Marco 
Hofschneider (1992's "Europa, Europa"), hamming it up and having a heck of a 
time in the process, as sleek, womanizing cinematographer Simon; the 
charismatic Eva Mendez, as camera technician Vanessa, who secretly harbors a 
crush on Amy; the very funny Jessica Cauffiel (2000's "Road Trip"), as bad 
actress Sandra; and Joseph Lawrence (TV's "Blossom"), wasted as showoff 
hotshot Graham. The sole returnee of "Urban Legend" comes in the form of that 
film's best character, security guard Reese, who has an affinity for acting 
out blaxploitation films, and aspires to be just like her idol, Pam Grier. 
Loretta Devine, as in the original, steals every scene she is in, and should 
there possibly ever be a second sequel, deserves to be the main star.
Aside from one disturbing sequence in which a girl wakes up in a bathtub full 
of ice, only to see that her kidney has been removed and lays on the table 
next to her, the film is never very scary, but it is consistently 
entertaining and surprisingly funny, as it offers up several great lines of 
dialogue and stringently follows the conventions of recent slasher films. 
"Urban Legends: Final Cut" is not a work of high art, but it is a relatively 
classy horror picture, and director John Ottman has proven that he can 
successfully cross over from being, not only a gifted composer, but also a 
respectable filmmaker.

Author
Jon Popick
Usually, Hollywood will only make sequels of films that make a ton of
money.  Urban Legends grossed an inauspicious $38 million when it was
released on the far superior heels of Scream and I Know What You Did
Last Summer.  Almost exactly two years later, its sequel  Urban
Legends: Final Cut (or UL2)  hits the screen with a lamer story and
much fewer stars than its predecessor.
Before we get into the content of the movie, let's look at the title.
Although it's an attempted clever play on words, Final Cut makes the
sequel seem like it's simply an unedited version of the first film.  And
don't think for a second Final Cut implies that it will be the last film
in the series.  We've been fooled before.  Remember Friday the 13th: The
Final Chapter?  It was followed up by Friday the 13th: A New Beginning.
Later, we saw Jason Goes to Hell: The Final Friday, but there's still
another sequel in the works.
Ditto for A Nightmare on Elm Street, which promised Freddy's Dead: The
Final Nightmare, but then came back with New Nightmare.  In the future,
we can probably expect titles like I Finally Forgot What You Did That
Summer followed by I Just Remembered What You Did, Like, Seven Summers
Ago.  Or The Slasher VI: We Swear to Christ It's the Last One and The
Slasher VII: We're Broke, and We're Back!
UL2 is set at Alpine University's film school, which apparently
specializes in churning out horror film directors (this is the only
truly frightening idea in the entire picture).  The professor advises
his students that the screenplays for their final projects are due,
which is odd, because some of them have already completed their films.
Amy Mayfield (Jennifer Morrison, Stir of Echoes), the daughter of an
Oscar winning documentary filmmaker, pitches the professor an idea of
filming the story of a serial killer that slays his victims to popular
urban legends.  The same urban legend killings that occurred in first
film
So UL2 is a sequel about a making a movie about what happened in the
sequel's antecedent.  Confused?  You shouldn't be.  You've already seen
the exact same thing in Scream 2 and Scream 3.  UL2 is full of scenes
featuring film props and sets that create a blurry line between the
movie and the movie within the movie.
The common belief among the surviving characters is that the killer is a
crazy film student bumping off his competition for the school's
prestigious Hitchcock Award (in addition to Hitch, UL2 has the audacity
to sully the names of François Truffaut and Pam Grier).  The
knife-wielding maniac dresses in black and wears either a fencing mask,
or a large kitchen strainer.  It's hard to tell.
The only returning character from the first film (save a surprise cameo
right before the closing credits) is the campus security guard played by
Loretta Devine (Introducing Dorothy Dandridge).  UL2 also features Joey
Lawrence from Blossom, although he prefers to go by `Joseph' now.  Yeah,
I guess you need to be taken more seriously when you make films like
this.
UL2 is the directorial debut of John Ottman, who edited and created the
score for Bryan Singer's (X-Men) first three films (he also scored and
edited this film).  The script was written by Hellraiser 5 scribes, Paul
Harris Boardman and Scott Derrickson.  Ironically, Ottman, Boardman and
Derrickson were classmates at the USC School of Cinema-Television.  I
wonder where they got the idea for this film?
There was a strange bar scene in UL2 where a female student, played by
Real World London star Jacinda Barrett, tells a fellow college senior,
`Next year, you'll be in the real world.'  I have no idea if this was
intentional, or just a bizarre coincidence.  It doesn't really matter,
since UL2 is largely a waste of time and money.  You'd be better off
reading about urban legends on Snopes.
1:40 - R for violence/gore, adult language and brief nudity and sexual
content

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated: R for strong violence/gore, language, and sexuality.
Starring: Jennifer Morrison, Joseph Laurence, Matthew Davis, Hal Bochner, 
Anson Mount, Eva Mendez, Jessica Cauffiel, Anthony Anderson, Loretta Devine, 
Michael Bacall. 
Out of all the rip-offs of Wes Craven's instant 1996 classic "Scream" and 
including it's sequels, only two really stood out as being original. The 
first was 1997's "I Know What You Did Last Summer" which was followed by a 
lame sequel, and the second is 1998's "Urban Legend" which went on to gross 
more than $38 million dollars, a nice sum for a low-budget horror film. Of 
course the ending left it open for a sequel, but one would hope they wouldn't 
make one. Surprise...they did anyway, and this time it has nothing to do with 
the original, well it does, but it doesn't. 
Amy Mayfield is a student at the Alpine University, majoring in film. She 
worked on a few of somebody elses, but her main goal is to make her own 
movie. After hearing a story about a university, where the students were 
murdered based on Urban Legends, she herself decides to make a movie called 
what else? Urban Legends. Everything goes well, her film starts production, 
but when she finds a reel of film she didn't make, showing a murder, Amy 
starts to suspect something isn't right. Once the people working on her 
production start to get killed in the style of urban legends, Amy knows there 
is a killer after her, and she has to try to stop him before he gets to her.
Of course there is the usual refereces to urban legends, and the plot 
developments of the story. Wait...we're missing something, oh yeah character 
development duh! I should have known that, but wait where is it at? Oh yeah 
there is none! Thats the biggest flaw of the entire movie, is the lack of 
character development. When the movie first starts, we go into a comedic 
opening sequence, and are introduced to the characters, of course we know who 
they are as in names, and we know what they do, but we don't know anything 
about them. 
In her first starring role, Jennifer Morrison, is great as the film student 
Amy. She brings out the most she can of her character, and does a credible 
job of playing her. Matthew Davis is in dual roles, as the bland 
Travis/Trevor, and doesn't really add much to the film, except a gratitous 
sex scene. Joey Lawrence is pointless in his role, but adds much to the comic 
relief. The two or actually three biggest standouts of the movie is the 
George Lucas fan duo, Michael Bacall and Anthony Anderson are extremely 
funny, and add much to the film, but not much to the story. Finally Loretta 
Devine is the standout of the movie, and should get much credit to saving 
this movie from being a bust.
The direction by John Ottman is very stylish, and since he is an editor and 
composer, he of course, edited and composed this movie. Both are very nice, 
and the score is a standout, when this dvd comes out, I would like to see a 
isolated score, just to hear this, because it adds much to the tight 
atmosphere. The movie itself, is never scary, excluding one scene that has to 
do with the tub, ice and kidney. This was very gruesome and quite intense. 
John Ottman did a good job on the techinal well-making, that he forgot to add 
more excitement and suspense.
Overall the movie is entertaining throughout, and merits at least one watch. 
The killer is fun to guess, and I was surprised at who it was, although the 
motive is laughable. At the end, they change the slasher ending into 
something different, and the end of the movie before the credits role, I 
thought was extremely funny and very clever. The standout scene of the movie 
is the end, and at the end of the movie, I turned to my friend and said "That 
was ok, nothing special, but nothing bad". It deserves one watch, if not two. 
It really has nothing to do with the original, and really is pointless, but 
for what it's worth it isn't that bad. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures/Phoenix Pictures
 Director: John Ottman
 Writer: Paul Harris Boardman, Scott Derrickson
 Cast: Jennifer Morrison, Joseph Lawrence, Anson Mount,
Eva Mendes, Jessica Cauffiel, Marco Hofschneider, Matthew
Davis, Loretta Devine, Hart Bovchner, Michael Bacall,
Anthony Anderson
   The narrative line that informs "Urban Legends: The Final
Cut" is so hackneyed, so stale, that even the junior high
school kids who were admitted to a special advance
screening of this R-rated movie (which has one or two fairly
explicit sex scenes and lots of gore) appeared burned out. 
The three fourteen-year-olds I chatted with on the way out
said they'd seen it all before "hey, man lots o' times," they
knew the killer would be the person least suspected, they
even knew which quick scares were false alarms and which
would lead to actual slashings.  
   The pretensions to Hitchcock that director John Ottman
played around with in his directorial debut may have been as
over the heads of the tykes in the audience as the master's
birds, and when a couple of characters on screen bullied
each other with accusations of campus power struggles, the
young 'uns in their plush seats simply cried out "Hit him!"
without understanding the drift of the controversy.  But
Hitchcockian birds, towers and intimations of paranoia
notwithstanding, isn't it time to close the door on these same
ol' same ol' pix?  If you've seen 'em twenty times before,
they're no longer scary and given the absence of wit in
scripters Paul Harris Boardman and Scott Derrickson's
dialogue, we look forward with apathy to their upcoming
"Hellraiser Inferno" which was commissioned by Dimension
Films.
   One of the performers, Sandra (Jessica Cauffiel) did turn in
one of the few decent comic scenes in the opening twenty
minutes of a movie which started out with some promise and
then fell into inanity.  The big concept in Ottman's film is the
notion of life vs. art, specifically, when is an action on the
screen part of a film within a film and when is the action a
representation of reality?  The action takes place on a college
campus (surprise!), actually filmed at a place in Ontario,
Canada which has some surprisingly vivid architecture. 
We're in film school where a bunch of 20-year-old aspiring
filmmakers are competing for the coveted Hitchcock award,
whose attainment would yield $15,000 to the winner and
guarantee him or her a Hollywood deal.  One person on
campus is determined to kill the competition.  
   Chief among the contenders at Alpine University is Amy
Mayfield (Jennifer Morrison), who breaks from her favorite
genre of documentaries to try a Hithcockian suspense story
for her thesis project.  She hires a bunch of unpaid amateurs,
proving that you get what you pay for.  Her staff includes
lesbian Vanessa (Eva Mendes--who gets to knock off one of
the film's cutest, if terribly vulgar, one-liners); Simon (Marco
Hofschneider), a pretentious, womanizing Continental type; a
couple of grossly stereotypical gofers, Stan (Anthony
Anderson) and Dirk (Michael Bacall), the specimens whom
we know will be killed off around the middle of the story. 
Travis (Matthew Davis)is chief among the heartthrobs, the
one we trust will end up with Amy.  As a latex-bearing killer
picks off these seniors, in one case removing a girl's kidney
before cutting her up some more and guillotining the damsel,
we temporarily pick up the brains we checked at the box to 
figure the identity of the maniac--who looks like a cross between a
duellist out of The Count of Monte Cristo and a microphone.
   The one arresting part of the film occurs at the very
beginning during a stormy airplane ride in which Sandra
(Jessica Cauffiel) screams in competition with the roar of the
thunder as the plane hurtles toward the earth.  Jennifer
Morrison, who attempts to anchor the film, is not particularly
appealing but she does a reasonable job with what the banal
dialogue she's been given.
Rated R.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The original URBAN LEGEND was not a good movie. It got hacked at the knees
by the critics and clomped over the head at the box-office, with a little
over $38 million in final grosses. So now that the whole "teen slasher"
genre seems to be dissipating, what do you think is the best thing to do for
a studio? Well, it's pretty obvious, no? Release a sequel to a film that
wasn't so good in the first place and hope that its hackneyed plotline could
resurrect the genre!! Yeesh, what are these people thinking...
PLOT:
A bunch of college film students are completing their own movie projects
with the hopes of winning the prestigious Hitchcock award, a prize which
apparently leads directly to the riches of Hollywood. Suddenly, many of them
start dropping like flies, as a mysterious killer begins his swatting. Will
they live to finish their films? Will they ever figure out who the killer
really is? Will Joey Lawrence ever make us forget all about "Blossom"? Find
out below...
CRITIQUE:
A fun opening scene leads to a great opening murder which eventually leads
to one of the stupidest movies of the year. That's right, people.
Stupid...just plain dumb! There were so many cool ways in which this film
could have gone, but for some reason or another, the filmmakers decided to
start off strong and then jump right into yet another pile of heaping teen
slasher absurdity. It's funny because if there was one thing that everyone
agreed on about the first film, it was the fact that the mystery of the
murderer was so ridiculous, so "out there", that it reinforced much of the
idiocy that came before it. Well, apparently nobody from this production
decided to take any lessons away from the first go-around, and seriously
mucked this one up even larger. I get the feeling that these screenwriters
sit around thinking, "Who do you think is the one person which people would
LEAST suspect? Okay, let's go with that then!" Uhhhm, okay that's fine
fellas, but you know that it also has to make a little bit of sense, don't
you? Just a little bit...c'mon...please!!
The sad part is that the first half hour of this movie is actually pretty
good. It has some tense moments, funny moments, an exciting murder sequence
that should gross anybody out, and a decent little premise set in a perfect
place to develop a great story (film sets). Unfortunately for the audience,
that's where the "good" part of the movie ends. About half an hour into the
film, a character just happens to "pop into" the picture and pretty much
designates the exact spot at which the film ricochets into a downward spiral
of implausibility, predictability and just plain stupidity.
It was as if another director suddenly took over from the guy who started.
This second director might've been a fan of soap operas in his day, but
that's another story. And that's when the "idiot moves" begin. Girl being
chased, runs into a forest. Good move. Girl being chased again, runs up a
million steps to get to the roof. Uhhhm, and that's gonna help you...how?
And since when is there nobody, and I mean NOBODY else on a huge campus such
as theirs!? I dare any of you to show me one other student who shows up
anywhere in this film! It's just so sad, so ridiculous and just so stupid.
But don't fault the actors. They all actually do decent jobs with what they
have to work with, especially Jennifer Morrison who gives a solid
performance, and even Joey, oops, Joseph Lawrence who comes out of this one,
unscathed. The problem is the script, the script and the script! Half an
hour in, the plot is shot up like Swiss cheese and even though I was hoping
for some kind of "twist ending" to save it all, all I got was a "twist
ending" so completely out of left field, that it just had me laughing out
loud. In fact, pretty much everyone in the audience was laughing at the last
30 minutes of this film. Not sure if that was the idea, but that's what
happened here and deservedly so. Oh yeah, and the soundtrack was also
non-existent (the teens will love that, Mr. Filmmaker, good move!). I can't
say much more, but there it is. Check out the first half hour, then walk out
and get your money back. Trust me, you'll have seen all that you need to
see.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Joey (Joseph) Lawrence's birth name is Joseph Mignogna Jr.
This is Jennifer Morrison's first lead role in a picture, but she did have a
crucial role in last year's under-appreciated thriller STIR OF ECHOES, in
which she played "Samantha Kozac", the missing girl.
This is director John Ottman's directorial debut, although he has been in
the business for a number of years as a composer and editor. He composed the
music and edited three Bryan Singer movies, THE USUAL SUSPECTS, APT PUPIL
and PUBLIC ACCESS, and was the composer on several other "horror" flicks
including LAKE PLACID, H20 and 1997's SNOW WHITE aka SNOW WHITE: A TALE OF
TERROR. He also edited and composed the music for this film.
There are two specific "inside" references to the original URBAN LEGEND
movie in this film. The first is a scene in which two students are wearing
the exact same parkas as the killer from the first movie. And the second is
a scene which I will not ruin, but it's the last scene of the movie and it
refers directly to the first one as well. That final one is actually pretty
funny, with the Hitchcock music playing in the background, but much like the
rest of the movie, it ultimately goes nowhere.
Hart Bochner, the man who plays professor Solomon in this movie, is also a
director himself. He directed the Zucker brothers' HIGH SCHOOL HIGH, and PCU
back in 1994. He's probably best remembered for his role in the original DIE
HARD movie. He's the bearded horny dude who gets killed early on and loves
his cocaine.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by John Ottman. Screenplay by Paul Harris Boardman & Scott
Derrickson, based on characters created by Silvio Horta. Starring Jennifer
Morrison, Matthew Davis, Loretta Devine. Running time: 100 minutes. Rated
R by the MFCB. Reviewed on October 2nd, 2000.
Two years ago, the original "Urban Legend" was a surprise, proving to be
the most worthy of the litany of "Scream" rip-offs. Although by no means
classic cinema, it was entertaining and boasted an entertaining premise,
taking typical slasher-film shenanigans and dressing them up in the
context of popular urban legends. Aided by good performances and energetic
direction, "Urban Legend" turned out to be ideal popcorn fare.
Now comes the sequel of sorts, "Urban Legends: Final Cut". Instead of
being a continuation of the first movie, this one is intended to be more
of a thematic successor. Its events are inspired by the original, and only
two characters carry over. Most notable is security guard Reese (Loretta
Devine), now working at a university whose film students compete for the
prestigious and lucrative Hitchcock Prize. One night, Reese encounters Amy
Mayfield (Jennifer Morrison), who is casting about for a topic for her
thesis film. Reese tells her about the events she endured at Pendleton
in the original picture ("but that's just an urban legend," Amy protests
in one of the more clever lines of dialogue) and this inspires Amy to make
her own movie about a campus killer who bases his murders on urban 
myths. But as production gets under way, somebody seizes on the Pendleton
"legend" in a far more literal manner, and begins killing film students in
the same style.
Or, at least, that's what's supposed to be happening. But "Urban Legends"
is so ineptly written by Paul Harris Boardman and Scott Derrickson that
the central motif is virtually forgotten about, or treated more as a
crutch. Although Boardman and Derrickson go through the motions of
dressing their murders up in "urban legend" style, this is largely just
used as an irrelevant backdrop while the killings are carried out in
typical slasher style. There is a startling dearth of imagination here:
even the deaths, usually the high points of any movie of this genre, lack
invention.
There is a similar lethargy to many of the other plot points. Characters
are introduced who are so obviously intended to be potential suspects -- a
rival movie director, a mysterious twin brother, an eccentric movie
groupie -- that they deserve little flags. Having introduced such
characters, Boardman and Derrickson make little effort to heighten the
suspense by developing them further; they are pretty much just thrown
out there, and it is expected that the viewer will generate his own 
mystery trying to figure out which one actually did it. "Urban Legends",
though, is so thoroughly unengaging that there is no cause to contemplate
such things; there are far greater mysteries, like why a studio would
greenlight such a paltry, third-rate script.
"Urban Legends" has the feel almost of a serialised drama, with each
incident happening seemingly in isolation. Characters appear just so that
they can serve as the next victim. People die and are not mentioned again
for huge stretches of time. The movie evokes the sense of filmmakers going
through the motions -- murders and other scary incidents occur not because
the plot demands it, but just to fill time. This is moviemaking at its
most mechanical.
There is little in the way of characterisation to speak of, and few of
the castmembers engender any interest or sympathy. The revelation that
one character has a twin, for example, is completely defused by the fact
that we knew nothing about the character in the first place. Morrison
proves a poor successor to "Urban Legend's" spunky Alicia Witt -- not
because she doesn't try, but simply because she is given no material to
work with. Amy is a dull, monotonous character, and the filmmakers seem to
assume that we will empathise with her simply because she's the main
character, not because they have established her as somebody worthy of our
interest.
Amongst the other characters, Devine is downright embarrassing as Reese,
having apparently graduated from the "Police Academy" stable. Matthew
Davis, who plays twins Travis and Trevor, is aimless in either role.
Perhaps the biggest name actor, Joseph Lawrence (best known as the guy who
says 'woah!' on "Blossom"), is confined to a forgettable one-note part.
John Ottman's direction is unremarkable and drops the ball more than once
during action scenes, where the sequence of events is frequently confusing
and difficult to discern. Certainly, Ottman does little to cultivate an
atmosphere of suspense or terror. But then, there is precious little
mystery anywhere in "Urban Legends" -- a particularly galling fact given
that the film invokes such names as Hitchcock and Welles. It all comes to
a head with the revelation of the killer, which is done so off-handedly
and absurdly that I kept waiting for the other shoe to drop (it never
does).
Indeed, it was moments like this that made me wonder if "Urban Legends"
was perhaps intended to be more a satire of slasher films than just a
standard entry into the genre. But if that is the case, then it is a most
incompetent effort, totally failing to illuminate any truths about slasher
movies (except, perhaps, that they're all but exhausted) and instead
wallowing in their most dubious cliches.
"Urban Legends: Final Cut" is, quite simply, badly made. The direction is
hamfisted. The acting is without merit. The writing is on about the same
level as that roomful of typewriter-endowed chimpanzees. It is amusing
that the movie is set at a film school, because you have to wonder how
much time its creators actually spent at one.
The only positive thing that can be said about "Urban Legends" is that,
in the end, it could have been a lot worse. It is never actively
terrible; it is just incredibly lazy, inducing more a sense of ennui than
of critical revulsion. Nonetheless, it is yet another example of how the
teen slasher genre is in desperate need of either fresh ideas or a long
rest. Hopefully, this is indeed the 'final cut' for the "Urban Legend"
mini-franchise.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/UrbanLegends.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Steve Rhodes
In URBAN LEGENDS: FINAL CUT, the film students are preparing their 
thesis films.  The best of the bunch could win the prestigious Hitchcock 
Award, something that URBAN LEGENDS: FINAL CUT would have no chance of 
winning.
Why don't they make sequels of movies whose characters we would like to 
know more about -- THE BIG CHILL, for example?  The original URBAN 
LEGEND, which is pretty bad, is a decidedly watchable movie compared to 
its schlocky sequel.
With a homogeneous group of young actors playing almost completely 
interchangeable characters, the movie is slapped together by its 
director (John Ottman) and writers (Silvio Horta, Paul Harris Boardman 
and Scott Derrickson) like a toddler with Duplo blocks.  As blood 
splatters everywhere, the film uses every cliché in the horror movie 
writer's manual, from stupid victims to loud noises.  There isn't an 
incident in it that you haven't seen done before, and frequently better.
There is simply no reason to waste your money on this movie, which 
wouldn't be worth seeing if it were the only thing showing in town.  If 
you want to see a good movie about urban legends, URBANIA, currently 
playing the art houses, covers this ground with style, even if the film 
is a thriller rather than a horror movie.  If it's a horror movie you're 
after, perhaps the best ever made, THE EXORCIST, complete with new 
footage and a new digital soundtrack, is currently playing at your local 
multiplex.
URBAN LEGENDS: FINAL CUT runs a long 1:40.  It is rated R for violence, 
gore, language and some sexuality and would be acceptable for high 
school seniors and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Urban_Legends:_Final_Cut_ (R) * 1/2 (out of ****)
The original _Urban_Legend_ grossed only $38 million at U.S. theatres in
the fall of 1998, but given how cheaply (in _every_ conceivable meaning
of the word) that horror flick was produced, a profit was
inevitable--and, of course, a sequel.  However,
_Urban_Legends:_Final_Cut_ is less sequel than very loose spinoff--a good
thing, considering how abysmally ludicrous the original was.  But to say
that the new film is a step above its predecessor isn't saying much at
all, for _Final_Cut_ simply takes a more tolerable approach to the same
sort of slasher silliness.
_UL2_ (as the title initially appears onscreen) marks the feature
directorial debut of film virtuoso John Ottman, who has already made a
name for himself as a score composer and film editor (two positions he
once again holds here in addition to the directing reins); his
contributions are what elevate the film above the original.  His most
savvy move was the casting of unknown Jennifer Morrison, who does a much
more capable job in the lead than the unimpressive Alicia Witt in the
first film.  Morrison is likable and convincing as Amy, one of a number
of student filmmakers at Alpine University vying for the prestigious
Hitchcock Award for best thesis film--which, we are repeatedly told,
"guarantees a career in Hollywood."
With that preposterous plot point, writers Scott Derrickson and Paul
Harris Boardman immediately throw all story plausibility out the
window--long before various co-eds get bumped off by a mysterious
stranger wearing a fencing mask.  Of course, all these students are all
in the running for the Hitchcock, and presumably the masked murderer is
killing to get his or her hands on the award and that coveted career.
Much to Ottman's credit, the requisite scare sequences are refreshingly
light on the cheap fakeout (which was plentiful in _UL1_), and they are
done with a reasonable sense of style and some dark, cheeky humor; this
is especially the case with the first major murder scene, which begins
with a riff on the "kidney heist" urban legend.  However, though the film
is called _Urban_Legends_, this is the only concrete reference to that
idea.  Amy's thesis film is supposed about an urban legend killer
(namely, the story of the first film), but all the "legends" are invented
ones.  And the one major tie to _UL1_, the character of security guard
Reese (Loretta Devine, again wasted), adds nothing to the mix.
Which begs the question--why even make this film as an _Urban_Legend_
sequel?  The answer is simple: without the tangential ties to the first
film, _UL2_ would too obviously be a low-rent version of the also
moviemaking-themed _Scream_3_.  Ottman does what he can to make this bad
idea work (there are some stylishly edited visuals, and his score is up
to his standards), but ultimately he and the actors--excepting _Blossom_
alum Joey (I refuse to call him by his new, official moniker of "Joseph")
Lawrence, whose work is dreadful all around--must go down the path laid
down by the writers, and the course they have mapped out is not pretty.
The subtitle of _Urban_Legends_, _Final_Cut_, is meant to be a play on
words referring to filmmaking and the slice-and-dice killings, but one
can only hope it also means something else--that this is the final lame-o
youth horror film we see in a very long time.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
John Beachem
Directed by: John Ottman
Written by: Silvio Horta, Paul Harris Boardman, Scott Derrickson
The events of the first "Urban Legends" film have become urban legends 
themselves. The only person still hanging around to talk about them is the 
security guard, Reese (Loretta Devine). She's now at a different school, but 
the same thing seems to be happening again. This time, film student Amy 
Mayfield (Jennifer Morrison) is making a movie about the killer from the 
first movie. Professor Solomon (Hart Bochner) encourages her to proceed, as 
does her friend and fellow student film director, Travis Stark (Matthew 
Davis). So, gathering a crew of film students, she sets about making her 
movie. There's just one problem, a real serial killer has started wiping out 
her cast. Amy's theory is that it's another film student who is seeking to 
kill all competition for the much coveted Alfred Hitchcock award. The award 
includes a large sum of cash, and a chance to direct a real motion picture 
in Hollywood. Now Amy and her friends have to find out who the killer is 
before she runs out of crew members. Could it be Graham (Joey Lawrence), the 
student making another slasher movie? Or how about Toby (Anson Mount), the 
slightly off kilter sound guy. Of course, the real mystery is to find out if 
anyone really cares.
Hah! Sorry, that just slipped out. Truth be told, I couldn't help but laugh 
at this stupid movie. I think I would have lost my mind if I hadn't. "Urban 
Legends: Final Cut" is such a ridiculously stupid movie you'll probably 
spend half your time staring blankly at the screen, shocked that this thing 
ever got the green light. I personally stumbled out of the theater searching 
vainly for something strong to drink. "ULFC" will appeal to one group, those 
who love mindless, cookie-cutter teen slasher movies. All the rest of us 
will react with varying degrees of disgust. At first I was actually willing 
to brush the film off with a two star rating for being yet another stupid, 
harmless slasher movie. Then it did something flat out insulting. The 
writers had the gall to talk about Hitchcock in this film. They dared to 
compare this piece of garbage to the master in any way? I think that's 
punishable by death in some states (or if it isn't, it certainly should be). 
I can picture the master right now, rolling in his grave at the thought of 
his name being thrown about in some cheesy teen movie. It's enough to make 
on violently ill.
The cast in "ULFC" is full of your traditional teen movie stars. You know 
the type, people who are nice to look at but don't have anything even 
remotely resembling talent. First up is Jennifer Morrison ("Stir of 
Echoes"). Comely? Yes. Talented? Far from it. She seems to have been 
educated at the Jennifer Lopez school for acting, where students are taught 
that talking softly makes you appear to have acting skills. Next we've got 
Matthew Davis, making his first (and hopefully last) appearance in a feature 
film. I think Matthew was educated at the Freddie Prinze school for acting. 
There they teach students to say little, but occasionally smile slightly at 
the camera so all the girls in the audience can swoon. He should get a 
refund, because I didn't hear any girls swooning. The talented Anthony 
Anderson ("Me, Myself, and Irene") makes an appearance as the school's film 
geek, but he has hardly any screen time. He does get one of the film's few 
truly funny scenes however. The remaining actors fall into the "don't care 
who they are or what they've done" category, with the exception of Jessica 
Cauffiel (last seen destroying her boyfriend's car in "Road Trip"). Jessica 
does a great job playing a girl who can't act. Take that in whatever context 
you'd like.
Much as I'd like to blame John Ottman for this movie I can't. Why do I want 
to blame him? Well, I'm more than a little irritated with him for giving up 
composing (he composed the great theme to the equally great "The Usual 
Suspects") so he could direct a movie like this. No, all the blame can rest 
firmly on the shoulders of the film's three writers (another bad movie with 
multiple writers. What is this?). This script is so insipidly stupid it 
doesn't deserve to be analyzed, but I'm going to anyway. First of all, the 
title makes no sense. Granted, the characters are making a movie about the 
first "Urban Legends" film, but the killer doesn't kill based on urban 
legends (except for the first victim, but that was the movie's only somewhat 
interesting scene). Second, the mystery element is terrible. It's  painfully 
obvious who the killer is. I won't say here of course, but if you don't 
figure it out you must have been asleep (not that I can blame you for that. 
Wish I'd fallen asleep). Third, the movie is more predictable than - than - 
I can't even think of a comparison. You know exactly who is going to die 
from the first ten minutes of the movie. Finally, the script borrows from 
everything. From "The Blair Witch Project", from ever slasher film ever 
made, even from "The Usual Suspects" (at least there was a scene that had a 
Usual Suspects feel to it).
Okay, now that I've ground another movie into the dirt and spit on it, I 
guess I should make note of the film's good points (this won't take long). 
There is one good gore scene for all the gore lovers out there. Anthony 
Anderson does have a few funny moments. That about does it. One thing that 
really shocked me was that we had a serial killer dressed in fencing garb 
(or at least the mask) and we didn't get one "En Garde" or "Touche". That 
just shows lack of ability on the parts of the writers (Hah! as though 
everything else didn't). The film's score is decent enough, and big 
surprise, it's by John Ottman. "Urban Legends: Final Cut" runs 100 minutes, 
which is about an hour and a half too long. At one point the characters say 
that the question was asked, "Is film more important than life?" Whoever 
asked that obviously never saw this movie. I recommend "ULFC" to those 
strange people who love cliche ridden, predictable teen slasher movies, but 
to no one else. I give the film one and a half out of five stars. Oh! Before 
I forget, the film does contain one legitimate scare: it leaves itself open 
for a sequel. Be afraid, be very afraid.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.
