Title
Review for Breaking In (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Hal Render
     I just saw the movie BREAKING IN last night.  It's the story of Ernie,  an
aging veteran burglar/safe-cracker who meets Mike, a kid with a casual 
disrespect for other people's property.  The story develops as Ernie decides to
show Mike the ins and outs (literally) of what Ernie calls "thieving."  The
result is a gentle comedy that takes a lighter look at crime without lapsing
into slapstick or farce.  The script was written by John Sayles (RETURN OF THE
SECAUCUS SEVEN; BABY, IT'S YOU; EIGHT MEN OUT) and the film was directed by Bill
Forsyth (GREGORY'S GIRL, LOCAL HERO, COMFORT AND JOY).  Those familiar with the
work of the two men will recognize their trademarks: witty dialogue,
understated characters, and quiet humor.
     Perhaps the most pleasing thing about BREAKING IN is the portrayal of
Ernie by Burt Reynolds.  Eschewing his characteristic smirk and unnaturally
curly hairpiece, Reynolds plays Ernie as written: a graying, 61-year old thief
with thinning hair, bad eyes and a limp.  Ernie is a survivor in the world of
crime, a philosophical professional thief who has accepted a low-profile 
lifestyle in exchange for anonymity with the police.  With another actor, Ernie
could just be a rather dull, workaday crook, but Reynolds charm and touch for
light comedy make Ernie an interesting, likable character.
     Mike, well played by Casey Siemaszcko (sp?), is a naive, unsophisticated
kid who is drawn to the apparent glamour represented by Ernie.  The real
interest in the film is watching Ernie, who treats crime as a job, try to
instill in Mike, who treats crime as an adventure, the attitude that will allow
Mike to survive as Ernie has.  The humor comes from Mike's naivete and bumbling
attempts to adapt to the lifestyle of a professional thief.
     While ostensibly a crime film, there is no real violence in BREAKING IN, 
and little serious tension.  This may deter viewers who cannot watch a film 
without at least one car chase or gunshot victim.  However, for those who like
character pieces and the sort of humor found in the films of Sayles and
Forsyth, this film should prove enjoyable.  And for fans of Burt Reynolds, this
will be the chance to seem him in what is probably his best comedic role since
STARTING OVER in 1979.  I recommend it.
