Title
Review for Duets (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Pete Croatto
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Pete Croatto.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c07fa1f8af5471768825695c00674d56?OpenDocument
        In Duets, karaoke bars dominate the American Western landscape like
Taco Bells and Starbucks.  They're in every major city and full of hot,
young people swaying while marginally talented participants sing Weather
Girls covers.
Karaoke is a craze, the way dandruff or waxy ears are a craze.  I like
to think I'm pretty pop culture savvy, thanks to years of reading
Rolling Stone and Entertainment Weekly.  But I don't remember reading
one article about karaoke clubs being the discos of our times.
        The absurdity of introducing karaoke as a happening trend is the first
of many flaws in Bruce Paltrow's bafflingly bad movie, which features
three duos struggling with each other while traveling to Omaha for a
$5,000 karaoke contest.
        We have the rugged, wandering karaoke hustler (this is not a joke)
played by Huey Lewis(!).  He meets his long-lost, family happy daughter
(Gwyneth Paltrow, Bruce's daughter) after her mother dies.
Then we have a corporate, married schmoe (the talented Paul Giamatti),
chucking it all away after a bad day at the office.  Warbling through
Todd Rundgren's "Hello It's Me" in a New Mexico joint revives his
spirits, which he shares with the escaped convict hitchhiker he picks up
(Andre Braugher).
I'm not even going to bother describing the circumstances that bring
Felcity's Scott Speedman and Payback's Maria Bello together.  You've
probably run away screaming by now.  If not, thanks for keeping up.
Like most bad movies, the characters are rehashed.  I've seen Gwyneth
Paltrow and Lewis' situation countless time, mostly on daytime talk
shows.  Giamatti and Braugher have a kind of Odd Couple thing going. 
Bello plays another slut with a heart of gold, while Speedman is looking
for spiritual guidance.
Some of these people can act, especially Paltrow and Giamatti.  There
might be hope if screenwriter John Byrum hadn't included a stupid road
movie plot and vignette format, turning them into faceless dramatics. 
Since their development stops at scene one, they sound like a broken
record throughout the entire film.  Giamatti is the worst culprit,
blathering on endlessly about the need to return to old-fashioned
American values.  With more background this could have been interesting,
but instead it's like being hit over the head with a mallet.
This lack of character care also leads to more questions than the SATs. 
What caused Bello, who gets what she wants through her body, on her
path?  If Lewis has been away his family for so long, who gave him a
call that his lover was dead?  And why did he even bother to show up? 
What did Braugher do to land in jail, and why does he take a shine to
Giamatti, instead of robbing the guy?
The movie's lone bright spot is that the singing is okay.  At least it's
not
as bad as Woody Allen's misguided musical Everyone Says I Love You. 
Gwyneth in particular, sounds great.
But I didn't really enjoy the musical numbers, save for Gwyneth's
climatic duet with Lewis.  To me, karaoke is a self-indulgent,
embarrassing act that is best left in the privacy of one's own home. 
With the shades pulled.  And the doors locked.  I can't buy singing as
any kind of triumph of the will, as portrayed here.
For those die-hard karaoke fans (or hustlers) that go from dive to dive
craving for the next Leo Sayer tune to cover, you'll love it.  All five
of you.
Director: Bruce Paltrow
Producer: Bruce Paltrow, Kevin Jones, John Byrum
Writer: John Byrum
Starring: Gwyneth Paltrow, Huey Lewis, Paul Giamatti, Andre Braugher,
Maria Bello, Scott Speedman
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Gwyneth Paltrow, Paul Giamatti, Huey Lewis, Andre Braugher, Maria 
Bello, Scott Speedman, Angie Dickinson
Expectations are an odd thing. (Here comes the segue…wait for it). Last week 
I went to see NURSE BETTY with high apple pie in the sky hopes, for you see 
the picture had not only garnered a screenplay award at the prestigious 
CANNES FILM FESTIVAL, but an A grade from the mostly trustworthy folk at 
ENTERTAINMENT WEEKLY, among a veritable avalanche of positive reviews. And I 
have no clue what any of them were talking about. The movie was a hodgepodge 
of indie irritations (I've taken to calling them "indieisms", an example of 
which could be those ever so common hip, articulate philosophy minded hit 
men) filtered through a mainstream feel-good sensibility; it's one of the few 
films aimed at both the audiences for schmaltzy STEPMOM-like hokum and 
cynical, ironical PULP FICTION-like grit. A week later I trudge into DUETS, 
my hopes dulled to nada just from glancing at its highly negative notices, 
plus rumors of Disney's uncertainty with the film, and some last minute 
re-shoots. Naturally I was expecting a train wreck. Instead I got a minor 
fender bender. A bicycle pile-up really. And I groaned and rolled my eyes a 
whole lot less than I did through BETTY. But oh yes, I did groan and roll my 
eyes. Though because of what I stated above in my oh so perceptive opening 
sentence, I can't really be mad at this flick; compared to what I thought I 
was in store for, DUETS was very nearly a blessing.
It's a strange film in that it has moments of greatness, coupled with clichés 
that should have been retired way before we entered the 90's. We get yet 
another pairing of a black guy and white guy who initially don't quite know 
what to make of the other, then eventually falling in love (…but not in a 
homosexual way), the estranged father and daughter (the father is a deadbeat 
type who wants nothing to do with his daughter, and frankly I'd feel the same 
way if she were played by Gwenyth Paltrow in blonde airhead mode), and the 
kind hooker who falls for the straight laced guy (nuff' said there). DUETS 
even includes a more recent motif; the family man who goes berserk like Kevin 
Spacey in AMERICAN BEAUTY, only instead of black mailing his boss and lusting 
after his daughter's teenage friends, he pierces his ears and paints his toe 
nails cherry red. Despite all that, I still found much to like amid this 
particular mess; it's sometimes clever, occasionally poignant, but just when 
you think you're watching a quality picture it slaps you in the face with an 
utterly dopey Nora Ephron moment (this occurs in nearly every scene with 
Paltrow).
The flick veers off into three separate stories, with only one worth paying 
attention to, not because it's so well done, rather because its performers 
manage to transcend all the lameness. We begin with Huey Lewis as a karaoke 
hustler (yep, that's when the first eye roll occurred), who stumbles into a 
bar looking like he doesn't know his right from left, trounces up to a 
bragging karaoke champ and mumbles "what the hell is this, karate-oke?" This 
leads to some spectacular singing by Lewis, which by the way is the one thing 
this film gets right every time. DUETS is like a modern musical, here, the 
actors have a reason to belt out tunes; they're performing. And even if the 
actors (all of whom do their own voice work with the exception of Braugher 
who was dubbed) don't hit all the right notes, they give confident and wildly 
energetic turns-- I practically had to hold myself in that sticky multiplex 
seat to keep from leaping in front of the screen and dancing like a fool. 
Even the weasel-voiced Gimatti does a fine job (after a purposely shaky 
start) with his rendition of HELLO IT'S ME by Todd Rundgren.
Huey Lewis doesn't give a great acting performance but I forgive him, 
considering that he has one the most interesting faces I've seen on the 
silver screen in a while. Time worn and handsome, his features are like a 
well-tread road map propped up by his inquisitive eyebrows. He looks like the 
beaten man he's playing. We find that he has an estranged daughter, Liv 
(Gwyneth Paltrow) who wants to get to know him, though he resists. Once this 
business starts, every scene between them becomes clichesville, with Paltrow 
pouting and scrunching her face up as if she were trying to capture the 
nuances of a Jennifer Love Hewitt performance. It's her most annoying work 
yet, though she kinda makes up for it when she gets to sing, which she does 
with sensuous aplomb. Nonetheless, their happy ending is a bit sudden and 
anti-climactic (nothing the characters do suggest the sudden change that 
occurs) though it too leads to some good stuff, notably a duet between 
Paltrow and Lewis to Smokey Robinson's CRUISIN' that had me smiling despite 
the falseness of its build-up. Like everyone in the film, the pair is on its 
way to Omaha for a karaoke showdown and, hopefully, some prize money.
Less annoying but still pretty bad, is the mini-story about the sweet-hearted 
hooker who meets a wannabe priest, now underachieving cab driver played by TV 
hunk Scott Speedman. I'm not familiar with Speedman and he's easily the worst 
link here with his dull line readings and utter inexpressivness; still, I'm 
convinced that once he masters a second facial expression they'll be no 
stopping him. This is one of those performances where the actor relies on his 
good-natured smile far too much, and it is indeed one of those sparkling 
"look at me!" Tom Cruise smiles. This smirk factory generates no chemistry 
with his female co-star, Maria Bello, who's so good she actually had me sorta 
enjoying the umpteenth variation on the ol' hooker with a heart of gold (see, 
she's different cause she sings too).
The third thread works out best, which is something, considering it has the 
most to negotiate. This is the one with Paul Giamatti as a sad sack 
businessman going certifiable, ditching his job and heading out on the road 
in search of freedom and, apparently, cigarettes. He impulsively picks up a 
hitchhiker played by the great Andre Braugher of the great (and no 
longer…R.I.P.) HOMICIDE: LIFE ON THE STREET. They have some terrific scenes 
together, particularly a thrilling bit where Giamatti teaches Braugher to 
drive, and does so very badly. The problem here is that they go from being a 
fairly genial couple (with vaguely haunted undertones) to a grim pairing 
after some completely out of place violence. This was the problem Disney had 
with the film, and they made the director, Bruce Paltrow (Gwyneth's father, 
again, nuff said), trim much of the objectionable material. So we don't 
really see anything, but the act is still there casting a pall over a film 
that spent most of its time working for a fairly light hearted tone.
The basic theme DUETS presents isn't a bad one; it being that the patrons who 
fill out karaoke bars ("it's a rush like you wouldn't believe," one character 
enthuses) are lonely and looking for some kind, any kind, of connection. 
Fine, but then don't make these characters so damn common, and don't put them 
through paces we've seen over and over (that was my personal aside to the 
film makers). The un-negotiable problem of the film lies in its screenplay; 
it's as if the writer, John Byrum, was too scared to tell a story too 
different, so he wound up filling his film with recognizable character types. 
And who's that gonna please?
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     "Duets" isn't a very good movie, but it has moments so good that 
you almost forgive it.  It takes place in the world of karaoke, that 
fading phenomenon that gives people a chance to be a star for three 
minutes (one-fifth of the Warhol lifetime allowance.)
     The good moments are not much to be seen early.  It's all dim 
lighting, bad blocking, and missed moments.  A karaoke hustler (Huey 
Lewis) plays the rube, lays some side bets, and then blows away the 
competition.  It's no news that Huey Lewis can handle a song, but the 
scene doesn't rise to the occasion.  Other characters are introduced - 
his estranged chorus girl daughter (Gwynneth Paltrow, director Bruce 
Paltrow's daughter), a salesman weary of his job and his life (Paul 
Giamatti), an ex-con guilty of "an error in judgment" (Andre Braugher), 
a cab driver and a karaoke singer (Scott Speedman, Maria Bello).  The 
most intriguing insight the movie offers is that fellatio is more 
dependable currency than frequent flyer miles. 
     But there are music scenes that really take off, particularly those 
involving Giamatti and Braugher, who also provide the most interesting 
duet of the proceedings, thanks more to their playing than to the 
hackneyed script.  Their "Try a Little Tenderness" got people whooping 
in the movie theater (although Braugher's singing is dubbed.)  Gwynneth 
Paltrow does well as a sweet dim bulb, and shows off a beautiful voice.  
     It's TV veteran Paltrow's first theatrical feature since '82 ("A 
Little Sex"), and you won't leave the theater wondering why.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DUETS (director: Bruce Paltrow; screenwriter: John Byrum;
cinematographer: Paul Sarossy; editor: Jerry Greenberg; cast: Maria
Bello (Suzi Loomis), Andre Braugher (Reggie Kane), Paul Giamatti (Todd
Woods), Huey Lewis (Ricky Dean), Gwyneth Paltrow (Liv), Scott Speedman
(Billy), Lochlyn Munro (Ronny Jackson), Kiersten Warren (Candy Woods),
Marian Seldes (Harriet Gahagan), Angie Phillips (Arlene), Angie
Dickinson (Blair); Runtime:112; Hollywood Pictures; 2000)
Duets is the second feature film by longtime TV producer Bruce Paltrow
(A Little Sex), it stars his daughter Gwyneth. There are also some
interesting casting choices he makes such as, a cameo for Angie
Dickinson as Gwyneth's grandmother and the noted singer Huey Newton in a
starring role, whose expressions and looks reminded me of Sydney
Pollack.
Duets is a cross-country road comedy/drama whose stage is karaoke, which
uses that setting to explore the hopes of three twosomes headed for a
karaoke contest in Omaha. They search for what went wrong in their lives
as they try to come to terms with their family crisis: Ricky Dean (Huey
Lewis) is a selfish, enigmatic karaoke hustler, pretending not to know
what karaoke is as he works his hustle, who meets his daughter -- a
Vegas casino girl named Liv (Gwyneth Paltrow) -- for the first time at
the funeral of her Vegas showgirl mother; a toady traveling salesman,
Todd Woods (Paul Giamatti), who goes out for a pack of cigarettes but
doesn't return home when he gets a chilly reception from his suburban
wife and kids, after flying to Houston and thinking he's in Florida to
pitch a theme park. He leaves his family and becomes a deranged monster
railing against American culture and its misuse of the frequent flyer
miles perks the airlines advertise but do not deliver on what is
promised. He will give the ex-con Reggie Kane (Andre Braugher) a ride,
and their odd friendship will center around the salesman trying to break
the chains of his empty life by taking mood-altering drugs and singing
karaoke; and lastly, a young, underachieving, angelic Cincinnati
cabdriver, Billy (Scott Speedman), who reluctantly agrees to drive an
edgy waitress and hooker, Suzi Loomis (Maria Bello), with ambitions to
be a singer, to California, after he catches his wife sleeping with his
taxi partner, stopping off on the way for Suzi to compete in karaoke
bars for prize money, before going to Omaha with her when she wins her
competition.
The salesman story is the featured one, evoking a sense of the American
culture being a deadly one to one's psyche. This story is the most
bizarre and implausible, but it has the strength of bringing out a
number of small truths that add up, allowing the film to maintain a
quirky sense of justification for its messiness. Its impact is helped
greatly by the engagingly nuanced performances of Giamatti and Braugher.
I first thought Giamatti, who is not a household name as an actor, was
Wallace Shawn doing Giamatti. Giamatti, who turns from a meek salesman
to a terrorist-like maniac waving a gun at America's false dreams, gives
the film its finest vitality, as he gets to emote all screenwriter John
Byrum's best lines.
The two things this film has going for it in spades, is the lively
karaoke music and the unpredictability of its comedy, which gives the
film a very fresh feel, even overcoming the nonsense of its
interconnected stories and awkward sense of drama. These stories don't
exactly connect for these disenfranchised folks, but it shows what
happens to them psychologically when they come to a crossroads in Omaha,
making it appear to be the Super Bowl for dreamers in the world of
karaoke -- their chance to heal their wounded egos as they steal someone
else's talent for a few moments and call it theirs.
The film starts off in a karaoke bar in Tulsa, where Ricky is a karaoke
hustler, if there is such an animal as that, it's new to me -- but his
thing is to bet other performers that he can top them, betting a huge
sum of money over the usual $100 first-place prize. There is also a trip
to Omaha for the winner, where the competition is national and the prize
money is significantly higher at $5,000, but considering the way money
has been thrown around in contests with less skill than this one, this
is still a very low figure as a payoff. This hustling bit brought back
memories of Paul Newman and Jackie Gleason as pool sharks in the "The
Hustler," or more recently Matt Damon as a card hustler in the
"Rounders." The hustle is more than what the money can bring them,
therefore the stakes aren't as important as what the rush brings to
their ego.
When father and daughter bond in Vegas, he has no choice but to take her
to Omaha, where he sees that she can also belt out a tune karaoke style.
She does a marvelous rendition of "Bette Davis Eyes." But their story
was rather tame, as there was nothing touching about their relationship
and nothing revealed that wasn't expected, it played as if something was
left out but that it wasn't important to find out what that was. Yet
their chemistry was good together, making their story most watchable
one.
The story that seemed the most forced was the cabbie and the whore on
the run one. She turns out to be like all the other karaoke performers,
needing someone else's tender love to make the world a warmer place.
This vignette took its dramatics too seriously and explained their
obvious emergency relationship in too fine a matter for how absurd it
all seemed.
I must applaud the film for not emphasizing the competition at the
contest, as so many recent commercial films have in such films, and for
taking a chance and going for some dramatic fireworks in a screwball
comedy. That it doesn't always come together as a fluid film, is pushed
aside by how zany and entertaining it was, with a good sense of energy
released through some risks that were taken by not trying to put
together a familiar film. I have a good feeling about this film and
think it will stay around as a cult favorite and grow in status over the
years.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Bruce Paltrow's DUETS, a would-be comedy about competitive karaoke 
singing, is about as much fun to watch as a bad karaoke singer.  
Actually, it's worse, since the karaoke singers in the film aren't bad 
enough to laugh at.  Instead, too many of them are so good that you 
wonder if they're lip-synching.  With its low energy and its leaden 
script, the movie has almost nothing going for it except the presence of 
Bruce's daughter Gwyneth in the cast.
Watching the intelligent Gwyneth Paltrow trying to play a dumb character 
like Liv is at best disconcerting and at worst embarrassing.  Liv is one 
of many people in this road-trip comedy who are traveling to Omaha, 
Nebraska for the chance to earn the $5000 first prize at a karaoke 
contest.
The rag-tag collection making the journey includes a large cross-section 
of people who are down on their luck and trying to change it.  Suzi 
(Maria Bello, the bar owner in COYOTE UGLY) barters her body across the 
country.  Her price list includes oral sex in return for a car paint 
job.   Billy (Scott Speedman), a taxi cab driver whose last girlfriend 
was caught cheating on him with his pudgy, older partner, provides Suzi 
with transportation across country in return for her being "nice" to 
him.
The ditzy Liv first meets her father, Ricky Dean (Huey Lewis), at the 
funeral home where her mom's dead body rests.  Ricky and Liv become one 
of the story's many karaoke singing duets.  About the only part of their 
routine that's memorable is Liv's beatific smile.
The only interesting character, a middle-class revolutionary named Todd, 
is played by Paul Giamatti (BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE).  After his wife gives 
him the modern equivalent of "I've got a headache" -- "Honey, I'm 
on-line here," she tells him without looking up from her keyboard -- 
Todd flips out.  Shortly thereafter, Todd begins to look and act like a 
skid-row wino with violent tendencies.  Wearing a big earring, clothes 
that look rolled in dirt and a scruffy beard, Todd stays constantly 
drunk.  After he meets up with an escaped convict who sings like an 
angel (André Braugher from FREQUENCY), Todd uses his gun to shoot up 
several establishments who don't provide the level of service that he 
expects.  The movie's best on-going joke involves Todd's inability to 
use any of his 800,000 frequent flyer miles.
"What is karaoke?" Todd asks when he first hears about it.  "It's a rush 
like you won't believe!" replies one of its participants.  One of the 
many problems with DUETS, besides being a comedy that's not funny, is 
that this "rush" is never present on the screen.  
The movie leaves us with one question.  Why did Gwyneth Paltrow agree to 
do this movie?  Yes, her father undoubtedly asked her, but, at her age, 
she's old enough to be able to say no.  Sometimes even parents have 
really bad ideas.
DUETS runs 1:52.  It is rated R for language and some sexuality and 
would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
DUETS
(Hollywood)
Starring:  Maria Bello, Andre Braugher, Paul Giamatti, Huey Lewis, Gwyneth
Paltrow, Scott Speedman, Kiersten Warren.
Screenplay:  John Byrum.
Producers:  Kevin Jones, Bruce Paltrow and John Byrum.
Director:  Bruce Paltrow.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, brief nudity, adult themes,
drug use, violence)
Running Time:  113 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In the opening scene of DUETS, director Bruce Paltrow establishes
with little room for doubt that we have fled reality for its hideous
cinematic doppleganger. In that scene, a weathered-looking fellow in
horn-rims named Ricky Dean sits in a karaoke bar, taunting the hot-shot
kid who has just wowed 'em from the stage. Ricky feigns ignorance about
"karateoke," then bets the kid that he can win the competition out from
under him. Of course the bet proves to be a hustle, but the problem is the
casting. As Ricky dazzles the crowd with his rendition of Joe Cocker's
"Feeling Alright," we're left with the baffling realization that Ricky is
played by Huey Lewis. The kid's jaw drops, the patrons shriek, women throw
themselves at him ... not for the Voice of God, but for the competent,
breathy chops of Huey Lewis. This isn't the Eddie Felson of the karaoke
set we're talking about; it's not even the Eddie Money of the karaoke
set. It's Huey. Freaking. Lewis.
     For the next 108 minutes or so, DUETS leaps from that implausible
scenario to scenarios even less plausible, turning it into a character
study in which inhabitants of the planet earth are nowhere to be found.
Essentially it's a road picture, switching back and forth between three
less-than-dynamic duos converging on a big karaoke contest in Omaha. The
aforementioned Ricky is on his way, with a tag-along named Liv (Gwyneth
Paltrow) who happens to be the daughter he's never met before. Brassy Suzi
Loomis (Maria Bello) also has designs on the prize, and a reluctant
chauffeur in recently-cuckolded cab driver Billy (Scott Speedman). And
Todd Woods (Paul Giamatti), a career salesman having a mid-life crisis,
has also become a born again karaokist, accompanied by a career convict
named Reggie (Andre Braugher) he picked up hitchhiking.
     DUETS is one of those "When Bad Movies Happen to Good Actors" 
experiences that makes you wonder whether anyone involved actually read
the script before committing. It's particularly sad watching Giamatti and
Braugher do the buddy bonding thing with such shallow characters. Giamatti
makes for such a wonderfully manic schlub that he's entertaining to watch
in spite of the material; Braugher has presence, but he can't bring any
depth to a character that's ultimately supposed to be tragic. Paltrow does
a nice ditzy bit, but that's the one note her character is allowed. In
fact, that's true of every character in the film. Bello, Speedman, Lewis
and company are all playing characters with one note, one epiphany and one
grinning resolution. These aren't performances; they're cries for help.
     Paltrow the elder offers none, and goes one better by actually making
matters worse. A talented television director with little feature film
experience, Paltrow puts his film together in such a disjointed manner
that even well-constructed characters would have been hard-pressed to
emerge intact. Close-ups become medium shots for a couple of seconds for
no apparent reason before returning to close-ups; ostensibly comic scenes
linger and dawdle with no punch. Paltrow does have the paternal generosity
and good sense to let the gifted cinematographer Paul Sarossy shoot
Gwyneth lovingly. There's no pacing, no momentum and no point.
     There is, however, plenty of karaoke. DUETS seems constructed with
the desperate hope that viewers will be entertained enough by the
musical numbers -- lifted heavily from the pop music glory years of the
late '70s and early '80s -- that they'll ignore the complete absence of
personality in anyone singing them. For the record, Gwyneth Paltrow has a
sultry, insinuating voice, and does justice to both "Bette Davis Eyes" and
Smokey Robinson's "Cruisin';" also for the record, there is no need for
cross-cutting between a police action and plus-size comic John Pinette's
rendition of "Copacabana." Unfortunately, that's fairly typical of the
skewed world served up in DUETS. If you loved Huey as the pride of every
karaoke joint, you'll love the police leaving an armed man alone for a
final tender moment. In this paper-thin road film, reality is the road not 
taken.

Author
Ross Anthony
Huey Lewis' hustle-line "Karate-oke" might have made a better title to this
big-hearted, road-trippy, small-town karaoke contest-hopping, comedy.
Huey (sporting Al Franken nerd glasses) makes a living upping the stakes
with pretty-boy favorites at anywhereville, USA singing-dives. But his is
just one of two side stories to the main event -- a frazzled Paul Giamatti's
suburban salesman mid-life crisis sends him unshaven and skidding into a
reckless life of crossing the double-yellow and singing no-holds-barred to
colorized words on the video screen.
There's more to the film than that (I didn't even mention Gwyneth's role or
the spectacular performance by Andre Braugher or that Angie Dickinson
appears briefly); best to leave the rest to surprise.
Although the picture has a few screws that could use tightening and a couple
of minor "errors in judgment," the direction and attention to detail is just
as determined to live life to its fullest as bubble-eyed Paul Giamatti.
Delightful peculiarities pepper-spice the film. Examples: A groggy and
disoriented Giamatti draws the hotel window shades to a jetliner that's so
close it fills the entire pane, a young innocent Speedman comes home to his
girlfriend only to hear the guy she just slept with singing in the shower -
this is a crystal-fresh way to tell what could have been a Hollywood/soap
cliché.
Similarly, extraneous characters engulf their roles with richness. Even in
their limited screen time, they endear you to the film and strengthen your
commitment to the main characters. The most memorable being a
kleptomaniac/retired elementary school teacher, "They caught me with a
smoked ham in my crotch" and a road-hardened trucker with a John Wayne glint
in his eye. Kudos to those savory mini-performances.
Btw, adding to the film's sincerity: Giamatti, Paltrow, Bello (and of course
Lewis) do their own singing.
I didn't like the poster, but loved the film.
Duets. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Paul Giamatti, Andre Braugher, Huey Lewis, Gwyneth Paltrow, Scott
Speedman, Maria Bello, Marian Seldes (teacher), Bill Croft (trucker).
Directed by Bruce Paltrow (Gwyneth's pappa).
Written by John Byrum.
Produced by Kevin Jones, Bruce Paltrow, John Byrum at Hollywood Pics/Buena
Vista.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Susan Granger
   For Oscar-winner Gwyneth Paltrow, making this dark comedy
was obviously a labor of love since it's directed by her real-life
father, Bruce Paltrow (creator of TV's "St. Elsewhere," "The White
Shadow"), who was stricken with throat cancer. Shooting began in
Vancouver only three weeks after he completed radiation therapy. The
story revolves around six unhappy characters hoping to win $5,000 in a
karaoke competition in Omaha, Nebraska. Huey Lewis plays a karaoke
hustler who meets his long-lost daughter, a third-generation Las Vegas
showgirl - that's the too-thin, too flat-chested-to-be-believable as
an innocent showgirl Gwyneth, when they're introduced by her
grandmother (Angie Dickinson in a cameo) at her mother's wake. Paul
Giamatti's a meek, mild-mannered salesman, obsessed with redeeming his
frequent flyer miles, who picks up a hitchhiking escaped convict,
Andre Braugher. And Maria Bello, as a scheming waitress/wannabe rock
star, promises sexual favors to a Cincinnati taxi driver, Scott
Speedman. They're all maudlin misfits who like to sing but, for the
most part, their renditions make you cringe. Gwyneth's not bad
warbling "Bette Davis Eyes," but she's not good either. Written by
John Byrum, this manipulative, ill-fated project has gone through
several incarnations, beginning originally as a starring vehicle for
Gwyneth Paltrow and her then-fiance Brad Pitt. After they split up, it
was revised and, in an unprecedented move, because of its violent
content, Disney shopped "Duets" around to other studios; eventually,
studio executives decided to re-cut it, editing the objectionable
scenes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Duets" is a
disappointing, discordant 4. This rambling, raucous road trip-to-
redemption saga strikes a distinctly sour note.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Six people, each unhappy in his or her own way, get
together in fairly believable ways, each showing the other that
life really is worth living if only you can make a few changes. 
Sound familiar?  The theme sure is, but this is perhaps the
first time a major film uses the motif of karaoke as the
catalytic agent.  What gives the movie most of its charm is
not the shopworn, sentimental story but the surprisingly good
singing by one of Hollywood's greats, Gwyneth Paltrow, who
took away the prizes for her gender-bender role in
"Shakespeare in Love" and now proves that she could
credibly appear on the Broadway stage if Stephen Sondheim
could write a musical for her.
   Bruce Paltrow, noted for his TV series "St. Elsewhere" and
a single feature movie "A Little Sex," is at the helm,
determined to let his performers have as good a time as are
the typically once-shy, now-turned-on-by-karaoke folks once
put into the limelight to enjoy a high which some insist is as
effective as a snort of coke.  Using John Byrum's sugary
script, he opens his story on a professional singer, Ricky
Dean (Huey Lewis), who behind thick-framed glasses could
probably fool anyone into thinking he's a nerdish school
teacher who knows nothing about karaoke.  His shtick is to
come up to those who are performing in the mid-west bars
where singing to canned music is de rigueur, shake his head
in puzzlement over this "karate-oakley," and wonder why
people would want to waste time at such a foolish pastime. 
Putting down a few hundred dollars as a bet with a hayseed
who thinks he can eat the man for lunch, he knocks 'em dead
and takes off with his newfound cash.  Trouble is the man is
unhappy, his former girl friend having died.  When he shows
up for the funeral he meets his daughter for the first time, she
hooks on to the reluctant man, and from then on they're a
singing team.  And boy can Liv (Gwyneth Paltrow) make her
old man look even better, harmonizing with her silky vocal
chords about as well as the best in the group, a hustler of
another sort named Suzi (Maria Bello), who teams up with
underachieving cab driver Billy (Scott Speedman) in an all-
too-sketchy portrayal, who drives her from the midwest to
California to pursue a singing career.
   Gwyneth Paltrow's startling vocal qualities aside, the
stealer this time around is Paul Giamatti in the role of a
perpetually traveling businessman, Todd, terribly unhappy not
only because he is away from his family so often
accumulating frequent flyer miles but because he is facing a
moral dilemma.  Berating himself for despoiling the
environment--at one point he kicks himself verbally for
destroying the breeding ground of turtles in order to develop
a theme-park waterslide for children--Todd hooks up with
escaped convict Reggie (Andre Braugher), who tells one man
whom he robs that he has no skills, but is put on the right
track by Todd who brings out the singer in him at the karaoke
competitions.
   The highlight of John Byrum's script is a monologue that
could be a treasure if used by actors in auditions, in which
Todd lashes out against the strip-malling of America, raising
the red flag of revolution against the McDonalds, Wendys and
Pizza Huts that have turned this country from a pristine
paradise into a commercial eyesore.  Acting out a major
midlife crisis, Todd dons a single earring, gives up his razor
blade for days at a time, and roams the midwest with his new
buddy in search of a life free from the physical and emotional
poisons of American corporations.
   When Giamatti takes off in the role of his lifetime, he will
have the audience eating out of his hand.  But when oddball
humor is at the forefront, director Paltrow could conceivably
lose some of the fans of the very types of movies against
which Todd could conceivably rage.  The karaoke does not in
any way dominate the picture and, in fact, the final
competition does not end in the style of the typical football
movie with the audience two steps ahead of the judges. 
Rather the contest is cut short in favor of heartstring tugs. 
While the father-daughter bonding is hackneyed and the
underachiever-hustler scenario is underdeveloped, Paltrow
does succeed enough by highlighting Giamatti in his first
scene-stealing role and featuring the heretofore unknown
quality of Gwyneth Paltrow's sound.
Rated R.  Running time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Bob Bloom
Duets (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Gwyneth Paltrow, Paul Giamatti,
Andre Braugher, Huey Lewis, Scott Speedman, Maria Bello and Angie
Dickinson. Written by John Byrum. Directed by Bruce Paltrow. Rated R.
 When the performers are on stage, "Duets" soars. But when this uneven
movie follows its performers offstage it is transformed into a
discordant, cliched, mess.
 This episodic comedy-drama lacks direction and cohesion as it follows
three plotlines that converge on the stage in Omaha, Neb., for the
$5,000 Grand Prize Karaoke Contest.
 The most intriguing story involves Todd Woods (Paul Giamatti), a driven
salesman who suffers a meltdown while chasing the American Dream, who
chucks it all to go on stage and sing, and his connection with Reggie
Kane (Andre Braugher), an ex-con with the voice of an angel who is
unwilling to follow society's rules.
 When these two performers are on screen - and on stage - "Duets" is
magical.
 Unfortunately, the film's other stories are weak sisters. One involves
a Karaoke hustler (Huey Lewis) who is saddled with the daughter he
hasn't seen in years. She's a Las Vegas showgirl (Gwyneth Paltrow) who
wants only to belong to a family.
 The other story involves Suzi Loomis (Maria Bello), an earthy waitress
who sees winning the contest as a stepping stone to a musical career and
is willing to do anything to attain her goal. She hooks up with an
idealistic cab driver, Billy (Scott Speedman), whom she convinces to
drive her to Omaha.
 Unfortunately, director Bruce Paltrow (Gwyneth's father) cannot get
screenwriter John Byrum's script to gel. It is fragmented and jagged,
never coalescing into one coherent story.
 Plus the mixture of schmaltz, drama and comedy never comfortably
adhere.
 Gwyneth Paltrow's character, Liv, is very unfocused and ill-defined.
She acts like a naive, almost simple, child, chasing dad Ricky Dean
(Lewis) around like a hurt puppy.
 Bello's Loomis is too self-centered to care about, while Speedman's
Billy is too idealistic to be believed.
 And while Giamatti's Woods is a bit over the top, he is the one
character you can root for and make an emotional connection with. You
feel his pain and disillusionment.
 Braugher's character, while interesting, seems a bit too sketchy and
his ultimate sacrifice seems more a plot contrivance.
 But the movie's best moments are the ones involving the music. When
these characters are on stage - whether singing themselves or via voice
doubles - "Duets" shows signs of greatness.
 If you like good music, "Duets" is a movie you should see, despite its
many flaws and shortcomings.
 It is too bad that the care and attention lavished on the musical
numbers could not be transferred to the other parts of the film.
 Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net.
Reviews by Bob Bloom can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
