Title
Review for Golden Bowl, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Laura Clifford
American Charlotte Stant (Uma Thurman) is in love with Italian Prince
Amerigo (Jeremy Northam, "An Ideal Husband"), but she doesn't have the money
he needs to restore his beloved family Palazzo.  With the help of 
Fanny Assingham (Anjelica Huston) he becomes betrothed to Maggie Verver 
(Kate Beckinsale, "The Last Days of Disco"), daughter of America's first
billionaire Adam Verver (Nick Nolte), a school chum of Charlotte's.  Fanny
advises Charlotte that her acquaintance with Amerigo will be kept from the
Ververs.  In order to remain close to Amerigo, Charlotte nabs Maggie's
widowed 
father and begins a complex game of lies and deceit in the latest Merchant 
Ivory adaptation of a Henry James novel, "The Golden Blow."
The titular golden bowl is a gold encrusted piece of crystal presented
to Charlotte as a possible wedding gift by an antiques merchant.  Amerigo,
who has accompanied her, advises outside the shop that the crystal is
cracked.  While Amerigo appears to be content with his lovely, innocent
young wife, Charlotte will not let him go and Maggie's devotion to her 
father allow the foursome to pair up according to Charlotte's desires.
Charlotte's passion for Amerigo makes her deaf to gossip, but her husband
is not as blind as she might think.  His veiled warnings to her go unheeded,
but Amerigo is quick to pick up on his father-in-law's doublespeak.
This lusty, modern adaptation by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala gives the art house
crowd a period soap opera to relish.  James' story casts Charlotte the
villain of the piece on a surface level, but some consideration makes one 
begin to doubt - hasn't Amerigo betrayed everyone, and for money no less,
while Charlotte is motivated by love?
Uma Thurman forgoes her usual pallid, somnambular style and sinks her teeth 
into her meatiest role since "Pulp Fiction."  If she seems overtly modern 
and out of control, those are qualities that make Charlotte such a hair 
trigger, allowing the film to build up to a squirmy level of tension.  Nick
Nolte, who had the misfortune being cast in the lead of Merchant Ivory's least
successful film "Jefferson in Paris," rises to the occasion here.  Adam
seems the stereotypical, open, easy-going, buried-in-work American, but 
Nolte allows the shrewdness to wink out at us even as his costars accept
his oblivious good nature.  Beckinsdale is terrifically appealing as the
naive Maggie.  The sweetness she brings to the role emphasizes the
underhandedness she's dealt.  The English Northam is believable as an Italian
aristrocrat, but he's a bit too opaque, not enough an object of such desire.
Anjelica Huston can't quite decide on her accent (she seems distinctly
Southern
American in her initial scene), but does the hand-wringing thing well as her
cover-up breaks down.  James Fox ("The Remains of the Day") is a comic asset 
as her husband, Colonel Bob Assingham.
Director Ivory borrows from Jane Campion's "Portrait of a Lady" flourishes,
using period title cards, old stills and period-look news footage to move
his tale along.  A secret meeting between Charlotte and Amerigo at a wax
museum is heightened when the eyes from a tableau seem to follow the
duplicitous couple, yet a horrific tale from Amerigo's ancestry used to 
bookend the film is heavy handed.  Costume, art direction and locations are 
lush beyond measure and a treat for the eye.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
JONATHAN F RICHARDS
In the rich, dense world of Henry James, tension between Europe and 
America hangs like cigar smoke in a parlor, penetrating and clinging to 
every fabric, flavoring and corrupting the very air. Europe is old, 
calculating, saturnine, and devious; America is young, naEFve, rich in =
material wealth and impoverished in taste and judgment. In The Golden 
Bowl, James's last novel, these lines are clearly drawn, and then 
blurred with deft and subtle strokes.
There is nobody better suited to the Jamesian vision than the team of 
producer Ismael Merchant, director James Ivory, and screenwriter Ruth 
Prawer Jhabvala. They tackled his works twenty years ago in The 
Europeans and The Bostonians, with middling success, but since then 
they've hit their stride, fashioning some of their greatest works out of 
E.M. Forster (A Room With a View, Howard's End). Now they've turned back 
to James again, and this time they're ready.
The visual beauty of The Golden Bowl is breathtaking. Under the eye of 
cinematographer Tony Pierce-Roberts, the images are steeped in the 
paintings of John Singer Sargent and spread across the screen in 
rapturous elegance. We expect no less of Merchant-Ivory, but this talent 
is both a blessing and a curse; "that the visuals would be sumptuous was 
a foregone conclusion," sniffs one critic, and their detractors like to 
dismiss their work as "Masterpiece Theater", which somehow takes on a 
derogatory connotation.
The story is introduced with a grisly tale: a 17th-century nobleman 
discovers his young wife in bed with his grown son, and the adulterous 
couple is brutally executed. The tale is told by Prince Amerigo (Jeremy 
Northam), the 20th century scion of the now-impoverished (by princely 
standards) family, to Charlotte (Uma Thurman), his American lover. 
Sadly, she's poor too, and to refill the family coffers he's about to 
marry her best friend, Maggie (Kate Beckinsale), daughter of America's 
first billionaire Adam Verver (Nick Nolte). Maggie doesn't know Amerigo 
and Charlotte know each other. Fond as Charlotte is of Maggie, she's 
fonder of the prince, and doesn't mean to allow a thing like his 
marriage to interfere with her pleasure. When Charlotte and Adam are 
thrown together and Adam proposes, it knits the four of them into one 
big and briefly happy family.
But the Americans are not the easy dupes the Europeans take them for 
(Charlotte is American but she thinks like a European, complicating 
things even more.) As they begin to wise up, a mesmerizing pattern of 
strategy, protection, and chilling retribution emerges. None of the four 
principal characters are bad, but all are flawed. The story is rife with 
duplicity, obsession, repressed incest, and ill-gotten gains.
Subtle, intelligent acting by the six principals (including Angelica 
Huston and James Fox) takes the characters and the story beyond the 
surface a movie's timetable affords. Particularly good are Thurman's 
reckless Charlotte and Nolte's frighteningly powerful Adam Verver, a man 
whose immense wealth and taste clothe the brutal sinews of the man who 
acquired them. Verver has amassed a fabulous collection of European art 
by the brute force of his money and intellect; and by brute force he 
intends to stuff them down the throats of an uninterested American 
public by building them the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Merchant and Ivory set the stage so lushly we feel the silks and 
brocades against our skin and breathe the air of fin-de-siE8cle =
European elegance. Jhabvala, who can dissect a classic novel and extract 
its central nervous system like a surgeon, has done a beautiful job of 
it here.
The golden bowl of the title makes several fatefully-timed appearances 
in the story. It is an exquisite piece of gilt crystal, but the gilding 
conceals a crack; and by the bowl's final appearance, the metaphors and 
double-entendres are swarming like swallows on a spring day in 
Capistrano. It's one of the few flaws in an otherwise exquisite piece, 
but the gilding is so masterful one hardly need take offense.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In Mike Nichols's landmark film "The Graduate," a naive
college graduate falls in love with the daughter of a woman
who has seduced him, arriving just before the younger
woman is to take her wedding vows with another man.  In the
movie's dramatic, concluding moments, he succeeds in
stopping the wedding and spiriting the bride away.  While
some brides have been known to flee from the altar moments
before tying the knot, such escapes rarely happen in such a
striking manner.  What's more common, however, is for a
man or woman to walk the aisle with a second choice--with
someone accepted because numero uno is somehow not
available.  Imagine what would happen, though, if just before
the marriage of convenience--and for months after the
occasion--one's true love shows up hither and thither to
rekindles the flame!  Such is the subject of Henry James's
mature novel, "The Golden Bowl," which in the hands of a
typical Hollywood studio could be made into broad comedy
with soapish sentiment but is treated by James Ivory with
much of the subtlety given the theme by the novelist.
   In a gorgeous film that embraces the theme of
class differences, Prince Amerigo (Jeremy Northam), a
member of Europe's impoverished aristocracy, must abjure
marriage to Charlotte (Uma Thurman), the love of his life, as
they are too poor to marry (much like Lily Bart and Lawrence
Selden in Edith Wharton's "The Mouse of Mirth").  The prince
is luckier.  When Charlotte re-enters the scene just before the
scheduled nuptials of her prince in shining armor to Maggie
(Kate Beckinsale)--who is the daughter of billionaire Adam
Verver (Nick Nolte)--the tightly-drawn coil begins to unwind.  
   Talky, this is.  But so what?  The talk is good: clever, witty,
ironic as all get-out and for suspense our attention is riveted
almost throughout the film on how the plot will turn out.  We
are persuaded that Adam, who has about the closest
relationship to his daughter Maggie that one can imagine a
dad having with his grown-up girl, will take violent action
against Amerigo for hurting her--for lying about his past affair
with Charlotte and even worse for continuing the affair during
the marriage to Maggie.  After all, Amerigo and Charlotte are
so dauntless in their attachment that they risk getting
caught time and again.  To foreshadow the potential of this
revenge, director James Ivory opens the movie in much the
way that Philip Kaufman opened "Quills."  In Kaufman's case,
a weeping aristocratic woman is being coarsely tied and led
to the guillotine by a brutal executioner.  Here, we see some
of Amerigo's ancestors (15th or 16th century I believe) caught
in bed with the wrong people, both led by an infuriated lord
to a beheading.  (One thinks of the revenge of Hannibal
against Pazzi in Ridley Scott's blockbuster movie: tossed out
the window and hanged in much the way a Pazzi of yore was
done away with.)
   The central symbol, the golden bowl, is a flawed gift which
Charlotte and Amerigo consider buying for Maggie, the flaw
representing the life led by the two rich Ververs which shield
them from the truth about their most important relationships.
   What a cast, with one exception.  What's Uma Thurman
doing in a Merchant-Ivory movie anyway?  To my eyes she's
unattractive: one can hardly understand the prince's undying
passion for her particularly when he is married to a rich and
awfully cute woman (that's Kate Beckinsale), but given the
debonair character of Amerigo with his sexy Italian accent
(well kept throughout by Jeremy Northam), one can
understand the fatal-attraction type love felt for him by Ms.
Thurman's character.  As for production design, tops.  A
costume ball contrasts with a scene of industrial America, the
latter indicating that Adam Verver made his money by paying
immigrant labor mighty low wages for a 12-hour 7-day week. 
Castles all over Italy and England were borrowed for the
occasion.
   Anjelica Huston plays the Maggie-Smith like role as the all-
knowing aunt (Fanny), nose-in-the-air with disgust at the
vulgar American culture which she fortunately need not put
up with in England, and Nick Nolte shines as the well-kept
rich guy with his collection of Holbeins and the like but with
an almost agoraphobic mistrust of the fresh air.  
   Since "The Golden Bowl" is considered by some to be
Henry James's most mature work, one wonders why it took
so long for the filmed version, given the existence of Iain
Softley's "The Wings of the Dove," James Ivory's "The
Bostonians" and "The Europeans," Agnieszka Holland's
"Washington Square,"  Peter Bogdanovich's "Daisy Miller"
and James Campion's "The Portrait of a Lady."  Perhaps
screenwriters were intimidated with the story's intricate,
sophisticated, even convoluted narrative and the difficulty of
putting subtle levels of analysis and character on the big
screen.  Nonetheless we're pleased that Ruth Prawer
Jhabvala has tackled the difficult job of trying to evoke the
subtlety of the novelist's language--James's bid to circle
around a subject without touching it directly.  While "The
Golden Bowl" is filmed by James Ivory on location in
England, Italy and a sound-bite in the U.S., cultural
differences are subordinated in the film (as they were in the
novel) in favor of an intense study of individual character in
this filmed version.  A startling production which would be of
interest to the Merchant-Ivory fans but too verbal for the MTV
crowd.
Not Rated.  Running time: 130 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Adultery is the key word in the latest effort by the directing, producing 
and writing team of James Ivory, Ishmael Merchant and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala 
as they bring yet another Henry James novel to screen life in "The Golden 
Bowl." 
Adam Verver (Nick Nolte) is a fabulously wealthy American industrialist, 
possibly the world's first billionaire, living in the lap of luxury in 
Europe with daughter, Maggie (Kate Beckinsale). They meet, in their 
travels, a self-styled matchmaker, Fanny Assingham (Anjelica Huston), who 
does her darnedest to get Maggie together with handsome, penniless Prince 
Amerigo (Jeremy Northam) from Italy. Fanny also pushes Adam into the arms 
of Charlotte Stant (Uma Thurman), Maggie's closest friend. Unknown to the 
Ververs, their soon-to-be spouses have just recently ended their own torrid 
love affair because the poor prince could not possibly marry an equally 
poor commoner. But, is the affair really over? 
This is the third film that Merchant/Ivory/Jhabvala have adapted from the 
collected works of turn of the 19th century American novelist James. ("The 
Europeans" and "The Bostonians" were their previous efforts.) I have never 
been a fan of James's late 1800's era stories, finding his work too stern 
and without humor, unlike, for instance, Jane Austen, whose earlier period 
work - of Englishmen, rather than Americans - are bright and full of wit. 
James is more concerned with the darker side of the human psyche and "The 
Golden Bowl" is burdened with an almost relentless dourness with it's tale 
of deceit and infidelity. 
The story keeps its focus on the four principals and the dynamics of the 
weird quadrangle of relationships. There's the close, almost spousal, bond 
between Adam and Maggie, as the father and daughter have had to depend on 
only each other for many years. A formal link exists between Maggie and 
Amerigo as the princely pauper uses his wife's vast wealth to rebuild his 
family estate. Amerigo is devoted to Maggie, but it's a devotion based on 
selfish motives, not love. Charlotte still actively lusts after Amerigo, 
but plays the game of loyal and loving wife to Adam. She and Maggie retain 
their best friendship even as she cuckolds her friend, but rends soon form 
in the delicate fabric of the relationships of the four. It's a lusty story 
that must have titillated the libidos of the reading public at the time the 
book was published. 
Nick Nolte is proving to be one of the best senior actors in the business. 
He plays, basically, the other side of the coin of the character he created 
in Oliver Stone's "U-Turn." But, where that film's Jake McKenna (Nolte) was 
rich, powerful and ruthlessly evil, Adam Verver is rich and powerful, too, 
but also kind, generous and zealously devoted to his daughter. Nolte puts 
completely different spins on his characters, always making them unique. 
Beckinsale's Maggie is such a good, loving person, that she is almost too 
good to be a real person. The actress gives dimension to her performance 
and a believable, loving grace to Maggie that garners sympathy. Northam 
seemed miscast, at first, as the Italian-accented Prince Amerigo, but soon 
displays the selfish weakness of the man convincingly. Uma Thurman, never 
one of my favorite actresses, is terrific as the hedonistic, conniving 
Charlotte and reps one of her best perfs to date. Award considerations are 
not out of line. 
Supporting cast is limited, but there are a couple of interesting 
characters floating around in the background. Huston, as Fanny, plays that 
catalyst that gets things in motion among the principals. Her accent strays 
between American/Southern and American/Neutral, but the role she plays is 
important to the fabric of the film. James Fox does a fine job in the small 
role of Fanny's husband and confidant, building his Bob Assingham into a 
real, and amusing, person. 
The symbolism of the titular object is wrought throughout the film as the 
apparent perfection of the golden bowl, like the perfection of the 
marriages, is suspect and the flaws become obvious to the players and the 
viewer alike. The juxtaposition of the cracks in the bowl and obvious 
marital flaws of the characters is obvious, and a little heavy-handed, 
symbolically. 
The production, as expected from this team, is sumptuous. The film looks 
terrific with authentic-feeling period sets and costumes, showing off the 
talents of a veteran group of behind-the-camera craftspeople. The lush, 
crisp photography by Tony Pierce-Roberts captures, vividly, the actions of 
these aristocrats and their times. Director Merchant musters his forces 
well, but, in the end, the story doesn't compel me, making the film feel 
too long. 
"The Golden Bowl" is a strong effort that is burdened by the source 
material or its adaptation - not having read the novel, it's hard to tell. 
I give it a B. 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Steve Rhodes
Looking for the perfect wedding gift for Maggie Verver (Kate 
Beckinsale), his soon-to-be bride, Italian Prince Amerigo (Jeremy 
Northam) and his current lover, Charlotte Stant (Uma Thurman), pick out 
a magnificent golden bowl in the movie based on the classic Henry James 
novel of manners and intrigue, "The Golden Bowl."  When the prince 
points out that the bowl has an almost imperceptible flaw, they decide 
to postpone its purchase.  
The story revolves around relationships that look perfect but aren't, 
just like the bowl.  Carrying the bowl metaphor a bit further, this 
exquisite motion picture itself has a few imperfections, including being 
about 10 minutes too long.  More disconcerting is Jeremy Northam's 
jarring Italian accent which feels just as fake as his beard, which may 
be genuine but doesn't look it.  Still, these are minor quibbles.  
THE GOLDEN BOWL is brought to the screen by the famous Merchant-Ivory 
team which includes producer Ismail Merchant, director James Ivory, 
screenwriter Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, cinematographer Tony Pierce-Roberts, 
composer Richard Robbins and costumer John Bright.  Their movies always 
look terrific.  Sometimes, as in THE ROOM WITH A VIEW, they let the look 
overwhelm the story, but other times, as in THE REMAINS OF THE DAY and 
THE GOLDEN BOWL, they come up with a story that's more than a match for 
the production's lush appearance.
Several decades ago, the BBC did a mini-series of "The Golden Bowl," 
which was shown on Masterpiece Theater in America -- the prince, by the 
way, notes that he is a direct descendant of Amerigo Vespucci from 
whence the word America is derived.  This television series is a 
personal favorite of mine, and, even if this film version doesn't quite 
measure up, it is a wonderful movie in its own right.
Starting in 1903, the movie spans a decade in which the prince does make 
a princess out of Maggie, who is the daughter of America's first 
billionaire, Adam Verver (Nick Nolte), a widower.  Although Charlotte 
would have been happy to marry the prince, he wisely points out that 
they are both broke so they must marry money.  Charlotte comes to 
realize the value of his advice when she marries Adam.  The real reason 
for her marriage, however, is to be closer to the prince since Maggie is 
a childish woman who is joined at the hip to her father.  The father and 
daughter go everywhere together, leaving their respective spouses with 
too much time alone.  Of course, being the generous and caring people 
that they are, Adam and Maggie insist that the prince keep Charlotte 
company.  Bad idea.
In this story of who knows what and when, the real intrigue stems from 
the characters' actions.  Who will first break the silence and say 
honestly what is on his or her mind?  And who will forever speak only in 
euphemisms?  Even after Maggie knows of her husband's infidelity, she 
tells Charlotte with something sounding like complete sincerity, "I have 
never thought you anything you but beautiful, wonderful and good."  It 
rather reminds one of the time that George McGovern said that he was 
"1,000 percent" behind his vice-presidential running mate and then 
dumped him like a hot potato right afterwards.  One thing is certain, 
there are lots of truthfully good things to say about this superb motion 
picture from the strong ensemble cast to the striking production to the 
mesmerizing yet delicate story.
THE GOLDEN BOWL runs 2:10.  It is rated R for a brief sex scene without 
nudity.  The movie would be acceptable for kids around 12 or 13 and up.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
