Title
Review for Murder on the Orient Express (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ryan Kohler
As my English Composition instructor commented recently, "Agatha Christie is
the coolest mystery writer ever." This is true with her books; however, in
many cases, film adaptions of her books have, in a word, sucked. An exception
is "Murder on the Orient Express," a luxurious, quick-paced throwback to a
different kind of time and place.
Made in 1974, "Orient Express" was directed by Sidney Lumet (known more for
gritty, urban pictures like "Dog Day Afternoon" and "Serpico.") In Lumet's
capable hands the film takes the viewer back to 1935 as the famed Orient
Express travels from Istanbul to Calais, France. Midway through the trip a
shady businessman, Ratchett (Richard Widmark), is murdered in his sleep.
Master Belgian sleuth Hercule Poirot (Albert Finney, in the best incarnation
of the character ever) is faced with the daunting task of discovering who is
the murderer(s).
Shot with an all-star cast, including Sean Connery, Ingrid Bergman, Sir John
Geilgud, and Lauren Bacall, among others, this film makes for a very
entertaining time. All the actors do well in their roles, especially Bergman
(who won an Oscar for this role) and Bacall. Only Anthony Perkins is a sore
point--his character recalls too much of the personable side of Norman Bates
to be effective here.
Best of the performances is, naturally, Finney. He imbibes Poirot with a
fastidious, lively approach. At once bouncy and charismatic, Finney's Poirot
is not one-dimensional. The high-point of the film, and of Finney's portrayal,
is when Poirot announces his solution to the murder. Basically twenty minutes
of just Poirot talking, Finney delivers a tour-de-force performance at this
crucial juncture.
Paul Dehn's screenplay brims over with wit and sarcasm, with many good lines
going to Bacall and Finney. Richard Rodney Bennett's score is throwback to
another time as he uses strings and the piano to a thrilling effect. Tony
Walton's glorious period costumes and the set design of the train is almost,
quite simply put, amazing.
"Murder on the Orient Express" is a brilliantly shot film. Cinematographer
Geoffrey Unsworth shoots almost everything in a brightly lit frame, giving all
the actors a glowing aura about them. He also manages to pull off an
outstanding camera feat as the train first pulls out of the station in
Istanbul--combined with Bennett's score it must be seen and heard to be
believed.
There is just so much to recommend in this film. Everything seems to come off
without a hitch. Just sit back, relax, and enjoy "Murder on the Orient
Express." Movies just are not made like this anymore.
"Murder on the Orient Express" (1974).  Directed by Sidney Lumet.  Written by
Paul Dehn, from the novel by Agatha Christie.  Music by Richard Rodney
Bennett.  With Albert Finney, Lauren Bacall, Ingrid Bergman, Sean Connery,
Anthony Perkins, Michael York, and many other big name stars.  Distributed by
Paramount.  Running time: 127 minutes.  Rated PG.  AVAILABLE ON HOME VIDEO.
Rating (out of a 4.0 cumulative average): 4.0
**Visit My Film Review Multiplex: http://pages.prodigy.com/XWKZ01B/index.htm**
