Title
Review for Midnight Cowboy (1969)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ahmed I Shihab
     This "dumb" cowboy blondie who thinks he is a `darn' good
loverboy, decides to leave his dusty ol' town somewhere in Texas and go
to New  York.  He puts on his beloved Cowboy attire and off he hops on
the next New York coach.
     When he arrives to New York, he immediately sets out to play Mr
Playboy thinking he is the best `darn' `stud' in the whol'o' New York
City.  Obviously he fails.
     He meets the 'cripple' Rico (Dustin Hoffman, who is terrifically
good) in a bar.  Rico has a leg that is paralysed from the knee down,
so he walks in a peculiar way.  Rico is a thief and wants to get some
money off this 'rich' dumb  Cowboy.  He cheats our Cowboy out of $20
through a somewhat detailed routine and disappears.
     Soon, our cowboy runs out of money: he gets kicked out of his
hotel, and starts getting hungry.  Walking through the city, with
"Everybody's talkin'" playing in the background (oh, and his prided
techno transistor radio in hand), he spots Rico in a cafe.
     Rico, half-scared, pours out all the money in his pocket. 60
filthy cents.  Our cowboy, hungry, is forgiving.  He is glad he found
someone he knows.  Rico offers to make it up for him.  And he invites
him to his place.  And what a filthy, cold place it is.  Our cowboy
falls asleep instantly in the (junk) bed.  When he finally wakes
(jumps?) up, he finds Rico looking at him. "You wanna cup'a'coffee?"
Rico asks in his friendly, sleazy, somewhat-childish manner while he
smokes on a ciggy.
     But all his doubts turn out to be unfounded.  Rico really has a
heart.  Together, they live in the junk apartment and almost freeze to
death.  Rico is convinced that the best place to be is Florida, where
the sun shines beautifully and there are lots of coconut trees.  But he
falls sick and is convinced that his cure is to go to Florida.
     "We will soon be in Miami" is the last sentence uttered in this
film and what a shocking, moving end of a film it is.  The classic
theme music: "Midnight Cowboy" helps bring about the feeling of
attachment that most viewers will experience towards the end of the
film.  Whether the attachment is to the two main characters or to their
dreams, is probably as debatable as whether it was the acting or the
direction that makes this film so memorable.
Please supply me with feedback, as this is the first time I
am posting to this newsgroup.
-- 
** Ahmed I Shihab, Research Student, Department of Computing, 
Imperial College, 180 Queen's Gate, London, UK 171-594 8381 
========= http://www-asds.doc.ic.ac.uk/cgi-bin/ais ==========

Author
Sean Lee
In the opening shot of Midnight Cowboy, we see a close-up of a blank movie
screen at a drive-in. We hear in the soundtrack human cries and the stomping
of horses' hooves. Without an image projected onto the screen, the audience
unerringly identifies the familiar sound of cowboys chasing Indians and can
spontaneously fill in the blank screen with images of old westerns in our
mind's eye. Even without having seen a cowboys and Indians movie, somehow
the cliched images of them seem to have found their way into our mental
schema. But do cowboys really exist, or are they merely Hollywood images
personified by John Wayne and Gary Cooper? Exploring this theme, director
John Schlesinger uses the idea of the cowboy as a metaphor for the American
Dream, an equally cliched yet ambiguous concept. Is the ease at which
salvation and success can be attained in America a hallmark of its
experience or an urban legend? Midnight Cowboy suggests that the American
Dream, like image of the cowboy, is merely a myth. As Joe Buck migrates from
place to place, he finds neither redemption nor reward in his attempt to
create a life for himself, only further degeneration.
During the opening credits, Joe walks past an abandoned theater whose
decrepit marquee reads `John Wayne: The Alamo.' As Joe is on the bus
listening to a radio talk show, a lady on the air describes her ideal man as
`Gary Cooper but he's dead.' A troubled expression comes across Joe's face,
as he wonders where have all the cowboys gone. Having adopted the image of a
cowboy since youth, Joe now finds himself deserted by the persona he tried
to embody. Joe's persistence in playing the act of the cowboy serves as an
analogue to his American Dream. He romanticizes about making it in the big
city, but his dreams will desert him as he is forced to compromise his
ideals for sustenance. By the end of Midnight Cowboy, Joe Buck loses
everything and gains nothing. Just as the audience can picture cowboys
chasing Indians on a blank screen, we can also conjure up scenes from Pretty
Woman as paradigms of American redemption and success. But how realistic are
these ideals? Joe had raped and been raped in Texas. The scars of his
troubled past prompt him to migrate to New York, but he does not know that
his aspirations to be a cowboy hero will fail him there just as they had in
Texas.
Alongside the dream of success is the dream of salvation. The ability to
pack up one's belongings and start anew seems to be an exclusive American
convention. Schlesinger provides us with strong hints as to Joe's abusive
and abused past with flashbacks of improper relationships with Crazy Anne
and Granny. We understand that Joe adopts the façade of a cowboy, a symbol
of virility and gallantry, as an attempt to neutralize his shame. He runs
from his past only to be sexually defiled this time by his homosexual
experiences in New York. In the scene at the diner which foreshadows Joe's
encounter with the gay student, Joe Buck spills ketchup on himself. Standing
up, we see the ketchup has made a red stain running from the crotch of his
pants down his thigh. Schlesinger visually depicts the degeneration of Joe's
virility by eliciting an image of bleeding genitals, signifying
emasculation. Beyond the symbol of castration, the scene may also connote
the bleeding of a virgin's first sexual encounter, a reference to Joe's
first homosexual liaison. The fact that the idea of a bleeding virgin is
relegated only to females furthers the imagery of Joe's emasculation. It is
ironic that Joe has trouble prospecting for female clients, but effortlessly
attracts men. Joe believes his broncobuster getup is emblematic of his
masculinity; New Yorkers see his ensemble as camp and `faggot stuff.'
There are two predominant images of New York. The first is that New York is
the rich, cosmopolitan city where hope and opportunity are symbolized by the
tall skyscrapers and the Statue of Liberty. The other New York is Travis
Bickle's New York, a seedy, corruptive hell on Earth. Joe envisions New York
as the former, but is presented with the latter. Mirroring the irony in
which Joe envisions his cowboy attire as masculine, he mistakenly buys into
the fable that New York is filled with lonely women neglected by gay men.
Joe thinks he is performing a great service for New York, but the city rapes
him of his pride and possessions. The people steal Joe's money, the landlord
confiscates his luggage, and the homosexuals rob him of his dignity. What
has become of Joe's American Dream? Schlesinger responds to this question
with the scene at the party. Joe gets invited to a shindig of sorts and at
the gathering is exposed to a dizzying array of food, drugs, and sex. At the
party, all of Joe and Ratzo's desires are made flesh; Joe flirts
successfully with women and Ratzo loads up on free salami. Contrasting Joe's
daily struggles, shots of Warhol's crew display wanton indulgence. There is
an irreverence in the partygoers' attitude; we see a shot of a woman
kowtowing to nothing in particular, orgies breaking out in the periphery,
and drugs passed around like party favors. The party makes a mockery of Joe'
s ideals. Joe believed that hard work and persistence were the elements for
success in America; scenes of the party and his rendezvous with Shirley
suggest that  it is the idle who profit from Joe's toils. The American
Dream, Schlesinger suggests, is merely a proletarian fantasy, for those who
are content no longer dream, but become indolent.
As Joe heads to Miami, all that was significant of the cowboy image has left
him. His masculinity is compromised and his morality is relinquished. For
Joe, nothing is left of the cowboy hero and commensurately, he surrenders
the identity. Tossing his boots into the garbage, he returns to the bus for
the last leg of his journey to Miami. The final shot of Midnight Cowboy
shows Joe inside the bus, more introspective, taking only a few glances
outside the window. Instead of the frequent POV shots of Joe excitedly
looking out of the bus on his way to New York,  Schlesinger sets up this
final shot from the exterior of the bus looking in through the window at
Joe. Reflections of the palm trees Ratzo so raved about run across the bus'
window with Joe hardly taking notice. The scenery of Miami no longer exacts
the same excitement from Joe as before. The world seems smaller to Joe now;
the termination of his journey coincides with the termination of his
American Dream. No longer does Joe aspire to be the enterprising gigolo; he
resolves to return to a normal job and resign to basic means.
Midnight Cowboy presents two familiar incarnations of the American Dream.
There is the frontier fantasy that if you are brave enough to repel a few
Indians, you can set up a ranch out West and raise a beautiful family. Then
there is the Jay Gatsby dream that a man of humble stock, with perseverance,
can make a fortune in the big city. Joe's attempt to realize these dreams
robs him of his innocence in Texas and morality in New York. During his
search for an intangible paradise, Joe ends up raping a girl and killing a
man. An allegory of chasing the promise of the American Dream, Joe Buck's
progressive moral atrophy is a warning against the pursuit of illusory
icons.

Author
Brian Koller
"Midnight Cowboy" is an excellent film that demonstrates
the gap between ambitions and reality, and gives
a flavor of what New York City (and rural Texas)
was like in the late 1960s.  "Midnight Cowboy" was
also a landmark film in its explicit treatment of sexual
behavior, especially homosexuality, which initially
earned an 'X' rating.  (The rating was later rescinded
after the Oscars had awarded it "Best Picture".)
Joe Buck (Jon Voight) is a young Texan who decides to
leave his dishwashing job and move to New York City.
He is naively certain that he can make a good living
as a "hustler", meaning a prostitute with older women
as customers.
Upon reaching New York, he is soon hustled himself.
Slow to realize the difference between reality and
his fantasies, he becomes impoverished and a male prostitute.
He moves into a condemned apartment already occupied
by small-time con and cripple Ratso Rizzo (Dustin Hoffman)
who has dreams of his own: living as an important man
in Florida.
The director, John Schlesinger, makes frequent use of
brief, long-ago flashbacks of Buck's childhood, and
pairs these flashbacks to relevent events in the present.
We learn that Buck was raised by his grandmother, who had
multiple boyfriends and who neglected and possibly sexually
abused him.  There are also fantasy scenes paired with
their real-world result.  For example, Voight approaches a
would-be customer, and there is a fantasy scene of him
escorting her to a posh suite.  The reality scene has
her making a quick exit, leaving Voight standing in
the street with a stupid look on his face.  These
flashback/fantasy scenes are even better than the rest
of the film, and it is a wonder that more films do not
make use of them.  Certainly Schlesinger was deserving
of his 'Best Director' Academy Award.
Dustin Hoffman is endearing in the role of Rizzo.
Hoffman can be very likable in secondary roles (as in
"Papillon"), where his character can show more
eccentricities.
Voight was a late casting, after the role had been
offered to Michael Sarrazin and even Elvis Presley.
The Joe Buck character is perhaps too naive and
stupid, but Voight is very credible as a yokel.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1969, R, 113 minutes [1 hour, 53 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Jon Voight (Joe Buck), Dustin Hoffman (Enrico "Ratso" Rizzo),
produced by Jerome Hellman, written by Waldo Salt, directed by John
Schlesinger, based on the novel by James Leo Herlihy.
"Midnight Cowboy" is a story of a strange attempt at the American Dream gone
wrong, which is exactly how the film works. It could have been a great
character study, and/or a detailed depiction of  the cruelness of reality,
but it tells its story in such a bizarre manner it's difficult to follow,
much less be moved by.
The film starts off seemingly normal as we meet Joe Buck (Voight), a young,
handsome cowboy who is on his way to New York City to make it big. But Joe is
arrogant fellow, he fantasizes about women and convinces himself he's every
woman's dream. However, the fantasy sequences are inter-cut with strange
flashbacks, and they work well to portray the surrealism of the mind. These
scenes are scattered throughout the film, but eventually start to become
redundant and lose their impact.
Joe arrives in NYC and checks into a hotel and then hits the streets and
tries to pick up women. But he's a tall cowboy roaming the streets of New
York, and we get typical fish-out-of-water scenes that are supposed to show
how cruel people can be, but instead seem more like quick comic relief. When
Joe meets a woman and seduces her, we finally learn his reason for coming to
New York: to become a "hustler" to rich women. Unfortunately, he doesn't know
what he's doing and his plan seems to fail.
Right away, the film's biggest flaw is obvious - why would Joe leave home to
pursue such an unattainable goal? Also, how could he have seduced a woman so
fast? I found myself asking questions like these throughout the film, and
thus became distracted because they were never answered.
One day Joe meets Enrico "Ratso" Rizzo (Hoffman), a small time con man,
thief, and all around unsuccessful criminal. Ratso learns of Joe's plan and
tries to hook him up with a "pimp," but that plan falls through. Joe becomes
furious with Ratso, but when he bumps into him again he doesn't take revenge.
Instead, the two move in together in an abandoned building!
Although many events take place throughout the first half, virtually nothing
happens in terms of story and plot. Most of the second half is a series of
extremely strange events that are only mildly interesting and not nearly as
thematic as they intend to be. Up until the encounter with the strange old
pimp the film had been relatively normal. From that point on it becomes very
strange with scenes that make little or no sense and an overall feeling of
vertigo.
For example, Joe, who is the epitome of staunch heterosexuality, has a
homosexual encounter with a young man who does not pay him afterwards, yet he
hardly seems to mind. Why this happens is beyond me. Does he do it just for
the money, or is he possibly bi-sexual? Perhaps the flashbacks were subtle,
Freudian hints, but the story is told so choppy nothing makes sense.
The final act starts to become a modernized version of "Of Mice And Men" as
we learn the two plan to move to Florida to escape the New York winter
because Ratso is dying from it. But unlike Lenny and George, where one was
stupid and the other smart but both cared for each other, these men are both
stupid and neither seems to care for the other, and why would they? They have
nothing in common, Voight and Hoffman have no chemistry, and the atmosphere
is too gritty to be believed. The two are self-made victims - it's hard to
feel sorry for them.
There is a scene at a psychedelic party where the film itself becomes an
acid trip where reality is there, it's just not realistic. This is symbolic
of "Midnight Cowboy" - there is reality to it, but because it's bizarre it
cannot be taken seriously
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Jason Overbeck
Midnight Cowboy is one of the best films ever made.  It is depressing
and exciting, and it crackles with visual excesses and brilliance.  It
is also the only X-rated film to win best picture at the Oscars.  The
content was very controversial when Midnight Cowboy was released in
1969, and now seems like a flat R, and less shocking.  
Midnight Cowboy tells a great stories that seems forever-recycled into
original material.  A small town kid, Joe Buck (Jon Voight) a cowboy
from Texas, enters a big city with high hopes that become deflated as he
tries to dodge the sharks.  He is looked after by Enrico "Ratso" Rizzo
(Dustin Hoffman) a con with a loser with a bum leg and heart.  Rizzo
helps Buck with his dream of becoming a hustler and Buck offer a friend.
The characters are seen so clearly and uncompromisingly that they put
most film characters to shame.  Buck as the ignorant kid who has a bad
temper and Rizzo as the pathetic con.  Both men try so hard to create a
good environment for themselves and each other that they end up cold and
desperate.  All actions in the film are character driven and Midnight
Cowboy never insults the audience by being presumptuous.  
Instead we get Ratso Rizzo one of the best tragic heroes of all time. 
You can't help feel sorry for this guy who may be bad on the surface but
really cares for his friend Buck and has the feeble hope of one day
getting to visit Florida and one day not being called Ratso but Enrico,
the name he was given.
Rizzo and Buck combine to make one of the best screen couples of all
time.  We watch as their relationship grows from nothing to wonderful
love and mutual respect.  When I say "LOVE" I'm not talking about the
easy way out love, but a friendship that will break wall and protect
them as far as it can take them.
Midnight Cowboy, which I just recently saw for the first time, doesn't
feel dated at all.  It holds it's own with freshness and excitement few
films today possess.  I would say this is a great companion piece to
Boogie Nights, the wonderful film of last year, which is now out on
video.  Midnight Cowboy's director John Schlesinger should receive most
of the credit for the film's still powerful impact and undated
qualities.
**A flat out wonderful film that should not be seen on Network
Television.
