Title
Review for Major League: Back to the Minors (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Christian Pyle
1989's "Major League" was a delightful surprise.  I didn't expect much of it
when I decided to watch it on cable, but it proved to be fresh and funny. 
However, when the appeal of a movie is its freshness, the sequels are virtually
guaranteed to be stale.  That's certainly true of "Major League II" and the
most recent entry, "Major League:  Back to the Minors."
The title is, of course, a contradiction.  Shouldn't it be "Minor League?" 
That contradiction suggests the lengths to which writer/director John Warren
has gone to squeeze a third movie out of the formula established by the first
movie.  Original stars Charlie Sheen and Tom Berenger (who returned for "Major
League II") are not around, leaving Corbin Bernsen the only original headliner
to make the third movie.  The other veterans who return (Dennis Haysbert as
voodoo-inspired batter Cerrano and Takaaki Ishibashi as Tanaka, who was
introduced in "League II") seem to be around just to lend legitimacy to the
enterprise.  The only returning cast member who produces any laughs is Bob
Uecker as radio announcer Harry Doyle, inexplicably broadcasting the games of a
minor league team far from his home turf.
The protagonist this time around is retiring pitcher Gus Cantrell (Scott
Bakula), who is hired by Minnesota Twins owner Roger Dorn (Bernsen) to manage
the Twins' AAA team, the Buzz.  You can write the movie from here:  he finds a
group of misfits who need to learn how to play together as a team in order to
win.  There's a future superstar whose ego keeps him from growing (Walton
Goggins), an ex-ballet dancer (Kenneth Johnson), a broken-down old timer (Thom
Barry), twin outfielders both named Juan (the DiFilippo triplets), and a couple
pitchers with throwing problems (Judson Mills and Peter Mackenzie).  Along the
way, Gus picks up Cerrano and Tanaka (Gus is supposedly an old teammate of
theirs, even though he wasn't in either of the preceding films).  Sum total: 
none.  The entire enterprise is artificial, and the cast is not ready for the
Hollywood majors.
Gus' antagonist is Twins manager Leonard Huff (Ted McGinley).  Leonard is a
slimy, sniveling little egotist, and the Twins are lazy, spoiled, and full of
themselves.  (Even watching the first movie I wondered why any real-life team
would lend itself to being caricatured in this manner).  Gus challenges Leonard
to a match, the Buzz vs. the Twins.  (Wanna guess who wins?)
"Back to the Minors" is a movie that has no reason to exist.  There's hardly a
laugh in it, the cast is weak, and the first movie left no room for even one
sequel.  
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
.">http://www.wpd.net/madreview/>.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Scott Bakula, Corbin Bernsen, Dennis Haysbert, Ted McGinley, 
      Walt Goggins, Eric Bruskotter, Thom Barry, Takaaki Ishibashi, 
      Jensen Daggett, Bob Uecker
Director: John Warren
Producer: James G. Robinson
Screenplay: John Warren
Cinematography: Tim Surhstedt
Music: Robert Folk
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     From a major league baseball radio broadcast, featuring play-by-
play man Harry Canary and color man Whitey Hashbrown, with special guest 
commentator James Berardinelli.
HC:  As we go to the top of the 8th, we're joined in the booth by film 
critic James Berardinelli, who's here fresh from seeing the new baseball 
movie, MAJOR LEAGUE: BACK TO THE MINORS, the third in the popular saga 
taking a lighter look at the Majors.  Nice to see you, Jim.  As a big 
baseball fan and a movie reviewer, can you give us the scoop on the new 
flick?
JB:  My opinion:  the producers should have stopped while they were 
ahead, and that was nine years ago.  One entry was definitely enough, 
and I'm surprised there was a third after the anemic showing and low 
quality of MAJOR LEAGUE 2.  This latest installment has all the earmarks 
of something that should have been released direct-to-video.  It's worse 
than a mediocre made-for-TV feature.  I should also mention that this 
movie likely won't play all that well in Cleveland.  Now that the real 
Indians are perennial contenders, they have been replaced by the 
Minnesota Twins as the cinematic sadsacks.  Actually, most of the action 
involves the Twins' AAA minor league club, the Buzz, rather than the 
actual major league franchise.
HC:  Sorry to interrupt, Jim, but we still have to do play-by-play for 
the game on the field.  Leading off this inning is John Warren.  He 
steps into the batter's box and takes Kent's pitch low for ball one.
WH:  So, the story's strictly minor league, right?  What's it about?
JB:  Scott Bakula, the guy from QUANTUM LEAP, plays career minor league 
pitcher Gus Cantrell.  When Twins owner Roger Dorn, once again portrayed 
by Corbin Bernsen, needs a new manager for his AAA team, he offers the 
job to Gus, who is now faced with two daunting tasks:  turn the team 
around and groom hot prospect Downtown Anderson (played by Walt Goggins) 
for a promotion to "the Show."  With the help of former major leaguers 
Pedro Cerrano (Dennis Haysbert), Rube Baker (Eric Bruskotter), and Isuro 
Tanaka (Takaaki Ishibashi), Gus gets the Buzz on the right track.  In 
fact, he is so successful that he earns the enmity of the jealous 
manager of the big-league club, Leonard Huff (played with over-the-top 
relish by Ted McGinley).  Soon, Dorn has arranged an exhibition game 
that pits Gus' overachieving group against Huff's overpaid, last-place 
bunch.
JB:  The results have all the suspense of watching the videotape of a 
game when you've already seen the box score.  On top of that, none of 
the mock-ups are presented with much flair.  They're not just boring; 
they're lackluster.  But the MAJOR LEAGUE movies have never been about 
drama or tension; they've been about using baseball situations to 
generate laughs.
JB:  Not one, from start to finish.  I enjoyed the first MAJOR LEAGUE 
because it was reasonably fresh and funny.  Okay, a lot of the jokes 
were sophomoric, but they made me laugh.  The two sequels haven't just 
been stale, but their humor quotient has been abysmally low.  Even Bob 
Uecker's once-sharp one-liners have turned lame, and they're the closest 
the film comes to being even vaguely amusing.
HC:  Here's the 1-1 pitch.  Looooooong drive… fair or foul…  Foul Ball!  
The count goes to 1 and 2.
WH:  Does the film at least get the baseball details correct?
JB:  Yes.  There aren't any glaring errors like there were in one of the 
best-ever baseball movies, THE NATURAL.  But I'd gladly trade a 
technically accurate film for one with a good story, believable 
characters, or even a little genuine humor.  Heck, THE NAKED GUN is a 
better baseball comedy than MAJOR LEAGUE: BACK TO THE MINORS.
WH:  It's nice to see old friends one more time, isn't it?  Like 
Cerrano, Tanaka, and Dorn.
JB:  Depends on whether you really care that anyone is back. There 
aren't any real characters here – just an assortment of cliched 
oddballs.  Yeah, the voodoo hitter, the catcher who can't throw back to 
the pitcher, the Japanese player, and the conceited player-turned-owner 
have all returned, but who really cares?  They have no depth.  Notable 
absences include Tom Berenger's veteran and Charlie Sheen's "Wild 
Thing."  We don't really miss them, though.  
HC:  Breaking ball, low and outside.  2 and 2.
WH:  So you're saying that we should give this one a miss?
JB:  That's right.  To use baseball terminology, it's a three-pitch 
strikeout.  If you're looking for a good movie that involves baseball, 
try popping THE NATURAL, FIELD OF DREAMS, BULL DURHAM, or even the first 
MAJOR LEAGUE into the VCR.  Actually, this is an oddly-timed release, 
since baseball fans are likely to be spending more time in parks than in 
theaters.  Even the minor league seasons are already underway.  Don't 
bother with MAJOR LEAGUE: BACK TO THE MINORS. It's a wretched time-
waster.
HC:  And here's the 2-2 pitch.  Fouled back, right into this booth.  
Hey, Jim, heads up!  Oops.  Somebody better get him some ice for that.  
He may be good at deflecting bad baseball movies, but he needs to learn 
not to duck into foul balls.  Odd how Warren seemed to aim that ball 
right at him, almost as if he has a grudge to settle.  Anyway, back to 
the action on the field…
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
James Sanford
        Perhaps having an easily identifiable title is all it takes to
get a movie these days. How else to explain the rash of unnecessary
and unappealing sequels - ``Odd Couple II,'' ``Species 2,'' ``Home
Alone 3,'' etc. - currently congesting marquees?
Add ``Major League 3: Back To The Minors'' to that list.
Granted, it's not as excruiating as ``Major League 2,'' but why
continue this franchise, especially since Charlie Sheen, Tom Berenger
and Wesley Snipes, the guys who made the 1989 original work, have long
since fled? In their place is a trio of tired-looking ex-TV stars:
Scott Bakula (``Quantum Leap''), Ted McGinley (``Married With
Children'') and Corbin Bernsen (``L.A. Law''), whose wardrobe of
oversize jackets and baggy sweaters can't hide the fact the
once-upon-a-time hunk should now be sporting an ``I'm Not Fat, I'm
Fluffy'' bumper sticker.
The drabness of the leads sets the tone for the picture, which
is not so much awful as it is awfully dull. Movies like ``Titanic''
weave vibrant, colorful tapestries; movies like ``Major League 3'' are
as invigorating as watching Saran Wrap unroll.
Writer-director John Warren has torn several pages from ``Bull
Durham'' without appropriating any of its humor, sexiness or human
interest.  Former major leaguer Gus Cantrell (Bakula) is talked into
managing the Buzz, a very minor league team made up of quirky souls,
such as an ex-ballet star who does arabesques on the field, a
hoity-toity pitcher who laments the fact that backwoods diners don't
serve balsamic vinegar, and one genuine talent in the form of
``Downtown'' Anderson (Walton Goggins, looking like Jim Carrey's rabid
brother). You need not call the Psychic Friends to figure out Cantrell
succeeds in turning this motley crew into a ball team to be reckoned
with.
McGinley, in one of the most grating comic performances since
Chris Tucker in ``Money Talks,'' plays Huff, the snobbish manager of
the Minnesota Twins, a dork whose grudge against Cantrell leads to a
showdown between the Twins and the Buzz in Minneapolis. Indicative of
``League 3'' 's skimpy budget, the ``crowd'' at the big game seems to
number only a few hundred, barely enough to fill one section of seats
in the stadium.
Those sad souls who can never get their fill of Bob Uecker
will delight in his frequent appearances throughout the film, dropping
such knee-slappers as ``they timed this kid's fastball with an
hourglass'' and ``I've seen better hands on a clock.'' But the movie's
sharpest insight goes to Huff: ``When you get major talent, you get
major personalities.'' To elaborate on that line, you could say when
you get major talent, you get ``Major League,'' and when you get major
has-beens, you get ``Major League 3.''

Author
Matt Williams
Well, you just can't keep a good franchise down...or a bad one from the
looks of it. Major League, a mildly amusing film that stretched for it's
first sequel now returns for a third try.  However, with most of the
original cast absent (most notably Charlie Sheen and Tom Berenger), the
Cleveland Indians nowhere in sight, and the shift of focus away from the
major league, it's a pretty big stretch to call this film a sequel.
Corbin Bernsen is the biggest name to return, as Roger Dorn. He helps to
run the Minnesota Twins, and needs a new manager for their AAA minor
league team, the Buzz.  He finds his man in worn-out pitcher Gus
Cantrell (Scott Bakula).
However, Gus finds the Buzz is full of misfits (surprise, surprise).
There's only one promising player, Downtown Anderson (Walt Goggis),
among the bunch.  Though Gus does recruit former Major League players
Pedor Cerrano (Dennis Haysbert) and Isuro Tanaka (Takaaki Ishibashi) for
his minor league team.  Let the wackiness ensue!!!
As you would expect, the Buzz starts out horribly, but then miraculously
turns into a good team.  So good, in fact, that Gus puts out a challenge
to his rival, Leonard Huff (Ted McGinley), manager of the Twins, to pit
the minor league Buzz vs. the major league Twins.
You know you're likely in trouble when a film can't even attract the
likes of Charlie Sheen or Tom Berenger to return, and when a pair of
out-of-work tv stars topline the movie, that trouble's almost certain.
To their credit, the filmmakers know their formula cold, but the film
doesn't even make the slightest effort to deviate from the norm.
The jokes they pile upon the film aren't as bad as they are simply
tired. (Hey!  A guy gets bonked in the head with a baseball!  Whoa!
Haven't seen that one before!) Some of the baseball commentary (by Bob
Uecker again) gets a chuckle or two, but it's not even up to the low
standards of the last Major League film.
As the lead, Scott Bakula has some talent, but I hope he's not trying to
showcase it here. He ran through this old formula once before in
Unnecessary Roughness (ok, that was football, but the bad-sports-team
concept still holds).  He doesn't uncover anything new this time out.
There are no real standouts among the rest of the cast.  Each player has
his quirk, and there's not much beyond that.  Hardly any of them even
rate a personality.
It's amazing that this one avoided going direct-to-video.  There's no
reason to see it on film...in fact, there are several reasons against
seeing it at all.  But, it isn't absolutely horrible, and could service
as a last-choice rental.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 17, 1998
Starring: Scott Bakula, Corbin Bernsen, Thom Barry, Ted McGinley Jensen
Daggett, Eric Bruskotter, Walt Goggins, Dennis Haysbert, Takaaki
Ishibashi, Bob Uecker
Directed by: John Warren
Distributed by: Warner Brothers
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (brief language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/major.htm
People who think Hollywood should stay away from sequels are most
definitely going to use MAJOR LEAGUE: BACK TO THE MINORS as ammunition
for their case. There are very few movies that can survive the sophomore
jinx, let alone become franchises that sprawl out to three or four or
even five movies. ROCKY, BATMAN, ALIEN, and LETHAL WEAPON are all
enjoyable movies that have now spawned at least three less-than-
enjoyable follow-ups, and in the case of ROCKY, we did have to sit
through Stallone's stinker of a fifth episode (although the point might
be made that it capped the series off). Hopefully, though, MAJOR LEAGUE
3's dismal appearance will warrant a cut-off for the series, as an
outing like this does not deserve to be repeated. 
There is little to like about the bad humor and dismal cast that
cultivates MAJOR LEAGUE 3. Only three members of the original cast
haven't nixed the franchise by this episode, and the title character is
fresh meat. Scott Bakula (from a more enjoyable sports comedy, Necessary
Roughness) plays Gus Cantrell, a minor league baseball player who, on
the verge of retirement, takes the option from Roger Dorn (Corbin
Bernsen) to manage a triple-A team in the Minnesota Twins' organization
called the Buzz. Predictably, at the movie's outset, the group is a
bumbling gaggle of klutzes that fight amongst themselves and boggle
routine plays. And predictably, with Gus' help, they become a top-notch
farm team. The climax of the movie comes with a bet between Gus and
Leonard Huff (Ted McGinley), the manager of the Twins, that pits the
Buzz against the Twins. 
Bob Uecker as Harry Doyle, the vulgar announcer, and Dennis Haysbert as
the intimdating Cuban batsman Pedro Cerrano, are the other two cast
members (along with Bernsen) to make it back. Also returning from the
second movie is Takaaki Ishibashi, although those three characters have
lost their novelty and don't lend much to the movie's story. Even
Uecker, usually funny, has lost a lot of his idiosyncrasies for the sake
of a PG-13 rating: his drunken abandon is replaced with dry humor that
loses appeal quickly. Bakula is decent as Buzz manager Cantrell,
although his attempt at middle-aged wisdom doesn't lend itself to the
audience the way Tom Berringer's did for the first movie. Bernsen, too,
as Dorn, has lost his appeal, and Jensen Daggett (from FRIDAY THE 13TH
PART VIII - now that's sequel overkill), who plays Gus' fiancee Maggie,
is good-looking onscreen but either underused in the script or just
pointless. 
Sports comedies are drastically in decline, and that may correlate to
the declining stability of professional sports. Laughable gems like
MAJOR LEAGUE don't deserve to be ruined by poor sequels, and even though
Warner Brothers may not have realized it prior to their distribution of
the third episode, they may after it brings in poor box office receipts.
Although CITY OF ANGELS was a diamond in the rough for the film company,
they haven't had a box-office smash in seven months. MAJOR LEAGUE: BACK
TO THE MINORS is definitely missable, for just about every person and
for just about any other movie.
FINAL AWARD FOR "MAJOR LEAGUE 3": 0.5 stars - a very poor movie.

Author
Michael Dequina
Major League: Back to the Minors (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
You know the guy: sometimes bearded, often burly, he always manages to
sit in the seat directly behind you, ever so eager to greet a film's
every slight attempt at humor with a hearty, guttural explosion of
laughter.  You know you're neck-deep into something awful when even
that guy, who reveals his erpetually guffawing self during the
trailers, remains as stonily silent throughout the film as everyone
else in the auditorium.  And Major League: Back to the Minors is truly
something awful.  Horribly written and directed by John Warren, this
third installment of the baseball comedy series is unwatchable drivel.
Aging minor-league pitcher Gus Cantrell (Scott Bakula) is recruited by
old friend and Minnesota Twins owner Roger Dorn (Corbin Bernsen) to
coach the Twins' struggling farm team, the Buzz, an inept squad that
counts among its ranks a former ballet dancer (ha ha).  As can be
expected, Gus manages to make winners out of these goofballs, leading
to the Buzz's big moment in the sun: an exhibition game against the
major league Twins themselves, in their big-city home field.  Much to
the chagrin of the Twins' slick, self-absorbed manager (Ted McGinley),
the Buzz put on a respectable showing.
End of story.  But wait--only 45 minutes of screen time has passed. So
what does Warren do now? Why, what any desperate, in-over-his-head
hack would do--recycle his script.  After the Buzz's star player (Walt
Goggins) is wooed into the majors, the Buzz once again hits hard
times, and Gus has to prod them back into shape. And he does, leading
to the team's big moment in the sun. You guessed it--an exhibition
game against the Twins, but this time taking place on the Buzz's
backwater home turf.
Going through the same story twice would not have been as big of an
annoyance if Warren's script had simply done its job: be funny.  But
nothing in the film comes close to eliciting the slightest smirk when the
writer's painful idea of witty comic repartée is something like this:
        "This team has a former ballerina?"
        "I don't think they call men ballerinas."
        "A balladeer?"
        "Isn't that a singer?"
        "I think that's a troubadour."
But to merely attack the screenplay on the humor level (though it
deserves a most thorough beating on that basis) is to let Warren off
too easily; he can't even integrate his product plugs with the
slightest trace of subtlety.  Says Bob Uecker, playing the Buzz's
announcer, in reference to something that happened a long time ago:
"That was before Diet Coke became my beverage of choice."  Warren's
direction is every bit as sloppy as his writing; even though the final
game's outcome is never in doubt, there's no attempt--through the
editing, music, anything--any at creating any illusion of suspense.
Contributing to the mess are the actors, who plod along in haphazard
directions as if no helmer were present at all, especially McGinley,
whose over-the-wall-and-out-of-the-ballpark antics worked on
Married... with Children but not here.
I have not seen either of the first two Major Leagues, and I'll give
those films the benefit of the doubt; they could very well hold some
merit. But after sitting through the excrutiating Back to the Minors,
you won't find me rushing to the video stores any time soon.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997
