Title
Review for Little Shop of Horrors, The (1960)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
The magic world of cult cinema is a place full of surprises
for those film-loving souls brave enough to wander through
it, guided by nothing but the hearsay. Sometimes, cult
movies lauded as masterpieces turn out to be incredible
disappointments, eroded by time and surpassed by the more
recent authors who had used it as an inspiration for much
better material. That was often the case with Roger Corman,
writer, producer, director and one of the legends of
American movie legends. Most often referenced as prolific
producers of B-movies, whose company encouraged young
talents and future directorial stars like Coppola or Demme,
Corman was also lauded as director himself. His films, in
most cases, didn't stand the test of time very well, and the
author of this review often wandered what was so special
about Corman. But not any more since he saw some of his true
gems of late 1950s and early 1960s. Among them the best
known film is LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, 1960 dark comedy with
the cult following that spawned Broadway musical and, later,
movie version of its own by Frank Oz in 1986.
The plot of the film is set in Skid Row, the bad
neighbourhood of Los Angeles where Mr. Mushnik (played by
Mel Welles) owns a not so profitable flower shop. His
financial frustrations are accompanied with the obvious
incompetence of his clumsy clerk Seymour Klerboined (played
by Jonathan Haze). The only thing that could save Seymour's
job is a strange plant he had grown and named after his
beautiful colleague Audrey Fulquard (played by Jackie
Joseph). The plant begins attracting customers and Mushnik
changes his mind about firing Seymour, at least as long as
he can take care of it. It looks like almost impossible task
until Seymour discovers that the plant feeds on human blood.
At first, Seymour sheds his own blood to keep his treasure
alive, but the plant is growing and its demands are
impossible to meet. Soon, Seymour must choose whether to let
the plant die or start killing people.
LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS became the legend not on its own
merit as a film, but because of the apocryphal stories about
its creation. Corman shot entire film in less than two days,
with a minimal budget, cheap and soon-to-be-torn-down
production sets and bunch of street bums as extras. It is
very visible on the finished product - film looks very
cheap, unpolished and sometimes even pathetic, at least
compared with the lavish production values of its 1986
remake. But the insufficiencies of the production were more
than compensated with the extremely funny script by Charles
B. Griffith (who appears in the cameo role of burglar). The
humour of the film is very dark and trashy, although rather
tame for today's Tarantinoesque standards, and the viewers
are quickly drawn into the story and its weird characters.
And this film features whole bunch of them, all played by
relatively unknown, but in this case, perfectly cast actors.
Jonathan Haze is excellent as Seymour, Mel Welles is perfect
as his neurotic boss and Wally Campo and Jack Warford give
perfect spoof of Dragnet-like cops. Jackie Joseph, on the
other hand, is rather inferior to Ellen Greene playing the
same role in 1986 version. There are plenty of great actors
in small roles here, but the best known of them all is young
Jack Nicholson as masochistic dental patient, one of the
first in long series of twisted characters that would later
make him famous. All in all, LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS is a
film that is hardly a masterpiece, but it is entertaining
enough to deserve all the love felt by generations of cult
classic aficionados.

Author
Brian Koller
For those who like their comedy black, with no
cream or sugar, "The Little Shop of Horrors" is
for you.  Made in two days with a cast of unknowns,
with a script written in under a week, and featuring
a story about a talking man-eating plant, the
film is far better than it has any expectation of
being.
Gravis Mushnick (Mel Welles) runs a struggling skid row
florist shop.  Other employees are clumsy fool Seymour
(Jonathan Haze) and ebullient dimwit Audrey (Jackie Joseph).
Seymour's hilariously hypocondriac mother is played by
Myrle Vail.  Seymour can only keep his pathetic job if
he can nurse to health an unusual crowd-drawing plant,
a plant that needs human blood in order to grow.
Seymour sort-of commits a series of murders to feed
the plant, which soon overruns the florist shop.
The legend behind "The Little Shop of Horrors" is
that a studio executive gave low-budget director
Roger Corman a challenge: to make a film using a
storefront set before it was to be torn down.  Necessity
is the mother of art as well as invention, and
"The Little Shop of Horrors" could be Corman's best
film.  Charles Griffith, who had previously collaborated
with Corman on the cult classic "A Bucket of Blood",
wrote the viciously funny script.
Ignored upon release, "The Little Shop of Horrors"
slowly gained notoriety over the years.  Its status
of a cult film was helped by the presence of then-
obscure Jack Nicholson, who has a small part as a
lunatic masochistic dental patient.  The film was
remade as "Please Don't Eat My Mother" (1972)
and the sequel was "Little Shop" (1991).  It eventually
become a Broadway musical, which became an excellent
film version in 1986.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
