Title
Review for Herman (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 6.3 out of 10 (C, ** out of ****)
     Herman (Anders Danielson Lie) is not that much different from most
11-year old boys, but he's unusual enough to earn him the taunts of his
classmates and the scorn of his teachers.  Counterbalancing his
difficulties at school, however, is a warm home life.  His parents
(Elisabeth Sand and Bjorn Floberg) are both caring people who always
make time in their busy lives for their son.  Herman's grandfather
(Frank Robert), an aging man with a kind heart and an engaging
disposition, becomes to his grandson more of a friend than a relative.
However, Herman's life is about to take a turn for the worse.  After
visiting the barber one day, he discovers that he has alopecia areata,
a skin disease that, while not fatal or dangerous, will cause him to
lose all of his hair.
     HERMAN is a lugubrious film about a relatively uninteresting
subject: the tribulations of a young boy who is going bald.
Admittedly, with a script infused with lively wit or emotionally-
wrenching pathos, it is possible to make a coming-of-age story
entertaining.  HERMAN, however, takes neither of these roads, instead
opting for a relatively-straightforward telling of the tale.  The
instances of humor, while occasionally amusing, are easily telegraphed,
and there's very little in the film to form an emotional link between
the title character and the audience.
     Going bald is likely to be a traumatic event for someone just out
of his first decade of life, but the lack of any palpable threat to
Herman's health makes it difficult to feel for him.  He becomes so
morose and despondent about losing his hair that we begin to view him
more as a whiner than someone undergoing a difficult time.  At least at
first, Herman definitely does not confront his disease heroically.
     The film really doesn't go anywhere.  Often, it's difficult to
gain an understanding of what HERMAN's real goal is.  Overall, I
suppose it's trying to give us a picture of a young boy who isn't
afraid to be unusual, and who eventually overcomes his problems through
that sense of individuality, but it's a message that takes too long to
get across.  This is not an involving movie.  It's not bad--there are
enough quirks of character to assure that--but neither is it good.
     For those who like straightforward villains, a few of the kids in
Herman's class fit the bill nicely.  They do all the things that
bullies do to smaller children--make fun of them, intimidate them, and
steal their things.  Only one fellow classmate, a lively redheaded girl
named Ruby, shows any friendship for Herman.  In the end, she plays a
part in his "salvation," while all the bad kids are punished.  This
whole part of the story is fairly trivial.
     Although HERMAN attempts to be another MY LIFE AS A DOG, it
doesn't come close.  That film had an emotional impact.  We were drawn
into the on-screen lives of the characters.  HERMAN keeps us too much
at a distance.  There are a few moments of genuine insight, but nothing
lasting.  In the end, instead of an emotionally-vibrant motion picture
experience, this movie turns out to be something of a dud.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Frank Maloney
     HERMAN is a Norwegian film directed by Erik Gustavson, written by
Lars Saabye Christensen from his own novel.  It stars Anders Danielson
Lie, Frank Robert, Elisabeth Sand.  Unrated.  In Norwegian, with English
subtitles.
     HERMAN is that unlikeliest of films, a fresh coming-of-age story.
It is about an 11-year-old Oslo schoolboy, Herman (Anders Danielson
Lie), who is a rather withdrawn, runty kid, bullied at school and
misunderstood at home.  He lives in a vivid fantasy world that includes
a Norwegian-speaking Zorro and walking into traffic whilst pretending to
be blind.  His only friends are his ailing grandfather and a beer-soaked
neighbor who was once a gardener to the king and who has pretty vivid
fantasy life himself until it turns into a first-class case of the DTs.
Herman's already fragile world really unravels when his barber discovers
a bald patch on the child's head, the first symptoms of alopecia areata,
an incurable cosmetic disorder that will cause him to lose all his hair
in time.
     It is Herman's progressive reactions to his malady and his growing
baldness that mark his growth and maturity.  His alopecia is, on one
level, merely a symbol of the agonies and changes that we all go through
moving from childhood to adulthood.  But like all good symbols, this one
is vividly specific, as Herman moves through anger (at his fate and at
his parents who are at something of a loss to know how to handle
things), onto various strategies, disguises, and other forms of denial
and withdrawal, and ultimately landing on his feet in a charming act of
acceptance.
     Herman as played by Lie believably, ingratiatingly, and often
comically.  His performance is likable, light-hearted, and completely
natural.  He manages to make the unusual point that even a child in a
stable, functional, loving family can still have a childhood marked by
pain and insecurity, that growing up is hellish for all of us.  Herman
performs the more accustomed role, too, of deflating adult pretenses and
evasions, of finding the truth amidst the lies.
     This is a totally charming film and I recommend it highly.  It's
current run in Seattle (Metro Cinemas) is its U.S. premiere.  It's
being distributed by RKO Pictures.  If it comes to your area, do
yourself the favor of going.
