Title
Review for Hear No Evil (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Marlee Matlin is a great actress, and it is real pity that
we don't see her more often in the movies. Unfortunately,
that seems to be case because of her own affliction. Being
deaf herself, she has rather limited pool of available
roles, but when she gets any of them, the audience is
rewarded with truly remarkable performances. One of the
examples is HEAR NO EVIL, 1993 thriller directed by Richard
Greenwald.
In this movie Matlin plays Jillian Shanahan, deaf exercise
instructor who, without knowing, got involved in rather
dangerous situation. Her friend, journalist Micky O'Malley
(played by John C. McGinley) got into the possession of
rare, valuable and stolen coin. Before being blown up in his
car, Micky had stashed the coin in Jillian's apartment.
Jillian is now becoming the target of Lieutenant Brock
(Martin Sheen), ferocious corrupt cop who sees the coin as
his own retirement fund. She is also being stalked by
mysterious figure dressed in black. The only help comes in
the shape of Ben Kendall (D.B. Sweeney), mountain climber
that also happens to fall in love with her.
Although not very original in concept and borrowing a lot
from WAIT UNTIL DARK, 1967 classic with Audrey Hepburn as
blind woman in similar situation, HEAR NO EVIL is very good
thriller. The crime subplot is unoriginal and very
formulaic, full of usual Hollywood plot holes and
implausibilities. On the other hand, the atmosphere of the
film is very well-done, Oregon locations seems refreshing,
and sometimes, the horror that waits our heroine can be
sensed by the audience too. The best thing in this film is
in actors' performances. Marlee Matlin is superb, and she
has a good chemistry in the romantic scenes with D.B.
Sweeney. Martin Sheen is also good in very reserved, yet
menacing role of corrupt policeman. All in all, HEAR NO EVIL
is film with weak concept, but the execution so good that
deserves praise.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Marlee Matlin plays Jillian, a deaf exercise instructor.  One of
her clients (John C. McGinley) comes into possession of some
information that leads him to a stolen ancient coin valued at
$1 million.  When a crooked police officer (Martin Sheen) who wants the
coin for his "retirement fund" gets close to it, McGinley's character
hides it among Jillian's possessions, right before a car he borrows
from one of his friends (D. B. Sweeney) blows up.  Soon after, Jillian
is assaulted and nearly killed.  Only the timely arrival of Sweeney's
character saves her.  Over the next few days, they get to know each
other, overcoming the hearing barrier that separates them while working
to find the coin and stay alive.
     When it comes to character development (at least that of the
primary characters), atmosphere, and a relatively-intelligent portrayal
deafness, HEAR NO EVIL is a good movie.  However, consider a little
thing like plot and the film is in trouble.  The storyline for this
picture is an amalgamation of cliches, coincidences, contrivances, and
plot holes.
     During the writing process, all of the thought and energy
apparently went into making HEAR NO EVIL's two main characters seem
like real people - and they do.  Marlee Matlin's Jillian is especially
effective - a mixture of sensitivity, humor, and strength.  She's not
the typical screaming female-in-danger who has to wait for the nearest
man to save her (although that does happen once).
     When it comes to dealing with the issue of deafness, HEAR NO EVIL
is no CHILDREN OF A LESSER GOD, but it is effective.  There are several
"scenes of silence" which purport to give Jillian's perspective on
events by turning off the audio.  These don't work as well as they
could have, principally because they aren't completely silent - there's
an annoying background tinkling, as of distant wind-chimes ringing.
However, at times the movie does a good job creating a sense of
almost-claustrophobic isolation.
     In some ways, this movie is similar to JENNIFER 8.  That film
deals with a blind woman being stalked.  In this one, it's a deaf
woman.  Both targets are rendered more vulnerable because of their
disability, but neither movie is exploitative or condescending.
JENNIFER 8 and HEAR NO EVIL sincerely attempt to present the audience
with a sense of what a victim experiences when she's cut off in some
way from the rest of the world.
     Where HEAR NO EVIL fails is in the story it has to tell.  The plot
is riddled with holes, and when it tries to plug some of the more
obvious ones, it widens them.  It's astonishing how little of the
script makes sense.  There are far too many contrivances and
coincidences for this picture to be credible.  The writers should have
given the audience credit for some intelligence.  Instead of going for
a slick ending with an abysmal twist, they should have stuck to a
straight thriller.  Maybe then they would have avoided a few of the
pitfalls that tripped them up.
     Fortunately, the stalker element of the plot doesn't take up all
the screen time.  A fair amount is devoted to the developing
relationship between the two main characters.  These scenes, often
sweet (but not cloyingly so) and almost always genuine-seeming, are
strong and almost make up for a lot of the other rubbish that clutters
up this movie.
     At least HEAR NO EVIL doesn't give us yet another clone of FATAL
ATTRACTION and/or THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE.  Lately, it seems
that every thriller fits into this category.  Unfortunately, while HEAR
NO EVIL goes in another direction, it doesn't blaze any new trails.
There is potential here, and good acting and a few decent characters to
go with it, but the story lets everyone down - especially the
audience.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
