Title
Review for Atlantide, L' (1961)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This 1961 film seems to appear in the United States most
frequently under the title JOURNEY BENEATH THE DESERT.  It is based
on Pierre Benoit's 1920 novel ATLANTIDA.  That novel is heavily
derivative of H. Rider Haggard's SHE.  Both books had multiple
silent adaptations and each was adapted into a film in the 1960s.
(SHE was adapted also once in the 1930s.)  Each is about a lost
civilization found in Africa and ruled over by a beautiful but evil
female tyrant.  In this film three men crash a helicopter in the
Sahara only to find that caverns underground hide the lost
civilization of Atlantis.  This desert was once under water and
Atlantis was then an island, but the ocean receded and sands covered
the city.  Antinea, the evil queen of Atlantis, holds the men
prisoner.  They are desperate to escape knowing that the desert
above their heads will soon be used for a nuclear test that will
obliterate the lost city.
     The Italian/French production of L'ATLANTIDE was directed by
classic director Edgar G. Ulmer who earlier directed films like THE
BLACK CAT and DETOUR.  Nearly every aspect of this film falls short
of its potential.  The inexpensive sets are small and lack
imagination.  One unimaginative set just has a curtain as a
background and a vase in the foreground.  The musical score is weak
and creates little emotion in the viewer.  The model work is poor
and frequently obvious.  The men's costumes are unimaginative robes
and the women's are just skimpy.  The acting is of the quality of
that of a Machiste muscle man movie.  The dialog in the dubbed
English version is at best uninspired and occasionally overripe.
All of these factors make it hard to meet this film halfway.  A film
like this needs to grip the imagination but this one never quite
achieves a feel of H. Rider Haggard it desperately requires.  This
rates a 4 on the 0 to 10 and a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
