Title
Review for Asfour Stah (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Tunisia/France, 1990
U.S. Availability: varies
Running Length: 1:38
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Nudity, sexual themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
Cast: Selim Boughedir, Mustapha Adouani, Rabia Ben Abdallah,
      Mohammed Driss, Carolyn Chelby
Director: Ferid Boughedir
Producers: Ahmed Baha Attia, Eliane Stutterheim, and Hassen Daldoul
Screenplay: Ferid Boughedir
Cinematography: Georges Barsky
Music: Anouar Braham
U.S. Distributor: International Film Circuit
In Arabic with subtitles
     Although it has been floating around film festival circuit for the
better part of five years, Ferid Boughedir's feature HALFAOUINE (named
after the small Tunisian town where it takes place), has finally
received U.S. distribution, albeit of the most limited kind (I believe
there's only one print).  However, while the film contains a few
memorable sequences, it's hardly worth the kind of intensive search that
will be necessary to uncover the nearest screening.
     Regardless of the culture in which a child grows up, adolescence is
always a confusing and difficult phase of the maturation process.  In
the Muslim lifestyle, where women's features are veiled and men assert
themselves as the "superior gender", the male's transition from boyhood
to manhood is all the more difficult.  At the age of 12, Noura (Selim
Boughedir) is regarded as neither a child nor an adult.  His growing
sexual curiosity has gotten him banned from the women's baths, where his
mother took him when he was younger, but he is not yet old enough to be
permitted to listen to discussions of "men's matters."  His sense of
isolation is profound.  His father (Mustapha Adouani) is emotionally
distant, yet warns him against closeness with his mother and aunt,
saying that "men don't hang around with women."  Noura's only real
companionship comes from a local libertine named Salih (Mohammed Driss),
who is the village's political outcast.
     HALFAOUINE is a coming-of-age story that, at its core, isn't much
different from similar narratives set in the United States.  Most of the
film deals with Noura's attempts to come to grips with his impending
adulthood, and sexual discovery is a large part of that growth.  Like
many boys his age, Noura is forever trying to sneak peeks at the female
body.  It's natural that in a society where women display little skin in
public that there is great curiosity about what lies under all the
clothing.
     Telling Noura's story isn't the movie's lone objective.  Openly
challenging religious traditions, the writer/director criticizes the
cultural schism that exists between the sexes.  As depicted in
HALFAOUINE, women are objectified in Muslim society, and it's the lack
of meaningful communication between husbands and wives that perpetuates
the cycle.  In addition to his social commentary, Ferid Boughedir paves
the streets of HALFAOUINE with a political subtext that is difficult for
an outsider to understand in anything but the broadest sense.
     HALFAOUINE contains interesting material, but a combination of
subpar acting and poorly-realized characters stains the fabric of the
production.  Aside from Noura, there isn't a well-scripted personality
in this film, and lead performer Selim Boughedir is not a naturally
gifted actor.  He seems to have two expressions:  a blank look and a
silly grin.  Because of Boughedir's limited range, Noura comes across as
emotionally stunted, which results in a picture that seems big on ideas
but small on heart.  HALFAOUINE is worth a look because of its
perspective of a different culture, not because it tells an engrossing
tale.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A kind-hearted story of the coming-of-age of a 12-year-old boy in modern
Tunisia.  Provides a rare look into sensuality and sexuality in modern
Arab societies.  Charming, frequently witty and funny, and very
entertaining.
Tunisia/France (English subtitles), color, 1990, 98 minutes.
Director/Writer: Ferid Boughedir
     The story centers on Noura, a 12 year old boy who is small for his
age.  Because of his size and appearance, he is still permitted to
accompany his mother to the women's bathhouse.  Inasmuch as Noura is
feeling the first desires associated with puberty, the baths are centers
of eroticism to him, as they are full of naked/partially naked women.
(I wonder whether the film was screened uncensored, i.e., including
nudity, in Tunisia?)
     However, Noura is growing up, and he will soon be banished from the
women's baths, and the society of women, into the much harsher society
of men.  The story line centers on Noura's exploits as he explores his
new and growing sexual desires.  Typical of "hormone comedies," he has
(two) male friends who are a bad influence on him, and encourage him to
engage in various types of mischief.  Noura's entry into the world of
men is helped by two women: his mother's cousin, and a beautiful young
woman hired as a maid in Noura's household.
     Because of religious sensitivities, films from Arab countries
usually cannot be as frank about sexuality and sensuality as Western
films.  In some ways that can be good, because it can force the
filmmakers to use humor or wit to compensate.  An example is the film
THE CITADEL, an extremely funny and witty film about polygamy and the
effects of uncontrolled sexual desire.  What makes HALFAOUINE
interesting is the direct view it provides of sexuality and sensuality
in an Arab culture.  The view is generally kind-hearted, and relatively
upbeat.
     In an interview published in the San Francisco International Film
Festival Program Guide, the director, Ferid Boughedir explains his
treatment of sexuality: "It has always fascinated me how everyday
sensuality has always belied the inflexibility of official dogma....  At
a time when cliches about the Arab culture are becoming as arbitrary as
ever, I am tempted to talk about a Mediterranean society that can still
be experienced today, a society that is luxuriant and tender, where
humor and eroticism are always prevalent together with tolerance -- a
word rather difficult to brandish about today."
     The film has been compared to MY LIFE AS A DOG, another story of a
young boy's coming-of-age.  However, HALFAOUINE is more upbeat, and does
not have the melancholy spirit of MY LIFE AS A DOG.  Of the two films, I
strongly prefer HALFAOUINE, for its pleasant humor and wit.
     Because of its pleasant humor and wit, I recommend the film to a
general audience.  Overall, the movie rates in the very good/excellent
range.
Print Source: Ervin, Cohen & Jessup; 9401 Wilshire Blvd; 9th Floor;
Beverly Hills, CA 90064. (Note: a screening is scheduled for 5/9/91, at
the Aquarius Twin Cinema, in Palo Alto, CA).
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
