Title
Review for Medusa: Dare to Be Truthful (1992) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
51 min., not rated, Comedy/Documentary/Music, 1992, B&W/Color,
Made-for-cable-television
Director: John Fortenberry
Cast: Julie Brown, Chris Elliot, Bob Goldthwait, Tom Kenny, Carol Leifer
     This film is comedienne Julie Brown's spoof of Madonna's
documentary MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE.  Brown, a ditsy singer, films her
"Blonde Leading the Blonde" tour and makes it into a movie.   The film
follows Madonna's almost exactly, except the events are comical.  Like
Madonna's, this film is filmed in black and white, except for concert
footage, which is in color.
     MEDUSA: DARE TO BE TRUTHFUL was originally aired on Showtime and
has just been released onto video cassette.  I, who happened to like
MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE, fully enjoyed this film.  I only recommend this
film to people who have seen Madonna's film, because otherwise most of
it will not be as humorous as it could be.  I recommend that if you
haven't seen MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE, then rent the two films on the same
night and watch Madonna's then Julie Brown's.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give MEDUSA: DARE TO BE TRUTHFUL a four.  MEDUSA: DARE TO BE
TRUTHFUL is not rated and contains explicit language and adult
situations.
     This is a great film for those who are fans of the comedienne Julie
Brown, or those that think Madonna is over exposed and riding on a high
horse.  Unfortunately for those of you, who like me, are fans of Bob
Goldthwait, he is not on for very long in this film.  I was a little
disappointed with that, but Julie Brown made up for it.  Chris Elliot
(of the canceled FOX sitcom "Get a Life") does a better job in this
than he did in "Get a Life", but that doesn't say much.  He is not the
main attraction in this film, and I don't think that he adds anything to
it.
     This film is excellently written.  The similarities between this
and MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE are plentiful, except in this film all the
events have been twisted around until they meet Brown's wishes.  This
film is extremely stupid, but I didn't find myself noticing that until I
was finished.  This is certainly not a film that has great significance,
but it is a enjoyable way to spend an hour.
