Title
Review for Forget Paris (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is springtime and romantic comedies are in the air.  By far
the best this season is the utterly hilarious FORGET PARIS written by
Billy Crystal, Lowell Ganz, and Babaloo Mandel, among the finest comedy
writers.  It comes then as no surprise that almost every remark is
witty regardless of which of the cast utters it.  And what a cast!
Director Billy Crystal has assembled a superb group to tell this
romantic story about marriage not being quite the same as a
honeymoon.  In addition, the novelty of the film's presentation is a
unique and delightful way to tell a story.
     Andy and Liz (Joe Mantegna and Cynthia Stevenson) are in a
restaurant at a large table awaiting the arrival of friends who will
soon be joining them.  Andy and Liz are engaged to be married.  To pass
the time until the other guests arrive, he tells her the story of
Mickey and Ellen (Billy Crystal and Debra Winger).  As each couple
arrives,  Craig and Lucy, (Richard Mazur and Julie Kavner), Lois and
Jack (Cathy Moriarty and John Spencer), each adds a bit to the
Mickey-Ellen story.  What they tell is seen in flashbacks.
     Mickey is a top referee in professional basketball.  His love life
consists of the cheerleaders.  When his father dies, a cantankerous man
whom no one likes, his body in a casket is shipped to France as that
was his last will, to lie alongside his wartime buddies.
     Mickey sees the casket put aboard the plane's baggage dept but
when he arrives in France, the casket (and Dad) are nowhere to be
found.  Sad?  Not at all.  That is how Mickey meets Ellen who is the
American VP for the airline in Paris.  He falls madly and instantly in
love with her and a few days later, proposes.  At this point she tells
him she is married but "separated."  By the way, Dad is finally found
and buried.
     The film, with every moment funny, tells of their relationship.
Does she give up her great job in Paris, get divorced and come to the
U.S.?  Or should he give up the job he loves as the pro referee and
come to France to live?  The movie, always maintaining its comedic
side, tangles with this and the many other questions that arise.  It
is a beaut!
     In real life, Billy Crystal has been married to the same wife,
Janice, for 25 years.  They have two children.  Crystal has wanted for
a long time to make a film about what real marriage is like and he has
succeeded brilliantly even if real marriage is not as funny as the
film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Every once in a while a love story comes along about two people
that the audience can feel are just made for each other.  They have
just the right chemistry, like Bacall and Bogart.  It can happen any
time from even an unlikely pairing.  So don't feel too bad if you don't
find that chemistry in a film like FORGET PARIS.  FORGET PARIS is the
forgettable new romantic comedy from the usually reliable writing tram
of Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel (of PARENTHOOD and CITY SLICKERS) who
just happened to hit an off film this time.  Being released shortly
after FRENCH KISS by itself might make this a hard film to remember,
but the writing certainly does not help.
     Billy Crystal, the star of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY, is trying to
recapture the success of that film by starring in a similarly themed
film.  This film could even be a missing chapter from that film.  But
this time Crystal also produces, directs, and co-writes the screenplay.
I am no judge of whether he succeeded in capturing the style of the
earlier romantic comedy since neither film did a whole lot for me.
Here the story of Mickey (Billy Crystal) and Ellen (Debra Winger) is
told in flashbacks to the very impressionable Liz (Cynthia Stevenson),
the fiancee of Mickey's friend Andy (Joseph Mantegna).  Her reactions
to this rather dull love story are way over the top.  She provides
roughly the same function that canned laughter provides to a bad TV
sitcom.
     The story covers something like four years in the relationship of
a couple including some hard times.  One would expect a little bit of
aging, but the only real difference we see in Mickey and Ellen is that
there is a lot less chemistry between them at the end than there was at
the beginning.  The relationship undergoes a number of predictable
strains including secrets from their past lives, irritation family
members, jobs that are incompatible, jobs that put the characters under
stress to make life-style changes, and each person just plain not
liking the other's life-style.  Each situation is played for comic
effect and none is as endearing as the character Liz seems to think it
is.
     To pad out the romantic humor the filmmakers have thrown in some
sports humor.  Mickey, it seems, is a basketball referee for the NBA
and one who is none too popular with the fans.  This gives Crystal a
chance to contrast his height to the likes of Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.  The
pairing is not as funny as it is intended and Crystal might do well to
study films like DESIGNING WOMAN to see how to integrate sports into a
comic film.  But some attempts at humor work better than others.  A
sequence involving a pigeon does pay off with some big audience laughs,
but generally the humor is on the level of Mickey telling Ellen that
she must not use his razor to shave hair in any part of her body.
Crystal assumes the incongruity of the scene and his own basic cuteness
will make this a funny scene.  Wrong bet.  There is nothing very
winning about these two people.
     This film needs any two of more appealing characters, bigger
laughs, or a more sympathetic audience.  I rate this a 0 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FORGET PARIS is a Billy Crystal movie in the style of one of Woody
Allen's New York Jewish comedies.  Crystal is the lead actor, the 
producer, the director, and the lead writer (along with Lowell Ganz and 
Babaloo Mandel).  He is even, briefly, the only singer in the movie.  I 
can not find the cinematographer's name so for all I know, Billy was 
behind the camera as well.
     FORGET PARIS tells the story of a hard nosed NBA referee called
Mickey (Billy Crystal).  He refers to himself as a "vertically 
challenged" individual, but he is not afraid of the redwood tree sized 
athletes of the NBA.  He looks right up to them and orders them around. 
In one classic scene, Mickey looses it, and throws every member and 
coach of both teams out on the game for technical fouls.  If you like 
the NBA, I don't, you can see all your favorite stars in cameos roles 
through out the movie although the basketball scenes take up less ten 
percent of the show.
     Nothing intimidates Mickey until he has to go to Paris to bury his
father and the French airline looses his father's body in baggage 
handling.  The French representatives of the airline do not care about 
his complaints.  He lives in the airport for two days complaining to 
them.  Finally, a middle manager at the airline, an American named 
Ellen (Debra Winger), takes over his case and awards him the honor of 
"passenger of the month" to make up for all of the troubles they have 
caused him.  He asks her to show him Paris and the on again, off again 
romance begins from there.
     The whole story of their romance is told in a series of flashbacks
by their friends (Julie Kavner, Joe Mantegna, Richard Masur, Cathy 
Moriarty, John Spencer, etc.) having dinner in New York.  The dinner 
party is actually quite interesting as well.  It provided the most 
humorous single line.  Joe Mantegna and his finance are telling how 
they met.  It seems he FAXed her by accident since he punched one digit 
wrong.  She then FAXed him back across the country and soon she said 
"we were FAXing each other's brains out".
     By far the funniest sequence has to be all of the fertility clinic
scenes.  The dialog is uproarious.  I had trouble controlling myself I 
was laughing so hard.  I got to worrying that I might be offensive to 
the rest of the audience I was laughing so loud.
     All of the above having been said, I am sad to report that the
movie was extremely uneven in quality.  Most of the time, it was like a 
flywheel that kept spinning but engaged only infrequently.  Crystal 
directed the actors so that they were like detached free agents. 
Moreover, the script only allocated them funny material at sporadic 
intervals.  When the scene's should have had strong male bonding, there 
was none.  The chemistry between Mickey and Ellen was never there so you 
did not care about them.  Since the movie tried to be both serious and 
comedic, having no believable relationships was a real problem.
The comedy, when it was present, was excellent.  The serious part was 
non-engaging, dull, and lifeless.
     FORGET PARIS runs a quick 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for the
fertility clinic scene, but overall, it is a mild PG-13.  There is no 
nudity or violence, albeit a lot of discussion of sex.  FORGET PARIS, 
when it worked, made me laugh hard and long so I can easily recommend 
it to you.  On the other hand, the vast majority of the film had no 
value other than filling in time before the next joke came along, so 
I am only awarding it only ** 1/2.
______________________________________________________________________ 
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year.  A must see film. 
***  = Excellent show.  Look for it.
**   = Average movie.  Kind of enjoyable. 
*    = Poor show.  Don't waste your money.
0    = One of the worst films of this or any year.  Totally unbearable.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG-13, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Billy Crystal (Mickey), Debra Winger (Ellen), Joe Mantegna (Andy),
Cythia Stevenson (Liz), written by Billy Crystal, Lowell Ganz, Babaloo
Mandel, produced and directed by Billy Crystal.
What is it about Europe that makes people fall in love with each other? Not
too long ago a wonderful film called "Before Sunrise" depicted a young couple
meeting in Europe and falling in love. By the end they had to go their
separate ways but no one wanted them to. "Forget Paris" wonders what would
happen if they had stayed together... and were older... and if it were a
comedy.
Billy Crystal stars in this film he also wrote, produced, and directed about
an NBA referee named Mickey who finds himself stuck in Paris, looking for his
father's coffin after the airline that shipped it there lost it.
Mickey meets the airline's customer service manager, Ellen (Winger), a
beautiful brunette who happens to be an American living and working in Paris.
They are immediately attracted to each other, but neither can come right out
and say it. This typical plot device works well here because of Crystal and
Winger's great chemistry. There is a scene that perfectly defines the  "don't
let her get away!" element.  It's difficult to make an audience think this,
and when Mickey and Ellen do get together it is quite satisfying. These two
people seem made for each other, and it appears as if everyone will live
happily ever after...
The two fall in love, move to L.A. and get married, but they have some
problems. Mickey travels constantly because of his job, and this affects
their relationship. There are some hysterical scenes in which Mickey takes
out his angst on the giant NBA players. It's very funny to watch this small
man get into a shouting contest with David Robinson and Charles Barkley, and
the fact the players can act doesn't hurt a bit. I only wish more there had
been more scenes like these.
Mickey and Ellen's marriage seems to be crumbling before their eyes and they
can't figure out what to do. They know they love each other and they don't
want anyone else, but because they are separated so much it takes its toll.
Crystal is able to keep a good balance between the comedic aspects and the
lighthearted, but realistic drama. No one over acts here, and the script
doesn't allow for any quick fixes.
Eventually Mickey takes time off from work, but Ellen's cranky, senile
father (William Hickey) moves in and hilarity ensues. The in-law friction
could be seen as a typical comedy device but it is believable here. But
things never seem to be as good as the should be, which makes us sad because
we actually care about these characters. They seem like real people who are
meant for each other, not just two characters in a movie. 
When Mickey and Ellen try to have a baby it doesn't work because of
fertility problems. There is a hysterical scene in which he must give a sperm
sample, and all I can say is, it takes a squad of police cars to safely
deliver his sample - a funny exploitation of the male code. 
Describing and critiquing the ending (and entire last act) would be rather
pointless. It's predictable, but it's sweet.
"Forget Paris" doesn't have the charm of "Before Sunrise" but it is still
funny. We laugh, we cry, we get a fairytale ending, but the process involving
in telling this story is entertaining and that's what counts. 
(7/18/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [see also: "Before Sunrise"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/19/95 
Running Length: 1:40 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, sexual themes) 
Starring: Billy Crystal, Debra Winger, Joe Mantegna, Julie Kavner, 
          Richard Masur, Cathy Moriarty, John Spencer, Cynthia Stevenson 
Director: Billy Crystal 
Producer: Billy Crystal 
Screenplay: Billy Crystal, Lowell Ganz, and Babaloo Mandel  
Cinematography: Don Burgess 
Music: Marc Shaiman 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     FORGET PARIS has a split personality.  It's not the mixture of 
comedy and drama--plenty of films manage to intertwine the two with 
aplomb; rather, it's the vastly different performance levels of the 
leads.  Debra Winger, a mature and competent actress, has developed a 
dramatic style that she uses to good effect.  Billy Crystal, on the 
other hand, is his usual character:  self-deprecating, glib, and 
entirely unconvincing in scenes requiring emotional displays.  Put 
simply, when Winger shines, Crystal is awful, and when Crystal is at his 
best, Winger fades into the background.  The most apparent result is 
that the characters never really connect. 
     Taken together, MR. SATURDAY NIGHT and FORGET PARIS offer 
compelling evidence that Crystal in his capacity as director/actor 
should stay away from films that require dramatic range.  The man is 
more of a personality than a performer.  He writes good jokes and has a 
funny delivery.  In this film, his best moments occur when he's trying 
to make the audience laugh.  His take on "The Phantom of the Opera" and 
his scenes with William Hickey are examples of the comic in top form.   
     FORGET PARIS comes from the ANNIE HALL school of chronicling the 
development and disintegration of a relationship.  The script, however, 
goes for slick one-liners in place of Woody Allen's insight, and the 
ending lacks emotional honesty.  But what else have we come to expect 
from Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, kings of the happy ending?  These 
two dribble so much honey on every screenplay they touch that it's a 
wonder audiences haven't gone into sugar shock. 
     Debra Winger plays Ellen Andrews, an airline customer relations 
executive in Paris.  She meets Mickey Gordon (Crystal) when the airline 
loses the body of his father, who was being transported to France for 
burial.  After the funeral, the pair spend some time sightseeing and 
falling in love.  Alas, after a week, Mickey must return to the United 
States:  he's an NBA referee and the season's about to start.  He and 
Ellen continue their relationship long-distance, each pining for the 
other during the separation.  Eventually, Mickey hops on a flight to 
France and surprises Ellen with a marriage proposal--which, for 
reasons she explains, she is unable to accept.  But even this unexpected 
turn of events can't break the lovers apart. 
     Mickey and Ellen's story is narrated by several of the couple's 
close friends (played by Joe Mantegna, Julie Kavner, Richard Masur, John 
Spencer, and Cathy Moriarty).  This is one of those rare occasions when 
voiceovers actually work--they allow for moments of comic flair to 
punctuate a story that often gets too sentimental.  Unfortunately, this 
also means that a fine supporting cast gets very little screen time. 
     Presumably, Crystal is attempting to provide a romantic alternative 
to the early summer action blockbusters (CRIMSON TIDE, DIE HARD WITH A 
VENGEANCE, etc.).  If so, he's missed the mark.  With its uneven tone, 
FORGET PARIS doesn't have enough comedy or heartfelt romance to eclipse 
its faults.  Crystal and Winger don't make a vibrant couple, and the 
various tribulations in their characters' relationship seem like 
episodes designed to set up the "wonderful" ending.  In his second 
directorial stint, Crystal has repeated most of the faults of his first 
(the aforementioned MR. SATURDAY NIGHT).  At least this time, we don't 
have to endure the terrible old-age makeup on top of everything else. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Christopher Null
     It's a shame that so many romantic comedies are in current release,
because inevitably, something good is going to be overlooked due to the
cinematic glut of warm fuzzies.  As the third of its type in about as many
weeks, FORGET PARIS is one of the strongest entries of the genre.
     Billy Crystal directs and stars in this Baby Boomer romantic fable
about a pair of star-crossed lovers (Crystal, as Mickey, and Debra Winger,
as Ellen) who can't seem to get their relationship right.  Going through a
dozen iterations of "boy meets girl, boy loses girl," the couple's story
is told through a narrative from their friends over dinner.
     Mickey is a tempestuous basketball referee (and some of the film's
funniest moments are with him on the courts with the
players--unfortunately, they have been overplayed ad nauseum in the film's
trailers).  Ellen is the newly found love of his life, an American
expatriate working in Paris for an airline which loses Mickey's dead
father, who is being flown to France for his burial.
     What follows is Woody Allen-esque hilarity.  The couple really click
and finally get together.  Ellen leaves Paris to be with Mickey.  Mickey
quits his traveling ref job to be with Ellen.  Ellen's father moves in. 
No one is happy, and one thing after another conspires against our tragic
couple to keep things from getting better.  The bulk of the film is their
various attempts at working things out, none of which seem to work.
     Crystal and Winger (cast against type and pulling it off well) have
some great chemistry, and they play off each other perfectly with
characteristic sarcasm.  Using the friends as a narrative plot device is
weak, but it is understated enough not to distract you from the rest of
the picture.
     As a romance, FORGET PARIS is hauntingly realistic and downright
hilarious, and although it gets a bit silly in places (as is expected when
Crystal is around), it doesn't flinch in showing you the unglamorous flip
side to the Hollywood Ending.  I'd wager that most of the audience will
leave the theater with a "been there, done that" sentiment that balances
the comedy perfectly.  Don't miss it.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        A man takes on a certain amount of stress and responsibility 
when he decides to direct, produce, co-write and star in a movie. Steve 
Martin struck out with A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE. Mel Brooks had 
several successes and flops. Billy Crystal, though, has managed to 
work in front of and behind the scenes of several movies. He took the 
gamble again here and won, with this movie that's a blatant WHEN 
HARRY MET SALLY clone yet takes on an identity and some hilarous 
humor of its own.
        Crystal goes to Paris to bury his dead dad and is put through 
two days of hell after the airline loses the body (but at least they didn't 
send it down the luggage carousel). On the plus side, his situation 
allows him to meet Debra Winger, an airline employee in charge of 
recovering missing corpses. It turns out the two were meant to be 
together, as they're the only two people in the world who can trade 
rapid-fire sarcasm back and forth without even cracking a smile.
        The week they spend together in Paris is sheer bliss (It can't 
just be "bliss," it has to be "sheer bliss," or maybe "pure bliss," but 
"bliss" can't stand alone.), and when it comes to an end, Crystal asks 
her to marry him. She eventually agrees and the two end up married, 
with Winger giving up her profession to move in with him, but the 
marriage is seemingly doomed from the start. Crystal is on the road 
most of the time as an NBA referee, not to mention various trying 
episodes of the movie, one where Winger gets a pigeon glued to her 
face (in a hysterically funny yet indescribable scene), another where 
Winger's senile father moves in with them, and yet another where the 
two try every known method to have a baby. As if the NAKED GUN 
33 1/3 sperm bank scene wasn't bad enough, now we've got Billy 
Crystal asking a nurse for the BARBARELLA video so he can be 
stimulated enough to fill a plastic cup.
        The whole story is told to Crystal's friend Joe Mantegna's 
fiance (played by Hope or Gloria--I'm not sure which) in a restaurant. 
Different stages of the relationship are told to the woman as the other 
dinner guests arrive (including Cathy Moriarty and Julie "Marge 
Simpson" Kavner), culminating in the arrival of Crystal himself at the 
end to complete the story. It's an incredibly clever plot device, I'll give 
Crystal that. And FORGET PARIS is overall a clever and funny movie. 
You basketball fans will be glad to know dozens of NBA stars appear 
as themselves in this movie. I can now die fulfilled, knowing I've seen 
Billy Crystal and Charles Barkley together onscreen.
