Title
Review for Moulin Rouge! (2001)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Stop me if you've heard this one before:  A high-profile Scientologist opens
a brand-new, hype-heavy film in May and the stupid thing hits the ground
with an unimpressive thud that leaves many people snickering at the
absurdity of it all.  While Moulin Rouge isn't anywhere near as awful as
Battlefield Earth, it probably is the biggest, loudest, flashiest, most
expensive dud since the John Travolta debacle of 2000.  It's a full-out
assault on the senses (and, in some cases, the taste); like an intricately
wrapped present that, upon opening, reveals nothing but a box full of
brightly colored tissue paper (and maybe a handful of glitter and confetti,
too).
I like many different types of film and just as many types of music, but for
some reason blending the two creative forms doesn't do a thing for me.  I'd
sooner gnaw off my own leg than sit through anything with Fred Astaire or
Judy Garland.  Aside from Jane Horrocks' work in Little Voice, that cool
scene from Magnolia where the characters sing along to the Aimee Mann song,
and Woody Allen's musical comedy Everyone Says I Love You, the whole movie
musical thing just seems like a waste of time and energy.
It's kind of ironic that Rouge has connections to the last two grand-scale
musicals to hit the screen (and, no, I'm not counting Duets).  One of the
film's big musical numbers is set to Madonna's "Like a Virgin" (she starred
in Evita), and Jim Broadbent, who played William Shwenk Gilbert in
Topsy-Turvy, stars here as Zidler, the owner of a club called Moulin Rouge
in the Bohemian section of turn-of-the-20th-century Paris.  Broadbent played
a similar role in Little Voice, which also featured another of Rouge's
stars - Ewan McGregor (The Phantom Menace), here playing an Englishman named
Christian who has just moved to Paris in pursuit of a writing career.  The
entire film is shown in one long flashback as we watch the bearded,
disheveled writer (who looks a lot like Kenneth Branagh) peck away at his
typewriter as he slowly relates his story of love and loss.
Upon his arrival in Paris, Christian is quite accidentally befriended by a
group of zany performers (led by John Leguizamo, who still has some of that
clown makeup from Spawn crusted onto his face) who are trying to put on
their own musical called "Spectacular Spectacular."  Unfortunately, they
have no funding and their story kind of stinks.  Enter Christian, who is
able to jazz up both the script and music, and, through a Three's
Company-like mix-up, lands the financial support of the wealthy Duke of
Worcester (Richard Roxburgh, Mission: Impossible 2).
The trouble is that the Duke and Christian are after the same girl - a
courtesan from the Moulin Rouge named Satine (Nicole Kidman, Eyes Wide
Shut), who happens to be the star of the play.  The story, which has now
evolved into the tale of a woman torn between the love of a penniless writer
and the wealth of an aristocrat, has begun to parallel the real goings-on
between Satine, Christian and the Duke.  Then the sparks begin to fly.
It's quite a simple story, but the whole thing is jazzed up with
song-and-dance numbers set to popular music, like Bowie, Nirvana, Queen and
the Police.  As soon as any of the characters open their mouths to sing,
Rouge becomes a mass version of Name That Tune and, brother, if you've never
heard the person sitting behind you belt out an Elton John tune in their own
little personal duet with Mr. McGregor, I envy you.  God, do I envy you.
Writer/director Baz Luhrmann, the guy responsible for the pretentious radio
hit "Everybody's Free to Wear Sunscreen," is certainly no stranger to
dancing (Strictly Ballroom) or manipulating the setting of a film (William
Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet).  There's a Pavement tune in which Stephen
Malkmus warbles that he's "got style for miles and miles; so much style that
it's wasted."  Luhrmann has a similar amount of talent, and he packs as much
of it as he can into Rouge.  The trouble is that it's just too much of a
good thing, leaving the film to literally burst at the seams with panache.
It's like when one of those tubes of Pillsbury biscuits busts open before
you're ready to use it - one big frigging mess.
Rouge could have been edited by a crack-addicted ferret with ADD who just
downed a half-dozen Pixie Stix.  It makes Armageddon look like The Thin Red
Line.  The film is exhaustive when it should have been exhilarating, and I
think Kidman was lucky to escape production with only a fractured rib and a
damaged knee.  Watching Rouge is like taking a beating; it's as garish as
the home-decorating skills of a mobster's wife.  Something this overwhelming
is better suited for a music video, or a television commercial, but
definitely not a 130-minute film.
Rouge's singing, which was all done by the acting talent involved, is
impressive, as is most of the technical package, which could see some
activity at Oscar time.  Kidman starts off as an annoying 85-pound Chihuahua
but gets a bit more likeable as the film progresses.  McGregor does well and
his Christian marks his first role where he hasn't whipped out his piece or
a light saber.  But anything with Leguizamo is an automatic -2 on the Planet
Sick-Boy rating system.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Who would have guessed that Ewan McGregor belting out Elton John's "Your
Song" while dressed in the period garb of 1900's Paris would be so
electrifying an image.  Yet in Baz Lurhmann's "Moulin Rouge," it's just one
of several hypnotic musical sequences.
In the hands of, say, anyone other than Baz, "Moulin Rouge" could so
easily have been a laugh riot (unintentionally speaking that is).  But the
Australian director of "Strictly Ballroom" and "William Shakespeare's Romeo
+ Juliet" proves he has what it takes, defying his critics by taking an
original story (loosely based on the Orpheus legend) and, in a "reinvention
of the musical form," interweaving contemporary songs in a way that, simply
put, just works.  Amazingly!
Jim Broadbent ("Topsy-Turvy") and Richard Roxburgh (as The Duke) goof off
to Madonna's "Like a Virgin," for example.  A minor character with the
arresting name of The Narcoleptic Argentinian performs a tango-inspired
take on The Police's "Roxanne."  And Nicole Kidman does "Diamonds Are a
Girl's Best Friend" on a swing.  And that's just a fraction of it.
"Moulin Rouge" is a musical extravaganza about a musical extravaganza, a
Spectacular Spectacular starring McGregor as a penniless poet who's
enlisted to write a can-can cabaret under the absinthe-clouded guidance of
Toulouse-Lautrec (played by John Leguizamo).  McGregor's Christian soon
becomes enmeshed in Lautrec's seedy, ooh la-la underworld of bohemian sex
and high-kicking showgirls where he meets--and quickly falls in love
with--a high-priced courtesan named Satine (Kidman).
Pretty soon it's apparent this one is heading in much the same direction
as Luhrmann's previous effort (the afore-mentioned "Romeo + Juliet"), but
that's not a bad thing.  "Moulin Rouge" kicks off with lots of rapid-fire
imagery, swooping camerawork, and intricate model shots that it takes a
little getting used to.  But once you do, and can revel in Luhrmann's
wicked sense of humor and extraordinary visual style coupled with co-writer
Craig Pearce's wickedly anachronistic dialogue (citing 20th century lyrics
whenever possible), you'll soon appreciate the film for what it is: a bold,
brave, audacious work that entertains on many levels.
None the least of which is listening to McGregor and Kidman warbling "The
Hills are Alive with the Sound of Music."  Forget Tom--every time these two
get together (and they're both excellent) Luhrmann cranks up the strings
and at the Moulin Rouge, it's enough to make you want to cry.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christopher Null
When a red curtain opens and an orchestra conductor emerges to "direct"
the unmistakable 20th Century Fox theme music, we know we're in for
something different.  Really different.  Good different.
Filled with virtuoso special effects and spectacular song-and-dance
sequences, Baz Luhrmann's long-awaited Moulin Rouge makes every minute
of our collectively held breath worthwhile.  In fact, during its opening
hour, this critic found it hard to look away even for a second to jot
down a note, for fear of missing even a nuanced sparkle in the eye of
some French whore.
Somewhere between a fairy tale and an episode of Sesame Street, sitting
on a strange line between history and fantasy, lies Moulin Rouge, a
vaguely familiar story about a love affair between a penniless writer
and a dying courtesan.  Set in Paris in the year 1900, in and around the
infamous Moulin Rouge -- a brothel/dancehall in the seediest part of
town -- the film quickly tosses us into a whirlwind of a story, windmill
included.
Christian (Ewan McGregor) arrives in Paris, eager to make his mark as a
writer.  No sooner does he begin to type than a band of bohemian poets
and actors literally fall in on him, including the crazed and diminutive
Toulouse-Lautrec (John Leguizamo, acting on his knees).  Together they
hatch a plot to take a new musical across the street to the Moulin Rouge
in search of a backer for their thrilling new show.
Naturally, before midnight strikes, Christian has fallen in love with
the star of the Rouge, the "Sparking Diamond" Satine (Nicole Kidman),
while her boss, the maniacal Zidler (Jim Broadbent) looks on
disapprovingly.  The man with the money is the Duke of Worcester
(Richard Roxburgh), to whom everyone must suck up.  But it wouldn't be a
movie unless the Duke was also in love with Sabine -- and boy does he
have a mean streak....
Its plot is as old and trite as the most overdone of Greek tragedies,
but the fun of Moulin Rouge is all in its telling.  Far and away the
best part of the movie are the spectacular musical numbers performed by
some very good (not great) singers.  (All the actors did their own voice
work.)  When they simply talk, you'll find yourself drumming your
fingers, hoping the next number will come along soon.  And they always
do -- like a machine gun, some 19 performances appear in rapid
succession.
The songs are all contemporary numbers unknown to 1900's Paris.  While
the use of pop songs in period pieces has actually been a mainstay of
the musical since the 1940's, it's never been taken to the extremes of
Rouge.  A Knight's Tale tried this stunt only a few weeks ago, with
mixed results.  In Moulin Rouge, McGregor belts out "The Sound of Music"
in one scene, Broadbent vamps through "Like a Virgin" (yes, Jim
Broadbent), McGregor and Kidman duet memorably through a host of
love-themed songs while standing atop the elephant in which she lives
(yes, elephant), and the entire cast tangos to a Latin-infused version
of "Roxanne," with Jose Feliciano backing the group.  You won't even
realize Marilyn Manson is covering "Smells Like Teen Spirit."  A
Knight's Tale's "We Will Rock You" comes off as lame in comparison.  Put
simply, Moulin Rouge rocks.
The cast is uniformly superb.  Jim Broadbent appears larger than life
(and he is larger than life to begin with), while John Leguizamo is
astonishingly smaller than life... with a French lisp to boot ("the
Thpawk-leeeng Die-aaay-mon!" -- try it out loud).  Of course, this is
Kidman's and McGregor's movie, and when they're together on screen the
picture shines brighter than ever.  In fact, for their duets, Luhrmann
really cranks things up, laying on the dazzle and pouring his heart into
the movie.  The three of them form a remarkably apt trio.
Still, there's only so much of this anyone can take.  Moulin Rouge is a
movie that wears down the audience and its cast.  While it starts off as
an unmitigated five-star extravaganza, it eventually flags into mere
four-star territory as the film becomes repetitious and a bit slow
(heresy!).  Still, it's one of the best films of the year to date,
following Memento is the only award-caliber film released so far in
2001.
But forget all of that.  What you will have witnessed after seeing
Moulin Rouge is nothing short of the rebirth of the movie musical.  It
will certainly be a love-it-or-hate-it experience for moviegoers -- but
like they say, if you don't get it, you're just too old.  Way too old.
Director: Baz Luhrmann
Producer: Fred Baron, Martin Brown, Baz Luhrmann
Writer: Baz Luhrmann, Craig Pearce
Starring: Nicole Kidman, Ewan McGregor, John Leguizamo, Jim Broadbent,
Richard Roxburgh, Kylie Minogue
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
The beauty, flash, energy and movement of "Moulin Rouge" is astounding. It is not just a film, it is a kinetic, visual barrage of richly colored images and upbeat music that thrill and dazzle the mind and enrich the heart. It is also the most tantalizing love story of the year by far. 
Ewan McGregor is Christian, a young writer who holds certain ideals in mind, namely the pursuit of "truth, beauty, and love." As soon as he arrives in Paris, he is thrown into the world of the Moulin Rouge, which holds all his ideals and more. The Moulin Rouge shown in this film is less the actual nightclub of 1900 and  more like a sinful, panoramic display of decadence gone wild. It is so wild and hyperkinetic that director Baz Luhrmann makes us feel we are inside a demented madhouse where anything can happen - we feel we are at the Moulin Rouge firsthand enjoying the party of our lives. 
Before embarking at the Moulin Rouge, Christian is introduced to the dwarf artist Toulouse-Lautrec (John Leguizamo) who lives above Christian's tenement. Lautrec comes crashing through Christian's roof one day and, after some initial patter, discovers he can use Christian's creative mindset for a show called "Spectacular Spectacular." The show could prove fruitful for the Moulin Rouge and for introducing the star dancer Satine (Nicole Kidman) - as well as provide income for Lautrec and his merry band of artists and dancers.  In order to get backing, they must persuade the snooty Duke of Worcester (Richard Roxburgh) to finance it. In one startlingly funny scene, the group improvise the entire show to the Duke - a sort of rambunctious version of a Hollywood pitch meeting. The Duke is overwhelmed and yet sold to the idea. There is only one hitch - the Duke must also have Satine as his bed mate and possible wife.  
The character of Satine is the one that shines the most in "Moulin Rouge." She is a prostitute and flashy dancer but underneath her exterior lies a deathly ill woman whose heart sings whenever she sees Christian. Christian adores Satine and is inspired by her. Satine is pleased by the attention and loves Christian but she is also aware of her duties, to please the sneering Duke who is after all financing the play. One character in the film even sings the famous phrase, "And the show must go on." 
"Moulin Rouge" has an old-fashioned romance that is as old as the Ten Commandments. Writer seeks and receives inspiration from prostitute who has a heart of gold. My, my, what an innovative idea! The difference is in the execution. Ewan McGregor and Nicole Kidman set the night sky sparkling with fireworks thanks to their charisma and credible romantic longing. All it takes is for McGregor to sing "All You Need is Love" against a starry nightscape and you know he sincerely means every word he utters. 
Nicole Kidman continues to surprise me in every film she is in. From her cold-hearted murderess in Gus Van Sant's "To Die For" to her heartfelt performance in Stanley Kubrick's "Eyes Wide Shut," Kidman breathes life on screen with her radiance, beauty and intelligence. In many ways, she is as enigmatic as the late Greta Garbo, and her Satine masks her pain as well as her happiness. Kidman is the rare actress who makes you stare at her, as watchable as anyone else right now, and she had me swooning long after the film was over. 
The film itself throws all kinds of visual razzle-dazzle pyrotechnics at us, including a constantly roving camera, very fast, precise cutting, lots of dancing, vibrant Technicolor colors, bodies swarming the compositions in such a way as to make Merce Cunningham blush, and so on. "Moulin Rouge" is not just a film, it is the "Natural Born Killers" of musicals - frenzied and high-pitched as hell. Director Luhrman is practically teasing you, testing your stamina while you watch the fantastic, rapid images unfold on screen. Boredom is not an expected reaction while watching this Moulin Rouge kick. There is even a justifiably trippy montage where the dance group take some absinthe and start to see images of multiple fairies singing and dancing. There is also a bravura tango number using Sting's "Roxanne" that is as marvelous and powerful a production number as any I've seen of late. And, if that is not enough, Madonna's "Like a Virgin" is used ever so briefly to comedic effect.
Despite the cartoonish casting of Richard Roxburgh as the Duke and a few lulls towards the end, "Moulin Rouge" is a fascinating, exhilarating, exhausting and vastly entertaining kaleidoscope of the famous nightclub itself. It's a postmodern pop musical guaranteed to leave you in a giddy high after it is all over.        
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Robin Clifford
There has been a hype preceding Baz Luhrmann's latest opus that has helped
to infuse interest in the budding Australian film industry. Fox Studios,
Sydney has bellied up to the bar in a big way to bring us the director's
own vision of turn-of-the-century Parisian nightlife in "Moulin Rouge."
"Moulin Rouge" is a jam-packed musical extravaganza utilizing brilliantly
conceived, complexly produced sets providing the viewer with a visual
cornucopia of images. There is so much going on during the high-octane
musical numbers, I could only think of Peter Greenaway's stunning sets in
"Prospero's Books" by way of comparison. The numerous, imaginative dance
routines are done with the director's patented hyperkinetic editing, giving
the film the feel of Gilbert and Sullivan on acid.
Luhrmann's frenzied form of filmmaking was evident in his stylish and fun
"Strictly Ballroom." He took it a step further (and faltered horribly) with
his annoying "William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet" that must have had the
Bard rolling in his grave. The helmer continues to follow his own vision in
his best work to date. Not that "Moulin Rouge" is a great film, mind you.
The are cracks in the kitsch that keeps this extravagant musical from
greatness.
The story, by Luhrmann and Craig Pearce, covers no new ground with poor,
struggling poet, Christian (Ewan MacGregor), attracted to the big city
lights of circa-1900 gay Paris where the diminutive artiste, Henri de
Toulouse-Lautrec (John Leguizamo), and his cronies befriend him. The gang
soon introduces the naďve Christian to the pleasures and debauchery of the
infamous Moulin Rouge, a notorious nightclub owned by a surrealistic emcee,
Zidler (Jim Broadbent). There the gullible budding poet is introduced to
the charms of the beautiful star of the show, Satine (Nicole Kidman), the
most famous courtesan in Paris.
Zidler wants to make the change from nightclub shill to legitimate theater
owner and uses Satine to lure the wealthy Duke of Worcester (Richard
Roxburgh) to invest in his venture. The selfish, arrogant aristocrat lusts
after the beautiful chanteuse and agrees to pay for the business transition
- if he gets Satine in the bargain. The deluded Zidler and ambitious
Satine, who hungers to be a legit actress and no longer a highly paid
whore, agree, but overlook one major snag. Christian falls for Satine and
vice versa. Oh, yeah. Satine suffers from consumption. You take it from
there, keeping in mind this is a romantic tragedy.
Luhrmann almost overwhelms you with his frenetic dance numbers that utilize
a plethora of pop music songs delivered in operatic-style. The list is long
and starts with "The Sound of Music" begun, first, as narrative but soon
breaking into song as Christian conceives the heart of the musical play
that will launch the new Moulin Rouge. This is where the flick is both at
its best and its worst (though "worst" is a bit harsh).
There is a Bob Fosse influence to Luhrmann's proceedings as he combines
1900 Can Can burlesque with the modern musical poetry of "Roxanne," "Like a
Virgin" and "Smells Like Teen Spirit." Elton John's "Your Song" is the
flagship tune that epitomizes the romance between Christian and Satine.
"Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend," a string of "love" songs (that's
song's with "love" in the title, Alex) - "In the Name of Love," "Silly Love
Songs," "All You Need Is Love" - "Up Where We Belong" (from "An Officer and
a Gentleman) and David Bowie's "Heroes" all get attention to varying
degrees. The all male "Like a Virgin," led by Broadbent, is good fun.
The myriad of musical numbers and references are, as I said, overwhelming
with the cleverness and single-minded wit of its auteur. For Luhrmann, more
is better as he batters you with a visual bombardment that weaves the
varied of songs into the fabric of the film.
There are actors up there on the screen and credit must be given to Kidman
and MacGregor for terrific musical performances. Each did their own singing
and both are first-rate, especially MacGregor, whose pipes could earn him a
living as a crooner. Jim Broadbent gives a wild and colorful perf as
Zidler, while Richard Roxburgh puts a Simon Legree spin on his sinister and
dispicable Duke. The rest of the cast provides a "Cabaret" level of
choreographic splendor to the striking dance numbers.
More is not always better and, sometimes, it is best to give the audience a
little time to chew on things a bit. The frenetic pace of "Moulin Rouge" is
a blessing and a bane, but it is certainly the vision of its maker. I give
it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In making love or in making musicals, you must never doubt your
own abilities.  Once you become self-conscious about how to do it,
you probably cannot any more.  The United States once was unexcelled
at making musicals, from Busby Berkeley to Rogers and Hammerstein
this made lots and most of the best.  Now the feature-length musical
has nearly died in the US except for some weak efforts in recent
years to bring it back.  Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU was
really a feeble attempt at dabbling in the genre.  More recently
there have been somewhat more successful attempts at the edges of
the genre with SOUTH PARK and O BROTHER, WHERE ART THOU?  On the
other hand, in Australia when it seems appropriate to make a musical
they just dive into it with the apparent natural ease of Rooney and
Garland saying, "Hey, let's put on a show."  Baz Luhrmann, with the
musical STRICTLY BALLROOM under his belt already, dives in with not
just ease but gusto to make the fabulous musical MOULIN ROUGE.  Set
in 1900 Paris, the beauty of the women, the weird characters, the
glamour the fin-de-siecle exuberance are presented in an explosion
of sensory overload.  Luhrmann does some really extraordinary things
with this film.  I like a director who does something unusual those
now boring studio banners at the beginning of the film.  It is a way
to announce that this will be a creative film from the very first
frame.  Luhrmann has some fun with the Fox logo and theme and right
away the viewer realizes this is a film that will have his eyes
glued to the screen.
     The plotting is somewhat familiar, but then most musicals do
not have a really strong plot.  Luhrmann, who both co-writes and
directs, opens the film with a half-hour or more of high-energy
excitement.  We start with fledgling writer, Christian (played by
Ewan McGregor) coming to Paris over his father's objections.  Almost
immediately he has an unconscious Argentinean fall through his
ceiling and in moments is embroiled in writing for the film's title
nitery a show called "Spectacular. Spectacular."  The star of the
show will be singer, courtesan, and toast of Paris, Satine (Nicole
Kidman).  The new show has been created by a small team of artists
led by the diminutive giant Toulouse Lautrec (John Leguizamo) under
the control of the impresario Zidler (Jim Broadbent having a field
day).  This first night Satine is scheduled to seduce the possible
producer for Spectacular Spectacular, the Duke of Worcestor (Richard
Roxburgh), but through a mistake in identity she seduces Christian
instead.  Being young and impressionable he stays seduced and in
love.  But the duke expects that he will get Satine as part of the
deal of producing the play.  From there the story borrows several
plot highlights from Alexander Dumas's CAMILLE.
     The film is marvelously inventive throughout, though after the
first half-hour it slows considerably.  Touches of that first rush
include a terrific visualization of the Green Fairy said to live in
bottles of that green (and literally toxic) intoxicant, absinthe.
The film remains a tribute to Paris and the extravagant musical
throughout, popular in Paris in the 19th and early 20th Century.
Luhrmann uses music not from the period but more modern and familiar
melodies choosing as the centerpiece a peculiar choice, "There Was a
Boy" from the film THE BOY WITH GREEN HAIR.
     The film features a standout performance by Nicole Kidman in a
role that seemed made for her.  She is an icon playing an icon, and
playing it to the hilt.  Ewan McGregor, of TRAINSPOTTING and the
screen's new Obi-Wan Kenobi is more than passable as the film's
lead, though his singing is obviously overdubbed.  Kidman does her
own singing and does it as well as any professional.  Jim Broadbent
is delicious as the strutting and high-stepping impresario Zidler.
Even the frequently irritating John Leguizamo does nicely as
Lautrec.  He does not seem French, of course, but then nobody else
in the cast does either.
     I can list on the fingers of one hand the set of musicals I
actually like as musicals.  I like FIDDLER ON THE ROOF, ROCKY HORROR
PICTURE SHOW, CABARET, and very few others.  Most musicals I bide my
time and wait for the singing to be over.  This is a bide-my-time
sort of musical, but it has its share of other rewards.  Even I can
appreciate its tributes to the stage and screen musical.  I rate it
a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Shane Burridge
There's a windmill that keeps popping up in MOULIN ROUGE every few minutes.  
It's not central to the plot: it's just there, decked out with pretty 
lights, turning around in circles and going nowhere.  It's probably as good 
a metaphor for MOULIN ROUGE as any, although I'm tempted to think that 
director Baz Luhrmann originally intended it as a jokey aside to the 
Quixotic nature of his brash new undertaking.  You will either love or hate 
MOULIN ROGUE, or more likely both.  There's much that is wonderful and 
dynamic, and just as much that is irritating or hackneyed.  There's 
certainly not much in the storyline: Ewan McGregor plays a would-be bohemian 
writer visiting Paris at the turn of the 20th century, where he becomes 
besotted with Satine (Nicole Kidman), the star attraction of the infamous 
Moulin Rouge nightclub.  The fate of the nightclub is in the hands of an 
unscrupulous Duke (Richard Roxburgh) who also has his eye on Satine and will 
brook no competition from the lovesick McGregor.
It took me a while to figure out exactly what Luhrmann was trying to do with 
MOULIN ROUGE.  It's a natural, if predictable, progression from his previous 
two films STRICTLY BALLROOM and ROMEO + JULIET but at first glance seeks 
only to amplify them.  It wasn't until the melodrama of the film's final 
reel that I remembered its great opening credits, and realized that MOULIN 
ROUGE is intended to be a silent film - with music.  Luhrmann, who I suspect 
would be quite pleased to become heir apparent to the throne of Postmodern 
Cinema, throws every reference, in-joke and quotation imaginable into what 
he determines to be the 21st Century version of the Musical, a genre that 
was pretty much defunct after the 60s.  It would not suit the viewing 
sensibilities of modern audiences to play the story straight, as would have 
been done in the days of Judy Garland or Gene Kelly, so instead Luhrmann 
chooses to be campy and flippant.  This makes the film great fun, but also 
repeats the inconsistency of his previous ROMEO + JULIET: MOULIN ROUGE 
immerses us in a totally artificial (i.e. distinctly cinematic) world with 
over-the-top characters and then expects us to feel genuine emotion for them 
at the end simply by descending into pathos.
The death scene, a less successful rehash of R+J, is tiresome, but not as 
tiresome as the film's other patent flaw.  Luhrmann is a talented director 
with a wayward sense of humor, but in MOULIN ROUGE he has only one joke and 
it is repeated ad nauseam.  Worse, it is that laziest recourse of humor, the 
anachronism joke.  It first happens a few minutes into the film when Ewan 
McGregor bursts into a rendition of 'The Sound of Music'.  It's a forgivable 
gag when it occurs, because it points out to us the direction the rest of 
the movie is heading.  Twenty minutes later, when it becomes apparent that 
the characters are not going to stop quoting song lyrics as if they were 
prose, the joke has worn thin (and reminds us that Luhrmann had a better 
writer for his earlier picture!).  It also raises some confusion - there is 
a specific audience that will be of the right age to recognize the quotes 
(mostly from 1970s tunes) so the spoofy nature of the dialogue will be lost 
on many viewers.  It's one thing to have Prince's 'When Doves Cry' 
reformatted for choirboys in ROMEO + JULIET, but another to have McGregor 
and Kidman spouting Bernie Taupin lyrics as if they were poetry and talking 
in conversations made up entirely of lines from Jennifer Warnes, David 
Bowie, The Sweet, Wings, and other artists.  This might be the stuff of 
Postmodernism but it's also a depressing reminder that a number of new 
film-makers are cannibalistic: they don't make movies based on books any 
more, they make movies based on other movies.  Just to show how intertextual 
Luhrmann gets, Kidman's opening scene starts with her belting out 'Diamonds 
are a Girl's Best Friend', which is abruptly interrupted by a phrase from 
Madonna's 'Material Girl'.  Why?  Because the original Madonna video clip 
was itself a parody of the 'Diamonds' number from the film GENTLEMEN PREFER 
BLONDES.  At this stage Luhrmann isn't even making a movie based on a movie, 
but a movie based on a film clip based on a movie.  In the end, MOULIN ROUGE 
is left strutting its stuff like a Frankenstein monster covered in glitter.
Despite this pot-pourri approach, MOULIN ROUGE still manages to be 
refreshing and original.  This doesn't mean it's an original musical - the 
songs are well-known pop tunes that have been incorporated, mostly for 
humorous effect, into the storyline.  I don't have any complaint with this 
because it wasn't uncommon for musicals of the past to be made in a similar 
style, with tunes cobbled together from the likes of Gershwin, Porter and 
Berlin to ensure good box-office - even the classic SINGING IN THE RAIN is 
made up of songs taken from other films.  When it comes down to the bottom 
line, only one question needs to be asked: is this film worth seeing?  The 
answer is yes.  The high points outnumber the flaws (or, more likely, 
overwhelm them) and it is a gloriously cinematic spectacle which deserves to 
be seen and especially heard in a theater.  It outdoes everything Luhrmann 
has done to date, and while it may not be as cohesive as his earlier work it 
at least seems to have been the film he has always wanted to make.  Besides, 
anything featuring a cameo of pop princess Kylie Minogue as a hallucinatory 
green fairy has got to be worth checking out.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.

Author
Jonathan Richards
The first ten minute of Moulin Rouge are a bit unsettling.  It's 
like arriving at a party where everyone is at least three drinks ahead 
of you.  They're all feeling giggly and hilarious and you're wondering 
what the hell you're doing there.  But as you're fumbling for your keys 
and mumbling your excuses, the spirit of the occasion starts getting to 
you.  And then, what a party! 
Nominally the action is set in and around Paris's legendary Moulin 
Rouge at the end of the 19th century, but the real setting is in the 
romantic imagination.  Director Baz Luhrmann (Strictly Ballroom, William 
Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet) and production designer Catherine Martin 
have created an opulent digital fantasy of Montmartre, and peopled it 
with a wild and crazy cast of characters. 
The narrator is Christian (Ewan McGregor), who functions as the 
Christopher Isherwood of this cabaret, and his Sally Bowles is the 
beautiful courtesan and Moulin Rouge diva Satine (Nicole Kidman).  The 
role of Master of Ceremonies is manned by Jim Broadbent (Topsy-Turvy) as 
Zidler, the impresario with a bluster of toughness and a heart of mush.  
Christian has come to Paris to be a writer, and he soon falls in with a 
crowd of Bohemians led by that zany little painter Toulouse-Lautrec 
(John Leguizamo) who hang out at the Moulin Rouge.  Christian is swept 
up by their credo of "truth, beauty, freedom and love," (the summer of 
1899, like another season seven decades later, was apparently a "summer 
of love,") and he lets himself be drafted to write a musical 
extravaganza for Satine and the Moulin Rouge.
He falls for Satine, and she for him - beneath the rouge and 
provocative costumes beats an honest, loving heart - but the course of 
true love is complicated by disease (she has a nasty cough, and it 
leaves ominous spots of blood on her handkerchief) and economics (a 
musical, even in 1899, could not be mounted for a song.) 
Enter the wicked Duke of Worcester (Richard Roxburgh), who wants to 
bankroll the show and bedroll its star.  And so it goes - dissembling 
and stolen moments, agony and ecstasy, sacrifice, villainy, and heroism, 
all building to a romantic climax.
But the story is only a small part of the story.  Moulin Rouge is 
about rapture, and the rapture explodes from every pore of this glossy 
reinvention of the musical.  Luhrmann has packed it with a pot-pourri of 
 20th-century hits, and from the moment Christian extemporizes Elton 
John's "Your Song" for his admiring new pals, the movie stakes out a 
roller-coaster course that invites you to hang on for a wild ride or 
bail out then and there while the getting is good.
The pop flows like a barrel of weasels, with songs like "Diamonds 
Are a Girl's Best Friend", "The Sound of Music", "Roxanne", "Lady 
Marmalade", "All you Need is Love", and a hilariously saturnine 
rendition of Madonna's "Like a Virgin" sung by Broadbent.  McGregor 
strikes the right note of puppydog lovesickness and earnest pluck as 
Christian, and Kidman is irresistible in a performance that will make 
you forget all about Tom Cruise.  But the biggest star is Luhrmann, who 
stages this lollapalooza of an entertainment like a man deeply in the 
grip of hallucinogenic drugs.
Above, beneath, and throbbing through all the flash is the 
unabashed romanticism that is at the core of most great musicals.  It's 
driven home by the coda that reappears throughout the movie, from Nat 
"King" Cole's 1948 hit "Nature Boy":
"The greatest thing
"You'll ever learn
"Is just to love,
"And be loved
"In return."     

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Baz Luhrmann. Screenplay by Luhrmann and Craug Pearce.
Starring Nicole Kidman, Ewen McGregor, Richard Roxburgh. Running time: 128
minutes. Rated PG for mature theme by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 27th, 
2001.
Synopsis: In 1899, young playwright Christian (McGregor) travels to Paris 
where he befriends Toulouse Lautrec (John Leguizamo) and visits the Moulin 
Rouge, the infamous nightclub-turned-theatre run by Harold Zidler (Jim 
Broadbent). There, Christian falls in love with dancer and would-be 
actress Satine (Kidman), and must compete for her affections with the 
Moulin Rouge's odious benefactor, the Duke of Monroth (Roxburgh). It soon 
becomes evident that Christian's masterpiece will determine not only his 
future with Satine, but also the fate of the Moulin Rouge itself.
Review: Amazing! Astounding! A breath of fresh air! "Moulin Rouge!" is all 
this and more. Audiences may find its opening moments hard to process; its 
hyperkinetic pacing and raucous visual style is a vast departure from the 
mainstream. But most viewers should be able to attune themselves to 
Luhrmann's offbeat filmmaking before too long; those who expend the effort 
will find themselves plunged into a superior cinematic experience that 
makes it all worthwhile. Combining visual effects, model work, live action 
and any number of inventive camera angles and motions, Luhrmann gives 
"Moulin Rouge!" a distinctive appearance which nicely evokes the movie's 
setting of 1899 Paris and the "Bohemian Revolution". And though it may 
seem almost contradictory, Luhrmann's use of modern music -- everything 
from "Diamonds Are A Girl's Best Friend" to "My Song" -- merely enhances 
the atmosphere (Broadbent's uproarious rendition of "Like A Virgin" is 
especially noteworthy). The performers hit all the right notes, especially 
McGregor, who achieves a nice mix of optimism and desperation. But 
ironically, so spoiled are we by the first half of "Moulin Rouge!" that 
when things calm down a bit and drift into more traditional melodrama 
thereafter, it comes as a disappointment. Still, "Moulin Rouge!" is an 
assault on the eyes and ears of rare truculence, and rarer pleasure.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Baz Luhrmann.
Cast: Ewan McGregor, Nicole Kidman, Richard Roxburgh, John Leguizamo, Jim 
Broadbent, Kylie Minogue.
2001 - 126 minutes
Rated PG-13 (mature themes and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 2, 2001.
One does not watch Baz Luhrmann's phantasmagoric ode to Hollywood movie 
musicals of yore, "Moulin Rouge," as much as one feels as if they're living 
it. A trippy carnival ride through sensory overload and non-stop visual 
marvels, it is a wildly imaginative and sincerely audacious motion picture 
that has the ability to single-handedly revive one's faith in the movies, as 
they have begun to dwindle with the summer season currently upon us.
The story is simple, yet powerful. Set in Paris, circa 1899, Christian (Ewan 
McGregor) is a penniless writer who has just arrived in the town of 
Monmartre, home of the infamous Moulin Rouge nightclub. When Christian has a 
chance encounter with a group of petty unconformists, led by dwarf Toulouse 
Lautrec (John Leguizamo), and helps them to come up with the lyrics of "The 
Sound of Music" for the musical revue they are preparing for the Moulin 
Rouge, they immediately hire him to be their writer. They also set up a 
meeting with gorgeous courtesan Satine (Nicole Kidman), whom they want for 
the female lead of what they have entitled "Spectacular Spectacular!" At 
first mistaking him for a wealthy duke, Satine falls instantly in love with 
Christian, and vice versa, much to the chagrin of the real duke (Richard 
Roxburgh), who has not only just staked a claim in Moulin Rouge, but has 
gotten the club's owner, Zidler (Jim Broadbent), to sign an agreement giving 
him exclusive rights to Satine. And although Christian and Satine do not yet 
know it, Satine has been diagnosed with a fatal case of tuberculosis.
"Moulin Rouge" is as deeply romantic as any film in recent memory. Christian 
is a wistful young man who believes in four aspects of life: "truth, beauty, 
freedom--and above all others--love." Satine, on the other hand, is both a 
singer/dancer and a prostitute, and has been trained to never fall in love. 
In one of the film's most awe-inspiring, magical sequences, Christian 
serenades Satine with Elton John's "Your Song," to which they get so caught 
up in their feelings for one another that they are lifted out of the building 
window and onto the clouds in the sky. For the first time in her life, Satine 
feels something other than fake emotions for a man in her life, and it's an 
exhilarating rush. Their joy in finding each other does not last, however, as 
the wealthy duke enters the picture with an unfair proposition to make.
The sparks that actors Ewan McGregor and Nicole Kidman ignite as hopeless 
romantic Christian and unsure realist Satine are so bright, they're almost 
blinding. Their chemistry, for once, feels genuine, rather than "written," 
and it is the doomed love story of these two people that turn the movie into 
such a complex and touching experience. McGregor (1999's "Star Wars: The 
Phantom Menace") and Kidman (1999's "Eyes Wide Shut") are stunning in their 
roles, eliciting both the passion and determination that any two people have 
who are in love. Both of them, as well as the rest of the actors, sing their 
own songs, and they turn out to be startlingly talented at it. Special notice 
must go to Kidman, who has never been better. Often coming off as somehow 
aloof, Kidman fills Satine with a warmth that has never before been witnessed 
from the actress.
Aside from its two stars, where "Moulin Rouge" excels is in the almost 
non-stop barrage of singing. About 85-percent of the story is told through 
the original art form of song, all of which are classic pop tunes and love 
ballads from post-1899. Just because we are in turn-of-the-20th-century 
Paris, director Baz Luhrmann so convincingly argues, doesn't necessarily mean 
that people back then couldn't have the right to sing everything from Dolly 
Parton's "I Will Always Love You," to The Beatles' "All You Need is Love," to 
David Bowie's "Heroes," to Madonna's "Like a Virgin," to Sting's "Roxanne," 
to Nirvana's "Smells Like Teen Spirit." The film plays like a veritable who's 
who of '60s, '70s, and '80s music, and it is not only smashingly 
entertaining, but actually serves a strong purpose within the narrative. Each 
musical number--and there are a lot of them--are orchestrated with such 
unabashed energy and passion that you can't help but drift away in its 
rapturous spell.
With "Moulin Rouge," Baz Luhrmann (1996's "William Shakespeare's Romeo + 
Juliet") has made his first masterpiece as a filmmaker. The camera is 
constantly moving, swooping around people and objects, or zooming into 
building windows or through beautiful city landscapes. It is not done to keep 
the interest of the attention-impaired, though, but to simply aid in creating 
a glitzy, one-of-a-kind universe. Additionally, the story, written by 
Luhrmann and Craig Pearce, is just strong enough to be fully satisfying, 
while not being bogged down by overplotted developments. 
In a day when so many motion pictures strive for nothing more than adequacy, 
"Moulin Rouge" is alive with creativity and wonder, proving that the medium 
of film can take us anywhere, and act upon us in any way possible. One part 
comedy, one part romance, and one part tragedy, "Moulin Rouge" is a 
remarkable triumph, as well as the first truly brilliant film of 2001.
 http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/dustinputman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/reviewsby?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Homer Yen
Summer's most impressive visual spectacle has hit the
theatres.  But in this film, you won't find squadrons
of bombers or capsizing battleships.  Instead, you'll
find a rhapsodic presentation that evokes the great
Hollywood musicals of the 50s with sets that burst
with vivid color, production numbers as showy as any
Broadway spectacular, and a kinetic pace that patterns
itself after hip MTV videos.  And beneath all of this
pomp, you'll also find a moving story about "truth,
beauty, freedom, and love."
In the revisionist film, `Moulin Rouge,' story and
song boldly come together in a film about a tragic
love affair between penniless writer Christian (Ewan
McGregor) and beautiful courtesan Satine (Nicole
Kidman).  These two meet at the fabled nightclub
Moulin Rouge, where fantasies power its atmosphere of
glitz and opulence.  But when you return from your
state of euphoria, reality is hurtfully cold.
No character is caught up more in this state of
fantasy than the naive Christian, whom after
befriending dwarf artist Toulouse-Lautrec (John
Leguizamo), is given the rare opportunity to meet
Satine.  This encounter makes his heart sing,
literally.  He croons a love song to her delight ("I
can see you're going to be bad for business," she
says) but perhaps to the ambivalence of the audience. 
Actually, McGregor, Kidman and the cast members can
all competently carry a tune, but their renditions
lacked brassiness or distinction.  At other times,
such as when our couple sings a medley of love songs
to one another, the exercise seemed nauseatingly
silly.  Indeed some of the musical numbers bordered on
kitsch (like the sales pitch set to the tune of the
Can-Can to persuade a financier to invest) while other
numbers seemed forced just for the sake of song.  Yet,
many selections were quite impressive and easily
acquitted itself of this complaint such as the opening
and closing numbers and a dark Tango set to Sting's
"Roxanne."  
Christian's state of euphoria may soon come to an end
when he discovers that the investor (Richard Roxburgh)
who agrees to finance his latest play also wants
exclusivity to Satine.  If she does not agree, then he
shall also seize the property.  Harold (Jim
Broadbent), impresario and owner, asks her to hurt him
for the sake of everyone involved.  "We are creatures
of the underworld," he laments.  "We can not afford to
love."  
But their bond is unbreakable, which leaves our
flustered paterfamilias making up brilliant lies when
the investor begins to doubt her commitment.  A
terrific musical moment occurs when Harold explains to
him that Satine has cancelled her date because she has
gone to confessional and then breaks into Madonna's
"Like a Virgin."  His character is by far the most
enjoyable of the cast.
While we gladly accept the songs and take interest in
the love story, what really holds our attention,
however, is the film's camerawork and inventive
visualizations.  The film's images frenetically
display the pageantry of turn-of-the century Paris
during the period when avant-garde artistry was at its
heyday.  The extravagant production ably captures its
festive mood, from the tuxedo-clad clientele reveling
at the nightclub to the melodramatic characters to a
scene where our wildly-in-love couple dances on a
cloud while serenaded by the moon.  It's a fantasy of
which we should all be a part.


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie scripts, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A British poet moves to France and finds himself in a position to write 
a play for the Moulin Rouge. Soon thereafter, he falls in love with one 
of its stars, Satine. But the play and the Moulin Rouge will not go on 
unless a certain Duke invests his money into it. The catch? The Duke is 
also in love with Satine and doesn't know about the secret love affair 
between the poet and Satine. Oh yeah...and people sing throughout!
CRITIQUE:
A surprisingly potent love story is placed inside a red-hot bottle of 
music, dance, colors and vibrancy, and splashed across your movie screen 
with love as its foundation. Will everyone like it? Certainly not, the 
film has a certain over-stylized energy about it which may not sit well 
with everyone (I personally enjoyed most of the film's unique camera 
trickery, but did get lost in its frenzy from time to time), but anyone 
who loves musicals is sure to at least appreciate Mr. Luhrmann's bold 
approach to reviving this lost genre of films. I never did like musicals 
myself but ever since I was pleasantly surprised by last year's LOVE'S 
LABOUR'S LOST, I've opened my eyes to them, and with this film, you 
simply could not close them back again (there's so much happening on 
screen all the time!). I've also gotta credit all of the actors with 
amazing performances across the board. Nicole Kidman, wow, I was never 
much of a fan of hers, but she really gives you everything in this film. 
Dancing, acting, loving, crying, singing, fainting...she covered every 
angle out there and actually got me to invest myself emotionally to her 
character. And yes, I will even go out on a limb and ask the Academy to 
remember her at the end of this year if no other major actress roles 
have come through for a nomination as Best Actress. But let's not forget 
McGregor either. His ying to her yang, Ewan also surprised me with a 
different side of himself, one which resonated a genuine sense of 
passion, love, anguish and song! Damn, that boy could sing! And even 
more kudos go out to Jim Broadbent and Richard Roxburgh, who played the 
Duke and Mr. Zidler, for presenting us with more than just your everyday 
one-dimensional secondary characters. They are also a big part of what 
makes this movie work.
Of course, the film's main draw was its use of modern songs and lyrics 
inside a world of the past, and that experiment on its own definitely 
won me over. Anyone who could successfully incorporate Elton John, Kiss, 
Madonna and Nirvana into the same movie song list is "okay" in my book! 
In fact, many of the song sequences were beautifully sung and 
choreographed, touched up with stunning sets and atmosphere, and left 
quite an impression in my mind. One of my favorites was when the whole 
"gang" from the Moulin Rouge was trying to convince the Duke to invest 
with them by dancing and singing a rapid-fire ditty inside the big 
elephant. A sure-to-be classic scene (I know that it might sound goofy, 
but when you see the movie, you'll see what I mean). But in the end, 
movies like this are ultimately going to be judged by their basic 
storylines and I have to tell you that I too was quite shocked to find 
myself attached and rooting for the characters in this film. Thumbs up 
to Baz Luhrmann on two counts then: one for creating an extraordinary 
vision of an underground world so delightful and peppy and two, for 
co-writing a touching, funny, original and romantically tragic 
screenplay. This movie works because it enraptures its energy, love, 
style and wonderful set designs with solid acting, captivating song 
sequences and a love story that is sure to touch your heart. Yeah, JoBlo 
ain't a wuss but he sure lapped up everything that the director was 
handing out at this fantasy land. What's next...Broadway?
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Cell (8/10) - Dancer in the Dark (5/10) - Everyone Says I Love You 
(5/10) - Grease (8/10) - A Knight's Tale (7/10) - Love's Labour's Lost 
(8/10) - The Nightmare before Christmas (10/10) - O Brother Where Art 
Thou (7/10) - South Park (9/10) - The Sound of Music (9/10)

Author
Steve Rhodes
MOULIN ROUGE is the most audacious effort yet from director Baz 
Luhrmann, who last, in ROMEO + JULIET, imagined two Shakespearean lovers 
in a modern Verona Beach setting.  This time, Luhrmann turns his 
considerable talent to bringing back the movie musical, an art form 
whose obituary had supposedly long since been written.
Starring Nicole Kidman and Ewan McGregor, as Satine and Christian, two 
star-crossed lovers, this fairytale of a movie is a cornucopia of 
singing and dancing.  In fact there are probably enough songs in it for 
three musicals.  McGregor's big role of late was as Obi-Wan Kenobi in 
THE PHANTOM MENACE and Kidman's was in EYES WIDE SHUT.  She is, however, 
perhaps best known these days for her well publicized contract dispute 
with a guy who has impossible missions.
The movie's phenomenal sets look like a Tim Burton production of WILLIE 
WONKA AND THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY.  Among many imaginative and magical 
scenes, one has Satine and Christian standing on a cloud between the 
starry, deep blue sky and the twinkling apartment lights of Paris in 
1899 -- "the summer of love."
The film opens with such a long cacophony and montage of blurring images 
that it seems that the picture might be one of those near storyless 
movies like PINK FLOYD THE WALL.  This all changes when McGregor and 
Kidman begin to sing, "The Hills Are Alive With The Sound Of Music" in 
his case and "Diamonds Are A Girl's Best Friend" in hers.  To answer 
your first question: Yes, they sing all of their own songs.  And to 
answer your second: Yes, they are quite good, especially McGregor.  Best 
of all are their love duets, and their chemistry together is both 
credible and touching.
The story, which is filled with humor as well as love, concerns a 
fantastical nightclub called the Moulin Rouge, which is run by an 
impresario named Zidler (Jim Broadbent from TOPSY-TURVY).  He transforms 
his nightclub into a theater in order to put on a play called 
"Spectacular Spectacular," written by Christian.  The leading role will 
be sung by Satine, a courtesan.  
In order to get the funding Zidler gives the deed to the Moulin Rouge, 
and effectively to Satine as well, to the evil Duke of Monroth (Richard 
Roxburgh).  This deal might have worked out, had Christian and Satine 
not fallen in love.  A hopeless romantic, Christian's fundamental 
believe is, "The greatest thing you'll ever learn is just to love and to 
be loved in return."  The tragedy of the story comes from Satine's 
health -- she's dying of consumption -- and Christian's 
self-acknowledged "ridiculous obsession with love."
Operatic in scope, the film assaults our senses with the sumptuous 
music, costumes, sets and story.  With its rapid pacing, jump cuts, 
speed ups and slow downs, the film will leave you emotionally drained 
and exhilarated by the end, which does more with the "show must go on" 
than you could ever imagine.  It is also a rare film that is such a 
crowd-pleaser that you're likely to hear, as we did, spontaneous 
applause during the movie.
MOULIN ROUGE runs 2:10.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual content and would 
be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the film ***.  He had trouble with the 
intensity of the dying part but liked the music and the dancing.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 1, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century 
theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
In 1899, the summer of love, impoverished British writer Christian (Ewan 
McGregor, "Star Wars:  Episode I - the Phantom Menace") arrives in Paris
to find inspiration in Montmarte's bohemian artistic neighborhood.  When
a narcoleptic Argentian (Jacek Koman) and a midget dressed as a nun
(John Leguizamo as Henri de Toulouse Lautrec) fall through his ceiling,
Christian's cast in their alpine play, "Spectacular, Spectacular."  He breaks
their collective writers' block by belting out "The hills are alive!," 
is declared the play's new author and trundled off to meet Zidler (Jim
Broadbent, "Topsy Turvy"), the owner of their venue, the "Moulin Rouge."
Lautrec promises Christian that he'll meet with the play's star, Satine
(Nicole Kidman) alone, just as Zidler is promising the same to the Duke
(Richard Roxburgh, "Mission:  Impossible II"), a potential backer.  Satine,
Moulin Rouge's star and courtesan, gets mixed signals and sets to seducing
Christian, believing he's the wealthy Duke.
The story of "Moulin Rouge" (written by Baz Luhrmann and Craig Pearce, "William
Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet") mirrors Dumas' "Camille," where another 
consumptive courtesan captures the heart of an idealistic young man, but 
director Luhrmann uses the age old tale as a springboard to dazzle his audience 
with lavishly colorful visuals, dizzily photographed, alarmingly editted and
musically propelled via snippets of countless pop tunes.
Our initial introduction to the Moulin Rouge is through the eyes of
Christian after imbibing in absinthe (guided by Australian songstress Kylie 
Minogue as the green fairy), the legendary hallucinogenic green liqueur.  The 
skirts of can-can dancers whoosh by with a kaleidoscopic effect as the 
performers sing the most unlikely medley of "Voulez Vous Couchez Avec Moi?" and 
"Smells Like Teen Spirit."  A wild assortment of freaks and fashionistas make 
the patrons of the Moulin Rouge the Studio 54'ers of their day.  Then Satine 
makes her entrance, dangling from above on a swing, brilliant red hair and lips 
spotlighted against chalk white skin.  Satine's introductory medley, "Diamonds
Are a Girl's Best Friend/"Material Girl," prove that Kidman can carry a tune,
but are an uninspired choice.
Luhrmann then gives us a dose of the ludicrous as Satine writhes around her
opulent Indian elephant abode as Christian recites the 'poetry' of Elton
John's "Your Song."  The real Duke's arrival calls for quick thinking on
Satine's part and aided by Christian's fellow playmates she
outlines the play's plot on the spot.  This sequence plays as if the Marx
Brothers collided with the Three Stooges.
After this, Luhrmann eases up on the hyperkinetic editting and "Moulin
Rouge" settles in with its first truly showstopping number in which Zidler
performs "Like a Virgin" for the Duke accompanied by a chorus of dancing
waiters.  Other highlights include the narcoleptic Argentian's advise to
Christian about getting involved with courtesans by way of a tango number
set to "Roxanne," and the climax of the play within a play.
Luhrman has created a great piece of eye candy, from his opening black and
white zoom through the streets of Paris leading to the Moulin Rouge (looking
like "The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" crossed with "The City of Lost Children")
to the multi-level Indian set stages of a Bollywood Ziegfeld.  His "Romeo +
Juliet" team of cinematographer Donald McAlpine, editor Jill Bilcock,
and production designer/costume designer Catherine Martin are joined by
art director Ann-Marie Beauchamp and Set Decorator Brigitte Broch ("Chronos," 
"Amores Perros").
Yet all the film's spectular excesses don't add up to a completely satisfying 
experience, careening as it does from slapstick to melodrama.
Kidman looks ravishing, but her plight never pulls on the heartstrings.  
McGregor fares better, largely due to the real emotion he delivers with his 
full bodied singing voice.  Broadbent's Zidler is a pragmatic, rather than 
evil, version of Joel Grey's "Cabaret" emcee and he gives the film's most 
interesting performance (when Luhrmann lets us see it), yet his presence 
distractingly recalls the theatrical "Topsy Turvy."  Leguizamo is little more 
than a tearful clown - Toulouse who?  Roxburgh's Duke is as two dimentionally
villainous as the plot demands.
"Moulin Rouge" is itself like a courtesan, a lavishly oufitted, desirable
beauty who excels at artifice.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 MOULIN ROUGE (director/writer: Baz Luhrmann; screenwriter: Craig
 Pearce; cinematographer: Donald M. McAlpine; editor: Jill Bilcock;
 cast: Nicole Kidman (Satine), Ewan McGregor (Christian), John
 Leguizamo (Toulouse-Lautrec), Jim Broadbent (Zidler), Richard Roxburgh
 (Duke of Worcester), Christine Anu (Arabia) Garry McDonald (the
 Doctor), Kylie Minogue (Green Fairy), Kerry Walker (Marie), Jacek
 Koman (The Unconscious Argentinean); Runtime: 126; 20th Century Fox;
 2001)
A dazzling and lively fictionalized musical/romantic/comedy about the
notorious Moulin Rouge, which is set during the period between 1899 (the
summer of love) and 1900. It's a fluffy romantic story about doomed
lovers, a courtesan and a penniless writer, living the bohemian
lifestyle, and about a play they put on that needs the support of a rich
nobleman who has a black heart and an evil eye for the courtesan. The
musical numbers are splashy, hijacked from other musicals, and gaudily
presented, befitting such a story set in a notorious Parisian
tourist-trap like the Moulin Rouge nightclub (it was filmed in
Australia). The energy and vitality of these musical scores and a host
of bizarrely dressed supporting performers who fill the stage with song
and dance, gives this film a comical circus flavoring, which manages to
cover-up its cliché-ridden story as much as possible.
It's directed with an eye for color, especially the color of rouge, by
the pop-musical enthusiast, the Australian, Baz Luhrmann ("Romeo and
Juliet"/"Strictly Ballroom"), an MTV type of director, who is more
interested at getting at what dazzles than the why of the dazzle. The
film is a series of perpetual motion shots, never pausing to delve into
any  character study. The problem with that, is you don't really care
what happens to the lovers. The spectacle of the film is the only
substance offered, and its made sumptuously beautiful for the eye to
feast on. It sells its sex in the same way a snake-oil salesman hawks
his product, which results in a tirade for the bohemian motto of truth,
beauty, freedom, and love; but, it only succeeds in making the sex
presented onscreen not live up to expectations.
What excuses this film from being such a rip-off of other films, is that
what is stolen from other films works very well here. It gives the film
all the breathless moments found in other films a chance to breath again
in this whirlwind of a production that is in a constant climax mode. If
all it took was energy and beautiful sets and costumes, then this
production would be a glorious one; but, what this film didn't have was
a love story that could touch the heart, even as it screamed out that it
was all about heart. This is an easy movie to praise for being inventive
and diverting, but it cannot be admired for a film that has a semblance
of truth about it. It's just another enjoyable but forgettable Hollywood
musical, in a long chorus line of such ventures. The film has the feel
in all its excesses of a Ken Russell type of musical crossed with any
number of Hollywood ones, even such an illustrious traditional one as
"Singing in the Rain."
The story is told through the eyes of an English writer (he acts as the
narrator), whose reason for being is to love someone and have that love
returned. Ewan McGregor stars as Christian. He is the young innocent who
leaves behind his uptight father during the French belle époque of the
1890s to live the bohemian life as a writer in Montmartre, Paris.
Pecking away at his typewriter, Christian is startled when a costumed
Argentinean actor falls through the ceiling of his garret and a dwarf
with a lisp, the artist who is now a performing artist, Toulouse-Lautrec
(John Leguizamo), greets him at the door. They have been rehearsing a
stage production called "Spectacular Spectacular," and quickly realize
how talented Christian is and he is hired on the spot to be the play's
new writer. He will also be introduced to the fast track lifestyle of
the bohemians in matters of drink and love.
But there are obstacles in the way of putting on the play in the Moulin
Rouge, which must be met with by trickery by Lautrec (he's the acting
groups' leader). He first inveigles a very private meeting with the
would-be star of the show, the courtesan and headline performer at the
Moulin Rouge, the leggy and sexy Satine (Kidman), and at this meeting
she thinks he's the duke. When she discovers he's not, it's too late,
she has already fallen in love with him. This changes her hardened
personality to one of an innocent girl who sweetly falls in love, a
scenario which the film couldn't convincingly pull off. She will also
have a secret she keeps from Christian, that she's dying from
consumption. The wealthy duke is the heavy in this film. He is played by
Richard Roxburgh, who plays the one-dimensional role as tritely as it is
written. He's got the dough to make the show happen so the impresario of
the dance hall, the colorful liar with the tough exterior but soft
heart, Harold Zidler (Broadbent), entices the duke by setting up a
private liason with him and Satine -- who is also known as "the
Sparkling Diamond." When all the confusion clears, the result is that
the play is sponsored by the duke with the understanding he gets to
sleep with Satine.
The film's gimmick is having 20th century musical songs and routines,
that are eye popping, fill this 19th century set musical. They range
from songs such as: "The Sound of Music," "Your Song," "Diamonds Are a
Girl's Best Friend," "Material Girl," "Smells Like Teen Spirit," "Like a
Virgin," "Lady Marmalade," "Silly Love Songs," "All You Need Is Love,"
"Up Where We Belong," "Don't Leave Me This Way," "Heroes," "In the Name
of Love," and "Roxanne." This is just a partial list of songs, as the
stage is always tuned for some song and dance action.
All the main characters played are the usual stock archetypes--Nicole
Kidman was eye catching as the nightclub star and courtesan who is
really a sweetie for a whore, but she was too physically big to be
handled in a believable way by Ewan McGregor. He's the sensitive writer
type with the pure heart, who falls in love with a woman who makes him
pine for her (at least he stays in character for the entire film). I was
amused by John Leguizamo as the rascal-like Toulouse-Lautrec, and Jim
Broadbent was overpowering in his role as ringmaster of this operation.
He seems to be much too stagy a thespian for these more profane
Hollywood actors he's surrounded by, as he stood out from them because
either he was a much better actor than they were or because he hammed it
up too much. In any case, his performance did stick out like someone who
is thumbing a ride back to Topsy-Turvy. Yet I felt myself partial to his
performance, as in every scene he was in I couldn't help being
overwhelmed by his strong presence; though, Kidman's performance was the
key one of the film. She handles her part in an admirable way, showing
us a lot of leg and feeling for who she was; but, the love story had no
sparks and just didn't work right.
It's a film that looked good (lots of garish colors and stardust),
sounded fine, and felt so-so. A great escape film in the tradition of
Hollywood spectacles, a film that does justice to the cancan dancers of
the Moulin Rouge. It's a fun film to let one's hair down, to sit
leisurely back with some popcorn and watch this film speed across the
screen; while, from time to time peeking in on the jewel-encrusted
elephant that goes for Satine's boudoir, or checking in on McGregor's
impoverished artist's digs as he slaves over the typewriter with an
outside neon sign shining throughout the night (speaking of clichés).
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Moulin Rouge (2001)
Nicole Kidman, Ewan McGregor, John Leguizamo, Jim Broadbent, Richard
Roxburgh. Cinematography by Donald McAlpine. Music by Craig Armstrong,
Marius De Vries and Steve Hitchcock. Screenplay by Baz Luhrmann and
Craig Pearce. Directed by Baz Luhrmann. 126 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
After the press screening of "Moulin Rouge," I stood in the lobby of the
theater listening to the reactions of my friends and colleagues.
Everyone seemed a bit numb, understandable after sitting through a
barrage of often-incongruous sounds and images. A pal of mine simply
said that he loved the film and could hardly wait to take his wife to
see it. Another enthusiast immediately began to analyze the production,
while a woman who flat-out hated the movie gave him the skunk eye. When
one fellow quietly stated "I've never really been a fan of musicals,"
the statement surprised me because, even though the story is told almost
completely through song, I didn't think of it as a musical. There is so
much going on in "Moulin Rouge" that "musical" seems too small a term to
cover it.
"Moulin Rouge" is the kind of creation that sends critics scurrying off
to the Big Tub O' Adjectives in search of proper words to describe the
experience. Australian director Baz Luhrmann, the man behind "Strictly
Ballroom" and "Romeo + Juliet," fills the heads of viewers with unique
camerawork, opulent imagery and songs ranging from "The Sound of Music"
to "Smells Like Teen Spirit." Sumptuous and beautiful, vulgar and
overdone, "Moulin Rogue" travels through the looking glass while an
ethereal stereo loaded with 50 years worth of catchy tunes operates on
the "random" setting.
"It was 1899, the summer of love... " Christian (Ewan McGregor) is a
penniless young writer newly arrived in Paris, "to write about truth,
beauty, freedom and love," where he encounters a group of bohemians, led
by Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (John Leguizamo). Christian meets Satine
(Nicole Kidman), a courtesan from the legendary Moulin Rogue, and his
world transforms from black and white to technicolor. At once fragile
and vivacious, the dazzling red-haired woman sweeps him off his feet
without even trying. Christian instantly falls in love with her and
Satine finds herself smitten with him as well, which is quite a
hindrance for someone in her profession.
Working with the bohemians and Moulin Rogue impresario Harold Zidler
(Jim Broadbent), Christian writes an opus modestly named "Spectacular
Spectacular." Zidler quickly finds a backer, the wealthy Duke of Monroth
(Richard Roxburgh), but there's a catch  the duke also wants the hand
of the fair Satine. As if all that isn't enough, Satine has a cough, and
while a cough in the real world probably indicates a cold, it rarely
turns out to be anything that simple in Movie Land.
Like a teeter-totter, "Moulin Rogue" moves up and down between the
ridiculous and the sublime. One of the loveliest moments comes as
Christine and Satine commune outdoors at night, becoming part of a
defiantly unrealistic Parisian cityscape straight from a book of fairy
tales. Together they dance, while serenaded by the man in the moon
(Alessandro Safina provides the vocals), apparently transported from the
classic Georges Méličs silent film to guard the nocturnal sky.
Other scenes merely traffic in everything-and-the-kitchen-sink overload.
The cavorting of Toulouse-Lautrec and his comrades gets strained at
times and some of their overt comedy, accompanied by cartoon sound
effects, is overly reminiscent of the frenzied farce that sitcoms like
"Bewitched" beat into the ground.
Of course, sensory overload was exactly what Baz Luhrmann had in mind.
"We never heard from Baz to turn it down," one of the actors told the
Los Angeles Times. "It was always, 'More! More!'" The director even sent
a note to his cast reading, "I dare you to make me say you've gone too
far."
The musical numbers reflect his attitude. One knockout piece, the
"Elephant Love Medley," incorporates the Beatles' "All You Need Is
Love," U2's "In the Name of Love," Dolly Parton's "I Will Always Love
You" and Elton John and Bernie Taupin's "Your Song." Need more? How
about "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend" spiced with portions of
"Material Girl?"
Luhrmann's cast offers a wide variety of approaches that, together, add
up to something messy, but often wonderful. Ewan McGregor is extremely
likable as Christian, emphasizing the sincerity of the love-struck poet.
McGregor's singing voice is robust and adds vigor at just the right
moments. Once labeled the "Ice Queen," Nicole Kidman melts that
characterization with a sizzling, yet tender, performance. She handles
the songs adroitly, although her voice sounds a bit thin in the upper
range. Veteran character actor Jim Broadbent is suitably larger than
life as ringmaster Zidler  wait until you see him perform "Like a
Virgin." As the buffoonish duke, Richard Roxburgh proves to be the
film's weakest link, although I'm sure he was simply following
instructions.
I suspect "Moulin Rogue" will be one of those love-it-or-hate-it films.
While I didn't completely love it, I most certainly liked it a lot. Over
the course of a year, I see well over 300 movies, and most of them look
like Xeroxes of each other. "Moulin Rogue" is an original, and an
original, even a flawed one, is a thing to be cherished.
