Title
Review for 3000 Miles to Graceland (2001)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Laura Clifford
Murphy (Kevin Costner) is a hard boiled criminal who believe's he's the
illegitimate son of Elvis.  His former cellmate Michael (Kurt Russell) has
agreed to meet him at the Last Chance motel outside of Las Vegas to pull
off a unique heist.  Murphy, Michael and Murphy's recruits Hanson (Christian 
Slater), Gus (David Arquette, "Ready to Rumble") and Franklin (Bokeem
Woodbine, "The Rock") will become color coded Elvis impersonators under
cover of the chaos of International Elvis week to rob the Riviera Hotel 
and Casino in "3000 Miles to Graceland."
Music video director/cowriter (with Richard Recco) Demian Lichtenstein begins
things snappily with his opening credit sequence of giant black (symbolizing
Murphy) and white (Michael's standin) computer generated scorpion-robots
battling in the desert to driving hard rock.  This clever bit of imagery
morphs into live action as Michael arrives at the Last Chance.  There he
meets 'Cybil with a C' (Courtney Cox Arquette, TV's 'Friends'), single mother
of young kleptomaniac son Jesse (David Kaye, "Legends of the Fall").  Jesse
steals Michael's custom lug nuts off his 59' cherry red Cadillac, Cybil
returns them then quickly maneuvers Michael into the sack.
Murphy and his gang arrive, pick up Michael, and perform their daring heist
to the tune of $3.2 million.  Unplanned is the massive body count left
behind before the arrival of their escape helicopter on the building's rooftop.
Unknown was Murphy's intent to murder his colleagues before heading north
to launder the loot.  A bulletproof vest worn by Michael and that stealing
habit of Jesse's change Murphy's plans while Michael finds himself on the
run with a woman he doesn't trust and her precocious son.
"3000 Miles to Graceland" is a pretty flashy ride, but suffers from shallow
characterizations and an over-the-top ending (think "Con Air").  Lichtenstein
mostly uses his music video background to good effect, only occasionally
overstepping the line between feature filmmaking and imagery that should have
been left on MTV.  Technically, the film is slick, particularly in the shooting
and editting of the early heist scene (cinematography by David Franco ("The 
Whole Nine Yards") who moves his camera up one side of a subject, over it and
downside the other; editing by Michael J. Duthie ("Stigmata") and Miklos
Wright).  
Lichtenstein is less successful with his writing.  It's hinted that Murphy
is conflicted in his feelings for 'the King,' his purported father, but
Lichtenstein doesn't go deep enough.  Similarly, Michael is too much of a
'good' bad guy - he knocks guards out and shoots glass partitions out to
slow down pursuers while his colleagues are massacring everyone in site -
yet we're given no back story as to why he spent over five years in jail 
and why he's aligned himself with Murphy in the first place.  Cybil is
written as more of a plot device than a character.
The principal actors try to flesh out their characters, though.  Costner
is effective as a real evil villain - clearly he's having some fun with this
role.  Courtney Cox Arquette takes a shallow role and really runs with it.
Russell is appealing, but the least successful at defining his character.
Thomas Haden Church (TV's 'Wings') puts a droll spin on Marshall Quigley,
the man on Murphy's tail.  Peterson, the Idaho money launderer, is given
the usual oily/whiny Jon Lovitz routine.
"3000 Miles to Graceland" is a fairly entertaining film that begins with
a bang and ends with too much contrivance.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Demian Lichtenstein's 3000 MILES TO GRACELAND isn't the movie that 
you've seen in the trailers, which is a shame.  That movie looked like a 
lot of fun.  Spoofing a bunch of Elvis impersonators out to make a 
killing (literally) with a high tech casino robbery in Vegas during 
Elvis week, it is energetic and original.  We know this because the 
first 20 minutes or so follow this outline.  But after that, in a hail 
of thousands and thousands of bullets, the picture turns into another 
gorefest that would be an NC-17 candidate if the MPAA hadn't long ago 
fallen asleep at the wheel.  (Even HANNIBAL is rated R.  Right!)
Our Elvis look-alike crooks include Murphy (Kevin Costner), Michael 
(Kurt Russell), Hanson (Christian Slater) and Gus (David Arquette).  
After a promising beginning, the guys shed their costumes and the movie 
turns into a bad spaghetti Western -- one too cheesy for Clint to have 
anything to do with.
Joining Michael for the ride is Courteney Cox, as "Cybil with a 'C'," 
and her thieving 10-year-old son, Jesse (David Kaye), as in Jesse James.  
Get it?  Well enjoy it, since that's about as funny as 3000 MILES TO 
GRACELAND ever gets.  
The busy script by Richard Recco and Demian Lichtenstein has more holes 
than the proverbial Swiss cheese.  The script attempts to fill all of 
the holes with lots of shoot-'em-ups.  And, when he can't think of 
anything else to do, which is often, the director points the camera at 
the clouds, which the editor speeds up.  Cars, especially Michael's 
fire-engine red, 1959 Coupe De Ville, are shown flying down the highway 
with the hyperdrive engaged.  Don't knock it.  It keeps you awake.  
Barely.
Among the Hollywood actors to drop by for parts is Jon Lovitz -- you 
know, the guy who invented the Yellow Pages.  "It's a joke," his 
character tells Murphy after one of his failed attempts at humor.  
You'll need to be reminded of that often in this comedy, which is as 
flat as the Nevada desert where it is set.  Take my advice and don't 
stay to watch the music video during the closing credits.  It will make 
you sad for it shows what the disappointing 3000 MILES TO GRACELAND 
could have been -- irreverently funny rather than mean-spiritedly 
tedious.  
3000 MILES TO GRACELAND runs 2:00.  It is rated R for strong violence, 
sexuality and language and would be acceptable for high school seniors 
and older.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Robin Clifford
International Elvis Week in Las Vegas draws a flood of King wannabes in
sequined jumpsuits and mutton chop sideburns. But, five copycats that enter
the Riviera Hotel and Casino have plans of their own - armed robbery with
really big guns. This is just the beginning of a tale of betrayal, murder
and revenge, starring Kurt Russell and Kevin Costner, in "3000 Miles to
Graceland."
It has been a while since we've had a crime caper movie on a visual par
with such films as "Con Air" or "True Romance," and it looked like "3000
Miles to Graceland" would fit the bill. We do get a pair of high-powered,
heavy-ordinance shootouts, one early on and the other the dramatic finale,
that provide the requisite thrills to grab the viewer's attention. But,
these action bits are bridged with a cat-and-mouse chase as the two key
figures, Michael (Kurt Russell) and Murphy (Kevin Costner), vie to take
possession of the $3.2 million stolen from the casino.
Things start off amiably enough when Michael parks his vintage, candy-apple
red, 1959 Cadillac Coupe de Ville convertible at the Last Chance Motel near
Vegas. A local kid, Jessie Waingrow (David Kaye), steals the fancy valve
caps off of the classic car and, to get them back, Michael meets the boy's
mom, Cybil (Courtney Cox). Sparks fly between the lonely ex-con and the
equally lonely Cybil and they have a romantic interlude. Then arrives
Murphy and his three partners - Hanson (Christian Slater), Franklin (Bokeem
Woodbine) and Gus (David Arquette).
Murphy, Michael and the rest, it turns out, are headed to Las Vegas for
International Elvis Week, where thousands of the King's impersonators are
gathering to honor their muse. The plan is, with all of the confusion in
town, to hit one of the big casinos for a fortune. The heavily armed
Elvises pull off the heist but are intercepted by security guards, ending
in a violent shootout right in the middle of the casino. As the guys blast
their way out, one of their number, Franklin, is hit and soon dies. When
the remaining four thieves get together to split the booty, a conflict
arises over Franklin's share. Hanson goes toe-to-toe with Murphy and loses,
making it a team of three. When they head out to get rid of the body in an
isolated place, Murphy tries to make their number just one - him.
Only Michael survives Murphy's attack and he tries to head off the killer
from getting the loot. He teams up with Cybil and Jessie to get the cash
laundered, all the while being relentlessly pursued by Murphy in a chase
that ends with a major confrontation with the law.
I was a little disappointed, part way into the film, when the Elvises in
Las Vegas bit falls by the wayside following the heist. It takes on a more
personal note as Michael, Cybil and Jesse hit the road with Murphy in
pursuit. Murphy has no trouble with killing and a string of bodies is left
along the way as they all head for the Canadian border and freedom. But,
this odd road movie takes on unusual proportions as greed kicks in and, for
awhile, it's every man (or woman) for himself. At one point, Michael and
Jessie are teamed as they chase Cybil who took the money and ran.
My complaint about "3000 Miles to Graceland" is the extended middle where
double cross is met by double cross. While the personality dynamics is
interesting, sometimes violent and sometimes amusing, it meanders along at
times, making me wish for some judicious editing. The bookend violence of
the story is shocking in its brutality and slick in its, no pun intended,
execution. As the heist and subsequent shootout takes place, with fast,
stylish inter-cutting between the violence and scenes from the dance floor
where Elvis clones and beautiful showgirls sing and dance, unaware of the
mayhem that is happening near by. The climactic finale is a Hollywood
example of more bullets is better as Murphy goes out in a blaze of glory
reminiscent of Jimmy Cagney in "White Heat."
Production credits are solid as we are brought into the fantasy world of
Las Vegas and its International Elvis Week. There are Elvises in all shapes
and sizes (there is even a dwarf Elvis who gets it during the heist) and
this has some amusing turns with impersonators who look decidedly unlike
the King. The gonzo gun duels are handled with fast camera work, faster
editing and well choreographed violence. Videomaker Demian Lichenstein
utilizes his music vid chops to infuse a hyperkinetic energy into the big
shootouts.
The perfs are relegated to the four principles once the heist is over and
Murphy thins the herd of contenders for the loot. Slater, Woodbine and
Arquette get some mileage as the other members of the gang and, as they are
offed, you wish there was more of them. But, the cast that's left does OK.
Costner is surprisingly good as the taciturn and murderous Murphy. It is
against his usual good guy persona and reflects one of his better
performances of late. The likable Kurt Russell is the good guy among the
bad and he gets to wear his shining armor to the end. Surprisingly,
Courtney Cox delivers one of her better perfs as the sexy and human Cybil.
Young David Kaye gives a good intro performance as the tough,
self-sufficient Jessie.
"3000 Miles to Graceland" is not just a heist flick as the trailers
reflect. It is that, but there is a larger story of greed, murder, betrayal
and revenge that hones itself to a sharp point before the explosive ending.
The two-hour run time could have been cut for a better film, but I still
give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews vist www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Demian Lichtenstein.
Cast: Kurt Russell, Kevin Costner, Courteney Cox, David Kaye, Christian 
Slater, David Arquette, Bokeem Woodbine, Kevin Pollak, Howie Long, Ice T, 
Thomas Haden Church, Jon Lovitz.
2001 - 125 minutes
Rated R (for graphic violence, profanity, and sex).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 24, 2001.
Had "3000 Miles to Graceland" captured the lightweight, happy-go-lucky tone 
of its superior theatrical trailer, it might have been something special. 
Trashy and silly, yes, but more satisfying than what we have been served: a 
violent, gruesome, almost unrelentingly mean-spirited ride through a 
Tarantino-esque landscape of color characters, witty writing, double-crosses, 
and more than a little bloodshed. It pales in comparison to the best of the 
genre, however, as it contains about three plot twists too many, about twenty 
minutes of excessive material that would have been better left cut out, and 
such unremittingly grim and violent sequences that it ends up leaving a 
bitter aftertaste in your mouth.
The movie opens as five ex-convicts set out to rob a Las Vegas casino holding 
an Elvis Presley convention. Dressed as Presley himself so as to blend in, 
they manage to escape with $2.3 in cold, hard cash, but not before a bloody 
massacre that leave many, many police officers, as well as civilians, dead. 
Back at their hideout in a seedy desert motel, it becomes clear that 
arrogant, chain-smoking badguy Murphy (Kevin Costner) plans to walk away with 
everyone else's loot. With three of them killed, the other remaining partner, 
Michael (Kurt Russell), manages to steal the money and sets off for a money 
launderer, with Murphy in hot pursuit. Tagging along for the ride with 
Michael is Cybil Waingrow (Courteney Cox), who has already managed to bed him 
twice in the last 24 hours, and her precocious, thieving son, Jesse (David 
Kaye).
In Quentin Tarantino's own "Pulp Fiction" or "Jackie Brown," which are 
clearly two of the prime models for "3000 Miles to Graceland," there were 
characters who were flawed, but easy to root for. In other words, they didn't 
always do the right things, but were believable and, most of all, human. 
Here, some of the people filling up the screen are supposed to be the heroes, 
but none are particularly that likable, and even the nicest one (played well 
by Courteney Cox) does things throughout that are rather despicable. At one 
point, she even takes off with the money herself, leaving her own son behind 
with Michael, who is the only other "good" character to be found. While she 
reasons out this plot point later on, and does manage to become sympathetic 
again by the final act, it still does not take away how inexcusable her 
behavior has been. 
For its two-plus hours, "3000 Miles to Graceland" is pretty entertaining 
stuff. Fairly well-written and directed with a sure hand by Demian 
Lichtenstein (in his feature-film debut), the movie often used quick-cuts and 
interesting camera angles without its high style ever becoming glaring or 
pretentious. The storyline is overly familiar, but fun to watch, for the most 
part, although it does tend to become repetitive and ends up overstaying its 
welcome.
What does drag the film down, though, is the unnecessary violence that pops 
up every few minutes. From the early shoot-out at the casino, to the gory 
climactic battle, the movie is needlessly, almost unrelentingly brutal, in 
its depiction of death and destruction. This especially doesn't gel since 
much of the picture wants to be a zany road comedy, and the rest wants to be 
a heartfelt romance. Every time Murphy shoots up a few more innocent people, 
the whole enterprise screeches to a somber halt, leaving you unsure of how 
you are supposed to be feeling when the comedy appears immediately afterwards.
Even if Murphy's nonstop evil personality doesn't always fit, Kevin Costner 
(2000's "13 Days") injects much life into him. Releasing off an air of 
head-sure, macho badness, Costner has never played a character quite like 
this one, and he seems to relish the chance. Likewise, Kurt Russell (1998's 
"Soldier") is very good, adding some depth to a part that probably wasn't as 
apparent on the written page. His budding relationship with Cybil works 
solely because he and Cox have a great amount of chemistry onscreen, and work 
well together. Aside from this, it plays like more of a plotting device than 
a natural romance between two dysfunctional people. It turns out that 
Courteney Cox (2000's "Scream 3") is the best of all, delivering a snappy, 
energetic portrayal of a beautiful single mother who longs for a little 
danger (and maybe a man and some extra cash) in her life. 
The supporting cast includes Christian Slater (2000's "The Contender"), David 
Arquette (2000's "Ready to Rumble"), and Bokeem Woodbine (1998's "Caught 
Up"), as the three ill-fated men who help to rob the casino with Michael and 
Murphy; Kevin Pollak, Ice T, and Thomas Haden Church as Federal Marshals out 
to capture them and get the stolen money back; and Howie Long (1998's 
"Firestorm") as a further accomplice to the crime that sets everything into 
motion. All do fine jobs with what they are given, which, admittedly, isn't 
very much.
Despite all of its strong points (including an exciting car chase that is 
better than anything in 2000's "Gone in Sixty Seconds"), "2000 Miles to 
Graceland" remains an uneasy, uncomfortable balance between a comedic romp 
and something remarkably darker. Ultimately, screenwriters Richard Recco and 
Demian Lichtenstein are never quite able to find that missing link that might 
have bridged the gap between the major flaws in its storytelling and tone, 
and the exuberant energy that so achingly tries to break free, but never 
quite does.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bunch of bad guys dressed up as Elvis impersonators rob a Vegas casino
during a Presley convention. The boys eventually get together to split the
money, but as plans change, double-crosses occur, dealing and wheeling goes
down and the crew set up for the road. Who's on the up and up, who's the
real bad guy and who's gonna get to bang Courteney Cox are just a few of the
questions which will be answered by the rest of this movie.
CRITIQUE:
The funnest movie that I've seen so far this year! It's got style, it's got
tough guys talkin' shite and it's got plenty of bullets to go around. A
definite hunk-a-hunk-a burnin' adventure! A guy's guy movie through and
through, and one that'll set your jollies to high if you dig on the rough
stuff. It's not very original, it goes on for a little too long, but Costner
and Russell make it happen, as two shite-kickin' Elvis lovers, who don't
stop till they, more or less, drop. This movie's got some pretty intensive
shoot-out scenes, one of the coolest robbery scenarios that I've ever
witnessed, featuring several Elvises with guns a blazin' and the King's
music playing in the background, and a decent helping of double-crosses,
sharp dialogue and funny moments. In fact, even though the cast is filled
with many name actors (B-actors as they might be for the most part), most of
them do their bit and succeed well in passing the torch onto the next
victim. But the true glue that holds this film together, other than the
spirit of Elvis himself, is Costner and Russell, who play their badass
characters to the T. Sure, Russell's been down this road before, but Costner
surprised me with his nastiness. I guess he's pissed at all the box-office
bombs that he's been in of late, but he sure played a great unstable Elvis
impersonating robber here. In the end, the bottom line with this movie is
having fun, kickin' ass and making sure there's enough bubblegum around to
chew afterwards. And smoke 'em if you got 'em, folks!
There is also this one really great show-down scene between Costner and a
cop, that'll have you crackin' up and lovin' it all at the same time. The
violent scenes in this movie are violent and the entire film is wrapped in a
soundtrack that'll kick your arse from this end of the theatre to the next.
It should actually come to no surprise to anyone that the director of this
movie comes from a music video background, with plenty, and I mean plenty,
of camera tricks, cuts and edits, but for this kind of flick, it actually
works. The film is not perfect though, it starts off with a pretty big bang,
but then pulls a WAY OF THE GUN on us, and slows the pace down somewhat in
the middle, while characters intermingle and disperse. I was personally kept
in the game despite some soft spots, and enjoyed the overall ride for what
it was as well. And did I mention that Courteney Cox looked mega-hot in the
movie? No...okay, well I just did! I coulda done without her whole "romance"
angle, but to be honest, it doesn't take up much of the film, which is
generally covered in blood, explosions, guts and Elvis nods. Try to see how
many "inside" connections to the King you can guess. Of course, it's no
secret that I am quite a big Elvis fan myself so please take this whole
review with that grain of salt in mind. I also like these types of "guy"
movies a lot, and even though the film doesn't bring much originality to the
table, it does offer a pretty coherent story, some nice twists and turns,
humor and a big ol' helping of whoop-ass coming straight from Costner and
Russell's respective boots. Probably not a film for everyone, but definitely
for those who enjoy the guns, the charismatic bad guys and a fun, if
entirely disposable, adventure. Now see how many Elvis songs I've used to
pun my way through this phony review below.
THE ELVIS SONGS ALSO RECOMMEND THIS MOVIE!
So whether you're lonesome tonight or any other night, remember to pack the
teddy bear with bullets, leave your little sister at home, bring your bossa
nova baby and rock out of that jailhouse, cause this movie ain't one to
return to the sender. I really beg of you, whether you're stuck in the
ghetto or crying in the chapel, to slap this cinematic ring around your neck
and love it tender. And no suspicious minds either, folks, cause I got stung
by this movie, I mean it really shook me up, and unless you're the devil in
disguise himself, I think you won't be able to help falling in love with
this lucky charm either. So don't be cruel, don't turn away, don't curl up
with your latest flame tonite (whether she be a hard-headed woman or not)
and surrender to the hound dog of movies that is this film. It's now or
never, folks. Trust me, I did it my way and the heartbreak hotel of crappy
movies that I'd seen so far this year is far behind me. JoBlo has now
officially left the sanity of his mind and this building. Thank you...thank
you very much!!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Get Carter (7/10) - Heat (8/10) - Honeymoon in Vegas (9/10) - Payback
(8/10) - Reindeer Games (5/10) -Reservoir Dogs (9/10) - Way of the Gun
(6/10)

Author
Bob Bloom

3000  Miles to Graceland (2001) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Kurt Russell,
Kevin Costner, Courtney Cox, Christian Slater, David Arquette, Bokeem
Woodbine, David Kaye, Kevin Pollack and Howie Long. Written by Richard
Recco and Demian Lichtenstein. Directed by Lichtenstein. Rated R.
 The reaction to watching 3000 Miles to Graceland is probably akin to
attending one of those Elvis nostalgia shows, but with the guy who does
the older, fatter Elvis.
 You enjoy the show, but are embarrassed and feel foolish about it.
 The same emotions tend to rear up during this outlandish crime caper.
 3000 Miles to Graceland is, like Elvis, chintzy retro. It is
ultra-violent and bloody, but in such a cartoonish manner that you can
neither take it seriously nor really be offended.
 This foray into foolishness is so outrageous, so near camp that all you
can do is sit back and go along for the ride when, at times, all you
wish you could do is ěReturn to Sender.î
 You watch this movie with disbelief at times, jaws agape at how
preposterous and excessive this entire venture can be.
 In a nutshell, the story revolves around a quintet of ex-cons who,
during an Elvis impersonation convention at a Vegas hotel, dress up as
The King to knock over the joint.
 The robbery isn't the filmís main focus, though, except that it is kind
of kinky seeing Kevin Costner, Kurt Russell, Christian Slater, David
Arquette and Bokeem Woodbine all decked out in their best
rhinestone-studded Elvis paraphernalia.
 No, it is the post-robbery double dealings that occupy most of the
filmís approximate 2 hours and 10 minutes.
 What we get is a combination chase, road movie and love story, all
courtesy of screenwriters Richard Recco and Demian Lichtenstein, the
latter also serving as director ó or ringmaster, depending on your
outlook.
 The bulk of the movie follows the cat-and-mouse game between Russellís
Michael and Costnerís Murphy for possession of the $3.2 million Vegas
loot.
 Along for the ride is con woman Cybil (Courtney Cox) and her precocious
10-year-old son, Jesse (David Kaye).
 The body count is mega-high, and that is disturbing, especially in this
post-Columbine climate in which officials are breathing down Hollywoodís
neck to tone down cinematic violence.
 It is like the filmmakers are thumbing their noses at the
establishment. But, of course, being Hollywood, the filmís creators try
to have it both ways by putting together an end-title sequence that
seems to say, ěHey, folks, don't get all riled up, we're only kidding
around and having some fun here.î
 One of the filmís weak points is Costnerís performance. The man cannot
be taken seriously as a badass ex-con. No matter how hard he tries, or
how many people he kills, he retains that Kevin Costner, all-American
good guy image. He even curses like a wuss.
 Russell fares better as the ex-con with a conscious. You can tell heís
the movieís good guy because heís the only one who doesnít mow down a
dozen cops or gamblers during the heist sequence.
 This is a movie in which the performances are really secondary to the
overall ambiance of the film. Director Lichtenstein uses hyper-drive
camera movements and lots of fancy angles to disguise the fact that what
he has created is merely a ferocious crime drama.
 3000 Miles to Graceland is a movie you may find entertaining, then
question your reaction afterwards.
 It is a savage, destructive outing with a modicum of wit, some style
and many disturbing images.
 However, you have to appreciate Lichtenstein and his crew for doing
things their way.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net More of Bloom's reviews can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Christopher Null
Those of you hoping to hear about a clever casino heist picture in the
style of Ocean's Eleven are in for a sore disappointment.  From this
movie's opening frames, featuring dueling CGI-animated scorpions, it's
obvious that we're in for some punk-ass director's idea of a snazzy
action film.
3000 Miles to Graceland is not the realization of that dream.
No, any sense of clever in Graceland's casino heist has to be scraped
from its ubiquitous Elvis costumes and Kurt Russell's masterful
hotwiring of an elevator.  The rest of the heist (and the movie) is
simply guns guns guns, as Russell, Kevin Costner, and a band of thugs
rob the Riviera casino in the midst of an Elvis impersonators'
convention.  Oh, the ingenuity!
Thirty minutes into the film, the heist is done, felons Costner and
Russell are off in different directions to spar over the loot, and
Courteney Cox stands between them as a poor man's femme fatale (with
child in tow).  Who'll end up with the money?  Who cares?  We've got 90
long minutes to go, and we're talking downhill.
I would normally say that trying to hang a movie on half-a-joke Elvis
kitsch would be a phenomenal letdown until I came to realize that the
Elvis bit is the only thing that Graceland has going for it at all.  For
two long hours, the film presents us with an unbearable litany of
unbelievable coincidences and awful continuity errors that would have
Elvis himself spinning in his grave.  (Case in point: It's only 1,600
miles by road from Las Vegas to Memphis, not 3,000.)
Graceland even manages to make bad action films look good.  Demian
Lichtenstein's music video-style direction wears thin after about five
minutes of slow-mo and fast-mo "special effects."  (Oddly enough,
Lichtenstein's past credits turn out to be, you guessed it, music
videos.)  But really, I have to fault Costner for the bulk of this
atrocity of a film simply for agreeing to be in it.  One hesitates to
ask not whether he read the script before signing on for the film, but
whether he can read at all.  On a side note to Lichtenstein and any
parents in the audience: Attempting to mask plot defects with loads of
violence tends to amplify them rather than conceal.
It's truer now more than ever... ladies and gentlemen, Elvis has left
the building.
Director: Demian Lichtenstein
Producer: Demian Lichtenstein, Eric Manes, Elie Samaha, Richard Spero,
Andrew Stevens
Writer: Richard Recco, Demian Lichtenstein
Starring: Kevin Costner, Kurt Russell, Christian Slater, Courteney Cox,
Howie Long, Jon Lovitz, David Arquette, Ice-T, Thomas Haden Church,
Kevin Pollack
http://3kmtg.warnerbros.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
Elvis is dead, and it would be damned kind of us to leave him that
way--especially when the vehicle for his return to the public eye is an
uninspired façade of a narrative like this.  Demian Lichtenstein's 3000
MILES TO GRACELAND is the latest cinematic offering to rape our collective
past, cheerfully exploiting American nostalgia and pillaging the icons of
an earlier, less jaded generation.  There's nothing wrong with satirizing
our heritage when it's done well--just take a look at the brilliant
PLEASANTVILLE, for instance--but this film feels less like homage than a
cheap attempt to whore our cultural icons for a quick buck.  May that be
all this film earns at the box office.
The story centers around a group of hard-nosed thieves who rob a
casino while dressed as Elvis impersonators.  All the film's main
characters are lifted wholesale from the Hollywood Book of Requisite
Action-Movie Stereotypes, including the gang's two ringleaders (Kurt
Russell and Kevin Costner), whose inability to agree on the best way to
divvy up the loot results in one stale argument scene after another; a
shallow single mother (played with no stretch whatsoever by Courtney Cox,
whose performance here equals the dramatic range she displayed in Bruce
Springsteen's "Dancing in the Dark" music video); and an army of
ever-expendable secondary characters, who exist here only to bring some
name recognition to the project.  (Ice T?  In an Elvis movie?  Well, thank
yuh.  Thank yuh very much.)
The film's trailer would have you believe that the majority of the tale
revolves around the planning and execution of the robbery, but don't be
fooled--the meat of the story centers more on the aftermath of the heist
than the crime itself, which is over and done with in the opening five
minutes.  Unfortunately, the first warning signs of the movie's dearth of
quality are apparent before this bullet ballet is over.  Lichtenstein,
attempting to disguise the film's disastrously uneven editing, takes every
opportunity to flaunt his music video roots at us--the two gunfights which
bookend the movie are constructed with quick jump cuts and needlessly
"flashy" camera shots that would be far more at home on MTV than in a film
aspiring to tell a coherent story.  The poor filmmaker, helming his second
feature film with 3000 MILES, doesn't yet seem to have a grasp on good
narrative storytelling technique, choosing instead to obfuscate the plot
behind stylistic editing and underwhelming camera moves that add nothing
but length to the final film.
But as tedious as the opening bloodbath is, things only get worse after
our merry band of nitwits hits the highway.  As you might expect, 3000
MILES TO GRACELAND is, in fact, a road movie about a trip to... Canada?
Yes, you read that correctly.  Canada.  But despite the fact that
Graceland plays no part in the film itself, its spirit does sort of hover
over the movie--a sad, disheveled icon that once had meaning, but now rots
away like so many peanut butter and 'nana sandwiches left out in the rain.
(Rather like Presley himself, at the hands of this movie.  It's sad that
Elvis, arguably the first true Sugar Daddy of rock and roll--and I'm
talking *lots* of sugar, sweet'pea--has been forced to "pseudo-star"
posthumously in this banal tale of crime, guns, and Elvis impersonators,
which serves less as a cohesive narrative than a barometer of pain.  This
is not the first film to ever feature Elvis impersonators as an integral
part of the plot, but it's unquestionably the worst.)
The cast is populated by a group of Hollywood A-list actors, all of whom
should have known better.  Kurt Russell and Kevin Costner get the king's
share (no pun intended) of screen time, and therefore deserve the complete
career derailments that are likely to occur after John P. Consumer gets an
eyeful of this garbage.  This is particularly disappointing--and
surprising--since Russell drew critical accolades for his performance of
Elvis in John Carpenter's 1979 TV miniseries; as such, it's lamentable
that he comes across so ham-fisted this time around--not so much
incompetent as begging for attention.
And sadly, Kevin Costner proves that the dramatic rebound I thought I'd
glimpsed in the recent THIRTEEN DAYS is nothing more than a passing fluke.
In 3000 MILES, Costner's performance as Dances with Whoppers (his
character is actually named Murphy, but admit it, you like my idea better)
comes across not so much as an effective villain but a reluctant actor;
I've heard of phoning in a role before, but Costner here doesn't even seem
to have the coins needed to place the call.  With starring roles in such
recent cinematic disasters as WATERWORLD and THE POSTMAN under his belt,
Kevin Costner proves one thing in 3000 MILES: he has the worst agent in
the known universe.
So, is there *anything* positive I can say about this film?    Well, I guess the cars were kinda cool.  And I suppose
that there are moments in 3000 MILES TO GRACELAND that manage to capture
the gritty excitement of being out on the road, with the dust flying up
around your car while the approved soundtrack of rebellion--rock and
roll--explodes from your speakers.  But with this material's painfully
inept handling, it might have been better if the film had choked on that
dust instead of cruising into theaters.
This review is (c)Copyright 2001 by Joe Barlow.  It may be freely
distributed, as long as nothing is changed and this paragraph remains
intact.  If you'd like to join Joe's mailing list to receive new reviews
free of charge, please send a blank e-mail to:
joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com .  Joe's first book of film criticism, 100
NIGHTS IN THE DARK, is now available at bookstores everywhere (ISBN:
0-595-16391-2).  Please see  http://www.joebarlow.com  for more
information.
No portion of this review may be reprinted for profit without
authorization from the author.
=====
Joe Barlow
Author of "100 Nights in the Dark: A Collection of
Contemporary Film Reviews and Essays," available at:
http://www.joebarlow.com  and at bookstores everywhere (ISBN: 0-595-16391-2).
Joe Barlow on Film: http://www.joebarlow.com


Author
Michael Dequina
_3000_Miles_to_Graceland_ (R) * 1/2 (out of ****)
        Kurt Russell.  Kevin Costner.  Courteney Cox.  David Arquette. 
Christian Slater.  Bokeem Woodbine.  Howie Long.  Kevin Pollak.  Jon
Lovitz.  Thomas Haden Church.  Paul Anka.  Ice-T.  Bet you never expected
those last two, at least, to ever appear in the same film.  Yet despite
(or is that because of?) such a fascinatingly offbeat assembly of talent,
Warner Bros. has appeared to just about sweep _3000_Miles_to_Graceland_
under the proverbial rug, releasing the heist/road picture in an off-peak
season and giving it hardly the big promotional push that usually comes
with not one, but two name stars.  But who can blame them when the film
fails to even be amusing on a camp level?
        However, it must be said that the film is not a complete bore. 
In fact, once the film's first action sequence hits about 20 minutes in,
it looks as if a mildly diverting action thriller is kicking in.  Amid
the hubbub of Elvis week in Vegas, Russell's Michael and Costner's Murph
and three others (played by Slater, Arquette, and Woodbine) stage a
daring casino heist--all dressed up as the King, of course.  What begins
smoothly ends up culminating in a hail of bullets.  Director/co-writer
(with Richard Recco) Demian Lichtenstein, a music video vet in his first
big assignment, obviously studied up on John Woo before staging this
lengthy shootout, but there's no arguing the fact that such blatant
lifting gives this sequence a jolt.
        Sadly, that jolt is short-lived.  After some rather
rushed-through doublecrosses, the cast is whittled down significantly
(anyone familiar with movie conventions should figure out who gets offed
first), and the pace slows accordingly as Michael finds himself making a
quick getaway.  Weighing him down on his trip is not only a big bag full
of cash, but also overeager single mom Cybil (Cox, mysteriously billed
without the extra "Arquette"), with whom he's had some wild romps in the
sack; and her felon-in-waiting young son Jesse (David Kaye).  Meanwhile,
a not-so-happy Murph is following close behind, leaving a bloody trail in
his wake.
        Rumor has it that Costner and Russell put together two different
cuts; in the end, Russell's "character-oriented" edit was passed over in
favor of Costner's "action-oriented" version.  If this is the
faster-paced cut, I'd really hate to see the other one.  Once the
characters hit the road, the film slows to a snooze-worthy crawl, with
very few engaging moments breaking up the tedium.  These moments come
exclusively in the Costner section, which is less an indication of his
effectiveness here as a cold-blooded killer (he's simply functional) than
of how nothing of interest happens in the Russell thread.  Composed
mostly of soggy bonding between Michael and Jesse, this side of the film
is made memorable for all the wrong reasons by Lichtenstein's labored
efforts to make the audience care.
        But no one works harder to make some "emotional" connection than
Cox, who proves ill-equipped to handle material that can vaguely be
considered dramatic.  Her showcase Oscar clip is especially embarrassing;
while she has no difficulty in generating post-nasal drip, she fails to
squeeze out a single tear from her eyes.  By comparison, a bored-looking
Russell can only look good; and his ennui, in turn, makes Costner's
nominally more energized work look that much better.
        Lichtenstein finally gets guns blazing again in the long-overdue
finale, but by this point audiences will just be glad to be near the end.
 Without a particularly hissable villain nor a "hero" that holds any
rooting interest, _3000_Miles_to_Graceland_ doesn't even  get the basics
of a standard action thriller right.  Lichtenstein apparently thought
quirks such as a head-scratcher of an opening title sequence (depicting
two very CG scorpions engaged in fierce combat), a wacky Elvis-based
quasi-explanation for Murph's behavior, and the sight of Paul "Having My
Baby" Anka firing a rifle would be enough to keep a viewer entertained,
but like the film itself, these oddball touches sound a lot more
interesting than they really are.  
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 3000 MILES TO GRACELAND (director/writer: Demian Lichtenstein;
 screenwriter: Richard Recco; cinematographer: David Franco; editor:
 Michael Duthie; cast: Kevin Costner (Murphy), Kurt Russell (Michael),
 Courteney Cox (Cybil), Kevin Pollak (Marshall Damitry), Christian
 Slater (Hanson), Howie Long (Jack), David Arquette (Gus), Bokeem
 Woodbine (Franklin), Thomas Haden Church (Marshall Quigley), Jon
 Lovitz (Peterson), David Kaye (Jesse Waingrow), Paul Anka (Head
 Security Guard); Runtime: 120; Warner Bros.; 2001)
This is a poorly directed and scripted derivative casino heist movie,
shamelessly stealing jokes, plot situations and shootout scenarios from
many other such films, including "Ocean's 11," "Honeymoon in Vegas,"
"The Limey," and "Reindeer Games." All the main characters are
unappealing, even the young boy can't get over as someone appealing. But
the most disheartening thing about this irrelevant flick, was its
unethical conclusion and its totally amoral characterization of the
film's stars. There is not one person worth too much in this motley crew
of lowlifes.
A gang meets in a desolate town outside of Las Vegas, planning to rob
the casino at the  Riviera Hotel. They are all dressed as Elvis
impersonators, as they arrive during an International Convention of
Elvis lookalikes. Michael (Kurt Russell), just released from prison, is
the first there, arriving in his 1959 red Cadillac convertible. A young
kid, Jesse (David Kaye), living in a rundown motel, robs his hubcaps.
Michael gets his sexy mother, Cybil (Courteney Cox), to return the
stolen goods and before the opening credits are completed, they're in
her motel room making the bedsprings creak bouncing up and down on the
bed.
Soon another car of Elvis impersonators arrives, with the gang's
sociopath leader, ex-con Murphy (Costner), sporting some mean looking
white trash, mutton-chop sideburns, and looking like the King did when
he was loaded up on drugs. Murphy is a cartoonish character, who has not
only fallen in love with his image as the King, but believes he is his
illegitimate son. The other gang members are Hanson (Christian Slater),
Gus (David Arquette) and Franklin (Bokeem Woodbine), all attired in
wigs, beaded flamboyant jump-suit Elvis costumes. It's a sight that is
meant to excite the faithful and help them fit into the Vegas scene.
The elaborate casino robbery, featuring slo-mo mayhem, which becomes the
heart of the film, was gratuitously violent, as the King's music played
throughout, performed by an Elvis impersonator on stage, even while the
bloody machine-gun robbery was in progress and dozens of security cops
were being shot from all angles.
When the gang escapes a conflict arises over how to split-up the over
three million dollars, which is settled by gunplay. The remainder of the
film turns into a road movie, with Murphy chasing after the dough
Michael and Cybil took from him. The conniving Cybil has fallen for him
and wants to domesticate him, and live happily ever after like a normal
nuclear family. They travel across Nevada and Idaho (where money
launderer Jon Lovitz makes a deal he wishes he didn't), and finally it
all comes to a bloody conclusion in Seattle. There are two federal
marshalls (Thomas Haden Church and Kevin Pollak) in on the chase, who
also contribute lame jokes, just like the gang members do. Even the head
of casino security (Paul Anka), has a lame joke about what's the fuss
about Elvis, he's been dead for ages. The only lame joke that made me
laugh, was when one gang member asked, What's the advantage of dating a
homeless woman? The answer is, you can drop her off anywhere. This film
is so ridiculous, that as one of the cynical FBI men wisecracks, after
learning about Murphy's rap sheet, "you can't make stuff like this up."
Unfortunately the screenwriters Lichtenstein and Recco did, which makes
for a particularly distasteful film. The only thing the film has going
for it, is that the situation and the characters are so ludicrous and
full of Elvis twitches, that there is certain kind of enjoyment to be
found in a film as bad as this one is -- that might be taken by some as
a guilty pleasure.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
It's late February, and a new film hits the screens in which a character
gets out of jail and meets up with a group of other criminals, led by a
maniacal madman.  They successfully rob a casino, but the two Alpha males
end up butting heads because of the money and a girl.  No, you're not having
a flashback to 2000's Reindeer Games (which was released exactly one year
ago).  The new film is 3000 Miles to Graceland, and it probably would have
been a direct-to-cable release if it weren't for the cast.
Graceland features two male leads that have 15 Razzie nominations between
them.  Kurt Russell (Soldier) plays Michael, a Jersey baddie who has just
been popped from the pokey and is on his way to Las Vegas to meet up with
Murphy (Kevin Costner, Thirteen Days) and his band of miscreants (Christian
Slater, Bokeem Woodbine and David Arquette), who are planning to knock off a
casino.  The heist has been coordinated around "Elvis Week" at the Riveria,
and each of the five men dress like The King to, theoretically, blend into
the background.
But they hardly keep a low profile.  People are still going to notice five
men purposefully marching across a casino floor, whether they're dressed as
Elvis or not.  Punching a guy out probably wouldn't be high on the list of
things to do if you're trying to go undetected, but don't tell that to this
think tank.  They get their loot and also get involved in a big shoot-out
that proves The Brother Rule is in full effect and that guns never need to
be reloaded.
You know right away which character you're supposed to root for after seeing
Murphy carelessly blow away innocent people, while the more gentle, caring
Michael opts to use his brains to avoid violent clashes with police and
casino security.  They get split up, but each knows where the other is
headed, so the rest of the film is kind of a road picture where Michael and
Murphy try to out-con each other to get their hands on the money.  Courteney
Cox (Scream 3) plays a sex-hungry single mom who is either in love with
Michael or just out to get the casino cash (she appears Arquette-less in the
credits).
If you had a black pompadour and long sideburns, and there was a nationwide
manhunt for two men who looked like Elvis, wouldn't you cut your hair and
shave even if you weren't involved in criminal activity?  The thought never
crosses the minds of Michael or Murphy, and that's just one of several
things that don't make sense in Graceland.  The film was helmed by music
video director Demian Lichtenstein, who co-wrote the script with first-timer
Richard Recco.  The technical standout is George Clinton's score, which
isn't really all that great, but compared to the rest of the film it's pure
genius.  Like Payback, Graceland is so needlessly violent, Charlton Heston
would likely turn his head in disgust at the unoriginal, over-the-top
gunplay.  It's violence for the sake of violence, and completely devoid of
style.
Costner, who is like an old, dull Batman villain, has been a much better
(and much cooler) robber in A Perfect World, and Russell has been a better
Elvis (he played The King in John Carpenter's 1979 television movie).  The
best - and most underused - characters were the two federal agents (Thomas
Haden Church and Kevin Pollak) trying to track down Michael and Murphy.  And
don't get me started on former NFL star Howie Long.  The latent homosexual
is only in a handful of scenes, but gives one man an extended hug, sings a
Paul Simon song and, in the coup de grace, grabs Costner from behind and
grunts like a man in love.
If you get queasy during a Lars von Trier film, this one will probably make
you throw up.  Actually, if you've ever even seen a von Trier film,
Graceland will probably make you want to throw up anyway.  And the editing
here makes Michael Bay look like John Sayles.  There's enough smoking in the
film to give you cancer (third-hand smoke?), but there aren't enough
pyrotechnics, bullets or modern rock to spackle the giant holes in the plot.
2:03 - R for strong violence, sexuality and language

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "3,000 MILES TO GRACELAND" (Warner Bros.)
 Despite its catchy title, this is an excruciatingly long, violent, despairing journey into the heart of darkness - without a paddle. Going "from Rat Pack to fat pack," it's International Elvis Week in Las Vegas when Kurt Russell, Kevin Costner, Christian Slater, David Arquette, and Bokeem Woodbine - clad in glitzy jumpsuits and sideburns - stage an explosive, blood-splattered $3.2 million heist at the Riviera Hotel & Casino. After the excessive carnage clears, it's obvious that Costner wants all the cash for himself, so Russell grabs the loot and sets out to launder the marked currency, hooking up with a sexy grifter, Courteney Cox, and her bratty, kleptomaniac kid (David Kaye) with two bumbling Feds (Kevin Pollak, Thomas Haden Church) in pursuit. Writer Richard Recco and director Demian Lichtenstein concocted senseless, humorless banter that passes for dialogue and a banal murder & mayhem plot in which not one participant is either likable or sympathetic. Rather than!
 bother with character development, they fixate on deafening gunfire, fiery explosions, fighting scorpions and car stunts, often involving an eye-catching fire-engine red '50 Cadillac Coupe de Ville. Russell plays a cliche bad guy-with-a-conscience, while Costner is a one-dimensional, nasty, sinister mercenary who thinks he's Elvis's illegitimate son. As a despicable mother who abandons her son, Cox is not only shrill but so skinny that, clad in tight pants, she looks like a stork. In the final credits, Russell, who got an Emmy nomination for the TV movie "This is Elvis" (1979), finally does his impression of the King. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "3,000 Miles to Graceland" is an ominous 1. It's an ineptly edited, tedious trip to nowhere that is deservedly R-rated for strong violence, sexuality and language.
