Title
Review for Fantasticks, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 United Artists
 Director: Michael Ritchie
 Writer:  Tom Jones, Harvey Schmidt
 Cast: Joel Grey, Barnard Hughes, Jean Louisa Kelly, Joseph
McIntyre, Jonathon Morris, Brad Sullivan, Teller
   When "The Fantasticks" opened off-Broadway on May 3,
1960 the two-act musical by Tom Jones, music by Harvey
Schmidt (suggested by Edmond Rostand's play "Les
Romanesques") was not yet dated.  Broadway productions
like "South Pacific" were already over the hill, but "The
Fantasticks" was perhaps considered timeless--a benefit
helped by its simple staging in the tiny Sullivan Street
Playhouse in New York's Greenwich Village where it is still
playing.  The staged work got a nice boost from Jerry
Orbach's position in the principal role of El Gallo, the
handsome would-be bandit who creates a fairy-tale world for
two teenagers to show them that you're best off looking for
love and romance in your own back yard.  
   You'd think that once the Vietnam War dragged on, leading
to increasing cynicism in the country, that such a fragile work
would die out as hopelessly dated.  Nonetheless the mood
created by this gossamer show hooked the crowds, which,
we are told, often remained in their seats several minutes
after the final curtain, the middle-aged members of the
audience remembering their youth and their first loves
through rose-tinted spectacles.
   Michael Ritchie's movie version opens up the play, still
keeping the fairy-tale motif, with its Arizona setting reminding
us of the vast reaches of farmland in the U.S. and helping to
make the characters stand out as isolated individuals in a
self-enclosed world.  What Ritchie does not ultimately
succeed in doing is re-creating the ambience that we felt in
the small theater in the Village because, after all, this is not a
grand and glorious celebration of life that made "Oklahoma"
even better on the big screen than on the stage.
   Ritchie re-arranged the songs, leaving the most famous
yearning song of nostalgia, "Try to Remember," for last,
perhaps because this is the one song recalled by anyone
who had seen the play forty years ago.  This is the strain that
moviegoers today probably wait to hear in fond anticipation. 
While the term "rape" is mentioned only once or twice--its
meaning in this play being the primary one of abduction and
seizure--the Rape Ballet no longer has that name and there is
no mention of the "First Class Rape" ordered by the fathers
in a roundabout way to help persuade their two children to
marry each other.
   The story is of two fathers, Bellamy (Joel Grey) and
Hucklebee (Brad Sullivan), who build a wall between the
adjoining homes and pretend to feud so that their children,
Luisa (Jean Louisa Lelly) and Matt (Joseph McIntyre) would
act as teens always do--to defy their allegedly hostile parents
and bond happily with each other.  To further their plan, they
pay El Gallo (Jonathon Morris)--who is the leader of a
traveling carnival act--to kidnap the girl so that the boy could
come to her rescue and be deemed a hero.  But Luisa
becomes infatuated with the handsome would-be bandit--who
takes her on a smoke-and-mirrors trip around the world--while
Matt, made to drink a bitter, magic solution, thinks like Judy
Garland's Dorothy that he is traveling way outside his
neighborhood.  Realizing that the world is not as glamorous
as they thought, the two young lovers are happily reunited.
   What saves the movie from terminal obsolescence is the
magical voice of Jean Louisa Kelly who can dance almost as
well as she can vocalize and whose intense and lovely
adolescent expressiveness should win most in the audience. 
Jonathon Morris makes a charming El Gallo but the two guys
playing the fathers, Joel Grey and Brad Sullivan, are so
irritating in the story that they become annoying for us in the
audience to watch.
   The movie does have innovations worthy of note.  For one,
thanks to digital technology, the actors sang live during the
shooting rather than lip-synching with recorded tracks.  For
another, this sugary musical is an antidote to the overkill of
vulgarity of the last two or three seasons.  Even the kisses
are innocent ones, over the eyes, on the hand and on the
wrist.  Also, the two performers playing the lovebirds are
teens themselves, not the twenty-somethings usually cast in
stories involving high-school kids.  In the final analysis the
movie could make one wonder about the longevity of the
play, but then, "Cats" has already proved that box office is
usually not directly related to quality.
Rated PG.  Running time: 85 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        Not all the talk surrounding Lars von Trier's _Dancer_in_the_Dark_
revolves around the film's love-it-or-hate-it qualities (though most of
it is).  With _Dancer_ taking the top prize at Cannes this year and Baz
Luhrmann's _Moulin_Rouge_ on the horizon for next summer, there's been
lots of rumbling about the "return" of the movie musical.  The reality
is, however, it never really went away, just mutated--into the "dance
musical," which is a rather commonplace find at the cineplex these days.
_Bootmen_, the latest of this "dancing yes, singing no" brand of musical
follows a rebellious young male steel worker in Australia wants to become
a tap dancer.  No, producer Jerry Bruckheimer hasn't taken his act down
under and made a reverse-gender spinoff of _Flashdance_.  Not that his
absence from the credits makes much difference, anyhow, for _Bootmen_
plays very much like typical Bruckheimer--all shiny surfaces with nothing
underneath.
For the most part, pretty boy star Adam Garcia perfectly personifies the
faux Bruckheimer feel.  His winning smile should be familiar--he was the
vacuous slab of beef that sent hearts aflutter in _Coyote_Ugly_ (a bona
fide Bruckheimer production, not so coincidentally).  Unlike in that
film, though, Garcia displays some talent in _Bootmen_--the talent to
dance.  That is certainly fortunate since he plays the aforementioned
"rebel" tap dancer, who has real, raw talent but little patience for
uptight tradition; a promising gig with a major Sydney dance company is
taken from him as quickly as he wins it.  So he and a few old friends
decide to pursue an unlikely dream--form their own dance group in their
industrial hometown of Newcastle.  But "Bootmen" (as they call
themselves) isn't your mother's tap troupe--a mix of traditional tap with
the musical cacophony of STOMP and Björk's first musical number in
_Dancer_in_the_Dark_, they're every bit about attitude as they are about
dance.
Director Dein Perry is the creator of the popular Bootmen-like group Tap
Dogs, so it comes as no surprise that the film's dance numbers are the
energetic highlights.  But a Bruckheimer knockoff wouldn't be one without
a dose of treacly and completely bogus emotional content, and Perry and
screenwriter Steve Worland don't fail to deliver.  The threads designed
to lend the film are obvious and heavyhanded--Sean's romance with a
hairdresser (Sophie Lee), who also had a dalliance with his car thief
younger brother Mitchell (Sam Worthington); Sean's relationship with his
disapproving father (Richard Carter), who wants his son to forget his
dreams and hold down an honest job in the factory.  These stories offer
nothing in the way of surprise--except perhaps the amount of violence in
Mitchell's subplot.
With the plot leaving a lot to be desired, _Bootmen_ is left to sink or
swim on the merits of its star--for better or worse.  Whenever the film
gives him an opportunity to flash his fancy footwork or simply stand
there and exude cocky charisma, Garcia is able to coast by. 
Unfortunately, the dance sequences are too few and far between, as are
the moments of silence, thus leaving him too much space to open his mouth
and "act"--something he simply cannot do.  Wisely (though not
surprisingly), Perry ends his film with one big--and, crucially, mostly
dialogue-free--dance extravaganza, but it's too little, too late.
It is tempting to call _The_Fantasticks_, Michael Ritchie's
long-on-the-shelf (it was completed in 1995) film of the long-running
off-Broadway musical as being too little, too late to revive the form of
film musical that is indeed dead--the traditional type where characters
burst into song (and, often, dance) at the drop of a hat and a full
orchestral backing (and chorus) materializes just as spontaneously.  The
film is based on a play perhaps second-best known (behind the popular
pair of tunes "Try to Remember" and "Soon It's Gonna Rain") for its
minimalism in staging and story.  And in remaining true to the spirit of
the original production, Ritchie's _The_Fantasticks_ is hardly
revolutionary; a trifle of a film based on a trifle of a show--and in its
resolutely old-fashioned ways is where its ingratiating charm lies.
The writers of the original play, Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt, wrote
the screenplay, and as such the simple story remains intact.  Neighbors
Bellomy (Joel Grey) and Hucklebee (Brad Sullivan) pretend to feud in an
effort to bring Bellomy's daughter Luisa (Jean Louisa Kelly) and
Hucklebee's son Matt (Joe McIntyre) together.  Their plan works, and they
enlist the aid of mysterious carnival magician El Gallo (Jonathon Morris)
to "resolve" the "feud."  After a long night during which the elaborate
plan plays out and Matt is crowned a "hero," all's right with the
world--that is, until the harsh light of day makes clear how less than
ideal things really are.
_The_Fantasticks_ had long been considered unfilmable since it is
typically performed on a bare stage with virtually no props.  Since such
minimalism is unthinkable for the big screen, Ritchie has opened up the
play to the extreme, filming in full Panavision glory--all the better to
capture Fred Murphy's gorgeous photography of the film's adopted setting
of the '20s American Midwest.  The stunning images, plus the
reorchestrated score (adapted from Jones and Schmidt's original
arrangements by Jonathan Tunick) gives simple scenes such as Luisa's big
"I Want" song, "Much More," an epic quality that harkens back to the
grand screen musicals of yesteryear.
While Ritchie adjusted a number of things in the translation to film,
the one thing he curiously didn't weren't the performances.  On one hand,
this is a good thing; he employed new digital technology to capture the
actors' singing live on set rather than lipsynch to a prerecorded track
(the standard procedure for all other musical films).  But the sense of
intimacy achieved by the live vocals is cancelled out by the broad, stagy
performance quality he coaxes from his cast.  While a seasoned theater
pro like Grey and the luminous ingenue Kelly are able to get away with
some exaggerated mugging, such an approach proves nearly ruinous for the
new kid on the block (in every sense), McIntyre.  Luckily, his
all-too-evident inexperience as an actor is compensated by his sweet
rapport with Kelly.
It also helps that McIntyre, widely thought to be his former boy band's
best singer, can indeed carry a tune, for after all the key to
_The_Fantasticks_' enduring stage success are those memorable, hummable
tunes.  Just as the story is as flimsy and inconsequential as ever, the
music--invigorated by the actors' spirited vocal performances--is still
able to cast a magical spell.   Unfortunately, in this day and age most
people's society-nurtured cynicism has immunized them to the quiet and
decidedly old school delights of a film like _The_Fantasticks_, which is
much too modest to spur on a full-on revival of this type of movie
musical (and, to no one's surprise, its box office returns have been soft
at best).  But for those who still bear a sense of that unabashedly
innocent, almost naive romanticism, _The_Fantasticks_ presents an
inviting opportunity to "try to remember" a cinematic art that has sadly
been all but lost.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Susan Granger
  It's been more than 40 years since the two-act, fairy-tale
musical by Tom Jones with lyrics by Harvey Schmidt opened off-Broadway
at the tiny Sullivan Street Playhouse in Greenwich Village. Performed
simply no scenery and few props, it relied primarily on the audience's
imagination, much like "Our Town." In Michael Ritchie's screen
version, it's set in rural Arizona, where a traveling carnival sets up
in the vast wilderness. The plot still revolves around two fathers
(Joel Grey, Brad Sullivan) who pretend to have an on-going feud in
hopes that their respective children, Louisa and Matt (Jean Louisa
Kelly, Joseph McIntyre), will behave as teenagers have throughout the
centuries: rebel against them and fall in love. When this happens, the
fathers must find a way to resolve their imaginary feud, so they
conspire to have the carnival's handsome El Gallo (Jonathan Morris)
pretend to be a bandit and kidnap Luisa so that Matt rescue her. What
they don't figure into their plan is that Luisa might become
infatuated with her abductor and that Matt might not be up to the
task. What works is the simple story and evocative musical score -
with "Try to Remember" now used as a finale. What doesn't work is
opening up the concept to the big-screen; unlike "Oklahoma," for
instance, the wind doesn't come sweeping down the plains. As a result,
video sales will no doubt top theatrical revenues. Perhaps that's why
this film has sat on the shelf for five years. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Fantasticks" is a charming, nostalgic 7. It's
timeless, old-fashioned family-fare, filled with hopes and dreams
which bridge the generations and offer all of us a feeling of wondrous
well-being. But is there still an audience for movie musicals?

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a798b7c8e97eb65c8825695900042829?OpenDocument
After 40 continuous years of off-Broadway performances, the musical
sensation of Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt comes inexplicably to the big
screen. That's right, folks. All the dancing, singing, and
mindbogglingly stupid antics of off-Broadway's longest-running
embarrassment can now be experienced at a cinema near you.
Set deep in rural America, this is the story of two neighboring fathers
who fake a feud in order to trick their children into courtship. Of
course, the young man and woman (played by Joe McIntyre and Jean Louisa
Kelly, respectively) are easily duped and everything is going as
planned. That is, until the circus comes to town. And that's when the
moronic singing starts.
Perhaps the most baffling thing about this incomprehensible production
is that it languished for about five years on MGM shelves, nearly (but
not nearly enough) not making it to the screen, until Francis Ford
Coppola offered to have a look at it at much risk to his own sanity.
Sadly, even FFC's magical touch could not spare us the horror The
Fantasticks has in store. The unique combination of cheesy choreography,
inept dialog, and insanely ridiculous music, so brilliantly captured
under Michael Ritchie's direction, is surely enough to have audiences
howling all the way to their cars within the first twenty minutes.
This is the sort of film our grandmothers might have loved. Well,
probably not my grandmother but maybe yours, if she was an invalid. One
credit I can pay this flick is that, against all probability, its makers
managed to cram more moments of ungodly torture into an 86-minute
musical than I could ever have thought possible.
The saddest thing about The Fantasticks is the inclusion in its cast of
Cabaret's memorable emcee, Joel Grey. A longtime fan of Grey's
performances, I will be forever scarred by this experience. To be sure,
Jean Louisa Kelly and Joe McIntyre will live long enough to regret their
roles in this picture. Teller (of Penn & Teller), on the other hand,
might very well consider this the crowning achievement of a career spent
frolicking silently about in the shadow of a lowbrow windbag.
The Fantasticks might well serve as a worthwhile sacrifice in American
filmmaking, demonstrating for all time the God-awful stupidity of silver
screen musicals. Use it as you would a roadside accident; gawk
thoroughly as you cruise slowly by, praying for all your life is worth
that this sort of atrocity never happens to anyone, ever again.
Director: Michael Ritchie
Producer: Linne Radmin
Writers: Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt
Starring: Joel Grey, Barnard Hughes, Jean Luisa Kelly, Joe McIntyre,
Jonathon Morris, Brad Sullivan, Teller
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
