Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
Number of Reviews
56

Author
Greg King
Yet another biting satire that savagely deconstructs the
notion of wholesome family values in the heartland of American
suburbia.  As an exploration of dysfunctional families, the erosion of
family values and the souring of the American dream, American Beauty
is a fascinating and insightful character driven piece that explores
similar territory to films like The Ice Storm and the recent
Happiness.  However, this is a far more enjoyable film than Happiness,
with which it shares a number of thematic similarities.  Although
there is a nasty edge to this ironically titled comedy, there is also
a strong vein of irreverent humour and compassion running throughout.
Kevin Spacey is superbly droll and bitingly acerbic as Lester
Burnham, a middle aged man who is suffering burn out.  He is bored
with his life and his marriage to the ambitious, shrewish, neurotic
and sarcastic Carolyn (Annette Bening).  But then he becomes attracted
towards Angela (Mena Suvari, recently seen in American Pie, etc), the
shallow, self-centred cheerleader, who is also the best friend of his
teenage daughter Jane (Thora Birch).
Apathy soon gives way to a new enthusiasm for life that
confuses his family.  He quits his job as a sales executive with a
media company, wrangles a hefty $60,000 pay out, and sets about
changing his life.  Meanwhile Carolyn, a real estate agent, is
sexually attracted towards her rival (Peter Gallagher).  Adding to the
combustible mix are the Burnum's new neighbours, a homophobic retired
Marine (Chris Cooper), his mousy and withdrawn wife (Allison Janney)
and his enigmatic son Ricky (Wes Bentley), who obsessively captures
his surroundings on video.  It seems rather ironic that only the gay
couple (Scott Bakula and Sam Robards) who live next door may be the
only characters in this film who are truly happy with their lot.
Even the lesser characters are deftly observed in this
incisive, cutting and beautifully nuanced script from Alan Ball, a
veteran of television sitcoms (Cybill, etc).  The performances
throughout are uniformly impressive, and Oscar nominations seem
assured.  Spacey delivers easily his best screen performance for
years, and he brings a pathos and honesty to his character that is
perversely endearing.  Bening revels in her richly drawn character,
bringing an exuberant quality and a nicely hysterical edge to her
bitchiness and selfishness.
American Beauty is the first feature film from noted British
theatre director Sam Mendes, and he develops a superb rapport with his
ensemble cast and a great understanding into the complexities and
insecurities of the characters.  He brings an outsider's eye to this
bleak, edgy view of suburbia, and turns the camera into a scalpel,
with almost surgical precision.  Veteran cinematographer Conrad L Hall
brilliantly charts the gradually darkening tone of the film, from the
bright colours that characterise the deceptively sedate opening scenes
through to the grittier, more oppressive tones that mark the grim
finale.
American Beauty is a raw, uncompromising and archly cynical
view of contemporary America that should not be missed.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       This surprisingly dramatic black comedy goes for the jugular as
it examines with bruising intensity two dysfunctional families in
American suburbia. Oscar winner Kevin Spacey ("The Usual Suspects")
stars as a cynical advertising exec who hates his job and resents his
controlling wife, played by Annette Bening. She's a fiercely
ambitious, high-strung perfectionist, intoxicated with success, as she
passionately devotes herself to selling real estate and tending her
rose garden. Thora Birch is their daughter - and she loathes them. In
fact, the film opens with videotape footage of the teenager
complaining about her father, wishing someone would kill him. Early
on, we discover someone does. Spacey will be dead within the year - at
least that's what he tells us. Who? How? When? Why? That's what's
eventually revealed on the screen. It's a classic suspense device -
and it works. Meanwhile, Spacey's lusting after his daughter's
flirtatious high school chum (Mena Suvari) and Bening's bedding a
realtor (Peter Gallagher), as Birch becomes involved with the "psycho
next door" (Wes Bentley), who is - in turn - terrorized by his stern,
abusive father (Chris Cooper).  In this satiric, sophisticated social
commentary, first-time screenwriter Alan Ball and first-time film
director Sam Mendes (Broadway's "Cabaret," "The Blue Room")
cinematically capture the hilarious, hedonistic, and heartbreaking
desperation of a marital mid-life crisis and struggle in depth with
the ironic definition of beauty. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "American Beauty" is an amazing, powerfully disturbing 10, as it
skewers the '90s. Let's talk Oscar nominations - this is one of the
best pictures of the year!

Author
Michael Dequina
It is not so much for that reason that _American_Beauty_ defies
conventional categorization than the manner in which it blends disparate
elements; that is, incredibly seamlessly.  Credit Ball and especially
Mendes, who knows not to simply strike the major note of each given scene
but also touch on the undertones that will take prominence in others. 
Even in the more outrageous, laugh-inducing moments, a darker, more
serious undercurrent can always be felt.  Part of this has to do with an
ominous piece of information that Lester divulges in voiceover in the
film's opening minutes: "In less than a year, I will be dead." 
The deft meshing of the comic and the tragic is best exemplified by the
characters.  This group of people is far from the most likable bunch one
can encounter; in fact, often they are flat-out unlikable, and much of
the film's humor is derived from that point.  But for all their comic
value, the characters aren't caricatures; they're painfully human. 
Underneath their frequently selfish actions lies their shared motivation:
a grave emotional desperation.  That deeper dimension comes through in
every one of the actors' performances; even the younger members of the
cast hold an impressively firm grasp of their characters' complexities. 
The most difficult acting job, of course, belongs to Spacey, whose
extraordinary performance not only makes Lester's newly rebellious life
course wickedly hilarious, but heartbreakingly sad as well.
_American_Beauty_ has been described as both a comedy and a drama, but
neither one is the most fitting description.  In retrospect, the term
that springs  to mind is mystery, but not necessarily because of the
questions surrounding Lester's eventual demise, though they do figure
prominently.  The film's central mystery is that of the meaning of its
title.  The answer that is eventually arrived at may not be all that
surprising, and perhaps a bit trite for some.  But what comes as
something of a shock is how profound and exhilarating the experience of
its discovery is--not so much for any of the film's characters, but for
the audience.  (opens September 15)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Curtis Edmonds
American Beauty:  Only Skin Deep
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
Kevin Spacey, not too long ago, helped reintroduce us to the seven
deadly sins in Seven.  In no particular order, they are gluttony,
avarice, envy, pride, wrath, lust, and the other one.  (I'd look it up,
but I'm too lazy.)
Aside from a hearty helping of Lust, American Beauty mostly steers
clears of the deadly sins.  What we see are a laundry list of tacky
little suburban sins.  Stalking the Cute Neighbor with a Video Camera.
Trading in the Camry without Asking the Wife.  Buying Marijuana from the
Kid Next Door.  Saying Mean-Spirited Things about the Gay Neighbors.
And so forth.  Even the Lust is tacky, lending itself more to Jerry
Springer than the stuff of high drama.
In a way, this is appropriate, American Beauty is not truly concerned
with the deadly power of sin at all.  Its focus is on resentment, which
is equally as destructive and deadly without being as much fun.
American Beauty presents a seething, simmering cauldron of resentment,
focusing on one Lester Burnham, played by the incomparable Kevin
Spacey.  Burnham is burnt out, sick of his cubicle and his job and his
smarmy employer.  His family dynamics are replete with the sort of
circular resentment it takes years of therapy to overcome.  It's
spilling over into the real estate practice of wife Carolyn (Annette
Bening) and into  daughter Jane's (Thora Birch) relationship with her
beautiful best friend Angela (Mena Suvari, a tempting enchantress right
up until the time that she opens her mouth).
So much resentment is building at the Burnham house that it's even
sloshing over to next door.  One family, we're told, has already left
the neighborhood because an enraged Carolyn uprooted their sycamore
tree.  ("The root system was on our side," she explains.)  The new
neighbors have their own growing resentments, and these interact with
the Burnham's resentments.  In fact, you'd have to be a sociopath not to
be affected by this yawning ocean of resentments.  American Beauty is
thoughtful enough to provide us one in the person of Ricky Fitts, (Wes
Bentley), the teenage neighbor next door with the video camera.  Ricky
is admirably self-possessed and confident, but creepy -- a young
Hannibal Lecter with a camcorder.
Eventually, with all this resentment floating around, something has to
give.
And when you think about it, this may be a good year to let off a little
resentment.  Check out the Doug Hutchison character in The Green Mile
and see how he unleashes his resentment against an inmate who mocked
him.  Take a look at George Clooney's soon-to-be-cashiered major in
Three Kings, who is driven at least as much by resentment as greed.  Or
the extreme steps taken by John Cusack's character when he resents his
wife's desire for freedom in Being John Malkovich.  To go back to the
earlier part of the year, there's Election and Rushmore, where Matthew
Broderick and Bill Murray experience a lot of the same resentment as
Spacey does here.  And don't forget Fight Club, which oozes with
resentment to about the same extent that it oozes with blood.
Better yet, don't go to any of these movies.  Just stay at home and rent
The Ref.  If you haven't seen it, you're missing out on one of the
funniest comedies of the 1990's.  The Ref features the selfsame Kevin
Spacey, playing Lester Burnham all over again.  Judy Davis is his
frustrated wife, and her character is a close enough duplicate of
Bening's to make one wonder if Davis and Bening have ever been in the
same room at the same time.  In The Ref, a long-brewing cloudburst
between husband and wife is precipitated by the arrival of cat burglar
Denis Leary, who takes the couple hostage in the course of a botched
robbery.  Davis and Spacey engage in this tremendously bitter verbal
duel all the way through the movie, but the resentment level is leavened
considerably by a hilarious script.
Much of the comedy in The Ref comes from the aggravation that Leary (no
stranger to angry resentful outbursts himself) is forced to endure in
listening to the bickerings between Spacey and Davis.  But in American
Beauty, we, the audience, are the outsiders looking in on these
resentful relationships.  Unlike Leary's character, we can't tie up
Spacey and Bening and yell at them to shut up, and more's the pity.
While there's some comedy to be had in American Beauty, (especially one
funny scene where Spacey and Bening confront each other at a fast-food
joint) mostly, it's overwhelmed by the anger and the bitterness and the
resentment.
As a piece of entertainment, American Beauty is just flat-out
disappointing.  For me, anyway, the pervasive level of repressed
hostility and outright resentment seeped over into a resentment of the
movie and all its works, enough so that I couldn't enjoy it at any
level.  The characters are neither likable or sufficiently interesting
or colorful to allow them to get away with unlikability.  The acting
isn't good enough to recommend it, either.  Although Spacey is his usual
wonderful self, he never manages to differentiate Lester Burnham's
character from his overall persona.  Wes Bentley is spooky-good as the
creepy neighbor, but his part is just so odd that it's hard to connect
with him.
American Beauty has been winning a lot of the critic's awards, so
there's very likely more to it than I got out of it.  But it's hard to
see what that might be.  Maybe there's some value to the whole thing
about unveiling the seedy side of suburbia, but, hey, I could've told
you that suburban life is depressing, and it wouldn't have cost you $7,
either.  There's some pretentious talk about the idea of beauty,
illustrated by this little movie of this plastic bag flying around like
the feather from Forrest Gump.  However, all of this claptrap comes out
of the mouth of Ricky the sociopathic neighbor, who walks around filming
dead birds and such.  If there's higher truth or higher meaning in
American Beauty, it's only skin-deep.
According to one of the real-estate signs in the neighborhood, American
Beauty takes place in area code 847, which works out to be suburban
Chicago.  I know this, because I just looked it up, and I can tell you
that I'm disappointed.  Why?  You see, at the beginning of the movie,
Lester Burnham tells us that he's going to die.  Well, he does die.  And
when he dies, I was comforted by the thought that maybe the death took
place in suburban Baltimore, and that maybe, just maybe, Tim Bayliss and
Frank Pembleton would show up at the door and investigate, and that
somehow, this whole movie would turn into a Homicide episode, which
would have improved it no end.
For me, at least, in moviemaking, there are only two deadly sins.  One
is casting Richard Gere.  The other one, almost as bad, is the sin of
not being entertaining.  American Beauty wisely steers clear of the
first one, but commits the second one over and over again.  In the end,
it's enough to make you resent the whole movie.
Movie Reviews:
http://www.hsbr.org/buzz/reviewer/reviews/bdreviews.html

Author
John Sylva
American Beauty by John Sylva (DewyNGale@aol.com)     Rating: A+
http://2Webmasters.simplenet.com (COMING OCTOBER 26th)
Think hard about the following question.  When was the last time that when a
film's credits started rolling, you just stared at the screen, in silence? 
Seconds, minutes later, you were still in silence.  The grin on your face seems
to be placed there naturally, and won't go away.  You can't move a muscle, as
you are completely shocked and astonished, as the film you just viewed is among
your favorites of all time.  If you're stumped, and can't answer this question,
as it has been too long since this has happened to you, go see American Beauty,
and feel the experience, once again.
You see a happily married man.  He is a magazine writer, father of one.  His
life couldn't be any happier.
You see a self absorbed, sarcastic, mean spirited person who despises his wife,
and only cares about what he wants.
You see a happily married woman. She is a successful realtor, and mother of
one. Her life couldn't be any more perfect.
You see a shallow, rude person who despises her family, and only seems to be
the reflection of Carol Brady.
Lester (Kevin Spacey) and Carolyn (Annette Bening) Burnham live in a peaceful,
ordinary suburban neighborhood, where they live their not so peaceful lives. 
The unhappily married couple live with teen daughter Jane (Thora Birch), who
appears to hate both her parents, as she often smarts off to them and uses
vulgar words at them.  This relatively small, threesome of a family is the main
focus of American Beauty, in which we get a closer look at each one of the main
characters, as the film unfolds each being's true beauty.  By the time American
Beauty reaches its climax, we have "looked closer" at every character, as their
true personalities and feelings are true.  By the time American Beauty reaches
its climax, you have felt so many emotions and thoughts you feel like you're
going to explode.  By the time American Beauty reaches its climax, you realize
you've seen one of the most powerful, saddening, funny, and real motion
pictures of our time. 
Looking to take an active interest in their daughter, Lester and Carolyn attend
a basketball game in which Jane is cheerleading in.  Lester catches a glimpse
of one of Jane's fellow cheerleaders, Angela (Mena Suvari), and something
inside of him is sparked.  Just by taking one look at this girl, Lester decides
to quit his job, take up smoking pot, and start working out.
"I feel like I've been in a coma for about twenty years, and I'm just now
waking up."
Of course the entire Burnham family realizes these odd changes in him
immediately, but they also start noticing changes in themselves.  Jane's life
is changed by Ricky (Wes Bentley), the new kid on the block, who just moved
next door, and films everything he sees.  Ricky, who has been in a mental
institution, finds no joys in life except the beauty in it, as he has an entire
wall full of videos that he has filmed.  In an extraordinarily powerful scene,
Ricky shows Jane the most beautiful thing he's ever seen- a paper bag, blowing
around in the wind with the leaves, on a cold, beautiful day.
Carolyn's life is changed instantly and drastically by "The King" Buddy Kane,
the most popular realtor in town, whom she has an affair with.  Carolyn goes
through with the affair with Buddy as a result of her now care free husband,
and the fact that she is on the verge of becoming a psychotic person.  As the
three go on their own separate conquests, the family becomes farther and
farther apart, as Jane continues to give desperate cries for attention to her
parents, but they are pre occupied with their own needs. 
The entire ensemble cast gives performances nothing short of perfection, as
every line, every move, every facial gesture, and every blink each actor makes
is so perfect, so real, the characters come to life, and stop being characters
in a movie, but your friends, family, and neighbors.  The screenplay, along
with the actors, bring each and every character to life with such vivid color
and beauty, you feel like you're watching your life story put to screen.  The
screenplay takes your basic, cookie cutter characters, and shows what the
characters are really like, instead of giving a one dimensional, predictable
personality.  The main cast, consisting of Annette Bening, Kevin Spacey, Thora
Birch, Mena Suvari, and Wes Bentley all deliver performances that will surely
bring them many award nominations and hopefully wins, as the bunch are such a
likable, talented group, I don't think any motion picture group, including the
Academy, can ignore their performances while choosing the nominees and winners.
Annette Bening and Kevin Spacey are a marvelous on screen duo, as you savor for
the moment the two are in a scene together, and start dealing out argumentative
statements.  At times, the two are hilarious, but when the words become darker,
and more serious, the smile on your face starts to fade away and turn into a
frown.  Watching a fight between the couple is like watching your own parents
fight, as the dialogue and acting is so real, you feel horrible and unstable
while watching.
It's obvious where veteran actors such as Spacey and Bening would give Oscar
worthy performances, but the big surprise performances come from the
youngsters.  Thora Birch and Mena Suvari bring their roles to life with an
extra touch of realism, making you believe they are teens, not characters
written to act like teens, and Wes Bentley, although not always acting like a
teen, adds the psychotic touch that the character needs to make his character
work.
American Beauty can make you laugh at one time, with its outrageously funny one
liners, and at the next can jerk a tear or two.  Or three.  Or twenty.  The
heart racing, moving climax is one that moved me in a way a film has never
done, as I sat there, eyes bulged open, jaw dropped to the ground, tears on
their way to my eyes.  Everything from start to finish in American Beauty is
done so perfectly, you wonder how the screenplay is written by, and the film is
directed by, first time filmmakers.  The screenplay, written by Alan Ball, will
surely launch him into superstardom, as American Beauty is the most skillfully
crafted piece of work to be put to screen this year.  Ball knows not only how
to make the viewer laugh and cry, but how to make them sympathize with
characters, relate to characters, and care for them deeply.  Director Sam
Mendes' directorial debut in film is an enticing blend of comedy, drama, and
contains a rock solid, down to earth feel about it, you just can't refuse
loving this four star gem.
The Bottom Line- You see a movie.  Look closer, and you'll see one of the
decade's best.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Leo Tolstoy told us that happy families are all alike; every
unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.  While 90% of us
get married, confident that we will be in the former
category, statistics prove otherwise.  What's unfortunate in
that regard is advantageous for art, though.  Is "The Brady
Bunch" among the world's great contributions? Hardly.  Look
for dramatic excitement to "Agamemnon," "Medea,"
"Oedipus," and Hamlet, to cite a few examples. 
Dysfunctional families make for maximum enjoyment.  But
you don't have to kill your husband, your children, your uncle,
or your father to deliver an interesting story.  Sam Mendes
proves this by adapting Alan Ball's alternately funny and
poignant story, "American Beauty," to the big screen. 
Already named by some critics as one of the two Oscar
contenders (Tom Hanks's vehicle, "The Green Mile," being
the other), "American Beauty" mesmerizes because every
moment, however caricatured, hits a nerve in each of us. 
Don't tell others who have seen this film that you cannot
identify with any of the characters.  You're likely to get the
fortune-cookie reply, "You ought to get out more often."
   We'd like to tell our bosses where to shove their jobs, our
spouses where to hurl their demands, our parents where to
fling their uptight, middle-class values.  In "American Beauty,"
repressions, anxieties, and hostilities are played out in a
suburban neighborhood, but urban landscapes are no
strangers to dysfunction.  Among well-mown lawns and
newly-painted picket fences, though, more pressure is put
upon residents to fit in, to appear successful, to have happy
marriages, to get with the program.  And so suburbanites
have been reproached--justifiably or not--for having less
tolerance for differences than city people.  This notion makes
the generic American suburb the consummate setting for
"American Beauty," an ideal backdrop for its chiefly sorrowful
society which--through nominally tidy lawns and lives and
spirits-sodden socials try to imprint their triumphs on their
acquaintances.
   Foremost among them, Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey)
works in a cubicle as a media writer, but has utter contempt
for the hollow mission of his organization and disdain for the
company higher-ups and for the people he contacts each
day.  Nor is his home life the escape-hatch so promoted by
the psychological pap that passes for profound professional
literature.  His wife Carolyn (Annette Bening), an every-hair-
in-place real-estate agent, is frustrated to the point of tears
because of her inability to sell houses.  Her envy of the
flourishing "king of real estate," Buddy Kane (Peter
Gallagher), will prompt her to suck up to this alpha male in
more than a figurative manner.  
   Her parents' disappointments are easily perceived by their
teen-aged daughter, Jane (Thora Birch), whose best
friend Angela (Mena Suvari) considers Jane's father a freak
but whose secret admirer Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley) is so
without cynicism that he sees beauty in everything.  Though
physically and psychologically abused at home by his ex-
Marine father, Col. Fitts (Chris Cooper), Ricky is so enthralled
by the world's resplendence that he carefully photographs
all that he considers divine--people, swirling leaves and
papers, even a dead bird, amassing a library of videotapes
whose subject could well be American Beauty.
   While director Sam Mendes ponders the town's
relationships--the colonel with his son and his clinically
depressed wife Barbara (Allison Janney); the daughter with
her parents, her sexy best friend Angela, and her boy friend
Ricky; Carolyn with her husband and her new lover, Buddy--
the focal point is Lester Burnham's connection with himself. 
And what an awesome job Mendes does with this fellow! 
Carefully and humorously developing Lester's cynicism,
disappointments, and flat-out numbness, Mendes shows what
happens when at the age of 42 Lester awakens from his
extended coma, laying his eyes on the seductive teen
cheerleader, Angela.  Lester's rush recalls Dr. Bill
Maplewood's attraction to the 11-year-old Billy in Todd
Solondz's "Happiness" and Humbert Humbert's for Lolita in
the Nabokov novel, brought back to cinematic life last year by
Adrian Lyne.  With Angela as catalyst for change, Lester
determines to shuck off his paunch by working out until he
develops awesome abs, to express himself in the most
intemperate ways to his boss, his wife and his daughter, and
to try at his stage of mid-life to restore the joy and laughter
and abandon he experienced in his youth.  His resolve, while
admirable in some ways, is financially irresponsible and
psychologically is little more than important rage.  But what is
more trenchant is that he is too late.  Henri Etienne was on
the money when he said in 1594 "Si jeunesse savait, si
vieillesse pouvait," or, "If youth but knew, if age but could."
   Thrilling acting by Kevin Spacey, one of America's greatest
performers, should assure him an Oscar nomination.  Unfairly
edged out the Tony award competition for his dazzling
performance as Hickey in Broadway's "The Iceman Cometh,"
Spacey sets a new standard here by his facility in switching
gears, in turning from a narrator who is alternately
side-splitting, self-deprecatory, seething, sexy, and sensitive. 
Annette Bening in the less-developed and implausibly over-
the-top role is a suitable butt for Spacey's rage, Chris Cooper
as the stereotypical former Marine who cannot get used to
the "ex" in his title, and Wes Bentley as the half-freaky, half-
responsive connoisseur of American beauty are all on target.
Yet Spacey carries the show.  "It's just stuff and it's become
more important to you than life," he protests to his
materialistic wife, who is more concerned about spilling a
drink on the $4000 sofa than showing physical affection for
her husband.  Lest we get carried away by his newly-found
contempt for money, we must realize how much he grooves
on the old Pontiac Firebird he has just acquired and how
important Ricky's $40,000 is if he is going to continue finding
life as beautiful as he has felt it to be in the past. 
   Most of the world's people do not live in capacious
suburban homes with picket fences for decoration and
Golden Retrievers to greet them when they get home.  Two-
thirds of humanity live in the tar-paper shacks, wooden
shanties, and the like.  Should we dismiss the woes of the
comfortably situated as mere bourgeois inconveniences that
can be solved by a few affordable sessions on the couch? 
Of course not.  I've read of privileged, attractive and talented
high-school students who shoot up their classmates and
stockbrokers who kill their wives.  I've seen dirt-poor, unclad
kids in southern India playing on the beaches, sporting broad,
authentic smiles that I see less often on the faces of
American children.  The Greek tragedians, in fact, seemed to
believe that only the rich and powerful could truly suffer.  I
challenge you to see "American Beauty" without feeling great
compassion for the anguish of its well-situated people, whose
laughter and good times do not always erase their anguish
and distress.  The performances led by Kevin Spacey, the
capable direction by Sam Mendes backed up by Conrad
Hall's eye behind the camera, and Thomas Newman's
pulsating soundtrack, all position the film for a flurry of year-
end awards.  I'd be hard-put to recall another movie (certainly
not Ang Lee's detached and clinical "The Ice Storm") that has
so skillfully integrated exuberant humor with heartbreaking
pathos.

Author
Michael Redman
Virtually every man and woman snaps awake at least once in their life to hear
the words "This is not my beautiful house. This is not my beautiful life" -
even if they aren't listening to a Talking Heads song.
Call it middle-age crisis or spiritual awakening, suddenly there is a
realization that they've been the walking undead for a l-o-o-o-n-g time and
they want to do something about it. For women it's often triggered by the
biological alarm clock ringing or perhaps the emptying of their nest. For men,
the catalyst is often not so defined, but it usually hits people sometime
after about age 35.
For everyone the change has them looking around at their life and identifying
their lack of fulfillment. Have they really been working at that dead-end job
for 20 years? Have they really forgotten to be alive for decades?
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey), 42 year old suburban family man, gets his
wake-up call from God in a time-honored male holy tradition. He falls in lust
with a high school cheerleader.
Lester's fed up with his job. His family hates him and he returns the emotion.
His life is going to hell in a handbasket on the express lane. He is sure that
everything is wrong, "I've lost something. I didn't always feel so sedated."
And he is powerless to do anything about it.
Until, that is, he encounters his daughter Jane's (Thora Birch) seductive
teenage friend Angela (Mena Suvari). That night Angela's image comes to him,
projected on his bedroom ceiling covered in rose petals. Suddenly Lester pump
iron, quits his job and cruises around town smoking dope in his newly-acquired
seventies Firebird with "American Woman" at full blast.
He's become a poster boy for a bad male mid-life crisis: the kind you see in
cartoons of an old guy in a sports car with a blonde babe next to him. The
kind you cringe when someone you know falls into it.
But from the inside it's something entirely different. Lester has opened his
eyes to the truth and is trying every way possible to recapture some of his
enthusiasm for life. Sure he does some stupid things and makes some bad
choices, but at least he's trying. He thinks he's doing it all to get Angela,
but actually he's engaged in a holy war for his soul.
The new boy next door, Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley), dresses like a Mormon on a
bicycle mission and is obsessed with videotaping Jane. At first she is
grossed-out, but comes to appreciate his artistic soul. When he shows her the
most beautiful thing he has ever taped, it is an empty plastic bag dancing in
the wind. The visual with his voice explaining his feelings is mesmerizing.
Like everyone else in the film, Ricky is an odd internal mix. He finds beauty
in everything, even a dead bird. He's independent, but lets his ex-Marine
father beat him. He won't leave home until his father gives him permission.
Ricky has a moment of exquisite truth when he tells Jane they all live in deep
denial. Everyone in the film is living a lie. Lester's wife Carolyn (Annette
Benning) thinks she'll finally be happy if she can sell more houses. Jane is
saving her money for a "boob job", but when she undresses in front of her
window for Ricky's camera, it's apparent that's the last thing she needs.
In the fifties, living in the suburbs became the holy grail for the middle
class. If they could move out to the land of white picket fences, every day
would be a Pleasant Valley Sunday. In later decades, Ozzie and Harriet were
revealed to be merely masks for the quietly desperate.
The film gradually grows darker as the truths become revealed. When the
characters began to see their wretched lives, it remains hilarious, but with a
much sharper edge.
The greatest strength of "American Beauty" is its actors, followed closely by
the cinematography. There's hardly a mis-step anywhere. If there's any
justice, look for nominations when awards time comes around.
Perhaps the most amazing aspect for me is that the theater was packed. Do this
many people want to see a very dark comedy about how dead they are. Watch for Firebirds.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 24 years or so. He's had
about a dozen mid-life crises and looks forward to many more. Email your tales
of inappropriate lust to redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 10/7/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
This week's Y2K article: http://www.indepen.com/
Y2K archives: http://www.indepen.com/y2k.html

Author
Frankie Paiva
NOTE: Throughout this review I will designate parts of the film that deserve
Oscar nominations with a @.
I think that if any of us have learned a lesson from all of the movies that
have come out during this past year it's that too much hype is a bad thing.
Star Wars - Episode I: The Phantom Menace was hyped since last November for
being one of the biggest motion picture events ever. The film turned out to be
just a bad marketing scam designed to continue the cash flow to George Lucas's
bank account. How about Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me? While the sequel
to the hit original was funny, it was also packed full of bathroom humor that
was gross and un-appealing. Or for an even better example, how about The Blair
Witch Project, a little film that was supposed to be one of the scariest ever
that barely even brought out a fright. The next heavily hyped film is American
Beauty, being praised as the best film of the year with millions of Oscar
nominations coming it's way. I was hesitant at first, but finally I'm here to
review a film that lives up to it's hype.
Lester Burnham (Spacey @) is living in a middle class neighborhood with his
control freak wife Carolyn, (Bening @) she's a real estate agent who is
competing with Buddy Kane, (Peter Gallagher) the "King" of real estate. Lester
finds his life boring, his teenage daughter Jane (Thora Birch @) hates him, his
job is leaving him un-satisfied, and he's beginning to have some type of an
identity crisis. That all changes when he sees Jane's friend Angela, (Mena
Suvari @) he wants her and will do anything to get her.
So he begins working out in the garage to impress her. Lifting weights and
smoking the drugs that are supplied by his next door neighbor Ricky (Wes Bently
@) who Jane soon falls in love with. Ricky films every he sees with a digital
camera he bought with his drug money. As Lester finds what he wants in life,
his family begins to fall apart, Carolyn gets the "royal treatment" from Buddy
Kane, and Jane hates him even more because he's in love with Angela. 
But it's not only the excellent acting and witty screenplay (@) that make
American Beauty what it is, it's the message that it contains. Here is a film
so wonderful that it truly deserves to be seen by every American. If this isn't
a Best Picture (@) winner, I don't know what is. Everything about American
Beauty is interesting and I could easily see this film again and again. The
film does however have one flaw, yes, I'm perfectly aware that this is an edgy,
and experimental film, but it has a little too much sex and a little too much
drug use. Both of these things prevents people like me from seeing the picture,
but I'm sure it's good that they are there. So go and see this film now,
whatever junk you were considering to go see, drop it. You must see this film
now. What are you still reading this for? It's like your not even listening to
me...you must stop reading now. Go to the theater and view American Beauty
which gets **** stars.
The Young-Uns: Ouch, this great film features loads of objectionable content.
Lots and lots of sex talk occurs along with a sex scene and two long views of
two different character's breasts. Drug use also rates as a high, people smoke
pot in at least six scenes. Violence also rates as an extreme because of a
bloody shooting and a man beating up his son. Also, bad attitudes fill up the
entire picture. Good Age: 17 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Alex Ioshpe
Cast:  Kevin Spacey, Anette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena Suvari,
Chris Cooper (I)
'American Beauty' is one of those films that leave a huge emotional impact
that remains for days after you have seen it. Seldom have I seen such
marvelous characters, each somehow representing an important puzzle piece of
our modern society. And it is not often you get to experience a film where
virtually every actor is giving an award worthy performance. The story
itself is a constantly surprising, complex and ingeniously spinned web of
events, ideas, characters, thoughts and feelings.
The hero in the story is Lester (Kevin Spacey). He is working in a
respectable firm, lives in a great neighborhood, has a beautiful wife and a
sweet daughter. He is living the American dream -- or so it seems. The truth
is that Lester is hated by his daughter, ignored by his wife and is
"expendable" at work. His wife, Carolyn (Anette Bening) is so perfect that
her garden shears are coordinated with her footwear. She is a successful
real state agent, happy and content -- or so it seems. Actually Carolyn is a
neurotic woman, unsuccessful in work and family. She has simply forgotten
what it is to feel alive. His daughter, Jane (Thora Birch) is a lonely and
unhappy girl that lives in a certain apathy, longing to leave home. Her
friend, Angela (Mena Suvari) is the blond beauty that is the school's main
attraction. A girl that is dreaming o becoming a model. Her motto is "There
is nothing worse than being ordinary". The truth is that she has never dated
a single boy and her love affairs have been fiction and lies that she used
to seem attractive and unordinary. Those are the main characters, but there
are others that add color and meaning to the story. There is an ex-Marine
officer (Chris Cooper) that collects nazi stuff and has some radical
thoughts about gays. He is a tuff, angry, almost sadistic man that tests
tests his son, Ricky (Wes Bentley ) for drugs, taking a urine sample every
six months and beating the shit out of him for no obvious reasons. In the
end it becomes clear that he is gay himself. Ricky is the good and polite
son at home, but spends his time to change jobs and selling drugs and
basically any whatever his "clients" wish for.
What starts as parallel stories soon float into each other, creating a web
of misunderstandings that are nothing less than bizarre. Lester is
unwillingly dragged along by his wife to see his daughter perform as a
cheerleader. And it is here he sees his angel, his key to instant bliss and
happiness, the only thing that makes him feel alive. The only trouble is
that she is Angela. There are so many events that it is impossible and
unnecessary to sum them up, they have to be experienced. The film ends with
a finale that is so intense and powerful that it is simply unforgettable.
"American Beauty" is not only a Lolita-kind of story. It is a tale about a
man waking up after 30 years of apathy and numbness, thinking about what
happened to your life.  It is a man that wants to bring some of his dreams,
hopes and fantasies to life - a simple wish to live again, to feel alive.
Off course there is more to it. It is basically a story about or society --
under the facade of obvious happiness and success, hides a different
reality. It is about the fact that image and success mean everything, and
are worth sacrificing your own identity and happiness. What we are trying to
hide is our humanity -- our true feelings, our actual thoughts and dreams --
the very things that make us human.
This theme is rather familiar and parallels to films as "Fight Club" and
"Eyes Wide Shut" can be drawn. Like "Fight Club", "American Beauty"
gracefully balances between tragic drama and amusing comedy, never becoming
boring or sentimental -- a kind of feeling like laughing through tears. Both
films are brilliantly written and spectacularly acted and both present our
society in a rather bad light. So it almost seems that they are equal, but
not quite. David Fincher's description of society is sharper, darker, deeper
and far more controversial, because of its unique style and daring story.
Sam Mendes doesn't go that far and he doesn't break any barriers or open new
doors. "Fight lub" didn't only capture the three dimentionality  and essence
of the problem, but provided also the consequences of our actions and
showing us the path towards which we are heading. Mendes doesn't do that. He
is simply scratching the surface and never goes as deep as Fincher. That is
why "American Beauty" will be popular at the Academy Awards, and "Fight
Club" will not.
Acting (as I've mentioned at least a hundred times) is wonderful. This may
be Kevin Spacy's finest, most colorful and mature performance. A natural and
intelligent approach that simply strengthens the film. Likewise is Anette
Bening. A rather unexpected depth and understanding that she portrays in
such an easy manner, that it is simply a joy to watch. The other cast
members are weaker, but still amazing. Especially Wes Bentley as the
romantic, dreamy young man that sees outstanding beauty in everything. I am
confident that a bright future in Hollywood awaits this promising, young
actor. The technical side of the film is likewise perfect. A brilliant
cinematography, magnificent editing and a stimulating musical score wrap the
whole thing up into an unforgettable and fascinating film that deserves both
attention and appreciation.


Author
Homer Yen
`American Beauty' offers us a glimpse into what really
fuels suburban families, like that of Lester Burnham
(Kevin Spacey).  In doing so, the film tears apart the
suburban myth of well-trimmed rose-gardens and
automatic garage door openers.  Sure, Lester may have
a nice house, a family, and a relatively secure
future, but his life isn't much more exciting than
that of a mannequin.  And though he projects a
constant smile, his life is just an endless spiral of
boredom and the highlight of his day is his morning
shower.  What has made his life so bereft of passion? 
Perhaps it's his prissy wife, Carolyn (Annette
Bening).  She also smiles a lot and tries to excel as
a real estate agent.  But her life is equally vacuous
and her soul is joyless.  Her self-confidence is
almost non-existent, and her marriage to the
milquetoast Lester is nothing but a loveless sham. 
Daughter Jane (Thora Birch) doesn't add any sanity to
this family either.  Even Lester admits that what
neighbors see is `a commercial for how normal we are
when we're anything but.'  
Now, dig a little deeper and look a little closer. 
This film reveals some very surprising things that you
would never think would exist.  What gets Lester's
juices flowing again is Angela (Mena Suvari), a friend
of Jane's that he begins fantasizing about.  Angela,
who confidently boasts about her adult experiences,
doesn't mind the attention and says that if Lester had
more muscles, she would be interested.  DING!  Lester
breaks out the weights and starts a running regimen. 
But this is just the beginning of the new Lester.  He
quits his job and blackmails his boss at the same
time, he begins smoking powerful marijuana, and he
buys a classic muscle car.  But why should Lester have
all the fun?  His radical actions prompt Carolyn to
begin an affair with her chief competitor while Jane
begins to take an interest in a mysterious boy next
door.
The wheels are set in motion and the film wonderfully
strips any conventions that we have of suburbia and
gives us some very strange yet sad characters with
whom we can empathize.  For Lester, it's time to let
loose.  He no longer cares about anything and while
chaos can destroy the sanctity of his home, it is the
only thing he appreciates now in his life. 
Consequently, the situations that he winds up in are
often funny, poignant, and amusing.  A counter-story
to Lester's life features a militaristic, homophobic
retired marine living next door.  He preaches
discipline to his son.  But like the Burnham's nothing
on the outside is as it really seems.  The real
interesting point that this film makes features
another of Lester's neighbors, Jim and Jim (Scott
Bakula and Sam Robards), who are gay.  Despite their
strange outward appearance, their lives were the most
normal of all.
The beauty of `American Beauty' is it's harsh
revelations and brutally frank situations.  
This is not a film that strives to entertain as a
comedy.  Rather it is a film that tries to scrape away
at the true nature of people like Lester Burnham.  As
Lester, Kevin Spacey is comfortable and almost too
real as the dispirited suburbanite whose last chance
at living is fading fast.  Annette Bening also shows
might in her portrayal of the brittle housewife. 
However all of the wonderfully developed characters
and their complexities will beg you to ask yourself
what may really be going on in your own cul-de-sac
world. 

Author
Walter Frith
How often have you felt your life to be insignificant, tedious and downright
meaningless?  Films like 'It's a Wonderful Life' show just how one single
person can have a large impact on the lives of those around them and
likewise.  'American Beauty' falls within the compound of urban melodrama,
sexual fantasy and inverted satire all mixed into one platform of story
telling.  The ads for the film are sort of misleading.  When I saw the
television spot for it, I thought it was a comedy.  How wrong I was!  The
film is a catapulting force of inventive character studies with the people
involved having mostly negative feelings about each other and is a truly
dead on accurate of how distant people have become with each passing year.
The people involved aren't widely known directors or writers and the cast is
a group of people who have won critical acclaim, Oscars, and praise for
their work.  They aren't movie stars, just great talents put together like a
jigsaw puzzle with all of the pieces falling into the right places.
Let's begin with the Burnham family.  There is Lester (Kevin Spacey).  He's
a 42 year old writer who has worked for a magazine the last 14 years of his
life.  He is a man who has never really gathered up his adult
responsibilities in life.  He isn't the kind of guy you want to hang around
with in real life.  His personality is actually that of  Kramer from
'Seinfeld' except for the humour.  Take away the laughs and you have a
character you actually feel sorry for.  His wife Carolyn (Annette Bening) is
a materialistic woman with ice in her veins.  The two of them haven't had
sex in a very long time.  Even though that is never mentioned, you can tell
and that observation is even made by another one of the film's characters.
Not only have they alienated each other but their teenage daughter Jane
(Thora Birch) is at odds with them and herself for that matter and has
nothing but contempt for her parents.  Her best friend Angela Hayes (Mena
Suvari) has caught the attention of Lester's eye who develops a crush on his
daughter's friend and sexually fantasizes about her quite often and we see
his fantasies visually with nicely textured scenes which are tasteful and
very deep rooted.
Next door to the Burnham family live the Fitts.  There is the teenage son
Ricky (Wes Bentley), a drug dealer with a deceiving and clean cut appearance
and shining personality.  His father is a right wing gung ho marine (Chris
Cooper) who is a bigot and his mother Barbara (Allison Janney) is a woman
who enjoys playing second fiddle to her military husband and has no life of
her own.  Minor characters that appear briefly but turn out to be important
to the film's resolution and should have been seen more to solidify the
film's emotional tone are two gay men played by Scott Bakula and Sam Robards
as fellow neighbors to the Burnhams and Fitts'.  Rounding out the cast of
significant players is a highly successful real estate honcho portrayed by
Peter Gallagher who has an adulterous affair with Carolyn.
'American Beauty' is filled with acute observations about suburban life and
makes some unattractive characters seem likeable and others which are
equally unattractive are displayed as highly unlikable.  It depicts
personality as its key element of appeal.  Kevin Spacey is brilliant in this
film.  He manages to be tragic, extremely funny and displays youthful
exuberance as a man just past the middle aged part of his life.  Annette
Bening is just as impressive in this film as a woman whose rigid
conservatism makes her sexually repressed, cold and failing as a wife and
mother.  Chris Cooper is the stand out in a supporting performance as one of
those characters you would just love to dunk at a carnival water tank
attached to a target.  His tough as nails portrait of a military man who
hates sensitivity and those different than him make his character perhaps
the most hated in the film as he tries to control his family's every move.
Director Sam Mendes illuminates his film with even strength.  The film never
takes a wrong path when faced with a fork in the road.  Everything is highly
believable and you will shutter with just how much you will identify with at
least one of the film's characters and although you think you can avoid the
comparisons, it will nag at you long after you view the final cut.  The
right words and situations are dished out courtesy of writer Alan Ball.  He
builds an arc of reality around the entire story to the point where its
conclusion should make you seriously evaluate your own life, no matter how
small you deem it to be in certain cases.  'American Beauty' is Oscar
material in all academic categories and despite its title, it really isn't
an American issue at all but one that is possible in any suburban
neighbourhood in the world where there are people.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Donlee Brussel
"American Beauty" is the impressive off the wall, jet-black magnum opus
dramedy debut from writer Alan Ball and director Sam Mendes.   It's the
story about Lester (Kevin Spacey) and Carolyn Burnham (Annette Bening).
They're an extremely happy couple like Mike and Carol Brady with their
friends, neighbors & co-workers.  They go to company events; they look
the look, talk the talk and walk the walk.  As the tagline says, "Look
closer'
The Burnhams are actually a dysfunctional couple deteriorating.
Carolyn has an "I just took Prozac" look on her face as a real estate
saleswoman and she's thinking about cheating on her husband.  Lester on
the other hand, is sedated.  Spacey's character is a "colossal loser"
hated by his wife and adolescent daughter.  He's a man dead on the
inside, the highlight of his day is jerking off in the shower.
Lester Burnham's life changes when he develops a crush on his
daughter's best friend, a vixen cheerleader (Mena Suvari).  It brings
back his mojo that's been missing since college ended.  Meanwhile, his
daughter Jane (Thora Birch) develops a relationship with the enigmatic
boy next door named Ricky (Wes Bentley).  Bentley's character is a
voyeur who lives with his military-minded homophobic father (Chris
Cooper) and estranged mother (Allison Janney).  Throughout the film, we
will see all the characters go through numerous changes.
Kevin Spacey and Annette Benning seem to only get better with age.
They give Oscar-worthy performances that remind us why they were so
remarkable in the first place.  They're so good in fact, that you'd
think in a movie like this, only the leads would be impressive.
Surprisingly, the supporting cast matches the main characters blow for
blow.
At the beginning of the year, people were talking Oscar for Cooper
because of his role as a controlling father in "October Sky."  Now
he'll have to get it for his truly stand out work in "American Beauty"
that is far superior to anything else he's ever done.  Then there are
the three young adults in the film, all of which hold their own with
these seasoned vets with highly respectable performances.  It's safe to
say that all the players here invigorate a lot of life into the already
wonderfully three-dimensional characters that Alan Ball created for
them.
"American Beauty" is that rare film, one with both crackling dialogue
and intricate character development in addition to everything else.
Though some think it is impossible in this day and age, Ball has done
it.  He's concocted one of the most gleaming scripts in a long time.
Chances are, he'll be picking up an Oscar or at least a nomination for
Best Original Screenplay.  This scribe has dialogue up there with Kevin
Smith, David Mamet and David Rabe.  He's taken the old dysfunctional
family plot and given it enough clever and adroit twists to make it a
gem amongst all the wannabes.
Sam Mendes masterfully directs scenes here with beautiful imagery and
style in stride.  He is only complemented by Conrad L. Hall's superb
brand of cinematography that includes close-ups of the actors and
actresses at their most emotional.  His distinctive touches contributed
to the film make it all the more unique.    "Beauty" also has another
hauntingly effective score from the always refreshing Thomas Newman
that is genuinely sublime.
There are many other admirable traits in "American Beauty."  I'd like
to list them all here.  However, I'd rather just recommend that you all
witness this thought-provoking tour de force yourselves.

Author
Jon Ridge
Ever seen a film so well-constructed, so accomplished
every moment, one to the next, you get chills?  That happened
to me about ten times during the brilliant, brilliant,
brilliant AMERICAN BEAUTY.
Hard to describe, and how often does that happen to
movies, BEAUTY stars Kevin Spacey (in _the_ performance of
1999) as Lester Burnham, a self-proclaimed loser who tells
us candidly hešll be dead soon.  He feels dead already,
anyway, so his presage sounds like that of someone content
with, at least, knowing how things are going to turn out,
knowing they gave a crack at changing their dolorous existence
for the better while they still had a chance to.  As opposed
to living in a constant state of numbness, and certainty life
will always be unsatisfactory and the best to possibly hope
for, from it, is to occasionally experience mediocrity.  Noone
around you respects you, youšre stuck in a dead-end job, home
and family couldnšt be more wrought with dysfunction -- so
much so that itšs like everybody knows their role, and nobody
even feels connected to themself any longer.  I canšt imagine
a lower form of being, which is right AMERICAN BEAUTY kicks
off.
Lester canšt take anymore.  The day to day to day emotional
void; the resent laying dormant, just below the surface,
chafing everything.  The nagging sense of detachment.  His power-
trip wife, Carolyn (a most energetic Annette Bening), places
too high a value on their couch, and dresses professionally to
tend garden; no time for sex.  His daughter Jane (Thora Birch)
hates both parents, equally, and wishes they would just go away.
At work, his boss hints around a firing, unless he writes a
company letter begging them to keep him on.  Hopeless scenario.
Then, Lester meets two individuals whošll turn things around.
One is Amanda Hayes (Mena Suvari), his daughteršs cheerleader
classmate.  At a high school basketball game, he spots the blonde
lolita -- in a rather racy dance sequence, ages considered, where
itšs just the two of them: Lester alone in the bleachers, spot-
light on her -- and is marvelled.  Therešs a great scene right
after -- Jane introduces Amanda, and Spacey stares at the girl,
mouth agape, stumbling desperately for something to say; itšs an
embarassing moment because Spacey plays it with genuine infatuation,
crush written all over his face, exposed and vulnerable.  Later,
he eavesdrops on an integral conversation which promptly inspires
Lester to start working out, get buff.  To impress, at first,
but it becomes more about building self-confidence.
Person #2 is Ricky (a mesmerizing Wes Bentley), the new
arrival next door with a propensity for filming everything in
sight; broken home, itšs a means of escape.  He hooks Lester
up with weed and, in another terrific scene, quits his job as
a waiter -- probably just as big a waste of time as Lesteršs
advertising position -- without batting an eye.  Lesteršs
floored by that kind of indifference; friendship is instantaneous.
We also meet Rickyšs domineering Marine colonel father
(Chris Cooper), who beats him up for disrespecting privacy and
requires a drug test every six months.  Something I canšt recall
ever having seen before in a movie.  I didnšt so much agree
with that characteršs turn of events, but hešs performed with
a firey intensity by Cooper that brings the caricature bully
out of cliche zone.
Same goes for the rest of this cast.  Thora Birch, as
Jane, with a permanent cautious/troubled gaze, lets us know
the isolation of jaded youth from scene one, as she is video-
taped by an unseen Ricky who asks her if she wants him to kill
her old man.  Birch finds just the right tone and sustains it
effortlessly.  She has the generation-angst, sure -- mom and
dad (mostly mom) construe her as brat -- but a scarred soul to
boot, and the actress looking lovely in her teens, hair dark,
face ravaged by repressed emotion, haunts in a knock-out piece
of work.  I loved all her scene with Bentley (Supporting nom for
this guy, please), the creepy new guy Jane catches spying on her
and dismisses with a łfuck you˛.  Face to face, though, Ricky
staring directly at Jane, nothing but eye contact, it isnšt so
easy since he seems to be looking into her.  Through her.
Getting to know her, which we presume nobodyšs ever taken the
time to do, without words -- just pure, unspoken honesty.  Their
best scene is spent watching a plastic bag dance in the wind;
he explains itšs like God speaking to anyone aware enough to
notce.  He notices.  And, therešs the great line, ł... so much
beauty in the world, I feel like I canšt take it˛, made all
the more powerful by Bentleyšs tear-eyed delivery.  Ricky is
observant, forthright:  łIšm not obsessing.  Išm just curious,˛
he tells Jane; or, łYoušre ugly.  Youšre boring.  Totally
ordinary.  And, you know it˛ to the superficial Amanda.  Sometimes
the words hurt, but theyšre always true.  Itšs a defense
mechanism, his brutal honesty, we sense.  We get to sense a lot,
with this nuanced portrayal of sophisticated toughness.
I have to go back to Kevin Spacey.  Hešs found a career
high.. no minor feat (his work, here, surpasses even GLENGARRY
GLENN ROSS - my favorite).  Like Billy Bob Thornton, in last
yearšs A SIMPLE PLAN, or Robert Downey, Jr., in TWO GIRLS AND A
GUY, this is truly superlative acting.  I always measure the
effectiveness of a performance by whether or not I can make
out an actoršs face, or if there is only the character; wierd,
but it happens.  Only the great ones do that, and in BEAUTY,
Spacey does it.  I was glad to see Lester Burnham regain self-
esteem.  I cared.  His alliance with the much younger, but only
in appearance, Ricky is palpabe and memorable.  His perhaps
insalubrious relationship with Amanda is expertly handled.
Lester is turned on by her, and she by him, and that doesnšt go
away once the script has established Lesteršs awakening, rebirth
so to speak; the sexual longing still remains, even after Lester
has become a better personš.  He also loves his wife (quite
obviously, from their couch scene), and that doesnšt disappear,
either.  This is three-dimensional writing at its best, and
the magnetic Spacey makes it unforgettable.
Three specific moments mark AMERICAN BEAUTY -- along
with everything else I have said -- best film of the Fall,
and year, thusfar:  Rickyšs final, mental revenge against
his father; perfect.  The long, aforementioned close-up of a
plastic bag, with voice-over; perfect.  And, in the warm,
poignant scene between Lester and the underage object of his
affection, when she asks him how his life has been; Spaceyšs
expression, reflecting back, the way it curls into a triumphant
smile moved me to tears.
Bravo to Adam Bellšs uninhibited, progressively interesting
screenplay.  Bravo to a stellar ensemble.  Bravo to myriad
inevitable Oscar nods.  AMERICAN BEAUTY reminds us, above all,
the vitality of indisputably great cinema.
    Best line:  "I'm looking for the least possible amount

Author
Bob Bloom
  "American Beauty" (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Kevin Spacey,
Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena Suvari, Chris Cooper and
Peter Gallagher. Directed by Sam Mendes
 Lester Burnham is going through a midlife crisis. Correction. Lester
Burnham is a walking, breathing midlife crisis, a tragedy in waiting.
 He hates his job, is distant from his wife and daughter, has no interests,
no friends, no passion. The highlight of his day is masturbating during his
morning shower.
  Lester is invisible. He gets no enjoyment out of life nor does he give any.
 That all changes though when Lester sees Angela (Mena Suvari), his high
school daughter's best friend. Quicker than you can say Lolita, Lester has
found a purpose in life.
 He decides to buff up, take stock in himself, become a new man, all to
impress a teeny-bopper.
 Thus is the crux of "American Beauty," a disturbing, sad and funny look at
a dysfunctional family trying to fool itself into believing its a living a
normal American middle-class existence.
 "American Beauty" is an actor's movie. Forget the plot and subplots, as
interesting as they are. What sticks here are the performances. Kevin
Spacey and Annette Bening are mesmerizing and daring as Lester and Carolyn
Burnham.
 He's a burnt-out copy editor for a magazine, she's a gung-ho wannabe real
estate agent. They have as much in common as Jesse Helms and Chastity Bono.
 They don't communicate, they bark, snarl and snap.
 Spacey starts out shuffling around like a schlep. He doesn't walk, but
drags himself painfully through his daily existence. As his focus narrows
and his mind becomes more set on his courseof action, he becomes more
confident in tone and stride.
 It is fascinating to watch this transformation. It is Academy
Award-caliber acting. It is imaginative and smart because through it all,
Spacey keeps in character. He makes it so casual, so matter-of-fact, that
you don't question his re-emergence into the land of the living.
 Bening's Carolyn is a woman who refuses to be dragged down into the muck
of dispair that is sucking away her husband's soul.
 She fights to remain the optimist, scrubbing and cleaning the property she
is trying to sell, then slapping herself out of discouragement after an
open house from hell.
 Caught in the middle of it all is the Burnham's daughter, Jane (Thora
Birch), who can neither understand nor cope with either parent.
 Birch also gives a compelling performance as a confused adolescent who
cannot grasp the vacuum between her parents. Like most teen-agers, she is
self-absorbed with her own wants and needs, repelling any attempts at
communication from either parent.
 Doom hangs over the Burnham household like a smog over Los Angeles.
 Yet for all its tragic undertones, "American Beauty" actually has you
laughing. But sometimes it's that embarrassed laughter, the one that comes
out when you see someone take a fall or walk around with his fly unzipped.
 "American Beauty" is not a perfect film. Writer Alan Ball has created a
couple of quirky characters too many, especially Chris Cooper's Marine Col.
Fitts, a send-up stereotype that could have come from Kubrick's "Full Metal
Jacket." His character doesn't seem to fit and when he is on screen,
American Beauty goes a bit a-kilter.
 Fitts' son, Ricky (Wes Bentley), first appears as a creepy peeping Tom,
secretly recording life in Burnham household, with special emphasis on Jane.
 But Ricky, despite dealing drugs, turns out to be - normal is not the word
- but moral and decent.
 Director Sam Mendes has done a masterful job with his cast. He has taken
extraordinary situations and what could have been over-the-top
characterizations and molded them into people you may not understand, but
could at least symphathize with.
 "American Beauty" is an original, a tour-de-force exhibition of acting
missing from the movie screen so far this year.
 When Academy Award nomination time rolls around, "American Beauty" is a
movie that will not - should not and cannot - be ignored.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Katy Lindemann
Simple truths become the most stark revelations of 'American Beauty'. An
excruciatingly thought-provoking satire of the failings of the American
dream, this is an exquisitely stylish film.
Spacey revels in the lead role of Lester Burnham, an everyman of sterile
middle-class suburbia, dissatisfied with the current malaise of his life,
who experiences an epiphany after catching sight of a nubile young friend of
his daughter's, and sets out to reclaim the exuberance of his youth. Bening
portrays his Stepford-esque wife Carolyn, who cannot see beyond outward
appearances and the values of US consumer society, and whose relationship
with Lester could at best be described as distant. Both Thora Birch and Mena
Suvari put in stellar performances as teenagers treading the thorny paths of
their own adolescence - and yet managing to avoid the cliches that spring to
mind when one reads such a description of their roles.
Neither do the Burnhams' equally troubled neighbours disappoint. The
drug-dealing, voyeuristic eighteen year-old Ricky Fitts is one of the most
touching characters to appear in American cinema for a long time. Though
several audible murmurs in the audience professed Ricky to be merely
'creepy', Wes Bentley shows him to be wildly perceptive, and able to
appreciate the beauty that is all around him - hidden beneath the most
mundane of things. His delivery of "Sometimes there's so much beauty in the
world I feel like I can't take it...and my heart is going to cave in" was
breathtaking. Though Oscar nominations seem a given for Best Picture and
Best Actor for Spacey, I really hope Bentley receives the recognition he
deserves: though he will be most likely overlooked when nominations are
being handed out, his performance more than warrants consideration for Best
Supporting Actor.
This is the feature debut for acclaimed British theatre director Sam Mendes,
and 'Beauty' reflects this background, with a strong emphasis placed on the
visual aspects of the film. Mendes and cinematographer Conrad L. Hall employ
the rose motif to great effect: the titular "American Beauty" rose
symbolises both superficial beauty, and helps to reinforce Lester's often
surreal fantasies of the virginal Angela.
Many will find 'Beauty' hard to stomach. Its apparent advocation of
pot-smoking, nudity of minors, frank dealings with Lester's infatuation with
a young girl and his subsequent rebellion will turn many movie-goers away.
And therein lies the true beauty of this film. Its examination of all these
issues forces us to 'look closer', serving to make us feel both
uncomfortable at the parallels with our own lives, and to realise the beauty
of the naked truths that exist behind false exteriors. That we feel a
curious delight as Lester triumphs, and yet disturbance at such an
irreverent quasi-hero is all part of its appeal. Encompassing outstanding
acting by all the cast, flawless dialogue, and originality that has been
sadly lacking in so many Hollywood productions, this is not to be missed.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on February 4, 2000; certificate 18; 122 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Sam Mendes; produced by Bruce Cohen, Dan Jinks.
Written by Alan Ball.
Photographed by Conrad L Hall; edited by Tariq Anwar, Christopher Greenbury.
Sam Mendes, the director of "American Beauty", has shot a glorious film about 
a man who gets a life; what a pity that the screenwriter kills the character 
off. On the basis of this horrible ending, I'm tempted to call the movie a 
thematic mess. But the rest of it is too darn involving. I guess I'll just 
say that it's great while it lasts.
The film is a study of two dysfunctional three-member families in suburban 
Connecticut. Mainly we follow the Burnhams -- Lester (Kevin Spacey), a 
depressive loser who writes mindless magazine copy and lusts after his 
daughter's best friend Angela (Mena Suvari), Carolyn (Annette Bening), a 
hideously perky estate agent whose vernacular of upbeat capitalist platitudes 
seems to have come from 1980s self-help tapes, and Jane (Thora Birch), a 
typically moody teenager. Just moved in next door are the clan Fitz -- Frank 
(Chris Cooper), a violent, homophobic colonel in the marine corps, Barbara 
(Alison Janney), his senile wife, and young Ricky (Wes Bentley), who makes 
vast sums of money selling pot behind his parents' backs.
These are, for the most part, people who refuse to face how disconnected and 
desperately unhappy they really are, clinging to societal labels and 
conventional ideas of propriety and beauty to convince themselves that things 
are going fine. Lester and Carolyn don't see themselves as a loveless couple 
working jobs they hate, but as productive middle-class earners. Frank would 
not stand to be called a bigoted psychopath, because he's officially an 
American hero, and he'd never admit that Barbara has gone batty -- after all, 
she performs her housekeeping tasks efficiently; she MUST be functioning 
perfectly well!
This sounds like ugly and depressing material, but Mendes doesn't try to 
evoke typical reactions of disgust from the audience; his camera holds back, 
viewing things from a sympathetic distance, emphasising the absurdity of 
situations rather than their scandal. We're invited to find both pathos and 
pantomime humour in behaviour that could have come across as creepy. Lester's 
infatuation with Angela is a perfect example -- just look at the scene where 
he's eavesdropping on her outside Jane's door, thinks she's on to him and 
darts  away like a child who doesn't want to be caught misbehaving.
It is Lester's conduct throughout "American Beauty" which points to why this 
movie is worth seeing, whereas last year's "Happiness" was not. In that 
movie, the characters just sat and whined about their miserable lives -- 
here, Lester sees how easily Ricky gets on with life, and finds himself 
inspired to change, to be honest with himself after all these years of 
blackout. Even if you instinctively find more happiness in looking at a 
plastic bag than in buying a silk sofa, the kid quite reasonably points out, 
then why go to the trouble of pretending otherwise?
In taking stock of what's important to him, Lester quits his job, starts 
pumping iron and resolves to be frank whenever he speaks -- actions that, in 
practice, most people would think weird, and the signs of mid-life crisis. 
But they're healthy for Lester; he's starting to grow as a person. By the end 
of the movie he's rejecting Angela's sexual advances; at the beginning, he 
would never have had the self-control or even the opportunity.
Spacey is wonderful in this role. There is an enthused glint people get in 
their eyes when they begin to re-invent themselves -- he nails it. And pay 
attention, too, to the subtle way his voice and body language come across as 
sluggish at the start of the movie and become progressively cooler. There are 
several good performances in "American Beauty", but his is the standout.
It would have been a great film, too, if it had followed through on its 
ideas, and allowed Lester's character to develop even further. But instead he 
is shot dead -- which we're told is going to happen from the outset, but 
still doesn't feel right. The point of Lester's self-improvement is to show 
us how it's possible to wake up from self-delusion and embrace what touches 
us. Killing him off implies that life is meaningless, everyone might as well 
lead unhappy lives and there's no point trying to work ourselves out of ruts 
because we're all doomed anyway. As if this isn't bad enough, the final 
scenes of the movie turn into tacky murder mystery, and set up a series of 
preposterous misunderstandings to give the killer a motive. What a letdown.
But don't take my word for it. My view is in the minority, and "American 
Beauty" looks set to win the top Oscars, having been named best picture of 
the year by the Online Film Critics Society and at the Golden Globes. Me, I 
think it unfolds as a profound masterpiece, then collapses in a muddle of 
probably unintentional, certainly unnecessary pessimism. It's as if Aladdin 
had forgotten how to unleash the genie, gone nuts and used his lamp to burn 
himself to death.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Gary Jones
Kevin Spacey is one of the few actors whose name in the credits alone
would make me want to see a film. Even in his smaller roles, such as his
portrayal of serial killer John Doe in Seven, he makes an impact far
beyond his screen time, but here he is given the chance to move from
being the king of character actors to being a movie star. He probably
doesn't think of it in those terms, but that's what's happened. Spacey
plays Lester Burhnam, a bumbling inconsequential man in a joyless
marriage to Carolyn (Annette Benning) and with a daughter (Thora Birch)
who hates him for being so pathetic. Lester considers himself to be
half-dead.  Then he meets his daughter's pretty friend (Mena Suvari) and
his life is transformed. But this is not just a film about a middle-aged
man falling for a young girl. The film's main theme is developed by
Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley), the Burnham's new neighbour, who sees beauty
all around him and captures this beauty on video.
Although Sam Mendes is a first-time movie director, he has worked in the
theatre, notable directing Nicole Kidman in the London production of The
Blue Room. Given this background, it is not surprising that he has
obtained such fine, emotionally revealing performances from his cast,
but what is striking is that he has not just directed a play and filmed
it - he has made a technically sophisticated movie and had fun playing
with the medium, but he never falls into the trap of being gratuitously
tricksy. Given that this is a film about beauty, it is appropriate that
the film itself is often astonishingly beautiful. The idea of finding
beauty in unexpected places is taken to an extreme in some grainy video
footage of a plastic bag blowing in the wind;  one of the most gorgeous
images I'd ever see in a movie. And in the use of colour and the framing
of characters in their environment, such as the Burnhams at their dining
table, Mendes and cinematographer Conrad Hall produce images that could
have been by Kubrick.
There are moments of utter delight in the screenplay by Alan Ball
(another first-timer), which shares some thematic similarities to David
Fincher's Fight Club - even the leading characters' names (Lester
Burnham and Tyler Durden) have a similar ring. Lester echoes Tyler in
his rejection of society's obsession with material goods, telling his
wife that "it's just stuff" and seeking fulfilment in less conventional
ways. There are also similarities to Todd Solondz's Happiness, which
also frankly examines middle-American family life and sexual mores.
American Beauty, however, has found an audience Happiness couldn't,
maybe because Solondz's film was a little too brutal.
I've seen American Beauty film twice - once with a typical suburban
multiplex crowd and one with an audience made up almost entirely of
students. Both times the cinema was packed and both audiences seemed to
love the film. Lets hope the Hollywood bean-counter take note - serious,
intelligent and accessible movies can be made by new writers and
directors. And these films can make lots of money.
Although it contains much to admire and enjoy, American Beauty is not
perfect. It works better in pieces than as a whole and there is a clumsy
sub-plot and framing device involving Ricky's father, a homophobic ex-
Marines colonel. Although finely played by Chris Cooper, this character
seems to have no relevance to the substance of the film and his
existence in the story seems contrived to provide a dramatic and tidy
end. Its structural flaws aside, American Beauty is a fine film - it's
just not quite the masterpiece that the generally ecstatic critical
reception would suggest.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Louis Proyect
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) enjoys all the outward trappings of
middle-class success in the aptly but ironically titled film "American
Beauty": a beautiful wife named Carolyn (Annette Bening) with her own
real-estate business and a teenage daughter with no obvious flaws. But
his life is joyless. His sole pleasure seems to be masturbating in the
shower each morning, an act that he keeps secret from his wife with
whom he no longer has sexual relations.
Their life is filled with empty rituals. They sit in a well-appointed
dining room each evening trading insults over their meal, while the
strains of schmaltzy arrangements of Rogers and Hammerstein show tunes
are heard on the stereo in utter contrast to the acrimony at the
table. Sexual tension would explain most of the bickering between
husband and wife. Their daughter Jane (Thora Burch) has no use for
either of them as well, but holds her father in greater contempt for
his remoteness. When he makes clumsy attempts to bond with her, she
recoils in disgust.
A series of events will soon destroy any illusions that they had in
normal family life. Lester has a meeting with a personnel manager
whose task it is to figure out what people are contributing to the
media corporation that employs them. Everybody, including Lester, is
supposed to turn in a one page summary of what their job
responsibilities consist of--presumably those whose summaries seem
superfluous to the operation of the corporation will become
superfluous themselves. A spark of rebellion prompts Lester to tell
the manager that this is just a thinly disguised downsizing plot. This
initial meeting leads to mounting confrontations with the corporate
world that sustains him and his empty lifestyle.
Later that week the Burnhams go to see their daughter perform in an
absurdly choreographed cheerleader dance number during half-time at a
high-school basketball game. He fixates on Angela (Mena Suvari), the
sexually precocious best friend of his daughter, who picks up on his
interest later that evening in the parking lot of the high school.
>From that point on she finds excuses to drop by the Burnham household
where she knows that Lester will leer at her. Their sexual flirtations
disgust his daughter.
His wife is oblivious to all this. Her only interest in life is
selling real estate. In one of the most powerful scenes in the film,
she is depicted feverishly cleaning a house early in the morning to
make it attractive to prospective buyers. Her entire day is then spent
with customers telling her that the house is unattractive. At the end
of the day, with the house unsold, she collapses in tears. Selling
houses is the only pleasure she gets out of life, an act analogous to
her husband's masturbation.
Into their tortured lives enters a young man, who offers Lester
liberation from boredom and oppression. Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley) is a
compulsive video photographer whom daughter Carolyn regards as a
voyeur after catching him in the act of filming her late one night.
Her father sees another side of Ricky. His other avocation besides
video is smoking and selling high-powered marijuana out of the bedroom
of his house. Lester soon becomes one of his best customers. Smoking
marijuana combines with the realization that the corporate world does
not matter to him anymore. What really matters is wooing his
daughter's libidinous classmate and living the lifestyle he enjoyed as
a 21 year old. He begins listening to Jimi Hendrix in his garage as he
pumps iron after Angela has told him that he needs to work out a
little. When he is not lifting weights, he is smoking expensive pot.
"American Beauty" is best at describing the futility of American
middle-class life. It is understandably weak in presenting a
believable alternative, since there is none within the confines of the
capitalist system. Poor Earl and Carolyn are driven to find salvation
within the system--her on the system's own terms and he within an
"alternative" lifestyle that owes more to a Levi's commercial than
anything else. Screenwriter Alan Ball's rebels are a middle-aged man
who lapses into late adolescence and an adolescent drug dealer who
operates within the fringes of consumerist society. What is marijuana,
after all, than the ultimate commodity. When he is showing Lester his
wares, he makes a sales pitch for genetically modified weed that uses
top secret government biotechnology and sells for $2000 an ounce.
"American Beauty", whatever its flaws, is worth seeing as a snapshot
of American society at a peculiar juncture in its unfolding as an
empire. In the final years of the second term of the Clinton
administration, which by some standards has produced more material
success than has been enjoyed in many years, Hollywood is turning out
films that curse the system that produced it.
Marxist discussion is at: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html

Author
Steve Evans
American Beauty  Dir: Sam Mendes. Starring Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening,
Thora Birch, Mena Suvari, Wes Bentley, Peter Gallagher and Chris Cooper.
The pitch: A man hobbled by a mid-life crisis and a nightmarish family
channels his depression into lust for a teen-age girl.
Yes, and there's so much more. A jet-black satire of suburbia, this
cautionary fable with a grim, inevitable climax features a stunning
performance from Spacey, as the 42-year-old advertising man who hates his
job and shrewish wife (Bening). Seldom does a film spew such venom, or offer
such a myopic and pessimistic worldview, only to shatter our expectations
with a glimmer of hope at the end. In terms of metaphor, as social
commentary and, yes, as art, American Beauty is the most challenging film of
1999, sure to prompt controversy and conversation. The constant, symbolic
use of the color red is enough to fuel many a late-night discussion, long
after the credits roll. Expect OscarŽ nominations for both actors,
first-time film director Mendes, for the incredible script by television
writer Alan Ball (Cybill) and certainly for the picture itself.
Let us be clear, so that no one goes into the theater unaware: American
Beauty is a difficult, provocative experience, a film concerned with ideas
that outwardly decent people don't discuss, though some no doubt ponder in
their hearts.
Watching his daughter's best friend Angela (Suvari) perform her cheerleading
routines, Spacey discovers a fire in his loins and a passion for life that
has been missing for two decades. When he sees Suvari strut, her arms
snaking over her lithe body, it's lust at first sight. But Spacey also feels
a renewed interest in life that has little to do with sex. Don't dismiss
this as just another Lolita tale, although it bears more than passing
resemblance to Nabokov's most famous novel. American Beauty is that rare
flower in American film  a major-studio (Dreamworks) production with A-list
stars tackling material that many daredevil independents might hesitate to
touch. The picture works the same territory as Todd Solondz's repugnant film
Happiness, except here the characters are treated with compassion and a
degree of humanity in spite of their weaknesses.
As the film opens, we learn Spacey's character is already dead. He narrates
in flashback, a technique reminiscent of Sunset Boulevard. And it works.
Discovering how Spacey will die is critical to the suspense of the
heartbreaking final reel. Spacey explains his fall and ultimate redemption
in the cynical-comical narration that frames the film. In fact, he says it
all:
`In a year, I would be dead,' he says. `In a way, I already was.'
His character is a loser whose career is trapped in an office cubicle. His
wife, a real-estate saleswoman, and their teen-age daughter (Birch) despise
him for no reason other than he is socially awkward. Spacey doesn't even
seem to like himself, though he masturbates in the shower before work and
declares it will be `the highlight of my day.'
His wife would rather tend to her blood-red roses, framing the white-picket
fence around their well-appointed home. She is so obsessive-compulsive, so
driven in her pursuit of perfection, that her pruning shears are
color-coordinated with her clogs. She worries that Spacey might spill a beer
on her $4,000 silk upholstered sofa. Bening is mesmerizing in the role.
Spacey's daughter is embarrassed for him as he stumbles out the door,
spilling the papers in his briefcase on the sidewalk.
The man knows something is missing from his life. When he meets the teen-age
sexpot Angela, his brain begins to boil. He fantasizes encounters with the
girl, reclining on a bed of rose petals. He quits his job, extorts $60,000
from his hateful boss and buys a 1971 fireapple-red muscle car. American
Woman by the Guess Who blares on the stereo as he drives home. He wails
along with the anthem, closing his eyes and nodding in recognition when that
serpentine guitar solo kicks in (this movie deals brilliantly in subtext).
He starts working out with free weights in the garage, after he eavesdrops
on Angela telling his daughter that her dad would be hot if he had a little
more muscle tone.
At a business party, while his wife flirts with the local king of home sales
(a slick, silver-haired Gallagher), Spacey sneaks out of the noxious
gathering to smoke a joint in the alley with the waiter (Bentley), a strange
kid who's just moved in to Spacey's neighborhood. He's the creepy teen-ager
next door.
Bentley has his own obsessions. He videotapes Spacey's daughter from his
bedroom and slowly, shyly, begins an awkward romance with the troubled girl.
He also sells high-quality pot and hides this enterprise from his abusive,
homophobic ex-Marine father (Cooper). Bentley has to provide urine samples
to his brutal dad every six months, ever since he was busted for dealing.
His mother has been so brow-beaten by Cooper that she can only stare at the
wall and make apologies for a house that is already spotless. Bentley is a
brooding teen, biding his time for a chance to leave home. And although he
professes to love the beauty in the world, in
his piercing stare we sometimes catch a glimpse of Columbine madness.
Director Mendes propels these miserable characters on a collision course,
then casually introduces a gay couple who live down the street. Theirs is
the only enduring relationship in the film.
Their chance encounter with Spacey and later, with the baleful Cooper,
triggers a series of comic misunderstandings between the core characters.
The confusion escalates with frightening speed into violence and
mind-numbing tragedy on a thunderous, rain-splattered night.
Spacey and his teen-age obsession exchange unforgettable words that will
leave even the most jaded viewer reeling. Spacey's closing monologue,
indeed, his final words, will haunt us long after the lights come up and we
are left to ponder -- as if his words were not enough -- that richly
symbolic use of red: the color of jealousy and hate. And of love.
Rated R for sexuality, nudity, familial violence, pervasive language and
drug use.
Cinema Uprising copyright C 1999 by Stephen B. Evans. All rights reserved.
This work may not be reproduced or transmitted in any form, by any means,
without the prior, written permission of the author.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
American Beauty (1999) 
Rated R; running time 119 minutes
Genre: Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0169547 
Official site: http://www.amazon.com/exec/  
Written by: Alan Ball 
Directed by: Sam Mendez
Starring:  Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, 
Mena Suvari, Peter Gallagher, Chris Cooper, Allison Janney, 
Scott Bakula, Sam Robards
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsamer.html
It's a good thing that I didn't see "American Beauty" when it was 
released back in October; I would've had a hard time choosing between it 
and "The Green Mile" for 1999's "Best Of".  As it is, I'm having a 
dickens of a time making my personal Oscar pick between them.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Residents of Plastic Suburbia, U.S.A. populate "American Beauty"...
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey), a fortysomething burnout whose highlight 
of the day is the time he spends with himself each morning in the 
shower, feels as trapped by his now-loveless marriage to his wife 
Carolyn (Annette Bening)--a mediocre real estate agent who can't quite 
see past the plastic liners on her furniture, her house, and her 
life--as she feels trapped by him.  Lester seeks a new life through 
rebuilding his body through exercise, as suggested by gay lovers Jim 
(Scott Bakula) and Jim (Sam Robards)--arguably the most "normal" 
residents of their little villa.  Carolyn, meanwhile, seeks mentorship, 
and a wee bit more, from real estate king Buddy King (Peter Gallagher).  
Equally trapped in their misery is their daughter Jane (Thora Birch); 
and as if normal teen angst wasn't enough for her, she also has to deal 
with her father's men-o-pause attraction her very blonde (and she knows 
it) cheerleader friend Angela Hayes (Mena Suvari).  
...the Fitts are Watchers Of Life: dope-dealing loner Ricky (Wes 
Bentley) watches Jane and her family while he tapes them via camcorder; 
bulldog Colonel Fitts (Chris Cooper) watches son Ricky turn into a 
zombie under the Colonel's cold, austere regiment; and all-but-braindead 
mother Barbara (Allison Janney) watches life go by in a haze of her own 
non-existence.
True poster families for Dysfunctions R Us.
The Upshot:
While I may have not seen "The Insider" until its Oscars re-release 
because, well, I didn't want to, my reasoning for missing "American 
Beauty" the first time around is much less harsh: I simply forgot to, 
until it was too late.  This is to my deficit--because "Beauty" lives up 
to its hype. 
There's little doubt that these are people you wouldn't normally want to 
associate with everyday--but in fact, probably do.  "Look closer", 
indeed: is flabby, unmotivated Lester really unlike sloppy 
Joe-down-the-street?  Doesn't Carolyn remind you of that obnoxious Avon 
Lady that keeps ringing your doorbell just as you're sitting down to 
dinner?  And face it: if Jane hasn't started bringing guns to Public 
School 101, she probably will soon.  Yes, America: these are the people 
in your neighborhood/in your neighborhood/in your neigh-bor-hood...
And look closer yet: beyond its portrait of dysfunctional suburbia in 
all its ugliness, "Beauty" has humor, glimmers of hope, wonderful 
cinematography, and above all, kickass performances throughout.  
As Lester, Kevin Spacey is, in a word, magnificent.  An actor's actor, 
Spacey lights up the screen in nearly every scene he's in.  Equally 
convincing both as a burnout and as a rejuvenated weightlifter, the only 
time I questioned his character was near the end, when he took a giant 
leap backwards, character development-wise (and since to say more would 
mean spoiling the movie unnecessarily, I'll just leave it at that for 
now).  But even with that seeming character mis-step, Spacey the actor 
was solid through and through.  Though I've wavered between "Beauty" and 
"Green" ever since seeing this film, my choice for Best Actor is 
crystal-clear.   As they used to say back in the day, "no comp".
Good on a different (and, somewhat lesser) scale is the rest of the 
cast.  Annette Bening gives a Oscar-worthy performance as Carolyn 
(though I still think that Hilary Swank should win for what I've seen of 
her "Boys Don't Cry" performance), proving yet again her range as an 
actress.  And though most reviewers trumpet Thora Birch as angry, angsty 
daughter Jane, my favorites among the supporting cast are Chris Cooper 
as the Colonel, and especially Wes Bentley as Ricky.  I've made it a 
point to look for both Cooper and Bentley in upcoming movies; I'm sure 
we haven't heard the last of either of them.  
For me, the sign that a director has done his or her job well is that I 
notice something behind the acting, but not quite know what that 
something is.  This was borne out in "Beauty", with Sam Mendez's 
"unseen" touches adding icing to a well-baked cake.  One scene in 
particular that I noticed his work came when Jane and Lester were seen 
talking through a kitchen window; though I listened and saw what was 
going on, I also noticed the row of bottles filled with colored liquid 
(which reminded me of a Photoshop class I'd just taken), and that 
further made me notice the use of light and shadows throughout the 
scene.  I had to snap out of it so I wouldn't miss the forest for the 
proverbial trees.
Where some would see those bottles as an unnecessary distraction, I saw 
the Beauty; it was a good touch on what might have otherwise been Just 
Another scene.
The "Black Factor"  [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
In her "American Beauty" review, my esteemed colleague The Diva implied 
that this movie may be more relevant to White audience members than to 
Blacks, because the types of dysfunctions portrayed are more typically 
seen in White suburb dwellers.  While I agree to a point, I'd say that, 
considering the phenomenon of "Buppies" and (for lack of a better term) 
the "Whitening" of the more affluent amongst us, the Melting Pot effect 
may see a few more of Us looking very much like Lester and Carolyn--and 
the Colonel.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I'd like to think think that my Brilliant Exposition is the 
be-all/end-all of my reader's existence, but that would be folly.  And 
in fact, the "American Beauty" site I happen to like most was not even 
done by an American (though she is most def a Beauty): I invite you to 
look closer at my good friend Katy Lindeman's tribute to "Beauty" (at 
http://www.americanbeauty.freeserve.co.uk/).  It's a real beaut.
"American Beauty" (rating: greenlight):
If this movie does for Dysfunctional Suburbia what "Fatal Attraction" 
did for...uh, Dysfunctional Suburbia...hmmm...

Author
Scott Renshaw
     "Look closer..." invites the tag line for AMERICAN BEAUTY, and rarely
has a two-word advertising campaign so effectively captured virtually
everything a film has to say.  AMERICAN BEAUTY is being touted as _the_
American film of 1999, a caustic no-holds-barred peek behind the curtains
of demented suburbia.  It's easy to understand much of the praise, since
it captures you in its world virtually from the first frame.  It's also a
surprisingly simple film in which the notions that should be its subtext
dominate its text.  Simultaneously gripping and frustrating, AMERICAN
BEAUTY is the best film of the year that irritated the hell out of me.
     AMERICAN BEAUTY opens on an Everytown, USA suburban street, where
42-year-old Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) is about to undergo a radical
life change.  Intimidated by his ferociously ambitious real estate agent
wife Carolyn (Annette Bening), alienated from his teenage daughter Janey
(Thora Birch) and disgusted with his job as at an advertising industry
publication, Lester feels numb to the world.  That is until he sees
Janey's fellow cheerleader Angela (Mena Suvari), a vision who comes to
dominate his every thought.  Lester suddenly decides to change everything
in his quest for what's missing, a journey paralleled by Janey's
relationship with enigmatic neighbor Ricky (Wes Bentley) and Carolyn's
affair with a big-shot competitor (Peter Gallagher).
     This, first and most important:  Kevin Spacey is brilliant.  That's
not exactly news, since Spacey has been brilliant on a regular basis for
several years, but in AMERICAN BEAUTY he burns himself into an incredibly
difficult role.  There is a hyper-real feeling to much of the film -- a
sense of people perceiving the world and people around them at an
exaggerated, almost grotesque level -- yet Spacey finds the ideal balance
between Lester the comic sadsack and Lester the rejuvenated man.  He grips
Alan Ball's best lines of dialogue and spits them out like bullets,
dominating the film so completely you may not realize how little screen
time he actually has.  Bentley and Birch are also quite effective in their
scenes together, providing the extremely relative base of normalcy around
which the more heightened performances by Bening, Suvari and Chris Cooper
(as Ricky's Marine father) whirl.
     The twisted, surreal vision of America provided by Ball and director
Sam Mendes -- even with its now-preditable assault on soul-deadening
middle class life -- could have made for a masterpiece with a revelatory
sensitbility at its core.  Instead, it's a very good film that makes a
very rare mistake.  Where most films exist entirely at the surface level,
AMERICAN BEAUTY exists entirely _below_ the surface, which is both tragic
and ironic.  It's easy to say that AMERICAN BEAUTY is about finding joy in
the improbable places already around you instead of seeking unattainable
ideals of joy, because the film makes this message excruciatingly clear in
Ricky's comments about his obsession with videotaping, as well as Lester's
narrative voice-overs.  The ostensibly surprising moments in AMERICAN
BEAUTY begin losing their power to surprise, since the film keeps telling
you that things are not what they seem on the surface.  It never allows a
moment to let the surfaces just be surfaces, opting instead to spell out
that real beauty is a wind-blown plastic bag.
     Amazingly, AMERICAN BEAUTY still manages to be occasionally
spell-binding, even as it stumbles through its literalism.  Mendes shows
an impressive command of film language for a rookie with stage roots,
using the talents of cinematographer Conrad Hall and composer Thomas
Newman to create strong, always consistent vision.  AMERICAN BEAUTY
dazzles, it entertains, it shows off an actor at the top of his form.  It
just isn't nearly as enlightening as it seems to be, because it never asks
the viewer to do too much work.  As good as the film is, it isn't
necessary for us to look closer.  The film-makers have done all the 
looking for us.

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated R: strong sexuality, nudity, language, drug use, violence.
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Mena Suvari, Wes Bentley, Thora Birch.
In the history of movies, some really good movies have come out. They have 
been memorable in our minds, and make us think about them even to this day. 
They can be 100 years old, to only a year old and still be a great film. 
Sometimes they are so good it is hard to explain to someone how good it 
really is. Out of the 1,000s of films I've seen, only one has impacted my 
life so much that to this very day I still think about the movie. It's 
incredible how a film of this standard can sweep the Oscars and audiences 
alike, and be one of the best reviewed films of all time with the critics. 
This movie is that one certain movie, a movie that I saw in theatres close to 
twenty times, but never got tired of the movie, and everytime I viewed it, 
found something new and beautiful.
Kevin Spacey plays an unhappily wed man Lester Burham, married to Annette 
Bening who plays Carolyn, who is unhappy as well, but hides her feelings 
underneath where they bottle up inside of her, ready to pop. Their marriage 
is extremely unhappy and close to falling apart. Thora Birch brilliantly 
plays their daughter Janie Burnhan who has troubles of her own, she thinks 
she isn't pretty and wants new boobs, only to realize that she is beautiful 
in someones eyes. Her neighbor Ricky Fritts (played amazingly by newcomer Wes 
Bentley) who uses his video camera to tape the world as he sees it through 
his eyes, everything has its own beauty in its own way. Mena Suvari impacts 
the screen as Janie's best friend Angela, whom Lester falls for and starts to 
work out, and becomes more rebelous. His life is falling apart, as is the 
world around him, coming to a shocking and deeply emotional, yet oddly 
compelling and satisfying ending.
Kevin Spacey won an oscar for his portrayal of Lester Burnham, a depressed 
deeply complex man who wasn't given enough time to do what he wanted to do, 
but what he did was amazing. Kevin takes the character and turns him into a 
real person, instead of a movie character, he knows what he is doing and 
makes us laugh, think and cry at the same time. Annette Being is one of my 
favorite actresses and she does not let me down here, she takes her character 
and like Spacey turns her into a real person so we feel for her but at the 
same time we hate her in some scenes. She is a character that has her perks 
and her downs. In one of the best teen performances to lighten the screen in 
a long time Thora Birch is absolutely magical as the daughter of this 
disfuctional family. She is so realistic to today's teens and so compelling 
that I feel she is almost a lead character in the movie as is Mena Suvari who 
plays Angela, she does a wonderful job as well. Wes Bentley stands out as the 
next door neighbor boy who sees beautiful things in his own way. Absolutely 
magical acting.
The script is a whole other story combined, this is one brilliant screenplay. 
Alan Ball who wrote this screenplay is to me a brilliant, very smart man who 
has a mind that no one can read or understand. He is very complex and it 
shows in his script, it makes you think while it makes you cry because of how 
beautiful it is, the dialogue comes out of the performers lips so smoothly, 
and they seem to be associating with it, possibly even relating. The audience 
(or at least I was) is in such awe of how amazing this movie is, that we 
almost become a character ourselves. We see through each of the persons eyes, 
and we see how they see, what they see and how what they are seeing affects 
them.
Sam Mendes makes his directing debut, and I must say I was really surprised 
by how good of a job he did on his directing, his camera shots are just plain 
out brilliant. Some of the shots especially towards the end are emotionally 
affecting towards me, and I found myself sitting there with my mouth wide 
open absorbed into this movie. The twists and turns in the story, the 
performances from the actors and actresses, the script that is so good it is 
unbelievable. I tried to find a flaw in this movie, but there was no flaw at 
all. Each and every scene is beautiful and amazing in its own way, never has 
a film made me cry at the end because of how beautiful it is.
To me it's safe to say, although your not supposed to as a movie critic, but 
I can say American Beauty ranks up there as my favorite movie I have seen. 
Besides Halloween, American Beauty is my favorite movie. Some people have all 
time favorites and plenty of them, and believe me I have many favorites, but 
this one I can safely say is my favorite one.

Author
MoviePhan2
  Very rarely does a film come along and show people what life is really like.
The importance, the joy, and troubles of life in today's society, are hardly
reflected in the media, let alone a motion picture. That is until, of course, I
viewed a near perfect film, that made me ponder into life itself.
  The story revolves around a suburban neighborhood. We see the unhappy Kevin
Spacey character, bored with his life. When he speaks of a normal day, he says
that masturbating is the only highlight. That alone gets a sense of what is to
come. Annette Bening, is his wife of many years, who seems to have no troubles,
except when it comes to tearing away at Spacey's habits. Their daughter (Thora
Birch), is the type of teen, who's life is gloom, almost gothic like. She hates
her parents, and hangs out with her popular friend (Mena Suvari). Meanwhile, a
creepy new neighbor (Wes Bentley), shows up and secretly tapes what he sees.
Things start picking up immediately at this point. Spacey goes a little insane,
and rebels against life, doing  what he pleases (including fantasies with Mena
Suvari). Annette on the other hand, is cheating on Spacey and Thora Birch hits
it off with the next door neighbor, Bentley. This all may seem like too much,
but it's actually quite fitting upon viewing it.
  "American Beauty" displays what few films dismiss in the 90's, and that is
presenting a complicated situation, and altering it's course, there by making
the film believable. I admit at first, the film appeared to be rather
discomforting, but thankfully, the acting graced the film, to help from falling
into that occurrence. Kevin Spacey has been known for his acting ability, but
has never been given a chance to prove it. I'm happy to say, that has finally
changed. Spacey is just flat out superb. It's outstanding, how he is able to
shift into different emotions, and at the same time, not disrupting the film's
pace. I honestly think he deserves an oscar for this role, unless someone
better comes along in a film this fall. There was also a truly magnificent
performance from Annette Bening. It was considerably intriguing, to see Bening
and Spacey argue about their daughter and marriage, because you know instantly,
their marriage has gone to pieces.
  The only problem that I had with "American Beauty," was the length and Wes
Bentley. Although the film was laid out nicely, parts did tend to drag, but it
doesn't make much of a dent. Wes Bentley however, was the only perspective,
that I felt, was out of focus. The whole film, I was waiting for a result in
his character, but I couldn't help but feel something was hidden from us. It
might possibly be his view on the world, but I'm leaning towards something in
the past. Not sure what that might be though.
  This might be a bit much, but this film will change the way you look at life.
It's a wake-up call to today's society, showing us to cherish what we have
before it's too late. You can't just wake up everyday and go off to work, you
have to live a little and love the things that are most important to you. I was
touched at how the message affected me. Very profound.
  One thing I can guarantee, is that director Sam Mendes, is bound to receive a
lot of attention for his work with this film. It's by far one of the most
impressive directorial. debuts of the decade. I'm looking forward to his next
project, and hopefully it will be in-tune with a similar topic.
  The end result is something out of the ordinary. A spectacular piece that
improves the more you think about it. Unforgettable.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"I will sell this house today."
Starring Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Chris
Cooper. Rated R.
In my reviews I try to make gentle recommendations rather than telling you
what to see or what not to see. I realize that we all have different tastes
and I cannot predict what my audience will like and what they will dislike.
But in the case of American Beauty, I must make an exception. If you haven't
yet seen it, go see it. Now. Stop reading this review and head for your
local multiplex, then after you've seen it, come back. I'll wait here.
Welcome Back. If you followed my advice (and I see no reason why you should
not have, do you?), I'm sure you've just had one of the richest cinematic
experiences of your life. American Beauty is an extraordinary film, a
powerful, jolting exploration of the dark side of the American dream. It's
humorous but it isn't funny because of the unrelenting ominous undercurrent
that runs throughout the whole production. Mixing comedy and the darkest of
drama was the way this film was intended, and by God, it works, making it
one of the year's very best.
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) has entered the mother of all mid-life crises.
He is living life without a purpose. He is bored, depressed and sick of his
sheltered, insignificant existence. He barely ever talks to his family, has
no sex life, is stuck at a dead-end job and thinks he has no reason to live.
But one day, when he and his equally troubled wife (Annette Bening) attend
one of his daughter's (Thora Birch) cheerleading performances, he sees
something that makes him come alive. What he sees is the performance by his
daughter's friend, the head cheerleader. He develops a lust for the
promiscuous young girl; an obsession which soon becomes pedophilic in
nature. But for the first time, Lester feels that he is actually living.
This crush is only the beginning. Lester proceeds to make more and more
radical changes in his life, buying the car of his dreams, cursing off the
boss and quitting his job ("Today I quit my job, told the boss to f***
himself and blackmailed him for $60,000 -- would you pass the asparagus
please?"), buying drugs from the voyeur-next-door (Ricky Fitts, a teenager
who mysteriously videotapes what he considers to be "beauty") and refusing
to be docile in family affairs. His new attitude further alienates his
daughter, only reassuring her that her parents are nothing more than freaks
of nature unjustly forced on her by the powers that be, and inspiring her to
enter a relationship with her eccentric neighbor.
And the Burnhams's neighbors provide American Beauty with a significant
chunk of its dramatic momentum. Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley) serves as the
film's thematic center, providing the obscure, powerful meaning of the
title. Colonel Fitts, the father, is one of the most fascinating and complex
characters in the movie, even considering his limited screentime.
Kevin Spacey has never been better, and this performance will certainly earn
him a chance to put a little gold person on his mantel. He never plays his
droll character as a freak, rather, he effectively portrays him as a normal
person led to drastic self-exploration by his dissatisfaction with life.
Spacey is poignant and devastating in the role of a lifetime. Equally
astonishing is young Thora Birch, who plays her potentially stereotypical
rebellious teen character with suprising feeling and tenderness.
At two hours and ten minutes, American Beauty didn't feel nearly long
enough. It's a complicated, unforgettable film that, like The Ice Storm two
years ago, dares to explore the darkest reaches of suburban life. Powerfully
and cynically, it dissects the notion of the pretty house with the white
picket fence and appealing garden being the American Dream. It claims that
this picture-perfect image is just that -- an image, and hiding behind it
are lives much darker than common knowledge would have it.
The dark, deeply ironic ending, though given away by our narrator in the
first few minutes of the movie, stays with you for weeks after it's all
over. American Beauty is just the kind of uncompromising film Hollywood
needs every now and then to counterbalance the mindless drivel we see
released; even more so considering it's a masterpiece.

Author
Homer Yen
`American Beauty' offers us a glimpse into what really
fuels suburban families, like that of Lester Burnham
(Kevin Spacey).  In doing so, the film tears apart the
suburban myth of well-trimmed rose-gardens and
automatic garage door openers.  Sure, Lester may have
a nice house, a family, and a relatively secure
future, but his life isn't much more exciting than
that of a mannequin.  And though he projects a
constant smile, his life is just an endless spiral of
boredom and the highlight of his day is his morning
shower.  What has made his life so bereft of passion? 
Perhaps it's his prissy wife, Carolyn (Annette
Bening).  She also smiles a lot and tries to excel as
a real estate agent.  But her life is equally vacuous
and her soul is joyless.  Her self-confidence is
almost non-existent, and her marriage to the
milquetoast Lester is nothing but a loveless sham. 
Daughter Jane (Thora Birch) doesn't add any sanity to
this family either.  Even Lester admits that what
neighbors see is `a commercial for how normal we are
when we're anything but.'  
Now, dig a little deeper and look a little closer. 
This film reveals some very surprising things that you
would never think would exist.  What gets Lester's
juices flowing again is Angela (Mena Suvari), a friend
of Jane's that he begins fantasizing about.  Angela,
who confidently boasts about her adult experiences,
doesn't mind the attention and says that if Lester had
more muscles, she would be interested.  DING!  Lester
breaks out the weights and starts a running regimen. 
But this is just the beginning of the new Lester.  He
quits his job and blackmails his boss at the same
time, he begins smoking powerful marijuana, and he
buys a classic muscle car.  But why should Lester have
all the fun?  His radical actions prompt Carolyn to
begin an affair with her chief competitor while Jane
begins to take an interest in a mysterious boy next
door.
The wheels are set in motion and the film wonderfully
strips any conventions that we have of suburbia and
gives us some very strange yet sad characters with
whom we can empathize.  For Lester, it's time to let
loose.  He no longer cares about anything and while
chaos can destroy the sanctity of his home, it is the
only thing he appreciates now in his life. 
Consequently, the situations that he winds up in are
often funny, poignant, and amusing.  A counter-story
to Lester's life features a militaristic, homophobic
retired marine living next door.  He preaches
discipline to his son.  But like the Burnham's nothing
on the outside is as it really seems.  The real
interesting point that this film makes features
another of Lester's neighbors, Jim and Jim (Scott
Bakula and Sam Robards), who are gay.  Despite their
strange outward appearance, their lives were the most
normal of all.
The beauty of `American Beauty' is it's harsh
revelations and brutally frank situations.  
This is not a film that strives to entertain as a
comedy.  Rather it is a film that tries to scrape away
at the true nature of people like Lester Burnham.  As
Lester, Kevin Spacey is comfortable and almost too
real as the dispirited suburbanite whose last chance
at living is fading fast.  Annette Bening also shows
might in her portrayal of the brittle housewife. 
However all of the wonderfully developed characters
and their complexities will beg you to ask yourself
what may really be going on in your own cul-de-sac
world. 

Author
Dennis Schwartz
AMERICAN BEAUTY (director:Sam Mendes; screenwriter:Alan Ball;
cinematographer: Conrad L. Hall; cast: Kevin Spacey (Lester Burnham),
Annette Bening (Caroline Burnham),Thora Birch (Jane Burnham), Wes
Bentley (Ricky Fitts), Mena Suvari (Angela Hayes), Chris Cooper (Colonel
Fitts), Peter Gallagher (Buddy Kane), Allison Janney (Barbara Fitts),
Barry Del Sherman (Brad), Scott Bakula (Jim No. 1), Sam Robards (Jim
No. 2), 1999)
This is a Steven Spielberg DreamWorks project film. Sam Mendes was
personally hired by the big boss, as he makes his feature film
directorial debut with American Beauty. He previously directed Arthur
Schnitzler's play "The Blue Room" on Broadway, starring Nicole Kidman,
and he also directed the award-winning London production of "The Rise
and Fall of Little Voice."
Mendes turns his attention here to the Anywhere in America, suburbs, a
favorite place for sitcoms, where the middle-class are always ripe for
social criticism. In this case, the film hones in on two dysfunctional
suburban families living next to each other, both with disturbing sexual
problems that keep each family from enjoying the "good life" they should
be having, even if they live in a good neighborhood with tree-lined
streets and have beautiful houses; but, there is something wrong with
them: they are living in hate.
In the first house, are the Burnhams: Lester (Kevin Spacey) is a
repressed middle-aged man. Carolyn (Annette Bening), is Lester's frigid
and enterprising Realtor wife, who is more interested in the material
things of life and in her hobby of growing garden roses, than she is in
having a warm relationship with her husband, whom she looks down upon.
Their teenage daughter Jane (Thora), finds that she can't communicate
with either parent, thinking that her dad is a pathetic loser and her
mother is an uncaring phony. Her unattentive folks don't even realize
what is eating at her, that she wants an unneeded breast enlargement,
and that she lacks self-esteem, thinking of herself as being
unattractive.
The Fitts' are the new neighbors of the Burnhams and the second
dysfunctional family featured. They are made up of the rigid, retired
marine corps colonel (Chris Cooper), who thinks the world should conform
to military-like rules; his gloomy robot-like wife (Janney), who is in
denial about her miserable life; and their misfit 18-year-old son, Ricky
(Wes Bentley), who was caught by his dad smoking dope and placed in a
mental institution by him after being kicked out of a military school
for trying to kill another student. The father tests his son every few
months for drugs by taking a sample of his urine.
The story centers around three sudden changes that happen to Lester, as
Lester via a voiceover from the other world, tells us he died within the
year of this story taking place. He is, at first, seen as a bland,
white-collar working stiff who feels in the doldrums about the emptiness
of his life and has what may be loosely termed, a spiritual reawakening,
when the frustration of his unsatisfying job as an editor for the last
14-years at an advertising publication firm reaches a critical point,
and before he gets the ax, he forces by bribery his snotty young boss
Brad (Del Sherman) to pay him a year's salary for severence pay, as he
also gets to tell him to go f*ck himself. Secondly, Ricky sells him some
top-notch grass and he starts listening to some old Dylan recordings as
he gets stoned, instead of having to listen to the Lawrence Welk type of
music his wife likes to put on when they're dining. And thirdly, his
antagonistic daughter Jane (Thora), reluctantly introduces him to her
nubile high school cheerleader friend, Angela (Mena), at a basketball
game he is dragged to by his wife. He falls in love with Angela
instantly and has her in his erotic dreams- where rose petals are seen
coming out from her cheerleader's sweater. Previously, his only pleasure
in life, was in jerking off once a day. Angela is a sexual tease, who
talks like a Valley girl, fearful of being thought of as ordinary, only
dreaming of becoming a super model. She enjoys having Jane's father
staring at her, as she tells the embarrassed Jane, that he's cute, and
if he worked out and got muscles she would go to bed with him. Lester
overhears this on the night Angela sleeps over in their house and
immediately starts a physical training program to pull in his gut and
become muscular.
Lester is rejuvenated by his dream girl, loses his inhibitions as he
starts to smoke pot regularly, and tries to turn back the clock to his
youth by becoming a hamburger flipper in a fast-food place, recalling
how happy he once was when working at a job without responsibilities and
getting laid and stoned all the time.
The story now follows Carolyn, who is having an affair with someone she
idolizes, her competitor, the king of the local real estate market,
Buddy `The King' Kane (Peter Gallagher), a person more driven for
success and more wrapped up in himself than she is. She also learns to
shoot a gun, at the suggestion of her lover, as a way to release her
pent-up tension. Kane is one of those guys who live by the slogans from
their motivational tapes, where there is a saying to get them through
anything in life.
The story then centers on Ricky and Jane, as she takes a chance and gets
to know the voyeur who, at first, bothered her by constantly videoing
her. But she surprisingly finds warmth in her relationship with this
freak. He can see the beauty in the simple things of life and makes no
pretense of trying to fit into suburbia, like she was trying to do.
Ricky seems to be weirdly obsessed with beauty and death, and has become
a compulsive voyeur to escape from the harsh realities of his life.
Somehow, he has developed a confidence in himself, just like one that
Lester will develop as his life physically and emotionally changes, as
these two become friends, and along with Jane become the heroes of the
story, or at least, these are the flawed characters who are found to be
worthy of being saved from their shallow lives.
The film builds to a mystery conclusion, where the characters are forced
to come together to decide their fate, to find out if they are worthy of
being redeemed.
Inviting Jane to see the most beautiful thing he has ever videotaped,
Ricky shows her the image of an empty plastic bag swirling in the wind
on a blustery day. He then tells her that he finds beauty in such
ordinary things and is constantly amazed that there is beauty behind
every image he uncovers. Ricky and Lester will share this same vision of
life, as this becomes the film's mantra, reinforced several times
throughout the film: that redemption can be gotten through love. This
mantra will also be repeated at the end of the film, before the credits
are shown. The viewer is told by Lester, from the other world: that if
you don't share the film's piercing vision of what really matters,
someday you will. So forgiveness for these flawed characters is in
order, as well as forgiveness for those who try to repress them because
they are bitter, having found no love in their own lives. The lesson to
be learnt is, that love is the only thing that can't be completely taken
away from people; it remains behind everything that is.
This Alan Ball script, his debut assignment in films, is bristling with
comedy and hard lessons to learn about life for these unfulfilled
characters. If normalcy is the thing that the families are striving for,
even if that is quickly seen as a sham, then what the director
brilliantly does, is shoot down any hope for his characters ever being
normal, even those who might think that they are normal. So what are
they striving for, if not normalcy? Perhaps, in the end, we see that
they are after love but have lost the way in their long trip through
life, and are now trying to get back on track, each in their own
convoluted way, as only the colonel can't because of his bad karma and
his wife can't because she just doesn't have the energy to even try.
What results is a darkly satirical story that was equisitively directed.
It makes sound points about the fallacy of normalcy and the necessity of
nonconformity, and that its barbs about suburbia are on target. But the
film succeeds, and in some regards is brilliant, not because some of the
flawed characters see the light of day at last and might possibly
reform, but because the acting was grand by everyone, and Spacey was
more than grand, his was a tour-de-force performance. He has the ability
to squeeze humor out of a stone and turn frightening at the drop of a
dish. He's that good of an actor to carry this film, even as he is
supported by a terrific cast, he still stands out as the star. Bening is
his perfect foil, with a special flare for comedy, but still, through no
fault of hers, is a cardboard villain, with no room to grow. Bentley, a
virtual newcomer to films, his prior experience being a few lines in
Beloved, gives a strong performance as a very complex teen, one who can
get the upper hand even as he is being punched around by his father,
while pretending to his father that he believes his disciplinary methods
are for his own good. Mena is in an exploitive role, one that calls for
an obligatory porn shot of her breasts; but she is delicious and
appealing, and brings more to the part than can be expected, even crying
out for sympathy by the film's end. Thora, a 17-year-old veteran
actress, even at that tender age, played a twisted and sullen figure,
but nevertheless came off as a sympathetic figure, giving a soulful
performance, in a role that reminded many people of one that Christina
Ricci would play, but not necessarily play better. Cooper did a fine job
as a homophobic and a closet homosexual, but his role as a villain was
also too one-dimensional to give his character a more introspective edge
to it, even if his performance was first-class.
So why did I just like the film very much but not love it? I think it is
because, as entertaining as this film was, something just didn't smell
right about these roses; everything discovered seemed to be only
something that is surface; there was no real revolution of character
going on. The characters were looking outwardly for help, none of them
had a grip on their inward nature, which is a good place to start when
looking for beauty. I think there were too many contradictions in the
lives of Lester, Ricky, and Jane to believe that they found what they
were looking for, even if, the film implies that is just what they did
do.
What goes for "real" change of character in this film (it is hard to
tell if the film means it to be a parody or not), can only be termed as
trivial changes, as seen by the following examples: Lester by working at
a Mr. Smileys fast food place after quitting his so called "real" job,
is not really going through an internal change, he is merely escaping
from life by going through a temporary childhood fantasy. The satire
also became mean-spirited, at this point, as I took exception to some of
the jokes plied from these scenes, as they seemed to be mocking those
who take such jobs, by implying those jobs are just for losers. Carolyn,
by screwing her way to liberation, has not found a means to love, but,
more than likely, she has only found a means to continue her path of
selfish pleasure. Ricky, by cowtailing to his father's persecution and
by becoming a successful drug dealer, has not found a healthy way to
handle an abnormal father-son relationship. His character was actually
the most interesting one in the film, since he saw things the others
couldn't see, yet I suspect there is something deeply wrong with a
teenager who has to find love by being a voyeur and material success by
being a drug dealer, no matter how it is explained away. Jane, by
running away from home with Ricky, is not doing what is necessarily a
good thing for a naive high school girl to do.
When you think about what the film had to say and distance yourself from
all the fine performances and the splendid cinematography that the
70-ish-year-old master of his craft, Conrad L. Hall, gave us, who is an
expert on lighting techniques, and you step away from the sharp wit
found in Alan Ball's dazzling script-- what you are left wondering
about, is how shallow it all is, in a film that has a bite to its satire
but not enough of a bite to dig into the characters other than what is
seen on the surface. In the end, this is primarily a Hollywood type of
film and all the hype about how daring and nonconventional this film is,
should be dismissed as nothing but hype. Yet it is a captivating film,
one that had its moments of grandeur, and all-in-all, I really was
absorbed in it, and somehow liked the film more than I probably should
have.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Murali Krishnan
Suburban America is often seen as a symbol of comfortable banality. In
actuality, it is not immune to the dissatisfaction, directionlessness,
and dysfunction that afflict modern life.
The film opens with an aerial view of the seeming typical and idyllic
tree-lined American suburb. A narration in the voice of the main
character, Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey), introduces the story with
the jarring revelation that his character is dead, and the story is
the tale of events that led to his demise. This immediately signals
that the film will aspire to lofty goals. One signal of manipulative
writing is the use of heavy-handed events, like a death, in the climax
of the story to elicit emotion in the viewer. By notifying the viewer
that the story ends with the death of the main character, the
narrative does not afford itself the cheap tactic of allowing this
turn of events to manipulate the viewer. Instead, it signals that the
description of events leading to it will be the focus of attention,
that it intends to tell a good story.
Lester is passing through middle age and has become practically a
zombie. No part of his life gives him any fulfillment. His
relationship with his wife, Carolyn (Annette Bening), has evolved from
one of passion to superficiality. Although he would like to have a
deeper involvement in the life of his teenage daughter, Jane (Thora
Birch), she feels he has made only sporadic attempts when it was
convenient for him, so as a result she is resentful of him. Both
Carolyn and Jane have their own demons. Jane is an alienated teenager,
resentful of the chasm that has developed between her and her parents.
Carolyn is a moderately successful real estate agent. She has focused
all her energy into her job and her housework and gardening because
she has control over these activities, unlike the relationships with
her family, which are strained and fruitless.
The usual life for the Burhams is disrupted by several separate
events. Upon seeing Jane's striking friend, Angela Hayes (Mena
Suvari), for the first time, Lester is immediately struck with desire,
and tries to interact with her as often as he can. For her part,
Angela enjoys the attention, and confesses to Jane that she welcomes
the effect her beauty has on men. Lester's obsessions with Angela
reawakens his spirit. He has gained meaning in his dull life and he is
inspired to remove the chains that have been placed on his psyche.
The relationship that develops between the middle-aged Lester and the
underaged Angela is troubling. Although it appears to benefit Lester
and not hurt Angela in any way, the inequity in their positions, let
alone standard social taboos, is a bothersome development. Still, it
is undeniable that Lester's new obsession was the trigger for his
spiritual rebirth, and in that aspect, it seems positive. Like when a
dog runs after a car, it is not necessarily capture that is desired,
but the thrill of the chase. This appears to be the nature of Lester's
motivation, so the viewer does not fully feel uncomfortable with
Lester's seemingly deviant obsession.
A new family moves next to the Burhams, and the son, Ricky Fitts (Wes
Bentley), injects a new dynamic into the the lives of his neighbors.
Jane is drawn to the quiet but confident recluse. Jane slowly finds
she has more in common with the introspective loner than with her
cheerleader friend Angela. Ricky also becomes a friend of Lester's, by
becoming his marijuana dealer.
Most Americans who do not own guns will see them regularly in film and
television. They are a potent symbol of power, and are a convenient
and overused tool of American cinema. While guns are used in the
story, they are not overused. The narrative presents several
situations for a cliché, gun-based solution, but then steps aside from
the convenience.
The strongest suit of the film is the writing, which gives the story
power and eloquence. It mixes moments of dark humor and gripping
drama. The characters are drawn with depth and detail, and are
realized in uniformly superb performances. Bening is expressive as a
character who has gone through the same internal decay as Lester, but
has managed to cope in her own way. Bening is able to express the
settled exterior while also allowing the dark interior to show through
without being melodramatic. However, the clear master of the craft is
Spacey. Lester is a multi-faceted character who undergoes a
transformation from energyless to reclaimed. Spacey captures all
elements of the character and molds them into a coherent and utterly
believable flawed hero.
The success of the story is its ability to present difficult
situations in ways that do not appear manipulative. Although there are
several shocking turns of events, the surprise stems from the points
where the standard formula is broken, rather than from predictable
melodramatic vehicles.
Highly recommended. The film is ambitious and successful. It succeeds
with deep, thoughtful writing and effective, powerful acting. The
themes addressed will not be comfortable for all audiences, but it
should be rewarding for most viewers who like to see the realistic
portrayal of true and flawed characters.

Author
Ronald L. Strong
DREAMWORKS PICTURES  PRESENTS A JINKS/ COHEN
COMPANY PRODUCTION  KEVIN SPACEY  ANNETTE BENING  
"AMERICAN BEAUTY"   THORA BIRCH  ALLISON JANNEY 
PETER GALLAGHER MENA SUVARI  WES BENTLEY  AND
CHRIS COOPER
CO-PRODUCERS  STAN WLODKOWSKI  ALAN BALL   MUSIC
BY THOMAS NEWMAN   COSTUME DESIGNER  JULIE WEISS  
FILM EDITOR  TARIQ ANWAY  CHRIS GREENBURY  
PRODUCTION DESIGNER  NAOMI SHOHAN   DIRECTOR OF
PHOTOGRAPHY  CONRAD L. HALL, A.S.C.   PRODUCED
BY   BRUCE COHEN & DAN JINKS   WRITTEN BY ALAN
BALL   DIRECTED BY SAM MENDES
"Both my wife and daughter think I'm this gigantic
loser. And they're right. I have lost something. I
didn't always feel this sedated."
With that piece of dialogue, we are fully
introduced to Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey), a 42
year old man trapped within his own life. Lester
works for an advertising agency. His growing
dissatisfaction with his job is only one of the
mid-life crisis he is suffering. Estranged from
both his wife and his daughter, Lester starts to
crack under the stress. His life becomes nothing
more than a series of mastubatory fantasies, and
sullen apathy.
Carolyn Burnham (Annette Bening), is the
prototypical  career woman/ homemaker. She
carefully tends her rose garden, decorates her
home with the best  furnishings. But inside she is
desperate. Unsuccessful at her profession as a
real estate agent, she drives herself into states
of denial and self loathing that only feed her
growing resentment towards her family. The third
member of this anti-family is Jane Burnham (Thora
Birch), Lester and Carolyn's daughter. A young
girl going through the typical stages of
adolescence, but having to also come to terms with
her families growing dysfunction.
This funny (and frightening) slice of life is
refreshingly simple. Not one character is given
less than is needed to identify him or her. Some
of the most telling characters are those that
serve to highlight other characters. Most notably
is Barbara Fitts (Allison Janney), the almost
catatonic wife of  Retired Marine Colonel Fitts.
She has almost no dialogue, and seems to be either
recovering from a stroke or suffering from one.
Colonel Fitts (Chris Cooper) is an angry and
frightened man. His rage directed almost
singularly at his son, Ricky (Wes Bentley) who has
just moved with his family to the same
neighborhood as the Burnham's. In fact they are
the next door neighbors.
Anymore detail into the personalities of these
marvelously diverse characters would deprive one
of the many pleasures and surprises to be had in
"American Beauty". Alan Ball, who was the
co-executive producer of the hit TV series "Cybil"
and creator of the new sitcom "Oh Grow Up", has
fashioned one of the most insightful and expertly
tuned screenplays to have hit the screen in the
past ten years. Not one character in this film
rings falsely. And the depth of personality in
each, is achingly honest and insightful. The plot
detailing the last year in the life of a man as he
tries to find his own self worth is so
resoundingly cliched and at the same time original
as to bring to mind such marvelous film work as
"The Graduate" or "Lolita".
Kevin Spacey turns in one of this years most
pragmatic performances. His Lester Burnham is an
everyman caught up in the middle of a life that is
spiraling into old age. Finally unable to deal
with the lost soul that he has become, Lester
tries to return to his youth. He quits his job
(actually blackmailing his employer for one year's
salary), starts smoking pot, fantasizes about his
daughter's girlfriend Angela (Mena Suvari, in a
marvelous performance here), starts working out,
and finally takes a job at the local fast food
outlet. Mr. Spacey's performance is so remarkably
subtle and ingenuous, that we can be certain that
come OscarŽ time, we can be assured to see him
name among the five nominees.
Annette Bening also turns in what may be the best
performance of her career. Carolyn Burnham is a
woman who has become so insecure as to be caught
up in maintaining the facade of normalcy. Unable
to cope with her growing disillusionment, she
forces herself to maintain her demeanor, driving
her further and further into desperation, adultery
and possibly murder. Ms. Bening makes the
character of Carolyn so compelling as to be
identifiable to almost anyone. The slow and
methodical turn from happy home maker to charnel
house Martha Stewart is too frightening to express
in words.
Thora Birch holds her own against the talents cast
with her. Jane Burnham is both an innocent girl
caught up in what is a dysfunctional family, and a
rebellious child ready to abandon them at any
moment. Her growing distrust and isolation from
her family is something that many parents should
view as a warning. She is the prototypical trophy
child. When Carolyn praises her daughter after a
performance by her cheerleading team ("I'm so
proud of you, Honey. You didn't screw up once!"),
the bitterness and resentment are palpable. Thora
Birch is a young actress to watch.
Praise must also go to Chris Cooper who brings yet
another angry father role to life with depth and
resonance. Colonel Finn is a man in complete
denial. His military upbringing masking a desire
he is too repulsed to even comprehend. 
Wes Bentley as Ricky Finn is fine as the enigma.
The boy next door who may be more foe than friend.
A deceitful and calculating young man, whose
voyeuristic proclivities mask a deeper and more
profound understanding of life than any of the
adults around him. Mr. Bentley's performance is
the one troublesome note in the film. That is
simply because the character is such a grand and
complete liar, that one almost faults the
performance for it.
Director Sam Mendes handles all of the particulars
of the cast and the settings with a sure and
composed style that is neither intrusive nor
subtle. Scenes of Carolyn walking through the
rain, carry an ominous fission that calls
attention to the emotions of the character. The
subtle cinematography by Conrad Hall is wonderful,
capturing the season in all of it's harsh beauty
(Fall has never looked so inviting, yet
depressing). Every nuance of "American Beauty"
begs it's audience to think and examine. It is a
film that will be discussed and debated for years
to come. And well it should, as it is simply one
of this years best.


Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: American Beauty
Rated [R], 100 minutes
Starring Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena
Suvari, Peter Gallagher, Allison Janney, Scott Bakula, Sam Robards and
Chris Cooper
Screenplay by Alan Ball
Directed by Sam Mendes
What do you get when you team a first time screen director (a couple of
Broadway hits under his belt) and a first time big screen writer (a
couple of TV sitcoms)? Usually Cranky gets a massive headache. But
sometimes . . .
I've said it a couple of times before on these pages or in the
occasional radio or TV appearance: Great Films always begin as great
movies. Great Movies must make you laugh or cry; touch you or move you
emotionally; offer characters and/or situations that make some
connection to something deep inside. If a movie accomplishes one or two
of those things, it's probably worth the ticket price. If it does more,
we critics shout to the moon hoping that you readers will pay attention.
American Beauty is the second movie to tackle mid-life crises as the
center of its story. Unlike Election, there is no confusing this flick
with something aimed at, and starring teens, though there is a
substantial subplot dealing with those kidlets. Thus, you can approach
this flick from two angles, which is a mark of expert writing. I'm going
to start with the old folks, 'cuz that's what I am.
American Beauty is the story of Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey), who faces
imminent unemployment after 14 years writing for an advertising industry
trade mag. Living in a contented yet loveless marriage to his real
estate tycoon (at least, in her mind) wife Carolyn (Annette Bening),
Lester is facing mighty hard times. Communication problems plague his
once vital relationship with his now distant teenage daughter Jane
(Thora Birch). Lester wonders about, in a narrative track that
accompanies the flick, where it all started to go bad. Then, a glimpse
of Jane's friend, and almost superstar model slut pal Angela Hayes (Mena
Suvari) in her cheerleader outfit, gives Les the spark he needs. Out
come the weights and the sweatsuit, 'cuz the old man wants to get buff
for the American beauty he fantasizes about.
Yeah, the idea of a 42 year old man fantasizing about a 17 year old girl
is pretty disgusting. Cranky saw it happen to at least one father of one
of his friends and the result was the same: an instant reversion to
teenhood. Spacey's Lester is almost giddy with anticipation and his
complete reversal of character is missing only the zits. Angela, it
should be pointed out, does not discourage the attention and there's a
helluva lot more to this particular plot thread that you'll have to find
out for yourself. Carolyn, on the other hand, is ready to kiss up to the
competition. He's Buddy Kane (Peter Gallagher), the self-proclaimed
"King of Real Estate" and there's a helluva lot more etc etc etc.
The question of "why aren't things the way they used to be" lingers in
the neighborhood as well. The neighbors to the left are Jim (Scott
Bakula) and his partner Jim (Sam Robards). The neighbors to the right
are retired Marine Colonel Fitts (Chris Cooper), his almost catatonic
mom (Allison Janney) and their teenage son, Ricky (Wes Bentley), who has
been stalking Jane and videotaping her every move. This brings
alternative lifestyles, homophobia, Semper Fi stereotypes and some pot
humor into the story.
For the teens out there, the stories of Jane, Angela and Ricky should
provide plenty of diversion. Like most teens, their parents are
embarrassments. Jane wishes her dad were dead. Ricky volunteers to do
the job. But American Beauty ain't no murder mystery. It's a black
comedy whose humor is razor sharp, whose story is so well written that,
even up to the very end, you will sit in your seat working the
permutations on how the inevitable will happen. That's not spilling any
secret -- Spacey's narrative informs you within 15 seconds of the start
of American Beauty that his character will be dead by the end of it.
Whether the cause is natural or unnatural, Cranky won't say.
Writer Alan Ball has done a great job and given the actors all they need
to create great, and living, characters. Sam Mendes, best known for his
direction of the current Broadway version of Cabaret leads you on a
journey from fun to reality that is seamless and sobering.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to American Beauty, he would have
paid...
Highly recommended. Oscar list level. Cranky didn't expect to have to
start thinking about those damned end of year lists for at least another
month but . . .
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Christopher Null
     At last, a movie with no likable characters that is nothing short
of a joy to watch.  Let's see if AMERICAN PSYCHO can top that!
     AMERICAN BEAUTY chronicles the last year in the life of 42 year-old
hack magazine writer Lester Burnham (Spacey), a suburban loser that has
just about had it with his humdrum life and decides to make a few
changes to regain control, for better or for worse.  Those changes
include quitting his job and blackmailing his employers, buying a
vintage Firebird, taking a new job at the local fast food joint, buying
thousands of dollars worth of pot, and plotting to sleep with his
daughter's best friend (Suvari, the good girl from AMERICAN PIE, playing
the bad girl here).
     If you think he's gone over the edge, wait until you get a load of
his Realtor wife (Bening, playing an evil Martha Stewart  okay, a
*more* evil Martha Stewart).  Or the daughter (Birch), a zoned-out
basket of angst.  Or their neighbors, headed by a stern ex-Marine
(Cooper) and his pleasant but quietly psychotic drug-dealer son
(Bentley).  Everyone here is a creep, and it's delicious to watch them
play off one another  think of it as an updating of THE ICE STORM to
1999.
     The joy of BEAUTY lies in its brilliantly drawn characters, great
dialogue, flawless acting by all the players, and a clever voice-over by
Spacey that, for once, adds quite a bit to the picture.  For example,
we're told at the beginning that Lester is going to die.  While the
black comedy unfolds for two hours, we struggle to figure out exactly
how he's going to go.  Obviously, someone is going to kill him.  But
who, and how?  The genius of the script is that it could be anyone who
does it.
     Oscar nominations are deserved universally for the cast and crew,
and I hope AMERICAN BEAUTY is neither forgotten at Awards time nor at
the box office.  This is a rare and outstanding film that deserves
attention and will challenge some heady competition for a place as the
best film of the year.
Director: Sam Mendes
Producer: Bruce Cohen, Dan Jinks
Writer: Alan Ball
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Annette Beining, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena
Suvari, Chris Cooper, Peter Gallagher, Allison Janney, Scott Bakula, Sam
Robards
http://www.amazon.com/americanbeauty
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Look at the perfect suburban neighborhood, with the perfectly straight
street lined with perfectly spaced trees in front of each perfect home.
Look at the inhabitants of the house with the red door.  They seem to be
a perfectly ordinary family, but look closer.
Father and head-of-the-family Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey, Hurlyburly)
appears to be a normal middle-aged suburbanite.  He drives his Toyota
Camry to his job at Media Monthly Magazine, but if you look closer you
will see a man so broken of spirit that he has no qualms leering at his
teenage daughter's young friends or referring to his daily shower
masturbation session as the highlight of his day.  Lester explains, in
an opening narrative, that he is 42 and will be dead in a year  even
though it feels like part of him has been dying for years.
His wife Carolyn (Annette Bening, In Dreams) is a real estate agent with
a Mercedes SUV and an upbeat outlook on life, not to mention pruning
shears that match her gardening clogs.  Career-wise, Carolyn lives in
the huge shadow of Buddy Kane, the Real Estate King (Peter Gallagher,
The Man Who Knew too Little), whose face adorns park benches and
billboards around the unnamed town.  Look closer at the woman that
forces her family listen to elevator music during dinner each evening,
and you will see a person so afraid of professional and personal failure
that she actually beats herself in the face if she cries.
Lester and Caroline's only child is Jane (Thora Birch, Harrison Ford's
cute little kid in those Tom Clancy movies), a high school student
embarrassed that her lecherous dad will `spray his shorts' if she brings
home any female classmates.  She's a member of the school's pep squad,
but if you look closer, Jane finds herself struggling to escape the
shadow of her popular and brazen best friend (and model wannabe) Angela
(Mena Suvari, American Pie).
No longer able to stomach the daily grind of selling his soul at work,
Lester decides to quit his job and really live his life.  He trades the
Camry for the classic car he always dreamed of having.  He also starts
to work out and smoke pot, finding new employment at a fast food joint
called Smiley Burger  and he has never been happier.  Despite his
newfound euphoria, Lester's family suffers the brunt of the changes
brought upon by his revitalized outlook.
Their problem?  Lester really starts to push the envelope in a world
where you simply can't afford to be plain, but can't do much to really
stand out, either.  And that is the soul of the film.  Most men his age
are content to regale peers with tales of days past when they drove
across the country, stoned like Gonzo and his attorney, with The Allman
Brothers Live at the Fillmore East blaring from the stereo and the wind
whipping through hair they used to have.  Now older, married and
whipped, they are happy to have two minutes alone each day just to pinch
a loaf (or jerk off in the shower).
Not to be outdone by the reigning neighborhood dysfunction champions are
the Burnham's new neighbors, whose move into the vacant house next-door
coincides with Lester's mental collapse.  Their patriarch (Chris Cooper,
October Sky), a military man with a graying brush-cut, introduces
himself to everyone as `Colonel Fitts, U.S. Marine Corps.'  Wife Barbra
(Allison Janney, 10 Things I Hate About You) staggers through life like
a zombie, trying to mask whatever horrors life has previously dealt
her.  Like the Burnhams, the Fitts' have one child  a boy named Ricky
(newcomer Wes Bentley), who has just been released from a mental
institution, sells pot and captures life's quirks on a home video
camera.  Boy, did he move to the right neighborhood.
Likely to draw comparisons to both The Ice Storm and Happiness (all
three are interweaving tales of whacked-out suburban families with major
sexual issues), Beauty is nothing short of perfection.  Spacey has never
been better (plus, he has one of the best spit-takes of this decade) and
Birch is completely amazing for somebody who was in that cinematic opus
Monkey Business.  A role like Jane's would ordinarily be given to a
Christina Ricci or possibly an Anna Paquin, but Birch's performance
easily tops anything that either have done.
The scary part of Beauty (other than the content) is that it's the first
script written by Alan Ball and first picture helmed by Sam Mendes, who
has previously directed Broadway hits Cabaret and the Nicole Kidman
nude-fest The Blue Room.  Mendes' bold direction is technically
brilliant, recalling early efforts of Tarantino or Paul Thomas
Anderson.  Beauty is the kind of film that will reap loads of critical
praise, yet may not light up the box office and be too controversial to
be considered for Oscar nominations.  But it is so good that the Academy
may not be able to ignore it.  (1:52 - R for nudity, strong sexuality,
language, graphic violence and drug content)

Author
Ross Anthony
Poetic in its execution, "American Beauty" is a satire on Joe America who
hasn't stopped to smell the roses in so many years that the high point of
his day is playing with himself in the shower. He hates his life, his wife
hates him and their daughter hates them both ... not a pretty picture.
It takes a beady-eyed next door neighbor and a teen cheerleader to turn
things around for this family -- though the turn around isn't at all in a
Disney fashion.
If sexual suggestion between adults and high schoolers bother you (as it
does I) you may be off-put by substantial portions of this film (as was I).
However, the more often than not artful script, powerful performances by
Spacey, Bening and Bentley, strong direction and rosy surrealism cannot be
ignored.
I opened with the word "poetic." Like an extended poem, "American Beauty" is
sometimes beautiful, sometimes tedious, sometimes too far removed. While I
love the theme ... "There is so much beauty, I don't know if I can handle
it. I feel like my heart will collapse," I'd have preferred that this
realization be stumbled across by means other than pot and lust. Still a
strong film.
American Beauty. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena
Suvari, Peter Gallagher, Allison Janney.
Directed by Sam Mendes.
Produced by Dan Jinks and Bruce Cohen.
Screenplay by Alan Ball.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I'm 42 years old, and in less than a year I'll be dead," begins Kevin
Spacey, in narration in AMERICAN BEAUTY, as the despondent Lester
Burnham, a man with a family who loathes him, and vice versa.  "Of
course, I didn't know that yet."  And then, reflecting on the miserable
condition of his life he adds, "In a way, I'm dead already."
Even though you know he's going to die, how and why remain a complete
mystery until the end -- there are many possibilities in this black
comedy.  As written with biting wit by Alan Ball and directed with a
deft touch by Sam Mendes, the mystery is only a small part of the story.
The film's many rewards include a darkly sardonic script, which is
extremely funny, and an examination of middle age and teenage angst,
which will likely strike several chords with everyone in the audience.
We've had films about dysfunctional families, but this movie is about
people with dysfunctional lives.
"My wife and daughter think I'm this gigantic loser," Lester admits with
hopeless acceptance.
His sarcastic, bitch of a wife, Carolyn (Annette Bening), is an
obsessive-compulsive real estate agent, who cleans houses for sale in
her slip, lest she get a spot on her immaculate suit.  She orders her
husband around like a mongrel dog.
Her relationship with her daughter, Jane (Thora Birch), is almost as
strained as that with her husband.  Coming when she isn't wanted to
Jane's performance during the half-time show at the high school
basketball game, Carolyn doesn't even know how to give a compliment.
"Honey, I watched very clearly," she says in an off-putting remark.
"You didn't screw up once."
Her only advice to her daughter is an attempt to mold her into an
uncaring and unhappy perfectionist just like herself.  "You can't count
on anyone but yourself," Carolyn reveals as life's one commandment.
The angry and self-hating daughter can't stand her parents.  When her
dad refuses to accept "okay" as the answer to "how was school today?"
she mocks him.  "No, dad, it was spectacular," she tells him with
emphasis on the sarcastic, overblown adjective.
Although Lester despises his family, the same cannot be said of his
feelings toward Jane's best friend, Angela Hayes (Mena Suvari from
AMERICAN PIE), a teenage vamp who brags of her sexual conquests.
Lester's real life may be miserable, especially his non-existent sexual
relations with his wife, but his fantasy one is lively.  His many erotic
(but not explicit) dreams of Angela feature hundreds of American Beauty
red rose petals, just the type his wife likes to grow.  Suvari is
wonderfully alluring as the embodiment of most middle-age men's secret
desires.
Next door to the Burnhams, the Fitts move in and prove a fitting
addition to the town, a hotbed of neuroses.  The teenage boy, Ricky
Fitts (Wes Bentley), "who dresses like a Bible salesman," appears to be
a stalker and a voyeur.  He tries to hit on Jane, which Angela finds
very creepy.
Ricky's father, an ex-Marine colonel, is so strict that he conducts
regular drug tests on his son.  As Colonel Fitts, Chris Cooper plays a
similar role to the one he had in OCTOBER SKY, but this time most of his
character's humanity has been stripped away.  Ricky's mother (Allison
Janney) is AWOL in her own life, looking like someone who was
brainwashed during years of confinement in a concentration camp.
Carolyn worships the self-proclaimed, local real estate "king," Buddy
Kane (Peter Gallagher).  He's as full of advice and bluster as someone
on a late-night infomercial.  "Call me Crazy," he says meaning, of
course, that he thinks he isn't, "but to be a success one must project
an image of success at all times."  Such times include the imminent
departure of one's trophy wife.
The movie has more good scenes that one can count.  The dining table
sequences are the best since those in CITIZEN KANE.  In one, Lester
provides an aggressive replacement ("Don't interrupt me, honey!") for
the typical husband's canonical "whatever" response.
My favorite scene in the entire movie happens in a fast food restaurant
in which Spacey demonstrates amazing comedic control.  He wants a job at
Mr.  Smiley's, and no pipsqueak of a manager will come in his way.
As Lester comes to realize that he has some considerable control over
his fate, he transforms his attitude and approach in surprising and
frequently delightful ways.  It's easy to empathize with many of his
responses to life.  An engrossing satire for most of the movie, it
reaches for the stars in the more dramatic last act.  This final part
gets under your skin so deeply that you realize that this is no mere
comedy, but something much deeper and one of the best pictures of the
year.
Kevin Spacey's work in the movie is the best film acting that he has
ever done.  (I was fortunate to see him star in the play "The Iceman
Cometh" in both London and New York, and that, admittedly, was better
still.)  One hopes that, come Oscar time, he'll be taking home a best
acting statuette to go beside his best supporting one for THE USUAL
SUSPECTS.
AMERICAN BEAUTY runs 1:55.  It is rated R for strong sexuality,
language, violence and drug content and would be fine for teenagers only
if they are both older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
American Beauty (1999)
Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena Suvari, 
Peter Gallagher, Allison Janney, Chris Cooper, Scott Bakula, Sam Robards. 
Music by Thomas Newton. Cinematography by Conrad Hall. Screenplay by Alan 
Ball. Directed by Sam Mendes. 122 minutes.
Rated R, 4.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net
Midway through "American Beauty," a young man obsessed with videotaping 
asks a new friend if she'd like to see the most beautiful thing he ever 
filmed. He shows her a video of an empty plastic grocery sack caught in a 
breeze. With a brick wall behind it and a leaf-strewn sidewalk below, the 
bag dances in the wind; darting, fluttering, almost touching the ground, 
only to be swept up again to continue its herky-jerky aerial ballet. The 
image is mesmerizing and neatly underscores the film's central theme: 
look closer. 
Silky, seductive and unsettling, "American Beauty" is an dazzling piece 
of movie-making, nimbly shifting from dark comedy to drama to horror to 
pure poetry and back again. While its examination of what lies beneath 
the well-manicured facade of suburban life is nothing new ("The Ice Storm,
" "Happiness" and "Blue Velvet" are just a few of the works that have 
covered similar turf), the film's nervy script and remarkably assured 
approach, coupled with flawless cinematography and use of music, yields 
numerous rewards all its own. 
The story begins with a shot of a red door, accompanied by a voice-over 
introduction from lead character Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey). "I'm 42 
years old," he quietly intones. "In less than a year, I'll be dead. Of 
course, I don't know that yet. In a way, I'm dead already." Indeed he is. 
For years, Lester has gone through life on cruise control. He cohabits a 
house with his high-strung wife, Carolyn (Annette Bening) and sullen 
daughter, Jane (Thora Birch) in an atmosphere of simmering animosity. His 
job as a writer for a dull media publication hangs by a thread. Most of 
the time he is numb. "I know I've lost something," he says, "but I don't 
know what it is." One thing he does know is that he didn't always feel 
this sedated.
It's easy to toss around phrases like "mid-life crisis," but actually 
experiencing the phenomena is another matter entirely. Dealing with the 
prospect of one's own mortality, while realizing that the vitality of 
life has been smothered by day-to-day routine and the Quixotic quest for 
the illusion of security, is absolutely devastating. From the inside, a 
mid-life crisis is a Herculean struggle for survival of the soul that can 
lead a person to some pretty strange behavior.  
Two events trigger Lester's peculiar epiphany: the loss of his job and 
his infatuation with a gorgeous high school girl. At a cheerleading 
demonstration, he falls head over heels in lust for his daughter's best 
friend, Angela (Mena Suvani). Determined to seduce her, he starts pumping 
iron with a vengeance (she likes tight pecs), striving to recapture the 
appearance and passion of his youth.
Informed by his boss that his services will no longer be needed, Lester 
blackmails the man into giving him a big severance package. Freed of his 
job and financial concerns, he launches into a giddy joyride of 
irresponsibility. Remembering his carefree youthful days at a fast-food 
joint, Lester takes a job flipping burgers at Mr. Smiley. He smokes dope 
openly while cruising around town in his new dream car, begins speaking 
with devastating frankness and adopts an impulsive approach to life. 
The new Lester leaves his wife horrified and his daughter disgusted. 
Carolyn focuses desperately on her work as a real estate agent, while 
eyeing Buddy Kane (Peter Gallagher), known in realty circles as "The King.
" Jane hooks up with a strange new neighbor kid, Ricky (Wes Bentley), who 
deals dope, videotapes everything and constantly ducks from his severe 
drill-instructor of a father (Chris Cooper) and near-catatonic mother 
(Allison Janney). The tension within this circle of humanity is palpable 
and an explosion is clearly imminent. 
Kevin Spacey anchors the swirl of conflict with the best performance of 
his already stellar career. As Lester changes from repressed sardonic 
loser to freewheeling overage kid, Spacey is stunning, totally inhabiting 
the character. Despite his pursuit of an underage girl, you care for this 
man caught up in the heady euphoria of living without a safety net.
"American Beauty" navigates a fine line, creating stereotypes for the 
social satire, then humanizing the players for the drama. It doesn't 
always work. A great effort from Annette Bening manages to make Carolyn 
more than a materialist cliché, but even an actor of Chris Cooper's skill 
cannot turn Ricky's militaristic father into more than an evil cartoon. 
The film's biggest misstep comes with a kiss late in the proceedings. 
Intended as a revelation, the kiss is too easy a shock, playing like a 
page out of Psych 101. Understand, though, that I'm nit-picking. Even 
with its flaws, "American Beauty" is a whale of a movie. More than 
anything, it provokes thought and reflection, something that happens all 
too rarely in contemporary cinema. The film is similar to a Rorschach 
Test. How you react to this compelling, ambitious creation could reveal a 
bit about your place in this amazing corporeal journey we share. Look 
closer.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Over the years, Kevin Spacey has delighted in playing louses:
charming men with hearts as black as pitch.  In his latest film, Spacey is
more a loser than a louse, but his Lester Burnham still maintains some
unpleasant, creepy-crawly qualities.
        For 14 years Lester has been a writer for a crappy media magazine.
He's married, unhappily, to Carolyn (Annette Bening), an aspiring realtor
who lives the image of success even though she's not really all that good
at selling houses.  The Burnhams have a teenage daughter, Jane (Thora
Birch), but neither of them really know her.  Lester, bitter and
unfulfilled at 42, hates his job, which is just as well because he's about
to lose it.
        And, as Spacey's narration informs us at the beginning of the film,
he's not going to make it to 43 either.
        That admission sets the scene for "American Beauty," a dark and
disturbing black comedy with an almost painful emphasis on the black part.
It's a film that revels in the decay and disharmony of suburbia; there are
moments when you think to yourself "things are going to get ugly" before
realizing that things have been interminable from the outset.
        Lester's life is spiraling out of control; unhappiness reigns
supreme.  Then Jane brings home a cheerleading girlfriend one night and
it's lust at first sight (since Carolyn isn't exactly meeting Lester's
needs in that department).  Lester begins to fantasize about Angela (Mena
Suvari) who, of course, is young enough to be his daughter.  Meanwhile, a
camcorder-obsessed boy called Ricky Fitts moves in next door and takes a
shine to Jane, offering to get rid of Lester as a token of his affection
(his father, played by Chris Cooper, is a bigoted Marine who requires urine
samples from his son every six months to ensure that he's drug-free).
        It's not immediately clear whether Ricky (played with stone-cold
credulity by Wes Bentley) is kidding, but as Alan Ball's not very pretty
screenplay unfolds, events soon begin to take more chilling turns.
        The strength of the acting in "American Beauty" keeps everything on
the edge, with Spacey especially good as the frustrated Lester.  Former
Broadway director Sam Mendes makes his big-screen debut with this film, and
it's a good one.  There are times when "American Beauty" feels like it
might be toppling over into melodrama, but Mendes grabs the reins and reels
his actors in, generating power and a lot of perspiration in the process.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I've been accused of not appreciating the "deeper" and "romantic" films by
some in my circle (Okay, so I didn't love SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE...shoot me!),
but if this week is any indication, JoBlo is finally starting to go soft.
First of all, I actually enjoyed and choked back a few wet ones during Kevin
Costner's FOR LOVE OF THE GAME (7.5/10). And then, as if that wasn't enough,
I rate this commercial art-house adult dramedy as a very good movie?
Something must be wrong. Not really. In fact...everything is just beautiful!
:)
PLOT:
A husband bored with his life and family suddenly wakes up and smells the
coffee when he "falls for" one of his daughter's slutty teenage friends. A
wife, bent on succeeding in her career, drinks a lot and "falls for" the
town's biggest real-estate hotshot. A daughter, feeling awkward and freaky,
"falls for" a bizarre neighbor kid who likes to videotape almost everything
he sees (So that he could remember it!). In the end, will any of them really
"fall" or find exactly what they are looking for?
CRITIQUE:
If you are the type of person who appreciates every minute of your life,
then you may just enjoy this film to its fullest potential. If you are the
type of person who doesn't appreciate every minute of your life or the
people around you, then you may just need to see this film, and learn to
appreciate its full potential.
This film is original in story, interesting in premise, acted sharply by its
well-rounded cast, directed in a manner made all the more absorbing, and
edgy and humorous enough to keep me going, despite some pseudo-existential
stuff floating around from time to time. Before I go on any further, let it
be said that an actor by the name of Kevin Spacey rocks! Okay, now that I
got that off my chest, let's go on. Many are comparing this film to the
highly praised 1997 film ICE STORM (6/10), but despite some general
similarities, I found the latter film to have very little surface and too
much esoteric depth, while this one delivers a fresh, livelier outlook on
its subjects, despite their obvious miseries.
Don't get me wrong, there were some moments in this film when I did find
myself rolling a little of the eyes, especially when it concerned scenes
between the weird (A little too strange for my taste) neighbor kid, and the
daughter. But whenever Spacey took center stage, man stand back, cause that
bastard sucked me right back into the thick of things! Having said that,
this film is definitely an "adult" film to be savored by people who are in
touch with themselves and appreciate a frank, sometimes brutally honest,
look at their pathetic and drab existence. I personally enjoyed the strong
performances by the cast, especially Spacey and the friend of his daughter
(And yes, I wanted to nail her also!), the finale, which seemed like it was
going one way but then kept curving back every now and again, and the dark
humor, which filled many of the scenes. Certainly an overly valiant effort
from first time director Sam Mendes, who seems to have a solid grasp on the
pulse of characters going through varied difficulties in their lives.
Admittedly, I went into this film with mucho expectations, so don't take my
nitpicking too seriously. Check it out for yourself and see how you feel. It
may just help you appreciate certain aspects of your life much better. Just
look closer... (Sorry, but I had to!).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Kevin Spacey was rumored to be gay for many years, until he recently
came out and said that he wasn't (Take you time there, buddy!). His full
name is Kevin Spacey Fowler, and he was born in New Jersey. Spacey is his
mother's maiden name. Kevin's sole directorial gig to this point has been
1996's ALBINO ALLIGATOR.
This is the 14th film in which Annette Bening has participated. Nobody would
remember this, but she actually played a character named "Vicky" in a 1987
episode of "Miami Vice". She has been married to the man with the golden
dick, Warren Beatty, since 1992, and the are currently expecting their 4th
child together!
This won't be much of a "little known fact" after the release of this film,
but teen actress Thora Birch has got a great set of knockers! Wow. She also
played the character of Sally Ryan, daughter of Jack Ryan, in PATRIOT GAMES
and CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER.
Many of you hot-blooded teens will remember lovely actress Mena Suvari from
this summer's big teen horn-fest, AMERICAN PIE (7/10). She played the nice,
innocent girl. What a stretch from her role in this one! Her first role in a
big-time movie was 1997's KISS THE GIRLS (7/10) with Ashley Judd.
The man who plays the father neighbor in this film is actor Chris Cooper. He
played Uncle Joe in 1998's GREAT EXPECTATIONS and has been in three John
Sayles films.
Director Sam Mendes is best known for his direction of the current Broadway
version of Cabaret, and the Nicole Kidman nudie-show The Blue Room. He hails
from jolly England. This film is his directorial debut.

Author
James Sanford
         There have been plenty of other movies about the shallow values
of suburbanites, but few have been as consistently -- and bitterly --
funny as "American Beauty," a fairly astonishing debut film from British
stage director Sam Mendes. In the same way Chinese director Ang Lee
found fresh perspectives on the 1970s in "The Ice Storm," Mendes takes a
commonplace setting and a familiar-looking cast of characters and twists
them into frightening, fascinating new forms, with a considerable amount
of assistance from screenwriter Alan Ball (another first-timer) and a
superb cast.
 The premise of "Beauty" won't strike anyone as particularly
revolutionary, and, in fact, the film initially seems like it's going to
wind up as an updating of "Lolita," or worse, a send-up of the now-dusty
Amy Fisher scandal. Instead, it reveals its inspiration to be "Sunset
Boulevard," the seriocomic 1950 shocker about the quest to recapture
lost youth through an utterly futile love affair.
 "Beauty" delights in confounding our expectations again and
again, letting us make assumptions and then shattering them moments
later. In the blissfully boring homes that line Robin Hood Trail, where
most of the action takes place, an innocuous bottle of root beer can
serve as an aphrodisiac, a plain white platter might turn out to be a
piece of china from the Third Reich and a once-reliable daddy might
suddenly decide to quit his job and devote his days to working out and
getting high.
 That 42-year-old drop-out is Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey), one
of those guys who probably gets misty-eyed when he sees those VW Bug
commercials with the tagline, "if you sold your soul in the '80s...".
"Both my wife and my daughter think I'm a gigantic loser," Lester notes
in his narration of the story, "and they're right." Carolyn Burnham
(Annette Bening) is an overzealous real estate agent who's so absorbed
in visions of commissions and "sold" signs she barely even notices her
husband, and teenage Janie (Thora Birch) has drifted away from the
family and settled in on her own perpetually overcast island of
adolescent angst. Conversations between the three are few, and the ones
that do develop are generally spiked with sarcasm. When Lester asks
Janie about her day in school, she dryly replies, "it was spectacular."
 "I fantasize about a life that doesn't so closely resemble
Hell," Lester says, and it turns out most of his reveries involve
Janie's friend Angela (Mena Suvari), an aspiring model with a baby doll
face and a call girl's bravado. "I'm used to guys drooling over me," she
sighes, in a tone that suggests both weariness and delight.
 Lester first sees Angela performing in a halftime show at a
high school basketball game. The number is atrocious (a smart bit of
spoofery on the part of choreographer Paula Abdul), but Lester is
transfixed by the girl nonetheless, and it's not long before he's
jogging and pumping iron regularly in an attempt to trim down his
slightly flabby physique. At the same time, the other members of the
Burnham household have found outside interests as well: Carolyn is
spending long lunch hours trying to wheedle sales secrets out of local
real estate king Buddy Kane (Peter Gallagher), while Janie has taken an
interest in the boy next door, a slightly menacing-looking kid named
Ricky (Wes Bentley) who keeps clean urine samples in his freezer just in
case his dad (Chris Cooper) wants to check him for drug use.
 Ball's script will ultimately string all of these people
together, although not always in ways you might expect. In its probe of
what lies beneath the shiny surface of everday life, "Beauty" sometimes
recalls writer-director David Lynch's "Blue Velvet" or his
ground-breaking TV series "Twin Peaks." Although Mendes is not quite as
audacious a director as Lynch was in his heyday, the film is often
visually arresting, with dazzling use of colors (particularly red) and
motifs: Lester fantasizes about Angela bathing in rose petals, while the
increasingly shrewish Carolyn trots around in a blouse adorned with a
gaudy rose pattern.
 In the underrated 1994 sleeper "The Ref," Spacey showed he has
no equal when it comes to spitting out acidic recriminations and Ball
gives him a choice selection of them here. Whether he's describing the
high point of his day -- hint: it takes place in the shower -- or
warning Janie "you'd better watch it, or you're going to turn into a
real bitch, just like your mother," Spacey consistently nails that
simmering rage that's been bubbling inside Lester for who knows how
long. It's a magnificent comic performance.
Although she's undeniably amusing, Bening's hypertense Carolyn
is slightly more problematic, sometimes careening close to caricature.
She's ultimately grounded by two offbeat and oddly poignant crying
scenes that show the woman's facade slipping and Carolyn literally
trying to slap it back into place. Birch, Bentley and especially the
wide-eyed Suvari all excel as they pull the strings of the adults around
them. Even the supporting actors stand out here, particularly Allison
Janney as a Stepford Wife whose batteries are running low and Cooper as
a martinet with a mercurial temper and some unexpected needs. James
Sanford

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
"For pseudo-intellectual psycho-babble, it was very well acted."  So
decreed my wife as we were leaving a screening of Dreamworks' AMERICAN
BEAUTY.  It remains an insightful summation.
Kevin Spacey (HURLYBURLY) stars as Lester Burnham, a self-described
"ordinary guy with nothing to lose."  Trapped in a soul-sucking job and a
loveless marriage, he has already lost whatever verve or passion for life
that he once had.  His wife, Carolyn, (Annette Benning, IN DREAMS) is cold
and self-absorbed.  His daughter, Jane, (Thora Birch, ALASKA) is sullen
and distant.   These characters may live in the same house, but they are
all very much alone.
Lester's catalyst for change comes in the guise of one of Jane's friends,
a teen aged Lolita named Angela Hayes (Mena Suvari, AMERICAN PIE).  Lester
becomes fixated upon her, making her the object of his fantasies.  It
isn't long before Lester is "reborn." Tired of the life he has, he tries
to recapture the life he lost.  He starts smoking marijuana, pumping iron,
and (most importantly) speaking his mind without care or consideration as
to the impact his words might have.
Meanwhile, Carolyn, a materialistic Martha Stewart wannabe, is solely
focused upon her career as a Realtor.  Her obsession for success makes her
blind to the miserable life she is helping to make for her husband and
child.  Her mantra becomes: "In order to be successful, one must project
an image of success at all times."  She concentrates so much on the image,
she loses sight of the reality.
An opposing view is represented in the Burnham's next door neighbor,
Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley, BELOVED), an odd but amazingly self-assured teen
aged drug dealer, who begins to take a romantic interest in Jane.  He
looks for the beauty that lies behind every image presented to us.  It is
why he bypasses the beautiful but shallow Angela for Jane in whom he sees
the hidden beauty of her soul.
Ricky uses videotapes to help remember the ever present beauty he claims
lies behind all of life's images.  Inviting Jane to see the most beautiful
thing he has ever videotaped, he shows her the image of a plastic bag
hypnotically swirling in the wind.  Of all the characters in the film,
Ricky is presented as the one who is the most emotionally secure, although
he is not without his own deep psychological scars.
There isn't a weak actor in the cast.  Both Kevin Spacey and Annette
Benning are magnificent in their roles.  I am pleased to say that the hype
surrounding their performances has not been exaggerated.  Thora Birch,
Mena Suvari, Wes Bentley and Chris Cooper (OCTOBER SKY) as Ricky's rigid,
military-minded father all provide ample support.
Where the movie did not live up to the hype, in my estimation, is in the
subject matter itself.  The story it tells is neither original nor
classic.  It is a rather depressing comedy concerning pathetic individuals
trying to find meaning or substance in the lives they lead.  Sadly, they
begin looking in all the wrong places.  There is nothing beautiful in this
AMERICAN BEAUTY.
While it is true that there is a hidden quality behind all of life's
images or experiences, it is not necessarily beautiful.  What it is, is
spirit.  Spirit, of course, comes in two forms:  godly and ungodly.  In
observing the actions, habits, and desires of the on screen characters, it
becomes clear that the spiritual influences which motivate them are
devilish ones.
On the ride home from the theater, my wife and I were able to catalogue
sixteen distinctly different devil spirits who would have been involved in
the influencing of these characters' decisions.  Among them:  a spirit of
envy, a sullen spirit, a spirit of error, a spirit of depression, a spirit
of obsession, a sensual spirit, and a spirit of murder.
To the uninstructed, the above may seem foolish and unbelievable.  But
these devil spirits and others can be biblically documented and
categorized by any who would take the time and effort to study the
Scriptures.  With a working knowledge of the invisible influence of the
devil spirit realm, AMERICAN BEAUTY makes dark but perfect sense.  Without
it, it remains not much more than a well-acted piece of
"pseudo-intellectual psycho-babble."

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
There's something classic about the word "American" when it's used in a 
title.  It's appeared in the names of films, fiction, music and many more 
genres, and gains a certain amount of dignity perhaps from the nomenclature 
of history:  wars and political events.
"American Beauty," from director Sam Mendes, spins this proper adjective in 
an altogether new direction.
The film opens with an aerial shot, voice-over narration running as the 
camera closes in on a city and then a neighborhood and street.  Lester 
Burnham (Kevin Spacey) tells us this is his town and street - his life.  And 
he will be dead within a year.
Why the artifice, the super-removed point of view from a crucial character?  
It's part of the approach that lifts "American Beauty" beyond mediocrity and 
places it on the level of classic.
This guy Lester is your basic loser - at least his wife Carolyn (Annette 
Bening) and their only child Jane (Thora Birch) think so.  A schmuck that 
slaves for an advertising agency, Lester is on his way out due to 
downsizing.  His marriage is loveless, his wife caught up in her business as 
pusher of real estate, seemingly obsessed with beating out her competition, 
Buddy Kane, the "King" of Real Estate (played by a graying Peter Gallagher). 
  Daughter Jane is part of a high school troupe, sort of dancing 
cheerleaders, and often shows her sullen teen demeanor.  When Mom and Dad 
actually show up at the half time of a basketball game to catch the dancers' 
performance, Lester catches sight of Jane's friend Angela Hayes (Mena 
Suvari) and begins a fixation that traces his fall from typical American 
grace.  It is as though Angela dances for him alone, and we see the first of 
segments set in unreal time, the fantasies that feature Angela in sensual 
poses, surrounded by loads of red rose petals.
But Lester's life is not the only one beset by unhappiness and miserable 
hope.  Wife Carolyn becomes smitten by no other than Buddy the "King" 
himself, and Jane shows fascination with a new neighbor kid named Ricky 
Fitts (Wes Bentley), who has come out of two years in a mental hospital and 
now sells exotic marijuana to a wide clientele.  Ricky's father is a 
military retiree who introduces himself as "Colonel Fitts, U. S. Marine 
Corps."
What goes down largely involves Lester's abandoning of the American work 
ethic.  He writes an absurd diatribe of a job description for himself, 
ensuring his firing, but blackmails his way into a year's full salary and 
benefits, using knowledge of managerial infidelities.  After Angela comments 
to Jane that she would find Jane's dad attractive if he would just work out 
a little, Lester indeed begins to work out.  He also begins to speak his 
mind to his wife, and to smoke Ricky's very best blend.  We never expect 
Lester to be happy in the long term, as we know his fate already;  but he 
does have a heck of a good time in his reconciliation with reality.
The ensemble cast does a marvelous job of portraying individuals with lost 
dreams.  Kevin Spacey fills in the blanks of Lester's life with terrible 
nuances:  we are at once repelled and drawn by his devil-may-care antics.  
For a long time Lester is caught in his unsmiling rut.  When he finally 
breaks out and grins, we are happy for him, and realize the best side of the 
film:  it's a very dark comedy that pokes you in the ribs, getting as many 
winces of pain as it gets laughs.  For his sketching of Lester Burnham, 
Spacey deserves at least a few nominations.
Annette Bening shows her talent for comedy and melodrama, often in the same 
scene.  At one point she shows a hopeless cause of a house (which she 
herself cleans) to several reluctant couples.  After the open house is over, 
Carolyn leans against the patio door and sobs, finally slapping herself out 
of it.  She is a creature attracted to success to an extreme degree, using 
mantras like "I am going to sell this house today," and "I will no longer be 
a victim."  Carolyn's love for Lester is on hold, but she could connect once 
again if she could stop worrying about his ruining the furniture.
Thora Birch is wonderful as Jane, an angry girl looking for any type of 
attention.  With a talent for using a deadpan expression, Birch shows utter 
contempt for her parents, yet commences to see the beautiful side of her 
creepy neighbor Ricky.  This actress also shows perfectly natural, if a bit 
reluctant, nonchalance when she is the subject of Ricky's ever-present 
videocamera.
Chris Cooper, one of the best character actors now working, plays Colonel 
Fitts with gripping naturalness.  Although we need to know more about his 
motivation, Fitts treats son Ricky with extra-stern discipline, virtually 
jailing him for two years after the boy smokes pot and severely beats a 
schoolmate.  Late in the film Fitts shows more of his butch-headed mania;  
in every scene he thrills us with what he might do to any character around 
him.
First-time film director Sam Mendes does a nice job with Alan Ball's script. 
  One criticism is that Mendes, a veteran of theater, is overly enamored 
with the medium of film.  Composition and framing are often very noticeable, 
distracting viewers from the action, and in fact causing the action to move 
at a slow pace at times.  But the shots are nevertheless amazing to watch:  
perfectly groomed living rooms, double and triple images of Jane on Ricky's 
camera and television screens as she poses for him across the side yard.  
Further, imagery involving red roses and water lend the story a whimsical 
resonance.  Several scenes benefit from a stark soundtrack of piano and 
marimba.
What the film ultimately takes as its topic is just what the title suggests: 
  Beauty.  Angela Hayes is as beautiful as the red rose of the film's name, 
but beauty is in fact skin deep.  Ricky often mentions beauty when talking 
of his filming.  In one sequence that he shows to Jane, a white plastic bag 
is tossed in a tiny whirlwind among the leaves on an empty sidewalk, a 
symbol of the beauty that results from being human - from being tossed about 
and absorbing the aches we get from love or the lack of it, which is 
neglect.  The beauty these characters experience or miss is again typically 
American, and the result is a tale of immorality and wonder that causes 
mixed feelings toward the characters and their actions.
"American Beauty" has come out a couple of months before December's Oscar 
competitors, but some nominations should come its way.  The film is rated R 
for language and drug use, a couple of scenes of extreme violence, and 
strong sexual content.  I would hesitate taking along anyone under 17, the 
American recommendation for mature viewing audiences.


Author
Shay Casey
Good God almighty, what a movie. Let me ask you something, fair reader. Are
you feeling a little down after wading through the late-summer dreck thrown
at us by the movie studios recently? Do you need something to restore your
faith in film making? Never fear, because a film called "American Beauty"
has come along to prove that, yes, studio-funded films can still be
ambitious and intelligent. It's funny, tragic, entertaining, and
thought-provoking all at once, and may be the most impressive film released
by a major studio in the last three years. If nothing else, "American
Beauty" proves that Hollywood can still churn out a well-written and
satisfying movie when it wants to. Oh, and by the way, Kevin Spacey is one
hell of an actor.
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) is a man stuck in a rut. He works at a
dead-end job, is married to Carolyn (Annette Bening), a wife he no longer
cares for, and has a teenage daughter (Thora Birch) he pays no attention to.
The film opens with Lester, as narrator, telling the audience about how
pathetic his life has become. He would seem to have it all: a family, a
house in the suburbs, and a steady job, but he is unhappy. Wishing his life
weren't so boring, Lester waits for something to pull him out of his
oppressively dull existence. His wait is ended when he is dragged to a
basketball game at the local high school during which his daughter Jane will
perform in a cheerleading routine. During the routine, Lester's focus turns
to his daughter's beautiful friend and fellow cheerleader Angela (Mena
Suvari), who awakens his previously-dormant libido and inspires him to break
out of his dead-end life. He quits his job (but not before blackmailing his
former employers for a sizable severance payment), begins lifting weights
and smoking pot with abandon, and buys a brand-new sports car in which he
cruises around town blasting 70's rock music. Lester's newfound freedom has
serious repercussions on his family, who are taken completely by surprise
when he starts behaving so strangely.
The above plot summary doesn't remotely do justice to the numerous sub-plots
and characters in "American Beauty," and I will touch on several of those
later on, but I begin by centering on the character of Lester Burnham
because the actor playing him has delivered the best performance of his
rather illustrious career. That's not an exaggeration. Folks, if there was
ever any doubt of Kevin Spacey's immense acting talent, this film should put
an end to it straight away. Spacey is a complete delight here, delivering
each line with such conviction and depth that one can find at least two, and
often three meanings behind everything he says. At times, it seems like he
finds meaning that the screenwriter didn't even intend to be there. When his
lines are comical, Spacey makes them hilarious. When they're dramatic, they'
re shattering. When poignant, it's absolutely heartbreaking. I could go on
raving about Spacey, but he has plenty of worthy co-stars, so I'll just say
that he delivers the kind of performance that makes you think the actor has
far more screen time than he actually does.
While Spacey delivers the standout performance in "American Beauty," part of
the film's genius is that his is not necessarily the most important
character. That burden may actually fall on the shoulders of Wes Bentley,
who plays Ricky, the boy next door who spends much of his time videotaping
his neighbors, particularly the melancholy Jane. He initially appears as a
peripheral character, an outside observer, but Jane is soon drawn to his
mysterious nature, while Lester finds in him an unexpected confidant (and
drug provider). As it turns out, Ricky is not videotaping the Burnhams
solely for voyeuristic purposes, but because he sees something strangely
beautiful in them, along with everything else he records. A particularly
revealing passage has Ricky narrating some footage he took of a plastic bag
blowing in the wind, telling Jane, "Sometimes I feel there's so much beauty
in the world, I just can't take it." The quote feels like it should, a
little bit simplistic, but awfully profound for a 17-year-old kid.
Bentley is a revelation in his role, which should garner him more choice
parts in the future. It's not easy to play a character like Ricky without
coming off as silly, but Bentley manages a certain earnestness that can't be
dismissed. Every other actor in "American Beauty" also delivers a fine
performance. Bening starts off as an annoyingly shallow caricature, but
reveals a sad desperation when left alone with her own self-doubt. Suvari
likewise seems a stereotypical teenage vixen, but in a particularly rending
scene near the end of the film, Bentley tears down her facade with a few
well-placed comments. Suvari really shows some acting chops here, and it may
be the most singularly honest scene in the film. Chris Cooper, playing Ricky
's controlling ex-Marine father, is intense and frightening. It's a fine
performance from an unappreciated character actor, and even though his
character isn't fleshed out as much as the others, rest assured that even he
is not what he seems on the surface.
A great strength of "American Beauty's" script is its refusal to draw up
simple characters and keep them as they are. The characters here change and
grow, and even though they aren't the nicest people in the world, I couldn't
help but feel sympathy for each and every one of them at some point during
the movie. I was often reminded of the first time I saw "A Streetcar Named
Desire" and was initially put off by what I saw as the inherent shallowness
of Blanche DuBois. Of course, it is eventually revealed that the shallowness
is there for a reason, as Blanche's annoying personality is only skin deep.
There are similar characters, and similar disrobing moments in "American
Beauty" (and I'm talking about metaphorical disrobing, not the literal kind
that Birch and Suvari each engage in during the film). Just remember,
whatever you think of the characters' personalities early in "American
Beauty," it's a very thin veneer.
What makes this film's accomplishments all the more remarkable is that the
director, Sam Mendes, is directing a feature film for the first time! Having
only worked in live theater previously, Mendes directs "American Beauty" as
though he's been making movies for years. The film doesn't feel like a
photographed play; rather, the director has a good feel for
three-dimensional space, and he delves into symbolism and expressionism with
a steady hand. The screenplay, by Alan Ball, occasionally sinks into the
plotting of a trumped-up sitcom, but the characters are fully realized, and
its most shocking scenes hit like a ton of bricks. Mendes utilizes the
script to its full extent, and succeeds in squeezing every last drop of
effort out of his actors. It's nice to see a movie in which the entire cast
has put their best foot forward, and the end result doesn't look like a
wasted effort.
Ultimately, this film is about people who feel trapped. Sometimes they are
trapped by others, and sometimes they have trapped themselves. An overriding
illustration of this is in Spacey's opening narration, in which he reveals
to the audience that he will be dead by the end of the year. Not only does
this help us focus on the characters by drawing attention away from the film
's plottier elements and set up Lester as a tragic figure, but it has the
added effect of creating him as a man who is "trapped" by fate. No matter
how much Lester tries to recapture his youth, it is too late for him. In
this, the film would seem terminally cynical, but it is ultimately
redeeming. For you see, though he has lost his life, Lester Burnham has
accomplished his goal. At the time of his death, he has long since broken
out of his rut, while forcing others to break out of theirs, with sometimes
disastrous results.
"American Beauty" is the kind of film that when looking for something to
best encapsulate the 90's, one could hold up as a prime candidate, and few
would argue. It takes a microscope to the overriding cynicism of the decade
and tries to discover just what triggered such an attitude. Several films
have tried to get at this idea, with varying results, but none have been
half as entertaining and satisfying as "American Beauty." This is a stunning
film, a rare occasion when direction, writing, acting, and even studio
funding blend to create a masterpiece.
For more reviews, go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4252/movies.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Sam Mendes.
Cast: Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena Suvari, 
Chris
Cooper, Peter Gallagher, Allison Janney, Scott Bakula, Sam Robards.
1999 - 120 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex, nudity, and drug use).
Opens 9/15 (NY, LA); 9/24 (Other Major Markets); 10/1 (Wide).
Reviewed September 9, 1999.
In recent years, films centering on dysfunctional families have been on the 
uprise, from Jodie Foster's 1995 sophomore directing effort, `Home for the 
Holidays,' to 1997's tragic Ang Lee drama, `The Ice Storm,' to 1998's Todd 
Solondz black comedy, `Happiness.' The question, of course, is why are 
today's filmmakers so interested in depicting the clearly unstable 
relationships going on within a seemingly normal American household? And the 
answer, no doubt, is that its appeal stems from the viewer being able to 
relate to the characters and circumstances because, let's face it, no family 
is `normal,' whatever that may mean. `The Ice Storm' was a searing film about 
the way some parents unknowingly fail their children due to their own 
shortcomings and selfishness, as was the shockingly brutal `Happiness,' about 
the dark areas that hide within the exterior calm of suburbia, but no film 
that I have ever seen has portrayed a family, or families, in this case, with 
quite the unnerving honesty and sharp-eyed realism and sympathy of `American 
Beauty,' Sam Mendes' flawless, heartbreaking directing debut. Simply put, it 
is the most thought-provoking and powerful motion picture of the whole 
decade. 
To summarize the premise is to trivialize its multi-layered and 
clearly-defined characters, and the wholly unpredictable story developments, 
but here goes. Like Robert Altman's most impressive work (1975's `Nashville,' 
1993's `Short Cuts'), `American Beauty' is a meticulously-written tapestry of 
the lives of two families living side-by-side in a suburban neighborhood in 
Anywhere, USA. Occasionally narrated by Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey), a 
middle-aged man stuck in an emotionally dead and artificial marriage with 
Carolyn (Annette Bening), a real-estate agent, he tells us right from the 
very first scene that in a year, he will be dead, even though he doesn't know 
it yet. Without being told the particulars of his impending death, Lester 
decides to stop living his life the way everyone else expects him to, and 
immediately quits his sickeningly bland office job. Everything comes into 
focus for him when, while attending a high school basketball game to see his 
teenage daughter, Jane (Thora Birch), perform as a cheerleader, his undivided 
attention moves towards the most beautiful girl he's ever seen: the 
pixie-like, alluring Angela Hayes (Mena Suvari), who also happens to be a 
high school student and Jane's best friend. Soon, Lester is lifting weights 
and smoking pot, free of all worries aside from hoping to have a chance with 
the sexually promiscuous Angela. Meanwhile, Carolyn starts having an affair 
with `The King' (Peter Gallagher), the most successful real estate agent in 
the town and the figure whom she most wants to be like. Due to Lester and
Carolyn's obvious failure as parents and their own self-involvement, they 
don't realize
how neglected they are making Jane feel, and Angela is no help, as she is 
constantly bragging about her latest sexual conquests and repeated success in 
everything she does. Saving up money for a breast augmentation, even though 
she doesn't need it, and with the self-esteem of an gnat, Jane luckily finds 
solace in the form of 18-year-old Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley), a dark, offbeat 
senior whom she first meets when she catches him filming her with his video 
camera, something he is never without. Ricky has also just moved in next door 
to the Burnham's, complete with a strict ex-Marine father (Chris Cooper) who 
checks his urine every few months to make sure he isn't on drugs, and a 
mother (Allison Janney) who inhabits the house as, more or less, a living 
zombie with no spontaneity of life left in her. 
`American Beauty,' which superficially refers to either Angela's physical 
appearance or the flowers Carolyn is growing in her garden, actually gets its 
name from the positive, existential way in which Ricky looks at the world. 
Constantly filming and documenting even the smallest thing with his camera, 
Ricky has escaped the unhappiness of his actual home life by finding simple 
beauty within the world, and in one lyrical sequence, he shows Jane `the most 
beautiful thing I've ever filmed,' which is the surprisingly extraordinary 
sight of a plastic bag blowing around outside on a blustery winter day, right 
before a snowfall. By looking closer at the people, objects, and nature 
around him, Ricky has discovered a truth within the world that not many 
people have the priviledge of ever seeing, and sometimes, he says, `the world 
is filled with so much beauty, I feel like I can't take it.' It is Ricky who 
also acts as the catalyst for Lester's drastic, personality-altering changes, 
as he believes that life is too short to waste your time doing what others 
expect you to do, and instead, should simply live your life as if each second 
were your last. 
In scene after marvelous scene, the trials, tribulations, and experiences of 
family life is portrayed as accurately as it ever has been in a fictional 
film, and every detail hits the bull's-eye. And as in real life, the film is 
carefully-structured in a way that it often feels like we are watching a 
series of moments in the lives of a group of people, rather than a 
cut-and-paste story, like so many conventional films fall victim to. The way 
Carolyn breaks down and cries in frustration after failing to sell a house; 
the way Ricky, camera in hand, zooms in on Jane's bedroom window, past Angela 
seductively dancing, and onto the mirror image of Jane smiling; the way 
Lester, liberated from quitting his job, belts out the 70s rock song, 
`American Woman,' by The Guess Who, as he drives down the street; the way 
Lester sneaks into Jane's room to find Angela's telephone number, only to 
hang up after calling this young girl who is at least twenty-five years 
younger than he; the way Jane, realizing she is falling in love, takes 
Ricky's hand and puts it in her own; the way Carolyn tries to have an honest 
mother-daughter moment, only for her to outrageously accuse Jane of being `an 
ungrateful little brat'; and the way Ricky's mom, an enormously depressed 
woman, doesn't even hear her son walk over to her and say,
`Hi,' are just a handful of individual moments that come together to form a 
magnificent whole, and that isn't even mentioning the tour de force climax, 
set on a stormy night, that left me physically reacting to the proceedings 
on-screen, on the edge of completely losing my composure with strong 
conflicting emotions of shock, curiosity, and absolute devastation.
There is no possible cast that could have improved upon this stunning group 
of actors, nor is there any way to pin-point just one outstanding 
performance. All six of the central thesps deserve Academy Award nominations 
come next year, and it would be criminal to overlook their incomparable work 
here. Kevin Spacey, a former Oscar winner for 1995's `The Usual Suspects,' 
gives his best performance to date, and one that is filled with such an 
overwhelming air of freedom that it is a treat just to watch him work. A man 
lacking in parenting skills, it isn't that Lester doesn't love Jane, but just 
that he is thoroughly fed up with his dead-end existence, and feels that it's 
about time he does what he wants to do.
Annette Bening, in her second stunning turn this year alone (after the 
underrated,
overlooked `In Dreams'), successfully paints her character of Carolyn with a 
vital
mixture of coldness and misery. Always hiding behind a phony facade of joy 
while out in public, she is desperate to fool everyone else into believing 
that she has an ideal marriage with Lester, even though they haven't actually 
been intimate in a long time. It seems the only thing keeping them from 
getting a divorce is their fear that it will only hurt Jane even more; little 
do they know it's probably making things even more of a disaster, as Jane has 
openly told Ricky herself that, `they've got to be psychologically damaging 
me in some way.'
Thora Birch, a 17-year-old actress who has been appearing in feature films 
for eleven
years, and someone I have watched closely since 1991 when she gave an 
Oscar-caliber performance in `Paradise,' practically blew me away with the 
maturity and
self-assuredness that she has gained as an actress since her last major role, 
in 1996's terrible `Alaska.' Birch, easily outdistancing the best 
performances from some of her peers, such as Christina Ricci and Gaby 
Hoffmann, is poignant and effective as the sullen Jane, and due to some 
surprisingly adult material, it obviously took a great deal of courage on her 
part, and she should be commended for it. Jane's relationship with her 
uninvolved parents is summed up early on when she matter-of-factly tells her 
father, `you've barely spoken to me in the last six months.'
Newcomer Wes Bentley, who won the important, decidedly difficult role of 
Ricky over
many of Hollywood's major young stars, is striking and intense throughout, 
but also
affecting, as this misunderstood teenager whose only claim to happiness is in 
his magical, bright-eyed world view. After all, he certainly doesn't get much 
familial support from his hot-tempered father, vividly and 
three-dimensionally played by Chris Cooper (1999's `October Sky'), or his 
zoned-out mother, in a performance of almost unbearable despair by the 
usually comedic actress, Allison Janney (1999's `Drop Dead Gorgeous').
And finally, Mena Suvari is a real discovery as the self-absorbed Angela, the 
character who triggers Lester's lust. Last appearing as the sweet choir girl, 
Heather, in this summer's `American Pie,' Suvari makes a full 180-degree turn 
to present us with a distinct character who, like everyone else, turns out to 
have many multiple layers behind her `cool' exterior. Angela, who judges her 
chances on becoming a model based on her desirability and the amount of 
people she has sex with, fears nothing worse than being ordinary, something 
that, if she would just stop to notice, she very well could be.
With a haunting, unnerving music score, by Thomas Newman; astoundingly 
gorgeous cinematography, by Conrad L. Hall, in which every frame and lighting 
decision turns out to be extremely important in its visual collage of the 
bleak corners in these characters' seemingly happy lives, as well as in the 
showstopping way it observes the things most people take for granted, such as 
a tree, or a person's face; and most importantly, in the literally 
pitch-perfect screenplay, by Alan Ball, `American Beauty' is an instant 
American film classic, and one that cannot be labelled under a certain genre, 
as it has both drama and comedy, both of which are sparked from its natural 
dialogue and sharp human observations. Entirely unpredictable as life's 
fortuitous turns and developments usually are, what we have here is a 
painstakingly on-target portrait of the human condition, as seen through the 
eyes of a group of always-original characters. Better yet, none of them are 
ever shortchanged or judged, nor are all of their dimensions revealed 
immediately, but instead, we learn about them as their true selves are 
gradually revealed. Because of this, there are no good or bad guys, but 
rather wholly sympathetic creations that, in one way or another, any adult or 
teenager will be able to identify with. By the time the ending arrived, a 
simply-filmed emotional powerhouse, the film had so deeply involved me that I 
felt as if I had known these characters all my life, and therefore, what 
happened to them meant just as much, if not more, to me, than in any
other film I have ever seen. `American Beauty' is a devastating motion 
picture of
unconceivable power, made with both intelligence and care, and it may just 
cause you to reevaluate the whole way you view the world. In an overstuffed 
Fall movie season  don't let this film fall through the cracks; it deserves 
all of the recognition and acclaim that has already been bestowed upon it, 
and should be trumpeted as an important turning point in the art of 
filmmaking, particularly with the start of the new millenium so quickly 
approaching. In one word, `American Beauty' is beautiful.

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    I have lived in suburbia for most of my life.  Most of the time I just
walk out the door, and walk to my car, and get in and not realize that
things are moving around me.  Things are actually happening behind me, but I
can never see them, because most of the time I really don't care.  AMERICAN
BEAUTY changed that perception more than anything else.  Sam Mendes'
astonishing debut is heartwrenching, hysterical, thoughtful, provocative,
controversial, and ultimately, the most rewarding and affirming movie of the
year.  And it very well could be the best movie of 1999.
Lester Burnham (Spacey) is tired.  He is tired of the pain he feels at
night, tired of the frustration at his family, his work, and at himself.  He
is not the man of hopes and dreams he once was.  He has, through the Reagan
Revolution and the age of capitalism, lost his soul, lost it in something in
no longer believes in anymore.  Lester probably has more in common with
Warren Beatty's delightful Jay Billington Bulworth in BULWORTH than any
other character ever created.  Like Bulworth, Lester is triggered into the
spirit of life by a woman.
The fact that she's a 17 year old cheerleader and classmate of Lester's
daughter Jane isn't the point, although it's a wickedly funny plot device.
The point is Lester's confrontation with beauty, and the beauty that exists
in the universe that he's been avoiding for so many years.  So, to the
dismay of his WASPish wife Carolyn (Bening), he starts to change.  He works
out.  He quits his job.  He smokes pot.  And he dreams, at night, of Angela
(Suvari).
But AMERICAN BEAUTY wouldn't work nearly as well as it does if this was
about Lester.  It's about the relationships we have with the people in our
lives.  And those people vary from our family to our neighbors to even
people we don't know but with whom we have a certain link to.  And all of
these are rich, probing characters in AMERICAN BEAUTY: all of these are
facets of the American culture that we inhabit.  Col. Fitts (Cooper) and his
drug-dealing son Ricky (Bentley) are one of them, and they are by far the
most interesting.  Others include the King (Peter Gallagher) and, to a
lesser extent, a gay couple played by Bakula and Sam Robards.
AMERICAN BEAUTY works so well, in fact, mostly because it's a comedy.
This is one hysterical movie, with gags all over the place.  But these
laughs hurt, because they are directed at us.  Lester Burnham is the neo
American hero, and as we mock his quest for independence we are ashamed at
laughing at him.  Some may object to his wild misbehavings, but the truth is
that no one can ever expunge 20 years of cultural domination over them
cleanly.  It takes a mad prophet to change the world, and Lester's my pick
for the next one.  Of course, to tell you more would be to ruin the glorious
ending of this film, where it stops being a good satire, and starts aiming
to be a classic masterpiece.
It would be an overblown statement to call this a masterpiece.
Certainly, despite the excellent script, there are kinks in the armor,
namely the over stereotyping of American subcultures.  But in the end, it
really does not matter.  The script decides to forego the middling material
it has and in the last hour, becomes the mad search for redemption in an
unforgiving world.  All of the characters, we realize, are looking for the
same thing: redemption.  And are not sure how in the world to find it.
It takes a gutsy performance to make this film work, and Kevin Spacey
gives it in the role of his career.  This is the role he has been working
towards all of his life: the summation of the state of America within a
character.  And he pulls it off in such dramatic fashion that it will be a
travesty if he is not awarded the Best Actor award at the Academy Awards.
Annette Bening is sensational, as are all the supporting players.  The movie
thematically seems to be sure of itself, but is not: it leaves a few holes
here and there, and may be too eager to force upon its themes to its
audience.  No matter.  For what its worth, this is a film that truly faces
the state of America today.  It reexamines beauty and its place in our
minds.  It is, truly, a beautiful work, one of the best of the year, and is
therefore fantastic in its implications.  The last act of this work is
downright astonishing, as is the far-reaching power of this film.  Mendes
shows a clear talent for imagery and brings alive a story that demonstrates
once and again the tremendous power of film.  A glorious achievement.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
AMERICAN BEAUTY (1999) ***  Directed by Sam Mendes. Written by Alan 
Ball. Photography, Conrad L. Hall. Editing, Tariq Anwar and Chris 
Greenbury. Production design, Naomi Shohan . Music, Thomas Newman. 
Producers ,Bruce Cohen and Dan Jinks. Cast: Kevin Spacey (Lester 
Burnham), Annette Bening (Carolyn Burnham), Thora Birch (Jane 
Burnham), Wes Bentley (Ricky Fitts), Mena Suvari (Angela Hayes), 
Peter Gallagher (Buddy Kane), Allison Janney (Barbara Fitts), Chris 
Cooper (Colonel Fitts), Scott Bakula (Jim No.1) and Sam Robards (Jim 
No. 2). A Dreamworks release.115 minutes. R (language, sex)
My friend Tomas de Torquemada is a very inquisitive fellow.
TT: Why did you wait this long to review American Beauty?
EJ: My paper has limited space. I gave the priority to other titles.
EJ: Because too many worthy films get here without the ballyhoo, 
publicity, promotions, previews, TV "interviews," or reviewers' 
glowing quotes. Hence, many persons miss them -- especially small 
productions, independent ones and especially foreign films.
TT: Yet doesn't movie quality eventually speak for itself?
TT: But at least some non-hyped, unfamiliar titles do make it on 
clocal screens.
EJ: They do. But the publicity is still zilch, the big chains 
schedule few showings, and/or don't keep them long enough for 
word-of-mouth to bring in
the public.
EJ: These are often too indigent for big ads. Since the distributors 
push the big, commercial titles, whenever a good but unfamiliar movie 
does arrive, its best -- often only -- friends are positive reviews 
in local media.
EJ: Not totally, but ninety percent. With rare exceptions, individual 
critics wield no power. What does is a mass of praise coming from the 
majority of the media. Even then, that works mostly for popular, 
mainstream films.
EJ: No, I said "mostly." There are surprises. The Blair Witch 
Project, an original, independent production made for a shoestring, 
has done extremely well, partly thanks to clever distributors who 
spent a fortune on promotion. But by and large, the masses hardly 
read reviews. Let's not fool ourselves about the influence of movie 
critics.
TT: Let's get back to your priorities. What are some of the recent 
movies you reviewed while postponing  American Beauty?
EJ: It was obvious that this film was being received enthusiastically 
by everybody and his sister. My own two cents would not make any 
difference, either way.
EJ: ... solid but unknown titles, many of them foreign: the hilarious 
French The Dinner Game; the beautiful Chinese The King of Masks; the 
quirky British My Life So Far; the French gem for connoisseurs, 
Autumn Tale. American films like the wrenching Holocaust film The 
Last Days; small, good movies which deal with minorities and had no 
publicity, such as Trick, or the Canadian Better Than Chocolate.
TT: But you did include some mainstream titles.
EJ: Yes. Even duds, as save-your-money warnings. Or else items that 
were getting negative reviews but, in my opinion, were highly 
entertaining. Like Double Jeopardy.
TT: Well now, what about American Beauty?
EJ: It 's good. The acting by Spacey and Bening is superb. Spacey is 
highly versatile and talented, can suggest (here and elsewhere) 
ambiguity like nobody's business. This ability serves fleshes out a 
character who, while not eccentric or original, melds anomie, revolt 
and libido.
In her best roles Bening has been a charmer with character, but no 
passive sweetie-pie. Here charm is replaced by nastiness. in the 
difficult role of a compulsive neatnik of the Martha Stewart 
persuasion, as well as an ambitious and shallow creature. She brings 
a weird kind of complexity to an unbending heart and brain.
Everyone knows by now that the film is about a dysfunctional society 
of which we see only a small section, which is conveniently set in 
suburbia. Conveniently because it keeps characters topologically 
close to one another. But there is no real reason for suburbia to be, 
as intended, a genuine culprit.
The who, what, where, how of the movie could as easily be in a 
megalopolis , in non-suburbia or non-exurbia.
There's almost a genre in which suburbanites are the target of 
ironies. The last one was Ang Lee's exceptionally powerful and 
memorable The Ice Storm. If you go back many years, one of the 
pioneering movies in the genre was the sad and sadly forgotten The 
Swimmer (1968) with Burt Lancaster(from a John Cheever story). In 
1975 we had The Stepford Wives (from an Ira Levin novel) that made is 
caustic points by going to science-fiction and its own brand of 
horror. The list is long.
If there is no horror, literally, in American Beauty, the picture is 
a gallery of creeps or creepiness. No one is immune or has redeeming 
values, from the protagonists to the two girls (and classmates) to 
Budy Kane, the smooth real-estate Czar who is not too far removed 
from business zombieism and with whom Carolyn Burnham has a sadly 
mechanical affair. Wes Bentley as Ricky Fitts, the 18-year old 
schoolmate, compulsive videographer,voyeur, druggie and drug-dealer 
is invidiously romanticized by the movie (a mistake, in my opinion). 
He gave me the creeps. Creepy too is his father, retired Colonel 
Fitts  (effectively played by Chris Cooper), with his Nazi 
paraphernalia, his silent, near-catatonic wife (we guess why she's 
that way at film's end, but I won't reveal it in case you have not 
seen the movie), his relationship with his son. Creepiest of all may 
be the son presenting his urine samples to Dad, so as to show he he 
is drug-free.
Also creepy is the supporting role of Lester's new immediate boss who 
stands for materialistic, arrivistic heartlessness, and stupidity. 
When the rebelling Lester tells him off you fell like applauding. But 
this is a secondary, though well worked-in character. The main ones, 
father, mother, daughter and only child Jane (Thora Birch in a 
Christine --The Ice Storm -- Ricci part), her pal  Angela and Ricky 
make up a sextet which is also a SEX-tet.
Each, in his/her way, is a sicko. Not that this is unjustified. 
Angela, the end-of-millennium Lolita, is an icky creature, almost 
repelling for me, but as the beacon of Lester's mid-life-crisis 
libido and his alienation from Carolyn, she fits in well.
Even so, I keep thinking of Gertrude Stein whose words ought to be on 
the Decalogue of Filmmaking: "I prefer the normal to the abnormal, 
since the normal is so much more complex and interesting."
Summarized in High Concept fashion American Beauty is primarily about 
Lester who takes stock of his life and comes up with a negative 
balance. Unnecessarily, the film opens with Lester addressing us "de 
profundis,"  telling us about his last days on this planet and about 
his impending death. This deja vu gimmick detracts from the story, as 
does much of the over-the-top script. It substitutes  "more is more" 
for the advice "less is more."
The overkill goes as far as packing, claustrophobically and  most 
improbably, almost all the characters as next-door-neigbhors.
Admittedly, the photography, by a master, is superb. There is also 
quite an assortment of humorous bits, not the least of which is 
Lester, semi-drunk, alcohol in hand, starting to make passes at his 
own wife who worries about her high-priced couch being soiled. What's 
extra funny to me is that I don't blame her.

Author
John Beachem
Seldom has a movie come along that had me walk out in such an absolute daze. In
truth, I needed a few days to let the film soak in before I could write this.
What I saw can only be described by a word used sarcasticaly several times in
the movie. Used here however, I'm completely serious. It was spectacular.
Normally I keep my synopsis fairly short, but this is such an involved movie
that it's going to require a longer plot outline.
Lester Burnham is a man with one year to live, so the opening narration tells
us. We aren't privy to the events surrounding his death however. Lester lives
in a generic neighborhood with his wife, Carolyn and daughter, Jane. He and his
wife were in love at some point in time, but that time is long since past. His
daughter thinks he's a tremendous loser, and it appears that he rather agrees
with her. He turns his whole life around when he meets his daughter's friend
Angela, who becomes the center of all his fantasies from then on out.
He quits his job, starts working out and smoking pot, buys his dream car, and
drives his wife even further over the edge. She has, in fact, become so
distanced from Lester that she's now having an affair with her real-estate
rival, Buddy Kane. Next door to the Burnhams live what could be viewed as an
even more disfunctional family. Colonel Fitts runs his household like a drill
seargeant. He requires urine samples from his son Ricky every six months for
drug testing. Ricky is, in fact, a drug dealer and a rather obsessive voyeur.
The newest interest of his video camera is Jane Burnham. This first disturbs
her and then slowly begins to fascinate her. The lives of these seven people
slowly grow together more and more until the film's dark yet strangely
necessary finale.
Despite the 5 star rating I've given this film, it is certainly not for
everybody. It deals with more taboo subjects than I can count. For starters,
the entire idea of a man in his forties lusting after a high school girl is
rather disturbing to most. Also touched upon are ideas about as abuse, drugs,
adultery, voyeurism, the list goes on and on. The rather frightening thing, is
that several of these forbidden subjects aren't portrayed as being evil. Those
who have moral misgivings about these few topics I've mentioned may want to
steer clear of this one.
Now that I've given the warning, I'll cover the things that truly made this a
great movie. For starters, the acting is exceptional all around. In particular,
Kevin Spacey is amazing in a role that is quite a change for him. Audiences are
used to seeing him in roles where his character is intelligent and put
together; such as Jack Vinceness (LA Confidential) and Chris Sabian (The
Negotiator). Here, his character is, for all intents and purposes, a loser.
However, he so completely throws himself into the role that we never for a
second doubt him. The other amazing performance comes from newcomer Wes
Bentley. Ricky seems to be the only person who is fully in charge of his
emotions, if not his life.
While the acting is certainly one of the highpoints, there are far more to this
film than I can cover in this review. The script is wonderful and involving,
changing from being hilarious to complete seriousness flawlessly. The
characters are sharply defined without being sterotypical (with the possible
exception of Colonel Fitts), and the music is perfectly used to enhance several
key scenes. I've heard some complaints about the film's dark ending not fitting
in with the rest of the movie. I completely disagree with this. I thought the
ending was esential considering the character types at play here.
Overall, I have to give this a full rating of five stars, yet advise you to see
it only if you think they can handle the forbidden subjects, so blatantly
depicted. Expect this to get nominations in all the major categories at this
year's academy awards.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Most movies willingly yield to even minimal analysis--fall apart in your
hands, into a set of easily identifiable conventions, character types, etc.
Not so with director Sam Mendes' American Beauty, the story of what the
suburban American dream looks like minus the veneer, the 'image' of success
each of the characters is either violently reacting to or desperately trying
to adopt. First there's Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey, in his best role since
se7en, perhaps), a pathetic excuse for a father in his daughter Jane's
(Thora Birch) eyes, and--as the brief opening establish es--even pathetic
enough that she 'hires' her off-camera boyfriend to kill him. But this isn'
t To Die For. Next there's Carolyn Burnham (Annette Benning), Lester's
neurotic wife. She who says part of her job is to "live the image of
success." So we know what pole she's at. After her there's the love-interest
pair we all want to make it out alive: Jane and off-camera beau Ricky Fitts
(Wes Bentley), two fringe-dwellers intent on not buying into the
establishment their parents represent. In addition there's Ricky's
homophobic Marine-dad (Chris Cooper) and Jane's non-friend Angela (Mena
Suvari) the budding model, who individually manage to supply a large part of
the forward motion of American Beauty, which in turn allows the core
characters to develop in a less contrived manner, as they don't have to
carry everything at every moment.
The key word here is strong writing, even down to the management of Lester's
occasional narrative intrusions. Yes, voice-overs. For an audience well
aware that Ridley Scott's cut of Bladerunner was far better without it. As
if that wasn't enough, too, writer Alan Ball even goes one better, by having
Lester's narration be from the grave, pace Traces of Red, Carlito's Way.
Unlike those two, however, the dead (dying) narrator here isn't a gimmick,
but a subtle narrative device: Lester earns our trust (becomes reliable) via
telling us in advance how the story is going to go--that he dies at the end.
This both provides a little dramatic impetus to things (we want to know how,
why) and fosters the illusion that all his cards are on the table, which in
turn suggests either that his death isn't going to be the 'real' climax of
the movie or that everything else is going to be so exciting that his death
will, in comparison, be anticlimactic. That there will be no mystery there.
But then, surprise surprise, there is some mystery, and his death definitely
is the climax, and the writing was so smooth all along--the narrative
manipulation so deft--that there's no need for the kind of critical
reinterpretation that, say, Arlington Road or Sixth Sense called for. Not
that kind of ending, where the curtain's finally pulled all the way back and
you wonder how you missed what was really going on. More the kind of ending
where character and theme come together just long enough for you to feel
like you're seeing deeper into something. And, as this is a movie (i.e.,
'moving image') about an image-driven America, that something is of course
there in the title: America.
But then there's that second word, Beauty, which our camera eye Ricky Fitts
doesn't see in the typical places--say, Angela Hayes, where Lester
definitely does sees it--but in either the supra-mundane or in death, the
second of which comes to form part of the algebra of the movie: that there's
beauty in death, that beauty equals death. Which calls for a reevaluation of
the title, keeping in mind that Lester's told us he's going to be dying here
soon. In not so many words, that his death will be beautiful. And it is,
both because it visually justifies the recurrent red-rose conceit of the
movie and because his death is the final stage of his long-awakening. It's
the old the-more-awake-you-are-the-more-doomed-you-are trick, except this
time it's not dramatically tied into things (e.g., in a horror movie, the
first person to 'realize' gets whacked, etc). And his awakening is a
pleasure to watch, both because Spacey pulls it off with such comic elegance
and because it sets so many things in motion that A) it seems highly
unlikely that Alan Ball will be able to properly 'answer' each complication,
and B) it becomes difficult to assign more importance to one thing or
another, which is to say each development is very difficult to predict. That
is, everything looks so random and muddled that our kneejerk cinematic
expectations kick in and we instinctively pigeonhole American Beauty as one
of those self-conscious movies more intent upon making us laugh at our
denuded selves than upon telling a good story.
But then, in the final minutes, Ball both ties everything neatly together
and manages to make each development unpredictable yet, in retrospect,
absolutely necessary. And it's all done without ever getting too
serious--Ricky's military dad even has a Mr. Roper/Three's Company moment
which, while not quite in keeping with the tone of the rest of the movie, is
nevertheless in keeping with his paranoid conception of the world. In those
final minutes too, during a sex scene which is the culmination of Lester's
awakening, Sam Mendes quietly directs the camera at a tennis shoe--a child's
shoe, Angela's--which manages to sum up Lester's plight in a way that
dialogue really couldn't. Meaning that not only is American Beauty
intelligently written, but it's strongly directed, which is a rare
combination, allows American Beauty to become the movie that Ice Storm
wanted to be, that The Myth of Fingerprints had vague inclinations towards,
that American History X might have been. It's perhaps the strongest movie to
come around in a few years. Five stars. Out of five.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Christian Pyle
Midway through "American Beauty" teenage filmmaker/pot dealer Ricky Fitts (Wes
Bentley) shows his girlfriend Jane Burnham (Thora Birch) a plate that Ricky's
father (Chris Cooper) keeps in a locked display case.  The plate is plain white
with gold trim; it is visibly old and elegant in its simplicity.  Jane turns
the plate over to find a swastika stamped in black.  Ricky explains, "It's like
official state china of the Third Reich."  The plate is a potent symbol for the
mission of the film:  to reveal the hidden depravity beneath the simple
elegance of American suburban conformity.
To the casual observer, the Burnhams seem perfect.  Lester (Kevin Spacey)
writes for a marketing magazine.  Carolyn (Annette Bening) sells real estate
and devotes her spare time to her rosebushes.  Their daughter Jane is a
cheerleader.  However, under the facade the cracks run deep, and everything is
about to split wide open.  Lester's boss has hired an efficiency expert (Barry
Del Sherman) to ax several workers.  Despite the fact that Carolyn's business
is overshadowed by that of Buddy Kane the Real Estate King (Peter Gallagher),
she lords her relative success over Lester's head and denies him sex or
affection.
Just as life looks its bleakest, Lester finds a strange salvation in Angela
Hayes (Mena Suvari), a teenage friend of Jane's.  Watching Angela perform as a
cheerleader, Lester has a surreal epiphany that launches him on a mid-life
crisis.  Before long, he quits his job in favor of working at a fast food
restaurant, buys a sportscar, buys weed from Ricky, and starts working out in
the garage.  Everytime Angela comes over, he fawns over her like a lovesick
kid, disgusting his daughter and raising an intense jealousy in her.  Meanwhile
Carolyn begins having an affair with Buddy and takes up target shooting.
The Burnhams are contrasted with their new neighbors, the Fitts.  Ricky is an
unusual young man obsessed with filming Beauty, an obsession that draws him to
Jane.  His father is a stern Marine Corps colonel given to fits of violence,
and his mother Barbara (Allison Janney of TV's "The West Wing") seems to have
been beaten into submission.  As dysfunctional as the Burnhams are, they're not
as bad as the Fitts.
Ricky becomes as important a character as Lester.  Although young, Ricky has
figured out what Lester learns in the movie.  Speaking of his most treasured
video, a plastic bag dancing in the wind, Ricky says this moment taught him
that "there was this entire life behind things and this incredibly benevolent
force that wanted me to know there was no reason to be afraid, ever."  Thus,
the title "American Beauty" is not as ironic as it may at first appear. 
Lester's vision of Angela as Aphrodite amid streams of rose petals is his
equivalent of the dancing bag, but he's confused by his lust and sexual
frustration for most of the movie.  Beneath the satire, "American Beauty" is
about the life-giving quest for beauty.
American Beauty marks the debut of both director Sam Mendes and screenwriter
Alan Ball.  Look for both to contribute great things in the future.  Ball's
script is easily the best of 1999 and richly deserves its inevitable Oscar.
The performances are excellent all around.  Since Kevin Spacey and Annette
Bening have already gotten their share of critical acclaim and award
nominations, I'd like to single out the always underrated Chris Cooper.  His
character, Col. Fitts, is an especially challenging character who has to go
through a complex transformation, and Cooper does an excellent job.  (Video
recommendation:  If you can find it, check out Cooper in "Pharaoh's Army," an
indie about the Civil War.)
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Mac VerStandig
American Beauty is a sitcom on the surface, but a remarkable social 
commentary laced with dark humor and thorough character development can 
be found just below. Kevin Spacey gives a performance, in what may be 
one of the great films of our time, that will surely garner him an 
Academy Award nomination.
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) lives an every-man life filled with 
misery. "Both my wife and daughter think I'm this gigantic loser" he 
quips. His boss is about to give him the axe. His marriage to Carolyn 
(Annette Bening), a real estate agent, is just for show. His daughter, 
Jane (Thora Birch) is experiencing more that just the typical teenage 
resentment of her father, as she rightfully points out to him "You've 
barely even spoken to me for months."
Lester's answer is to make a drastic change in his lifestyle. He 
blackmails his boss out of nearly $60,000, buys the car that he has 
always wanted, develops a secret crush on his daughter's best friend, 
starts smoking dope, and gets a job that he truly enjoys: flipping 
burgers at a fast food restaurant.
Before long, Jane takes a liking to her new neighbor and classmate, 
Ricky (Wes Bentley), whose quiet and deeply observant habits test the 
attention span of Angela Hayes, Jane's best friend. As Jane and Ricky 
develop into a couple, Angela fades away into a world of infinite 
loneliness.
The role of Lester Burnham is an extraordinarily tough one. It exhibits 
feelings of pedophilia, obsession, and carelessness; just to name a few. 
Kevin Spacey does it all, thus creating a believable character and 
delivering an amazing performance that is one of the finest in memory. 
Annette Bening and the rest of the cast all do a sound job and play 
their parts credibly.
The title of the film is equally as thought provoking as its subjects. 
Is "American Beauty" a reference to the rose garden which Carolyn 
cherishes? Could it be Angela Hayes, the blond haired and blue eyed 
cheerleader that lives in constant fear or being ordinary? Most likely 
it is a reference to what director Sam Mendes and writer Alan Ball are 
trying to show is the impossible dream.
Two types of people will see this movie. One will see it as a humorous, 
out-of-the-ordinary sitcom. For them it is entertainment worth the price 
of admission. The other group will not only see those qualities, but the 
deep symbolic themes that lie between the lines. For them the two-hours 
will be priceless.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Watching Sam Mendes's "American Beauty" is like taking a roller coaster tour
through suburbia - gleeful yet observant that something awry may be happening
in each house of each neighborhood. "American Beauty" is the latest 90's view
of dysfunctional families of America, a fascinating, complex, irritating,
grandiose and finally (and purposely) uneven satire. 
Kevin Spacey stars as the hapless, droll Lester Burnham, a magazine writer for
a bland organization run by bland businessmen who seemed to have emerged from
the offices of the film "In The Company of Men." He is unhappily married to his
frantic wife, Carolyn (Annette Bening), a real-estate agent whose sales have
depleted due to the new local hotshot honcho in town (Peter Gallagher). They
both have a smug, obnoxious daughter, Jane (Thora Birch) whose sole intent in
life is to have augmented breasts. 
Their new neighbors are not any less strange or threatening to suburbia. There
is the intensely coiled former Marine (Chris Cooper) and his catatonic wife
(Allison Janney, in an atypical role), and their son, Ricky (Wes Bentley), a
video camera freak with a steely gaze in his eyes - he has the ability to see
the beauty in things. 
There is a dichotomy in the breakdown of these two families. As far as the
Burnhams are concerned, Lester and Carolyn (their sexually frustration always
in check) listen to dinner music while eating, and Jane (who hates her parents)
brings her best friend, a seemingly teenage blonde nymphette named Angela (Mena
Suvari), for sleepovers. Angela admits that Jane's father is cute, and claims
she wants to have sex with him.  
Ricky's family has deep seated hatred towards Jews and homosexuals. His Marine
father does not want his son Ricky to resort to drugs use anymore, and
regularly beats him if he touches his belongings. Ricky draws more attention to
his video camera and films Jane and the rest of her family through his bedroom
window - it is his means of escape. And his mother never says a word and seems
to live a life of sadness reflected in her endless stares. 
By comparison, the Burnhams are living a life with more zest. Lester is drawn
to his daughter's sexy friend and has a regressive awakening. He quits his job,
starts lifting weights and jogging, and frequently postures and rants about his
newfangled freedom. Lester also starts smoking pot, listens to his collection
of 70's songs, and tells his family what he really thinks about his life and
his marriage. In other words, he is driving them further apart than they were
already.
There are many more revelations in the richly designed tapestry of writer Alan
Ball's screenplay, and it is unfair to say more because nothing in this film
can be predicted. I have been saying for a long time that Hollywood films
should take the initiative of relying on character-based narrative to unveil a
slice of Americana. Most recent Hollywood films rely on plot to drive the
characters forward in motion (see "Pushing Tin")  whereas Ball instead lets
these characters live and breathe by their passions and hungers - they are not
dictated by cumbersome plot points. Essentially, these people are not at all
what they seem to be, and slowly other attributes start to evolve in their
personalities. 
Lester undergoes the most thrilling transformation from a jerky, ironic
three-piece suit bureaucrat to a t-shirt wearing, posturing, reborn, virile man
with lots of attitude to spare, more so than his cheerleading daughter. He is
the anchor of the film, and basically underscores all the tension within his
family and his next-door neighbors with his rampant, rebellious slant on life. 
"American Beauty" scores heavily with Spacey's beautifully modulated, magnetic
performance - it is clearly his best work by far. Annette Bening finally has
her zestiest, most radiant role since "The Grifters" - here she accomplishes
the rare feat of being sympathetic while simultaneously being pathetic and
annoying. Thora Birch also does solid work as the cranky Jane (she certainly
grew up since her work in those Harrison Ford/Tom Clancy movies). 
One performance that deserves some recognition is the underrated Chris Cooper
as the violently abusive Marine. Cooper also played a dad earlier this year in
the gentle "October Sky" and has had decent parts in some John Sayles films.
Here he demonstrates an intensity that is nearly unwatchable, and his
rain-drenched scene with Spacey will make you squirm. 
More kudos are deserving of Mena Suvari as the blonde cheerleader friend of
Jane's - her role says more about the plight of teenage girls in high school
than most teen movies of late. She could give Rachel Leigh Cook a run for her
money.
As much as I like newcomer Wes Bentley, his enigmatic Ricky left me
unsatisfied, partly because we know so little about him. One critic described
him as evil (which he is not) but there is a disarming, almost Norman Bates
aura about this kid that is creepily inconclusive. Ditto Ricky's mother who is
left in the sidelines, though I imagine we can draw our own conclusions as to
why she is virtually catatonic.
"American Beauty" is not perfect or as harrowingly honest as last year's
undeniably great "Happiness," but it is entertainingly wicked, insightful and
satirical in its unfolding of this slice of suburban life. Once it is over, you
will get an urge to drive through the suburbs of any town in America and try to
take a  peek at what is happening in those family homes.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns, or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
`Both my wife and daughter think I'm this gigantic loser' says Lester
Burnham (Kevin Spacey), a 42-year old husband and father who is
experiencing a mid-life crisis. Lester and his wife Carolyn (Annette
Bening) are living out a normal, everyday marriage merely to provide an
adequate living environment for their teenage daughter, Jane (Thora
Birch). The only reason Lester continues on with the pointless charade
classified as `life' is his daily masturbating session in the shower.
Everything is downhill from there.
American Beauty isn't so much the chronicle of Lester's downfall than it
is the story of his rebirth. If you `look closer' beneath the glossy
surface, as the film's trailer suggests, you will find a film stirring
with truth and poignancy. Some will enjoy the film merely for it's
dead-on portrayal of a present day nuclear family, played out in the
fashion of a scathingly funny prime-time sitcom. Others will look beyond
that and *experience* American Beauty, as it explores the human mind and
ponders the ordinary existence that Lester forges ahead with every
morning.
Director Sam Mendes has done something remarkable with his directorial
debut. He has introduced us to three fully realized, richly detailed
characters that everyone can relate to in one way or another. Mendes
paints a beautiful picture around the Burnham family, and his delicate
style is immersed in storytelling brilliance. I foolishly made the
mistake of assuming American Beauty would simply revolve around Spacey's
awkward breakdown. In actuality, the film delves much deeper into the
nature of being human, and it delivers a relentlessly truthful and
unexpectedly powerful fable of everyday suburbia.
Spacey's work here is beyond brilliant. His performance as Lester
Burnham is sure to garner him an Oscar nomination, and for good reason.
The actor has perfectly realized Lester's difficult situation, but he
also respects the characters limitations like a genuine Hollywood
craftsman. Scenes at the Burnham dinner table strike the perfect tone,
as Lester (with the artificial smile of a caring father) desperately
attempts to connect with his daughter using the obvious `How was your
day at school, honey?' approach. It reeks of hopeless detachment, just
as Lester's fruitless job as a tele-marketer, and essentially every
minute of his pointless life.
When he and Carolyn attend a basketball game to view their daughter's
cheerleading abilities, Lester finds a reason to continue living: a
divinely attractive teenager named Angela (Mena Suvari). Despite the
notable fact that she and Jane are close friends, Lester begins
hopelessly lusting over the blond angel, experiencing surreal fantasies
in which her naked body is delicately covered with fallen rose petals.
He begins to lift weights and smoke pot on a regular basis, all with the
single hope of sleeping with Angela when the time is right. As Lester
puts it so very bluntly, `I'm just an ordinary guy with nothing to
lose'. Truer words have never been spoken.
Annette Bening, so ultimately convincing in a heartbreaking performance,
backs up Spacey with reliable persistence. Even as Lester loses his grip
on modern society, the lives of Carolyn and Jane are spiraling out of
control as well. Carolyn, unhappy with her job as a real estate agent,
tries valiantly to be a loyal wife and caring mother. She finds her own
escape when she christens a heated affair with a business competitor
(Peter Gallagher), who calls himself `The King'. Jane, convinced she has
no support from her parents, finds an unlikely curiosity in the weirdo
next-door (Wes Bentley), who videotapes everything as if worried he may
loose his grasp on reality. His father (Chris Cooper), an ex-marine and
right-wing gay basher, makes him provide a urine sample every 6 months
for drug testing. All of the characters in American Beauty have more to
reveal than initially evident.
Rarely has a film struck me with it's audacious courage the way American
Beauty has. The film - powered by astonishing performances from Spacey,
Bening, Bentley and Cooper - has an amazing power that affects the
viewer in places they least expect. As both a masterfully perceptive
tragedy and a bitingly funny satire,  it's a film of devastating and
unforgettable magnitude. The way it explores Lester's inadequacies - and
his realization that society has gone to hell - feels frighteningly true
to life. The poignant, touching and heartbreaking experience of American
Beauty is perhaps the two most rewarding hours you will ever spend in a
movie theater.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton
http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
http://MovieThing.com/members/movies/MovieViews
Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton - YOUTH WEB SITE NOMINEE
"CLICK"  --> Thanks for Your Support!!
http://www.shocking.co.uk/iawards/youth/home.cgi?referrer=movieviews

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) There are six main characters and another half-dozen
smaller parts in AMERICAN BEAUTY. All of them are well written and well
acted. Best of all, and most impressive for a mere movie, is that all
the characters grow and change in search of the niche that suits them.
On the surface they seem exaggerated, quirky, and sometimes a little
warped and sinister. But look closer and you'll see they are all within
the realm of credibility, and much more normal than they first appeared.
Their stage is a generic American neighborhood. 
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) anchors the film. He says his wife is
oblivious to him, and when he tries to talk to his teenaged daughter, he
fails to communicate. He hates his dead-end job and wonders what
happened to the days when the family was happy. Spacey is excellent at
conveying the detached, sarcastic, bemused frustration at the turns his
life is taking.
Two events quickly turn Lester's life around. At a high school
basketball halftime show, a cheerleader friend of his daughter makes eye
contact with him, which sends him into a rose-petaled sexual fantasy
where she is dancing just for him.
Another night, he goes with his wife to a fancy party for her real
estate friends. A young waiter spots Lester getting drunk alone, and
asks if he would like some pot. Why not, he figures, and the two go out
back to smoke a joint. The boss finds the kid outside and orders him
back to work, so the kid quits, just like that. Lester says "I think you
just became my personal hero."
Lester becomes enthralled with this adolescent life of pretty
cheerleaders, smooth dope, and a to-hell-with-work attitude. He
completely regresses, leaving his career, getting a part-time job
flipping burgers, and buying the car he always wanted in high school. He
even starts working out in hopes that he'll impress the cheerleader,
maybe to start a little something on the side with her.
Each of the other characters is affected by Lester and his change in
lifestyle.
Lester's wife Carolyn (Annette Bening) is one of the less sympathetic
characters in AMERICAN BEAUTY, in part because Lester, the central
figure, sees her as cold and selfish. She comes across as screechy and
closed-minded, but her character is still solidly written and acted.
Looking at the events from her point of view, her actions and emotions
are completely justified. From her perspective, she is a normal person
trapped in a family that has gone completely crazy.
The cheerleader is Angela (Mena Suvari), who looks very young, about 15.
(Her age gives Lester's earnest infatuation a creepy tone of lechery,
that somehow fits in with the movie's beauty-in-sickness themes.) Angela
is technically friends with Lester's daughter Jane (Thora Birch),
although the two have very little in common. Angela likes to outdo her
friends by talking about sex, and about which boy's dick is bigger.
Anything outside her Teen Beat world is passed off as "weird." In modern
parlance, Angela is a jock and Jane is a goth.
Jane claims to hate both of her parents. She think's dad is an
embarrassment and mom is out of touch. Two things in Jane's life seem
incongruous with a goth-type: first that she's a cheerleader, and second
that she's saving her babysitting money for a boob job. But Jane is at
that age where she's just discovering who she really is and she starts
to gravitate toward the quiet, moody boy next door (in spite of Angela's
speculations on how weird he probably is).
While the other characters are looking for something more, only Ricky
(Wes Bentley) seems to be at peace with life. He is smart, observant,
and a great judge of human nature, although he's still hiding in his
shell. Ricky is the Jane's boy next door and he's also the Lester's
young waiter. When he's not selling pot or staying out of the way of his
abusive father, he observes the world through his video camera,
searching for Beauty. He finds it in death, in sadness, in waste. 
Chris Cooper plays Ricky's overbearing father, Colonel Fitts. He loves
his son, and he THINKS he keeps a tight leash on him. Obviously, dealing
drugs isn't a very tight leash, but as Ricky says, "never underestimate
the power of denial." Cooper is almost becoming typecast as an
old-fashioned domineering figure. Still, he handles the character with
appropriate seriousness and gravity.
The plot is not one of actions but of character development. Starting
with Lester, the characters shun the lives they've become accustomed to.
In exchange, they discover and accept the lives their true natures
demand. Lester finds his inner adolescent. Carolyn accepts that her
career is what's most important. Jane and Ricky bring each other out of
their shells, and 
Over the soundtrack an amazingly simple musical theme plays. Scored by
Thomas Newman, the music hints at discovery, awakening, and revelation,
which ties in perfectly with the characters' metamorphosis.
AMERICAN BEAUTY is one of the best character studies in years. Movies
that shun plot for characters seem susceptible to problems. Sometimes
minor characters aren't fleshed out, which ruins the richness of the
movie. Sometimes a plot is tacked on that requires a character to do
something they wouldn't otherwise do. Very rarely is it done flawlessly.
Although it comes close, AMERICAN BEAUTY is not flawless, but it's
problems are almost never character-related. Sometimes the good-looking
cinematography seems a little staged. A few plot point setups are a
little too coincidental. But because the film succeeds where it tries
to, these complaints are nothing.
Come December, look for this movie to get honored with awards and high
spots on top ten lists, including mine.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Joy Wyse
American Beauty, Starring Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch,
Allison Janney, Peter Gallagher, Mena Suvari, Wes Bentley, and Chris Cooper
Directed by Sam Mendes
The catch phrase for American Beauty is `When you've got nothing to lose,
you might as well risk everything. At first glance Lester Burnham (Spacey)
appears to have everything to lose.  His is the typical suburban life,
with a lovely home, wife, daughter, and a well-paying job.  But that's at
first glance.  The more we get to know Lester, the more we understand his
actions.
Every character in the film reminds me of someone I know, including
myself although probably not to the extent that others see me.  Lester
himself is a quiet man routinely going through life, accepting his
surroundings.  He's one of the good guys.  His wife, Carolyn, is the
driving force in the family.  She is the one who sets the rules and
expects total compliance from Lester, their daughter, their neighbors, and
everyone that she encounters including her real estate customers.  She is
determined to project the `right' image, complete with a garden full of
American Beauty roses.  
Their daughter is on the high school cheerleading squad as is her friend,
a cute little blonde sexpot.  As Lester's life starts to crumble about
him, he envisions himself in an interlude with the blonde, and the rose
petals are cleverly interposed with those fantasies.
There are many subplots throughout the storyline, and all of them are
well-written, acted, and directed.  The neighbors are an assorted lot,
including the teenage boy who stalks Lester's daughter.   The male couple
who live on the other side of the Burnhams are well placed and they are an
integral part of the plot.
It is an exceptional plot and one that will stay with you for a while. 
Now that I know what happens, I want to see it again.  It deserves an A
for its unusual delivery.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley
Synopsis: 
Upper middle class, suburban family man Lester (Kevin Spacey) realizes that
he is just going through the motions: he is unable to feel passion; he is
soulless, cynical, and no longer able to feel the edge between success and
failure. Everyone else around him has similar symptoms. Lester's
unassertive daughter Jane (Thora Birch) is too lethargic to change her
world, yet all too ready to whine and complain. His wife Carolyn (Annette
Bening) is reduced to keeping up appearances and reciting commercialist
slogans. And these are people with a big house and a decent standard of
living.
The only person who seems able to appreciate beauty and freedom and life is
the person most deprived of it: a dope-dealing teen from across the street
who is practically imprisoned by a domineering, bullying father. When
Lester embarks on a mad scramble to feel the edge again, the fact that he
has quit his job to feel what it's like - - and his newfound interest in
exercise to impress a teenage girl - - ruffle a lot of feathers in the
family. Will Lester regain his ability to appreciate life? 
Opinion: 
People say it all the time: you never appreciate good health until it's
gone. Likewise, people raised in fabulously pampered prosperity can become
unhappy and spiteful over the dumbest, most inconsequential problems,
simply because they have no clue how good they have it. Sometimes it takes
a near fall - - accidentally or through deliberate fasting - - to move out
of apathy and reclaim your ability to challenge the world. The
deprivation/appreciation cycle is a major theme of AMERICAN BEAUTY.
AMERICAN BEAUTY is a non-formula, intelligent and articulate movie that
offers fantastic performances by everyone in the cast, especially Kevin
Spacey, who is simply gosh darn amazing this movie. The thing I like about
AMERICAN BEAUTY is that there is no sentimental music, no hospital scene
nor any overly dramatic hokum. The movie entertains and offers brilliant
performances just as is. 
If you are in the mood for a thoughtful, non-formula flick, I highly
recommend AMERICAN BEAUTY.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
George Wu
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) is in a loveless marriage, has a daughter who
hates him, and is on the verge of being fired from his job.  His id is
reawakened however when he encounters and obsesses over Angela Hayes (Mena
Suvari), a pretty blond who is also his daughter's good friend.  In the
mean time, his daughter, Jane (Thora Birch), meets and fall in love with
the new next door neighbor, Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley), a drug dealer who
videotapes everything around him.  This is the setup of the much
buzzed-about American Beauty, a film similar to The Ice Storm in subject
but not in theme.  While both sport dysfunctional families, The Ice Storm
was essentially about the inability to communicate.  American Beauty is
about joie de vivre counteracted by the illusions with which people live.
At the very beginning of American Beauty, in voiceover, Lester tells us he
is going to die.  This plot device works thematically to get us to see this
character in a different light -- one who may or may not make the most of
his life in the time he has left.  But giving this knowledge to the viewer
also has a destructive side effect.  The end of the film makes us focus on
how Lester is going to die, which really has little to do with the rest of
the movie.  The filmmakers encourage this by supplying multiple
alternatives (though not all are equally plausible).  This sudden
transition to thriller temporarily ejects the film's thematic concerns out
the window.
All the characters see something that is not really the case, except for
Ricky, the all-compassionate drug dealer aesthete.  Ricky is not the
disciplined hard worker his Neo-Nazi father, Colonel Fitts (Chris Cooper)
thinks he is.  A later plot twist further warps the Colonel's
misinterpretation of his son.  Ricky is also not the psychopath Angela
thinks he is.  Angela is not the perfect embodiment of fantasy that Lester
thinks she is, and Angela is not the worldly teenager Jane thinks she is. 
Jane does not care for her mother as her mother Carolyn (Annette Bening)
thinks she does.  All of this of course leads to tragedy.
Unfortunately, the characters are so caricatured, it takes a good portion
of the film for the all-around great cast to transcend their exaggerated
natures and humanize them.  Writer Alan Ball doesn't help matters by
outfitting each character with heavy symbolic weight.  Lester is the
Anarchist, Carolyn is the Ayn Rand Capitalist, Thora is the Lost Soul,
Ricky is the Artist, Angela is the Temptress, Colonel Fitts is Evil
Incarnate.  This is ultimately the kind of heavy-handedness that drags the
movie down.
In one scene, Ricky tells Jane that what he is about to show her is the
most beautiful thing he has ever filmed.  A Tarkovsky would have just shown
it (though not as blandly as done here).  Director Sam Mendes saddles his
image with the weight of the world and makes it feel trite.  This most
beautiful thing could have been just a naďve teenager's romanticism, but
Mendes returns to it later, indicating it is what Ricky intends.  Mendes is
an accomplished theater director, but this is his debut film, so he might
be forgiven for not following one of the most basic rules of narrative
filmmaking -- show, don't tell.  Mendes certainly does his share of
showing, but then the characters always tell us afterwards about the
significance of what we've just seen -- irrational homophobia!  Materialism
run rampant!  This does not only place a mistrust in the viewer, but makes
the film feel too self-important.  The most erring instance of this "just
in case you didn't get it" is the film's ending montage.  It is overstated,
sentimental, and wrongheaded.
American Beauty is a powerful film, but it owes its debt more to an
extraordinary cast than to its flawed writing and direction.
http://pages.prodigy.net/zvelf/index.htm

Author
Eric Walker

The Church of the SubGenius has a motto for breaking away from the chains
of conformity: "Repent!  Quit your job!  Slack off!"  And that's
essentially what AMERICAN BEAUTY is about: waking up and realizing what a
sham modern life is, before it's too late.  But there are powerful forces
at work forces determined to keep us subservient and asleep; if you're not
careful, you'll invoke the wrath of these all-powerful gods and they'll
destroy you.  So it is with films of this sort: when the protagonist (you
can't call him a "hero") wakes up and begins enjoying life to its fullest,
he is soon destroyed by the inability of his companions, co-workers, and
family to allow him the freedom to rebel.  In other words: If you dare to
break away and be yourself, you're screwed.
AMERICAN BEAUTY follows the path tread by other movies of this sort, from
David Lynch's BLUE VELVET to Linklater's SLACKER, or BREAKING AWAY, or
even ROBOCOP.  The setting of a peaceful, perfect-looking suburban town
suggests echoes of Lynch, but rather than following BLUE VELVET's idea
that "it's a strange world" lying beneath the surface of picket fences
and bright colors (the opening scenes of this movie include a white
picket fence and dazzling red roses, reminiscent of Lynch's creation),
this movie dares to suggest that you can become *part* of the weirdness --
and if you do, then you'll realize once again that life can be fun and
exciting.
Kevin Spacey is Lester Burnham, the man who repents, quits his job, and
slacks off.  He describes himself as a pethetic loser, but in fact
everyone in his world is so screwed up by their attempts to be successful
and "normal" that he's the only one who bothers to acknowledge it.  And
when he gets a glimpse of his daughter's best friend (a luscious
17-year-old cheerleader), he reacts in a manner that any grown-up man
would when he spies a girl of that sort.  But he's so beaten down and
numbed by his screwed-up "grown-up" life that the sudden feeling of
emotion takes him by surprise, overwhelming him and causing him to wake up
at last.  For a 42-year-old man to be lusting after a teenage girl is the
epitome of depravity...but Lester isn't really the dirty, sleazy child
molester that some critics of this movie have labelled him.  He's reaching
back to the time when he was 20 years old, free of responsibility,
listening to rock music and smoking pot, and lusting after teenage girls
when he was at the age to do so.  Lester was probably so much of an
outcast that at 20, he didn't have the courage to approach the object of
his fantasy.  And because his soul has been chained to a rock of
conformity and obedieance, he isn't able to wake up and achieve his goals
until now.
But *they* don't like that: how can this man actually expect to rebel
against authority and conformity, and even manage to be HAPPY?!?  Lester
may have been screwed up, but what none of the other characters in his
world want to admit is that they're even worse off than he is.  One of
this movie's strengths is the way that while we're given a lot of biting,
vicious laughs at the expense of Lester's wife, we also see that she's
terrified of the world -- so much so that we pity her, and we can honestly
understand her feelings during the movie's climax, as she drives home to
confront her husband for one last time.
And Lester's daughter -- played by Thora Birch, with a hairstyle and
makeup resembling Christina Ricci -- is so ashamed of her screwed-up
parents (and herself, for being raised in an environment like this) that
she saves money for a breast implant she doesn't really need and listens
to her best friend bragging about her sexual conquests.  So when the son
of her next-door neighbor comes into her life, offering her an alternative
from the asphyxiating "normality" of her everyday surroundings, she jumps
at the chance and bares herself (literally) to him.  In fact, it's the
neighbor's kid -- the one who gives Lester his first joint and encourages
him to rebel against society -- who's happiest in this movie.  (The fact
that his character spent two years in a mental instution probably
contributes to this: the world of AMERICAN BEAUTY is so insane that the
institution was enough of an escape to allow him to come to terms with
himself.)
The characters are what make this such a fascinating and entertaining
movie: they're out of control, every single one -- and yet we have no
problem seeing a little bit of ourselves there, right on the screen.  Am I
as hopeless and pathetic as Lester, scurrying to my job every day and
taking abuse from my boss?  Is my life destined to become as empty and
shapeless as his?  Or is it still possible for me to Repent, Quit my job,
and Slack Off? 
The story has a few awkward moments, mostly during the scenes that shape
the ongoing plot and make it seem a bit too contrived at times --
especially during the scene where Lester's next-door neighbor spies him
"seducing" his son, and later going to his home to confront him.  But the
movie is still off-kilter enough to keep us guessing to the very end...and
while the ultimate resolution of the movie isn't quite as satisfying as it
could be, it still doesn't feel like a cop-out.
But in spite of alll this blathering, I haven't really been able to show
you what a wicked black comedy AMERICAN BEAUTY is.  It's one of the few
Hollywood movies to come out that dares to go for the jugular, shoving a
mirror into our faces and making us laugh at what a mockery our lives are.
If the world of real life wasn't as screwed up as it is, then we might not
need a movie like this.  But, unfortunately, we do.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
You know how sometimes you don't realize how great, or beautiful, a
moment is until it has completely passed you by? You know how we all
strive and push ourselves to live out those moments and becomes
overwhelmed by them? Is personal beauty so unattainable that we can
spend our whole lives just searching for a perfect facade of it?
In the unforgettable "American Beauty", the first film from acclaimed
stage director Sam Mendes, these statements and questions are
presented with such honesty and skill that the concept of filmmaking
is almost reinvented. We are there to witness the downfall of a
seemingly normal American family, and we are there to try to learn
from their mistakes.
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) isn't a bad guy. But as we learn through
his opening narration, he lives in a nice house in a small town, and
within a year he will be dead.  His marriage to real estate agent
Carolyn (Annette Bening) is almost nonexistent, and his rebellious
teenage daughter, Jane, (Thora Birch) hates him. One day, after
resolving to spend more time with Jane, he meets her ambitious, sexpot
best friend, Angela (Mena Suvari). As Lester puts it, after seeing her
he felt like he had just awoke from a long coma.
In fact, Lester begins to rebel against his "perfect" suburban
society, and starts to make a lot of changes. He quits his boring job,
threatening to blackmail his boss about a fling with a prostitute, if
he doesn't get a year's worth of pay. He smokes dope with Ricky (Wes
Bentley), a teenager who just moved in next door. And he finally
starts speaking his mind, about everything from his marriage to his
masturbation to his lust for his daughter's best friend.
Meanwhile, Carolyn is doing some rebellion of her own. An obsessive
workaholic, she starts sleeping with her competition (Peter
Gallagher), the king of real estate.  She, however, lets her urge to
"not be a victim" take control of her (and eventually her husband's)
life.
But it is Ricky, the aforementioned boy next door, who takes control
of the film. He is a drug dealer who carries his videocamera with him
wherever he goes. When he moves onto the block, he films the Burnham's
darkest secrets, and is fascinated by them. Meanwhile, Jane takes a
liking to him. His abusive father (Chris Cooper), a General in the
Marines, once locked him up in a mental hospital because of his dope
habit, and doesn't know what is son is up to.
Ricky likes Jane because she isn't ordinary. He tries to show her that
the world is full of beauty that we tend to turn away from. Angela,
Jane's friend, wants to be a model because she believes that she is
beautiful, but Jane realizes what the audience has known all
along. She is a seductive bitch. As "American Beauty" builds up to its
final climax, we realize just how well drawn each character is.
"American Beauty" so completely blew me away, that it's hard to
coherently put into words just what the film is like. It is a flawless
black comedy in which you are afraid to laugh. The film explores
themes that have been studied in "Blue Velvet", "The Ice Storm" and
"Pleasantville", but first time director Sam Mendes and first time
writer Alan Ball are trying to show us something we may have seen, but
never really opened our eyes to.
The hardest part of dissecting "American Beauty" is picking out the
best performance. Kevin Spacey and Annette Bening have never been
better, while Thora Birch and Mena Suvari are incredible as the most
fully realized teenage characters in years. Chris Cooper is amazing in
yet another choice role for one of America's finest character actors,
but even he is not the best. Wes Bentley, whose only previous role was
a line or two in "Beloved", is captivating and mesmerizing. He brings
such life and knowledge to his role that a Best Supporting Actor Oscar
nod should not be far off.
"American Beauty", distributed by DreamWorks SKG, is far and away the
best film of the year, and definitely one of the finest films of the
decade. After seeing this film (and you must do so as soon as
possible) you may wonder how two first time filmmakers could handle
such a project. Well, I think that like Lester Burnham, these two were
free to realize their own respective creative visions, rather than
worrying if the film would be better than their last.
"American Beauty" is a film about lust, dysfunction, voyeurism and
murder.  However, the title is all the more pertinent every time I
think about it. I've been waiting a long time for a film like this to
totally sweep me away. Not a frame of film is wasted in this
triumphant classic; a film you must see to truly believe.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Pat Canavan
    It's the tenth month of the year,  and one has to be wondering when a 
film worthy to be nominated for best picture will be released.  It wasn't 
like this last year,  when "Saving Private Ryan" had been released in the 
summer,  and set the standard for the Oscar rush pics of November and 
December to live up to.  A truly exceptional drama had not been released 
until now,  and like "Ryan," "American Beauty" is the film that others will 
have to overcome in order to become the new favorite for best picture.
Although the film boasts several unique and absorbing characters,  it is 
essentially driven by Kevin Spacey's smooth portrayal of Lester Burnham,  a 
42-year-old suburbanite going through a severe mid-life crisis.  He is 
saddened at what his life has become,  but conveys his unhappiness with a 
cool sardonic tone that is echoed throughout the film.  We first see him in 
the shower masturbating.  "This is the high-point of my day," he tells us.  
"It's a downward spiral from this point on."
A similarly sharp Annette Benning plays Lester's wife Carolyn,  an overly 
ambitious workaholic,  whom Lester believes has forgotten who she once was,  
and has now become a phony.  "See the way the handle on those pruning shears 
matches her gardening clogs? That's not an accident," Lester scathingly 
remarks.  
Among the many things disturbing is the relationship the two have with 
their teenage daughter Jane (Thora Birch,  who plays a role very similar to 
that of Christina Ricci in "The Ice Storm," and even looks like her).  Their 
everyday dialogue has deteriorated into hi's and hello's,  and when Jane 
catches her dad leering at her friend,  her disgust and antipathy towards him 
begins to ferment.  She can't stop talking about what a loser she thinks he 
is,  and even speaks of how she could do without his pathetic existence.  
It is obvious that both parents hardly spend enough of their attention on 
Jane.  Carolyn becomes interested in a rival real estate salesman,  whom she 
idealizes for his success,  and seems to represent the same way Carolyn has 
lost her genuineness when he tells he that the key to success is always 
reflecting an image of success.  Lester turns his attention to Jane's 
self-absorbed best friend,  whom he can easily picture himself sexually 
involved with.
Jane tries to turn her attention away from her parents,  and she begins 
to focus on her new next-door neighbor Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley) whom she 
discovers videotaping her every move.  "I'm not obsessing,  just curious," he 
explains to her,  who is somewhat annoyed but relishes in the attention.  The 
Fitts family is even more of a paragon of dysfunction than the Burnham 
family.  Allison Janney is Ricky's vapid mom,  who barely communicates a 
change in facial expression to either Ricky,  or his authoritarian father (an 
excellently hard Chris Cooper).
The feel closely resembles Ang Lee's 1997 critical success and commercial 
failure "The Ice Storm," (even the score is similar) although this plot is 
much thicker and the Alan Ball's screenplay is much more comical.  First time 
director Sam Mendes,  who brought the same sexual charge to his production of 
"The Blue Room," could be in line for an Oscar,  and wouldn't it be a 
surprise if a DreamWorks director other than Speilberg won the award.  In 
fact,  there is only one thing standing in the way of a deserved sweep at the 
Oscars,  and isn't it ironic that it is the same thing that led to "The Ice 
Storm" getting snubbed: the controversial themes (especially homosexuality 
and sex amongst teenagers) are hardly looked highly upon by the conservative 
Academy.
It doesn't matter though,  how many awards the film racks up,  or its 
rank among the best films of the nineties.  In a year where the best made 
films seem to be teenage comedies ("Election," "American Pie," "Go"),  a 
drama so phenomenal as "American Beauty," is well worth the wait.
