Title
Review for True Crime (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Young American actress Alicia Silverstone might be
criticised for many things but not for the unwillingness to
diversify her roles and projects in which she is to be
involved. The proof for that might come in TRUE CRIME,
relatively obscure 1995 mystery thriller, made in time when
Silverstone used to be one of the hottest new things in
Hollywood.
The heroine of this film is Mary Giordano (played by Alicia
Silverstone), exemplary catholic high student with somewhat
unusual ambitions - she wants to follow dead father's
footsteps and become police detective. However, until she
becomes old enough to join police she has to satisfy her
desire by consuming true crime stories and books about
police procedure. When teenage girls in her small
Californian town start becoming a prey for vicious serial
killer, Mary decides to use her newly acquired knowledge to
start her own investigation, which frustrates her mentor and
late father's friend - Detective Jerry Guinn (played by Bill
Nunn). Mary soon finds out that she is not the only amateur
detective around - young police cadet Tony Campbell (played
by Kevin Dillon) also wants to find a killer. Two of them
team up and as their investigation starts to bring some
results, Mary becomes aware of feelings she has for young
police cadet.
This first (and last) film by screenwriter and director Pat
Verducci might look a strange genre combination of teen
romance and serial killer movie, but in reality it is
surprisingly dark and depressing drama that uses bizarre
story and characters as a metaphor for the loss of
innocence. Unlike almost any other Hollywood film that has
teenagers as amateur detectives (with an exception of
Lynch's BLUE VELVET), this film shows how young mind's
desire to satisfy natural curiosity might bring some rather
unpleasant consequences. Unusual tone of the film is matched
by the unusual choice of role for Alicia Silverstone. Her
character is nerdy and unglamorous, so far away from sexy
MTV images, and suspension is disbelief is complete -
despite the outrageousness of the story, viewers have an
impression that they watch real people and witness events
that actually might take place. Unfortunately, that
suspension of disbelief crumbles in the finale of the film,
burdened with predictability of Hollywood cliches and few
totally unnecessary and distracting scenes. This is a real
shame, because TRUE CRIME, although still more than
watchable film, had clear potential for being much more.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
