Title
Review for Himmel über Berlin, Der (1987)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Peter van der Linden
     When I went to see WINGS OF DESIRE this weekend, I'd been procrastinating
for some time;  I never thought for a moment that I'd enjoy the film.  And I
didn't.  But at least it wasn't as bad as it could have been.
     WINGS OF DESIRE is a sort of cinematic "Waiting for Godot"; nothing
happens but it takes two hours and there's a lot of complex symbolism.   Jeez,
is there ever symbolism.   This film is a powerful argument for those who claim
that the Germans should be expressly forbidden by international treaty from
writing literature and from making films.   And from annexing land east of the
river Elbe.  There hasn't been a halfway decent German filmmaker since
Fassbinder went to unspool that great big final reel in the sky.
     An angel falls in love with a ... trapeze artist!  WINGS OF DESIRE has
definite touches of KOYANNISQUATSI (I have to confess that I'm another of the
people who fell asleep during that film, and my blood sugar level is perfectly
fine, thank you).
     All films from German director Wim Wenders are boring odysseys, and WINGS
OF DESIRE is no exception.  Filmed in Berlin, it represents a homecoming
homage, after 7 years self-imposed exile in Hollywood.  All the sights of
Berlin are there: Anhalter Bahnhof, Mauer, the Grosser Stern, the Ku'damm,
Potsdammer Platz.  But notice anything about these places?  Right!  They're all
in West Berlin.  To me, it represented an awkward synthesis of what Berlin
never quite was, and now never will be.  Once the coldest focus of the cold
war, Berlin now languishes, forgotten and abandoned like a faded courtesan.
WINGS OF DESIRE would have made more sense if the angels' perch was not the
Grosser Stern, but rather the  Brandenburg Tor in the Russian sector.
     There's one memorable quote about Anhalter which I hadn't heard before.
Anhalter was, pre-1945, the grandest of the grand imperial railway stations.
Trains departed here for Ankara, Austria, Hungary, the Levant, and a host of
other exotic eastern destinations.  After the Red Army came to Berlin in 1945,
all that remains standing is a single wall in a field of muddy rubble.  "It was
not a station where the trains stopped; it was a station where the stations
stopped."  Wow, is that meaningful, or what?  Or is it?
     "Ich bin ein Berliner" said Kennedy, and the cartoonists had a field day,
for he had unknowingly said "I am a doughnut" in the Berliner dialect.  Wim
Wenders shows us that he is a doughnut, too, but the audience deserves a more
savory and filling repast.  
     Go see it if you're into artsy-fartsy stuff.  We can argue about it over a
bottle of wine in a smoky intellectual bar.  Film is worth 6.0 on the Richter
Scale (just like the earthquake which just occurred here)...

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Wim Wenders
Writers: Peter Handke and Wim Wenders
Starring: Bruno Ganz, Otto Sander, Solveig Dommartin, Peter Falk
Here's the most beautifully lyric, most poignant, and downright sensual
film you will probably ever see about the phenomenon known as angels. 
That's because this is not a glorification of what they are, it's a film
that tries to make it feel like you're one of the two angels in this film. 
It understands that they are the spirits God chose to watch over earth
because no one else could witness it.  It knows that perhaps children can
see them, but adults have lost the abitlity to.  And it knows that they try
and console those they see in desperation and sadness, but that they cannot
directly affect their lives.  To them, the world is a black and white world
that they know everything and nothing about.
The two angels of the film are named Damiel and Cassiel (Bruno Ganz and
Otto Sander), and they are the angels who look after Berlin, back when it
was divided by the Berlin Wall.  They have been there ever since the days
before of Hitler, have witnessed all of World War II, and have seen
everything they possibly can see.  The first hour and a half are a
slow-moving, totally hypnotic trip around Berlin as we see each of them
watching people, listening to their inner thoughts like they were stations
on the radio, and sometimes staying to see people in need of some help, to
which all they can give is a helping hand.
Somewhere in the beginning, Damiel wanders into a carnival, and soon falls
in love with an acrobat there, Marion (Solveig Dommartin), who is depressed
because the carnival is closing, and she will have to give up the job she
loves and take up a waitressing job.  It's easy to understand why Damiel
loves her: she has deep, sad feelings, something which the angels are not
able to really have, except for the giant yearning that Damiel soon has to
"take the plunge," as he puts it, and become human so that he can live as
the people he has been watching for so long.
Sound familiar?  Well, it should because it was recently remade here in
America as "City of Angels," with Nicolas Cage as the lead angel, and Meg
Ryan as the woman (a heart surgeon in the movie - get it?).  Yes, I missed
the film (on purpose), but as it looked, that was too obsessed with the
love story, which is fine, it's just not "Wings of Desire."  This film is
not one that would be as successful as "City of Angels" was.  It moves
slowly, and has no plot and really nowhere to go for most of its running
time.  It's obsessed with creating the feeling of being either Damiel and
Cassiel, not being able to see things the way humans do, and only being
able to act as a voyeur, even when they're right in front of the people
they're viewing.
"Wings of Desire" is one of the most delicately structured films I have
ever seen in my life.  It's filled with a heavy amount of sadness and
almost jealousy, but it's light as a feather.  There is no real feeling of
time, and it has no real place to go, just like the angels who inhabit the
movie.  At around the hour and a half spot, when Damiel becomes human, and
the black and white cinematography suddenly shifts to color to show the
world of humans (the film shifts a bit every now and then, depending on
what the perspective is), the film suddenly has somewhere to go, and the
scenes that take place are often more crucial to the "plot" than to the
overall feeling.  Suddenly, Damiel has the chance to win the heart of
Marion, and he better damn well do it!
There's another character in "Wings of Desire" played by American actor
Peter Falk, who's playing himself (literally) making a movie over in
Berlin.  We learn about half way through the film that he cannot really see
Damiel, but that he knows he's there, and when he suddenly begins talking
to him, Damiel is so moved that he finds he needs to become human right
away (and he does).  Although he's only in it intermittently, he's a very
crucial figure in the film for two reasons: a) he brings up the prospect
that many other angels have done what Damiel ends up doing, and b) he's an
opposite to the angels: he's the one everyone in the world wants to watch
while Damiel and Cassiel are the ones that want to be watched.
What's the film's overall message?  There really isn't one, which is
actually better.  Like "2001: A Space Odyssey," this is a film that doesn't
necessarily want to limit itself to one singular definition, but wants to
be philosophical while still becoming hypnotic.  So many films make the
mistake of trying to be too philosophical and forgetting that it's a film
and it needs to become an experience.  Here's a film that doesn't answer
all the questions it brings up, and doesn't even bring up all the questions
it could.  But for two hours, I guarantee that you will be glued to your
television set, and afterwards you can debate the concepts that it touches
on.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jeff Meyer
See at the Seattle Film Festival:
WINGS OF DESIRE (West Germany, 1987)
Director: Wim Wenders
Screenwriters: Wim Wenders and Peter Handke
Cast: Bruno Ganz, Solveig Dommartin, Peter Falk, Otto Sander
     I see a lot of films -- particularly at the Festival -- which try to
induce a surrealistic, dream-like state upon the viewer.  Very few of them come
close to succeeding.  WINGS OF DESIRE is 2 hours and 10 minutes long, and for
85% of that time its attempts to lull me into such a state were entirely
engrossing and stimulating.  This is a lyrical film: lyrical in its story, its
photography,  and in particular the original conception of its setting.
Wenders portrays divine characters in a manner that is extremely innovative, at
least to film, and when he lays out his world before us, divided into earthly
and ethereal halves, it is a new world.
     The film opens up with East and West Germany below us, in black and white.
We see an angel (Ganz) looking down on the city; he has wings, but they
disappear, and he floats through the city, intercepting the thoughts of people
all over the city.  Only an occasional rare child actually notices that he is
there.  The by-play of the voices and the "floating" camera is excellent; you
let it wash over you, and it is quite an experience.  Eventually, he meets and
talks to another angel (Sander) about his experiences, and how he yearns to be
human and sample what humans feel, in particular the actual progression of
time, which immortals cannot feel.  Angels all wear long coats, have pony
tails, and while they cannot interfere in what happens, their presence
(particularly their touch) can bring hope and health back to their spirits.
     After this point, the film begins to rotate around three other characters.
One, and old man, is observed by both Sander and Ganz; he is a survivor of the
Holocaust, and is often thinking back on it, and what it means about humanity
as a whole.  The second is a circus aerialist (Dommartin), a sad, beautiful
girl who loves her trapeze work but is lonely, and who Ganz falls in love with
(she senses his presence somehow, though not explicitly).  The final one is a
kick: Peter Falk, playing Peter Falk (he's shooting a detective/WW II movie in
Berlin).  He really *does* sense Ganz's presence, and for good reason, too --
he's a former angel who decided to become human years ago (to play Columbo, I
guess).  It's a delightfully strange performance, and Falk gives Ganz the
courage he needs for the final plunge: humanity.
     The film ends concentrating on Ganz and Dommartin; both Falk and the old
man are phased out (it's a bit annoying, but not very).  It also gets a bit too
longer here -- there's about twenty minutes here that could be trimmed without
anything being hurt (the bar scene, for those of you who've seen it).  But it's
a wonderful love story, the kind of dreamy, philosophically-drenched romance I
dote on, and it's one of the two best films I saw at this year's festival.
Ganz is excellent; the man has the kind of gentle, old-wise-innocent face an
angel would have; Dommartin is excellent at the subject of his love; Falk is
the occasional kick-in-the-butt the film needs for plot advancement -- and
besides, he's damn fun to watch.
     I should point out, though, that you shouldn't expect to be seeing a
"romance" or a "comedy" or anything of that sort.  I'd put it down as more of a
surreal experience, very pleasant and not at all disorienting, combined with
romantic and philosophical elements.  If that sounds at all appealing (for a
little over two hours), I strongly suspect you won't want to miss the film.
Technically, the film is marvelous; why I don't understand all of the changes
from B&W to color and back, they fit in with the feel of WINGS OF DESIRE.  The
script is very good; Wenders' and Handke's ideas for what angels talk about
(and listen to) is delightful (Stanley Kauffmann of THE NEW REPUBLIC said this
is one of the few scripts he'd almost prefer reading than watching).  Overall,
it could use a little more editing at the end; but a success all around, I
think.
     Rating: Not for everyone, but if the synopsis above sounds appealing , you
definitely should not miss it.

Author
Jim Hori
[Normally rec.arts.movies.reviews is not point/counter-point, but as Jim says,
this review talked more about the film than about the other review.  -moderator]
     You never thought for a moment ... you would enjoy the film.  Oh well.
But hey, different strokes, as Sylvester Stewart once said.  Here is a
different viewpoint from someone who went in with no pre-conceptions.  (Also,
this review talks more about the film than about the reviewer.)
     WINGS OF DESIRE is a film about the guardian angels who observe and watch
over the lives of the people of West Berlin, occasionally interceding on their
behalf.  These angels also spend a lot of time writing poetry.  Much of the
film simply tracks through streets and apartments, with voiceover inner
monologues of the people we see and the angel's poetry as the soundtrack.
Wenders uses magic realist techniques to involve us in the reality underlying
the surface reality.
     As the film progresses, Wenders begins to focus on one particular life,
that of an aerialist in a small circus.  The circus season is ending, the
aerialist will soon be adrift and alone, and she wonders what will come next.
That's all I'll reveal of the plot.
     One of the strengths of the film is the lush black-and-white
cinematography combined with well designed tracking shots.
     I knew after seeing this film that it would be considered difficult by
many people.  It isn't entertainment in the hyperbolic American sense, it is a
meditation.  Things happen but it takes a certain sensibility to be moved by
these particular happenings - the car chases and explosions and grossly overt
exposition required by dulled senses are missing; to sense what is going on
here takes a slower, more still appreciation.  The pyrotechnics are those of
the heart.
     Also contributing to the difficulty of the film is the sensitive poetic
language, maybe the only way Wenders had of describing the passion and
compassion he feels for the common people and their lives, the people watched
over by the angels.  In the end the film is about what makes life valuable,
friends, relationships, love, and compassion; we can all be each others
guardian angels.
     To see a film with this kind of message is important and deeply moving,
particularly when contrasted to the violence and degradation of much
contemporary cinema.  This is a film which requires contemplation and work, and
asks that the moviegoer come to it, rather than explicating the non-obvious.
For those who can appreciate the mystery, the reward will be a timeless
cinematic memory.

Author
Lon Ponschock
     Here is the beginning of the story of Cassiel and Damiel: Guardian
Angels.  This film from 1988 is, for me, the first major work by Wim
Wenders.  His previous collaboration with Peter Handke on Handke's play
called THE ANXIETY OF THE GOALIE AT THE PENALTY KICK goes back to a
period around 1973.  This play had become a modern classic in Germany.
Okay, in Germany it's a classic.  But for me the film treatment was
nothing more than 'another bad European film shot on a budget and meant
to look like *art*.'
     But *here* in Wenders' original 'voice' both in language and film
technique, *here* is a wonderful little film.  To do so much with city
streets, suggestions of costuming, and poetic dialogue is the art of
the master or the genius, who can say which for sure?  I've seen
Wenders' work when it was really BAD too.  An item called NOTEBOOK ON
CITIES AND CLOTHES is still on the current rack at one of the vid shops
around town.
     The camera turns in WINGS do not have the flourish of the more
recent companion piece which is called FAR AWAY SO CLOSE, but here the
director can turn a simple building and it's shape into a place of
magic and wonder.  Observe the library sequences in WINGS to see what I
mean.
     The subject is angels--Guardian Angels--a subject which has come
into vogue over the past two years in America.  There is something very
touching about this.  It tells us that in our heart of hearts we yearn
to not be alone. It is a belief that we want to cherish even though
this is a simple work of fiction.  Because the mind has conceived of
it, it has become it's own reality.   The spirits which the mind
conjures become beliefs or, at the very least, wishes.
     So WINGS OF DESIRE like all the angel shows before it, plays to
these feelings.
     With a simple detail like a ponytail tied with a string, Wenders
tells us here are the angels ... they see each other when no one else
can and we see them too.
     And there is this: a man is shown in despair.  An angel embraces
him.  Then his inner voice gives him the strength to go on with his
life.  The embrace of the angel ends.  The man sits up and continues on
his journey.
     WINGS OF DESIRE is categorized as a comedy, like it was some sort
of HEAVEN KNOWS MR. ALLISON or HEAVEN CAN WAIT and other such fluff.
There are moments of humor in WINGS to be sure.  But the film is so
much more than that.  So when you see it displayed do not be put off as
I was *for months* because of a judgement that didn't relate to the
work itself.
     Get WINGS OF DESIRE and FAR AWAY SO CLOSE together if at all
possible.  WINGS OF DESIRE is only available at WorldWide Video on
College Avenue in the Marketplace.  FAR AWAY is probably in wider
circulation.
     I'll conclude this rave-up with a small quotation from the film.
Wenders' work is poetic and he speaks to our hearts:

Author
Michael Sierchio
     Wim Wenders breaks new ground and travels old roads in his latest
cinematic effort, WINGS OF DESIRE, starring Bruno Ganz as an angel who becomes
involved in the lives of the Berliners he observes as part of his "work."
Privy to the internal dialogue of every human passerby, we see a world that is
modern and ancient, personal and public.  
     Employing a device that could easily have become kitsch, Wenders
masterfully switches between a tonally-rich black-and-white and the colored
world of human life.  Amazingly, he does so without the possibility that this
is a cinematic allusion to Oz -- rather, he refreshes what has become cliche.  
     Peter Falk makes an appearance as "himself," as Peter Falk working on a
WWII film in Berlin, and we see Lt. Columbo as a working actor, a careful
observer, a passionate man.
     As he grows less content with pure attention, with observing the details
of human life, Ganz longs for true engagement in the mortal, phenomenal world.
     Though the angels of WINGS are more (or less -- certainly other) than
human, there is no hint of deity in their work.  They provide a small quantum
of repose to the dwellers of the city, but refrain from  interfering in their
volitional acts -- murder, or suicide, or self- abnegation, or acts of
kindness.
     The movie ends with a beginning, a hopeful gesture that is an affirmation 
of human life.  

Author
Kevin Patterson
Not many modern films open with a shot of a lonely angel sitting on top of
a Berlin skyscraper, peering down at the city and its inhabitiants. WINGS
OF DESIRE, a film by German director Wim Wenders, does exactly that. This
angel, whose name is Damiel (Bruno Ganz), is having something of a crisis.
He has spent eternity with his companion Cassiel (Otto Sander), working to
spread compassion and hope among humans, but he is beginning to wish he
could share in the human experience. He wonders what it would be like to
have a cup of coffee, or feel a breeze on his face, or, more importantly,
fall in love. He gets an opportunity for the latter when he starts paying
attention to Marion (Solveig Dommartin), a lonely trapeze artist whose act
is going out of business.
Wenders asks the audience to swallow a large dose of peculiar ideas for
this film. First and foremost, we are asked to believe that angels are
simply God's errand boys: they go from place to place dispensing happiness,
and they are pleased when they have a positive effect on someone, but they
don't seem to be able to share in this happiness. Wenders also asks us to
accept that when Damiel appears in a dream to Marion, it is apparently so
vivid and real that when she sees him in the flesh, she instantly accepts
him as her true soul-mate. There's also the issue of whether the human or
angelic experience is more "real," though this is never really resolved.
Finally, there is the role played by Peter Falk, who happens to be making a
detective movie in Berlin and who eventually fits into the story in a way
that can only be described as unique and unexpected. That's not to say that
any of these ideas are bad, just that they really come from out of left
field.
Ultimately, however, what emerges is a poetic and artistically ambitious
film that serves as an examination of various facets of spirituality. There
isn't really much of a plot in this film, other than Damiel's
self-examination and eventual decision to "take the plunge" and become
human, but I don't think it needs one. Wenders is content to let his camera
wander through Berlin, following the angels as they spread intellectual
inspiration in a library, or comfort lonely subway passengers, or ruminate
on what it was like the first time anyone ever laughed (they have, after
all, been around for eternity). Their scenes are shot in black and white
and often accompanied by low, meditative music, while Damiel's scenes after
he becomes human are shot in color, backed up by the sounds of everyday
life in the city. Much of Damiel's attention is devoted to Marion, of
course, while Cassiel's "favorite human" seems to be an old writer whom he
often finds in the library or sitting in a deserted lot in the city.
What Wenders seems to be getting at is that there is a spiritual dimension
to human emotional and physical experiences, whether it's something as
complicated as falling in love or creating a work of art, or something as
simple as running around kicking dirt or finding a peaceful, isolated place
and sitting there, or even something seemingly unpleasant such as
loneliness. Damiel and Cassiel are the right characters for Wenders's
meditation on humanity, as apparently spiritual beings who are deprived of
sense experience. I kind of doubt that angels would actually be confined to
knowledge of the ethereal only, but the film wisely refrains from declaring
itself as theology and can easily be read as an allegory about human
existence.
Wenders and co-writer Peter Handke have created a haunting, hypnotic
testament to human spirituality in WINGS OF DESIRE. There's quite a bit of
metaphysics floating around here, and I'm not sure if all of it makes sense
or is explained very well, but on the other hand this isn't really the
point of the film. This is the sort of film that should be approached the
way one might approach a poem or a piece of music rather than an essay or a
novel. Its intellectual foundations may be tenuous, but its spiritual and
emotional impact is more than enough to make up for it.
