Title
Review for Blood & Donuts (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeff Barnum
This is turning out to be the cinematic era of the vampire.
        We've already had INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE and A VAMPIRE IN
BROOKLYN, I caught the ultra-hip Dracula sequel NADJA when in
Vancouver recently, and theres still Abel Ferrara's THE ADDICTION and
the Robert Rodriguez/Quentin Tarantino vehicle FROM DUSK 'TIL DAWN to
look forward to before Christmas.  Canada's contribution to this
Nosferatu festival is director Holly Dale's black comedy BLOOD AND
DONUTS.
        BLOOD AND DONUTS tells the story of Boya Zsekely, a reluctant
vampire who wakes up after a 25-year self-imposed slumber to
find a modern world full of decay.  Boya, played by Gordon Currie, is
something of a humanist who resists his vampiric thirsts and is shocked
by the evil he sees in mankind.
        Not being independently wealthy, Boya checks into a fleabag
Toronto hotel the same one he stayed at during his hippie days
in 1969 and befriends several fringe dwellers, including immigrant
cab driver Earl and Molly, the well-read donut shop waitress.
        Meanwhile, Boya's ex-girlfriend, a middle-aged hairdresser named
Rita, is searching for him, hoping he might finally bless her
with the gift of eternal life and beauty.
        It sounds like a promising premise, but it is not fulfilled.
This could have been a wonderful film, if the script wasnt so
flimsy.  Paul Sarossy's cinematography combines a slick Hollywood gloss
with moody lighting to perfect effect, masking the low budget of this
production.
        The soundtrack is filled with appropriate music (including
songs by Concrete Blonde and Screamin' Jay Hawkins) and eerie
score by Nash the Slash (yeah, that's the mummy musician, how
appropriate) Documentary director Dale has made the most of her weak
script, supplying us with a quick, humorous pace and intelligent
charm.
        The pacing is also due to fine editing by Brett Sullivan,
currently in Edmonton cutting the series "Jake and the Kid."
Sullivan, who is also trying to become something of an amateur
magician told Vue that the film was shot for $300,000.
     That's an incredible feat considering BLOOD AND DONUTS has possibly
more special effects than all previous Canadian films put together,
with the exception of JOHNNY MNEMONIC.  Sullivan also mentioned that
several scenes did not make it to the final cut of the film, which
explains a lot.  A note to the producers: this film could have easily
been fifteen minutes longer and been much more satisfying.
        As a consequence of the producers' effort to keep the film to a
short running time, Boya remains underdeveloped and probably
one of the least seductive vampires in film history, losing out even to
Tom Cruise's Lestat and Nicolas Cage's wannabe Peter Loew from VAMPIRE'S
KISS.  Also undeveloped is Boya's budding romance with Molly.
        Fortunately, Justin Louis as Earl is a bona fide scene stealer
and a prime candidate for a Best Supporting Actor Genie.  Earl
is at once wonderfully sweet and slimy; a truly original character
speaking in imperfect English.
        Are you inferring to me? he states in broken homage.  TAXI
DRIVER's Travis Bickle.  Earl has some problems with the
Toronto mob that need to be worked out, allowing for a great cameo from
Canadian director David Cronenberg (DEAD RINGERS) as the eccentric mob
boss who works out of the back of a bowling alley.  Um, David, just
wondering ... with your recent appearance as a Mafia hitman in TO DIE
FOR, is there some sort of trend developing here?
        And for film reviewers who unfoundedly gripe about lack of
Canadian content in our home productions, it should be noted
that BLOOD AND DONUTS is proudly Canadian.  One of the film's highlights
is the ridicule of a street thug, born and raised in Toronto, who
speaks in movie gansgter lingo.
        It should stack up against independent American competition,
although it would have been so much better with a stronger
script.  By the way, stick around after the credits for an extra
scene....
