Title
Review for Pan Jin Lian zhi qian shi jin sheng (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
Golden Lotus, the "#1 slut in ancient Chinese history," is reincarnated in
modern day China/Hong Kong to seek revenge on the reincarnations of those who
mistreated her.  The story of a woman who suffers because of her incredible
beauty.  Loaded with violence and sex, the film is a trashy melodrama.
However, it's good trash!
Hong Kong (English subtitles), color, 1989, approx 100 minutes.
Director: Clara Law
     The story begins in the afterlife; Lotus is preparing to return to the
material world, to be reincarnated.  All she can think of is getting revenge on
the man who murdered her.  She is born in Shanghai in the 1950's, and grows
into an extremely beautiful young woman.
     While a student, Lotus studies ballet.  The school principal notices her
beauty and rapes her.  When she protests, she is branded a slut and a counter-
revolutionary, and sent to work in a factory.  She develops a crush on a 
handsome worker there, Wu-Long, and gives him a pair of shoes.  For this, she 
is again branded a slut and sent away.
     Lotus is reduced to scraping out a living selling fruit to tourists
visiting Guangdong province.  A short, somewhat comical man from Hong Kong
notices her.  They eventually marry, although Lotus does not love him, and she
moves to Hong Kong.  It turns out that her husband is very, very wealthy.
     All this time Lotus has been troubled by visions from her past; the film
uses flashbacks to tell the story of the original Golden Lotus, which parallels
that of the modern-day Lotus (the same actors are used for present and past
scenes).  Things take an interesting turn; Wu-Long, the man Lotus was in love
with, works for her husband as a driver!  Lotus tries to seduce him, but fails,
for Wu-Long refuses to betray his boss, who is like a brother to him.  Lotus
eventually begins an affair with a designer, Simon Siu, who likes life in the
fast lane (his interests include drugs and bondage), and the story  continues
from there.
     At heart, this film is basically a melodrama, though laced with more
violence than is usual in melodrama.  The principal focus is on Lotus, who
suffers because of her great beauty (aside: Lotus is played by Joi Wong, who
appeared in A CHINESE GHOST STORY).  She is repeatedly falsely accused of being
a slut, and is even beaten for it.  I suppose that one should be upset by the
accusations; however, the audience reacted with laughter (good black humor).
The picture of Lotus that develops is that of a persecuted woman, an outcast.
     The other major theme of the movie is that of compulsion.  Lotus feels
compelled to try to seduce Wu-Long; she feels compelled to have an affair with
the designer.  Further, she is troubled by the visions from the past, which she
slowly begins to understand as the movie progresses.  Lotus tries, but is
unable to control herself.  She feels compelled to behave like a slut.
     The film is very well made, with high production values and good special
effects.  Acting and camera work are all first rate.  The film progresses at a
slow (by Hong Kong standards) pace; however, it should hold your interest.  As
melodramas go, it is quite good; recommended to fans of melodrama.
Distribution.  In limited distribution; recently showing in San Francisco. May
be available elsewhere also.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
