Title
Review for Unforgiven (1992)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
George V. Reilly
     UNFORGIVEN is a film directed and produced by Clint Eastwood, from
a script by David Webb Peoples.  It stars Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman,
Morgan Freeman, Richard Harris, Jaimz Woolvett, Saul Rubinek, Frances
Fisher, and Anna Thompson.  Rated R for violence.
     I went to see UNFORGIVEN with fairly high expectations, having
heard that it was Eastwood's best picture--as director or star--in
years.  I wasn't disappointed.
     There are no white hats and black hats in this Western; all of the
characters wear grey hats, though some hats are darker than others.  No
character is without flaws.  Revenge begets revenge, and brings out the
worst in everyone.
     Eastwood is Will Munny, a former gunslinger and drunkard, saved
eleven years before by the love of a good woman.  Freeman plays his old
partner, Ned Logan, another killer-turned-farmer.  Hackman is Little
Bill Daggett, a brutally sadistic sheriff, none too fastidious about how
he enforces law and order in his town.  Harris plays English Bob,
another old killer, with an ego so large that he travels with his own
biographer in tow.  Woolvett is the Schofield Kid, a callow,
bloodthirsty, myopic, would-be bounty hunter, who lures Will and Ned
back to being killers.  Rubinek is Beauchamp, the fickle biographer who
transfers his allegiance from the Duck, er, Duke of Death to Little Bill
after the sheriff beats English Bob to a pulp and discloses his feet of
clay.  Thompson plays Delilah, the scarred young prostitute whose
mutilation serves as the starting point for the story.  Fisher is Alice,
the tough senior prostitute who puts up a bounty for the lives of the
two cowboys who cut up Delilah.
     For the first hour, the film is somber in tone, leavened with
occasional humour: Munny fumbling in the mud of the pigsty, the old
killer who can't even get on a horse or shoot straight anymore, and the
young killer who can't see more than a few feet.  Thereafter UNFORGIVEN
becomes much darker, indeed unrelentingly grim, as death follows upon
death.  If there's any message to be drawn from all of this killing,
it's that violence solves nothing; quite the contrast to most of
Eastwood's earlier films.
     Those who go to UNFORGIVEN in the expectation of seeing a
Dirty-Harry-kicks-ass-in-the-West movie will be disappointed.  There is
violence aplenty, but it is not glorified.  When Little Bill starts
beating up English Bob or Will Munny, they go down and they stay down,
rolling in agony, taking days to recover.  When people get shot, they
are hurt, and sometimes they die, often with a great deal of noise.
     The rest of us will take pleasure in seeing a dark, moral tale, a
story of the West as it probably was instead of the simplistic good
guys/bad guys tales that Hollywood used to so revel in.
     Eastwood excels, both as star and director.  His character is old
and often pathetic, a washed-up has-been, and quite unglamourous.  He
progresses from being a somewhat befuddled pigfarmer who has forgotten
all of his old killing skills to being a lethal instrument of vengeance
after the sheriff kills his longtime partner, all the while staying
wholly believable.  As a director, he keeps the film focused.  There are
no wasted scenes and he coaxes fine performances from the rest of the
cast.
     Hackman too gives a first-class performance.  His competent, brutal
sheriff commands attention.  Little Bill runs the town of Big Whiskey
and has no compunctions about discouraging any killers who hope to
collect the bounty on the cowboys who cut up the prostitute.
     Freeman and Harris are the other two stars of the film who receive
top billing, but neither is on screen long enough for my liking.
Indeed, English Bob is run out of town before Will, Ned, and the Kid
ever get there and is seen no more.  While they are present however,
they also give of their best.
     Woolvett, a newcomer, has a big role as the young would-be killer
who discovers too late that he has no stomach for killing, and he makes
a good start.  Fisher plays the tough, loyal prostitute to perfection,
and Rubinek and Thompson are good in their supporting roles.
     The photography is worthy of note, particularly that of the
countryside and the high country.  The film was shot in Alberta, though
the story takes place in Wyoming and Kansas.

Author
Frank Maloney
     UNFORGIVEN is film directed and produced by Clint Eastwood, from a
script by David Webb Peoples.  It stars Eastwood, Gene Hackman, Morgan
Freeman, Richard Harris, and Jaimz Woolvett.  Rated R for violence.
     UNFORGIVEN is just short of being a perfect film.  I say this as a
person who has never liked Clint Eastwood either personally or
professionally.  I suppose this is a kind of come-back film for
Eastwood, who has littered the past decade of a string of ever worsening
embarrassments.  Viewers who are more familiar with Eastwood than I tell
me this may be the best film of his career.  It is certainly the best
Hollywood Western in the last twenty-one years, since McCABE AND MRS.
MILLER.
     The story -- bounty hunters, aging badmen, foolish newcomer,
sadistic sheriff, vengeful prostitutes, the shootout -- borrows elements
(ONE-EYED JACKS, THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN) and its end-of-the-West mood
(THE WILD BUNCH, THE SHOOTIST, and RIDE THE HIGH COUNTRY) from
distinguished classic Westerns.  The story is dark and ultra-violent,
yet funny in places, and thought-provoking throughout.  It is also
intense and emotionally charged throughout its 131 minute running time.
     I've seen UNFORGIVEN (not to be confused, by the way, with John
Huston's 1960 Western THE UNFORGIVEN) described as a revisionist
Western.  Yes, but that seems unduly limiting to me.  I see this film as
an assault, if that's the word, on the machismo cult of the West and by
extension the Western world.  The script, by David Webb Peoples (BLADE
RUNNER), leisurely establishes a rich cast of characters, complexly
conceived, in a situation that has to lead to its violent, sad, and
unsatisfying conflict.  In the process, characters like Eastwood's
renascent pig farmer have ample opportunity to reflect on the meaning
and effects of violence.
     Then, too, the idea that UNFORGIVEN debunks the myth of the
frontier, as Kevin Costner's DANCES WITH WOLVES deliberately set about
debunking the role of Native Americans in film, is too simplistic for
the reason that Eastwood's film even while it does set up each and every
relevant convention only to knock it down with a shot of realism
simultaneously celebrates the things we have always loved most about the
Western: loyalty, honor, courage, and the harsh and unfinished beauty of
the country.
     The photography of Jack N. Green and the sets designed by Henry
Bumstead make this the most visually evocative of Eastwood's films.  The
film was shot in Alberta, standing in for Kansas and Wyoming.  The spare
score of Lennie Niehaus adds its own support to the goings on in an
entirely consonant fashion.
     Eastwood has proved that as a director he can be both tasteful and
generous, and he knows how to stick to the point.  The film never
wanders or loses its way; every scene contains the central conflict of
abhoring and loving the Western.  There are no gratuitous scenes; the
entire movie, for all its length and its big feeling, is spare and
economical.  It is also informed by a gentle, not un-self-mocking humor
based on the characters.  Eastwood gives ample showcase scenes to his
other old-timer stars -- Freeman, Hackman, and Harris -- who never let
him down.  I haven't liked Hackman so much for years, and Richard Harris
as the scene-chewing, egotistical gunfighter English Bob makes his
portion of the film uniquely his own.  Freeman's role does bother me
slightly; not that Morgan Freeman isn't every bit as good as ever, but
that no one ever mentions his race in this highly racist time; this is a
modern sensitivity that jars with the general sense of "this is the way
things really were" that otherwise pervades UNFORGIVEN.  Eastwood also
is generous in introducing the newcomer (at least new to me) Jaimz
Woolvett as the Schofield Kid, a comic but moving clown of a
killer-wannabe.  I can also recommend the supporting part of the writer
of penny-dreadfuls played by Saul Rubinek; this part seems particularly
ripe in its potential for interpretation as a symbol for the
mythologizing of the West.
     Eastwood's own performance is nonpareil.  For the first time, he
appears as a grizzled, broken, often weak, wholly human old guy.  He
can't mount his horse, he can't shoot straight, he's haunted by his own
past.  It is even possible that there has been some justification for
the iconic cult of Eastwood all these years, that I was wrong to dismiss
him.  He is certain to be nominated for Best Actor next winter, and he
may well deserve to win.
     There is so much to like about UNFORGIVEN -- such as the treatment
of prostitution and the performances of Frances Fisher and Anna Thompson
as the angriest of the whores -- that it is more than worthy of several
viewings.  You would be fully justified to pay premium prices to see
UNFORGIVEN.

Author
John Beachem
In the town of Big Whisky, Wyoming, a prostitute has just been sliced up by 
two of her clients. After the local sheriff, Little Bill (Gene Hackman), 
makes the attackers pay only by giving the prostitute's employer some of 
their horses, her friends take matters into their own hands. They pool their 
money and place a bounty of one thousand dollars on the two cowboys, and 
send word out far and wide. William Munny (Clint Eastwood) used to be a 
known thief and murderer. Now he tries to take care of his two children by 
running a pig farm out on the plains. He's approached by The Schofield Kid 
(Jaimz Woolvet), a young gunfighter trying to make a name for himself. The 
kid proposes that he and Munny go to Big Whisky and collect on the bounty. 
Munny has no desire to return to his old ways, but he's failing as a farmer, 
and he needs the money. So Munny agrees on one condition, his old friend Ned 
Logan (Morgan Freeman) be allowed to join them. The three head for Big 
Whisky, The kid eager to make a name for himself, Munny and Logan haunted by 
ghosts from their murderous pasts.
There are some who will no doubt claim Clint Eastwood is biting the hand 
that fed him. They will say he is now slandering the genre that made him a 
star, and for that he should be crucified, stoned, hanged, or worse. I 
completely disagree. I don't believe "Unforgiven" is anti-western, I think 
Eastwood is simply showing a different face to the old west. Be forewarned, 
the face he's showing is a dark, depressing, and sadly realistic one. In 
fact, the entire movie is saturated by a sense of sadness. Watching the film 
on mute, you would still be able to feel the sense of emptiness Eastwood 
brilliantly conveys with his direction. Make no mistake, this isn't an 
action movie. It's a character study, and while the outstanding performances 
add a lot to the film's characters what really makes these people real is 
the way they are written. In David Peoples' ("Blade Runner") script, 
everyone is human. There are no superheroes nor villains, no one's perfect 
and no one's inhuman. Every character makes mistakes, everyone has a 
breaking point, and the sad fact of the matter is, there are no good guys. 
Oh sure, there are protagonists and antagonists, but you can understand 
everyone's motives and actions. In a strange sort of way, you won't want 
anyone to die, not even Little Bill. Yet you'll know, deep in your heart, 
that Bill Munny's words are true: "We all got it comin kid."
One of the best things about "Unforgiven" is the cast. While I'm obviously 
referring primarily to the three main cast members, Eastwood, Freeman, and 
Hackman, the entire supporting cast does a great job as well. To start with, 
we've got Eastwood, the king of westerns himself. Eastwood does an amazing 
job as a man trying to convince himself that he has changed his ways. The 
way he plays William Munny we think this character is really all his past 
characters (Josey Wales, the man with no name, even Dirty Harry) rolled up 
into one, trying to both atone for and forget the things he's done in the 
past. Then we have Morgan Freeman, playing a man too loyal and honest for 
his own good. Freeman brings remarkable depth and intelligence to every 
character he plays, and that has seldom been more true than it is here. 
Finally we have Gene Hackman, giving a performance the likes of which I've 
seldom seen. Hackman makes Little Bill into something much more than just 
another archetypal western villain. Little Bill is already written as having 
a sort of twisted sense of justice, and a dream to do nothing more than work 
on his house (this provides some of the film's few comic moments), but 
Hackman imbues the character with something more. It's hard to describe, and 
I know I can't do it justice here. This performance actually has to be 
witnessed to be appreciated.
You're no doubt wondering if there's any action in the movie. Yes there is, 
but not in the traditional sense. One of the things that most impressed me 
about "Unforgiven" was the way in which Eastwood could film excellent action 
scenes without glamorizing them. In fact, quite the opposite approach was 
taken. For example, there's a scene in which Munny shoots a man from some 
distance off with a shotgun. The hapless fellow crawls behind a rock, 
trailing blood behind him while his friends take cover. There's no pulse 
pounding music here, no war cries from the combatants, only the victim 
crying for water. Finally Eastwood shakes his head sadly and yells out at 
the man's friends, "Will you give him a drink of water for Christ's sake?! 
We ain't gonna shoot!" Even the giant, climactic shoot out at film's end is 
like this (oh come on, you knew there was going to be one). There's nothing 
glorious about the killing, each character simply does what they feel they 
have to do. It's a remarkable achievement by Eastwood, being able to film 
the movie in such a way, and a lot of it has to do with his use of the 
score, by composer and longtime Eastwood collaborator Lennie Niehaus. The 
score is haunting and powerful, but never lively or upbeat. I know that 
sounds bad, but it's remarkably effective. If a loud, uplifting score had 
been written for the gun fights it would have taken something away from 
them. By keeping the music low, or even completely unused during the fights, 
Eastwood makes them much more realistic and saddening.
When I first saw "Unforgiven" back in '92, I dismissed it as a good, if 
overrated, western about growing old. I saw it again about two years later 
and dismissed it again, but decided it wasn't about growing old, it was 
about vengeance and not being able to escape ones past. I watched it for the 
third time about a month ago, and I'm still haunted by it. There's something 
powerful and moving about this film that, try as I might, I can't put my 
finger on. It manages to interweave not only the two story arcs I described 
above, but dozens more into a film that has a rightful place on my personal 
100 best of all time list. Those who shove the film away as just another 
western, or try to place a similar restrictive title on it do so at their 
own risk. Don't take this movie lightly, and don't ignore it or you're doing 
yourself a great disservice. I know it seems like a long film, running 131 
minutes, but I was so involved I didn't even notice the time going by. I'd 
recommend "Unforgiven" to everyone, whether you like westerns or not, and 
give it a full five out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Stoneheel Michael
     Many Western fans consider this genre to be a cinema par
excellance, while other persons claim that only a few Westerns are good
films.  UNFORGIVEN is a perfect opportunity to confront this issue.  It
seems to me that this film is about the Western myth, but what is that
myth?
     It is the myth of open landscapes and wide spaces, a hero on his
horse, the good prostitute and the pure virgin, the progress against the
primitive, and the use of Christian values.  But most of all, it is the 
myth of the border between good and evil (usually the good hero is a 
reformed criminal, that could hardly be considered pure--like John
Wayne in STAGECOACH) which resolves in a conflict between individual 
morality and the law.
     Does Clint Eastwood follow this pattern?  Certainly yes!  The
landscapes are as wide as ever, the hero is a reformed not in shape
gunfighter (this is almost a cliche), the good guys act to restore the
dignity of a prostitute, the only way to solve problems is by lynching
and at the end we have a spectacle duel between the hero and the evil.
     Actually, we could not have been more wrong.  It seems that Clint
Eastwood tried to break the myth from every possible angle.  The abuse
of a woman is very rare in Westerns and it is more likely to be done by
Indians.  All the good gunfighters are being humiliated during the film
(either they cannot shot or cannot ride on their horses).  Can anyone
imagine a film in which John Wayne would be bitten by someone without
responding?
     From the narrative perspective, some things are worth to be pointed
out.  The tremendous use of closeups and the photographing of the hero's
face during a gunfight are against the principles of the old Western in
which everything was done to increase the myth.  Another way that
Eastwood use to break the myth is by making the Western more realistic
(the curses, showing scars and wounds, the way sex is treated and the
realistic killing).
     One may presume that Eastwood was trying to define the limits of
the myth.  If such a claim is correct than the limits could be pushed
even further.  The cause for the struggle could be less moral, the
sheriff could be more (or less) cruel, and the stereotype of the hero
could be less conventional.  At the end of the film the myth is as valid
as ever (not only for the spectator but also for everybody in the
film).  Could it be shattered?
     If Gene Hackman (or someone from the town) had made the score even,
the answer would have been probably yes.  Not only would such an act
break the myth, but it would shutter a much more important thing, the
myth of Clint Eastwood, the actor.  In fact, Eastwood has demonstrated
that even if he looks ugly, being humiliated, has a dubious sense of
morality, the myth of him as a super hero actor is greater than ever.
It is quite impressive, but should we admire him for it?
     Actually, the myth of the hero is being finally realized in the
duel scene.  Eastwood has found the primer component in the aesthetics
of the struggle, namely, the sympathy and admiration for the weak
against the strong, for the few against the numerous and for the
individual against everybody else.  The result is a transformation of
the conflict between the individual and the society from the moral
level to a struggle dealing with action.  Are all the ideas, stated so
far, sufficient for explaining the evolution of the myth?
     One must admit that the myth exists inside of us from the first
moment we lay our eyes on the screen.  To understand it profoundly, one
should see classic Westerns like STAGECOACH, SHANE, RED RIVER, THE MAN
WHO SHOT LIBERTY VALANCE etc., but even by watching BONANZA much of the
myth is becoming a part of the viewer.  If many years ago the myth was
a benefit for the Western, at some stage the overloaded self concern
with it became an artistic obstacle.  When discarding the exhausted
self concern with the myth, there is no form of expression and not much
is left.  I'm not saying that there aren't Westerns which are great
films.  Usually, such films are being consisted of more aspects.
     Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN is probably the best Western created in the
last ten years, nothing less and nothing more.

Author
eric walker
NOTE: Spoilers for the movie UNFORGIVEN appear below.  Normally I try
to reveal as little of the movie's plot as possible, but this time I
want to do more than simply say what a good movie it is.
    With the release of Clint Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN, the American
Western has returned to the movies with a vengeance.
    One might say that John Wayne's THE SHOOTIST marked the end of an
era, as the mythic, larger-than-life Old West came to a close.  Despite
several attempts to "revitalize" the genre, from the disastrous HEAVEN'S
GATE to PALE RIDER (in which Eastwood himself emulated Alan Ladd's
Shane) to SILVERADO, the Western was effectively dead and buried in
Hollywood.  YOUNG GUNS and its sequel managed to make a quick buck off
of the popularity of its "brat pack" cast, but those movies could hardly
live up to the standards set by the likes of John Ford and Sergio Leone.
    But seemingly from out of nowhere, Kevin Costner pulled off the coup
of the decade with DANCES WITH WOLVES.  This shamelessly politically-
correct movie was entertaining in its own right, and it proved that even
the Hollywood Western could be recreated in the era of the 1990s.  More
importantly, it was a smash box-office hit.  Hollywood looked up and
realized that yes, people *do* still watch Westerns.
    Flash-forward to 1992.  Ron Howard makes FAR AND AWAY, and he also
bows to the gods of Political Correctness.  FAR AND AWAY was a light
and fluffy folk tale that tried to be an "epic saga."  It succeeded on
the popcorn level, but failed to achieve anything higher than that.
    A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS, the movie that made Eastwood a star, proved
to be the death knell of the Classical Western of good-and- bad.  The
so-called "spaghetti Westerns" reflected the way America's tastes in
movies were changing in the 1960s, as they sought to de-mythify the
Western and bring it down to earth.  Now, with UNFORGIVEN, Eastwood once
again makes a name for himself, and once again he brings the Western to
another level.
    Eastwood plays the role of Bill Munny, a grizzled old retired
gunfighter who has settled down to raise hogs with his two children.
Everything seems peaceful, though he doesn't seem very happy.  What's
more, he doesn't seem to be having much luck as a homesteader.  His wife
died three years ago, and the hogs are coming down with fever.
    But then along comes a young man calling himself the "Schofield
Kid."  He's heard about a $1,000 reward being offered by a small-town
brothel for killing two men, and he's looking for a partner to help him
do it.  Munny had quite a reputation as a gunfighter, and so he's
offered the role.  He accepts.
    During the first half or so of the movie, Munny keeps repeating how
he's no longer a killer the way he used to be - his wife changed all
that.  This is, in fact, only partially true: Munny has mellowed with
age, but he was born to be a gunfighter, and we know that his attempts
to convince everyone that he's not a killer are only half-hearted.
    In fact, Munny's return to way of the gun marks more than his own
return - it's symbolic of the way the Western genre itself has come back
to claim its former place.  The gunfighter has returned from retirement,
but he's not the man he used to be.  The old gunfighter with the white
hat of the Golden Age of Hollywood is history; today's gunfighter is a
complex, struggling figure who is anything but the good Paladin of old.
    This story deliberately takes every Western cliche and turns it on
its side.  Notice the way the movie pokes fun at the classic scenes of
target practice, where the gunfighter shoots at a can sitting on a log;
or the ease with which the gunfighter can mount his horse and be off in
a matter of microseconds; or the way a man can fall from his horse and
suffer only a few scratches.  Sometimes the revisions are so deliberate
that they stand out from the rest of the movie, as in one scene where
Eastwood reaches behind a bar to get a bottle of whiskey to smash his
attacker's face; but this never detracts from the story as a whole.
Every scene, every line has its purpose.
    But despite these little in-jokes, Eastwood achieves far more than a
mere parody of the Western.  All of the characters in UNFORGIVEN are
richly developed, with their own sets of morals and their own ideals of
right and wrong.  The entire movie is set in the grey area of morals, so
that we don't really know who is right and who is wrong.
    The story begins when two cowboys participate in the shame of a
prostitute, slashing her face so that she can no longer work.  Her
fellow ladies are outraged at the way her plight is heartlessly treated
by the Sherriff, and so they offer a $1,000 reward to the people who can
come into town and kill the two men.  But it's not as simple as that.
The question is raised: is the scarring of a woman worth the lives of
two men?  She was cruelly treated and the men deserved to be punished,
but is killing them the right answer?  In fact, when one of the two men
tries to make amends above and beyond the payment he is forced to give
(he tries to give the woman his best pony), his gesture of apology is
literally thrown back into his face.
    The morals question is also reflected in the Sherriff, Little Bill
Daggett (played to perfection by Gene Hackman).  He knows that in a
frontier town such as this one (its name is "Big Whiskey"), he must rule
with an iron hand - and he honestly believes that he is keeping law and
order in town.  He enforces a code that requires all visitors to the
town to turn their guns over to him - a rule that he hopes will keep any
bounty hunters from trying to claim the reward.  We see how he enacts
his "justice" on one such hopeful, a gentlemanly chap named English Bob
who turns out to be no gentleman.  He beats and kicks Bob almost to
death - but he does so as a warning to other potential trouble-makers.
In the harsh times of the Western frontier, his cruel way of sending
this "message" may actually be justified, because he's doing it to a
would-be murderer who wants to kill a person he is sworn to protect.
    In a similar fashion, Little Bill takes time out to explain the lack
of morality on the Frontier to a traveling writer, W. W. Beauchamp.
This man was formerly English Bob's companion, but he decides to hang
around Little Bill because Bill wants to tell him "the truth" as opposed
to Bob's wild stories.  In UNFORGIVEN, W. W. actually represents us, the
viewing audience.  For many a year, we've seen Westerns that portray the
Wild Wild West as a fantasy land of justice and morals, where the Good
Guys play fair and the Bad Guys always win in the end.  W. W. is writing
a silly book that romanticizes English Bill's exploits, describing them
in a fashion that we've heard in the classic Westerns.  But Little Bill
tells W. W. what it's "really" like to be a gunfighter, and he blasts
the myth of the Old West to pieces.  As W. W. learns what a harsh and
dangerous place the West can be, so to do we ourselves learn that there
is no true "Right" and "Wrong" in the realistic world of the new
Hollywood Western.
    I haven't touched the main characters yet.  There's the "Schofield
Kid," who plays the role of the brash, boastful young wannabe
gunfighter.  He learns the harsh lesson that killing your first man is
never what you think it will be, but in UNFORGIVEN it affects him as it
never did in the Westerns of old.  He reminded me a lot of the sassy
young kid in RIDE THE HIGH COUNTRY, even to the point where he's only
interested in the reward money.  But he learns that money isn't
everything.
    Morgan Freeman plays Ned Logan, Bill Munny's old partner who has
also retired from gunfighting.  While he's also willing to get back on
the saddle and earn a piece of the reward, it seems that retirement has
taken its toll on him.  He's the only one in the movie who has a
distinct, clear set of morals - but this is only more proof that
Eastwood's purpose in this movie was to kill off the simplistic ideals
of the Classic Western once and for all.
    It's with Ned Logan's character that Eastwood makes his only bow
towards political correctness: not once in the movie is the fact that
Ned is black mentioned.  On one hand, this is a good move on Hollywood's
part, but on the other hand it subtracts slightly from the realistic
feel of the movie - after all, the 19th Century was as racist a time as
ever there was, here in America.  The problem here is with the ultimate
fate of Ned Logan: does this constitute the Hollywood cliche of once
again killing off a major black character in the cast, while the white
guys live on to the end of the movie?  Ned's death is an important plot
twist, and it's certainly essential to the story.  But casting Morgan
Freeman in this role called my attention once again to the way blacks
are portrayed in Hollywood movies.  Or am I merely overreacting?
    Mention must be made of the movie's superb direction as well.
Despite its length (2 hours and 10 minutes seems to be the new Hollywood
"epic" standard - *just* longer than the length of a typical two-hour
videotape), this movie will keep you mesmerized from beginning to end.
     The Frontier of UNFORGIVEN is a lonely place, where a cold wind
blows day and night and the sky is often overcast.  I remember seeing a
sunny scene exactly three times in this movie: the very beginning and
the very end (both of which are sunsets), and once during the middle of
the movie where the scarred prostitute is talking to Bill Munny.  Rain
figures prominently in this movie, contrasting to the hot desert
locations where most of the classic Westerns were filmed.
     If you go to see UNFORGIVEN expecting another action flick in the
order of A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS, you will be sorely disappointed.  While
the movie does end with a shootout (vastly different from the standard
Hollywood Shootout Climax, however!), it's truly a drama of characters,
where what a person says and how he acts is far more important than what
he does and who he shoots.
     This a thinking person's Western.  If you hate Westerns, you will
fall under the harsh spell of UNFORGIVEN.  If you love Westerns, you
will never forget this one.  This is truly a movie for the ages, and
future movies will look back upon this one for inspiration and guidance.

Author
Brian Koller
"Unforgiven" was a long time in coming.  The
script was written by David Webb Peoples in
1976.  Eventually, the rights were acquired by
Clint Eastwood, who waited to film it until
he had aged enough to match the lead character.
Certainly, "Unforgiven" was worth the wait:
Eastwood won both Best Picture and Best Director,
and was nominated for Best Actor.
Eastwood plays William Munny, formerly a notorious
drunk, train robber and killer.  He later married a
woman who reformed him.  Smallpox left him a widower,
and he struggles to raise two adorable children
(Shane Meier and Aline Levasseur) by scratching out
a living as a pig farmer.
Meanwhile, two cowboys (David Mucci and Rob Campbell)
disfigure a young prostitute (Anna Thomson) in the
town of Big Whiskey.  The tough local sheriff Little
Bill (Gene Hackman) merely fines the men, with the
fine payable to the prostitute's humorless owner
(Anthony James).  Outraged, the other prostitutes pitch
together a $1,000 reward payable upon the murder of
the two cowboys.
With his farming enterprise failing, Munny is enticed
to collect the bounty by a near-sighted, boasting,
would-be gunman (Jaimz Woolvett).  Munny also convinces
his old friend Ned (Morgan Freeman).  The three arrive
at Big Whiskey, but have a run-in with Little Bill,
whose definition of law-and-order does not include
roaming hired gunmen.  The brutal sheriff has already
disposed of one mercenary, English Bob (Richard Harris),
taking his pulp writer sidekick Beauchamp (Saul Rubinek)
for good measure.
"Unforgiven" was nominated for nine Academy Awards,
winning four.  Gene Hackman won Best Supporting Actor,
and Joel Cox won for editing.  The screenplay, the
cinematography (Jack Green), the sets and the sound
were also nominated.
For once, the Academy had picked a film fully
worthy of Best Picture.  "Unforgiven" not only
revitalized the Western epic, but gave it a
human face and memorable characters.  Except
for the climatic showdown, "Unforgiven" depicts
a West filled with characters who are neither
heroes or villains, and with flaws that are all
too obvious.
The film also makes a statement about personal
redemption: despite the protestations by Eastwood's
character that he is reformed, his actions prove
otherwise.  The conversations between Little Bill
and the pulp writer dismiss the myth of the West,
which is restored by Eastwood in his big showdown.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I understand that the Marlboro Man died recently.  For years he
represented the spirit of the Old West with a tattooed hand holding a pack
of Marlboros while he sat around the campfire or rode a magnificent horse
through snowy prairies.  The cause of his death, in wonderful irony if not
total coincidence, was lung cancer.  He spent the last part of his life
doing public service messages to warn people against smoking.  The myth of
the macho smoker and the reality were, in his case, very different.  He
lived off the myth, but at some point he realized the myth was dangerous and
wanted people to know the reality.
     I picture Clint Eastwood as having gone through a similar moral crisis.
He was the Man with No Name who could kill men by reflex.  He was Dirty
Harry, who made his day by gunning down punks. Eastwood made his living by
that image.  Perhaps there are even kids in urban high schools and even
junior highs who have patterned their own gun skills on Eastwood's.  Perhaps
that was a  concern of Eastwood's; perhaps not.  But he certainly has made a
film about the myth and reality of gun fighting.  Saul Rubinek plays a small
but very central role as W. W. Beauchamp, who follows around the great
gunfighters and writes dime novels that glamorize the life of the gun.  He
turns the dirty, disgusting, demeaning profession of killing into exciting
and completely inaccurate accounts for avid readers.  UNFORGIVEN is a story
of gunfighting as it really was--and it was a little less romantic than
killing chickens for a living.  Eastwood produced and directed a powerful
and nightmarish Western.
     It is 1880 in the flyspeck town of Big Whiskey, Wyoming.  Two cowpokes
are in town taking advantage of the local whorehouse.  One of the whores
makes an ungenerous comment and her client goes after her with a Bowie
knife.  In the dark, his partner may have tried to restrain him, but the end
result is a woman cut up very badly.  Sheriff Little Bill Daggett (played by
gene Hackman) wades in to bring peace.  In his judgement, it is the owner of
the whorehouse who has been wronged and must be paid off in valuable ponies.
Whores, being whores, do not need to be paid back.  This is not a decision
which goes over well with the women.  They decide to pool their money and
offer $1000 to anyone who will kill the two men, whether it is one or both
who are guilty.
     A young gunslinger, anxious to make a name for himself (played by Jaimz
Woolvett), decides he can collect if he teams up with the legendary
gunfighter Bill Munny (played by Clint Eastwood).  Marriage has made a very
different man of Munny and now he is a widower with two children to raise, a
failing pig farm, and nightmares of the men he has killed.  In spite of
being incredibly out of practice, he decides to go along, but only if his
old partner Ned Logan (played by Morgan Freeman) will join them.
     UNFORGIVEN is a dark Western.  It is dark in tone and often dark in
photography.  It is a murky film about murky moral decisions.  Nobody is
totally good; nobody is totally bad.  While there is not a lot to redeem to
cowpoke who sets the whole fiasco in motion, there is at least a modicum of
understanding of why he did what he did and the feeling that his intended
punishment may outweigh his crime.  I could be wrong, but it seems to me his
partner was only well-intentioned and he too is pulled far too deeply into
the mess that ensues.  If the timing had been different, Hackman's character
as a sadistic sheriff could have been inspired by Daryl Gates.  He combines
a laudable desire to defend justice with a dangerous desire to define it.
     This film shows a surprising bitterness about the myths of the Old
West.  Yet where they are debunked, the film rings true.  Sleeping out under
the stars may be nice, but with storm clouds it is a different matter.  the
great gunfights of the West are about as romantic as the great gunfights of
Vietnam.  An obvious "happy ending" is foreshadowed and then avoided.  And
one nice touch of bitter irony it would be a pity to miss: the saloon and
whorehouse that is the core of the hellhole town of Big Whiskey, Wyoming, is
called "Greeley's."
     UNFORGIVEN ranks up with THE OUTLAW JOSEY WALES as one of Eastwood's
two best films.  I give it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
