Title
Review for Journey of Honor (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
It isn't often that we see many collaborations with Hollywood.  This time,
with Japanese money another film on the honor of the samurai warrior, and
their way of life, during a time, when changes had to be made.
The Japanese warlord has not lost his battles with the rival Shogun who
wants his post, but he is rapidly losing men to the invaders guns.  A stroke
of luck allows him to buy time, and keep his enemies down for a longer
period of time. It rains, and the guns that once only fired on a flame, are
all of a sudden totally dead, and useless.  The warlord wins this battle,
but he knows he will lose others without the weapons of fire.  Amidst the
shuffle, and the  treachery, he decides that his heir to the throne is the
best candidate to  go to Spain to buy some guns.  The heir is under constant
attack, the
enemies' one hope to end a family tree, and chance the start of another.
While this film doesn't have the emotional strength of an Akira Kurosawa
film, it does have a little of a curious twist to history.  It implicates
that even the Japanese were involved in the history of the world in the 16th
and 17th centuries, in ways that our history books never indicated.  It
seems like there only existed Portuguese and Spaniards, and Brittons around,
then.  Gee whiz, a few Japanese, too.
Basically the film shows that the world of a shogun, and the Japanese
warlords are coming to an end.  Their need for fire arms, is a small threat
to the Spaniards, but then, so are the volcanoes.  The Japanese, after all,
were too far away to invade Europe, or vice versa, though the Christian
church movement did far better than any conquistador.
Of interest in this film, is Christopher Lee in a bit of a listless role
 nothing like Scaramonga ) and Toshiro Miffune, in a role which he looks
bored doing for the umpteenth time.  The youngsters carry the day, though.
The young regent, and protector uncle, are strong enough in their martial
arts abilities to keep many a dishonest Spaniard, and Moroccan scoundrel, at
bay, and  eventually gain access to the guns they wish.  The title is the
definition of their voyage, and their ability to stand up for the honour and
valor of an English sea captain who helped them, and a tribute to their
courage, in a world where they were a definite minority.
It's good entertainment, not as intense as RAN, or the original TV series of
James Clavell's SHOGUN, but it is rather nice, and enjoyable little stroll
through a few ruins and old ships.  David Essex, as the Spaniard bastard
baron/lord with an ego the size of Spain at that time ( half the world ) is
good, though one gets the feeling he is over playing the role.
