Title
Review for Honest (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Pathé on May 26, 2000; certificate 18; 110 minutes; 
country of origin UK; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by David A. Stewart; produced by Eileen Gregory, Michael Peiser.
Written by Dick Clement, Ian La Frenais, David A. Stewart, Karen Lee Street.
Photographed by David Johnson; edited by David Martin.
"Honest" is too confident and professional to really be called bad, but it's 
still a bewildering mess. There's too much going on in terms of art direction 
and too much going nowhere in terms of plot, and although it's intended as a 
star vehicle for the pop group All Saints, two of them are hardly ever 
onscreen and the third plays a character who hides her feelings. I have a 
question for the four screenwriters: What the hell is this movie about, why 
does it take so long to get going, is it comic or dramatic, and who is the 
main player?
Those All Saints girls -- Nicole Appleton, Natalie Appleton and Melanie Blatt 
-- play three sisters in the East End of London in the 1960s. They dress up 
as men and pull armed robberies, but the folks in the neighbourhood don't 
know this, and think they're just a bunch of harmless young tarts. During one 
botched heist of a magazine office, an American hippie journalist, Daniel 
Wheaton (Peter Facinelli), captures and then proceeds to fall in love with 
Nicole's character, Gerry. Most of the movie is taken up by him following her 
around, and her telling him she's not interested (but not why), and then he 
gets entangled in a big violent chase, as the girls' criminal pasts catch up 
with them.
This probably sounds dull and confusing, and it is, not least because it's 
all that happens in the movie. Things take forever to unfold, and yet somehow 
nothing is ever fleshed out. The three sisters never have a conversation that 
tells us anything about their personalities -- all their lines are questions, 
answers, orders or points of information. The script tries to use some of 
Gerry and Daniel's exchanges to compare the revolutionaries of the 1960s with 
the unchanging working class, but nothing much is made of this theme, because 
"Honest" does not give us a convincing re-creation of its time. It doesn't so 
much take place in the 60s as in one of those "Austin Powers"-style pieces of 
production design overkill that pretend to be the 60s by teeming with joints, 
psychedelic polka-dot clothes, people saying "Far out!" and hit songs 
blasting out of every radio.
Lazy critics will blame the failure of this movie on the All Saints, or on 
the director, the Eurythmics' Dave Stewart, who are all musicians making 
their film debuts. But it's not their fault that they can't make sense of a 
script in which nothing happens for long stretches, and there is no real 
focus for anything, or reason for the period setting. It's not that I wasn't 
paying attention -- I watched "Honest" so attentively that I even noticed the 
in-jokes on the road signs of the sets.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website at 
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
