Title
Review for C'est arrivé prčs de chez vous (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Max Hoffmann
     If you are one sick puppy when it comes to "black humor", (e.g.,
you love "dead baby" jokes) this film is a "must see."  I'd give it a
10, but am downgrading it to 8.5 to account for my own perceptions,
warped by being born in a year that they were still conducting above
ground nuclear testing.
     CONCEPT: a professional hit man is followed during every waking
moment by a documentary film crew who want to "capture it all."
Including *brutally* realistic executions, a "Cold Blood" type killing
of a suburban family, and more.  Spice it up by making the subject of
the documentary an insufferable, mugging, poet-wanna-be and media
addict, with attitudes about women that went out with the Eisenhower
era, and who performs chamber music in his spare time.
     The grainy, shaky camerawork is eerily reminiscent of Marcel
Ophuls's epic, THE SORROW AND THE PITY.  Many of the supporting
characters are tongue in cheek portrayals of Belgium's answer to "family
values."  A lot of the humor is indescribable, (the long-suffering "I'm
not going to let this affect my demeanor" look on the mother's face when
the injured hit-man's hospital room mate goes berserk and starts singing
a song about "ka ka.")  The camera crew themselves occasionally end up
on film, for instance when the sound man stuffs the boom under his
arm-pit and helps stuff the slain taxi driver into the trunk.  After
drinks at a sleazy pub the hit man laments, "sheesh, I'm ready for bed
and forgot about the cab driver in the trunk ... now I'll have to head
out to the quarry first."  (Done in the vein of the old "please, Mother,
I'd rather do it *myself*" Anacin TV commercials.)
     Obviously filmed on a shoe-string, the camera-work is amazingly
versatile, and allows for nary a dull moment.  (Several times in the
film, the director confesses that they are running out of money, and the
hit man makes another "hit" to help pay for the film stock.)  Even in
dingy pubs, light by bare light bulbs, you can almost feel the grease on
the pressed tin wall panels.  Many of the settings are direct steals
from well-known films.  On one assignment, the hit man is chasing his
victim through an abandoned factory, and some shots are Xerox copies of
DOA or the bell tower scene of NIAGARA.  The brutal yet some-how
still funny slaying of a suburban family has black-hole hallways
straight out of IN COLD BLOOD.
     Although Benoit Peolvoorde (who at times has a spooky resemblance
to Lee Harvey Oswald) is thoroughly engaging as the star-struck hit man,
perhaps the most fascinating character is the camera itself.  Although
we never see the cameraman, we create our own images of what he must
look like.  Walking through factories and back streets, with praying
mantis-like side glances into rooms and dirty sinks ... we get a
slightly exaggerated portrayal of our *own* voyeurism.
     Supporting cast is composed entirely of the director's friends,
using their *real* names.
     The film *is* low-budget, and not without its rough spots.  (For
instance, Benoit's overblown posturing, with "solutions" outside a
housing project, that lapses so far into mugging that your index finger
starts itching to reach for your tonsils.)  But overall, it is a *very*
fresh and original package of entertainment.
     I recall reading an article in the SF CHRONICLE, something to the
effect that the film makers (they star and film) are dealing directly
with the few screens that will show this epic.  So if you see it listed
in *your* neighborhood, change your plans and go.  Although this film
wouldn't suffer terribly in the transition to the boob tube, I wouldn't
hold my breath waiting for it to show up at Blockbuster.

Author
Phineas Narco
     I just rented this movie last night (I think it just came out on
tape) and was kind of skeptical at first as I usually don't like
foreign movies, but I was *very* *very* impressed by this movie.  I
know of no other movie that was so simultaneously shocking, disturbing
and yet consistently hilarious as this one.  Scenes like the
shitting/singing guy and the nurse arguing in the hospital, confronting
the other film crew and shooting them and many others have me ROTFL.
Another interesting dichotomy was that the movie was simultaneously
done very realistically and yet was extremely absurd.  I'd be very
interested in any information people might have as to how the movie was
made, how such natural performances were elicited from people who may
or may not be actors, the special effects, how much was actually
improvised, etc.  Some aspects of the movie reminded me of Woody
Allen's TAKE THE MONEY AND RUN and Reiner's SPINAL TAP... due to the
cinema verite' absurdist pseudo documentary style of the picture.
Other scenes reminded me of HENRY-PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER  such as
the slow motion replaying of an attempted murder and the assault on a
family in a suburban home.  The neck brace reminded me of the final
scene in A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, another movie with a charismatic
psychopath as it's focus.  Many scenes reached the point of stomach
wrenching realism and then some absurd element was added when the
viewer reaches the maximum point of queasiness.  *This movie is great!*
In case anyone doesn't know what I'm talking about the movie is
basically a pseudo-documentary that follows the exploits of a
charismatic French serial killer.  I *highly* recommend this film!

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating:  8.0 out of 10 (B, **1/2 out of ****)
Starring:  Remy Belvaux, Benoit Poelvoorde, Andre Bonzei
Director:  Remy Belvaux
Producers:  Belvaux, Poelvoorde, and Bonzei
Screenplay:  Belvaux, Poelvoorde, Bonzei, and Vincent Tavier
Released by Roxie Releasing
French with English subtitles
     MAN BITES DOG is a pseudo-documentary that follows the killing
sprees of the murderous Benoit (Benoit Poelvoorde).  With cameras
rolling, he calmly explains his theories about killing people and
weighing down the bodies so they won't float to the surface of whatever
river or lake he dumps them in.  He then proceeds to slaughter person
after person, respecting neither age nor sex nor race, and murdering in
a wide variety of ways from strangulation to a bullet to the head.  All
the while, the film crew trails him, heedless of the danger they put
themselves in, and uncaring as they are drawn deeper and deeper into
the psychotic, criminal world of their subject.
     As a short, this could have been a brilliant, blistering satire on
society's views of violence and how it relates to movies.  However, MAN
BITES DOG is a full-length feature and, as such, spends a little too
much time with its subject.  Thirty minutes, or even forty-five, would
have been a perfect length, but by the end of the third half-hour,
certain elements of this movie (namely Ben's endless philosophizing)
have grown tired.  The violence has lost its edge and the movie has
begun to meander.
     Nevertheless, despite the possibly-excessive length, there is
still a lot to praise in this obscure effort by a trio of
previously-unknown Belgian film makers.  They have taken violence in
the cinema to its ultimate limit and created an always-irreverent,
often darkly funny look at killers and victims.
     Every moment of this film is shot documentary-style in grainy
black-and-white.  This pseudo-realism, complete with choppy editing
and unsteady, hand-held camera shots, gives an eerie air of legitimacy
to MAN BITES DOG.  Added to that, the three main characters in the film
all use their real names.  The film makers are Remy and Andre, and the
killer is Benoit.
     Benoit possesses an especially interesting personae.  Heartless as
a killer, he's actually a fun guy to be around most of the time.  He
loves his girlfriend and adores his family.  He's smart and thoughtful,
often giving lengthy discourses on various aspects of life and death.
Then, the next thing you know, he's blowing someone's brains out or
raping a woman while her naked husband looks on in horror.
     An issue addressed by MAN BITES DOG is how intimately the media
becomes involved in the stories they cover.  Are they simply reporting
the facts or, by their mere presence, are they participating in them?
The answer given by this film isn't obscure as the movie makers slowly
come to assist Ben in his various crimes.  At first, it's just little
things like shining a light in a certain spot, but it doesn't take long
before they're actually joining in.
     At one time or another, comparisons have been made between this
film and a couple of other recent, gut-wrenching productions--HENRY:
PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER and RESERVOIR DOGS.  From my point-of-view,
while there are superficial similarities between these pictures and MAN
BITES DOG, the basic thrust is radically different.  RESERVOIR DOGS and
HENRY are both serious movies.  MAN BITES DOG approaches itself and its
subject with tongue planted firmly in cheek.
     One of the most hilarious moments in the film comes when Ben has a
shoot-out with another killer.  After Ben kills his rival, the film
crew catches up with him standing over the body.  At that moment,
another group of men with cameras show up--they had been doing a
documentary about the exploits of the now-dead man.  Dark, twisted
humor like this characterizes MAN BITES DOG.
     The limited budget of the film shows, but in a way that adds to
the genuine feel of what we're seeing.  The plot has a couple of twists
that allow us to see various emotions from all of the principals of MAN
BITES DOG.  Nevertheless, through the entire movie, the only character
to be effectively developed is that of the killer, Ben.
     Obviously not a movie for everyone, MAN BITES DOG boasts graphic
displays of murder and rape.  There's very little of the human
body--inside or out--that isn't shown at one time or another during
the course of this movie.  Nevertheless, if you do venture to see MAN
BITES DOG, you would have to be made out of stone to miss the visceral,
sardonic impact of a highly-unusual film.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
