Title
Review for Paris Is Burning (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     PARIS IS BURNING is a documentary film by Jennie Livingstone.  It
stars Dorian Corey, Pepper Labeija, Venus Xtravaganza, Octavia
St. Laurent, Willi Ninja, Anji Xtravaganza, and Freddie Pendavis.
Running time approx.  75 minutes.
     I have only one complaint about PARIS IS BURNING: at 75 minutes, it
is too short.  The film was shot mainly in 1987, and its subject is
somewhat more familiar to the mainstream  now than then thanks to
Madonna's video, "Vogue", and other commercializations.  But the
subject, the culture built around Harlem drag balls, and the subjects,
the people who have structured their lives around the balls and their
culture, remain deeply moving, shocking, astonishing,  fascinating,
foreign, and near.
     One of the great strengths -- and there are many -- of PARIS IS
BURNING is the clarity with which the film explains this culture to
those of us who have never been exposed to it.  As I have had occasion
to mention from time to time, I am gay; I'm all white, middle-class,
Seattle-born and -bred, and far,  far away from Harlem both in geography
and mind.  The ball  culture comes as a revelation, like discovering a
colony of  Martians in woods behind Microsoft.
     And yet, I know these people.  I recognize their hopes and fears.
We do talk a common language.  And I come to love and care for them, as
much as one can for any flickering, celluloid ghost.  They have vision
and purpose, and they live to express that  vision with guts and
dedication and vast reservoirs of courage.
     It is the people in PARIS IS BURNING who continue to live in my
mind.  The wonderful old queen (Dorian Corey?), sits at her make-up
table, working on the paint job, and saying wonderful things to the
camera (is this Harvey Fierstein when he grows up?).  She has the last
lines in the movie and they come as the kind of revelatory *mot* that is
so *juste* that one's breath is taken away, as if from a blow to the
gut.
     There's Venus Xtravaganza the petite, tragic transsexual who wants
The Operation, a home in the 'burbs, the hubby and picket fence.  She
has completely, perhaps insanely, bought into the Great American Dream,
and she breaks your heart doing it.
     There's Pepper Labeija, the Mother of the House of Labeija, looking
and talking like a truly hip Eddie Murphy or Arsenio Hall; wise,
protective, seeing the troubles as well as the triumphs.  There's Willi
Ninja, who wants to take the House of Ninja to Paris.  There's the
Freddie Pendavis, who not only wants to be star, but may make it, if any
of them does.
     Two things are made achingly clear in the movie: the cruel hoax of
our material culture -- the idea that things make us happy; and
aggressive, combative nature of drag.  
     The private dreams of many of the interviewees is for wealth,
success, stardom, beautiful clothes, beautiful things that they don't
have to steal.  And there is the concept of "realness" -- the different
categories at the balls emphasize the criterion of a total
verisimilitude in not only the look but the attitude of being a
"schoolgirl," "town and country," "executive," or "high-fashion
Parisian."  This is not satire or burlesque, this is striving for the
length of time it takes to walk the floor of being a prep or
businessman.  These people are three-times outside the white, suburban
culture they emulate in their drag.  Many of them are transvestites or
transsexuals, all of them are outsiders, even in the context of Harlem.
And the balls are how they survive the clash between their dreams and
their reality.
     There's a longish section in the middle of the film about several
levels of drag war that culminates in a dance of domination -- two
people dancing against each other, never touching, each seeking to outdo
the other's contortionist poses -- the one more successful is in trying
oneself into a knot is the winner in this stylized and stylish surrogate
for street fighting.  As people remark from time to time, it's tough
being gay in New York.
     I've had occasion to talk to other people -- straight and gay --
about this film.  Every one of them was, if you will forgive the antique
locution, blown away by it.  We all have our favorite moments, our
personal revelations.  It's speaks to us, each of us, regardless of our
backgrounds or experiences.  Octavia St. Laurent, Anji Xtravaganza are
us and Jennie Livingston's direction and awareness make this all too
clear.
