Title
Review for No Way to Treat a Lady (1968)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NO WAY TO TREAT A LADY (director: Jack Smight; screenwriter: John
Gay/From a William Goldman novel; cinematographer: Jack Priestley;
editor: Archie Marshek; cast: Rod Steiger (Christopher Gill), George
Segal (Morris Brummel), Lee Remick (Kate Palmer), Eileen Heckart (Mrs.
Brummel), Michael Dunn (Midget), Murray Hamilton (Inspector Haines),
Martine Bartlett (Alma Mulloy), Ruth White (Mrs. Himmel),  Barbara
Baxley (Belle Poppie), Doris Roberts (Sylvia Poppie), Val Bisoglio
(Detective Monaghan), David Doyle (Lieutenant Dawson), 1968)
A thoroughly enjoyable film about a pitiless serial killer of
middle-aged women, that is played for laughs at the expense of the women
victims. It is a black comedy, acclaimed for its stellar performances,
especially by Rod Steiger as Christopher Gill, the psychologically
warped killer, with a severe mother fixation, who uses a number of
disguises to commit the murders and performs the murders as if he was
on-stage, being only natural, considering that he is an accomplished
Broadway actor and well-known theater owner, and the son of a great
actress.
George Segal is the likable Jewish detective, Morris Brummel, who is
assigned to investigate the murder case. He also has a mother problem,
as his stereotypical Jewish mother, Eileen Heckart, offers him her
possessive love and could nag with the best of them. This presents an
interesting contrast with the way the killer handles his neuroses.
Segal, who lives with his mother, takes his daily punishment in stride,
offering a bon mot here and there and sometimes just a resigned look,
but without really complaining, rather feeling resigned to his fate and
accepting it like a mensch (man). His performance is endearing and
Heckart's is amusingly right on target. Also noteworthy, is the
beautiful and giddy shiksa (non-Jewish woman), Lee Remick as Kate
Palmer, who will become romantically involved with the nice Jewish boy
as a result of the case. She is delightfully refreshing, offering her
beauty, sensitivity, and comedy in a splendid performance. Her romance
with the bashful Segal was well-conceived, as she leads him on by her
womanly flirtations and draws out of him how much he loves her as a
whole person and not just for her body, as her past lover did. She also
has this great line, in response to him complimenting her on her looks,
"Getting dolled up is easy; looking natural takes time." This is an
actor's film and they all make the most of it.
In the first scene, Steiger is disguised as an Irish priest, merrily
walking into his first victim's tenement building whistling and when
seeing Remick on the stairs, saying "top of the morning" to the art
museun guide who lives in the victim's building and will be called on to
become an eyewitness to identify the killer. Steiger knocks on Mrs.
Mulloy's door and gains entry by saying he is the new priest in the
neighborhood. He drinks some port with her, tells her some absurd
stories, and he begins to tickle her like his mother liked to be
tickled, and, as she goes into a ticklish convulsion, he strangles her
to death. He leaves her in the bathroom with his trademark signature for
the murder, lips smeared on with lipstick across her forehead.
Segal is assigned the case and is quoted in the paper as giving the
killer a rave review, saying how well-planned and executed the murder
was. Steiger calls him the next day and offers to become Segal's
telephone confidant, but tells him, "Remember, I am smarter than you
are." He will commit five murders and only fail to call Segal after the
first and fourth.
Steiger next poses as a German plumber and after eating some home-made
cake with the middle-aged woman who was born in Frankfort, a place where
he pretends he's from, he strangles her and does his lipstick bit again.
He then calls Segal and gives him the latest victim's address.
This role is a hammy actor's dream, a role in which Steiger gets a
chance to outshine the indomitable Peter Sellers, the master of
disguises. Steiger will also be disguised as a gay hairdresser, a police
officer, a woman, and an Italian waiter with a southern accent. He will
do Cary Grant, W.C. Fields, and Maurice Chevalier imitations, as well as
calling the detective from different places, such as an art gallery,
Sardi's restaurant, and from Remick's apartment.
There is one very funny scene where a midget confesses to the crime, but
who becomes upset that Segal doesn't take his confession seriously. When
told an eyewitness says the killer was of normal height, the midget
responds, "See, I'm a master of disguises."
It was difficult not to find this witty film funny and its romantic
subplot equally charming. It was adapted from William Goldman's novel.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
As a jolly Irish priest, Christopher Gill (Rod Steiger) charms the
lonely woman in her small apartment.  Telling her funny stories, he
begins to tickle her, and, as her laughs turn into convulsions, he
reaches over and strangles her to death.  He leaves her, his first in a
series of victims, in the bathroom with his trademark lips painted on
her forehead using her own lipstick.
In town to receive a tribute from San Jose's Cinequest film festival as
a maverick motion picture legend, Steiger chose 1968's NO WAY TO TREAT A
LADY to show as one of his personal favorites.  I asked him about the
movie, and his mixed emotions about it showed.  He complained bitterly
that, since the studio never got behind the movie, it did poorly at the
box office.  It later became very popular on television, which helped in
rejuvenating his career.  Opening as it did with the controversial scene
above, one can partially understand why the studios back then were
nonplussed.  Still, the delicious black comedy has such appeal, it is a
shame that it wasn't more aggressively marketed.
The killer's nemesis in the story is a detective named Morris Brummel,
who lives with his complaining Jewish mother.  A good-spirited George
Segal gives a likable and inviting performance as Detective Brummel.
The detective is taunted by the killer, who likes to call him after each
murder.  "Remember, I'm smarter than you," Christopher admonishes the
detective.
Steiger clearly had great fun with his part.  He told me that he was
cocky back then.  "Who is this guy Peter Sellers?" he said, referring to
Sellers's fame for being able to play multiple parts in a single movie.
Steiger wanted to outdo him.
Steiger gets to really chew up the scenery in NO WAY TO TREAT A LADY,
and he has the time of his life doing it.  Skirting the fine line of
overacting, he doesn't go over it until the last scene, in which his
pent-up energy explodes in an over-the-top scene in which director Jack
Smight should have restrained him some.
The movie wasn't just a vehicle for Steiger to dazzle us with his acting
feats.  It also contains a credible and sweet, little love story between
Segal and a very sexy Lee Remick, as Kate Palmer, a woman who saw the
killer briefly at the first crime scene.  Segal has all the shy
giddiness of a man unaccustomed to love.  Setting her sights on the
detective, Kate flirts with him in a beautiful display of womanly
charms.  He remarks on their second meeting about her spending a lot of
time getting "dolled up."  Shaking her head she explains, "Getting
dolled up is easy; looking natural takes time."
Kate is pleased to be taken seriously.  Her previous boyfriend, who only
liked her body, made fun of her mind.  "What mind?" he mocked her.  "A
thought of yours would die of loneliness."
The audacious killer enjoys taking risks as much as developing new
accents and disguises.  On one call to the detective, he phones from his
table at a busy, upscale Manhattan restaurant.
John Gay's intelligent script has the detective develop a clever
stratagem for stopping the serial murderer.  When the killer's finally
trapped, we feel a bit sorry for him.  Steiger's characterization of him
has won our hearts.  As black comedies go, this is one of the sunniest.
NO WAY TO TREAT A LADY runs 1:48.  It is not rated but might be an R
for, mainly off-screen, violence and mature themes and would be fine for
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
