Title
Review for Falls, The (1980)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Another counting game by idiosyncratic director Peter Greenaway.  In many 
ways it is the ultimate Greenaway film.  Audacious feature has no story and 
seems like a put-on when you try to describe it to others.  A strange 
occurrence, known in the film as the Violent Unknown Event (VUE), strikes 
the planet one night and leaves 19 million victims in its wake.  The effects 
are mixed, sometimes benevolent, sometimes not, sometimes a little of both, 
but common symptoms can be identified.  Most pointedly, the victims become 
obsessed with birds and flight.  Several also begin talking in 
unidentifiable languages.  Greenaway elects to tell his story by excerpting 
92 biographies from a filmed catalogue of VUE victims, each name starting 
with the letters FALL.  For the first twenty minutes this doesn't look like 
easy viewing - by the fifteenth biography (they vary in running times) we 
realize there are still another 77 to go - but eventually we become familiar 
with the material and its recurring themes, and Greenaway's mammoth project 
becomes intriguing.
Anyone acquainted with other Greenaway films will know that his work is very 
much an acquired taste, which is why THE FALLS is not recommended to 
neophytes (but if you're feeling brave, go ahead and take the plunge).  Much 
of the fun comes from recognizing quotes from his previous short subjects 
and future features - there are the women called Cissie Colpitts (who would 
resurface - pun intended - in DROWNING BY NUMBERS); one subject's obsession 
with the letter H (H IS FOR HOUSE); the dreams of water (WATER); the 
characters who are watching another Greenaway film (VERTICAL FEATURES 
REMAKE); the blend of artwork and birds (A WALK THROUGH H).  THE FALLS also 
quotes from itself: there are 92 biographies, 92 trains, 92 VUE languages; 
characters do indeed 'fall' (from buildings, from homemade wings in the 
style of Icarus) and literally become 'falls' (one woman turns into a human 
waterfall, a man changes his name to Niagara).  Greenaway's punning and 
deadpan humour reinforce the futility of his project.  Much of the 
information compiled for the biographies is trivial and not particularly 
useful (e.g. one man's body heat is identical to the average temperature of 
sedentary passerines).  The randomness of the VUE symptoms add to its 
arbitrariness.  Nobody can agree on theories (the epicentre of the VUE) or 
even facts (the date in history when one man jumped from the Eiffel Tower).  
It appears that to Greenaway any collection of statistics is just as 
fanciful as a fiction, which may explain his project's concept.  THE FALLS 
presents facts and figures as ultimately fractal, where the very act of 
codifying creates a sort of unpredictable, baroque aesthetic.  And who 
better than Greenaway, an artist and former statistician, to present this?
This may be Greenaway's least accessible feature, but it has a lot going for 
it - it is markedly unique and highly personal.  Not merely an elaborate 
experimental film, it reminds us of the territories that cinema can create 
and then travel in.  But it's probably enough that THE FALLS runs for three 
hours - Greenaway has stated that he would like to make an even longer 
version for television.  Given his interest in computer/video technology, 
it's likely that the ultimate fate of THE FALLS is to exist as an actual 
directory on CD-ROM.  That's taking cinematic boundaries about as far as 
they can get.

