Title
Review for Winter Guest, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE WINTER GUEST, first-time director Alan Rickman's ode to
bleakness, tells four overlapping stories which occur in a Scottish
seaside town on the coldest day in living memory.  So bitter is the
weather that even the surface of the sea freezes solid.
     One story concerns the trivialities of two elderly women, played
by Sheila Reid as Lily and Sandra Voe as Chloe, traveling to a funeral.
Another explores the uncertain romantic feelings of two teenagers,
played by Gary Hollywood and Arlene Cockburn.  A third has two boys,
played by Douglas Murphy and Sean Biggerstaff, frolicking at the beach.
The centerpiece of the picture is the verbal pas de deux between Emma
Thompson and her real-life mother Phyllida Law, playing fictional
mother and daughter Frances and Elspeth.
     Rickman, who played opposite Thompson in SENSE AND SENSIBILITY,
brings a slow and delicate touch to his directing.  With more engaging
material, this approach could have worked, but the remote and
uninvolving script makes less for a movie than a cinematic tone poem.
Rickman and Sharman MacDonald created the script from MacDonald's play,
which was hopefully better than the motion picture adaptation.
     The accomplished actress Emma Thompson, in one of her lesser
performances, plays a depressed woman whose husband died a few years
ago and who resents her pushy mother.  ("This is my own body," she
informs her mother who complains about the way her hair looks.  "I can
do what I like.  I can gain weight if I like, and I can cut my own
hair.")
     Phyllida Law plays a constant complainer of a mother.  "I should
of had a boy," she says.  "Girls are hard to rear and hard of heart."
Both Law and Thompson appear to be following directions carefully in
their acting, but neither character is well developed or worth caring
about.
     Michael Kamen's hauntingly sad piano music and Seamus McGarvey's
chillingly handsome cinematography fill the screen with beauty, but the
movie itself is as cold as the frozen climate.  The movie is so
soporific that one begins to hope against hope that some misfortune
will strike one of the players to stir up some genuine conflicts and
emotions.  Instead, all we get is contrived and meaningless banter and
inconsequential actions.  If the dialog is deep and worth pondering,
then saying little and doing less can succeed, but this story bogs down
in petty disagreements.
     When a show works, it is easy to forgive major mistakes in its
staging, but this dreadfully dull tale had me noticing them everywhere.
Consider just one aspect.  The story goes to great lengths to remind
the audience how cold it is -- the temperature being the film's chief
metaphor.  Why then are there so many incongruities?  1) There is there
never any frozen breath, 2) When the women complain about the wind
cutting right through them, the wind is calm, 3) Actors walk around
outside with their jackets unbuttoned, and 4) The teenagers are in a
house in which the heat hasn't worked in a long time, yet a single
smoldering log in the fireplace seems to suffice.
     "I don't where I was," Chloe remarks at one point in the movie.
"I don't know who I am yet."  She is as lost as the story itself.  With
the actors' scenes edited out, we would be left with a lovely fifteen
minute music video.  That part is all that is worth seeing.
     THE WINTER GUEST runs 1:50.  It is rated R for brief nudity and a
little profanity.  The picture would be fine for teenagers.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Phylida Law, Emma Thompson, Gary Hollywood, Arlene Cockburn,
SheilaReid, Sandra Voe, Douglas Murphy, Sean Biggerstaff
Director: Alan Rickman
Screenplay: Sharman Macdonald and Alan Rickman
I cannot adequately express how disappointed I feel after watching THE
WINTER GUEST. I had expected great things from Alan Rickman in this his
debut as a director. Let's face it, he's a better actor. Secondly,
whatever persuaded Emma Thompson, an Academy Award Winner for best
screen adaptation, to except a very poor adaptation of stage play to
screen play carrying the same name???
Yes I hated, I greatly detested, THE WINTER GUEST from the instant that
Phyllida Law opened her mouth. Perhaps, her character is meant to be
that of a nagging old bit'hmm, but to the extent that it cat whips the
viewer's nerves raw? Several people walked out early when they saw where
this movie was heading. I should have done the same and got my money
back, but unfortunately I don't do it on principle. One kept expecting
the old crone to drop dead, with the fake Parkisonian tremor an all, but
no she has to live right to the end and say ‘My name is Elspeth', like
it's something profound and the audience is meant to understand what she
means by it. I couldn't, so I put it down to early onset dementia. She
could have done the audience a favour and walked out onto the frozen sea
and never returned.
Other annoying factors is how stagey the entire movie feels, even though
most of the sets are outdoors. There is also a problem with the script
sounding artificial, ‘Shakespearan' without the heart of the great poet.
The actors speak, but most of the time what they rant about is
inconsequential, empty and even baffling. There's almost never more than
two people in a scene, it's like no one lives in this town except for
eight people split into pairs. Other problems concern two boys who find
condoms and kittens on the beach, before deciding to rub deep heat on
their dicks. Every second word spoken is a swear word, and they're only
ten! You may expect it from PULP FICTION, but not from kids! Then there
are two young people experimenting with their bodies, wanting to have
sex but don't because there's a feeling the dead boy's father is in the
room. Before we meet two old ladies, one screaming ‘I'm going to fall,
I'm going to fall.' No doubt she is having a panic attack, but hey she's
on a bus there is no where to fall! Finally, Phyllida Law and Emma
Thompson, mother and daughter, I just hope there relationship in real
life is not as awful as it is on screen. There is enough nagging in this
movie to make one grow old in their seat.
This was an awful script and an awful movie with little resolution of
the presenting problems, leaving the viewer (myself) very angry and
dissatisfied.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   During the postwar years Great Britain has not only lost a
huge empire but is threatened even now with the departure of
its northern province, Scotland.  Well, then, if the Scottish
independence movement wants to hasten the UK's egress, it
wouldn't hurt them to expose the powers-that-be to the film
"The Winter Guest," based on a play staged in 1995 by
Sharman MacDonald.  The action takes place on the coldest
day of the year in as remote an area as Atom Egoyan's
Canadian wilderness in his "The Sweet Hereafter," a place
that's so Godforsaken that if the ministers in London
considered it representative of Scotland, they would wash
their hands of the whole area with delight.  Of course, this
fishing village is as different from Edinburgh as Death Valley
is from New York City, but the rural area does make for an
effective backdrop to what is essentially a filmed, static play,
in which inner action substitutes for outward adventure.
   Under Alan Rickman's direction--which evokes some
powerful acting from an ensemble of performers headed by
Emma Thompson and her real-life mother Phyllida Law--"The
Winter Guest" shows the transformation occurring in an
assortment of people of varying generations and outlooks in
quite a short period of time, a metamorphosis all the more
surprising given the apparent shortage of stimulations that
people in more urban areas enjoy.  What Rickman has done
in adapting MacDonald's play to the screen is to switch back
and forth among four stories, weaving the disparate groups
into a whole as story concludes.  "The Winter Guest" is too
slow and uneventful for the typical film audience.  But if you
want an antidote to Tarantino-style cinematography and story-
lines, you couldn't find a movie with a style more dissimilar.
   The core relationship is between Frances (Emma
Thompson) and her vulnerable, interfering mother, Elspeth
(Phyllida Law), the latter paying a surprise visit on her
daughter shortly after the death of Frances's handsome
husband.   Frances, a gifted photographer who has suffered
emotionally over her loss, has resorted to taking black-and-
white photos of landscapes, even hiding in the bathroom
when she hears the salutation of her aging mother.  Elspeth's
heart is in the right place.  While she fears that her daughter
will leave her alone, making good on her promise to move
with her son Alex (Gary Hollywood) to Australia, she feels for
Frances and is determined to cheer her up--to change the
middle-aged woman's focus from death into a empathy for the
living souls around her.
   The small of people to whom we are introduced in the story
have had time to cultivate their eccentricities, particularly two
elderly women: the bulgy-eyed Chloe (Sandra Voe) and the
more down-to-earth Lily (Sheila Reid), who get their kicks
from reading obituaries and attending funerals.  No matter
that they care little about the departed and that they must wait
in the icy weather for a bus that seems to pass the frozen
stop but once a day.  They celebrate the funerals with visits to
a tea parlor where they close their eyes in ecstasy over slabs
of fresh Napoleon served with piping hot pots of tea.
   Youth get their representation through the coming of Alex's
first sexual experience. Rickman milks the eroticism by filming
a kind of extended foreplay-in-the-snow as Alex meets and
banters with the gamin-like Nita (Arlene Cockburn)--a forward
girl who resembles a young Liza Minelli and whose attraction
to the red-haired Alex is palpable.  Alex is conflicted about the
approaching experience, offering the young woman his
bathtub while she continues her seduction while wrapped in a
large Turkish towel.  In still another episode that adds comic
relief, a pair of boys of about the age of fourteen (Douglas
Murphy and Sean Biggerstaff) wander around the icy coastal
area jesting about women and scoring some yocks from the
audience when they discover a used condom.
   The key relationship is obviously on the mother-daughter
bond, one which begins like a mother-in-law joke as Frances
freezes up at the visit of her carping mother but warms up
enough to her to reconsider her proposed trip to antipodean
lands.  "The Winter Guest" is slow going, a theatrical movie
that borders on preciosity, as we are exposed to the icy wilds
of Scotland and to the flames, both real and metaphorical,
that help to heat up the eight principals.  Its real home is the
stage, though we have Alan Rickman to thanks for allowing a
greater audience into the recesses of his characters through
the medium of the cinema.  Rated R.  Running Time: 110
minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 12/25/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:50
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Phylida Law, Emma Thompson, Gary Hollywood, Arlene Cockburn, 
      Sheila Reid, Sandra Voe, Douglas Murphy, Sean Biggerstaff
Director: Alan Rickman
Producers: Ken Lipper, Edward R. Pressman, Steve Clark-Hall
Screenplay: Sharman Macdonald and Alan Rickman
Cinematography: Seamus McGarvey
Music: Michael Kamen
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     Anyone who saw Alan Rickman's finely-realized performances in TRULY 
MADLY DEEPLY and SENSE AND SENSIBILITY will be unsurprised that the 
actor-turned-director is a bit of a poet at heart.  However, for those 
who recall him only as the maniacal villain of DIE HARD and ROBIN HOOD: 
PRINCE OF THIEVES, this recognition may be something of a shock.  
Nevertheless, "poetic" is an excellent term to describe Rickman's 
feature debut as a director, THE WINTER GUEST.  The film has a simple, 
unhurried rhythm that uses all of the available elements to fashion a 
successful whole.  The result is an occasionally haunting, sometimes 
magical, and always insightful human drama.  THE WINTER GUEST isn't 
about resolving plot threads and advancing a story line; it's about 
exploring relationships and examining life in all of its stages.
     THE WINTER GUEST does not tell a traditional tale, nor does it 
ascribe to a conventional narrative structure  – there is no real 
beginning or end.  Instead, we are given an opportunity to observe one 
day in the lives of eight humans.  They represent both sexes, multiple 
generations, and a variety of relationships – male and female; young, 
middle-aged, and elderly; friends, would-be lovers, and kin.  We see 
expectations fulfilled and disappointed, emotional boundaries eroded, 
and truths unveiled.  There is comedy and tragedy.  Most importantly, 
much of what transpires during the course of THE WINTER GUEST will find 
an echo in our own lives – in this fiction can be found much truth.
     The setting is small town in Scotland on the coldest day of the 
year.  It's so frigid that the sea has begun to freeze over.  The 
onshore wind cuts like a knife and snow blankets the beach, giving the 
terrain an alien appearance.  It is against this backdrop that the 
relationships of the film are captured.  There are four pairings, and, 
although there is some interaction between the different twosomes, THE 
WINTER GUEST's focus is on the dynamics internal to each relationship.
     The first, meatiest pairing is that of Elspeth (Phylida Law) and 
her recently-widowed daughter, Frances (Emma Thompson).  These two have 
a stormy relationship.  They love each other deeply, but both are 
stubborn and willful, and neither is willing to admit that they need the 
other.  Much of their interaction is argumentative, but, during the 
course of a long walk to the frozen shoreline, they come to an unspoken 
understanding of how much each means to the other.  
     Frances' adult son, Alex (Gary Hollywood), is a lonely young man 
who has been caring for his mother since the death of his father.  On 
this day, he meets a girl, Nita (Arlene Cockburn), who has secretly been 
spying on him for weeks.  Although their first encounter is antagonistic 
(she throws a snowball at him), both quickly become aware of an 
undeniable attraction.  Once they retire to a place where they can be 
alone, however, things don't go exactly as planned.
     Lily (Sheila Reid) and Chloe (Sandra Voe) are a couple of old 
friends who are frequent funeral attendees.  Death is a topic of endless 
fascination for them, perhaps because they are so close to it, and they 
spend their spare time scanning the obituaries, looking for the next 
funeral or cremation in the area.  It doesn't matter whether or not they 
knew the deceased.  It's the ceremony that they're interested in.
     Sam (Douglas Murphy) and Tom (Sean Biggerstaff), a pair of 
schoolboy chums, are spending this cold February day cutting classes and 
hanging out at the beach, horsing around, building a small fire for 
warmth, and walking on the frozen water.  Unlike Lily and Chloe, these 
two have their entire lives ahead of them.  They are young enough to 
still believe in magic, but old enough to recognize that the process of 
crossing into adulthood robs life of the simple joy that only children 
can experience.
     The acting is strong and believable.  The mixture of veteran 
performers and first-timers is effective, with the most successful 
choice being the casting of real-life mother and daughter Phylida Law 
and Emma Thompson in the most prominent roles.  There is a chemistry in 
their interaction that would be hard to replicate with two different, 
non-related actors.  And, of course, the physical resemblance makes it 
that much easier to accept Elspeth and Frances as parent and child.
     THE WINTER GUEST began its life as a stage play in 1995, with 
Rickman as the director.  Four of the film's principals, Phylida Law, 
Arlene Cockburn, Sheila Reid, and Sandra Voe, appeared in the theatrical 
version before moving to the film.  Unlike several recent motion 
pictures adapted from plays, THE WINTER GUEST has been successfully 
opened up.  The rough, bleak Scottish countryside becomes as much of a 
character as any of the eight humans.  In fact, considering how 
important the climate is to every relationship under Rickman's 
microscope, it could be argued that this is the single most important 
element of the movie.  If you appreciate character studies, THE WINTER 
GUEST is a solid effort with enough power to stay with you after you 
have left the theater.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."
