Title
Review for Sleepwalkers (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., R, Horror, 1992
Director: Mick Garris
Cast: Brian Krause, Alice Krige, Madchen Amick, Stephen King
     Note: Sleepwalkers are "people" who are only half-human.   They
need to feed on human female virgins.
     Brian Krause is the new kid in town.  He goes to the local high
school and he gets to know beautiful, but unpopular, Madchen Amick.
Unfortunately for Madchen Amick, Brian Krause is a Sleepwalker who needs
to feed and help feed his mother Alice Krige or she will die.
     SLEEPWALKERS is a relatively good horror film.  It gets a bit
strange in some places, and the film gets very unrealistic at times, but
is still fun to watch.  The film is sometimes gory which will deter some
people from the film.  You could definitely do worse than this film,
although I don't know whether to recommend that you see this film in the
theater.  You may be better off waiting to see SLEEPWALKERS when it
comes to video.   On a scale of zero to five, I give SLEEPWALKERS a
four.   SLEEPWALKERS is rated R for explicit language, adult situations,
and graphic violence.
     I saw SLEEPWALKERS on opening night (Friday) and it is not at all
what I was expecting.  The advertisements that I saw for the film
painted a different picture in my head of what the film was going to be
like.  Sure, I liked SLEEPWALKERS, but it was nowhere near as good as I
was hoping it was going to be.  By now, I have come to expect a certain
amount from the films whose screenplay is written by Stephen King (films
based on Stephen King films written by someone else are totally
unpredictable as to how good they will be, so I don't expect too much
out of them).  This is definitely a low for him.  From what I have
heard, MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE is *really* bad, so evidently this is not
Stephen King's worst screenplay (then again he didn't direct this film).
     SLEEPWALKERS is the first full feature film that Stephen King has
written exclusively for the screen.  I feel the main problem with the
film is that it does get very unbelievable at some points.   Personally,
that detracted from my enjoyment of the film.  And, for those
interested, Stephen King has a cameo part as the caretaker of a
graveyard.
     BASIC INSTINCT has stirred up some controversy on it's portrayal of
lesbians and bisexuals.  Well, SLEEPWALKERS may unearth some trouble
with the portrayal of incest between Brian Krause and his mother Alice
Krige.  This seemed to really disturb some of the people in the theater,
so will be likely to offend others.  If you feel that this may offend
you, don't go to see the film.  There are plenty of other good films
playing that you can see instead.

Author
The Phantom
     The Phantom hardly knows where to start.  He supposes that he
should begin by pointing out that SLEEPWALKERS is not still another in a
long line of perfectly awful Stephen King adaptations, in part because
Stephen King apparently wrote the original screenplay himself.  And in
part because it is not, in fact, perfectly awful.  It's only imperfectly
awful, which is certainly a step in the right direction, coming as
SLEEPWALKERS does fast on the heels of THE LAWNMOWER MAN, yet another
spiritless, insipid, King-inspired horror film in the grand tradition of
CHILDREN OF THE CORN and MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE.
     In fact, in many ways, SLEEPWALKERS is really quite good, although
it hardly qualifies as a horror classic.  Or a good Stephen King tale.
Or even a film that's worth going too far out of your way to see.  By
now, many phans will have read the early reviews in the Usenet movies
newsgroups and concluded from the sheer uniformity of their
recommendations that SLEEPWALKERS isn't worth their time, and that they
would be better off spending their $7.50 on that new and rather
frighteningly politically correct animated film about rain forests.
After all, although SLEEPWALKERS features gore galore -- a surprising
amount of it, considering that it's a major studio release -- it does
not as well feature the twin bonuses of seeing Sharon Stone naked every
5 minutes and Michael Douglas walk around without any pants on.
Fiscally prudent filmgoers are always looking to get the most for their
money, and in this respect SLEEPWALKERS doesn't even come close to more
socially acceptable films like BASIC INSTINCT.
     However, this is not to say that SLEEPWALKERS is entirely without
merit (observant phans will note that saying that a film is not entirely
without merit is among the highest praise the Phantom has ever lavished
on a King adaptation, MISERY excepted).  It may in fact be most
enjoyable to those phans who can spot all the other films that get
ripped off (or are paid homage to, if you -- like Brian DePalma --
prefer to think of it in slightly more civil terms); certainly that was
one of the reasons the Phantom had a fairly good time throughout most of
the film.  And the ripoffs come fast and furious, starting with BLUE
VELVET and continuing with, among others, NEAR DARK, AN AMERICAN
WEREWOLF IN LONDON, THE SHINING, NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD and LIFEFORCE.
And those are just the ones that come to mind as the Phantom writes this
paragraph; chances are that another half dozen will occur to him before
he finishes this review.
     The story, such as it is, revolves a mother and son family of
"sleepwalkers," a race of beings the film helpfully defines for us as
perhaps the forerunners of those creatures we call vampires.  They, like
vampires, need human blood to remain forever young; however, unlike
vampires they don't mind daylight, don't have to sleep in coffins, and
tend to hang around cemeteries only if they're on a date or having a
picnic.  And they're deathly afraid of cats.  (That's with a lowercase
"c," rather than "Cats" the Broadway show; the Phantom can sympathize
with both fears, though only because he suffers from occasional cat
hair-induced allergies and is not otherwise predisposed to like animals
who deposit dead rodents on one's bed.  And Andrew Lloyd Weber's
perpetual-money-machine still gives him the chills whenever he passes it
on his way to some form of entertainment that doesn't require grown
adults to look like living outtakes from THE WIZARD OF OZ.)
     Why they should be so afraid of cats is -- like so many other
things -- never adequately explained by King's near-illiterate script.
Yet because Mick Garris (the director) keeps the film rolling along, we
don't generally have time to think about its seemingly endless supply of
absurdities.  In fact, Garris does about as well as can be expected from
any director given the material with which he had to work; the Phantom
was pleasantly surprised at the number of Raimi-esque touches throughout
the film, and he is heartened to think that directors other than Sam
Raimi, Brian DePalma, the Coen brothers and Stanley Kubrick may
occasionally try camera angles other than those approved by the
television networks for their ever-so-inventive movie-of-the-week
presentations.  (With luck, we'll see something else from Mr.  Garris
sometime soon; with hope, it will be something with a significantly
better screenplay.)
     We are also treated to "discount morphing" every 10 minutes or so,
presumably because the film's budget could not justify even more
morphing than that.  "Morphing," as those who follow the special effects
industry, watch Michael Jackson's videos, or have seen TERMINATOR 2 --
that is, presumably everyone in the world -- know, is the
less-impressive-with-every-viewing effect that shows one object smoothly
transforming into another.  For example, imagine the auditorium in a
theater showing SLEEPWALKERS on successive Friday nights: if seen in
fast motion, the appearance would be of a room growing steadily more and
more empty, as a packed house on opening night smoothly transforms into
a near-empty auditorium just two weeks later.  (In fact, the Phantom
suspects that the theater manager at the Loews Astor Plaza in New York
City -- one of the largest theaters on the east coast -- will have a
pretty good feel for the delightful "morphing" effect by the end of
April, as he counts the days until the May 15th release of LETHAL 3 will
again allow him to fill the 1000 seats in his theater.)
     As if that weren't enough, we also get a healthy dose of splatter
as people's hands are ripped off, fingers are chewed off, arms and necks
are lacerated by knives and glass, eardrums are pierced and bodies are
set on fire; apparently the MPAA has fled the country after having given
BASIC INSTINCT their seal of approval for our nation's
ever-impressionable youth and no one is minding the censorship store.
(Hint to George Romero: re-edit and -release your DEAD films ASAP and
see if the MPAA will give them a pass this time around if you throw in a
naked bisexual bleached blonde or two.  After all, cannibalism, ice-pick
murders -- what's the difference, really, as long as it's between
consenting adults?)  The Phantom is, of course, the last to mourn our
nation's moral disintegration, and far be it for him to complain that a
film has perhaps one too many scenes of someone losing a body part;
still, for a film that is advertised in such a wholesome way and has so
many attempts at levity scattered throughout it to descend to point
where it feels it must swing half-cats at the screen -- the Phantom
supposes he should consider himself fortunate that SLEEPWALKERS wasn't
filmed in headache-inducing "Freddy-Vision" -- well something seems just
a little amiss.
     What's amiss, as it turns out, is apparently a coherent story, or
at least one that's not filled with so many plot holes that the
filmmakers feel they must resort to every horror cliche in the book to
compensate.  The biggest problem, as the Phantom has already mentioned,
is the film's atrocious script, a problem that must be laid directly at
the feet of the master of horror himself, a man who with SLEEPWALKERS
can't seem to keep himself focused on a single, tellable tale.  Although
100-page-long digressions are always welcome in the context of King's
cinder-block-shaped novels, they simply do not belong in a film that is
only 90 minutes long.  And the answer is not to make the film even
longer; instead, the answer is to confine oneself as a writer or
director to a single story idea that can be told well on film.  This is
something that Kathryn Bigelow did to perfection with her excellent
first feature, NEAR DARK, a film which will likely remain the final word
on modern retellings of the vampire legend for quite some time; it's
also a film that is "paid homage to" throughout SLEEPWALKERS.
Unfortunately, the effect of this is to make us wish we'd taken our
$7.50 to Blockbusters and rented NEAR DARK instead of using it to
encourage Stephen King to write still more bad screenplays and
collaborate in yet another disappointing horror film.
     King's script veers all over the place, from allusions to BLUE
VELVET and NEAR DARK to wholesale ripoffs of AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN
LONDON (the Phantom counted 2 complete scenes that were lifted directly
from John Landis' far superior film, and he was hardly paying attention
most of the time), and along the way King has his characters behaving in
the most ridiculous and unlikely ways imaginable.  Going on a first date
with the mysterious but charming new boy in town?  Why not have a picnic
at Homestead Cemetery, apparently your staid Midwestern town's version
of lovers' lane?  Trapped in your home by hundreds of extremely
domesticated and unthreatening-looking house cats?  Why not avoid at all
costs the acquisition of 6 large Dobermans, each of whom could eat a
dozen of those cats for lunch without working up a sweat, in favor of a
single ineffectual bear trap?  And on and on; it's almost as if King
were saying to us, "I have no respect at all for your intelligence, so
I'll just have my characters do the most expedient thing possible to
move my screenplay forward."  The shame of it is that in his novels,
King takes the trouble to give his characters something at least
resembling motivation, and in general he doesn't have them behave like
complete idiots most of the time.  His screenplays, however, have been
uniformly contemptuous of the audience; either that, or he doesn't take
writing for the screen as seriously as he does writing for the New York
Times best seller list.
     SLEEPWALKERS also suffers from a bad case of Freddy-itis (the
tendency to crack wise when the film would do better maintaining a
serious tone) at times, and the film overall amounts to much less than
the sum of its parts, perhaps due to King's inability to focus, or
perhaps due to the extremely artificial look of the film itself, which
appears to have been shot entirely indoors on a back lot somewhere far
away from the Midwest.
     That said, the Phantom should note that SLEEPWALKERS is enjoyable
enough as these exercises in parting gullible filmgoers from their
entertainment dollars go (phans may remember that the Phantom enjoyed
William Friedkin's even more loopy 1990 film THE GUARDIAN; if the
Phantom can find evil trees and Druid nannies entertaining, he can
certainly be diverted by wholesale gore and discount morphing).  Garris
keeps the film moving, and many individual scenes are quite effective.
And if one can overlook the inevitable scenes of people in giant,
unlikely-looking bug suits (or perhaps they were giant cat suits -- the
light was bad and it was difficult to tell, though mercifully no one
started singing "Memories"), and the few brief scenes in which fat and
lazy-looking housecats bestir themselves and leap unlikely distances to
attack the sleepwalkers -- scenes that brought back fond memories of
MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL's killer rabbit -- then it is quite
possible to enjoy SLEEPWALKERS for what it is: a few good ideas,
well-handled by a talented director and special-effects crew but
ultimately sabotaged by a writer who should stick to paperbacks.
     (Goodness, even the Phantom's obligatory "that said" paragraph
ended on a critical note.  Perhaps SLEEPWALKERS doesn't even deserve a
"that said," though the Phantom did in fact enjoy parts of the film.
It's certainly a better film than THE LAWNMOWER MAN, and the Phantom can
without difficulty think of many worse horror films that have been
released in the past year or so -- CHILD'S PLAY 3 comes quickly to mind,
as does the final nail in the ELM STREET coffin, FREDDY'S DEAD.  It's
worth a rental, so be sure to visit your local Blockbusters in about 4
months.  In the meantime, phans would do well to rent any of the films
to which SLEEPWALKERS "pays homage," but especially Kathryn Bigelow's
horror classic, NEAR DARK, a film that proves -- once again, and most
theatrical horror releases to the contrary -- that low-budget horror can
be both literate and very entertaining.)
     (Second of three parenthetical paragraphs: phans should note that
the BASIC INSTINCT of horror is already available as Tobe Hooper's
extremely silly and quite frankly terrible LIFEFORCE.  Naked bleached
blonde space vampires abound, though sadly there are no messy ice-pick
murders.  At Blockbusters everywhere, under "B" for bad.)
     (Finally, a point in SLEEPWALKERS' favor: it has a surprisingly low
Spring-Loaded Cat quotient, given the considerable temptations the
filmmakers must have felt.  Kudos to Garris for keeping the cats-in-
the-closet, 120dB ringing telephones, and hands-on-the-shoulder to a
minimum.)

Author
Chris J. Randall
For those of you who don't wish to be spoiled (although not that bad), leave
now...
     Stephen King's track record is once again affirmed with his latest film,
SLEEPWALKERS.
     I don't think that I've ever left a movie feeling so disappointed.
This movie had such potential, but every chance they had was wasted on
something trivial....
     The acting, in general, was decent.  Unfortunately, they spent no
time on any real character development, which I think caused the film to
lose a lot.  The main characters were competent, and in some cases good.
There just simply was no reason to care about what they were doing most
of the time.  
     What the hell are these "Sleepwalker" things?  They give us a
definition in the beginning, but we get no other explanation other than
what we figure out on our own.  We don't know where they came from, why
they were the way they were, or how they became these things.  If they
had given fifteen minutes of the film to explain their origin, it would
have added much needed depth to the film.  Instead, we're left to make
up our own theories about the Sleepwalkers.
     The effects were good, and in some cases, outstanding.  Granted,
they weren't up to T-2 standards (what is?), but some things were very
eye-catching.   The car transformation scenes stand out, as well as the
morphing of the faces.  Would someone mind explaining what they were
siphoning out of the victims?  Not a very efficient means of draining
someone's "life force" if all they had to do to stop it was close their
mouth.  
     The only bad effect were those using the cats.  It was so painfully
obvious that some parts weren't real, and it looked as if they just
didn't care.  They were capable of good cat effects, as witnessed by
when the mother caught the cat in mid-air and snapped it in half.  At
times, the whole thing reminded me of an extended "Toonces the driving
cat" skit on SNL, except SNL's cat is a little more realistic.
     Holy inconsistencies, Batman!  The biggest one in the whole film
was the story -- actually, there wasn't much that could be called a
story.  Like I said before -- there was no background for any of the
characters, and points were brought up that could have provided
interest, but were quickly dropped.   The make a reference to other
"Sleepwalkers" around, but they never go any further.  Also, the origins
would have been interesting, but once again, nothing was said.  When the
kid gets shot in the back by the cop, notice the placement of the bullet
wound.  Later, when the kid crawls into his house, look at his back --
no wound of any kind.  Just plain sloppy.
     I'm not sure what Stephen King wanted this to be billed as.  From
what I've seen and heard, this is just supposed to be horror.  The crowd
didn't take it as such.  There was more laughter in that theatre than
I've heard in movies labeled as "comedies."  There are so many moments
when we weren't supposed to laugh, but the whole thing was so
ridiculous, we couldn't help it.  I mean, when the majority of the
theatre starts chanting the cat's name when it appears, you know
something's wrong.  (I've never seen a cat so strong that it could get
into a house by breaking a window...   :)
     All I can say is that I'm glad I saw it for free.  Even so, I still
feel a bit cheated.  King is capable of good stuff, and with a few
simple changes in character development and story development, this
could have been a really good movie.  The potential was *there*, but
they failed to capitalize on it.  King has no excuses like "Well, it
didn't carry over well from the novel."  He's responsible for it and has
no one to blame but himself.  At most, I'd say that this movie is worth
matinee prices.  If you really want to see it, wait till it hits the
$1.50 theatres.
     At least we got to see previews of LETHAL WEAPON 3 (Looks Great),
ALIEN 3 (Looks Great), and BATMAN RETURNS (Looks Great, but I don't
know...).  Hmmm.  I do believe that I'm going to be going to the movies
quite a bit this summer....  :)

Author
Gregory D. Peterson
     Well, a group of us just returned from a sneak preview of Stephen
King's newest, and I have to say that it was quite memorable.  For those
that keep track, the movie has Brian Krause, Madchen Amick, and Alice
Krige "starring" in it.  After seeing the movie, I am impressed by how
brave they were to let their names be associated with this movie.  
     A quick summary of the movie: a shape-changing mother and son team
have moved to a little town in Indiana for some lunch.  Of course, the 
sweet, innocent virgin (tm) is to be the main course.  The plot is
peppered with lots of chases, deaths, and helpless screaming by our
heroine, the virgin.  Pretty much your average horror fare, except for
the ridiculous plot.  We laughed at the first scene, and quite a bit
more as it progressed.  Indeed, the whole audience was roaring as we
approached the climax.
     I have to point out that I got to see it for free, and it was worth
every penny.  Given Stephen King's recent track record, I was not
expecting much, but I am glad I saw it.  Everyone had a great time, but
we might have cried if we had paid full price.  We all decided that it
deserved two thumbs up, so I heartily recommend it - but only at matinee
prices.  If you can wait for cable or rentals (shouldn't take long),
then all the better.  This movie is a great parody - I'm just not sure
that it was intended to be.
     SLEEPWALKERS had a multitude of silly scenes.  We knew we were in
for a great time when the opening credits featured dozens of mangled
feline carcasses decorating a house.  As they entered the house, one of
the cops noticed that someone sure didn't like cats.  Funny enough, but
that seemed to be the central plot of the movie.  
     I can't really say which scenes were the best.  There were some
classics, like the incest/animal sex scene.  And I have to credit King
with the most creative death in a long time: death by corn-holing.  If
you don't like cats, you'll enjoy watching a number of them meet their
maker.  King had a cameo as the keeper of a graveyard whose aimless
wandering evoked images of the director (Mick Garris) wandering about,
attempting to salvage some semblance of a horror movie from this
faulted work.  People say that Stephen King writes a new book every
week.  Based on  SLEEPWALKERS, I think he's decided to cut back his
efforts.

Author
Richard John Rauser
     I know, I know.  Stephen King on the screen = two hour groans.
But there *were* exceptions: THE SHINING.  MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE (no
flames!  I know everyone hated it but me!).  MISERY.  PET SEMATARY.  And
considering the fact that SLEEPWALKERS was written "expressly for the
screen" I had hopes.  High hopes.  They came a-tumblin' down.  
     What makes this film such an abysmal failure are two main
weaknesses: (1) It is a *stupid* film.  (2) Nothing in the film is ever
explained to the audience (gee, this is sounding like BASIC INSTINCT all
over again).
     Before I begin to sound like an unintelligent reviewer, let me
explain.  Point 1: This film is stupid.  It's that simple.
SLEEPWALKERS is a silly story.  Without giving away anything that
happens (though I really should to prevent anyone from seeing this piece
of garbage) let me give you a few tidbits: savage cat-people called
"sleepwalkers" (we don't know why) come into town.  They are terrified
of cats (we have no clue why) and to survive they suck "energy" (my best
guess) from "pure, untainted" virgins (again, we have no clue why).
There are two sleepwalkers in the film, a mother and son.  They have an
incestuous relationship.  (We don't know why and don't *want* to know.
This is typical King-esque grotesqueness ... usually effective.  But
this time it doesn't wash).  
     The son is infatuated with a cute high school girl (staring at this
girl is the only thing I salvaged out of the two hours...that and seeing
Mark Hamill in a short scene in the beginning of the movie) and tries to
kill her.  Does he succeed?  Gee, take your best guess.
     SLEEPWALKERS is agonizingly cliched.  We have scary Sixties
"horror" music every time one of the sleepwalkers appears on screen (I
keep cursing CAPE FEAR for reviving that style of score) and the film
bombards us with ridiculous dialogue such as:  
  Mother Sleepwalker: Do you love me?
  Son Sleepwalker: Of course.
  Mother Sleepwalker: Are you going to get her? (the virgin girl)
  Son Sleepwalker: Tomorrow.
  Mother Sleepwalker: (licking her lips). Good. I'm SOOO hungry.
     The problem is that Stephen King expects us to take this tripe
*seriously*.  As a spoof on horror films this would work fine.  But the
audience laughs nervously and/or with embarrassment as they realize that
this is intended as a bona fide horror movie.  Scenes such as the one
above are actually suppose to *scare& us.  Trust me, they don't.
     This film slips into absurdity with the sleepwalkers' fear of cats.
Cats are drawn to the sleepwalkers until by the end of the film there
are about one hundred cats lounging around their home and yard (again we
have no explanation for this and by this time we don't want one).  This
is supposed to be eerie, to be scary.  The cats are supposed to be a
premonition of doom, a symbol of bizarre cosmic justice (remember the
cats in PET SEMATARY and CAT'S EYE?).  The problem is that real cats are
much less scary than the hissing demonic felines portrayed in the movie
poster.  MUCH less.  Each time the audience saw this swarm of cats at
the sleepwalkers' home, we laughed.  It just looked funny and cute.
When the cats attacked the sleepwalkers, jumping at them screaming
MEEEEOWWW!  (this happens throughout the film) we laughed even harder.
It looked like something from an Archie comic or a bad sitcom.  There
was nothing scary about it.
     How's this for intelligent dialogue?  Son sleepwalker in his trans
am offers a ride home to beautiful high school girl.  He jumps in the
car without opening the door.  
     Mere words cannot describe how bad the acting in this film is and
how unbelievable the characters are.  SLEEPWALKERS is a study in bad
acting, bad characterization, and *bad* dialogue, things that King is a
master at in his novels.  Why does it translate so badly to the screen?
I wish I knew.
     I almost forgot to mention: the sleepwalkers can alter their
appearance as well as their surroundings (they can turn invisible and
change a car from a Mustang to a Trans Am).  Again, *this is never
explained*.
     Aside from the horrible acting, I think that this is SLEEPWALKERS'
main flaw.  It makes no sense.  Point 2: We are given so many little
clues and hints and suggestions about these strange creatures with their
strange powers and incestuous relationship (yes, we actually see mother
and son in bed) yet we are never told about their origins, their
background, their history ... it's like the last half of the film was
chopped out.
     Stephen King has a very short cameo which is quite humorous (this
time the humor is intentional) and as I said earlier, Mark Hamill is in
the first five minutes of this film as a Sheriff in the town the
sleepwalkers were last in.  It's neat seeing Luke Skywalker.  It's also
nice looking at the high school girl almost killed by the sleepwalkers.
Horrible acting aside, she has a beautiful smile.
     In the above paragraph I outlined the good things about this film.
Everything else is bad.  Score another turkey for Stephen King.  On a
scale of 1 to 10, I would have no choice but to give SLEEPWALKERS a 0.
It is boring, confusing, laughable, *un*-scary, and decidedly
*un*-interesting.  I can say with all honesty that this film has no
redeeming qualities whatsoever.  Not only was I kicking and screaming
when the credits rolled for the loss of my eight dollars, but I also
felt cheated of two hours of my life, two hours I will never get back.
     In short, SLEEPWALKERS is a horrible disappointment.  It's one of
those films that is so bad the viewer is amazed.  Did the producers
actually think this film would be scary?  Did they think people would
like it?
     I can say with all honesty that having suffered through this film,
I cannot imagine the answer to that question being yes.
