Title
Review for Angel at My Table, An (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
The life and times of people who have made it into the world of the arts is
not always a pleasant story.  But it does make one heck of a film.
Janet Frame was born with a bit of an unstable mind, or so everyone thought
around her.  She is placed in various schools and eventually is treated for
being a schizophrenic person, something which she
has to fight all her life.  But as she gets older, and wiser, she discovers
that she is capable of writing, and exciting people with her style.  The
problem is that no one around her accepts her ability
as something worthy of anything except another of her tirades in what is
considered unstable mind.  She is placed in various mental institutions and
barely escapes the ultimate punishment of a
lobotomy.
But to her credit, along the way she manages to get something written and
published.  Which helps her cause... except that her capacity to believe in
herself and abilities is lagging far behind.  And with
the help of a couple of therapists, she manages to get herself a writer's
grant and spend some time travelling and preparing for another piece of
work.  This takes her to England, where she is
able to get a couple of pieces published, until one publisher makes a
comment that she needs something that sells, not another bunch of words on
paper.  She takes of for a sea side resort in
Spain where her abilities flourish, thanks in part to an affair with an
American artist, who is also trying to escape the personal assaults from
family and friends.
And from here on, Janet Frame becomes a writer, and although ( today ) she
is not considered famous and major, her work has place countries like New
Zealand on the map of the arts.  But the price one has to pay  to get this
far, is often too harsh.  Janet barely made it through
the cracks of the world in one piece.
And Jane Campion, found a person who could help.  She made a film about this
writer, no doubt to also illustrate her frustration at not being able to
direct film in a man's world.  She succeeds. This is an excellent film, if
not a bit long, but lovingly directed and caring, about what it means to be
a person that has visions and desires which are not common, or related to
personal belongings beyond those in words on a piece of paper, in this case,
as the only means to survival.
Kerry Fox is just a treat to watch as Janet.  An acting job that deserves
much more than it ever got, which was no mention, and ignored.  And the
director treats the material with such a nerve that leaves us realizing how
important it is to accept a person's desire to see and express feelings,
specially those
which are considered artistic, or literary  in this example.
AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE is really a sad film, and like THE PIANO done much
later, it is one that leads to a satisfying conclusion.  Janet suffered, but
she will be remembered, and she knows it.  And Jane made sure that her
literature was known, much later.  She's not a major writer, but she was a
person that was nearly destroyed by a society enamored with destruction, not
life.
A must see for anyone that writes, as an exercise that futility is never
around the corner no matter how bad things can be.  And without much fuss,
this film happens to be a stand on the merit and value of
woman writers in a world that tends to disregard them.  In one scene a
publisher wants her to create a pen name of a man... now  that's liberation
come a long way.  And a merit worth having earned, not only for Janet Frame,
but many women writers and artists, not to mention Jane Campion.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Reviewer and Moderator of the CENTIPEDE's THE FILM.
