Title
Review for This Is Not an Exit: The Fictional World of Bret Easton Ellis (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
"My problem was being a young man with money in Manhattan," says Bret
Easton Ellis, citing his inspiration for American Psycho.  When it comes
to vivid fantasies of alienated urban narcissism, his prose strikes a
chilling, edgy chord.  Like skimming the surface of an icy lake, we are
left imagining the dark depths below.
Hey, that really sounds poetic!  I'm gonna have another Valium before
writing the rest of this review -- maybe someday I'll be as glib as
Ellis!
Just kidding.  I've actually enjoyed reading Ellis' novels of passive
emptiness.  Less Than Zero is the perfect book for road trips,
especially when you look out the window having thoughts that resemble
the shallow characters.  "Ah, yes, adolescence truly is a volatile
mystery!"
Having said that, Ellis prose typically comes off as, well, boring,
glib, pseudo-intellectual, snooty, irritating, and shallow when read
aloud.  Try reading passages to your friends.  Watch them lose interest
in you as a human being.  Don't scoff!  If you were in their shoes, you
would, too!  Heck, you probably will if you attempt to sit through
Gerald Fox's unintentionally grating documentary, This is Not an Exit:
The Fictional World of Bret Easton Ellis.
Fox tries to pull off the imaginative conceit of crossing interview
footage of Ellis with dramatizations from his body of work, including
Less Than Zero and his recent perils-of-celebrity bestseller,
Glamorama.  It's like a kaleidoscope of short films with additional
commentary from the novelist.  Unfortunately for Ellis, he's so smug,
creepy, and annoying that he does his novels a disservice by appearing
onscreen.  Potential readers will take one look at this privileged brat
and understandably vow never to read him.
I haven't even started discussing Ellis' whiny friends, hogging for
screen time as they take a limo cruise through New York City searching
for the perfect restaurant.  It's scary that his unimaginative fictional
characters bear such a scary resemblance to his actual peers.  When one
of them compares him to Orson Welles ("cuz you're a big genius, Bret!"),
I wanted to slap that pompous grin off his mug.
Okay, maybe I'm jealous that I don't have Ellis' problems.  Beautiful
friends, a fat wallet, the inability to see through my own vapidity. 
Maybe I'm being too hard on the guy.  Gotta calm my nerves before I
finish this review.  Pass the cocaine.
A bottom-of-the-barrel budget doesn't help illuminate the scenes lifted
from Ellis' novels.  Rough, jarring cuts and washed out cinematography
are completely inappropriate for the polished world his characters
inhabit.  The bland white walls and inept lighting could have been
easily better-realized by inexperienced first year film students.
The poorly staged Ellis stories serve as a reminder of how right Mary
Harron's instincts were on American Psycho.  By dwelling on impeccable
art design, tailored suits, embossed business cards and designer
glasses, she found the precise visual counterpart to Ellis'
hyper-detailed take on consumer culture.
Bored, introverted characters with zero empathy can be compelling on the
page, but it doesn't always translate to the screen.  Christian Bale's
mannered performance as Psycho's killer Patrick Bateman was
appropriately deadpan.  Would that Declan Thurman (Uma's brother) showed
such restraint filling the same role in Exit.  He blows line readings
with a distracting assortment of eyebrow and lip twitches.  See, I'm
really crazy!  There's nothing hammy about Ellis' sparse writing style,
so why can't Thurman resist maniacal laughter when describing a girl's
head on a stick?
By discussing the "meaning" of his books, Ellis only winds up reducing
them to facile morality lessons.  He also eats up screen time defending
his prose from vicious critics, often protesting far too much for
comfort.  I don't hate women! American Psycho is a feminist tract!  Less
Than Zero was not autobiographical!  It's a sensationalized version of
my post-college years.
This vain little man seems to care an awful lot about what people think
of him.  Oh, go ahead!  Try telling him that and he'll retreat back into
a banal shell of doublespeak.  As one critic points out, it's almost
impossible to discuss Ellis' flaws without him embracing them as part of
his integrity.  Of course it's shallow, of course it's nihilistic! 
That's the world he created.  See how slippery he is?
What was that great Bill Murray quote from Rushmore?  "Money can buy a
lot of things, but it can't buy you backbone.  Take dead aim at the rich
kids!"  I don't think I ever truly appreciated that slice of wisdom
until Ellis got in my face.  Hey Bret: here's a quarter.  Go call
someone who cares.  And pass the amphetamines.  Fast.  You're losing me.
Director: Gerald Fox
Producers: Julian Ozanne
Writer: Bret Easton Ellis
Starring: Bret Easton Ellis, Declan Thurman, Rachel Weisz, Jason
Bushman, Paul Blackthorne, Jay McInerney
http://www.firstrunfeatures.com/vid/exit.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
