Title
Review for Romy and Michele's High School Reunion (1997)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Chuck Dowling
Romy and Michele's High School Reunion (1997) *1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Mira
Sorvina, Lisa Kudrow, Janeane Garofalo. Written by: Robin Schiff. Directed
by: David Mirkin. Running Time: 91 minutes.
First time feature film director David Mirkin has some great credits on his
resume. He has been a creative influence on some of the most intelligently
funny shows on television, notably "The Simpsons" and "Get A Life".
Unfortunately, he's trapped here with a bad script, and very few
opportunities to display his creative talents.
"Romy and Michele's High School Reunion" is a lot like "Clueless", and I
couldn't stand "Clueless" either. Kudrow and Sorvino play a couple of
airheaded losers who journey from Los Angeles to Tuscon, Arizona for their
ten-year high school reunion. Realizing that they are pretty pathetic and
have nothing to brag about in order to upstage the snotty preps who picked
on them in school, they first set out to better their lives. Five minutes
later, they realize that to better themselves is just too hard, so they
concoct an intricate (for them anyway) story about how they invented Post-It
Notes.
Also attending their reunion is Janeane Garofalo, who plays a frumpy, bitter
woman. I was shocked at this choice in casting! Angry and sarcastic? Spunky
Janeane? No, it can't be true. The only reason for her character to be here
is so that she can point out to Romy and Michele that no matter how bad they
thought they had it in high school, others had it worse. Really? Wow, who
knew?
This film, as with "Clueless", shows us such superficial characters that I
could care less about anything that happens to them. Also, the screen play
is incredibly simple. "Act One--flashbacks. Act Two--prep for the reunion.
Act Three--the reunion." Then, it's message towards the end of "Stay true to
who you really are inside" is so heavy-handed and out of nowhere. Also,
there's a dream sequence that lasts for what must be 20 minutes, which was
20 minutes too long. And, at the end of the reunion, Romy and Michele
participate in a dance that is so absurd that I think my jaw actually
dropped in disbelief.
But those reasons aren't as important as the film's main fault. The problem
is that, as far as comedies go, it's just not funny. There were maybe three
or four things I laughed at (intentionally, anyway) which probably amounted
to 45 seconds of screen time. 45 seconds out of 91 minutes is not a good
ratio. The film's best gag is only about five seconds long and occurs as a
flashback, when Romy and Michele wonder about a boy from drama class.
Basically, the film just boils down to two empty-headed, unfunny women who
wear tight, revealing clothing who are doing and saying things which
couldn't interest me in the slightest. And unfortunately, four bulging
breasts do not a good movie make. [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
James Sanford
             Sagebrush High School Class of 1987 graduates Romy White
(Mira Sorvino) and Michele Weinberger (Lisa Kudrow) share a
dream. Along with everyone else who was ever snubbed by the popular
clique in school, they want to get even.
    So the duo determine to bury their true underachieving
selves and attend their 10-year reunion in Tucson as brilliant
businesswomen who've made a fortune in L.A. After all, says Romy,
``What's the point of going if we're not going to impress people?''
  And so begins ``Romy and Michele's High School Reunion,''
which could just as easily have been called ``Ditzy and Ditzier.''
Friends since their teens, when Romy was chubby and Michele was stuck
in a squeaky neck brace, the two have spent the past decade
clubhopping, working run-of-the-mill jobs and wearing out their video
of ``Pretty Woman.''
  Living large has never been in their picture, but ``we never
had a really good reason like a reunion to motivate us,'' says Romy.
  Now, Romy has decided to go on a fat-free diet: ``nothing
but Gummi Bears, jelly beans and candy corn.'' Michele has made
stylish power-suits on her sewing machine. A Jaguar convertible has
been borrowed for transportation.
  Getting a hot boyfriend to escort them isn't so simple,
however. Romy applies to MTV's ``Singled Out,'' only to be rebuffed by
a production assistant, who sneers, ``Our cut-off age is 25. Try
VH1.'' Lines like that give ``Romy and Michele'' the kind of hip cache
that made ``Clueless'' all the rage two years ago.
  Consumed by the grand delusion that they're much cooler than
they actually are, Romy and Michele could easily have been turned into
self-indulgent culture vultures, but writer Robin Schiff manages to
keep them delightfully quirky.
  After such a portentous build-up, however, the reunion
itself seems a little flat. Most of what you might expect to happen
happens: the one-time dreamboat is now an alcoholic, the class nerd
has struck it rich, etc.  Even with only 91 minutes to fill, Schiff
runs out of plot and has to throw in an overextended fantasy sequence
to keep things going.
  As it is, the movie's best moments are often incidental, as
when Michele goes job-hunting in Beverly Hills or Romy evades a
pick-up artist by hobbling away, telling him ``Excuse me, I cut my
foot earlier and my shoe is filling up with blood.''
  Best of all is a tense argument between the women about
who's the cutest one, or rather who's ``the Mary'' and who's ``the
Rhoda.''
  Much of the comedy's success stems from Sorvino, who proves
her Oscar for ``Mighty Aphrodite'' was not a one-shot triumph. Her
delivery and timing are absolutely impeccable, and Sorvino seems to
empathize with Romy's compulsion to dazzle. ``If anybody needs to make
a call, I've got a phone,'' Romy announces to sarcastic ``A-group''
witches she's trying to impress, completely unaware that the device
lost its ``wow'' factor years ago.
  Kudrow makes the best of Michele, but the character is not
far removed from her TV role as Phoebe on ``Friends,'' and Schiff
shortchanges Michele in the wisecrack department.
  The most acidic quips go to the priceless Janeane Garofalo,
as the endlessly crabby Heather Mooney, who holds a grudge against
Sagebrush High in general and herself in particular. As she proved in
``Reality Bites'' and ``The Truth About Cats and Dogs,'' nobody does
self-loathing better than Garofalo, and her few scenes spark the
picture.
  Like the concurrent reunion-themed ``Grosse Pointe Blank,''
``Romy and Michele'' features a marvelous soundtrack of '80s anthems,
from the Vapors' ``Turning Japanese'' and the Pretenders ``Don't Get
Me Wrong'' to Kenny Loggins' ``Footloose,'' which Romy and Michele
struggle in vain to sing along with.
  Even when the comedy runs out of steam, it's hard to knock
any movie that dares to include not one, but two totally awsome hits
by Bananarama, the Romy and Michele of pop.

Author
Alex Fung
ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION (Touchstone - 1997)
Starring Mira Sorvino, Lisa Kudrow, Janeane Garafolo, Alan Cumming,
  Julia Campbell
Screenplay by Robin Schiff, inspired by her stage play THE LADIES'
 ROOM
Produced by Laurence Mark
Directed by David Mirkin
Running time: 91 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned.
    -------------------------------------------------------------
ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is an unabashedly formulaic
tale and while desperately upbeat and cheerful, it only manages to be
sporadically amusing and rarely does it ever become laugh-out-loud
funny - frankly, if you've seen the trailer for the film, you've more
or less seen its best lines.
The film's protagonists are endearingly-ditzy best friends Romy (Mira
Sorvino) and Michele (Lisa Kudrow), who share a place on Venice Beach
and spend their time club-hopping and rewatching PRETTY WOMAN on
video.  (Romy is the slightly-brigher of the two; she at least has
the good sense to make fun of the movie.)  When made aware of their
impending ten-year high school reunion, they reflect on their years
of ridicule from the A-group at Sagebrush High in Tucson, and come to
the shocking realization that their post-graduate lives haven't been
the epitome of success; both are single and only Romy has a job -
albeit, as a cashier.  Determined to impress their classmates, Romy
and Michele fabricate a success story (they settle on claiming to be
the inventors of Post-It notes), and hit the road for Arizona.
It doesn't take a genius to see where this movie is going - heck,
even Romy or Michele themselves could probably tell you that ROMY AND
MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is going to see their cliqueish
tormenters receive their proper dressing-down, and that Romy and
Michele are going to make a splash at Sagebrush High and exit their
high school reunion triumphant.  Robin Schiff's screenplay doesn't
surprise in that respect, but its utter predicatability isn't
necessarily a bad thing for a film such as this; if the screenplay's
destination is already a given, at least we can hope for a good ride
along the way.
Unfortunately, this doesn't happen in ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL
REUNION.  An extended fantasy sequence (and I mean extended - it seems
to run for about fifteen minutes) in the middle of the film doesn't
quite work, nor does a series of flashback sequences depicting Romy
and Michele's persecuted high school years. The actual high school
reunion scenes also don't quite click - come to think of it, none of
the film really works as good as it could or should, which is a real
disappointment.  Ringing particularly false is an unnecessary incident
in the film which temporarily drives Romy and Michele apart; it
clearly comes off as a none-too-efficient device to build momentum for
the reunion scenes and the obligatory reconciliation scenes, and
doesn't work at all.
Ms. Sorvino and Ms. Kudrow struggle valiantly, and for the most part
succeed in bringing their dense Romy and Michele characters to the
screen; they're bubble-headed, but likeable protagonists for the film.
Ms. Kudrow is a bit more successful as Michele than Ms. Sorvino as
Romy; Ms. Sorvino's natural intelligence manages to shine through her
portrayal of the character, undermining the credibility of Romy's
ditzyness (which is somewhat of a surprise, given how successful she
was in an Academy Award-winning portrayal of a similarly vacant
character in MIGHTY APHRODITE).
None of the supporting characters in ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL
REUNION are particularly well-drawn out.  Class curmudgeon Heather
(the scene-stealing Janeane Garafolo) is funny, but her character is
mostly a mystery in ths film.  Oafish jock Billy Christiansen
(Vincent Ventresca), for whom Romy had a crush, and snobbish, nasty
cheerleader queen Christine (Julia Campbell) are predictably
one-dimensional, and class geek-turned-Bill Gates-clone Sandy Frank
(Alan Cumming) is nothing more than a caricature.
David Mirkin's feature film debut has a lot of energy and is
relentlessly upbeat, with the soundtrack being filled by cheery 1980s
pop songs from the likes of the Go-Gos and Bananarama, but Mr. Mirkin
seems to be unable to overcome the vaguely episodic nature of the
film's screenplay, resulting in a tendency for ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH
SCHOOL REUNION to lurch back and forth.  (There's an ironic scene in
the film where Romy and Michele, singing along with Kenny Loggins'
"Footloose" [and forgetting most of the lyrics], drive a vehicle that
does just that.)
ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is a cheerful, frantically
feelgood comedy which ultimately proves to be unsatisfying.  It's
disappointing, because I found myself liking the Romy and Michele
characters; there's something endearing about their vacuous banter and
their obliviousness.  I'd like to see them in another movie, or at
least a better one than this.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"At one point when berated and bloodied by her male military superior,
 Moore screams out a guttural invitation to him to enjoy partaking in the
 absorption of a certain anatomical member." - Dan Cox, VARIETY, on G.I. JANE

Author
Craig Good
        I bravely predict that Lisa Kudrow and Mira Sorvino will be completely
overlooked come Oscar time since the Academy still seems to think that there's
something easy about doing comedy. Perhaps it's because once in a while
someone like Kudrow or Sorvino will come along and make it look so easy. In
"Romy and Michele's High School Reunion" their performances are a reminder
that at least half of story telling is in the telling -- it's not just the
script.
        The script by Robin Schiff is good, and it is funny, but the story
itself doesn't break particularly new ground. Which doesn't matter a whit
because it *is* funny, and the film *is* good. Sorvino and Kudrow turn in
performances which accomplish something rare: they give a real depth and
humanity to a couple of shallow people. They are also funny and fun
to watch. (Any red--blooded male could be entirely forgiven for becoming
obsessed with Mira Sorvino's mouth after watching her talk for a while.)
        On the surface, Romy and Michele are none too bright. They haven't
managed to do anything impressive in ten years after high school except
bond in a vital friendship. Their joy is positively contagious as they
continue to find the things they have in common. Every time they give each
other that "Wow, you *too*?" look it's a moment of discovery for them. That
these things are all completely banal is beside the point. The basic arc of
the story, that they fight and then rediscover their friendship, is easy
to see coming. What's pleasantly unpredictable is just what these two are
going to do or say next. It's pleasant mostly because just about everything
they say or do is funny.
        Speaking of good work likely to be overlooked, this movie happens
to have some of the most subtile effects makeup work I've ever seen. There
is some good age makeup in a dream sequence but (and I'm being vague so as
not to spoil anything) check out the character in the limo who says he has
had plastic surgery. Now that is really nice work.
        Back to the movie. Another fun performance to watch is that of
Janeane Garofalo as the uptight and in a rush woman with a chip on her
shoulder the size of Montana. And aside from the romantic frustrations she
suffered in high school the best I can figure is that she's just angry because
she has such a big chip on her shoulder.
        Walking home from the theatre I could overhear the conversation
of a couple of young teen girls who were busily analyzing Romy and Michele's
clothes and hair in each sequence of the movie. I'd bet folding money that
neither of them realized how much they sounded just like Romy and Michele.
They reminded me that no matter how far off the wall they got (which is
pretty darn far by the end of the reunion) Romy and Michele were in the
end bright, likeable and most of all, human. If you're looking for a fun
time at the movies you could do a lot worse.

Author
Christopher Null
     With more Go-Go's songs than any other film this year, ROMY AND
MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is a treat if for no other reason than to
hear the 80's soundtrack.  The plot?  Simple:  Romy and Michele have
gone nowhere in the ten years since high school, so they create
themselves into seriously unbelievable "businesswomen" in an attempt to
impress their fellow graduates at the reunion.  Much like GROSSE POINTE
BLANK, though, too much emphasis is placed on nostalgia and not enough
is placed on the script.  Mira Sorvino and Lisa Kudrow prove to be a
powerful duo on-screen, but with jokes that hit about 50 percent of the
time, not even the shiniest of outfits can pull them through the low
points of this film.  Janeane Garofalo disappoints here, also, reprising
the stereotypical, crusty, chain-smoker she has played a hundred times. 
It all boils down to a fair-enough experience... you know... like,
whatever.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Brian Takeshita
ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION
I've got a couple more years until my ten-year high school reunion.  I
therefore have that much time to lose fifteen pounds, make twenty
million dollars, become famous, and marry Sandra Bullock.  But let's
face it, I'd be lucky just to lose the weight.  Movies made about high
school reunions are very sympathetic toward this predicament.  The
plot is pretty much always the same:  The main characters get an
invitation to their ten-year reunion, and realize that they are not
what they wanted to be by this time.  They make up an elaborate ruse
to fool people into thinking they are more successful than they really
are, only to have their cover blown at the reunion itself, causing
significant shame.  However, through a process of learning that
certain other classmates are also not doctors, lawyers, corporate
heads or movie stars, while still others who have achieved "success"
are not leading the fantasy life they thought they would, our heroes
find that just by being happy, they are success stories after all.
ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION follows this formula to a tee.
Romy (Mira Sorvino) and Michele (Lisa Kudrow) are friends who have
stayed together since high school, having moved from their hometown of
Tucson, Arizona, to Venice Beach, California. Romy is a cashier at the
service department of the local Jaguar dealership, while Michele is
one of California's gainfully unemployed.  They find out through a
classmate (Janeane Garafolo) that their reunion is a couple of weeks
away, and while filling in an informational survey for the event,
realize that they have not come nearly as far as they had expected.
After failed attempts to lose weight (how much more stick-thin could
they get?) and find good jobs and dreamy boyfriends, they hatch a
scheme to show everyone up by agreeing to pretend to be successful
businesswomen.
>From the beginning of the film, Romy and Michele are so full of
themselves and their appearances, I thought I was watching a movie
about the reunion for the high school class from CLUELESS.  Needless
to say, I didn't start viewing this movie caring for the characters
very much at all; Romy and Michele are quite simply annoying, with
annoying ways of talking and annoying little laughs.  We only start
identifying with them as protagonists because we find out through a
series of high school flashbacks that there were other students even
more self absorbed than them.  Once that is made plain, the two women
become a little more likable.
The film does a good job of characterizing some of the cliques which
comprise the teen social strata, and it's fun to watch them on screen.
There's the "A Group", made up of the debutantes and the handsome
jocks, the "B Group" comprised of the drama people, the "C group"
consisting of your various kinds of nerds, and then there are your
loners.  The representation of each group is pushed just the right
amount over the top so you can have a nice laugh reminiscing.  Too
much would have made them utterly ridiculous and unidentifiable.  Too
little would have probably caused horrifying flashbacks of your own.
Romy and Michele decide they don't quite fit into any of those groups,
but I'd say "airhead" transcends many categories.
As astonishing as it is, there is actually some decent character
development.  By the end of the movie, the two women not only find out
something about themselves, which is always the case is this formula,
but also about each other.  Take, for example, their plot to tell
everyone at the reunion that they developed Post-It Notes as a team.
Michele is horrified to learn that Romy doesn't think anyone would
believe that Michele would do more than suggest they make the notes
yellow.  "You're more of a design person," she tells Michele, implying
that she doesn't have the brains to do much more than express
feelings.  To the credit of screenwriter Robin Schiff, the conflict
between the two friends is not suddenly laid in our laps to give us
drama at the right point.  Instead, the first allusions to a possible
falling out occur shortly after they find out about the reunion, and
it builds from there.  This not only fleshes out the characters in a
more believable way, but also results in a nice way of showing how
reunions can bring out the worst in everyone.
Mira Sorvino does a competent job playing Romy, who is annoying and
vacuous but not completely hopeless.  Lisa Kudrow is basically playing
the character she plays on "Friends", but for an hour and a half.  She
is definitely the heir apparent to the ditz queen title previously
held by the likes of Goldie Hawn and Teri Garr.  Janeane Garafolo is
the one who really steals the show as the highly successful but
mean-spirited classmate who's spite is indiscriminate.  Unlike the "A
Group", she is just mean to everybody, and her interactions with other
characters is absolutely hilarious.  Although she's not on camera for
much of the film, any more screen time would have seen diminishing
marginal returns.
True to formula, the reunion goes exactly as you'd expect.  You're
given a message about human nature and society, and you take it with a
grain of salt.  I suppose it's because so many of us have faced or
will be faced with a situation similar to Romy and Michele's that by
the end of the film, you're actually hoping things will work out for
those who deserve it, even though you know they will.  That's in the
formula too, you know.

Author
Ben Hoffman
It has been quite a while since we have been treated to a couple of
young women as ditzY as Romy (Mira Sorvino) and her even flakier
friend, Michele (Lisa Kudrow).  Based on Robin Schiff's play, LADY'S
ROOM, which also starred Kudrow as Michele, and adapted by Schiff for
the screen, the film is a delightful romp.
Romy and Michele have been living together since they graduated from
Tucson's Sagebrush High School ten years ago. Their lot has not
improved any since those school days while time has flown by.  Romy is
a clerk at a car dealership while Michele is unemployed at the moment.
Not very exciting. When they learn about their school's ten year
reunion which they want to attend, they realize they will present the
same "nothing" appearance they did when they went to high school.
Everyone else is probably a TV anchorwoman or something equally
glamorous.  If the 2 young women are to attend the reunion and not
look as stupid as ever, they must invent something about themselves
that is exciting.  How about being the inventor of  Post-It?  That
ought to get the snooty girls at the reunion to now look up to them.
And so they are off to the reunion.  Romy hopes to meet the guy she was
in love with when they were in high school but who never gave her a
tumble. Michele has even less ambition. She just wants to have fun.
Everything is going well at the reunion for them when each announces
(to separate people) that she is very rich, having invented Post-It.
All the other women are duly impressed until their story is blown by
the very weird Heather, (Janeane Garofalo).
What the story behind the story is that Romy and Michele say whatever
comes to mind, going from hesd to mouth without stopping to think; and
their friendship is everything because they do enjoy each other's
company.  There is not enough of that in real life.
Mention should be made of the four-letter language (so leave the little
ones at home) as well as advice delivered by Heather to a cowboy that
includes something about "a sheep or your sister."  Very funny.
This may be a good time to mention that Kudrow should now be looking
for other types of roles lest she be typecast as strictly ditzy.
Others in the cast include the snooty Christie (the beautiful Julia
Campbell), boyfriends played by Alan  Cumming,  Vincent Vantresca, the
Cowboy played by Justin Theroux.
This is a no-brainer but quite, quite entertaining and what more could
one ask for?

Author
Scott Renshaw
     ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION isn't just a film _about_ two
eras; it's a film trapped _between_ two eras.  First-time feature film
director David Mirkin is a veteran executive producer of TV's "The
Simpsons," and there are times when ROMY AND MICHELE aims for a similar
vein of absurdism and satire.  At other times, it is nearly as formulaic
and synthetic as the 1980s youth comedies spawned by the films of John
Hughes.  ROMY AND MICHELE is a film with plenty of enjoyable bits and
pieces, but it may actually hit its '80s nostalgia target a bit too well.
It's a light-hearted lark until it turns into THE BREAKFAST CLUB'S HIGH
SCHOOL REUNION.
     Our heroines are Romy White (Mira Sorvino) and Michele Weinberger
(Lisa Kudrow), two best friends living together in Los Angeles.  They are
happy with their lives of club-hopping and watching PRETTY WOMAN together,
despite the fact that neither one of them has a significant other and only
Romy has a job -- as a cashier.  As their ten year reunion for Tuscon's
Sagebrush High School approaches, however, Romy and Michele begin to worry
that these vital statistics might make them look like...well, losers.
Determined to attend the reunion and impress the "A" group who scorned
them in high school, Romy and Michele decide to change their images and
tell a success story which stretches the truth _just_ a bit.
Unfortunately, one classmate knows their real story:  Heather Mooney
(Janeane Garofolo), embittered one-time social nobody turned wealthy
inventor of the fast-burning cigarette.
     For a while, it seems that ROMY AND MICHELE is going for a CLUELESS
sort of ditzy-hip vibe, with Sorvino and Kudrow sporting garish fashions
by CLUELESS designer Mona May.  May's costumes may by the Most Valuable
Player in ROMY AND MICHELE, providing reliable laughs every time we see
the stars in a new pair of day-glo platform shoes or a new sausage-casing
dress.  Sorvino and Kudrow give satisfying performances, with Kudrow
straying little from her Phoebe characterization from "Friends," but
screenwriter Robin Schiff doesn't give them many good lines to work with.
With few exceptions, the big laughs Sorvino and Kudrow draw are ones they 
earn through sheer exuberance; even the fifth or sixth time Michele
responds to one of Romy's observations with a gasp of "Me too!" is funny
because Kudrow sells each one like the first time it has ever occurred to
her that she and Romy have a lot in common.
     The sluggish stretches in ROMY AND MICHELE come when Schiff and
Mirkin take long breaks either for exposition flashbacks or fantasy
sequences which aren't nearly as amusing as the scenes between the adult
Romy and Michele. Worse yet, the exposition serves primarily to set up the
morals to the story, and ROMY AND MICHELE spends far too much time serving
up more than the Recommended Daily Allowance of reminders to "be
yourself." The comedy becomes terribly predictable at this point, with the
last fifteen minutes of ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION turning
into a succession of cues for us cheer the revenge of the nerds and silly
moments of petty vengeance.  In a way, the later stages of the film serve
mostly as a depressing reminder of the main reasons people go to high
school reunions:  those who were unpopular but became successful get a
chance for a symbolic smack in the face to those who tormented them; those
who were popular get a chance to re-live memories of faded glory which may
have eluded them ever since.  
     ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION provides some solid belly
laughs, but its overly-sincere observations about the high school social
order rapidly become frustrating.  With its soundtrack full of mid 80s
early MTV "classics," ROMY AND MICHELE is clearly aimed at those who are
ready to do some reminiscing about their high school years, but instead of
laughing at the absurdity of it all, Mirkin and Schiff provide what they
must think is a necessary catharsis.  Romy and Michele are entertaining
characters, but they're in the wrong movie; their obliviousness is more
appealing than their self-awareness.  While Janeane Garofolo provides a
necessary dose of ironic distance, Sorvino and Kudrow are obliged to
immerse themselves in a very retro sort of crowd-pleaser.  Individual
moments are satisfying in ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION, but it
doesn't trust its comic creations to carry the film without Important
Messages.  With its reminders of how tough we _all_ had it, regardless of
our place on the teenage social ladder, all it really needs is the 
strident refrain of Simple Minds' "Don't You Forget About Me" to make the
cinematic flashback complete.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION makes more missteps than I
care to count.  Mira Sorvino and Lisa Kudrow are, indeed, a winning pair
as the Venice Beach space cases, pretending to be successful, self-
employed inventors at their ten-year reunion.  (Their claimed claim to
fame:  Post-It notes.) Alas, the movie, a cross between CLUELESS and
DUMB AND DUMBER, lets them down at almost every turn.  Flashbacks dispel
the momentum of the first thirty minutes, while an extended dream
sequence serves little purpose in hour two.  At least the movie is
watchable up to that point.  The finale-- where things get serious and
the reunited characters begin confessing to this, that, and the other--
sent me straight for the door.  Trust me, the final reel is best viewed
from underneath the Exit sign.  (Rated "PG"/95 min.)

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Most of Hollywood is composed of revenge fantasies, of 
people who still carry hatchets around from their less-than-perfect 
formative years. Once everyone's eyes are on them, they can make the 
cool people look bad, make their parents out to be idiots, show their 
bossy superiors as hypocrites, and so on. ROMY AND MICHELE'S 
HIGH SCHOOL REUNION crosses that with a coming-of-age of '80s 
teen comedies. Age, not maturity. The characters are still as 
caricaturistic as ever, although a witty script and buddies Mira 
Sorvino and Lisa Kudrow make it likable cinematic trash.
        Sorvino and Kudrow are, of course, the title characters -- 
Romy and Michele, a couple ditzes still pretty much stuck in the 
Valley Girl era and still bitter about the pains exacted upon them in 
high school by the A-crowd. In the ten years since high school, 
they've accompished nothing aside from Romy's low profile clerk job. 
They live together, alone, spending their nights fishing for men in 
L.A. dance clubs or watching PRETTY WOMAN for the 36th time. 
And they still get teary-eyed when the snobs in the clothing store 
finally let Julia Roberts shop there.
        In a time when movies from less than ten years ago have 
become "classics" that are cultural reference points for the uncultured 
boobs of Generation X, it's inevitable entire movies will be patterned 
the same way. If you don't believe me, sit there with a stopwatch 
during SCREAM and see if HALLOWEEN isn't mentioned every five 
minutes. The entire theme of ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL 
REUNION comes from that one replayed PRETTY WOMAN scene. 
These women have been shut out of the high-life and fully expect to 
receive the apologetic acceptance of the peers that rejected them 
when Kim Wilde's remake of "You Keep Me Hangin' On" was #1.
        So when Romy runs into bitter woman in black Janeane 
Garofalo (a former classmate whose claim to fame is having invented 
a cigarette that burns twice as fast, "for the woman on the go") and 
hears of the upcoming ten year reunion, she and Michele decide they 
have to go to show up all their fellow alumni. Problem is, what is 
there to show off? I mean, besides the fact that they're both gorgeous, 
statuesque blondes. The movie considers their beauty a moot point, 
even having them both go on crash diets before their reunion, I guess 
to bring them down to 100 pounds from 102.
        In fact, the least believable thing about ROMY AND MICHELE'S 
HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is the idea of the title characters as 
losers. Yes, they're not too bright, but come on, they're so lovable. 
And those freaky clothes they wear would make them the most 
popular girls in a modern high school. That doesn't stop director 
David Mirkin from including several flashback scenes where we see 
just how lame Romy and Michele's high school days were. Everyone 
plays themselves in the flashbacks, which is about as convincing as 
the rest of the movie.
        ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is 
based on a Robin Schiff play that Kudrow performed in years before 
her current turn on "Friends." The Michele character is a Phoebe 
clone Sorvino isn't too far removed from her MIGHTY APHRODITE 
days. But both are fun and exuberant, and Garofalo is as entertaining 
here as ever. There's even a great collection of '80s tunes from "Time 
After Time" to "She Blinded Me With Science." If there wasn't so 
much padded crap in here, the star rating would be higher, but as it 
is, I _almost_ liked it.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Phil Curtolo
What do you get when you combine Clueless and Dumb and Dumber? To
answer the question, you get director David Mirkin's new comedy Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion. 
Romy White (Mira Sorvino, Mighty Aprhodite) and Michele Weinberger
(Lisa Kudrow, TV's Friends) have been inseparable buddies since they
graduated from Sagebrush High in 1987. However, when former classmate
Heather Mooney (Janeane Garafolo, The Truth About Cats and Dogs)
confronts Romy about the 10 year reunion, she is astounded that she
forgot.
Watching Pretty Woman for the um-teenth time, they are reminded of how
they wouldn't let Julia Roberts' character shop in the expensive stores
because of her appearance. Then it hits them: they are not successful.
What are she and Michele going to do? Romy's instant solution is lose
some weight off their already slender frames, "bag a couple of
boyfriends," and get jobs. Romy says this will be easy, but Michele
retorts that if it is so easy, why hadn't they already done it. 
Robin Schiff's script keeps the show moving with some nice one-liners.
One of the best has Romy reminiscing about her life's battle against the
bathroom scales. "I was so lucky getting mono," she says looking at her
thinnest high school picture. "That was like the best diet ever." The
casting for the film is so perfect that one begins to suspect that the
leads were chosen and then the script was developed.
Romy and Michele use their high school yearbook to discuss the caste
system at their high school. The film's editor David Finfer dissolves
the stills from the yearbook to live action flashbacks which makes the
past come to life. 
At Sagebrush High, the hierarchy consisted of the A group
(cheerleaders), the B group (drama club) and the C group (nerds). Romy
and Michele were none of the above. Ridiculed as "the weirdoes," they
were constant targets for abuse. Even though they were quite attractive,
they had so much fun being together that they did not care about the
others. That they make their own outlandish clothes helped keep the wall
around them.
Complementing Romy and Michele's lightness, is Janeane Garofalo as the
dark, pudgy Heather Mooney. Heather, who invented a new cigarette paper
for cigarettes with "twice the taste in half the time for the gal on the
go," has the success and the money that they would like. Heather was
even more of an outsider than they were in high school. Garofalo's
one-dimensional role is only a side show. This is a two person film with
the other characters there merely for the two leads to bounce their
lines off of. The genuine chemistry between Sorvino and Kudrow makes for
a sweet and sometimes touching comedy. They have so much fun acting out
their parts, their enjoyment spreads to the audience. 
Grade: B, ***1/2 out of *****

Author
Michael Dequina
Romy and Michele's High School Reunion (R) *** (out of ****)
Take arguably the funniest dumb blonde on TV (Lisa Kudrow), pair her
with the most memorable dumb blonde in recent film (Mira Sorvino), and you
get the irreverent, loopy, and entertaining new comedy Romy and Michele's
High School Reunion.
As can be expected, Sorvino, who won an Oscar for her Mighty
Aphrodite numskull hooker routine, and Kudrow, Emmy nominee for her work as
dullard songstress Phoebe on NBC's hit Friends, perfectly embody Romy White
and Michele Weinberger, respectively, a couple of aimless L.A. clubhopping
losers attend to their ten-year high school reunion in Tucson, Arizona.
These two can play this type of role in their sleep, but there's no question
that they play the part well.  How well?  Having two incredibly idiotic
people as the leads in a film has the potential to grow old really fast, but
Sorvino and Kudrow keep their characters consistently interesting and
likable throughout the film, never losing the audience's rooting interest;
they're just a lot of fun to hang around with.  The two have a natural
rapport, and their best moments come early in the film, as the
intelligence-impaired pair attempt to shape up their lives in time to brag
to their old enemies at the reunion.  Of course, their plan for
self-improvement doesn't work, and they instead decide to just pretend to be
successful, something much easier said than done.  Then again, for these
two, everything is much easier said than done.
Sorvino and Kudrow are on pitch-perfect target during the heart of
the film, the reunion itself, but the second half of Romy and Michele
belongs to neither Romy nor Michele.  It is clearly owned by Janeane
Garofalo, simply terrific as acid-tongued Heather Mooney, who was even more
of a social outcast in high school than Romy and Michele.  She has all the
best lines in Robin Schiff's amusing script, and her dry, nasty,
movie-stealing performance keeps the proceedings from becoming overly
saccharine and sweet--which, at times, it threatens to do, especially when
the high school snobs (led by a hissably bitchy Julia Campbell) get their
expected comeuppance.
First-time helmer David Mirkin, an executive producer on The
Simpsons, displays some of that series' witty, irreverent sense of humor in
this film, especially in a wildly unexpected plot curve midway through.  He
brings some refreshing visual flair to the obligatory high school flashback
scenes, which are presented as yearbook pictures come to life.  The '80s
soundtrack is also quite effectively used, not simply as nostalgia but also
as background score; for instance, Romy is belittled by people from the "A
crowd" as Bananarama's "Cruel Summer" plays in the background, and Belinda
Carlisle's "Heaven Is a Place on Earth" provides a perfect bubblegum
backdrop for our heroines' ultimate triumph.  Also, I don't think I'll ever
hear Cyndi Lauper's "Time After Time" in quite the same way after seeing
the--for lack of a better term--"unique" dance number it underscores.
Romy and Michele's High School Reunion gets the job done as popcorn
entertainment, but in the end I can't say that a whole lot really goes on in
its 90something minutes--ditzy Romy and Michele go to their reunion and get
their revenge--and the film is just about instantly forgettable.  But what
isn't forgettable are the characters: the main duo and, most of all, the
hilariously prickly Heather.  Sorvino and Kudrow have expressed a desire to
do a whole Romy and Michele series, but here's hoping they can get Garofalo
to join in on a series of Romy, Michele, and Heather flicks.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Tim Voon
Starring: Mira Sorvino, Lisa Kudrow, Janeane Garofolo, Alan Cumming,
Julia Campbell. Screenplay: Robin Schiff. Director: David Mirkin.
Who hasn't dreamed of returning to their high school reunion to show
that they have made something of their lives. It is especially difficult
to face up to the past when you were the odd kid on the block and nobody
liked you; and it takes even more courage to go as you are.
Romy and Michelle (Sorvino and Kudrow), are invited to return to their
high school reunion, Class of 87, Sagebrush  High. They haven't made
much of their opportunities in the last ten years since high school (one
is unemployed and the other is a receptionist). They feel that they need
to upgrade their profile in order to be liked, so they pretend to be
successful business women who discovered 'post-its' and the self
adhesive glue that binds it. After much ridicule from the 'brat pack' at
the reunion, they finally realise that they need to be themselves.
Shedding their disguises they face the past, the pack, and their
problems on their own level and terms.
This pleasant, mindless excursion into comedy is both charming and
flawed. It skims over issues of coming to terms with one's past fears of
rejection and lost hopes, with enough light hearted ditziness to give a
cow vertigo. Not everyone will leave their high school reunion,
transformed from a duckling to a swan, in the arms of a millionaire in
his private helicopter. I can guarantee that most of us will not.
The final dance sequence was so embarrassing I wanted to hide.
Sorvino and Kudrow play 'blondes' to a tee, with enough 80's music to
wallow with nostalgia.
Comment: One big, overdrawn blonde joke.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mira Sorvino, Lisa Kudrow, Janeane Garofalo, Alan Cumming, 
      Julia Campbell, Mia Cottet, Kristin Bauer, Elaine Hendrix, 
      Vincent Ventresca
Director: David Mirkin
Producer: Laurence Mark
Screenplay: Robin Schiff based on her play THE LADIES' ROOM
Cinematography: Reynaldo Villalobos
Music: Steve Bartek
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     If I had a choice between attending Romy and Michele's high school 
reunion or the one with John Cusack at Grosse Pointe, which would I 
choose?  It's actually a difficult decision, because, although the two 
movies have vastly different strengths and weaknesses, the bottom line 
is that they're of similar quality.  GROSSE POINTE BLANK is, at times, 
too dark and disjointed.  ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is, on 
the other hand, occasionally a little too light and vacuous.  And, if 
GROSSE POINTE has too much of an edge, then ROMY AND MICHELE doesn't 
have enough of one.  All things considered, however, I think I'll take 
the girls over the hit man.  
     That said, those expecting a female version of DUMB AND DUMBER are 
in for a disappointment.  Yes, Romy (Mira Sorvino) and Michele (Lisa 
Kudrow) have vacuum-filled brain cavities, and the film doesn't shy away 
from raunchy sexual innuendo, but the pervasive flatulence of the Jim 
Carrey/Jeff Daniels comedy is entirely absent.  ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH 
SCHOOL REUNION is about two ditzes who adore PRETTY WOMAN, think Mono is 
"the best diet ever", and believe that looking fantastic is the most 
important thing.  
     The title characters are blond Southern California babes who have 
been rooming together since they moved to the L.A. area after graduating 
from high school.  They have been friends for a lot longer -- two 
inseparable peas in a pod who have never fit in with the hip crowd and 
have never cared that they're outsiders.  Now, a decade after brushing 
the dust of Tucson, Arizona from their heels, the receive word that the 
Sagebrush High School Class of '87 is holding a ten-year reunion.  So, 
armed with lies about how they have become successful business women, 
they head east to impress the classmates who used to taunt and ridicule 
them.
     Neither Mira Sorvino (MIGHTY APHRODITE, for which she won a Best 
Supporting Actress Oscar) nor Lisa Kudrow (MOTHER, TV's FRIENDS) is a 
stranger to playing this sort of dumb-as-a-post role.  Under the control 
of two such deft comic talents, Romy and Michele are exaggerated just 
enough to be funny but not so much that they're unsympathetic.  The 
characters originally appeared in screenwriter Robin Schiff's stage 
play, THE LADIES' ROOM, and were inspired by a pair of real individuals 
whom Schiff overheard talking in a night club bathroom.  In fact, the 
most disturbing thing about ROMY AND MICHELE is recognizing that there 
are actually people in this world who think and act like these two 
cartoon characters do.
     Although I smiled frequently during the film, I didn't laugh too 
often.  Perhaps surprisingly, a lot of the humor is low-key, and there 
are very few truly hilarious moments.  Another problem is that the 
script unsuccessfully attempts to inject a little lame drama with a 
moral ("be true to yourself") into the mix.  I have no problem with 
ambitious comedies introducing dramatic elements into the storyline, but 
those aspects should be less banal than the ones pulled off the "stock 
plot device" shelf for this movie.  ROMY AND MICHELE is at its best when 
it's being lighthearted and at its weakest when it takes a halfhearted 
stab at semi-seriousness.
     As in GROSSE POINTE BLANK, the reunion is something of a 
disappointment (actually, for reasons I won't go into here, there are 
two reunions).  ROMY AND MICHELE starts out exceptionally strong, with 
lots of flashbacks and reminiscences about the girls' high school days, 
but it loses momentum by the time the duo reaches Tucson.  The final 
forty-five minutes features a few clever moments (including a bizarre 
dance number with Sorvino, Kudrow, and Alan Cumming), but almost all of 
the best scenes occur during the first half.  
     ROMY AND MICHELE boasts a lively supporting cast.  As is often the 
case, Janeane Garofalo (THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS) steals her share 
of scenes.  Playing a chain-smoking, foul-mouthed business woman, she 
pops in and out of the film to make life generally miserable for 
everyone around her.  Alan Cumming (EMMA) is the nerd who once had a 
crush on Michele, and Vincent Ventresca (TV's BOSTON COMMON) is the stud 
who caught Romy's eye.  Julia Campbell (TV's MEN BEHAVING BADLY) is that 
staple of the reunion movie -- the stuck-up prom queen whose vocabulary 
is made up solely of put-downs.
     ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is one of those pleasant 
movie-going experiences that doesn't offend, excite, or challenge 
anyone.  There are all sorts of likable things about it -- Sorvino and 
Kudrow, accessible humor, and an '80s soundtrack that's the most 
definitive survey of the decade in pop music since PETER'S FRIENDS.  
First-time director David Mirkin brings a lot of energy to the 
production, always keeping things moving.  And, perhaps most 
intriguingly, anyone who has ever gone to a reunion will recognize a 
kernel of truth lurking under all of ROMY AND MICHELE'S blond and 
brainless icing. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So how did your tenth high school reunion go?  More apropos, how
would you like it to have gone?
     This conundrum faces normally happy-go-lucky Romy and Michele in
ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION.  They have been inseparable
buddies forever so they must face this challenge in their life
together.  Romy's instant solution is: Lose some weight off their
already slender frames, "bag a couple of boyfriends," and get a job.
Romy says this will be easy, but Michele retorts that if it is so easy,
why hadn't they already done it.
     Robin Schiff's script keeps the show moving with some nice
one-liners.  One of the best has Romy reminiscing about her life's
battle against the bathroom scales.  "I was so lucky getting mono," she
says looking at her thinnest high school picture.  "That was like the
best diet ever."
     The casting for the film is so perfect that one begins to suspect
that the leads were chosen and then the script was developed.  Mira
Sorvino, who won the Academy Award for her role in MIGHTY APHRODITE,
plays Romy, the brighter of the two, if that is possible.  Lisa Kudrow,
from the TV series "Friends" and "Mad About You," plays the slightly
dumber Michele.
     Roommates Romy and Michele in this good spirited parody are your
canonical ditzy blondes.  The show's tag line "the blonde leading the
blonde" uses blonde as a metaphor for blind.
     Romy and Michele use their high school yearbook to discuss the
delineation of the caste system at their high school.  (Editor David
Finfer dissolves the stills in the annual to live action flashbacks
which gives immediacy to the past coming to life.)
     At Sagebrush High, the hierarchy consisted of the A group
(cheerleaders), the B group (drama club) and the C group (nerds).  Romy
and Michele were none of the above.  Ridiculed as "the weirdoes," they
were constant targets for abuse.  Even though they were quite
attractive, they had so much fun being together that they did not care
about the others.  That they make their own outlandish clothes helped
keep the wall around them.  Mona May's costumes contribute to the
show's breezy fun.  The colorful and revealing dresses of lime green,
lavender, and other pastels include heavy use of plastic fruit.  She
even has the people at the reunion carry color coordinated frozen
daiquiris.  Romy and Michele's hairdos have the bulk that birds need to
build nests.
     Complementing Romy and Michele's lightness, is Janeane Garofalo as
the dark, pudgy Heather Mooney.  Heather, who invented a new cigarette
paper for cigarettes with "twice the taste in half the time for the gal
on the go," has the success and the money that they would like.
Heather was even more of an outsider than they were in high school.
Garofalo's one dimensional role is only a side show.  This is a two
person film with the other characters there merely for the two leads to
bounce their lines off of.  The genuine chemistry between Sorvino and
Kudrow makes for a sweet and sometimes touching comedy.
     Director David Mirkin's presentation is uneven.  Although the
lines are periodically funny, the picture as a whole just does not have
the comedic power of GROSS POINTE BLANK, which is another 10th high
school reunion comedy currently playing.  Still, Sorvino and Kudrow
have so much fun doing their parts, their enjoyment spreads to the
audience.
     ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION runs a fast 1:33.  It is
rated R for sexual humor and a little profanity.  The film would be
fine for kids 10 or 11 and over.  I recommend this lighthearted and
lightweight comedy and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Rory Mackay
In Brief: Nothing original, or even that funny, but not without its charm.
Lisa Kudrow (Phoebe from "Friends") and Mira Sorvino star in this aimiable
comedy. Remember Jim Carrey's "Dumb and Dumber"? Well this film might well
have been named "Blonde and Blonder". It was a bit of a surprise, actually,
that Lisa Kudrow is basically playing a mirror image of her kooky "Friends"
character, Phoebe Buffay. Not that I mind, after all I love "Friends" and
Phoebe's probably my favourite character. It's just a wonder that Kudrow
agreed to star in a film that basically stereotypes her as the scatty
blonde. Still, she plays the part tremendously well, and joined by Mira
Sorvino -- well, there's too Phoebes!
The plot revolves around Romy and Michelle's impending High School reunion
(funnily enough!) and their attempts to make themselves appear more
successful than they have actually turned out ("You won't believe this, but
I invented the Post-it!"). Maybe you've already figured that there's
nothing terribly original or fresh about the plot. True, there's not, in
fact the film is riddled with cliches. But I don't really care, 'cos
they're fun cliches, and this is a fun film.
I'm not so sure it's that funny a film, though. There are some funny
moments, but it's more the type of comedy that'll have you quietly smiling
to yourself, occasionally giggling, as opposed to rolling around the floor
in hysterics. It's a quiet, gentle humour but quite enjoyable all the same.
Kudrow and Sorvino are made for the roles, and are a lot of fun throughout.
There are also a number of other engaging (if cliched) characters who were
good fun.
One thing I could have done without was the obligatory "Romy and Michelle
fall out" which popped up, jarringly, in the middle of the film. It felt
forced and unoriginal. We knew they'd make up by the end of the film,
anyway. Another annoying thing was one of those exceptionally frustrating
"Oh, I've just woken up -- the past half hour was all a dream!" sequences.
I wanted to cry out "Cheat! Cheat! CHEAT!"
So, summing up; the film is unashamedly unoriginal and maybe not quite as
funny as it could have been it's an enjoyable, feel-good yarn. Worth a
look.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
Check out my site for regularly-updated Film and TV Reviews!

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is nearly
flawless. That's not to say that it's great (or even good, necessarily),
but it does accomplish what it sets out to do.
It's been ten years since Romy and Michele graduated. They are still
living together, partying together, dieting together, and when there are
no cute guys, dancing together. Romy (or is that Michele?) works as a
cashier at a garage specializing in Jaguars, and Michele is unemployed.
Their lives are not defined by their jobs, but by their vanity, their
clothes, and their social life.
At work, Romy runs into her old classmate Heather (vibrantly played by
Janeane Garofalo, whom I hope we start seeing more of). Seeing Heather,
Romy realizes how much time really has passed. She talks Michele into
going back to Tucson for their high school reunion.
The two concoct a story to convince everyone back home that they are
successful businesswomen. To back up the story, they design their own
"business suits" and wrangle a Jaguar from Romy's work. When the show
up, they show up in style.
Woven into the story are the defining moments from ten years ago that
make us understand why these two are eager to return home -- both to show
themselves off and to see how their friends and enemies are doing.
ROMY AND MICHELE works well, at least in part, because it doesn't judge
the main characters too harshly. The movie is practically made of blonde
jokes, but the characters are always in on the jokes, if not telling
them. No jokes are made at the expense of their dignity.
The movie also has a joy for life that shines through all the rigors of
filmmaking. The scene that comes to mind is the fantastic pas de trois
dance scene at the end. The broad choreographed movements are funny, but
the dance continues and it's not just a joke. Romy, Michele, and their
partner (I won't give away who it is) seem to really be living life and
enjoying themselves. The rest of us, both on screen and in the audience
look on in jealous admiration of their dance of life.
Along the same lines, the events of the movie lead up to a moral, of
sorts. I feared that the moral would be some awkward lesson imposed by
the film's producer, not learned by the main characters. But when the
time came, the lesson was simple, not shallow, and quite appropriate to
the characters.
The movie gets off to a slow start. Some of the early jokes are obvious
and the timing is a little off. But even though the movie takes a while
to hit its stride, it is well worth the wait.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes
