Title
Review for Outside Providence (1999)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Michael Dequina
Ever hear ssomeone tell supposedly amusing tales of their childhood and
adolescence that seem only to hold the slightest bit of interest to the
person telling the story?  That's the sense I felt while watching
_Outside_Providence_, based on the semi-autobiographical novel by Peter
Farrelly.  Yes, that's Peter as in Peter and Bobby Farrelly, the warped
minds behind the likes of _Kingpin_ and _There's_Something_About_Mary_. 
But anyone looking for their brand of grossout humor will be disappointed
by the wistful _Providence_, scripted by the brothers and director
Michael Corrente.  Then again, anything looking for humor, period, will
be disappointed, for the film is strangely devoid of laughs.
_Providence_ is set in 1974, when teen Tim Dunphy's (Shawn Hatosy)
aimless, pot-fueled antics leads his father (Alec Baldwin) to ship him
from their home of Pawtucket, New Jersey, to Cornwall Academy, a stuffy
prep school in Connecticut.  A fish-out-of-water scenario where all
manner of hilarity should ensue, but what unfolds is bizarrely lifeless
and often simply boring, with Tim regularly running afoul of an uptight
headmaster (Tim Crowe) when not running after Jane (Amy Smart), a
fetching student at the girls' school.  Every so often Corrente cuts to a
scene back in Pawtucket, usually with Old Man Dunphy playing poker with
pals.  It's as exciting as it sounds.
The actors playing the only two recognizable characters are the only
thing that holds interest in the film, aside from Corrente's keen eye for
period detail.  Baldwin does an admirable job of disappearing into his
character, obviously wearing a few (to say the least) more pounds than
usual and speaking in a very convincing Jersey accent.  But there's more
to his performance than a mere physical transformation; Baldwin infuses
the macho blowhard with a palpable warmth.  Not as showy is the work of
Hatosy, who has a natural, understated ease about him that makes slacker
Tim more likable than he otherwise would be (as played by another actor,
he probably wouldn't be at all).
A more compelling semi-autobiographical tale of adolescence can be found
in _West_Beirut_, written and directed by Ziad Doueiri.  The film indeed
is set in Lebanon in the late '70s to early '80s, when civil war divided
the country and split the city of Beirut into a Christian-run East and a
Muslim-run West; against this backdrop, we see the development of young
Tarek (Rami Doueiri), Omar (Mohamad Chamas), and their Christian friend
May (Rola Al Amin), as well as the effects the unrest has on Tarek's
parents (Carmen Lebbos and Joseph Bou Nassar).  Despite more than a few
serious turns of events, there are plenty of moments of humor as the
teens simply go about their business of having fun, learning about life,
and growing up as any others would in any corner of the globe.  Paying no
mind to the setting and situational differences, _West_Beirut_ is more
effective a film semi-memoir than _Outside_Providence_ for one simple
reason--it actually feels like a story worth telling.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Michael Corrente.
Written by Peter Farrelly, Bobby Farrelly, Michael Corrente.
Cast: Shawn Hatosy, Alec Baldwin, Amy Smart, Jack Ferver, Jon Abrahams, 
Gabriel Mann, Jonathan Brandis, George Wendt.
1999 - 90 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, drug use, and sexual situations).
Reviewed September 4, 1999.
"The outrageous new comedy from the guys who brought you 'There's Something 
About Mary,'" reads the tagline on the poster for "Outside Providence." Maybe 
in a fantasy world, but realistically speaking, nothing could possibly be 
further from the truth. True, Peter and Bobby Farrelly wrote "Outside 
Providence," but while "Mary" really was a raucous, un-PC comedic excursion, 
their latest scripting job is a sweet and earnest coming-of-age story that, 
yes, does have its fair share of big laughs sprinkled throughout. You won't, 
however, ever see a peculiar substance in the leading lady's hair here.
Depicting one year in the life of 17-year-old Timothy Dunphy (Shawn Hatosy), 
"Outside Providence" is supposedly semi-autobiographical of the Farrelly 
Brothers' own lives growing up, and I'd believe it, as the film is made up 
more out of individual moments, rather than one that follows a clear-cut plot 
from Point A to Point B. Tim lives in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, directly 
outside of Providence, and in the summer of 1974, he spends his days and 
nights hanging out with his stoner friends getting high. His gruff, 
blue-collar father (Alec Baldwin) has an embarrassing nickname for 
him--"Dildo"--and he has a close relationship with his wheelchair-bound 
younger brother. One night while driving around with his buddies, the 
overwhelming marijuana smoke in the car causes Tim to wreck into a parked 
police car, and he is promptly sent off to stay at the prestigious Cornwall 
Academy for his senior year of high school. Immediately realizing that he is 
far behind the rest of the students in his highly competitive classes, and 
instantly disliked by the unfair headmaster of the school, Tim's prospects 
suddenly brighten when he meets fellow student Jane (Amy Smart), apparently 
the only girl in the whole Academy (or so it seems). From there on, they 
start a relatively innocent and kind-hearted romance, the type that only can 
be found in a person's young adult years, before their views of the world 
become jaded. Meanwhile, Tim is struggling to piece together why his mother 
could have possibly committed suicide several years before, as well as his 
uneasy relationship with his father.
The two keys to the success of "Outside Providence" is in its on-target 
period flavor of the '70s, complete with many classic rock songs (The Who's 
timeless "Won't Get Fooled Again," Lynyrd Skynyrd's "Sweet Home Alabama") 
that perfectly walk hand-in-hand with the story, as well as in its sharp, 
winning performances from the whole cast. In the central role, Shawn Hatosy 
is a truly talented young actor (who, by the way, is from my hometown of 
Frederick, MD) with an almost blindingly-bright future ahead of him 
(tellingly, his next two movies also consist of the likes of Susan Sarandon, 
Natalie Portman, Sharon Stone, and Nick Nolte). Like Jason Biggs ("American 
Pie"), Hatosy has a sort of everybody look to him that only helps the viewer 
to more closely identify with him, and his charactor of Dunph, as his friends 
call him, is a likable and engaging protagonist.
In a stunning change-of-pace, Alec Baldwin is a standout (and possible Oscar 
nominee) as Old Man Dunphy, Tim's father, who is sometimes hard on his son, 
but only because he cares for him and wants him to make something out of his 
life. A stern figure at first, Baldwin especially shines late in the picture, 
particularly in a scene where he teaches Tim how to put on a tie, and another 
set outside of a bar when Tim questions him about why his mother killed 
herself.
Amy Smart, the highlight of last spring's otherwise mediocre "Varsity Blues," 
brings a surprising warmth and intelligence to her role of Jane, a bright 
girl who knows how to have a good time, but also takes pride in challenging 
herself with her school work, and encourages Tim to do the same. Smart exudes 
an overwhelming amount of beauty, dignity, and empathy, and it's doubtful any 
other young actress could have done a superior job.
While the screenplay is consistently well-written, gently mixing comedy and 
bittersweet drama together, it is often a given that some major editing was 
done before the film's release, judging from various subplots that are 
brought up and never really resolved. Two minor stories that come to mind is 
in the questionable sexual orientation of one of Old Man Dunphy's poker 
buddies (George Wendt, in a touching performance), and another concerning 
Tim's geeky roommate at Cornwall (Jack Ferver) who is thinking about calling 
up his ex-girlfriend to work out their problems. Since nothing more comes of 
these sideway plotlines, perhaps it would have been wise to cut them out 
completely, and maybe add a few more scenes with Tim and Jane.
Otherwise, "Outside Providence" is a more-than-amiable way to spend ninety 
minutes in a movie theater, and if you've already seen "The Sixth Sense" and 
"The Blair Witch Project," this is your best bet. Entertaining and charming, 
the film is one of the better, more accurate, "coming-of-age" films to be 
released in awhile, and as directed by Michael Corrente, gets far more things 
exactly right than wrong.

Author
Christopher Null
     The latest entry on the long list of follow-up disappointments will
have to be OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE, a film sort-of from the Farrelly brothers
(THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY) with practically none of its charm.
     Based on an old novel by Peter Farrelly, this is the (obviously
autobiographical to some extent) tale of a good-for-nothing, super-poor
kid called Dunph (Hatosy) growing up in Pawtucket, Rhode Island (you
know, outside Providence).  When he gets high and smashes the car into a
police cruiser, dad somehow works a deal to get him sent to a prep
school in Connecticut, where he finds himself a fish out of water.
     Now Dunph is so stupid that he actually thinks Arizona is on the
coast.  But when he meets a cute girl (Smart) she mends his evil ways
and gets him to study.  There's wacky hijinx along the way (a pale
imitation of DEAD POETS SOCIETY), which really amounts to a collection
of random scenes involving heavy drug use, various pranks, mean school
authorities, and George Wendt's character inexplicably coming out of the
closet.
     Most notable among the players here is Alec Baldwin, apparently
doing his best grumpy Jackie Gleeson impersonation as Dunph's father.
All of the other players are pretty much forgettable.  Which is why,
ultimately, this is a movie that goes nowhere after close to two hours.
     Is it funny?  Occasionally, and fans of the coming-of-age genre
will probably be satisfied.  Is it Cameron Diaz-hair gel funny?  Not
even an outside chance.
Director: Michael Corrente
Producer: Peter Farrelly, Michael Corrente, Bobby Farrelly, Randy Finch
Writer: Peter Farrelly, Michael Corrente, Bobby Farrelly
Starring: Shawn Hatosy, Jon Abrahams, Tommy Bone, Jonathan Brandis, Jack
Ferver, Kristen Shorten, Amy Smart, George Wendt, Alec Baldwin
http://miramax.com/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=0&midStr=1091
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Timothy Dunphy (Shawn Hatosy, The Faculty) had been called `Ass Bag' and
`Queer' before his father finally settled on the nickname `Dildo.'
Dunph, as he is more commonly known, has spent his entire life in
Pawtucket, Rhode Island with his blue-collar old man (Alec Baldwin,
Mercury Rising), a three-legged dog named Cyclops and paraplegic kid
brother Jackie (Kyle & Ryan Pepi), who was injured falling off the roof
during a game of football.  Their mother died when both boys were
little.
Life in Pawtucket isn't too exciting for kids, and Dunph ends up
spending his evenings on the town's water tower, getting high with other
disenchanted neighborhood teenagers.  They all use fantastic slang when
talking about women, referring to their faces as `helmets,' breasts as
`floaters,' and rear ends as `toilets.'  And in Pawtucket, you don't get
to third base with a girl  you stink-finger her.
One night, while driving without a license and having his vision
impaired immense clouds of pot smoke, Dunph slams into a parked cop
car.  Thanks to a `connected' friend of his father, the judge's only
punishment is to make Dunph enroll in Cornwall Academy, a prep school in
central Connecticut.  When asked what prep school would actually prepare
him for, Dunph's old man grunts `to prepare you from not gettin' your
neck broke by me.'
Dunph sets off for Cornwall with thirty frogpelts from his pop and a
garbage bag full of personal belongings.  He instantly deduces that
there might be a period of adjustment when he shows up for orientation
in a dingy t-shirt and blue jeans, while everybody else is outfitted in
blue blazers and neckties.  Soon enough, Dunph finds a counterculture of
dope fiends and troublemakers, including a comely young woman named Jane
Weston (Amy Smart, Varsity Blues).
Essentially a typical coming-of-age film, Providence succeeds where
others asphyxiate from mediocrity, due to its production pedigree.  The
film is based on Peter Farrelly's novel of the same name and the book,
which was really sort of boring, was adapted here by Farrelly, his
brother Bobby (the guys that made There's Something About Mary) and
director Michael Corrente (American Buffalo).  Don't be fooled  this
isn't a slapstick comedy like Mary.  It's more character driven than
bodily fluid driven, but still entertaining nonetheless.  (1:38 - R for
pervasive teen drug use and strong language including sexual references)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE (director: Michael Corrente; screenwriter: written by
Peter Farrelly/ Corrente/Bobby Farrelly/based on the novel by Peter
Farrelly; cinematographer: Richard Crudo; editor: Kate Sanford; cast:
Shawn Hatosy (Tim Dunphy), Jon Abrahams (Drugs Delaney), Jack Ferver
(Irving Waltham), Amy  Smart (Jane Weston), George Wendt (Joey), Alec
Baldwin (Old Man Dunphy), Tommy Bone (Jackie Dunphy), George Martin
(Dean Mort), Gabriel Mann (Jack Wheeler), Tim Crowe (Funderberk);
Runtime: 95; Miramax; 1999)
This is a lame coming-of-age film, yet Michael Corrente directs it with
great sympathy for the characters, taking a lighthearted approach to
some mild rebellion going on in the mid '70s, contrasting the lifestyles
of both working-class and upper-class students. It comes to the
'startling' conclusion that rich kids might do the same bad things
working-class kids do, but get away with it because their money gives
them privileges.
The film plays as if it's a slogan for "stupid pride." A self-satisfied
morality play about bigotry and personal ethics seems to be where it is
going, as a pot-smoking teen, Tim Dunphy (Shawn Hatosy), from a
blue-collar environment in Pawtucket, which is just outside Providence,
gets into trouble with the law after his car smashes into a parked
police car while he is high and it is arranged with a mobster friend of
his dad's, to get the help of the judge trying his case, so that he goes
to the elite Cornwall prep school in Connecticut instead of to jail.
To emphasize how dumb the kid is, when asked in the prep school class
who his favorite author is, he says Hamlet. He sticks out in this snooty
environment like a sore thumb, wearing a dungaree jacket with an
American flag on his back instead of the  traditional blazer, and
instead of luggage, he arrives with a garbage bag full of his clothes.
Old man Dunphy (Alec Baldwin), a bellicose single parent of two boys,
plays poker with his reactionary lowbrow friends as they rail against
the Jews and homosexuals while boozing it up, they even try to figure
out if Rock Hudson is queer. Meanwhile, right under his nose, his son
hangs out with a bunch of slackers, with the irrepressible Drugs Delaney
(Jon Abrahams) doing an imitation of how a stoned-out freak talks and
acts. Tim's younger brother Jackie (Tommy Bone) is wheelchair-bound, who
is used as a prop for some flippant one-liners by his family and
friends, as he is cut no slack for his physical condition. He enjoys
hanging out with his older brother's druggie friends and listening to
them sound each other out, and is supposedly being taught a valuable
lesson in life: not to have self-pity. To show that the family is really
a caring one, the family pet is a three-legged mutt, who sports an
eyepatch.
At the school, he meets all the stock characters you would expect in
such a formulaic film. There is the rich, pretty, popular,
down-to-earth, smart girl who has poise and class, Jane Weston (Amy
Smart). She will smoke pot and have a sweet non-sexual relationship with
him, become accepted to Brown University and help persuade the
disinterested student to study hard enough so that he could at least
graduate and go to a junior college. There is, of course, the film's
ogre, who is the school disciplinarian, Mr. Funderberk (Crowe), who will
pick on all of Dunph's friends (he's called that by his friends, his
father affectionately calls him Dildo).
School life for Dunph falls into the routine of smoking weed, playing
hockey, getting into minor trouble, and then trying to get out of
trouble.
The students were all predictable one-dimensional characters: there is
the nerd Irving (Ferver), who is looking for respect. Wheeler (Gabriel
Mann) is the sneaky student who rats out his friends to get the dean's
recommendation to Yale. The other students Dunph hangs out with are all
the ones who smoke pot like his friends back home, but do it in a more
sophisticated way. Better bongs.
There are two events in this story that have an impact on Dunph: his
mother committed suicide and his father never told him why, as he
eventually bonds with his gruff father after he graduates and learns in
a heart-to-heart talk that his father loves him very much in his own
way. He also learns that his mother was mentally ill. In the second
event, Dunph invites Jane to his dorm room, and he's caught smoking pot
there by Funderberk. The dull scene that follows plays like typical
sitcom trauma, as the innocent Jane is expelled and thereby Brown
University declines to accept her. In the silliness that goes for either
comedy or dramatics, which wasn't funny or enlightening, just stupid and
incredible, Dunph goes to the Brown University dean and pleads for Jane
to be taken back, supposedly proving that he learned something about
personal responsibility at the prep school.
The poker players also ease up in their bigotry and let a gay card
player (George Wendt) back in the game (this phony story contrivance was
just absurd). The problem with all these resolutions were that all the
characters were clichés, no one's character was fleshed out, and this
film based loosely on Peter Farrelly's life, never got untracked. The
story might have been a heartfelt one for the author, who is the
co-director with his brother Bobby of  "There's Something About Mary,"
but it had little impact on film and was very much underwritten. There
was just no story to get into which was worth getting into, nor were any
of the characters in the least bit interesting. Everything and everybody
was trivialized with the purpose to force some comedy out of their
characters, but the comedy never came about naturally. It all seemed
like a futile effort to catch something about class status that had
already been caught in a better light by recent films like "Rushmore "
and "Slums of Beverly Hills."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Shawn Hatosy, Alec Baldwin, Amy Smart. Rated R.
Those who believed the ads trying to convince the American Public that
Outside Providence is another There's Something About Mary are in for a
shock. It bears no resemblance to the horrifyingly popular 1998 gross-
out laugh-fest; unfortunately it's not anywhere near as good, either.
It's meant to be an outrageous coming-of-age comedy, but the laughs are
few and far between. As for the coming-of-age part, let's just say it is
beaten out in that department by The Thirteenth Warrior.
The reason behind all of the comparisons is that Outside Providence was
scripted by Peter Farrelly, one of the men responsible for Mary. However
the film is directed by Michael Corrente (American Buffalo) and doesn't
have Mary's take-no-prisoners attitude. That's the problem: it is more
interested in lackluster drama rather than comedy.
The concept itself isn't particularly tantalizing: the film is about
Timothy Dunphy a.k.a. "Dildo", a deadbeat, troublemaking high-schooler
who is sent to a fancy prep school by his father (Alec Baldwin). He
doesn't seem to fit in: he is surrounded by smart kids while he himself
isn't particularly bright; he likes getting stoned but though some of
his schoolmates do as well, they, unlike him, know that studying is
important. It gets worse when he meets opposition from the typically
evil schoolmaster (Timothy Crowe); an authority figure intent on
catching Timothy breaking a rule.
Of course Tim meets a girl. Of course Tim likes the girl. And, of
course, he gets the girl in trouble and has to figure out whether to
save her ass and put his on the line or whether to walk away happy and
leave his dear Jane (Amy Smart) in the hole. That's the coming-of-age
portion of the film... will Tim take responsibility for his own actions
or will he remain a freeloader, potentially for the rest of his life?
This is the kind of movie where I leave the theater in a bad mood -- not
because I hated what I just saw, but because it was sheer mediocrity
from beginning to end. Outside Providence didn't fill me with dislike,
as a matter of fact, it failed to evoke any sort of cognizable emotional
reaction from me. I laughed a couple of times. Smiled a few. Nothing
more. The movie built up a little dramatic momentum at a few points.
Nothing more. I didn't hate the film. Part of me wishes I did.
The only way to fix this mess would be to go to the core of the problem:
the script. It tries to balance comedy and drama and fails; as a result
we get a movie that isn't very funny or very, um, dramatic. There are a
few moments in Outside Providence when I was wishing for the script to
take a particular gag or concept farther. The subplot about the
schoolmaster demonstrates this perfectly: the man is almost the villain
in the story; almost a funny caricature. If the film was going to go in
this direction, I thought to myself, why not go all the way?. Why not go
a step further and make it genuinely funny? Instead, it stopped short;
chickened out, if you will.
Shawn Hatosy (The Faculty) is as unexceptional as everything else in
Outside Providence. He looks so stoned throughout the first two-thirds
of the movie that when we get to the point where we are supposed to
believe that his Tim is a changed man, we can't. Amy Smart's (Starship
Troopers) whole performance is the good-girl-with-a-wild-side cliche; a
shame since her character is so central to the plot.
I suppose this isn't such a bad film. I've seen worse. Outside
Providence is a movie where everything that is tried fails to rise above
the merely adequate. To have made the film better it would have to have
been completely revamped, something big-shot Peter Farrelly would
probably never have permitted: this has been his pet project. I don't
know why. As I said, there's nothing remotely tantalizing about the idea
or the final result. It isn't horrible, either. It's just... there. And
that sucks.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: Outside Providence
Rated [R]; 105 minutes
Starring Shawn Hatosy, Amy Smart, Alec Baldwin, George Wendt
Screenplay by Peter Farrelly, Michael Corrente, Bobby Farrelly
Based on the novel by Peter Farrelly
Directed by Michael Corrente
website: http://www.miramax.com
What do you get if you take a Farrelly Brothers movie, strip it of the
sex and the more gruesome physical gags (y'know, like a fishhook through
the face) and cast Alec Baldwin in a supporting role as a blue collar
foulmouth whose nickname for his eldest son is unprintable on these
boards?
You get a very funny coming of age movie, that's what you get.
To be historically accurate, Outside Providence is based on a novel
Peter Farrelly wrote before he and brother Bobby hit it big with flicks
like Dumb and Dumber and There's Something About Mary. As always, no
reference is made to the Source Material, which director Michael
Corrente picked up for a buck at a used bookshop. ...
Set in the Pawtucket, Rhode Island of 1974, dopehead Timothy Dunphy
(Shawn Hatosy) cheerfully helps his wheelchair bound brother Jackie
(Tommy Bone) deliver newspapers while their three legged dog, Clopsie,
limps behind them. With his equally vacant friends Dunphy smokes dope,
hangs out, talks big about girls (though the entire bunch is inept) with
a mouth which his mom would've washed with soap, had she not blown her
brains out a couple of years earlier.
OK, now that we've scared away half of my readers, Cranky'll take aim at
those of you that liked Mary...
Outside Providence, lacking the really cheap humor of There's Something
About Mary, replaces it with something even more interesting. A solid
story, with character development, terrific performances and a moral
ending. Yep. Surprised the hell out of me, too. Not only is Outside
Providence downright funny, it has a moral! Dunphy actually goes through
the kind of character transformation that film students and critics
like. Topping even Shawn Hatosy's performance is the outstanding
best-of-the-year quality work from Alec Baldwin.
After sneaking his bong out of the house -- Dunphy tells his old man
it's a musical instrument, and only the old man's poker buddy Joey
(George Wendt) knows better -- the losers hit the local disco, hit the
bong, and hit a parked police car. Dad ships Dunphy off to a prep school
where it's graduate or go to jail. While you may think this "blue collar
guy in white collar world" has been done to death in other teen flicks,
it is here that a substantial and very sweet story kicks into gear. Most
of the gross jokes fall by the wayside (though one particularly
revolting bit involving spaghetti up a nose will thrill teenboys) as
Dunphy meets, falls for and wins the much smarter, much richer and much
prettier Jane West (Amy Smart).
Yep, opposites attract. That this mook can win the heart of a preppie,
destroy her carefully planned future, regret his actions and make it all
better yields a really sweet love story. That it all came out of the pen
of Peter Farrelly is the bigger surprise. I grudgingly admitted to
liking There's Something About Mary, though Kingpin and Dumb and Dumber
were utterly tasteless and revolting, which is what they were supposed
to be -- not to my taste.
Outside Providence is better than good. It delivers an  excellent story
and great performances by relative newcomers Hatosy and Smart. Baldwin
gets a place on my year end list and George Wendt will surprise the heck
out of all of you. This is a top notch movie, though if you have
problems with four letter words, consider yourself warned.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Outside Providence, he would have
paid...
Damn fine movie. To make an good thing even better, the soundtrack (not
only in the film, but on the CD you'll shell out cash for) is filled
with absolute killer kuts of the 70s: The Who; Paul McCartney and Wings;
The Eagles; The Doobie Brothers; Yes; Badfinger; Free; and the best
track Lynyrd Skynyrd ever graced FM radio with ('cuz I played it daily
back when I was a DJ). For a full songlist and discount purchase option,
click here.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Outside Providence (1999)
Shawn Hatosy, Alec Baldwin, Amy Smart, George Wendt, Jon Abrahams, Tommy 
Bone, Jonathan Brandis, Jack Ferver, Adam Lavorgna, Jesse Leach, Gabriel 
Mann, Kristen Shorten, Alex Toma, Timothy Crowe. Screenplay by Peter 
Farrelly, Michael Corrente, and Bobby Farrelly, based on the novel by 
Peter Farrelly. Directed by Michael Corrente 105 minutes
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Traditionally, the last two weeks of August and first two weeks of 
September spell nothing but bad news for filmgoers. The studios view the 
period as a cinematic Bermuda Triangle, a place to dump those movies too 
flimsy to compete in the crowded summer marketplace and too weak to have 
a prayer in the autumn Oscar marathon. For critics, reviewing these 
flicks is a daunting experience because, after three months of writing 
about dreck like "Wild Wild West" and "Inspector Gadget," most of us have 
run out of insults. So when a nice little offering like "Outside 
Providence" comes along, I feel particularly grateful. 
While the TV ads trumpet the film as a "non-stop laugh-fest from the 
creators of 'Dumb and Dumber,' 'Kingpin' and 'There's Something About 
Mary,'" "Outside Providence" actually contains as much drama as comedy. 
The Farrelly brothers brand of humor is present, but the jokes are 
incorporated into a surprisingly effective coming-of-age story.
Set in the blue-collar town of Pawtucket, Rhode Island in 1974, the movie 
follows young Timothy Dunphy (Shawn Hatosy), an aimless high school 
stoner living with his wheelchair-bound kid brother (Tommy Bone) and 
surly father (Alec Baldwin). When not lingering at the grave of his 
mother or enduring the insults of his dad (whose nickname for his son is 
"Dildo"), Tim spends his time smoking dope with his friends, until one 
fateful night when he has a run-in with the law. Literally.
The kid is spared a jail sentence when Pop pulls some strings and packs 
the boy off to spend his senior year two and a half hours away at the 
Cornwall Prep School. Initially, Tim seems hopelessly lost in this 
cultured environment, but he soon finds that the alien setting offers 
many new possibilities, including the prospect of romance. 
Plotwise, there's nothing in "Outside Providence" we haven't encountered 
countless times before, but the screenplay navigates adroitly through the 
various clichéd situations. In fact, many of the film's rewards come from 
what doesn't happen. A frail kid confronts a bully and, instead of a 
fight or chase scene, they quietly make peace with each other. A student 
feuds with an authority figure and, instead of building to some 
outlandish public confrontation, their relationship ends on a realistic 
note. A man faces an angry reaction from his buddies when he reveals that 
he's gay and, instead of a melodramatic make-up scene, we simply see the 
guys playing cards together again later, having come to terms with his 
revelation off-screen. 
More than anything else, "Outside Providence" is about growth and 
reconciliation, and the film feels far more touching and real than what 
one would expect for a work associated with the Farrelly brothers.
A great part of the authenticity comes from director Michael Corrente 
("Federal Hill," "American Buffalo"), who picked up Peter Farrelly's 
gritty 1988 comic novel for a buck in a used bookstore. Corrente found 
the book hilarious and saw in it the potential for something more than a 
standard teen comedy. He inserted his own dramatic sensibilities into the 
story, along with several images from his childhood, including a tender 
scene of Old Man Dunphy teaching Tim how to fasten his tie. Corrente also 
took a treasured memory of his parents playfully shooting Christmas tree 
bulbs with a "Rifleman" gun and reworked it into a poignant flashback 
sequence.   
Too often, actors playing working-class folks come off like they're 
slumming, but not here. Shawn Hatosy, the fresh-faced kid with the 
crooked teeth from "In and Out" and "The Faculty," hits just the right 
notes as Tim Dunphy. From his early scenes as a clueless druggie to the 
latter portion of the film, when he begins the rough journey towards 
manhood, Hatosy subtly works expression and inflection to make his 
character ring true. 
Alec Baldwin gives one of the best performances of his career as Old Man 
Dunphy, an emotionally stunted man who buries his pain beneath a stream 
of "good-natured" wisecracks. Baldwin expertly shades his portrayal of 
the damaged father, using his eyes to show the love for his sons that 
lies beneath Dunphy's crude and rude exterior.      
The supporting players are also good, with the exception of Tim Crowe, 
who overacts as dorm-master Mr. Funderburk, making him nasty almost to 
the point of being cartoonish. 
Stylistically, Corrente proves adept at mixing the Farrelly-style comic 
bits with the dramatic text. He also nicely contrasts the Pawtucket and 
Cornwall settings, using a grainier film stock for the hometown scenes. 
Although the film is packed with '70s hits, Corrente wisely keeps the era 
in the background, maintaining an appropriate perspective on the retro-
kitsch. 
The Farrelly brother's name could hurt "Outside Providence" more than it 
helps it. Those expecting a barrage of "There's Something About Mary" 
style gross-out gags may feel let down, while those who would appreciate 
the bittersweet coming-of-age story may very well avoid the film because 
of the Farrelly trademark. Hopefully, in the sea of early September 
mediocrity, this funny, sad, sweet little film will find the audience it 
deserves.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films
 Director: Michael Corriente  
 Writer:   Michael Corriente, Peter Farrelly, Bobby Farrelly,
book by Peter Farrelly
 Cast: Alec Baldwin, Jon Abrahams, Jonathan Brandis,
Shawn Hatosy, Gabriel Mann, Seth William Meier, Kyle Pepi,
Ryan Pepi, Scott Rabideau, Amy Smart, George Wendt
   Of all the coming-of-age films released this year, the
premise of this one intrigued me the most.  I went to prep
school in the mid-fifties--not the sleepaway sort depicted in
"Outside Providence" but nonetheless one with a similar
setup--and could identify in at least one way with the 17-year-
old narrator.  Peter Ferrelly's novel, "Outside Providence,"
made into a screenplay by director Michael Corriente
and Ferrelly's brother Bobby, spotlights Tim Dunphy (Shawn
Hatosy), a lad from a working-class family who attends public
schools until he completes junior year in the shabby town of
Pawtucket RI, and is then sent against his will to a
prep school in a lovely area of Connecticut.  Like Tim, I was
from a similar background and somehow wound up in a
private Brooklyn high school situated just across from the
rolling hills of the country's busiest golf course.  And like Tim
I had to find a way of fitting in with my classmates, the large
majority of whom were from the upper middle class.  While
my folks owned a small, neighborhood, women's wear shop,
the guys in my class were the sons of corporate executives
who freely brought stock certificates to class as part of their
economics projects while I had only ladies' stockings to
exhibit from my folks' little business.
   Though in some ways the young hero of "Outside
Providence" had a more difficult time than I--his dad barely
knew what a college was, had only an inkling of the meaning
of prep school, and gambled on the kitchen card table rather
than on chips available on Wall Street--his 1970s Connecticut
school, Cornwall Academy, was quite a bit more democratic
than mine.  For ome, many appear to be from ethnic and
religious minorities.  More important, not a single one of
these comfortably-situated boys could in fairness be labeled a
snob, so that Tim was not a fish out of water after all.  When
he shows up the first day on campus with his faded jeans
jacket, an altogether preppie-looking Jack Wheeler (Gabriel
Mann) takes him aside and sets him up with the standard
uniform of blazer and tie before that initial auditorium
presentation. When the young woman of every guy's fantasy,
the intelligent, blond knockout Jane Weston (Amy Smart)
takes a liking to Tim, she may have felt that somehow this
working-class lad could be more fun than the more polished
twits in the school--just as Rose DeWitt Bukater must have
felt about Jack Dawson in James Cameron's movie "Titanic."  
   "Outside Providence" considers the adventures of Tim
Dunphy--in some ways a stand-in for both novelist Peter
Farrelly and co-writer Michael Corriente when they were
youngsters.  The boy grows up quite a bit in that year while
at the same time missing his less fortunate buddies back
home in Pawtucket.  In short, while he is moving on to
broader horizons, he's the sort that will never forget where he
came from. The movie opens on Tim (affectionately
nicknamed Dildo by his dad) and his pals, who like all other
kids during the seventies smoked, got high and got into some
trouble.  In one episode, Tim's pal Drugs Delaney (Jon
Abrahams) crashes his truck into a cop car.  All are booked
for possession of weed.  Through the judge's connections,
Tim is sent to a boarding school with the proviso that he will
avoid serving time if he graduates.  While his dad continues
to play cards with his own friends, who include George Wendt
in the all-too-brief role of Joey (who surprises the group with
an announcement all-too-honest for the time), Tim meets the
classy Jane Weston, who effectively challenges Tim to study
hard and makes the boy realize that "getting more beaver
than the Hoover Dam" is not the prime consideration when
you really like the girl.
   If you come to the film expecting a Farrelly idiot-piece like
"Dumb and Dumber" or a flat-out vulgar "There's Something
About Mary," you'll be pleasantly surprised to observe just
how sweet the Farrelly Brothers can be when they are
adapting a novel composed before "Mary" entered their
minds.  "Outside Providence" is a sweet, poignant, wholly
effective story that does not depend on a sit-coming joke-a-
minute format, but credibly exhibits the love that a gruff father
has for his son, a love that he would have considered
anything but macho to admit openly--until he engages in
some serious discussions with his newly-mature boy.  Alec
Baldwin plays against type as a rough, somewhat hoarse
blue-collar representative who scarcely knows what he has
missed in life as his thoughts rarely extended beyond his little
neighborhood in a decaying Rhode Island town.  As the film's
center, Shawn Hatosy ("The Faculty," "Anything But Here,"
"Inventing the Abbots") is convincing and ultimately moving
as a lad who finds true love, comes to terms with his father,
and manages to glide smoothly between two different worlds.  
   Coming of age movies are not an infrequent occurrence in
cinema these days.  The indie films at Sundance have been
pushing them for a while now.  But "Outside Providence" is
among the most sincere and touching entries in recent years.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Hard to market. That is what this movie is. Hard to market. I suppose that
is why Miramax was trying to sell it as a "Farrelly brothers comedy",
because it's a movie whose target audience is extremely hard to pinpoint. Is
it a teen comedy? Sort of. Is it a father-son drama? Sort of. Is it for kids
or for adults, funny or dramatic? Sort of. And I guess that's why Peter
Farrelly has come out and said that it's basically just a coming of age
story. And that's basically it. Not much more, and not much less.
PLOT:
A young boy from the wrong side of the tracks gets busted for drugs and is
sent to a prep school by his uneducated, vulgar, drunk of a father. While
away, he discovers new friends, a girlfriend and more pot. Oh yeah...and he
learns a few lessons too!
CRITIQUE:
I originally wondered why they had translated this movie into "Cannabis 101"
for the French posters around town here in Montreal, but I wonder no more.
Lots of pot smoking going on in here, people. That aside, this is a passable
teen comedy with little original inspiration, save for the over-the-top,
gruffy performance from Mr. Chesthair himself, Alec Baldwin. It basically
treads no new ground in respect to the genre that it inhibits
(coming-of-age), and made me curious as to how it ever got made in the first
place (Can anyone say "Farrelly brothers!"). Having said that, the movie
does contain some humorous sequences, one or two touching moments, and a lot
of scenes showing kids smoking drugs and drinking booze. I guess you should
see the movie if the general premise appeals to you, but overall, I would
say that it's a rental for sure.
Unfortunately, despite some of the comedic sequences actually coming through
in this film, the same cannot be said for its dramatic element. In fact,
there seemed to be no palpable tension or any real obstacles to overcome for
anyone in this movie. It just sort of floated along in front of my eyes, and
then suddenly disappeared, just as the credits popped up. The tete-a-tete
stuff vs the school supervisor was the least effective, since the man was
once more, composed of little less than one dimension, while the romance
with the girl was easy and unexciting at best. I guess that could actually
be said about the whole movie as well. Easy and unexciting. Nice enough for
a date movie, a few laughs, or a video rental, but little else. Hatosy
reminds me of a young Peter Berg. One thing is for sure: DO NOT go into this
movie expecting a "Farrelly Brothers comedy". It's a reincarnated
coming-of-age dramedy, and that's about it. Baldwin rocks!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Shawn Hatosy hails from the state of Maryland, where he was born in
1975, in a place called Fredrick. He made his motion picture debut in the
Jodie Foster-directed 1995 film HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS. He played the
"counter boy". You may also remember him as the student who ultimately had
the courage to stand up for his recently outed teacher Kevin Kline, in
1997's IN & OUT.
Director Michael Corrente was born in the town of Pawtucket, Rhode Island,
the same city in which this film takes place. In fact, most of the film was
shot in and around Rhode Island. Michael has also done some acting in his
career, and played "Scranton Wino" in the Farrelly Brothers hilarious 1996
movie KINGPIN (8.5/10). He did almost everything on his first picture called
FEDERAL HILL in 1995. He wrote, directed and starred in it.
The Farrelly brothers were also born in Rhode Island. Cumberland, RI, to be
exact. Peter Farrelly actually graduated from Providence College in
Providence, RI, and based this film on his semi-autobiographical novel of
the same name.
This film was released and translated into the title "CANNABIS 101" in the
province of Quebec, Canada.

Author
Steve Rhodes
If those crude bits of offensive language are all it takes to make you
laugh, you may find bits of Michael Corrente's OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE funny.
Most of this laughless comedy, written by the director and by THERE'S
SOMETHING ABOUT MARY's Peter and Bobby Farrelly, only sporadically even
attempts to be funny.  In the dead spots between the would-be jokes that
fall like stones, the story has a semi-serious set of sob stories.
As the obnoxious and clichéd father known as "Old Man Dunphy," Alec
Baldwin delivers a starkly abysmal performance.  A dad who calls his
older son "dildo" for unexplained reasons, he's not exactly warmly
loved.  His younger son is a "cripple," so you can guess how shamelessly
the movie will exploit the boy and his handicap.  Old Man Dunphy wants
you to feel sorry for him, and the story gives him such stereotypically
boorish behavior that there's no chance that you will.  "It ain't easy
being Ozzie, when you ain't got no Harriet," he whines.
His older son, Timothy Dunphy (Shawn Hatosy), is called Dunph by his
friends, who include a guy called Drugs and one called Mousy.  Dunph,
who is poor and not especially bright, lives with his father outside of
Providence, Rhode Island.  After he gets into trouble, he is sent off to
an expensive boarding school -- where the money comes from isn't
explained -- called "Cornwall Academy for Boys."  Girls are there too.
Don't ask; the movie never bothers to explain.
Leaving home is probably good for him even if the school has a forbidden
activities list that seems endless.  All of the rules are broken anyway.
At least away from home he can avoid his dad and his beer-drinking
buddies' poker games full of anti-Semitic, homophobic and generally
offensive language and behavior.  You'd want to leave home too, if you
had a dad like that.
Dunph is a high school senior who believes that Arizona is on the coast
-- at least after the Alamo.  You don't want to try to follow his logic.
Like most of the movie, it isn't worth your time.  In fact, if the
Farrelly brothers weren't associated with the movie, it would have
undoubtedly never been green-lighted for production.
Always on the outlook for redeeming features to pathetic movies, your
trusty critic found two this time.  Although Richard Crudo (AMERICAN
BUFFALO) films the interior scenes with a cheap-looking ugliness, the
outside sequences happen mainly in a gorgeous, New England autumn in
which the trees are bursting with their radiant fall colors.  And,
although there isn't a single laugh in the entire picture, the sign
"Three-Fingered Freddie's Fireworks" is worth a small grin.
OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE runs 1:42, but will feel much longer.  It is rated R
for drug usage, sexual references and language and would be acceptable
for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Tim Chandler
Directed by: Michael Corrente
Written by: Peter and Bobby Farrelly & Michael Corrente
Starring: Shawn Hatosy, Alec Baldwin, Amy Smart, George Wendt
Produced by: Michael Corrente, Peter and Bobby Farrelly, Randy Finch
A slacker from Pawtucket has to cope with being sent to a prep school by
his father.
    Outside Providence is a cross between Detroit Rock City and
countless fish-out-of-water films such as Crocodile Dundee. Peter
Farrelly, writer of There's Something About Mary and Dumb & Dumber, goes
for an intelligent, non-physical style of comedy here, but mars it with
misplaced, unneeded bits of drama. Many scenes make you laugh out loud,
occasionally even applaud, and with a better script and tighter
direction from Michael Corrente, Outside Providence could have been a
success.
    The story follows Tim Dunphy (Hatosy), "Dildo" to his blue-collar
father (Baldwin), as he is sent off to prep school in 1974. His slacker,
drugged-out friends (including one hilarious buddy named Drugs) are
sorry to see him go, but their lives really don't change much with his
departure. Once arrived at his new home, Tim manages to find a group of
students who enjoy the same pastimes as he does (drinking, smoking,
doing drugs etc.) and meets a love interest, Jane (Weston). He has many
misadventures, often involving getting in trouble with the dorm master.
Unfortunately, the Farrellys and director Corrente chose to add some
drama to their film, giving Tim a dead mother with a tragic past, a
girlfriend whose aspirations of going to Brown University become
uncertain, and a crippled younger brother.
    When the Farrellys go for laughs, they consistently hit their
target. They have perfectly caught the diction, attitude and humour
found in potheads from a small town. Tim and his friends spend every
night getting high and drunk, often with surprising results. Some of the
humour is typical of the gross-out humour permeating 1999 so far (a
student who has never done drugs before throws up on a classmate), but
the majority is intelligent and witty, concentrating on the lack of
schooling and vocabulary of the young men (one student declines a joint,
saying "no, I want to remember this moment, I want to saviour it.") The
awkwardness of youth  is expertly explored as well, with freshmen
getting "froshed" (vicious humiliating pranks played on them) and young
men mooning over the picture of their secret love.
    Director Michael Corrente needs to find his own vision for his
future endeavours. Outside Providence suffers from a bad case of
deja-vu. Whether it is the montage of romantic moments between Tim and
Jane that plays during a low period in their relationship, or Tim's
becoming a good student, numerous scenes are copies of past films. Even
the soundtrack of tunes that can be found in every film about the 70s is
familiar, with several songs having already appeared on a soundtrack in
1999 already. Alec Baldwin and his poker buddies are funny but unneeded.
Baldwin is particularly good at playing the ignorant blue-collar dad,
but unconvincing in his one dramatic scene. George Wendt gives the film
another familiar face, and a plot twist that has nothing to do with the
film. Shawn Hatosy and Amy Smart ably carry the film's major roles, with
Hatosy in particular doing a better job of being an unschooled 70s
stoner than any cast member from Detroit Rock City.
    Outside Providence will make you laugh quite a bit. It is unoriginal
and unnecessarily dramatic as well, but if you don't care about such
things, you will likely love this film. Everyone else will consider this
film an amusing distraction, but that's all.
email Tim Chandler at timbit@canada.com
or check out The Bottom Line at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
In Michael Corrente's "Outside Providence", the first image we see is
that of a boy on his bicycle.  Behind him, tied to his bike with a
rope, is a kid in a wheelchair, throwing newspapers to people's
houses. Tied to the wheelchair is a three-legged dog, limping for his
life.  We've seen this picture before, now haven't we? If "we" have
seen a film by Peter and Bobby Farrelly, then yes, we have.
But then again, the Farrelly brothers' three films("Dumb And Dumber",
"Kingpin" and "There's Something About Mary") all had something going
for them. A hilarious sense of humor and an aura of
unpredictabililty. "Outside Providence", which is based on the
"semi-autobiography" of Peter Farrelly, shares neither of these two
qualities, and doesn't have much to offer.
Peter Farrelly's alias in the film is Tim Dunphy(Shawn Hatosy), a
teenager who lives in 1970's Pawtucket, Rhode Island with his
wheelchair-bound little brother and his alcoholic, aggressive
father(Alec Baldwin), who refers to Tim as "Dildo". Tim lives a
somewhat bored existence in Pawtucket, where he spends his time going
to parties and getting high with his friends. However, when he
accidentally crashes into a parked police car, he is given no choice
but to spend his senior year at Cornwall Academy, a strict co-ed
private high school.
Tim makes a few new friends, and manages to break just about every
rule the school has. But it isn't until he meets Jane Weston(Amy
Smart), the best-looking and perhaps smartest girl in school, that he
begins let go and just try to have fun. And of course, through Jane,
Tim learns about real love, and starts to do better in school.
"Outside Providence" also relies on a small subplot which has Old Man
Dunphy(Alec Baldwin) and some of his buddies sitting around playing
cards. In one particular scene, a guy named Joey(George Wendt) admits
to being gay, and the guys kick him out of the house. This scene and
another awful subplot involving Tim's dead mother make up the dramatic
core of the film, which is not good news.
Not only is "Outside Providence" a story we seem to have seen before,
it is also a very poorly made film. It's predictable, corny, unfunny
and gratuitous. Why do I have a good feeling that the Farrelly
brothers were forced into adding a three-legged dog and a barfing
scene?  Maybe because I took a look at Miramax's marketing push behind
the movie.
The acting isn't very good either. Shawn Hatosy and Amy Smart are
one-dimensional as the leads, and even a "different" performance by
Alec Baldwin, who surprisingly takes a supporting role here, is only
marginally good. "Outside Providence", the book by Peter Farrelly, was
blasted by critics, so it doesn't surprise me that the Farrelly
brothers would be the ones adapting it for the screen.
Being a Farrelly Brothers movie, the movie obviously has some fun
scenes, but the film as a whole feels pointless, and without
direction, thanks in a large part to first-time director Michael
Corrente.  Miramax Films has made some very smart moves in the past
few years, and financing this piece of recycled trash was not one of
them.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com
this review is also featured at http://jump.to/moviepage 


Author
Jamey Hughton
While exiting the theater after a recent showing of Outside Providence,
I heard this remark from a fellow audience patron: `Well, it was no
There's Something About Mary... but I liked it.' Of course it's no
There's Something About Mary. Comparing this to Mary would be a mistake,
because where that film is filled with outrageous sight gags and various
bodily fluids, Outside Providence is sweet and genuinely funny. It may
be co-written by the Farrelly brothers, but this is an earlier effort
that reveals a softer side. At least, softer than their previous
directorial efforts (also including the gross-out comedies Dumb and
Dumber and Kingpin).
70's nostalgia seems to be popping up often at the cinema lately, with
Dick and then Detroit Rock City appearing amongst the late summer movie
crowd. This entry features Shawn Hatosy (who recently fought alien
administrators in The Faculty) as Tim Dunphy, a trouble-making pot head
from Rhode Island. Tim is always involved in wrong-doings with his
friends (well, what does it tell you when his best chum is named Drugs
Delaney??). On this occasion, he runs into a parked police car, most
likely due to his impaired vision from a vehicle full of billowing
smoke. His father (Alec Baldwin) finally draws the line, and sends him
to a prep school named Cornwall Academy. This is the type of place that
forbids everything that Tim usually takes part in, namely smoking and
drinking.
Outside Providence is the kind of movie that, while not achieving
anything groundbreaking, has you leaving the theater with a smile
plastered across your face. The main protagonist is easily likable, and
the material is reasonably well-written. Those expecting another
`outrageous' comedy in the tradition of Mary should perhaps tread
elsewhere - the down-to-earth realism in this film may leave them
slightly disappointed. But, that's not to say Outside Providence isn't
funny. There are some great comic moments, captured perfectly in time by
director Michael Corrente (American Buffalo) and the Farrelly's nicely
paced screenplay.
The performances are also impressive. Hatosy doesn't have to work hard
to achieve a certain charm, and Alec Baldwin is wonderful. Playing a
poker-faced widower who sits around in his underwear eating ice cream,
Baldwin is delightfully convincing, and without putting an unnecessary
spin on his character. He plays it straight, fitting the character
requirements nicely (he's also got an interesting nickname for his
son...). As his poker buddy, Cheers veteran George Wendt is solid, and
Amy Smart displays all the charisma and vibrance needed for an adequate
romantic interest.
There is some moralizing going on beneath it's core, but the film
handles everything surprisingly naturally. Certain important issues are
dealt with, including (but not limited to) the loss of Tim's mother and
a member of the poker group coming out of the closet. There is also
plenty of drug use going on, so much, that it almost drains the film's
real purpose. There is nothing special about Outside Providence, which
is what could be described as a change of pace `coming-of-age' story
from the notorious brothers' Farrelly (aka Bobby and Peter). But the
film is entirely enjoyable, and fully equipped with a toe-tappin' 70's
soundtrack that aids the atmosphere nicely.
And those yearning for more classic Farrelly moments (like the widely
popular `hair gel' sequence) still will have a few brief seconds of
redemption. But those most likely to enjoy Outside Providence should be
expecting an honest, well-acted dramedy - a movie with real characters
instead of cardboard cut-outs designed to draw laughs. Yes, it's no
There's Something About Mary. But it remains good-natured fun in it's
own right.
                    1999 SUMMER MOVIE ROUND-UP
 http://moviething.com/members/movies/movieviews/index137.shtml

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
        Don't expect another "There's Something About Mary," just
because this contemporary comedy is made by Peter and Bobby
Farrelly. Instead of gross silliness, there's gloppy sentiment, as
Shawn Hatosy portrays a pot-smoking slacker teen, circa 1974, in the
blue-collar town of Pawtucket, Rhode Island.  After a fender-bender
with a parked police car, he's packed off to a fancy Connecticut prep
school, Cornwall Academy, where he's outnumbered, outclassed, and
definitely out of place. But he gets little sympathy from his
beer-guzzling, loud-mouthed, deadbeat dad (Alec Baldwin) whose idea of
affection is to nickname the boy "Dildo." "It ain't easy being Ozzie
when you ain't got a Harriet," dad explains. Predictably - and
somewhat unimaginatively - Hatosy not only ends up with the prettiest
girl around (Amy Smart), protects his wheelchair-bound younger brother
(Tommy Bone), and takes revenge on a repressive dean. Directed and
co-written by Michael Corrente ("American Buffalo"), there are quirky
touches like a three-legged dog and some crude slapstick antics, but
there's nothing to make your hair stand on end about this prosaic
coming-of-age story set. Not surprising since the script was recycled
from long before the Farrelly brothers had hits like "Dumb and
Dumber." And the edgy comedy "Rushmore," released early this year,
covered the same territory far better. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Outside Providence" is a flimsy 5. It's bittersweet nostalgia
- wait for the video.

Author
Scott Renshaw
OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE
(Miramax)
Starring:  Shawn Hatosy, Amy Smart, Alec Baldwin
Screenplay:  Peter Farrelly, Bobby Farrelly and Michael Corrente, based on
the novel by Peter Farrelly.
Producers:  Peter Farrelly, Bobby Farrelly, Michael Corrente and Randy
Finch.
Director:  Michael Corrente.
MPAA Rating: R (profanity, drug use, adult themes)
Running Time:  99 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Miramax bows to no one when it comes to marketing films, but with
OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE, they've crossed the line.  They're touting the film as
"the new comedy from the guys who made THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY,"
which is deceptive for two reasons.  First, though Peter and Bobby
Farrelly contributed to the script (based on Peter's semi-autobiographical
novel), OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE was directed by Michael Corrente (FEDERAL
HILL).  Second, OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE is about as much like THERE'S SOMETHING
ABOUT MARY as THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY is like THE BIG CHILL.  A
raucous, outrageous Farrelly brothers comedy it is not, despite the
three-legged dog prominently displayed in all the ad copy.
     To cut Miramax some slack, I'm not sure what they should have done to
market this film.  It starts with a decent high-concept comic premise:
Circa 1974, Pawtucket, Rhode Island working class 17-year-old Tim "Dunph"
Dunphy (Shawn Hatosy) has a stoned encounter with a parked police car.
Dunph's concerned single father (Alec Baldwin) calls in a favor and sends
him away from his dead-end buddies to Cornwall Academy, a tony Connecticut
prep school.  There Dunph finds he fits in surprisingly well, finding a
different set of stoner pals and continuing to waste his high school years
away.  Then he meets Jane Watson (Amy Smart), an academically ambitious
girl whose influence begins to turn Dunph around.
     Every so often, OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE shows flashes of the twisted
sensibility the Farrelly brothers have come to represent.  Many of those
moments involve Dunph's wheelchair-bound brother (Tommy Bone), who slams
around the bed of a pickup truck and feigns a developmental handicap to
get into a pro football game.  There's also a funny scene in which
Cornwall's elderly dean (George Martin) reads a profane stream-of-addled-
consciousness letter from Dunph's best friend Drugs (John Abrahams), and a
stupid human trick with a strand of spaghetti better seen than described.
Such moments are rare, however, generally taking a back seat to romantic
montages, gruff family bonding, and more dope-filled scenes than we've
seen since the glory days of Cheech & Chong.
     It's not the fault of Corrente or the Farrellys that Miramax is
promising something OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE isn't.  It is their fault that it's
hard to enjoy what OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE is.  This episodic coming-of-age
tale has no focus, no rhythm, and no strong sense of its characters.
Dunph's interchangeable Pawtucket pals simply occupy space, never even
coming to life when they interact with Dunph's upper-crust schoolmates.
Most of the scenes at Cornwall are strangely inert, rarely exploiting the
fish-out-of-water concept of a blue collar amidst starched collars except
for a single lame prank.  By the time OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE staggers through
a few more out-of-nowhere sub-plots -- including revelations about Dunph's
late mother and a betrayal by a Cornwall crony (Gabriel Mann, Young James
Spader Lookalike Contest finalist) -- Dunph's gradual acceptance of
responsibility is lost.  The filmmakers' wandering attention span suggests
they were catching plenty of second-hand smoke from their cast.
     OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE does have a certain gritty appeal as an off-beat
family dramedy.  Hatosy's performance is solid, as is Baldwin's atypical
work as an unconventional father.  Corrente knows the streets of
Providence, and he creates that world effectively with cinematographer
Richard Crudo.  It's just a film that's always casting around for its
center, offering sporadic entertainment that doesn't stick to you.  It's
not quite funny enough for a comedy, not quite insightful enough for a
story of adolescent awakening, and not quite emotional enough for a story 
of family ties.  That's a hard sell for any marketing department, enough
to send you fishing for comparisons to a movie that exists in an entirely
different universe.

Author
Greg King
OUTSIDE PROVIDENCE (M).  
(Miramax/Village Roadshow)
Director: Michael Corrente
Stars: Shawn Hatosy, Alec Bladwin, Amy Smart, Tommy Bone, Jonathan 
Brandis, Jon Abrahams, Adam 
La Vorgna, Gabriel Mann, Jack Ferver, Jesse Leach, Kristen Shorten, Alex 
Toma, George Wendt, Tim 
Crowe, George Martin, Richard Jenkins, Mike Cerrone, Robert Turano.
Set in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, in 1974, Outside Providence is
a sensitive but largely uninspiring coming of age tale about a teenage
slacker from the wrong side of the tracks who eventually finds wisdom.
Somewhat surprisingly, this sensitive coming of age tale comes from
Bobby and Peter Farrelly, the film making siblings better known for
their deliberately dumb and low brow sense of humour that shaped the
clever and hilarious There's Something About Mary and Dumb And Dumber.
Outside Providence centres around 17 year old Tim Dunphy
(Shawn Hatosy, recently seen in The Faculty, etc), affectionately
known as "Dildo" by his gruff, embittered, widowed working class
father (Alec Baldwin).  Tim protects his wheelchair-bound younger
brother Jackie (Tommy Bone), and hangs out with his slacker mates
(including an almost unrecognisable Jonathan Brandis, best known for
his role in SeaQuest).  His father plays cards and drinks beers with
his close mates, while they discuss such world shattering events as
Watergate and whether or not Rock Hudson is gay.
Following a minor traffic accident in which he rear ends a
police car while driving without a licence and engulfed in a fugue of
drug smoke, Tim is promptly packed off to Cornwall, an exclusive
preparatory academy.  A misfit and a rebel, he struggles against the
strict rules and regulations of the college, and clashes with his
humourless dormitory head.  Much of the film also focuses on his
developing relationship with the beautiful Jane (Amy Smart, from
Varsity Blues, etc), who attends the nearby girl's school.
  Outside Providence is based on Peter Farrelly's own
semi-autobiographical novel, although the material lacks anything of
real substance or interest to say.  The brothers put their
predilection for crass toilet humour and hilarious sight gags on hold,
for the duration.  They have handed over directorial chores to
co-writer Michael Corrente (American Buffalo, etc), who brings a touch
of restraint and sensitivity to the material.  Lacking eye catching
gags about zippers, hair gel, flatulence and dead dogs, Outside
Providence is a rather straightforward and bland tale that ultimately
lacks broad appeal.  It's difficult to feel any sense of empathy
towards the characters and their exploits.
The performances from the young, largely unknown cast are
solid.  Hatosy makes the most of his role as the likeable rogue, but
he occasionally struggles with the uninteresting material.  Cast
largely against type, Baldwin delivers a restrained but insightful and
sensitive performance as Tim's gruff but ultimately understanding
father, and he brings more complexity to the role than was originally
on paper.
Outside Providence is strongly reminiscent of Richard
Linklater's 1993 slacker generation comedy Dazed And Confused,
although it lacks the same wicked, anarchic edge.  The film also lacks
anything of real substance or interest to say.  Director Corrente
fails to imbue this disappointing blend of comedy and drama with any
real sense of nostalgia, apart from the superb soundtrack of early
'70's hits that will strike a chord with audiences old enough to
remember those halcyon days.  

Author
Bob Bloom
 Outside Providence (1999) 2 stars out of 4. Stars Shawn Hatosy, Alec
Baldwin and Amy Smart. Written by Peter and Bobby Farrelly and Michael
Corrente. Directed by Corrente
 Now that the Farrelly brothers, Peter and Bobby, have said something about
Mary, they are taking a semi-sentimental turn and tackling father-son
relationships and the maturing process of '70s teen-agers.
 "Outside Providence," based on a novel by Peter Farrelly, is the story of
Timothy Dunphy (Shawn Hatosy), a blue-collar kid from Pawtucket, R.I., who
is on the fast track to nowhere.
 He spends most of his time drinking and smoking pot with his friends. He
has no plans for his future and just lives from one toke to the next.
 But after an accident in which Timothy rams into a parked police cruiser,
his gruff, tough-talking dad (Alec Baldwin) ships him off to a tony prep
school in the hopes that Tim will straighten out his life.
 Instead, Tim finds himself over his head and out of his league socially
and academically.
 It's not until he meets Jane (Amy Smart) that he decides to actually begin
taking school seriously and concentrate on graduating.
 "Outside Providence" is not a side-splitting comedy. It's an uneasy
mixture of sentiment and humor, but the two never seem to mesh.
 Some scenes go nowhere, just stopping, as if the camera ran out of film.
 The film does not seem to have a main focus, switching from subplot to
subplot, while allowing other minor story points to merely disappear.
 For example, Tim's nerdy roommate, Irving, talks a lot about a girl he met
at summer camp who later dumped him. Two scenes between Tim and Irving
revolve around this girl. We even see her picture, as Tim encourages Irving
to call her and try to patch things up.
 But there is no payoff. The entire matter is dropped, and we never know
the outcome.
 The reason for other situations are never fully explained. The animosity,
for example, borne by Mr. Funderburk (Tim Crowe), a school official,
against Tim is never made clear. He seems to be simply a villainous device
to give the movie a protagonist.
 "Outside Providence" has some very good sequences. The scenes between Tim
and his dad ring true. The old man continually rides his son, but not out
of any spite. It is his way of showing affection, of trying to keep Tim on
the right path.
 Hatosy as Tim can't seem to get a grip on his character. Is he just a
slacker, or does he harbor some ambition? He changes depending on the whims
of the script, thus his character seems unfocused and lost.
 The movie suffers from a split personality. It can't decide if it should
be an outright comedy to attract the Mary fans, or a sentimental,
coming-of-age vignette to appease an older audience.
 It tries for both and only partially succeeds, which is too bad. For
buried somewhere in the screenplay by the Farrellys and director Michael
Corrente is the gem of a good movie.
 It is just too bad they did not dig deeper to unearth it.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
