Title
Review for Tao of Steve, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Michael Redman
Human mating rituals have to be the most fascinating aspect of existence.
There is no other activity man (or woman) kind spends so much energy
planning and agonizing over and no other one that makes us look so
ridiculous. "America's Funniest Home Videos" has nothing on 3:00 am at the
local bars.
Dex (Donal Logue) has it all figured out. He's an overweight slacker who
dresses funny; has never had a good hair day; spends his days smoking
American Spirits, drinking beer and playing frisbee golf and was born to bed
the babes. He's the guy who for no apparent reason is inexplicably
irresistible to the fairer sex.
Our pudgy lothario's secret is a mixture of self-serving eastern philosophy
("Be desireless: if you don't want to get laid, you _will_ get laid") and
the "Tao Of Steve" (McGarrett, Austin and McQueen). Within moments of the
film's beginning, he has had his way with a friend's wife in the library
stacks and convinced a young college woman that the true path to
enlightenment lies in his bed.
But, and as Peewee Herman says, "We all have big buts," it all comes to a
screeching halt when he falls for Syd (Greer Goodman) who is impervious to
his charms.
The turning point in the film comes when they discuss Kierkegaard's opinion
of "Don Giovanni" who slept with hundreds of women because he was afraid
that not one would actually love him. Dex's feigned detachment works with
the hundreds, but he has to search for something deeper for the one.
A witty and occasionally hilarious small film, Jenniphr Goodman's debut
directoral outing is a prize. The Sundance favorite isn't perfect: Dex's
scenes with his roommates and poker buddies border on the tedious. But the
screen time with him and Syd is charming and the mismatched lovers ooze with chemistry.
[Michael Redman has written film reviews in town for an exceptionally long
time and has to admit to some suspicions when his editor asked him to write
about a guy in weird clothes with unruly hair and his attitudes towards
women. Email clues to redman@bluemarble.net.]
[The appeared in the 10/19/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]

Author
Laura Clifford
"Eliminate desire. Be excellent. Retreat."  This is the Zen formula developed 
by Dex (Donal Logue), an overweight Lothario, on how to get a woman into bed. 
Dex has lived by these words since high school and they have never failed him. 
That is, until now, in "The Tao of Steve."
In high school, Dex was the BMOC and had no problem scoring with the chicks. He
was slender and charming and could bed any woman he set his sights on. Now, ten
years later, our hero is 100 pounds heavier, but still has the charismatic
charm to sweep a woman off her feet and get her in the sack. While attending 
his school's 10th reunion, he meets a pretty young lady, Syd (Greer Goodman) 
and Dex uses his tried and true Tao of Steve (as in Steve McQueen, the ultimate 
icon of cool) to make time with her. But, he forgot one very important thing - 
Syd was one of his conquests a decade ago and he doesn't remember her at all.
"The Tao of Steve" is a clever little flick that starts off strong, but peters
out as it gets to its romantic locus. When we first meet the portly Dex, he's
in the middle of a sexual encounter with a friend's wife. Satisfied, but not
sated, Dex hits on the young bartender at the reunion, using his wit and 
knowledge of philosophy, metaphorically at least, to charm her pants off. 
That's when he notices Syd and tries his patented maneuvers on her, not 
realizing he *knows* her already. This begins a battle of the sexes that will 
pit Dex and his successful philosophy against the savvy, not easily impressed 
Syd.
The best of "The Tao of Steve" takes place in the film's first half. As Dex
spouts his combination of Zen Buddhism, Judeo-Christianity, Islam, Hindu, and
every other religion, faith and philosophy, he forms the basis of the Tao of
Steve. Basically, the Tao is built around getting laid. The trick is, for a
guy, to not make it seem like sex is the ultimate goal. The 'Steve' of the 
title refers not only to McQueen, but also Steve McGarrett ("Hawaii Five-O"), 
Steve Austin ("Six Million Dollar Man") and some notable non-Steves like James 
Bond, Michael Jordan and Spiderman. The name 'Steve' is not a requisite to get 
on the list, but being totally cool is. The ultimate description of the cool 
American male, according to Dex, is: he never tries to impress the women, but 
always gets the girl.
Dex's Zen-like philosophy is nicely coupled with the screen presence of Donal
Logue. Dex may be really fat, but he has so much inherent charm, people
overlook his obvious flaws. He delivers his line of blarney with the best of 
them and has no problem using his God-given talent for blather to bed any and 
all women he meets. Running in parallel with the romance that builds between 
Syd and Dex is the sidebar that has the portly Casanova acting as the sensei 
of sexual conquest for his goofy friend and roommate Dave (Kimo Willis). Dex 
gives his Yoda-like advice to his malleable novice with a patience that is 
never condescending and always funny.
Part two of the flick brings Dex's interest in Syd to the surface, as he uses
his sexual wiles and Tao to seduce the reluctant young woman. Syd counters his
moves like a Tai Chi master with her passive resistance to his ploys. His
failures only encourage Dex to cast aside his longtime philosophies and he does
all the things that the Tao warns against in matters of love. The
conventionality of the love story - boy meets girl, boy loses girl, boy gets
girl - is in direct conflict with the witty totally guy humor of Dex's
philosophical views on life and love. The guy stuff is funny, dead on accurate
and, with the Tao of Steve, an interesting twist on the mating ritual. The love
story is less satisfying.
First-time helmer Jenniphr, along with co-scripters Greer Goodman and Duncan
North (from his original material), craft an amusing story that showcases Logue
in what could be a star making turn. His likable presence, combined with the
pithy Tao of Steve (which provides the bulk of the fun for the film), makes the
film a pleasant little 90 minutes. It isn't enough to sustain the film, though,
as it ends in a routine love story.
The writing does contain a decent variety of original humor that helps a lot,
at least in the first half. One scene, during the reunion, has Dex meeting an 
old classmate, who has since gone into the priesthood, in the men's room. As 
the cleric settles down to do his business in one of the stalls, Dex starts
questioning the man, from the adjoining stall,  about moral philosophy and sex
like a penitent talking to his confessor. The rapid talking Dex doesn't even
realize that he's intruding on the guy's private moment.
Newcomer Greer Gordon is OK as the object of Dex's lust, but she is hard
pressed to equal the animated and rapid-chatter perf of Logue. Kimo Willis is 
quite likable as the wide-eyed innocent being educated in the rules of l'amour 
by Dex, his muse. The rest of the cast is only there to flesh out the 
background.
Tech credits are low-key, but get the job done.
I give "The Tao of Steve" a philosophical C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"You've got so many great books," remarks Julie (Dana Goodman), a woman 
Dex (Donal Logue) has just met.  "All the better to seduce you with," 
replies the rotund but irresistible Dex.  "What?" asks Julie.  "All the 
better to deduce the truth with," he claims.
In the easiest film to enjoy this summer, Jenniphr Goodman's 
good-spirited THE TAO OF STEVE tells the story of a lovable philosopher 
who attracts women like honey even if he's way too big for his own good.  
The versatile Donal Logue (THE PATRIOT), who seems to show up in a 
supporting role in most movies lately, gets a rare starring role this 
time and makes the most of it.  Oozing charm from every pore, the sweet 
Dex is a chatterbox philosopher with a purpose -- picking up chicks.  
Dex quotes many philosophers, but his allegiance is to the Tao of Steve.  
("Steve isn't just a name, it's a state of mind. It's a way of living," 
we're told.)  You know, the famous Steves of history, including Steve 
McGarrett ("Hawaii Five-O"), Steve Austin ("The Six Million Dollar Man") 
and, most of all, Steve McQueen.  Being a Steve myself, I, of course, 
know these things, but I'll explain them to you in case you don't.  The 
fundamental principle in this philosophy is, "We pursue that which 
retreats from us."  This means, Dex explains to his friend Dave (Kimo 
Wills), that the way to get laid is to put it furthest from your mind 
when on a date.
The problem is that the first woman Dex really falls hard for, Syd, 
appears completely immune to his techniques.  Syd, one of the most 
genuine characters you're likely to see in the cinema, is played by 
Greer Goodman with the organic good looks of someone you might meet at a 
health food store.  She has a philosophy too -- "Just say no to nudity." 
-- that meshes exactly with Dex's, who is embarrassed by his body's 
superfluous 100 pounds, which he jokes is more like 200 extra.
Generally, however, Dex and Syd's chemistry together is great, albeit 
generally negative.  When Syd finds out that he's been seeing another 
woman while unsuccessfully pursuing her, she is upset.  "Am I supposed 
to remain celibate while I bask in the warm glow of your annihilating 
contempt?" he asks tartly.  The bright script by Greer Goodman, Jenniphr 
Goodman and Duncan North literally bursts with such gems.     
Dex has a glib response for every question, which drives Syd crazy.  
"What do you look for in a woman," Syd asks Dex seriously.  "Low 
standards," he snaps back.
Syd, who way back in their college days knew Dex in the biblical sense, 
can't understand why the smartest kid in class ended up so poorly.  With 
no ambition, little money, and a part-time job as a fun-loving 
kindergarten teacher, he is completely at peace with his complete lack 
of what goes for success.  "Doing stuff is overrated," Dex tells Syd, 
and then goes on to point out how much better the world would be if 
Hitler had been more laid-back.
To be fair, Dex has thoughts on more subjects than sexual pursuits.  He 
complains, for example, that people only talk to God when they want 
something.  Why, he asks Syd, don't people ask him, "Hey, God.  How was 
your day?"
The formulaic plot ends up exactly in the satisfying way that you would 
expect, but you'd be disappointed if it didn't.  One of the funniest 
parts of the movie may be missed by moviegoers who have never gone back 
to one of their school's reunions.  At Dex's class's 10th, which opens 
the movie, he is the only one who has gained weight.  The rest of the 
group are so trim that they could all be aerobics instructors.  Real 
reunions are celebrations of fat over fitness.  Anyone who hasn't gained 
weight stands out like a sore thumb.  Trust me.  I know.  I came back a 
100 pounds lighter.  My ex-schoolmates looked at me like they figured 
that I had contracted an emaciating and soon-to-be-fatal disease.
THE TAO OF STEVE runs a fast 1:28.  It is rated R for language and some 
drug use and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
For starters, there isn't a character named Steve in The Tao of Steve.
The title refers to a less-than-spiritual way of trying to bed women who
wouldn't ordinarily give a guy the time of day.  The titular Steve isn't
one particular Steve, but rather a blend of cool Steves (like McQueen
and Austinbut definitely not Guttenburg).  Armed with a simple phrase
(`We pursue that which retreats from us'), the Tao's followers pride
themselves on their ability to score by simply acting uninterested in
scoring.
After a clever opening, where a book titled `The Tao of Steve' is shown
on a bookshelf beside Plato, Aquinas and Dante, we meet Dex (Donal
Logue, The Patriot), a chain-smoking, part-time kindergarten teacher who
rides a motorcycle like Steve McQueen in The Great Escape.  Dex is fat
like the Buddah which rests on the headboard of his bed and, between
breakfast bong hits, the fast-talking philosophizer maintains an affair
with his friend's wife.
Despite these qualities (or lack thereof), Dex is still able to
sweet-talk the ladies, as evidenced by his ten-year college reunion,
where he chats up a former classmate named Syd (Greer Goodman) and goes
home with a nubile student bartender (Dana Goodman).  But Dex can't seem
to shake the image of Syd, who is in town temporarily working as a set
designer for a Santa Fe opera production.   Before long, Dex is hanging
around Syd more and more, and the two even begin to carpool after his
motorcycle breaks down.
If you haven't figured out the plot yet, you may be a stroke victim.
Dex is a modern-day Don Giovanni who sleeps with thousands of women
because he's afraid he'll never find true love.  When he finds it in
Syd, Dex is forced to abandon his own beliefs and attitude toward the
opposite sex, turning himself into the lovesick loser that he used to
openly mock.
Steve is garnering heaps of critical praise, but that shouldn't be a
surprise to anyone.  Most film critics are lazy, self-centered
egomaniacs who aren't exactly beating off women with sticks (myself
included), so the idea of a slovenly know-it-all who can score with
chicks by not trying plays like the feel good film of the year (you can
use the same rationale to explain American Beauty's critical success
last year).  Logue, who won a Special Jury Award at this year's Sundance
Film Festival, is fantastic as Dex, but I sure hope he used a fake tummy
for his performance.
Visually, Steve features bright, vivid colors in the beautifully shot
(by Teodoro Maniaci, Smoke) interior and exterior Santa Fe scenes.  The
sky is always a perfect blue, and the sunsets are always amazing.  If
Steve were a bigger film, I'd almost expect Santa Fe's population to
double in the next year.  It looks that incredible.  If Steve's beauty
doesn't sell you on Santa Fe, maybe All the Pretty Horses will.  The
Billy Bob Thornton film, which was also shot in the New Mexico city,
will hit theatres at the end of this year.
Steve is the directorial debut of Jenniphr Goodman, who co-wrote the
screenplay with her sister Greer (the one who plays Syd) and Duncan
North.  If you look closely at the closing credits, they suggest the
film is based on North's life.  The film is well directed for a
first-timer, and the script is full of witty, intellectual banter that
made me wonder if people really talk like this.  At times, the
characters sound like they just stepped off the set of Dawson's Creek.
1:28 - R for adult language and drug use

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE TAO OF STEVE
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Donal Logue, Greer Goodman, Kimo Wills, Ayelet Kaznelson, David
Aaron Baker.
Screenplay:  Greer Goodman, Jenniphr Goodman and Duncan North.
Producer:  Anthony Bregman.
Director:  Jenniphr Goodman.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, drug use, adult themes)
Running Time:  88 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Yes, it's another independent film about hyperarticulate-yet-
underemployed guys in need of a lot of growing up. It's also a fairly 
funny one, following the adventures of a philosophically inclined slacker
named Dex (Donal Logue). Though he was a brilliant student in college, ten
years later Dex is overweight, often stoned, a part-time worker at a day
care center and still living in a communal house with his male pals. That
doesn't prevent him from having plenty of success at sexual conquest, a
phenomenon he attributes to his adherence to "The Tao of Steve," based on
archetypal male behavior with the opposite sex. But his philosophy is
challenged by the reappearance of an old college acquaintance named Syd
(Greer Goodman), who throws a wrench into Dex's usually simple approach to
life.
     Co-writer/director Jenniphr Goodman (sister of co-star/co-writer
Greer) does exactly what one has to do to keep the "overgrown adolescent
finds love" story fresh. First, she gets good performances out of her
actors, particularly Logue, who imbues Dex with a strange shambling
charisma. Second, she creates sparks between her two romantic leads with
appealing situations like the hike and camping trip that shows Dex to be
truly at two with nature. Finally, she crafts sharp dialogue to wrap
around the provocative central philosophy devised by co-writer Duncan
North. It's the sort of thing that could be as talked about as WHEN HARRY
MET SALLY's infamous "men and women can't be friends" notion, positing
that the surest way to a woman's heart is to treat her with indifference. 
First dates beware: This may get you into deeper discussion than you'd
like.
     The result is a love story that's as smart and entertaining as it
is utterly predictable and instantly forgettable. It's fun watching
Logue's Dex play mentor to a romantically inept young acquaintance (Kimo
Wills), but it's clear virtually from the outset that the entire purpose
of the narrative is to humble Dex. That humbling occurs during a climax
that takes contrived to a new level, a genuinely clumsly conclusion to an
otherwise generally satisfying story. It's testimony to the effectiveness
of THE TAO OF STEVE's punch lines -- instantly quote-worthy though they're
not -- that the film  overcomes its erratic pacing and limp climax. And it
probably helps to be an alum of the School of Hyperarticulate-Yet-
Underemployed Guys to appreciate the minor charms of a film that's equally
comfortable tossing off references to Kierkegaard and "The Bugaloos."

Author
Jerry Saravia
Romantic comedies continue to multiply in Hollywood and the independent scene (the last couple of good ones I can recall on an independent scale are "Chasing Amy" and "The Brothers McMullen".) "The Tao of Steve" is a harmless time filler, likely to provoke some light laughs on a rainy Saturday afternoon. Its major selling point is the casting of the sweet Donal Logue at its center. 
Logue does not play Steve, in fact the title is a philosophy carried around by Dex. Logue plays Dex, a sweet, likable slacker with a prominent gut who has his own agenda on how to seduce women. No, it is not seduce and destroy, but rather do not let on you are seducing, then let them go after you have sex. First rule is to eliminate your desire. Second rule is to be excellent at something in their presence (camping is not an option). Third rule is to withdraw. This philosophy, known as the Tao of Steve, is based on the ancient Chinese philosopher Lao-tzu whom Dex reads avidly. The name "Steve" is used because it is the coolest name, and its claim to fame is from the coolest of all movie stars, Steve McQueen. The least coolest name is Stu (ironically the name of the coolest character in "Scream" but that is a moot point). 
The film begins at a ten-year college reunion where Dex was once known as Elvis, hence the most popular of all the students. He chuckles as he mentions that now he is a fat Elvis. At the reunion, he meets Syd (Greer Goodman), a set designer for the Santa Fe Opera, whom Dex has literally forgotten about, including their own tryst years ago. Most uncool for Dex and so anti-Steve. Dex naturally falls in love with Syd, and does not eliminate the desire - he makes it plainly known, even telling her he is falling in love with her. 
"The Tao of Steve" has some measured moments of truth about Dex's nature and about relationships in general, but it peters out to a hasty resolution that seems false and predictable. Let's just say that it is the kind of ending more attributed to Hollywood than an independent film of this kind. There are also frequent pop-culture references to "Hawaii Five-O," "Six-Million Dollar Man" and other TV shows of yesteryear, complete with music from said shows. It all feels contrived and unnecessary, simply marking time. And the cinematography is a little too muddy for my tastes considering the beautiful location - Santa Fe, New Mexico may be a bit overcast at times but it is ripe for high contrasts in filmmaking. 
Still, there is a genial warmth to the film thanks to Donal Logue (who won the Special Jury Prize Award for Best Actor at Sundance). He could be a mean-spirited, viciously verbal macho male yet, as written by director Jenniphr Goodman and co-writers Greer Goodman and Duncan North, the screenplay opts for gentler tones of body language and a sensitivity in Dex that makes him instantly likable. He is so damn sweet that it becomes infectious - how can a woman resist the temptations of a philosophical male who speaks of lust as a primary way of living? So what if he works part-time and smokes marijuana daily for breakfast!
"The Tao of Steve" is not a total success because it travels on safer terrain rather than truly exploring what motivates someone like Dex. He is the kind of guy that can surprise you, lead you to think he's less clever than he looks. The film's homespun philosophy is that love rules the day over lust, and a lover like Don Giovanni would eventually come to realize this. I feel Dex is a unique enough character that he would only make you think he has realized this. Sometimes those who see the error of their ways contine making the same errors. 
Footnote: The opening sequence of "The Tao of Steve" is set at a supposedly four-year college where a ten-year reunion is taking place. Actually, it is Santa Fe Community College, a two-year school that would not likely have a reunion. The setting looks familiar enough since I attended that very same school for two-and-a-half years! 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Robert Marley
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Marley.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/4d264cdb1503bdbc8825690f0078dfe7?OpenDocument
The Tao of Steve
A film review by Robert Marley- Copyright Š 2000 filmcritic.com
The word "Tao" has many meanings, one of which is, "The art or skill of
doing something in harmony with the essential nature of the thing."
The Tao of Steve is a story is about a guy named Dex (Donal Logue), an
unlikely hero living in Santa Fe who has grafted this ancient Chinese
philosophy with the super-cool personalities of guys like Steve McQueen,
Steve McGarret, and Steve Austin (though not "Stone Cold"). This
mutation of philosophies has become a foolproof theory on dating that
Dex and his buddies refer to as "The Tao of Steve". In other words, it's
the art of scoring with women while being in harmony with the essential
nature of all things cool.
Back in his college days, Dex was the big man on campus. The consummate
"player," his conquests in the realm of the opposite sex were the stuff
of legends - at least back then. But ten years and about a hundred
pounds later, Dex has become sort of the inside joke at his college
reunion. While trying to pick up a young bartender at the reunion, he
spots a woman named Syd (Greer Goodman) - a motorcycle-riding beauty who
seems immune to Dex's magical powers of the Tao. Through a series of
circumstances, Syd and Dex are thrown together, and he soon finds
himself questioning his belief in all things Steve, even as he continues
to be the ultimate Steve guru.
Donal Logue, best known as the "naughty vampire god" sidekick in the
movie Blade, received the Special Jury Award at the 2000 Sundance Film
Festival for his performance as this once-legendary, now-pathetic
Casanova. His portrayal -- based loosely on the personality of co-writer
Duncan North -- was funny, believable and very well-done. The film is
filled with a cast of first-timers and Greer Goodman -- also making her
film debut -- does a good job of both co-writing and acting in this fun
little romantic comedy. Shooting in New Mexico didn't hurt this picture
either, and the locations used are impressive and filled with color,
which help to create a sense of liveliness within the film.
The Tao of Steve is a funny, insightful little romp through a philosophy
that most people can associate with, eventually settling into a basic
love story. And while Jenniphr Goodman's (not a typo) direction is
pretty basic, it doesn't distract from this being a very entertaining
movie. God bless the independent filmmaker who is free to make a film
not based around demographics or seasonal box office appeal, but on the
value of the story being told. This is the way cinema was intended.
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html"> 
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Bob Bloom
The Tao of Steve (2000) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Donal Logue, Greer
Goodman, Kimo Wills, Ayelet Kaznelson, David Aaron Baker and Nina
Jaroslaw. Written by Duncan North with Grerr Goodman and Jenniphr
Goodman. Dirrected by Jenniphr Goodman.
 "The Tao of Steve "is a different type of romantic comedy in as much as
its protagonist is a character for whom you have very little respect and
whom - at least at the outset - I considered an immature, selfish,
perpetual adolescent.
 We first meet Dex (Donal Logue) at his 10-year college reunion. Once
big man on campus, Dex is now almost as large as a college campus. He
teaches kindergarten, is single and lives by a philosophy that is a
conglomeration of Eastern practices and self-created b.s.
 Basically, Dex's philosophy is this: Be cool and indifferent around
women, don't chase them, let them chase you. Women love to be the
hunters. You will get more women into bed if you be the prey and let
them be the pursuer.
 This is Dex's mantra. And it seems to work for the overweight,
out-of-shape, pot smoking, underachiever.
He is in the midst of an affair with Beth (Ayelet Kaznelson), the wife
of one of his closest friends, and he seems to have bedded half the
women in Santa Fe.
 Then he meets up with Syd (Greer Goodman), a gorgeous young woman who
rides motorcycles and designs sets for the Santa Fe opera. Dex is
smitten, but fights valiantly to maintain his credo.
 Yet at the same time Dex is falling in love with Syd, she appears
unimpressed by his charms. Later, we learn she has good reason for her
disdain.
 In a sense, "The Tao of Steve," written by Duncan North with Greer
Goodman and Jenniphr Goodman, though based on North's life, is actually
a feminist fantasy in which the love of a good woman rehabilitates an
otherwise unredeemable semi-slacker.
 However, the method in which the trio of screenwriters attain their
goal is intriguing to watch.
 Dex's journey to a new understanding is interesting to observe. We see
his doubts, his defense mechanism and his final acceptance of the truth.
 Logue has a very expressive face. It's part smirk, part hurt puppy with
a bit of false bravado tossed in for good measure. In public he feigns a
non-interest in Syd that is meant to keep her off balance. In private,
he pines for her.
 Greer Goodman's Syd could undo any red-blooded man's mantra. She is
lovely, intelligent, self-sufficient; not afraid to speak her mind. She
uses wisecracks to cover the hurt Dex unknowingly caused years before
and, like Dex, she feigns an indifference on the subject of the pair
committing to a meaningful relationship.
 Yet Syd is a vulnerable and caring woman, who cannot explain - even to
herself - her growing attraction to and affection for Dex.
 "The Tao of Steve" is one of those independent movies that is a
90-minute character study. There is a lot of dialogue - much of it
witty, especially a poker-game sequence where Dex and his cronies
explain the coolness of Steves, i.e., McQueen, McGarrett (Hawaii 5-0)
and Austin (The Six Million Dollar Man).
 Articulate and interesting movies such as this are rare. So, take a
chance. You may surprise yourself - and, guys, you may even see
something of yourself in "The Tao of Steve."
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
  Reviews by Bloom can be found on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE TAO OF STEVE (2000) ** Directed by Jenniphr Goodman. Written by 
Duncan North, Greer Goodman and Jenniphr Goodman. Photography, 
Teodoro Maniaci. Editing, Sarah Gartner. Production design,  Rosario 
Provenza. Music, Joe Delia. Produced by Anthony Bregman. Cast:  Donal 
Logue (Dex), Greer Goodman (Syd), Kimo Wills (Dave), Ayelet Kaznelson 
(Beth), David Aaron Baker (Rick), Nina Jaroslaw (Maggie), et al. A 
Sony Pictures Classics release. 87 minutes.  R. (language, pot, 
content), At the New Art Theatre.
Last night I saw on cable the 1949 "The Lady Takes a Sailor" directed 
by the often great Michael Curtiz  ("Captain Blood, "The Sea Wolf," 
"Santa Fe Trail,"'Yankee Doodle Dandy," "This is the Army," 
""Casablanca," "Mildred Pierce." etc.)  "Lady Takes a Sailor" is a 
pretty bad screwball comedy with Jane Wyman and Dennis Morgan, yet I 
enjoyed its unpretentious nonsense. I enjoyed less  "The Tao of 
Steve." which ambitions to be both funny and "profound." But don't 
take my word for this, as the movie does have a following, beginning 
with its premiere at Sundance.
Its first-time director's first name is Jenniphr (sic). (It's a small 
shock, but less so that a lady I saw whose name, I swear, was 
Latrina).  After her 1994 graduation from the NYU film school, Ms. 
Goodman (born in Santa Fe) moved back to New Mexico with her spouse. 
For two years they shared a house with old friend Duncan North, a 
kindergarten teacher who was overweight and an amazing lady-killer. 
North, becoming the center of a projected film, worked with Ms. 
Goodman and her New York-based actress sister Greer Goodman for two 
years on a script based on Mr. North life,  activities and sexual 
strategies.
The result is (in it makers' words) "a romantic comedy" in which 
Duncan North becomes kindergarten teacher Dex (no last name) played 
by Donal Logue  with the help of additional body contours. Dex is a 
slacker with time on his hands. The Tao of the title is the 
"philosophy" and the modus operandi of this most  improbable 
Casanova. Set in (or near?) Santa Fe, the story is essentially about 
sex rather than love. There is no Steve in it. The name refers to 
improbable role models, all actors named Steve:: Steve Austin (of 
TV's "Six Million Dollar Man," Steve McGarrett (of TV's "Hawaii 
Five-O," and way above all, Steve McQueen. What Dex admires is their 
COOL.
Having just seen again McQueen in the original, 1968 "The Thomas 
Crown Affair," having found it (again) a silly, nonsensical, empty 
stylistic exercise, I'm having second thoughts about cool, what it 
is,  where and what it gets you. Here is gets you a stream of 
semi-Zen, of references to Marx (Groucho), to the philosopher 
Heidegger (and/or Kierkegaard?), to Mozart, etc.
I forgot to mention that the film opens with a ten-year class reunion 
of  college classmates, with Dex sorting out the girls the way one 
examines a restaurant's menu. Dex used to be the hot-shot thinker of 
his class. His  utterances vary in style, but they are sort of 
academic -- not the way college professors talk among themselves (in 
mostly sensible, normal English), but in the heavy academic, 
jargonish way they often argue or lecture.
Almost all who speak here seem to do so with their mouths open. I 
wonder why. On the other hand, given the sexual nature of the movie, 
we get neither gratuitous nudity nor the usual four-letter words. ( 
These are present of course, but in spirit or via euphemisms.)
  I won't go or get into the "plot," except that it eventually gets 
Dex  together with Syd. She is a stage designer. Ten years ago she 
was also the object of a one-night stand with Dex.  And since Dex 
apparently dropped her pronto, and seems to have forgotten that 
micro-liaison, she's mad. And the flitting, non-committing man falls 
in love with her this time. The balance of the movie is about the 
possible transformation of the two into a twosome.
Some passages are pretty good, I agree. But the attraction of 
opposites which, in film after film, begins with antagonism and leads 
to "amore" is one of filmdom's most durable and fallacious illusions.
There are two lessons we can extract from the picture. One, that a 
little learning can be a bore to others. The other that a would-be 
seducer or lover who is fat should not worry about it.
In the filmmakers' suggestion box I will place a message: " If you 
want to show the complexities of male-female relationships, see the 
films of Eric Rohmer, study them, then do your own, different thing."

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TAO OF STEVE, THE (director/writer: Jenniphr Goodman; screenwriters:
Duncan North/Greer Goodman; cinematographer: Teodoro Maniaci; editor:
Sarah Gartner; cast: Donal Logue (Dex), Greer Goodman (Syd), Kimo Wills
(Dave), Ayelet Kaznelson (Beth), David Aaron Baker (Rick), John Hines
(Ed), Nina Jaroslaw (Maggie); Runtime: 87; A Good Machine production in
association with Thunderhead Prods; 2000)
"The Tao of Steve" is a likable romantic comedy about an obese comman
man type who happens to have the extraordinary ability to be a
successful seducer of women despite his unappealing looks, convinced he
is scoring women because of his philosophy. The philosophy takes
something that is Eastern, of being desireless and without attachments,
and he adds to it an homage to three famous Steves and their masculine
auras: Steve Austin from The Six Million Dollar Man, Steve Garret from
Hawaii Five-O, and the late film star Steve McQueen. When the philosophy
is working, he has put sex out of his mind and the result is that women
end up finding him to be cool, and go to bed with him because of his
laidback attitude.
The humble film, producing some earnest chuckles, is Jenniphr Goodman's
debut as a director; she wrote the screenplay with her sister Greer
Goodman and Duncan North, as Greer also plays the co-star Syd. The film
is based on the real life of the obese Duncan, a friend of the
director's from where they live in Santa Fe. The film is slightly
offbeat, feeling very natural and human, and offering a chance for the
characters to be somewhat fleshed out as they intermingle and search for
relationships. The film played well and was enjoyable in poking holes at
how insincere and ready for a downfall the main character was, but the
obvious plot and the predictable way the film was going, defeated its
zen-like approach, wanting too much to resolve things by contrivances
instead of surrendering to a more natural ending. Yet I enjoyed the film
and its loopy moments and thought it did a good job of catching the
banter that goes on between the twenty-somethings, struggling to make
relationships and fight their fear of loneliness.
Donal Logue is charming as Dex, once a thin ladies' man, being then an
arrogant and very smart college student, who now attends his college
reunion of ten years and is a very fat, pot-smoking, part-time
kindergarten teacher in Santa Fe, N.M., endowed only with his best asset
from college: a sense of humor.
At the party, he meets the blonde with a great smile, Syd, who was in
his philosophy class but he can't remember her name or that he slept
with her. He is attracted to her, willing to throw aside his other
conquests, such as the married Beth (Ayelet), to be with her. But she is
mad that he didn't even recognize her.
Syd is staying for the summer with their mutual college friends (Nina
Jaroslaw & David Aaron Baker), a happily married couple, and will soon
be returning to her New York job as a set designer for the opera.
Dex is living in a communal house with some guys, where he is a mentor
to the womanless,  Gomer Pyle-like Dave (Kimo Wills), laying on him his
Tao-Steve philosophy. Dex is seen interacting with his roommates in an
engaging way, still acting like he hasn't matured. At work, he is great
with the kids, dancing with them, playing games, and giving them a good
teaching experience. He also has a loving relationship with his
retriever dog Astral.
Philosophy comes out of Dex's mouth with the ease of a braggart. But he
has met his match with Syd, as the two discuss Kierkegaard's dark secret
nature and compare it with the opera Don Giovanni, which takes on the
film's theme and makes way for relating that to the eventual
transcendence of Dex. The opera star we are told was a seducer of
thousands of women because he was afraid that one woman wouldn't love
him.
In his attempt to be with Syd, he fails to fix his motorcycle and
thereby manuevers a ride from her to work, giving him a second chance to
see if he could win her over again. He also gets invited on a camping
trip with her and their mutual friends, even though he hates the outdoor
experience. He takes advantage of the camping trip to tell her how much
he cares for her, breaking all the rules of his philosophy. But she sees
through his myth and is too sharp-witted for him to pull his philosophy
ruse off. But their relationship will prosper again, when they both
recognize their faults: he's stuck at being a seducer, a slob, lacking
drive and ambition, while she seems uptight, unable to loosen up and
have fun.
That this film works in the way most romantic Hollywood films work from
since when, with its storybook ending intact...did not disturb me to the
point of dismissing the film. That the script allowed this unlikely
romance to succeed no matter what, never deterred it from being a fun
film. The joy is in watching Dex and Syd, in all their reactions and
struggles, somehow change and get together. The film reminded me of
those old-fashioned Hollywood studio films of the '30s and '40s, only
updated to take in the new trends and hip language used by those living
in modern times.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David N. Butterworth
        In order to be successful with the ladies, you have to have the Tao
of Steve, otherwise you're just a Stu.  So preaches "The Tao of Steve," an
independent first feature by director Jenniphr Goodman about an overweight
Santa Fe slacker who, for some unimaginable reason, women find irresistible.
        Certainly it's not his dining etiquette.  Ice cream, chocolate
sauce, and Readi-Whip go straight from the refrigerator into Dex's
mouth--no dinnerware necessary.  And don't forget to save some for the dog!
        Among those who fall for the pot-smoking yet high-on-existentialism
Kindergarten teacher are the wife of one of his best friends and a plucky
young student tending bar at the Ten Year Reunion which opens the film.
Dex is cool, Dex is hot, and when it comes to women, Dex has it all figured
out.  But then someone like Syd (Greer Goodman), a theatrical set designer,
comes along and suddenly Dex has more questions than answers.
        It's a cute idea for a silly movie but, sadly, "The Tao of Steve"
hits two major stumbling blocks: sub-standard actors and a sub-standard
script.  Most of the performers here are rank amateurs and come across as
such.  These, unfortunately, include Donal Logue as the portly Dex, who's
asked to carry the weight of the movie along with his own bulk, and the
task is just too much for him.  The best performer in the film is co-writer
Greer Goodman which is encouraging because she's also the director's sister.
        The script, by the Goodmans and Duncan North (based on North
himself, according to the end credits), isn't as clever as it should be.
If you have to explain who the Steves (Steve McGarrett, Steve Austin, and
Steve McQueen) who give the Tao of Steve its name are, then you're playing
to the wrong audience.  Constant name calling ("Hey, Martha Stewart"
someone quips while Dex prepares his aphrodisiacal mango mahi-mahi) doesn't
make your script hip either--there's way too much of this and not enough
meaningful jingoism.
        Is Dex as cool as he thinks he is?  Syd certainly seems impervious
to his charms.  But as soon as Dex starts spouting his Zen philosophies and
espousing the seductive merits of Kierkegaard, she too is all over him.  So
whatever couple conflicts the scriptwriters initially dreamed up soon
deteriorate into more of the same: Dex has got It.  Although he can barely
hold down a job, with the Tao of Steve in his repertoire Dex can sure hold
down the babes.  By the time this film is over you'll be asking yourself
"Why?"
        As lightweight as its central protagonist is overweight, "The Tao
of Steve" is an amiable little picture that bumbles along harmlessly all
the while banking on the new age affability of its lead Logue.  It is,
however, only occasionally successful in making pertinent observations
about the ongoing battle of the sexes.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Lesley Abrams
THE TAO OF STEVE is a rare treat of a film. Nothing blows up, no one is
killed, nothing dramatic happens and people talk about ideas. It's a
thoughtful film about philosophy and what women want and Steve McQueen.
In the hands of less capable actors and writers,  THE TAO OF STEVE might
have been downright insulting. As it is, it's a refreshing change of
pace with important ideas woven into a witty premise.
Dex is a pudgy kindergarten teacher, former philosophy major genius,
current slacker and babe magnet. He owes his irresistibleness to a
philosophy of `Steveness' -- that is, Steve Austin (THE SIX MILLION
DOLLAR MAN), Steve Garrett (HAWAII FIVE-O) and the Steviest of all --
Steve McQueen (GREAT ESCAPE). These Steves embody the essence of
maleness. Steve is a state of mind, a way of living. The opposite of
Steve is Stu.
There are rules to being a Steve Master: Eliminate your desire for a
woman (she will come begging), be excellent in her presence (prepare
that one mahi mahi recipe you've perfected) and retreat (if you're
attached to nothing, you lose nothing). Living in a mess of a house in
Santa Fe with like-minded men (really frat boys in their 30s) its all
worked for Dex so far.
Until Syd reenters his life. Meeting at their tenth college reunion, Dex
is clearly smitten. And he cannot integrate his ideology with his
feelings. He does not retreat, he is most un-excellent in her presence
(with some genuinely amusing results) and he cannot eliminate his desire
for her. More importantly, he may be in love for the first time.
THE TAO OF STEVE is written by Jennipher Goodman (the director of the
film), her sister Greer (who plays Dex's love interest) and Duncan
North. It is credited as being North's life story, but it is clearly
shaped by the respectful hands of the Goodman women. It is a poignant
look at the battle of the sexes in Millennial America -- only it's not
much  of a battle anymore. Maybe a skirmish. Or a contest. Or a big
flirt dressed up to look like a battle. Dex and Syd's bumpy dance
towards each other is written with such truth and sweetness, both
characters remain likable throughout. Despite the frightening sexist
principles that guide Dex's life, we adore him.
As Dex, Donal Logue is a good-for-nothing charmer. He's always late,
mooches off his friends, smokes pot for breakfast and is philosophically
opposed to the idea of work. But early on, we get to see a glimpse past
the Steve exterior. Dex likens himself to Don Giovanni, who slept with
thousands of women because he was afraid he would never be loved by one.
Logue's performance is breezy and sure-footed. We certainly understand
all the women's attraction for this boy/man even while we enjoy it when
he gets his comeuppance.
THE TAO OF STEVE is very funny, very smart and very thoughtful. It's a
delicious opportunity to think in the movie theatre -- as opposed to the
normal flinch, gasp, gape, and marvel. It's a thinking person's film
about thinking people. They don't come along too often.
