Title
Review for Hoodlum (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring Laurence Fishburne, Tim Roth, Vanessa L. Williams and Andy Garcia
The Harlem Renaissance must have been one of the more exciting times in
history to be alive.  The people of Harlem achieved heights in music,
literature and the arts which have been duplicated by no other city in the
United States.  Yet this cultural boon was of benefit mostly to the white
audiences which ventured uptown; this was still the Depression, after all. 
Even the Cotton Club, Harlem's showplace, was off limits to blacks unless
they played in the band or worked in the kitchen.  Harlem's main source of
revenue in those days was the Numbers racket, an illegal lottery run under
the auspices of Stephanie St. Clair (Cicely Tyson), known as the Queen of
Policy.  HOODLUM proposes that the Policy racket was a legitimate form of
black free enterprise, indeed the only enterprise open to a black man or
woman in a time of severe economic hardship.  In the guise of a gangster
epic, the film makes a strong case.  Even so, while HOODLUM has the benefit
of a compelling central character and a story begging to be told, it loses
much in unconvincing detail.  
HOODLUM opens in 1934, as Ellsworth "Bumpy" Johnson (Laurence Fishburne),
chess player, poet and Renaissance gangster, is released from Sing Sing. 
Upon returning to Harlem, he finds himself in the middle of a range war: 
Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth), the downtown Numbers king, has developed a taste
for Harlem money and is determined to move in on the Queen.  Dutch is held
in check by Lucky Luciano (Andy Garcia), the true underworld authority in
New York, but just barely.  Bumpy, who knows trouble when he sees it,
convinces the Queen to make him her lieutenant after she is arrested in a
graft-funded police raid.  He's determined to keep Dutch out of Harlem, and
is prepared to match him gun for gun and corpse for corpse until one of
them goes down.  Naturally, a bloodbath ensues.  As Bumpy watches the
bodies pile up, he must weigh his personal hatred of Dutch against its cost
in innocent lives, and must also justify his actions to his saintly
girlfriend Francine (Vanessa L. Williams), a Harlem relief worker. 
Director Bill Duke is shooting for a Depression-era Western, and he mostly
hits his mark; you could easily transport this whole cast of characters to
Tombstone in 1874 and tell the same story.
Duke comes as close as possible to making a great movie without actually
making one.  For a change, the problem isn't in the script.  Chris
Brancato's screenplay keeps to the narrow path as it focuses on themes of
pride, betrayal, and the obstinacy of rival Kings.  Bumpy Johnson is the
classic flawed hero of Greek Tragedy; he cannot give up is vendetta against
Dutch even if victory requires that he lose his soul.  His good intentions
are quickly useless.  As the Queen points out, this war will not be fought
downtown, but in the streets of Harlem.
Neither are the actors at fault.  Oh, I admit it takes a while before you
can understand what the hell Tim Roth is saying.  Englishmen should not
attempt Brooklyn accents; they can only embarrass themselves.  Vanessa L.
Williams may look fantastic in her bleached-white and pressed nurse's
uniform, but she brings the grace of a crowbar to the film's weakest role. 
Andy Garcia succeeds only in utterly draining the life from whatever scene
he's in.  But the cast grows on you, until you're rooting for them as if
they were the cast of a spunky community theater troupe.  As always,
Fishburne is aces; the man understands the value of subtlety.  When he
raises his voice, you listen to him, because he hasn't shouted and mugged
his way through the whole movie like some actors I could name.
No, what this picture lacks is atmosphere.  How you define atmosphere, I
don't know; but like comedy, I know it when I see it, and this picture
doesn't have it.  It's lacking in the gleam of the shiny period
automobiles, which are all showroom clean and without a spot or blemish. 
Didn't they have rust in the Depression?  It's lacking in the subtitle
"DECEMBER 1934" shot over a scene in which the trees have leaves on them,
and followed by a scene in which Dutch listens to a baseball game in his
office.  And it's sorely lacking in the tiger-striped pillows and
love-daddy decor of Bumpy's estate. How else Duke could have added
atmosphere, it's hard to say; black-themed pictures are notoriously
low-balled by Hollywood studios, so maybe there would have been another $10
or $20 million in the budget if the picture had been about Irish gangsters
so that Brad Pitt could have tried out his brogue again.  Duke's use of the
camera could stand to grow beyond the standard tracking and crane shots we
see in every TNT made-for-cable film.  But I believe this film was made
with noble intent, and I believe cast and crew gave it everything they had,
so I was able to walk away from it without feeling swindled.  HOODLUM is a
good story which could have been told more artfully.  So infrequently do
good stories emerge unscathed from Hollywood, we should be thankful it was
told at all.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:

Author
Randy Turgeon
    Set in Harlem during the Great Depression, rival gangster "families" go to
war over control of "The Numbers", an illegal gambling lottery.  "Runners" take
bets from potential lottery winners and deliver them to private locations for
drawings.
    The undisputed leader of the Harlem numbers is the Madame Queen (Cicely
Tyson) who is challenged by Dutch Schulz (Tim Roth), a ruthless hoodlum. By
turning against the Queen, Dutch defies his partner, the infamous Lucky Luciano
(Andy Garcia), who wishes to respect the Queen and keep the peace.
    The Queens' army strengthens when an acquaintance, Ellsworth "Bumpy"
Johnson
(Lawrence Fishburne) is released from prison and becomes a bodyguard for her.
He
proves himself worthy in short time as he thwarts an assassination attempt (on
himself and the Queen), and later takes control of the Queens army when she is
jailed for tax evasion. Bumpy's reign is not as restrained and subdued as the
Queen and he declares all out war on Dutch. Bloody gang warfare ensues.
    Bumpy faces many obstacles during his reign. His new army questions his
methods. His girlfriend (Vanessa L. Williams) and the Queen disagree with his
violent solutions. Most importantly (in his eyes), Dutch has become a more
formidable foe than he imagined, and seeks help from Lucky Luciano to
assassinate him. 
    There have been so many movies dealing with organized crime that it must be
hard to write an original story dealing with it. This movie is not original at
all. In fact, I was angered by how many similarities there was between this
film
and, arguably, the best gangster movie of all time, The Godfather. If you are
going to borrow ideas from another movie and not give credit, why not borrow
from a lesser known movie (say, Millers Crossing?). How could the credited
screenwriter Chris Brancato not give credit to Mario Puzo himself? Here are
just
some of the major similarities (I stopped counting at 10).
Crooked Cop assaults blood relative of the leader.
Gang extracts revenge on crooked cop.
Wife (or girlfriend) questions her partners' murderous activities and leaves
him.
High ranking "officer" betrays the leader.
Blood relative of the leader murdered.
War erupting between the "families".
High-ranking officer disapproves of the leader in front of other family
members.
New leader runs family differently from previous leader.
Large meeting with all families involved.
    The setup in this movie is done rather well. I enjoyed the portrayal of the
network of "runners" sprinting through the streets collecting bets for the
Queens lottery. This was the way of life in Harlem, and most people involved
with the Queen did so because it was the only way to support their families and
put food on the table. Number running was the only way for the Harlem
population
to find work. I also enjoyed the interaction between the angry, violent Dutch
and the calm, patient Lucky.
    After about the 30-40 minute mark all of the similarities with the
Godfather
start appearing, one after the other (and in short order). It was a huge
distraction, and an insult to my intelligence. Who was the screenwriter kidding
here? 
    Some of the individual performances were well done. Andy Garcia was very
convincing as Lucky, unfortunately his screen time is reduced to a supporting
role. Tim Roth effectively plays the cocky villain, much like his roles in "The
Cook, the Thief, his Wife and her Lover" and "Rob Roy". The good performances
and convincing setup during the first third of the movie do not make up for the
lackluster story that follows. A couple of coincidences is one thing, over a
dozen is an insult.
Ellsworth Bumpy Johnson.......Lawrence Fishburne
Dutch Schultz............Tim Roth
Lucky Luciano..........Andy Garcia
The Queen.............Cicely Tyson
Francine Hughes..........Vanessa L. Williams
Illinois Gordon..........Chi McBride
Written by Randy Turgeon, January 22, 1998

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Laurence Fishburne, Tim Roth, Andy Garcia, Vanessa L. Williams, 
      Chi McBride, Clarence Williams III, Cicely Tyson, 
      William Atherton, Loretta Devine
Director: Bill Duke
Producer: Frank Mancuso Jr.
Screenplay: Chris Brancato
Cinematography: Frank Tidy
Music: Elmer Bernstein
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     There's something about a well-made gangster movie that never fails 
to captivate an audience.  The romance surrounding the mob, with its 
seductive lure of wealth, power, and family, is undeniable.  The curious 
mix of violence and charm, with the implicit threat of death lurking 
behind every toothy smile, adds luster to the mystery.  Since its early 
days, Hollywood has recognized the appeal of mob stories, and some of 
the best films of all time -- including THE GODFATHER and GOODFELLAS -- 
have belonged to the genre.  
     HOODLUM is a period-piece gangster film, harkening back to 
Depression-era Harlem.  While Al Capone was king in Chicago, Lucky 
Luciano (Andy Garcia) ruled New York, parceling out the city to members 
of his "Sicilian Syndicate."  The 1930s were the mob's heyday, when no 
cop, special prosecutor, or judge was too expensive to buy, and when the 
only real law was the one laid down by Luciano or one of his many 
"associates."  Of course, in a place as big as New York, there were 
bound to be wild cards.  One was Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth), a former 
partner of Luciano's whose forays into the uptown numbers racket put him 
on a collision course with the Queen of Harlem, Stephanie St. Clair 
(Cicely Tyson), and her trustworthy friend and protector, Bumpy Johnson 
(Laurence Fishburne).  The resulting turf war between Schultz and the 
St. Clair/Johnson camp littered the streets of Harlem with bodies, and 
threatened the mob's security in New York when the violence spread to 
downtown targets.  
     The story told in HOODLUM is similar to the one related in Francis 
Ford Coppola's 1984 feature, THE COTTON CLUB.  The setting is the same, 
many of the characters are the same, and certain aspects of the 
storylines intersect.  The perspective, however, is different.  Unlike 
THE COTTON CLUB, which focused on the lives of many of the "normal" 
people who frequented and played in the nightclub, HOODLUM, as Bumpy's 
story, is a relatively straightforward gangster yarn that melds fact 
with fiction to create a dramatically compelling two hours.
     While Chris Brancato's script doesn't reveal anything new or 
surprising (students of history and fans of THE COTTON CLUB already know 
how this film ends), it's a competent piece of storytelling that 
incorporates elements of human interest with the threat of escalating 
violence.  Director Bill Duke (A RAGE IN HARLEM) guides the movie with a 
firm hand, never allowing the almost-mystical aura of the era to 
overcome the characters.  At times, HOODLUM has the feel of an epic, 
although certain dubious editing choices (probably made to reduce the 
running time) mute the effectiveness of several relationships.  For 
example, the love affair between Bumpy and his girlfriend, Francine 
(Vanessa L. Williams), is developed in fits and starts, with a "musical 
montage" used to condense several loving months into a minute of screen 
time.  
     The acting is top notch.  As Bumpy, Fishburne is mesmerizing, 
displaying his range as an actor by subtly and effectively presenting 
the variety of emotions that lurk just beneath Bumpy's seemingly-placid 
exterior.  Actually, this is the second time Fishburne has played this 
role, although his screen time here is considerably more substantial 
than in THE COTTON CLUB, where he first essayed the part.  (THE COTTON 
CLUB character, despite being named "Bumpy Rhodes", was meant to 
represent Johnson.)  Tim Roth, the versatile British actor who has 
portrayed almost every kind of character imaginable during his career, 
brings a flamboyant mix of impatience and casual viciousness to Dutch 
Schultz.  Andy Garcia, on the other hand, is low-key in his approach to 
Lucky Luciano, presenting the famed mobster as charismatic, urbane, and 
intelligent, with only a hint of the danger he represents.  Of the 
supporting players, only Vanessa L. Williams seems off-key.  Chi McBride 
(as Bumpy's cousin and right-hand man, Illinois) and Clarence Williams 
III (as one of Schultz's most dangerous henchmen) are memorable.
     For a film that meticulously develops a '30s atmosphere and pays 
careful attention to certain details (such as the droop of Luciano's 
right eyelid and the authenticity of his pinky ring), the one very 
obvious gaffe comes across as jarring.  Immediately following an on-
screen caption of "December 1934," HOODLUM cuts to an indoor scene where 
several men are listening to the radio play-by-play of a Yankees game.  
Baseball in December?  Fortunately, none of the film's other mistakes 
are as blatant.
     Overall, HOODLUM represents a very respectable entry into the ever-
popular gangster genre, and may be the best tale of this sort from the 
era since Brian DePalma's THE UNTOUCHABLES.  Also, the movie's decision 
to approach the situation from the point-of-view of several black 
characters lends a fresh angle to a fairly well-known historical 
account.  For, although HOODLUM is not the definitive chronicle of New 
York mob activity during the 1930s, its contribution should not be 
overlooked.
The website is moving!!
ReelViews web site through 8/31: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
ReelViews web site beginning 9/1: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Laurence Fishburne, Tim Roth, Andy Garcia, Vanessa L. Williams, Chi
McBride, Clarence Williams III, Cicely Tyson, William Atherton, Loretta
Devine Director: Bill Duke Screenplay: Chris Brancato
In the streets of Harlem 1930's, bullets fly and body counts rise as gang
war erupts between the mad and the black. The war is between the ruthlessly
insane Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth) who is invading the turf of Madam Queen
(Cicely Tyson). This is the era of the great depression and illegal gambling
`numbers' (equivalent to today's lotto) is a lucrative source of income for
the mob and a source of employment and diversion for the poor. Queen is
losing the war to Dutch before ‘Bumpy' Johnson (Laurence Fishburne) arrives
on the scene and takes the war to a higher level of intensity.
The sets are wonderfully designed, as are the costumes, but this does not
compensate for my intense dislike of gangster movies. Especially when the
endings are always so predictable – somebody has to die, if not everybody. I
find Laurence Fishburne an intensely stoic actor whose movements on screen
seem excessively deliberate. Nevertheless, it works to his advantage in this
movie and also in the awful EVENT HORIZON, where little emotion is required.
Tim Roth on the other hand excels as the mad Dutch Man and seems much more
at ease with his role. Vanessa Williams graces the screen with her pretty
face, but her character Fracine succumbs too easily to the brute charms of
Bumpy Johnson. Andy Garcia also has a supporting role as Lucky Luciano, the
Godfather who tries to resolve the conflict between the two groups.
There is nothing new in HOODLUM that has not been done, said and re-said in
the countless gangster films made prior to this. Most of which have a higher
quality of direction and acting i.e. THE GODFATHER series, GOOD FELLAS etc.
So unless you have spare cash on hand and spare time to squander, HOODLUM
can be left for a late night showing on television or an afternoon matinee.

Author
Michael Redman
Gangster films have long been a major mainstay of cinema lore. While there
have been superb movies of this genre and several different approaches to the
subject, in some ways they have a sameness. "Hoodlum" is a good looking film
and offers a high level of entertainment but little new.
Loosely based on a true story of the struggle for the numbers racket in
Depression-era Harlem, the film follows the rise of "Bumpy" Johnson (Laurence
Fishburne). South Carolina teenager Johnson, sent to live with his older
sister in New York rapidly ran into trouble with the law during the Harlem
Renaissance of the Roaring Twenties.
After doing time at various institutions, he is released in the early
Thirties. This is where the film begins. Johnson rejoins his old buddies and
immediately becomes involved with Madame Queen's (Cicely Tyson) numbers
"business". The numbers game, similar to the lotteries available now in almost
every state, was illegal of course because it wasn't being run by the government.
Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth) has taken over the numbers concession in every New
York neighborhood except Harlem and is making his ruthless bid for those
pennies. Bumpy isn't about to let that happen.
When the Queen is arrested by a crooked cop in Schultz's back pocket, she
turns control over to Johnson and he declares all-out war against the
Dutchman. The blood is about to flow and everyone knows it.
Lucky Luciano (Andy Garcia) has organized the gangs in the city but is having
trouble with Schultz who is crude, unrefined and, perhaps even worse, not
Italian. His politician, the Special Prosecutor, makes loud noises when the
fighting breaks out of Harlem as Bumpy brings the war uptown.
Luciano brings the gangsters to the bargaining table but to no avail. These
two aren't built for compromise. Seeing that the battle is not near an end,
Bumpy decides to fight Schultz with the weapons where he is clearly superior.
He is going to out-think him.
Director Bill Duke ("A Rage In Harlem"), set designer Charles Bennett
("Roots") and costumer Richard Bruno ("The Untouchables") combine with
cinematographer Frank Tidy ("Under Siege") to craft an especially attractive
one if you can excuse the graphically violent scenes. 
Harlem of that time was a study in contrasts. The extremely poor co-existed
with the high fashion. The well-known Cotton Club featured Black performers
but non-Whites were not allowed in the audience. This film captures the mood
with style.
Fishburne is exceeding prolific recently, appearing in a number of movies and
turning in a respectable job with each role. He and Garcia adopt the
respectable mobster look with chic clothes, sly smiles and talk of chess. It
is Roth who takes the chances here when he portrays Schultz as a cultureless
sadistic low life. Coming dangerously close to overplaying the role, he takes
it to the edge but not a step further.
The scene-stealer of the film is Chi McBride as Bumpy's cousin Illinois
Gordon. Every time he is on the screen, he captures all eyes. Serving as the
gang's conscience, he repeatedly points out that innocent people are dying as
the war heats up and Bumpy hardens. His romance with his "big woman" is
especially touching while providing the film with some of its lighter moments.
Bumpy's love doesn't hold as much interest. While Francine (Vanessa Williams)
is certainly a looker, her "good girl falling for the tough guy" character
isn't very convincing. Most of her scenes could have been dropped from the
overly long (almost two and a half hours) film and we wouldn't have missed a thing.
The trend towards romanticizing mobsters is troublesome. Was Bumpy Johnson
really a Robin Hood, stealing from Schultz to give away the money to the poor?
Was he defending Harlem from outsiders so that the community could control
their own business and provide jobs to 2,000 otherwise unemployed number
runners? The body count provides evidence that Bumpy was no angel.
Bad politics and stylish demeanor: looks like the wave of the cinematic
future. 
(Michael Redman who has penned this type of thing for over 22 years is looking
forward to the beautiful southern Indiana autumn and losing this muggy stuff
that passes for weather.)
[This appeared in the "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana 9/4/97.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:mredman@bvoice.com

Author
Nick Schaden
    At one moment in "Hoodlum" Laurence Fishburne holds a switchblade to a
gangster's throat. About to finish him off, Fishburne pauses. A tear rolls
from his face. Whether you think Fishburne's emotions are appropriate or
not, you can see that Fishburne is trying - trying with all his might to
captivate the audience. This intensity that "Hoodlum" pushes throughout
makes for a high quality and sometimes stunning movie.
    "Hoodlum" is set in the 1930s during the era of the Great Depression.
For much of the impoverished, working for and betting on an underground
lottery, nicknamed "numbers" is the only way to bring food to the table.
Mobster Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth) had decided to increase his numbers
boundary to Harlem, which would throw many blacks out of jobs into the
streets. The main force which runs numbers in Harlem is determined to stop
Schultz's plight. Bumpy Johnson (Laurence Fishburne), a leader of the Harlem
force, decides to take Schultz head on - which results in betrayal, deals,
and war between the mobsters and the Harlem force.
    We've seen this kind of plot before ("The Untouchables") and none of the
audience is surprised when plenty of bloodshed results. Instead what makes
the movie so good is the intensity, the effort shown by the actors and
screenplay to make the movie work. Shoot-outs are shot with strong visual
intensity and little or no music, illustrating the horrors of war between
the mobsters and Harlem. The emotional scenes have good cinematography and
many times booming music for the viewer to really feel the characters'
emotions. To boot, the movie doesn't try for too many subplots and thus
keeps the movie simple yet clear to the viewer. Finally, Laurence
Fishburne's acting is superb, I loved many of the small emotional touches he
imprints in "Hoodlum".
    The movie still falls short in a few areas. Tim Roth, a great actor of
our time, at certain points can get old spewing "f" words as though he's
reenacting that famous coffee shop scene from Pulp Fiction again and
again. While Vanessa Williams acts much better in this movie than in the
dreadful Eraser, at times of extreme emotion she stumbles. Finally,
the movie seemed a bit too long - I enjoyed the movie but certain scenes
seemed to continue longer than necessary.
    While "Hoodlum" can't measure near the greatness of Martin Scorcese's
mobster movies ("Casino", "Goodfellas") it's still a strong film and was
definitely worth my $5.50 admission.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HOODLUM is an exceedingly handsome movie, all dressed up with no
place interesting to go.  The sets by Charles Bennett ("Roots")
recreate Harlem in the 1930s with a believable authenticity.  The
costumes by Richard Bruno (THE UNTOUCHABLES) are gorgeous, especially
the dark suits set off by wide brimmed white hats.  The striking
cinematography by Frank Tidy (UNDER SIEGE) uses sharp contrast black
and white complemented by saturated colors.  And Academy Award winning
composer Elmer Bernstein's music is full of soulful trumpets and
foreboding piano solos.
     Even the acting, with the exception of the embarrassingly poor
performance by Cicely Tyson as the Queen of Harlem, is superb.  But the
gangster party they throw bogs down frequently and seems like it will
never end.  Director Bill Duke and editor Harry Keramida have no sense
of focus.  Numerous pointless scenes that should have been left on the
cutting room floor are included and others long overstay their welcome.
     This is not to say that the film is without merit.  Although
first-time writer Chris Brancato's script never gels, the performances
by the actors frequently manage to rise above the mediocrity of the
material.  (The story, which the press notes are careful to point out
is complete fiction, uses historical characters.  Since most of these
famous people were killers, the liberties taken with the facts of their
lives might be forgiven, but having famous crime fighter Thomas Dewey,
who in real life was responsible for squashing most of the
racketeering, accept huge payoffs from the gangsters is reprehensible.)
     The story surrounds a character known as "Bumpy" Johnson, played
with impressive style by Laurence Fishburne.  He helps out Queen when
Dutch Schultz, played with perfect sadistic crudeness by Tim Roth,
tries to take over her Harlem numbers racket.  Andy Garcia plays Lucky
Luciano like a figure straight out of a fashion shoot for GQ.  Lucky is
a power broker in the mob, who tries to negotiate various alliances
among Dutch, Bumpy, and himself.  Each of these talented actors are
Academy Award winners or nominees.  With lesser actors, the picture
would have been little more than a fashion show and, when the
inevitable warfare breaks out, a long bloodbath.
     The screenwriter feels compelled to give Bumpy an almost
saint-like aura.  His girlfriend Francine, played by Vanessa Williams,
refers to him as "a perfect gentlemen and a poet."  He also plays chess
and worries about the poor.  When he first steals money from Dutch, he
throws it with great panache to a group of the needy in a soup line.
The show even tells us in the introductory text that gambling via the
numbers was the only way some in Harlem were able to put food on the
table.  Given the odds, of course, gambling was a sure-fire way to keep
food from ever getting on the table.
     Eventually, Bumpy hardens after he kills scores of people, but the
script remains relatively sympathetic to him until the end.  When
Pigfoot Mary, played sweetly by Loretta Devine, first lays eyes on him,
she tells her friends, "Oh honey, he's a killer diller."  The camera
loves him too with his thin mustache and his captivating little smile.
     The script lacks much story telling ability, but when it tries to
mimic PULP FICTION, it is at its best.  When Dutch hires the Salke
Brothers, played by Mike and Beau Starr, to take their trademark ax to
Bumpy's skull, he balks at first at their $3,000 fee.  "I remember the
days when you could get a guy hit for 40 bucks," reminisces Dutch.  "We
live in inflationary times," explains one of Salke brothers.  Even
better is the conversation between the Salke brothers on their way to
the contract kill.  They argue about where to find the best of
everything in New York.  Only on the hot dogs (Nathan's) do they agree.
     Bumpy's ultimate accomplishments are best summarized by the
undertaker, played dourly but with a devious smirk by Ellis Foster.
"Thank heavens for Mr. Johnson," the undertaker proclaims when Bumpy
pays him handsomely to bury in style another dead number's runner.
"That man's brought prosperity to Harlem."
     HOODLUM runs incredibly long at 2:22 -- a half hour less would
have improved the film immensely.  The show is rated R for massive
gore, profanity, and full frontal nudity.  It would be acceptable for
mature teenagers.  I admired parts of the show, but not enough to
recommend it.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Walter Frith
Like any realistic gangster film, 'Hoodlum' contains plenty of gunfire,
explosions, confrontations and dirty business deals.  Unlike any gangster
film I've ever seen, 'Hoodlum' is disappointingly scattershot.  That isn't to
say its a bad film, it just lacks focus.
Set in New York City during the hey day of the gangster era at the early part
of the twentieth century, its main character, Ellsworth 'Bumpy' Johnson
(Laurence Fishburne) is an ex-con who makes a name for himself when gangsters
such as Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth) and Lucky Luciano (Andy Garcia) try and
disrupt and strong-arm their way by invading a peaceful numbers running
operation run by Madame Queen (Cicely Tyson).  The film reportedly tells us
at the beginning that this so-called peaceful numbers running operation was
undisturbed for a decade until invaded by the forces of Schultz and Luciano
but anyone with common sense knows that illegal solicitation involving
currency always brings trouble.  
Fishburne finds love in a no-nonsense, charity driven and kind hearted woman
(Vanessa Williams) but loses her not by death but by the life he chooses.
While authentic looking, 'Hoodlum' is sort of a cross between Francis Ford
Coppola's 'The Cotton Club' (1984) and the Coen brothers' 'Miller Crossing'
(1990).  Like 'The Cotton Club', it spells out the true psychotic nature of
Dutch Schultz played in that film by James Remar and has scenes involving the
club itself and like the relationship sub plot between Richard Gere and Diane
Lane in 'The Cotton Club', this one has the relationship between Fishburne
and Williams.  Like 'Miller's Crossing', it underlines the loyalty and
rivalry relevant to a good crime story.
'Hoodlum' tries to build too much too quickly and rather than focusing on a
couple of main characters and making them interesting, it underplays the
characters of Luciano, Madame Queen and the film's love interest and chooses
to make the bitter war between 'Bumpy' Johnson and Dutch Schultz its main
priority.  
Director Bill Duke has shown us how gangsters operate rather than telling us
anything about who they are.  It has an appealing quality to it but
unfortunately you don't really feel compelled to give any thought to the
characters who die and the ones who live and as it plays out its hand it
comes up with little instead of delivering a full house.
