Title
Review for Trzy kolory: Bialy (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Gareth Rees
     Karol Karol (Zbigniew Zamachowski) is a Polish hairdresser who has
married glamorous and successful model Dominique (Julie Delpy) and
moved with her to Paris.  However, he is impotent and unable to
consummate the marriage, so she divorces him, frames him for the arson
of her business, and throws him out onto the street with a large trunk
containing all his possessions.  Despite all this, she tells him that
she still loves him and wants him.
     Karol takes up playing sad Polish folksongs on a comb-and-paper
harmonica in the Metro, and meets Mikolaj (Janusz Gajos), a depressive
Polish chess player.  The two of them conceive a plan to get Karol back
to Poland despite his lack of passport, and once there, Karol
determines that he is going to win Dominique back: when he has achieved
equality (personal equality, financial equality and equality of power)
with her, then he will be able to perform sexually.
     The films lurches unsteadily between comedy and tragedy.  Zbigniew
Zamachowski reprises his comic persona from THE DECALOGUE: TEN with
initial success as the whole world (incarnate in a pigeon outside the
divorce court) seems to dump on him.  He's less convincing as a cunning
and successful businessman later in the film, but the sharp and funny
portrayal of the new free-market Poland, where everything is for sale
and where a few lucky people make money through being in the right
place at the right time saves this section.  The ending is so sad and
yet such an inevitable and appropriate come-uppance for both of the
main characters that I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.
     If WHITE is unfair to anyone, it's to Dominique.  Kieslowski is
sometimes accused of misogyny, and certainly in this film it isn't
clear at all why Dominique behaves as she does.  We never see enough of
her point of view to determine why she loves this clown of a
hairdresser or why she is forced to stand up in court and say that she
does not love him.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WHITE is a bitter sweet tragedy from Polish director Krzysztof
Kieslowski.  Although it is the middle part of his three color trilogy
(BLUE has already been shown in the US and RED is coming), each movie
stands totally on its own.  The movie is in French and Polish with
English subtitles.
     In the opening scene, the husband (Zbigniew Zamachowski) is in
court being divorced by his wife (Julie Delpy) on the grounds that he
has been unable to consummate the marriage.  This opening sequence
leads quickly to the rest of the movie which is about his seeking
fortune and about his attempting to get back at his cruel wife for
divorcing him.
     The script written by Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof
Piesiewicz has a few nice twists that are kind of hard to guess.  The
movie takes place mainly in Poland.  Zamachowski's acting is good as
the common man who was wronged.  Delpy's acting consists of standing
around and looking beautiful.  Don't get me wrong she does a super job
at that, but you do not need an actress to stand up and look terrific -
they could have hired a fashion model.
     The movie's feel is that of a short story made into a movie.  The
only real complaint I have, other than there is not much substance, is
that I found the ending too abrupt.  Perhaps Red will be better; I
never got to see Blue.
     The movie is rated R for reasons I can not figure out.  It is
clearly a PG-13 show.  It runs 1:32 and has the real potential for
putting you to sleep in parts.  I give the movie * 1/2 for the acting
of the male lead and some fun plot twists, but I can not recommend to
anyone.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Zbigniew Zamachowski, Julie Delpy, Janusz Gajos, 
           Jerzy Stuhr 
Director:  Krzysztof Kieslowski 
Producer:  Marin Karmitz 
Screenplay:  Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz 
Cinematography:  Edward Klosinski 
Music:  Zbigniew Preisner 
Released by Miramax Films 
In French and Polish with subtitles 
     "Blue, liberty; White, equality; Red, fraternity... We looked very 
closely at these three ideas, how they functioned in everyday life, but 
from an individual's point of view.  These ideals are contradictory with 
human nature.  When you deal with them practically, you do not know how 
to live with them.  Do people really want liberty, equality, fraternity?" 
        - Writer/director Krzysztof Kieslowski 
     WHITE, the second chapter of Krzysztof Kieslowski's THREE COLORS
trilogy, is different from BLUE in more ways than the color it centers
on and the ideals represented.  Instead of the dark, somber tone
adopted by BLUE, this film aims for something lighter.  Additionally,
while WHITE possesses a sardonic quality never sought after by its
predecessor, the emotional tapestry of this picture is not the other's
equal.
     Although WHITE is self-contained, there is an intersection with
BLUE.  In the previous film, the stars of this one, Julie Delpy and
Zbigniew Zamachowski, make brief appearances; likewise, Juliette
Binoche sticks her head through a courtroom door near the beginning of
WHITE (blink and you may miss her).  Delpy, Zamachowski, and Binoche
all turn up at the conclusion of RED (due to be released this fall),
along with the featured performers of that movie, Jean-Louis
Trintignant and Irene Jacobs.
     WHITE begins in a Parisian courtroom with the arrival of a lonely,
dejected Karol Karol (Zamachowski), clutching a summons and looking
downtrodden.  Shortly thereafter, his marriage has been dissolved by
the court because of his inability to consummate the union, and his
beautiful young wife Dominique (Delpy) has claimed that she no longer
loves him.  Karol is devastated, and decides to quit Paris for his
native Poland.
     To make matters worse, he has no passport and no money to obtain
one, and after Dominique sets fire to a beauty shop that he and she
owned together, the police want him for arson.  Fate, however, is not
entirely working against Karol, and he finds a friend in his fellow
countryman Mikolaj (Janusz Gajos), who helps him back to Warsaw, where
he begins rebuilding his life and planning revenge against the woman he
still loves.
     WHITE focuses mainly on Karol's life, and that's one of its
possible flaws.  While we are presented with a well-rounded picture of
the Polish hairdresser, we see so little of his wife that the eventual
resolution falls a little flat.  The few glimpses we are afforded of
Dominique reveal an intensely interesting character who is quite simply
never given enough screen time.
     Another problem with WHITE is that the plot occasionally leaps
forward in a rather disjointed manner.  At times, it seems that there
are scenes missing.  While none of these gaps cause permanent damage,
they engender a momentary sense of confusion.  BLUE was seamlessly
edited; the same cannot be said about WHITE.
     Nevertheless, despite its flaws, WHITE is an excellent character
study, and the presentation of a twisted love story is compelling.  The
Chaplinesque Zbigniew Zamachowski delivers a performance that displays
the depth and breadth of his considerable talent.  In addition to
portraying desperation, pain, and triumph, Zamachowski gets an
opportunity to do a little light comedy.
     Julie Delpy, who was so impressive as Sam Shepard's tragic
girlfriend in VOYAGER (and also had roles in EUROPA, EUROPA and
Disney's THE THREE MUSKETEERS), is luminescent in limited exposure.
She's very effective, and her cold portrayal of Dominique during the
film's opening scenes does nothing to endear the character to the
audience.
     As was the case with BLUE, the title color permeates the film.
Kieslowski uses images of white to reinforce his theme of equality.
Poland, with its cloudy winter skies and snowscapes, is a perfect
setting, and the color shows up in dozens of other instances, including
building facades, cars, pigeons, a porcelain bust, clothing, and the
misty halo through which several scenes are filmed.  Zbigniew Preisner,
whose score was integral to BLUE, is the composer for WHITE, but in
this case, his music serves a more normal function.
     Kieslowski understands human nature, and his ability to breathe
life into that understanding through these characters is what sets his
films apart from those of many others.  As BLUE did for liberty, so
WHITE does for equality, giving a face to an abstract concept.  WHITE
does not have the impact of its predecessor, but neither will its story
or characters fade the moment the theater's lights go on.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Gareth Rees
     The three films are called BLUE, WHITE and RED; the colours are
those on the French revolutionary flag, the Tricolor, and the films are
nominally about the three ideals of the French revolution:  liberty,
equality and fraternity (respectively).  They are set in three European
cities:  Paris, Warsaw and Geneva (respectively).
     They are not otherwise connected in terms of character or plot,
except for a marvelously coincidental sequence in which the main
characters from the three films all appear together at the end of RED.
     There are occasional references to each other and to others of
Kieslowski's films, for example the old woman trying to put a bottle in
a bottle bank who appears in WHITE and RED illustrates some of the
differences between the situations and characters of Karol and
Valentine; Juliette Binoche (the star of BLUE) appears very briefly in
the courtroom at the start of WHITE; the funeral music in BLUE
attributed to the fictitious 18th-century Dutch composer "van den
Budenmayer' (actually Zbigniew Preisner) is the same as that in NO END,
Kieslowski's first collaboration with Preisner.  Van den Budenmayer
turns up again in RED, when Valentine buys a CD of his music.  There
are other references; Kieslowski is keen on this short of
intertextuality.
     As Kieslowski admits in interviews, the revolutionary themes are
just an excuse, a thematic structuring on which to hang the films,
which are about people, not about abstract themes.  The pan-European
settings (and the pro-European unity of the "Song for the Unification
of Europe" which features in BLUE) are to some extent a ruse to get
pan-European funding.
     The themes are treated very ironically: BLUE is about the unwanted
and unwelcome liberty experienced by Julie when her husband and child
are killed in a car crash; WHITE is about Karol's attempt to get even
with the glamorous wife who has divorced him, and RED is about a
retired judge who, cynical about the possibility of justice, uses a
radio to spy on the telephone conversations of his neighbours.
     Kieslowski has said that he does not intend to make any more films
after RED; he attributes this to the difficulty of getting funding.  If
he does retire, it would be a great shame, as he is surely one of
Europe's most talented directors.

Author
David Yang
     WHITE, or TROIS COULEURS: BLANC, is the second film in Krzysztof
Kieslowski's trilogy, though it is an independent story which happens
to be taking place at the same time.  (The first, BLUE, not to be
confused with the Derek Jarman film, came out last year, and RED has
already been shown at the Cannes Film Festival and is due in the US
around December.)  Off the top, I should say that WHITE is quite
different from BLUE, and liking one may have little to do with liking
the other, though I personally enjoyed both.  So even if you thought
BLUE was pretentious tripe, you shouldn't necessarily dismiss WHITE.
     WHITE is ostensibly a black comedy about Karol Karol, a Polish
hairdresser (Zamachowski) who has been divorced (because of
post-wedding impotence) and left penniless and wanted (by the police)
by Dominique (Delpy), his French wife.  The plot revolves around his
return to Poland and his efforts to revive his fortunes there and win
her back.  This is not simple, as even the trip back is complicated
(and funny), but the new Poland provides opportunities for the
entrepreneurial.  As the characters note several times, "you can now
buy anything"--though the film makes you feel ambivalent about the
transition.  Along the way, He gets helped by Mikolaj (Gajos), a
bridge-playing Pole whom he meets in Paris and helps him return to
Poland, and his brother Jurek (Stuhr).
     Zamachowski does a good job of contrasting his helpless self in
France and his gradually more confident self in Poland.  Delpy does not
have much screen time, but there's a nice contrast between her blushing
bride look in a flashback and her colder current self.  I found Gajos
quite appealing as the sad-eyed Mikolaj.  The script and plot are
clever, witty and observant, humor mixed with pathos--the scenes of the
return to Poland and the underground tunnel meeting stand out.  The
pacing tends to the slow side, especially at the beginning.  The music
is pleasant, light and playful.  The cinematography is pretty
straightforward, without too much flash.
     As BLUE was about liberty, WHITE is about equality, which shows up
in both the treatment of Karol's relationship with Dominique and the
idea of equality of economic opportunity in Poland.  The tone is quite
different from BLUE, but I felt that seeing WHITE helped me appreciate
BLUE more.  In particular, WHITE's depiction of post-Berlin Wall Poland
helped me see a political side of BLUE that I hadn't noticed before.
     There is some sex (though no nudity) and some violence.  WHITE
being a black comedy, there's also a nasty touch to some of the humor
and plot.
     I'd recommend this film for those who enjoy black comedy and
political satire--I think people who liked DELICATESSEN would like
WHITE, for example, though I'm not sure about those who liked HEATHERS
or HAROLD AND MAUDE (I liked all three).  For others, it might be worth
a video rental--in particular, it seems like it will be nice to see all
three films in the trilogy within a couple days of each other.

Author
Chad Polenz
White
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Zbigniew Zamachowski (Karol Karol), Janusz Gajos (Mikolaj), Julie
Delpy (Dominique), Jerzy Stuhr (Jurek), written by Krysztof Piesiewicz,
Krzysztof Kielowski, produced by Marin Karmitz, directed by Krysztof
Kielowski.
"White" is the second installment of Krzysztof Kielowski's "Three Colors"
trilogy. My ethnic origins are French and Polish so maybe I have some kind of
internal bias for liking this film which takes place in both France and
Poland (and was made by French and Polish filmmakers). But all of that is
really irrelevant because this is a good, moving film about love and freedom.
The story starts out in a French courtroom where a couple is getting a
divorce. The husband's name is Karol Karol, (Zamachowski), a depressed and
desperate man who loves his [soon to be ex-] wife Dominique (Delpy), but
doesn't know what he did wrong and doesn't know how to make things better. 
We then proceed to follow Karol around for a while which makes from some
good characterization and offbeat dialogue and situations. He is a Pole stuck
in France and wants to get back home, but has no money and no friends. Even
Dominique is unwilling to help him and we really can sympathize with him.
Karol is reduced to playing his comb like a harmonica, begging for change
until he meets another Pole named Mikolaj (Gajos), and the two become close
friends quickly. The two figure out a cunning way to sneak Karol back into
Poland. Maybe the situation in premise is difficult to relate to, but it is
the camaraderie between that two that makes the story so interesting, as
everyone knows how important, almost life-saving, a good friend can be.
But Karol's love for Dominique has not diminished. He becomes a con-man of
sorts, making a bundle of money through insider trading. Even through all
this great storytelling and characterization we can still sympathize for his
love for Dominique. He hatches a brilliant plan to get her back by faking his
own death.
I guess the final act works pretty much as you'd expect it to. It starts to
become a straight romance story, but all the while it's able to maintain its
good characterization.
"White" does harbor rather profound themes of love and relationships, but
it's more than a typical love story. It's a good film about living life to
the fullest, because unlike the characters, there's no guarantees of second
chances.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Bryant Frazer
     Bookended as it is by BLUE and RED, the second film in
Kieslowski's liberty/equality/fraternity trilogy is a welcome relief
from the sometimes tragic sensibility of the other two films.  WHITE is
about post-Communist Poland.  It is about the tricks that hold up our
own quests for "equality" (is there really such a thing outside of
mathematics?).  But most of all, it's a love story.
     Of course, all three of the films are love stories in a way;
but BLUE is a love story that ends as the film begins, and RED is a
love story once removed.  WHITE is a story about stubborn love, a sort
of co-dependent relationship that endures despite the best efforts of
both lovers.  Zbigniew Zamachowski plays Karol Karol, the impotent
hairdresser who is abandoned in Paris by wife Julie Delpy.  Unable to
support himself, the spurned lover eventually returns to his native
Poland, smuggling himself in inside a friend's suitcase.  Seething with
resentment, he makes a fortune in his newly capitalist homeland, and
then sets off on an elaborate plan to revenge himself on his wife.
Kieslowski makes some wry observations about the nature of capitalism
and the lust for "easy money." Karol doesn't simply want to make
himself the financial equal of his wife; he wants to become "more
equal" than she is.  That being the case, it's not enough for him
simply to make a fortune.  He wants to humiliate her, as well.
     He manages that, but the circumstances are an idiosyncratic
delight.  WHITE isn't lofty enough to avoid an occasional detour into
sober, existential territory, but the side trips add a little weight to
the story, which is at heart a marriage farce.  The sublime Zamachowski
pulls his best Chaplin routine here, and it pays off charmingly.  It's
no surprise that Delpy is radiant, and plays the ice queen well (my
favorite shot of Delpy is still her cameo in RED, where all three films
touch briefly).  In most ways, this film is the least of the trilogy --
WHITE is so conciliatory toward its audience that it threatens to float
away.  But at the end, it's anchored by a Chaplinesque moment of
revelation that justifies our attention and respect, and this film's
solid place in Kieslowski's admirable trilogy.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Zbigniew Zamachowski, Julie Delpy, Janusz Gajos.
Screenplay:  Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz.
Director:  Krzysztof Kieslowski.
     Give this to Krzysztof Kieslowski: he's been busy and he hasn't
been repeating himself.  It is understandable that he announced his
retirement from filmmaking at this year's Cannes Film Festival where
RED, the third segment of his THREE COLORS trilogy, premiered; three
films in two years is enough to burn anyone out.  Still, it is a shame
to see such a versatile director leave the scene.  Last year's BLUE was
a marvelous psychological drama; WHITE is an acidic little comedy.
WHITE is also somewhat less satisfying than BLUE, well-acted and
directed but suffering from basic deficiencies in motivation and
characterization.
     WHITE tells the story of Karol Karol (Zbigniew Zamachowski), a
meek Polish hairdresser living in Paris with his beautiful new wife
Dominique (Julie Delpy).  As the film opens, Dominique is suing Karol
for divorce, on the grounds that he has been unable to consummate their
marriage.  His bank accounts frozen and thrown out on the street, Karol
finds himself reduced to panhandling on the Metro.  There he meets
Mikolaj (Janusz Gajos), a kindly but depressive bridge player who helps
Karol return to Poland.  Once back in his homeland, Karol sets out to
change his life.  Through complicated wheeling and dealing, Karol puts
himself in a position of power, from which he will be able to even the
score with Dominique.
     Kieslowski does a superb job from the outset of establishing that
Karol is a man who is, both literally and figuratively, on the
receiving end of life's excrement.  Humiliated, broke and cuckolded
(over the phone, no less, in a scene both hysterical and sad), Karol is
a perfect stand-in for anyone who has felt positively overwhelmed by
life.  Zbigniew Zamachowski gives a delightful physical performance as
the rumpled but sympathetic Karol, appearing perpetually bewildered and
on the verge of tears.  However, he is less successful at conveying
Karol's transformation into a slick go-getter.  Like many events in
WHITE, the change occurs too quickly, and it seems to be presented as
an article of faith that this is something that was always within
Karol, just requiring the right setting--at least I didn't see it on
the screen.
     Even more perplexing is Dominique, whose feelings for Karol are
believably convoluted but who turns into a bizarre creation by the
film's conclusion.  There is a surreal quality to the events of WHITE's
last fifteen minutes, a quality which sabotages any sense of
character.  The sequence which theoretically explains this change
(featuring an effective use of an all-white screen as an accent)
doesn't, at least not as believably as it should.  Julie Delpy, like
Zamachowski, nails her character in the beginning of the film, but
drifts into something unrecognizable by the final scene.
     It's unfortunate that the characters are so unfocused, because
Kieslowski's exploration of equality is intriguingly multi-faceted.
Most obviously, there is Karol's attempt to "get even" with Dominique,
an attempt with unexpectedly successful results.  However, there is
also an examination of post-Communist economics in Poland, and how
Karol builds from his luck two-franc piece into a wealthy
entrepreneur.  As Karol's brother notes, "This is Europe now," as Karol
finds he can indeed buy anything.  Money serves both as a tool of
equality and inequality, allowing Kieslowski to question the benefits
of the new world order.  WHITE is full of interesting ideas, more than
ten average films put together, but they're just not executed all that
smoothly.  Moments of brilliance shine out in WHITE; others are dulled
by chaotic characterizations.
