Title
Review for Woodstock (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
In 1969, Woodstock, New York, was the site of rock
and roll's most famous music festival.  The massive,
three day concert was declared a national disaster
area when 400,000 people descended on the site.
There was a lack of food, water, and shelter.
Heavy rains made the concert a mudbath.
Transportation was impossible: with the roads snarled
for miles, the bands were flown in by helicopter.
But Woodstock is remembered for its positive aspects.
Many of the top acts of the day performed there,
and despite the difficulties faced by the massive
crowds, there was no hint of violence.  This lengthy
documentary (nearly four hours) captures the fleeting
moment in American history when hippies were the
dominant subculture.
Much of the documentary is concert footage.  The
acts vary in both style and quality.  Legendary British
group The Who are the loudest.  Pete Townshend closes
their set by throwing his guitar into the audience.
John Sebastian, former lead singer of the Lovin' Spoonful,
is the wimpiest.  There's Crosby Stills & Nash in
their second gig, and blues screecher Janis Joplin and
guitar god Jimi Hendrix a year before their drug
overdose deaths.  (The lead singer of Canned Heat,
another Woodstock performer, would also soon die of a
drug overdose).
One has to suffer Joan Baez's martyrizing her
imprisoned husband, and also her relentless vocal
trilling.  Jefferson Airplane (a hippie band if ever
there was one) is a bit disappointing, but white
blues singer Joe Cocker is awesome (those are
guys doing the backing vocals?).  Sly and the Family
Stone, perhaps the best band at Woodstock, mix rock
and soul into a formidable rhythm section.  Santana
makes an early career appearance, with Carlos Santana
competing with Alvin Lee of Ten Years After for the speed
guitarist award.  Hendrix is less interested in speed
than in feedback, which he uses to create a wild wah-wah
version of the national anthem.  But Hendrix performs
to only a handful: he arrived late to Woodstock,
and the crowds have vanished, leaving a mountain of
litter behind.
All I can ask is, where is Creedence Clearwater Revival?
One of the top bands of 1969, they appear in the credits
but are nowhere in the soundtrack.  Did the cameramen
snooze through their set?  Perhaps they were roaming the
grounds; the concert scenes are mixed with scenes of
hippies bathing naked, nursing their infant babies, and
standing in line to call their parents on pay phones.
Some of these parents are interviewed: some are sympathetic
with the polite, peaceful hippies, while others consider
them to be trespassers and animals.  There is an announcement
from the stage that the brown acid is bad.  The film also
conducts the first interview of somebody exiting a portable
outhouse: 'How were the facilities?' 'Sure beats the
woods, man!'
The editing is sometimes sloppy, and the cinematography
is overly fond of split screens and extreme close ups
(Stephen Stills has bad teeth).  But the documentary
deserves its registry in the Library of Congress; not
just for the great rock performances, but because it
best captures the brief era of flower power.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
