Title
Review for What's New, Pussycat (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Officially, this is what started it all in the film career of 
Woody Allen. From this uneven, overlong mishmash of a movie, 
you'd never guess he'd go on to become one of the most talented 
filmmakers of the 20th century (as opposed to the amazing movie 
directors of the Renaissance). WHAT'S NEW PUSSYCAT goes 
from a semi-interesting sex farce to a stunningly long and inane 
conclusion that even includes a go-kart chase.
        Peter "Pink Panther" Sellers plays a Don Juan who 
has women falling all over him. He gets plenty of sex out of it but 
is hounded by women wanting commitment. (Kind of a sex and 
race reversal version of SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT.) Sellers tells all 
his problems to his therapist (Peter O'Toole in a terrible black-
haired hippie fright wig... it frightened me, anyway), who is 
infinitely more screwed up than any of his patients because 
he's dying of horniness. O'Toole throughout the movie tries to 
force himself upon woman after woman, in that light-hearted 
brand of sexual harassment humor bred only in the 60's.
        Meanwhile, Allen himself has a minor role as Sellers' 
friend, who is in love with Romy Schneider, one of the women 
who wants Sellers to marry her. So Sellers, Allen and O'Toole all 
want Prentiss, although all three of them lust after scores of other 
beautiful women over the course of the movie. Allen ends up with 
Ursula Andress, "a close personal friend of James Bond," who 
sleeps with him after he buys a sports car.
        For 1965, WHAT'S NEW PUSSYCAT has a surprising 
amount of sexual content. There wouldn't be a plot without the 
sex, even down to the characters' occupations. Sellers is a fashion 
magazine editor who has a regular parade of models in and out of 
his bed and Allen is the guy who dresses and undresses strippers 
at a nightclub for twenty francs a week. ("It's all I could afford," 
Woody remarks.) In his later films, Allen would reduce sex to a 
supporting role with his other favorite topics of death, God and 
food (in that order), but in WHAT'S NEW PUSSYCAT sex is the 
front-and-center theme.
        Like the 1963 movie SEX AND THE SINGLE GIRL, the 
sexual tensions and desires from the first part of the movie 
manifest themselves in a wild, everything-but-the-kitchen-sink 
conclusion, but here the movie is severely hindered by the silly, 
convulted finale. In SEX, the conclusion was the best part of the 
movie, but with Woody Allen, a more laid-back verbal humor 
works best, not an overblown slapstick farce, particularly if he's 
only onscreen in a few scenes. When taking the starring role 
and directorial reigns in the early 70's classics BANANAS and 
SLEEPER, Woody would prove his talent for slapstick. But 
nothing is proven here, except that Sellers, Allen and Andress 
didn't learn their lesson the first time out. They would all three 
do much worse two years later with the 007 parody CASINO 
ROYALE.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
