Title
Review for Rocky V (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ron Schnell
     ROCKY V (Sylvester Stallone, writer, Michael S. Glick, Executive
Producer) has gotten a lot of press as the "last" of the ROCKY movies.
It is certainly one of the best.  After ROCKY (Best Picture, Best
Director, Best Editing, 1976 Academy Awards), none of the sequels really
had the same kind of "feel" about them.  After seeing ROCKY V the reason
becomes clear.  ROCKY V is directed by John G. Avildsen, who has not
directed another ROCKY since ROCKY I.  Mr. Avildsen has the ability to
direct people so gently, and to direct action so forcefully, that the
effect on the audience is quite stirring.  Mr. Stallone's new found
love for comedy is also evident in this film.
     ROCKY V starts where ROCKY IV left off, which has been the case in
all of the ROCKY films.  Rocky (Sylvester Stallone) has just finished
knocking out the Russian boxer/killer and flys home to meet the press
and face his next challenge.  The first thing one notices hearing Rocky
talk is that dumb-sounding, slurring voice that we have all come to
know.  Only this time it is noticeably dumber-sounding, as are the
things Rocky says.  What we eventually find out is that Rocky has
sustained damage to his brain, which will prevent him from ever being
licensed to fight again (in the United States).  This is a similar
problem to one found in ROCKY II, in which doctors tell Rocky that he
will never be able to fight again without risking blindness.  Somehow
though, director Avildsen really makes us believe that this will be the
end of Rocky as a boxer.  To make matters worse, a crooked accountant
has lost all of Rocky's money and house and leaves him destitute.  If
not for the pleading and crying of Rocky's wife Adrian (Talia Shire), he
would have immediately gone back in to the ring, probably risking his
life.  Rocky must retire and dedicate himself to figuring out a way to
support his wife and son Rocky Jr. (Sage Stallone).  Rocky Jr. is now
of grade-school age and will have to move back to the projects of
Philadelphia.  Eventually, Rocky meets up with a young fighter from
Oklahoma named Tommy Gunn (Tommy Morrison), who wants Rocky to train him
to be a heavyweight contender.  This movie is about the conflicts
between all of these characters, a Don King-type fight promoter named
George W. Duke (Richard Gant), and Rocky's strong desire to get back in
to the ring so that he can give his family the life they deserve.
     ROCKY V marks the serious acting debut of both Sage Stallone, and
Tommy Morrison.  Sage is one of two of Sylvester Stallone's sons by
ex-wife Sasha Stallone.  After seeing his performance in this film,
there is no question that we will be seeing him again.  His natural
talent for acting could be described as better than his father's.
Perhaps it is due to the fact that he is playing a character who has
many similarities to himself.  Tommy Morrison was chosen to play the
part of Tommy Gunn, solely based on his ability as a boxer, not as an
actor.  After seeing the film, I do not think that this was a good risk.
His acting could not be described as much better than poor, and it is
tough not to laugh when he speaks.  For those of you who do not like rap
music, be prepared to sit through a couple of long raps during action
scenes.  It's a lot different from the "Rocky Theme," or "Frank Stallone
Jr.," or "Survivor" (all music from previous ROCKYs).  A closing credits
song by Elton John is sure to get a lot of airplay from this movie.
Background music is still done by Bill Conti.  Burt Young returns to
play his role of Paulie.  He seems right at home returning to the slums,
and pulls no punches in trying to bring Rocky to reality.
     I found myself really feeling for Rocky for the entire movie.  His
situation is both believable and moving.  As in all sequels, I walked in
thinking, "This had better be the last one."  But as in all ROCKY
sequels (except maybe ROCKY IV which I viewed as terrible), I walked out
thinking, "Another one wouldn't be that bad."

Author
Nathan Shafer
          Capsule Review: Rocky, due to his brother-in-law's
     financial mismanagement, his wealth, and returns to his
     old neighborhood.  He is also forced by medical problems
     resulting from boxing to retire from fighting, while
     promoters clamor for more fights.  This is a nice change
     from the monolithic juggernaut of the last three
     films, and a return to the kind of characterization that
     made the first film great.  A bit heavy-handed at times,
     it still pleases and (wonder of wonders!) surprises
     from time to time.
     Many of the best stories I have read or seen on film have been
variations on the "test tube" model of plotting: take some chemicals (or
characters), throw them together in a test tube, and see what happens.
The more reactive and volatile the chemicals (or the characters), the
better.  Stories which follow this model usually follow one of two paths:
a "slice of life" path, which shows realisticly what would happen to
such characters in such a situation at a realistic pace, or a hyperbolic
path, in which events which would realistically occur over a span of
years take only a few weeks, or even a few hours, and in which
characters' motivations are amplified to a level approaching parody.
This film follows the second of these two paths.
     The problems facing the Balboa Clan as they move back into the
original seedy neighborhood they originally left behind are predictable:
Less physical comforts; neighbor-fans constantly hanging around; Rocky's
kid, who now has to attend the local public school, facing harassment by
the neighborhood "bad boys."  These are all present, and they are not
done especially realistically.  The kids in this "seedy" neighborhood of
Philly, for example, are all white, and the worst vices they seem to
have acquired are cigarette smoking and having pierced ears.  The image
of Philly's bad neighborhood seems to be a gentle one, pre-desegregation
and pre-crack.
     There is an extra complication, however: Tommy Gunn, a young boxer
from Oklahoma (he looks oh-so-farmboy, too!), who idolizes Rocky and has
come to Philly to seek him out, and receive the wisdom of this boxing
guru.  Rocky, seeing a chance at vicarious re-attainment of greatness,
takes Tommy under his wing to train him, while neglecting his son, who
desperately needs the kind of fatherly support Rocky bestows to Tommy.
Themes of fatherhood, parental neglect, and juvenile rebellion are
raised here, but the situations that come up in a matter of weeks seem
to be the kind that in real life occur over years.  This, however, does
not detract from the power of this side of the movie.  The questions
raised here are dealt with neither delicately nor subtlely, but neither
are they dismissed with platitudinous responses or excessive exposition.
     On the technical side, this movie uses to full effect the kind of
imagery the Rocky films have been built on: sweeping montages, images of
faces in the crowd, Adrienne saying Rocky's name, and of course punches,
punches, punches, seen from every angle and with blood on the mat to
spare.  The film, however, also takes advantage of Rocky's brain damage
to use some surreal imagery of Rocky's previous fight with Ivan Drago,
as well as some reminiscences of Mickey, Rocky's old trainer (played
once again by the wonderful Burgess Meredith).  This is in fact the
most nostalgic of the Rocky movies, looking back on them with fond
memories.  As Rocky prepares to move into the old neighborhood, he
doffs his old hat from the old days when he was muscle for a loan shark;
Adrienne returns to work at the pet store where she originally met Rocky;
Rocky returns to work at the gym where it all started.
     In many ways, this movie is like going home, after a rather
tasteless digression into world politics and several boring rehashes of
the old question of the "immovable object" and the "unstoppable
force."  It is especially pleasing to note that even within ten minutes
of the end I wasn't sure how the film would end; this film, unlike the
others, does not have the sunny Reagan Era Stallone who uttered such
lines as "Go for it."  Stallone seems to have, upon entering the 90s,
reflected some upon his own mortality, the transience of wealth, and
some of the simpler pleasures of life.

Author
Mark O'Hara
ROCKY V -- a favorite film at Badin High School, Hamilton, Ohio
Just like the three sequels before it, ROCKY V opens with a rehash of the 
last chapter.  We see the robotic Russian Ivan Drago (Dolph Lundgren) 
beating up on Rocky (Sylvester Stallone), before Rocky finally gathers the 
mental fortitude to snap back and floor the perfectly-conditioned giant.  
The sequence is extremely contrived, of course, the chronology of the fight 
tinkered with so that all of Rocky's comeback punches seem to come in an 
awesome few seconds.
This is one of the pluses that the underrated ROCKY V brings to fans of the 
series.  Director John G. Avildsen - who collected an Oscar for directing 
the very first installment - along with script writer Stallone, borrow 
liberally from the foundation built by the four other outings.  We get to 
see everyone and everything again - manager Mickey Goldmill, 
opponent-turned-friend Apollo Creed, even the black hat and duds worn by 
Rocky during his days working for a loan shark on the Philadelphia docks.  
We see Rocky's staunch supporters peopling the streets of the Italian 
market, as well as the statue (from ROCKY III) atop the steps of the 
temple-like Philadelphia Museum of Art.  It's not necessary to have watched 
numbers one through four in order to understand this closing chapter, but it 
makes for more enjoyment.
Here's the story:  Rocky is injured in the battle with the rock-faced 
Russian Drago, invoking late manager Mick's memory that something is "broken 
inside."  Mysteriously, Rocky never seeks a doctor's help.  (In fact, there 
is always a scarcity of promoters and press and especially medical personnel 
around Rocky's fights, considering they are supposed to be huge spectacles.) 
  Not until wife Adrian (Talia Shire) coaxes Rocky into a CAT scan does he 
discover the brain injury that could end his life.  Meanwhile, Don King-like 
promoter George Washington Duke (Richard Gant) attracts loads of attention 
with his mouth and his challenge for Rocky: give a title shot to my 
contender, Union Cane.  Rocky is sorely tempted, but Adrian keeps him from 
committing to any further matches.  What's especially hard, though, is 
Rocky's financial condition, a key component in the plot.  It seems Paulie 
inadvertently had Rocky sign a paper giving power of attorney to Rocky's 
accountant.  You guessed it - the guy invests the champ's millions and 
quickly loses them.
Predictability aside, Rocky's monetary ruin opens the story to compelling 
originality.  His estate auctioned off, Rocky moves his family into the 
South Philly rowhouse that he and Adrian bought as newlyweds.  We see some 
charming scenes with son Robert and Rocky kidding around, the boy showing 
great intelligence to Rocky's punchy and slangy style.  But Rocky is a good 
father, warning Robert about ways to act in the public school he must attend 
in the new neighborhood of "urban blight."
At least Rocky is a good father until a new young fighter comes all the way 
from Oklahoma to ask Rocky's guidance.  At first reluctant, Rocky grows to 
like the chance at still being in the ring, at least vicariously, through 
Tommy Gunn (Tommy Morrison).  The retired champ is flattered that he might 
establish a father-son relationship like the one Rocky had with Mick.  And 
they are successful together, much of Rocky's gut-punching greatness rubbing 
off on the young blonde pugilist.  The main question we want answered is how 
long can Tommy stand being called Rocky's boy?  How long will it be before 
the honey-tongued Duke lures Tommy over into his own slick side of the 
boxing game?
Humor contributes a lot to ROCKY V.  We still have Burt Young as Rocky's 
brother-in-law, a rummy hanger-on, a clichéd bumbling but lovable uncle to 
Rocky and Adrian's son Robert (Stallone's real-life son Sage Stallone).  And 
there's the wonderful exaggerated tone created by characters like George 
Washington Duke, the biggest ham since Apollo, and some over-the-top fight 
scenes that create as much laughter as fascination.
One of the most engaging parts of any ROCKY film is the montage.  "V" uses 
the technique well to tell a number of stories within the subplots.  We 
watch Rocky with protégé Tommy Gunn, training and coaching and mentoring, 
while Rocky's son Robert seeks attention but is shunned.  Because we've seen 
how close father and son really are, this drifting apart forms a serious 
threat to Rocky's success story:  it's clear that his family, such as it is, 
has always been more important to Rock than anything concerning the square 
circle.  Yes, it is overkill when Adrian says, "You're losing your family," 
but sometimes the big palooka needs a message to hit him square in the face. 
  My favorite sequence happens during a street fight.  Rocky is down and 
apparently out, flashes of memory adding to his trauma:  Ivan Drago's glare, 
his mouthpiece looking like steel teeth; Mick's gravelly voice belting out 
words of inspiration; a grainy shot of Rocky, eyes swollen shut, bright red 
blood poured suddenly over his face.  Avildsen has added some artful and 
gritty images here to explore Rocky's plight.  Even though Rocky's most 
dangerous weapon has always been his heart, how will he overcome the twinges 
of fear - and more directly, the brain damage - inflicted during combat with 
the Russian in the climax of ROCKY IV?
A brilliant stroke brings back Rocky's deceased manager Mickey; Burgess 
Meredith does a memorable cameo that ends up being one of the strongest 
scenes in the piece.  Bankrupt and disheartened, Rocky returns to the old 
gym where Mick first tutored him.  Mick willed it to Robert years before, 
and now Rock stands in the great dusty room and goes back into his memory to 
conjure Mick during a private moment just before Rocky fought Creed in the 
fluke title bout.  One can tell Meredith is 14 years older than he was in 
the 1976 ROCKY, but his veteran skills save the scene from being too 
sentimental, and help to provide Rocky with the incentive he needs to enter 
the other end of boxing.
Even though this final installment of ROCKY is ten years old, its themes 
strike home as very relevant.  Many of my students are inspired not only by 
Rocky's attitude and gutsy styles of training, but also by Bill Conti's 
music, an essential part of each film.  There's something mythical about the 
whole thing, the main plot lines involving glamorous rises and 
heart-breaking falls, underdogs overcoming high odds, father-son relations 
that are fatal or benevolent.  For fans of the ROCKY franchise, ROCKY V 
should be viewed carefully and not discounted as one of the best.

