Title
Review for Friday the 13th (1980)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jamey Hughton
You can probably blame `Friday the 13th' for all the putrid, Grade-Z
slasher film garbage that amassed in the 1980's. It was so popular among
horror movie fans that endless imitations begin spawning quickly
thereafter, drowning the Hollywood market in gore. Among these
imitations were eight `Friday' sequels (you heard right), but most
sucked the big one. People couldn't get enough, apparently, so the
slasher trend continued on throughout the years. I suppose the John
Carpenter classic `Halloween' initially started the horror craze that
lasted a healthy decade, but `Friday the 13th' brought the realization
that a horror movie could be lame and cheesy but still modestly received
by the public. Actually, despite the bad rap it often takes, the
original `Friday the 13th' isn't bad at all.
In fact, in comparison to the awful clones that followed, it may be a
flat-out masterpiece. The premise: a bunch of kids travel to Camp
Crystal Lake, where they are signed up as counselors for the approaching
season. Unfortunately, even before the young campers arrive, some
mysterious killer is knocking off the sex-crazed teens in singular (and
very gory) fashion. Of course, no one realizes they are being ruthlessly
hunted down until the finale, when the sole survivor stumbles upon their
rotting corpses and erupts in screaming. To once again quote Randy Meeks
(Jamie Kennedy), the legendary `Scream' character: `Their bodies will
come popping up in the last reel somewhere. Eyes gouged out, throats
slashed...' Yes siree, Randy knows his sh-t.
Despite being a blatant rip-off of the undeniably superior `Halloween',
this entry manages to generate a fair tally of scares. The mass
murdering takes a while to get underway, bet when it does, there is some
nice tension and a few sufficient shocks. (HEAVY SPOILERS AHEAD, FOR
ANYONE WHO CARES). The best of all comes when a young Kevin Bacon (who
graduated from the experience unscathed) is stabbed through a bed
mattress
with an archery arrow. That's about as inventive as the proceedings get,
but for anyone interested in researching famous horror cinema, `Friday
the 13th' is a fun and frightening little experience.
As anyone who watched `Scream' also knows, Jason Voorhees is not the
actual killer. Get ready for this shocker, boys and girls: it's his
mother!!! Yes, Mr. Voorhees doesn't do laundry or bake chocolate chip
cookies anymore - she murders people to make end's meet. But there is a
motive for these homicidal tendencies. Back in 1958, little Jason
drowned in the lake because his supervising counselors were too busy
with.... other matters. So now, the lady is out to exact revenge at the
place where she lost her beloved son. It's a real tearjerker.
As with the majority of horror films, the characters and dialogue in
`Friday the 13th' are unanimously pathetic. I will say, however, that
those aspects are more interesting than in the following sequels.
Director Sean S. Cunningham establishes a nice chill in the air, and the
elaborate death scenes deliver on a fairly reliable basis. The movie is
still relatively idiotic, though. I paid particular attention to how
efficiently Mrs. Voorhees could swing an axe while her face is off
screen. Funny, when the killer's identity is revealed and Betsy Palmer
steps in as the deranged matriarch, she can barely muscle up enough
strength to pick up a machete (and has even more trouble heaving it
toward the helpless victim). Despite this, along with numerous other
defects, `Friday the 13th' will still give you the jitters when you
watch it late at night.
Horror fanatics will definitely want to look into seeing this puppy,
mainly because it christened the most successful slasher movie franchise
in history. By all means, don't bother with any of the sequels (although
a few have some stylish attributes). Pick up this ancient fright flick
from the cobwebs at your local video store, and pop it into the VCR this
Halloween. The ending is terrible, but `Friday the 13th' is not as
unlucky as the title may suggest.
Comments Appreciated!  ">HREF="mailto:movieviews@hotmail.com">

Author
Joe Chamberlain
This is the first film in what would become the most successful series of
horror films of all time. A fair warning to those of you who might be
inclined to watch this movie for the first appearance of everyone's favorite
goalie-mask-wearing homicidal maniac. Jason, the guy who single handedly
controlled the overpopulation problem around the Crystal Lake area, doesn't
start his quest to find the most interesting household item with which to
kill someone until the sequel. While he does have a small role in this film,
we the audience have to depend on another blood thirsty maniac to rack up
the body count. The plot, like every other Friday The 13th movie goes
something like this -- crazed killer murders as many unsuspecting teenagers
as he/she/it possibly can in the space of a 90 minute movie. The reasons
that the afore mentioned unsuspecting teenagers come into contact with the
bloodthirsty killer are usually of little importance to the story. But for
those of you out there that might actually care about such trivial matters
in a movie such as a plot, here are the basics. A bunch of unsuspecting
teens get a summer job at a long closed summer camp. They are days away from
the arrival of the kids and they are spending their time fixing the place up
and making sure it is ready for the kids. Sadly, they start being butchered
one by one by the bloodthirsty killer.
At this point I would usually say something about the quality of acting,
directing or maybe something about the high quality of the production. Since
I'm not going to do that, feel free to assume that if I did, it wouldn't be
positive. I will say that this movie looks as if it was made for about a
hundred bucks, and that includes the actors' salaries. If you are used to
recent horror films like Scream, you are in for a bit of a surprise. The
only saving grace for Friday The 13th is that it was really the first of its
kind, with the killer taking real pride in their work. Using as many methods
of murder as they could. None of this single murder weapon stuff life that
unimaginative Leatherface in Chainsaw Massacre, or the creatively stifled
imagination of Halloween's Michael Myers who just used brute force or a
really big kitchen knife. Nope, in the Friday The 13th movies, you can
always count on the killer taking great pride in his work.
One fun fact about this movie is that the cast includes a very young Kevin
Bacon, although after this movie it is a wonder he ever worked again. The
main reason to see Friday The 13th is if you want to watch all of the series
from the beginning. If not, stick with the later films with Jason,
everyone's favorite hockey fan. Friday The 13th is the sort of movie that is
fun to sit down and get a couple of scares from, just don't sit down
expecting a whole lot.

Author
Shark Trager

A group of camp counsellors are terrorised by the mother of a boy who
drowned at the Camp 20 years beforehand.
I went into this movie with a lot of baggage. I'm 26 years old and
have never seen it before, although when I was at school it seemed
that everyone had seen it. I had avoided it because I didn't like that
kind of movie. I avoided HALLOWEEN and A NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREET for the same reason. Then a few years ago I finally saw those
two movies and thought they were excellent. For various reasons I
still hadn't gotten around to viewing FRIDAY THE 13TH until today. And
I have to admit, I enjoyed it. Granted it's not the greatest work of
art ever to hit the screen, but it had one or two real
jump-out-of-your-seat sections (for me at least!).
Firstly, though, the music. Right from the beginning it had some
Herrmann-esque qualities, as I'm sure I heard both some PSYCHO and
NORTH BY NORTHWEST riffs in there. Kevin Bacon himself is not an actor
who I have ever liked, so seeing him offed gave me a certain sense of
satisfaction, and just when I was thinking that the movie wasn't as
gory as I was expecting, the axe entered the head. A great scene, with
the tension built up well.
The acting was not bad, and Steve the camp manager, played by Peter
Brouwer was creepy enough for me to think that he had something to do
with the murders until he was dealt with himself.
I mentioned Bernard Herrmann before, and it is interesting to note
that whereas in Hitchcock's PSYCHO, for which Herrmann wrote the
score, it is the mother who lives on through the son, here it is the
son who lives on through the mother (Betsy Palmer).
The one true shock scene for me was definitely the one near the end
when Jason, the dead son, appears out of the water. I don't know how
well publicised that scene was in the past, but I certainly wasn't
expecting it. But am I wrong in thinking that Jason wears a hockey
mask in the later movies? I've never seen any of them, but this one
certainly entertained me enough to try to get hold of Part 2, if only
to find out where the hockey mask comes in to play.
So, all in all, an enjoyable movie, for which I award it 7 out of 10.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Friday the 13th (1980) * out of ***** - Cast: Betsy Palmer, Adrienne King,
Kevin Bacon. Directed by: Sean S. Cunningham. Running Time: 95 minutes.
The first film in a ridiculously long movie series about a crazed (almost
supernatural) killer in a hockey mask named Jason. Jason stalks Camp Crystal
Lake, killing naughty teens. Many people don't remember that in this, the
first installment, Jason wasn't the killer. He was merely a young camper who
had supposedly drowned while the camp's counselors were off having sex, and
now his mother was killing all the counselors at Camp Crystal Lake for
revenge. Dull, even by cheesy slasher-movie standards. Those who criticize
horror films as being sexist towards women should note that the lone
survivor of the film is a woman. Kevin Bacon, in one of his earliest roles
which I assume he'd like to forget, plays one of the counselors. [R]
Friday the 13th Part 2 (1981) * out of ***** - Cast: Betsy Palmer, Adrienne
King. Directed by: Steve Miner. Running Time: 87 minutes.
The second film isn't as ridiculous as most probably think, but it's just as
dull and padded as the first one. Five years after the events of part 1
(although only one year in real time... so technically it's 1985), Jason
(who isn't superhuman yet, just a demented man living in the woods) journeys
to the suburbs to kill the only survivor of part 1. Then, a group of kids go
through counselor training (translation: have sex) at a camp right next door
to Camp Crystal Lake. Soon, they are getting picked off one by one. Again,
the lone survivor is a woman, but the ending doesn't make any sense. The
heroine thinks she's safe with her boyfriend, until Jason explodes through
her window and takes her. A flash of white, and then we see paramedics
taking her away. She asks what happened to her boyfriend, and the film ends.
Hmmm. Jason has not acquired his hockey mask yet, so he wears a cloth sack
on his head. [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.
