Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
Number of Reviews
28

Author
Steve Rhodes
Liz is a hot-blooded young woman with a sexy young lover.  No, not the
young Elizabeth Taylor.  The clock is on English time, and it's set to
1554.  The woman in question is Queen Elizabeth I, and the movie,
ELIZABETH, covers the time just before and after the 25-year-old woman
is crowned queen.
Indian director Shekhar Kapur's vision of Elizabeth is as a modern
heroine, lover, and ruler.  Michael Hirst's script advances that view by
giving her dialog as fresh and bland as a modern novel.  Typical of the
insipid lines, are Elizabeth's statements, "I do not like wars.  They
have uncertain outcomes."
With the lovely and intelligent Cate Blanchett, from OSCAR AND LUCINDA,
cast as the lead, the movie bursts with potential.  The largely wasted
supporting cast includes SHINE's Geoffrey Rush, JUDE's Christopher
Eccleston, STEALING BEAUTY's Joseph Fiennes, JURASSIC PARK's Richard
Attenborough, COLONEL CHABERT's Fanny Ardant, SHADOWLANDS's Edward
Hardwicke, and even Sir John Gielgud in a cameo as the Pope.
Even with all of this promise, the film cries out for a one-word review:
Confusing.
With lavish sets by John Myhre, luxurious costumes by Alexandra Byrne,
radiant cinematography by Remi Adefarasin and stirring music by David
Hirschfelder, the film is a treat for the eyes and the ears, except for
the dialog.  With the center speakers turned off, the movie would make a
top-rated silent picture.
The writer and director get the visuals perfect but have great
difficulty in creating a coherent story.  Even those, like myself, who
consider themselves students of English history will have trouble
following the movie's details.  Filmed on the dark side, many of the
characters, who look similar, dart in and out of scenes without ever
establishing motivations for their actions.  Elizabeth's part is well
developed, but the supporting cast all have underwritten roles.
Although the overall setup for the story is clear, I posit that if they
were to have a pop quiz at end of the movie, most audiences would have
trouble identifying the characters and explaining their roles.
The movie opens with Queen Mary, a.k.a., Bloody Mary, having English
citizens burned at the stake for rejecting the "one-true Catholic
Church."  She imprisons her Protestant, half-sister Elizabeth with the
hopes of hanging a charge of treason on her.  "Why must we tear
ourselves apart with the small question of religion?" Elizabeth asks her
accusers as she is thrown in prison in the Tower of London
Elizabeth is a lithe, stunning and levelheaded beauty.  In contrast,
pudgy Queen Mary (Kathy Burke) seems a paranoid lunatic.  When Mary
dies, Elizabeth inherits a bankrupt kingdom with no army.  A rebellious
Mary of Guise hosts hostile French troops ready to make war on England.
The rest of the movie has a swarm of supporting characters in a
convoluted series of conspiratorial subplots.  The machinations are as
thick as they are confusing.  To develop them into a comprehensible
story, the filmmakers should either have added an extra hour to the
film's length or eliminated some of them.  Do we really need a royal
cross-dressing bisexual scene?
If writer Hirst and director Kapur are successful with this modern
adaptation of the story of Queen Elizabeth I, the future possibilities
are limitless and potentially appalling.  Perhaps, Christian Slater as
Julius Caesar?  Hirst could give him some snappy dialog like, "Hey
Brutus, what you doin' here?"  Please, no.
ELIZABETH runs 2:04.  It is rated R for violence, sex and nudity and
would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Elizabeth is the tale of Queen Elizabeth and her reign over England.  Cate
Blanchett plays the part of Elizabeth, who has a lot of problems in her life. 
Elizabeth has been accused of a crime and is threatened with the death penalty.
 The problem is that she is next in line to become the Queen of England.  When
her sister dies, she will become queen.  The only way she won't become queen is
if her sister decides to put her to death.  Her sister dies before she can make
the decision, and Elizabeth takes the thrown.
Elizabeth is extremely educational for children who don't know about the story
of Queen Elizabeth and her rule over England.  Elizabeth was like a history
text book, only a lot more interesting and fun to watch.  If it wasn't rated R,
many kids should see this moving and extremely educational story.  Elizabeth
ruled for over forty years, and people still talk about the great leader.  In
the film, we see why she is loved by so many people.  The way Elizabeth set
things up way back when is still the way things go in England.  
When Elizabeth comes to take power over England, she is a little overwhelmed. 
She is faced with making speeches, making important decisions, and pleasing all
of her people.  She is certainly a leader with a sense of humor.  She keeps the
people entertained, but she does her job at the same time.  Some people do not
like the decisions that Elizabeth is making.  A few attempts of murder have
been made towards Elizabeth.  This is a very hard time for Elizabeth.    
Everyone is forcing Elizabeth to marry.  She doesn't want to marry anyone, but
if she did marry someone it would by Lord Robert, played by Joseph Fiennes.  He
has been with Elizabeth for a long time, even before she became queen.  His
performance is very strong, and it only adds to the greatness of the film.  The
King of Spain is also trying to marry Elizabeth.  She decides she doesn't want
to be with anyone, and she will avoid men from now on.  She shaves her head
because she does not want to be attractive at all.  She doesn't want to be
married or to be with any man.    
The costumes in Elizabeth are outstanding.  Elizabeth's wardrobe is very
impressive ranging from extremely colorful dresses to very dull ones.  All of
them look very realistic.  The scenery is also realistic.  A lot of time and
effort was put towards the wonderful scenery pieces.  The castles in which many
people live are very nicely put together.  It looked like the movie was shot
back then, and it wasn't a recreation of the whole thing.  The film is very
dark and serious, and I liked that a lot.  There was little humor to it all,
which made it even more powerful.  Elizabeth shows how scary it was back in
those times.  Large numbers of people are tortured by Elizabeth's decisions.  
The best part of the entire film was Cate Blanchett's performance as Elizabeth.
 It was very surprising, considering that we don't see her in movies that
often.  Cate Blanchett's performance as the Queen Elizabeth was the best acting
performance of 1998.  Blanchett deserves an Oscar for the difficult role she
played.  She made you feel Elizabeth's pain about the tough positions she was
being put into.  The performance given by Blanchett was extremely moving and
powerful.  Her performance brought a lot into the movie, and if another actress
were to play her, I'm not sure if it would have worked.    
The Bottom Line- It was as golden as the story it told.

Author
Michael Redman
Modern cynical observers maintain that it's virtually impossible for a
virtuous person to enter politics and retain their morals. They say that the
backroom wheeling, dealing and backstabbing will corrupt anyone. Secrecy and
treachery in government are the norm according to the jaded.
As "Elizabeth" demonstrates, this is nothing new. But in the 16th century the
backstabbing was literal. If they were lucky, political enemies were tossed
into prison without a trial. Others were beheaded or burned at the stake. How
long could a newcomer survive without making shady deals?
Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett), daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, is living
in the country at her step-parents' house as her half-sister Queen ("Bloody
Mary") Mary (Kathy Bates) rules England. Elizabeth is a delicate pale beauty
with ginger hair frolicking in the fields. Mary is an unpleasant crass monarch
lurking in the shadows while she burns heretics. It's not difficult to decide
who the film wants us to like.
In a Britain that is torn apart by religious wars, Catholic Mary is afraid of
Protestant Elizabeth but won't sign the execution orders. She has her thrown
in the Tower Of London. Elizabeth survives and when Mary dies in 1558, she is
crowned Queen of England 
She is immediately faced with bad news. The army is in shambles; the treasury,
empty and they face danger from domestic and foreign enemies on every side.
Her court is filled with conspirators and there are very few people she can
believe. One trusted advisor, Sir William Cecil (Richard Attenborough) tells
her that she is in mortal danger until she produces an heir. Assassination
attempts prove him correct.
Cutting ties with Rome, she creates another powerful foe. The Pope release
English Catholics from allegiance to her and suggests that her death would be
a good thing for the church. A priest with that messages is dispatched to key
English families.
Pressured to marry either a French duke or Spanish king to forge political
alliances, Elizabeth shows that she is headstrong and refuses either. She
prefers the companionship of Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes). According to the
film, the Virgin Queen was certainly not one in the modern sense of the word.
Her bedroom scenes with Dudley demonstrate the hotblood that goes along with
her hothead.
Elizabeth's master spy Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush) does her dirty
work, eliminating foes by one means or another. Especially impressive is his
meeting with Mary of Guise (Fanny Ardant), the French Queen of Scotland, who
is amassing French troops on the English border.
The film looks great. As with other period dramas, the settings and costumes
are wondrous on the screen. A problem that I have with most such stories is
that it is difficult to tell what is fact and what is made up for the film.
There are historical inaccuracies here, but none that get in the way of the story.
Much of the movie's strength is in its actors. Blanchett is captivating as the
fragile young woman who grows into strength. Fiennes is adequate although
nothing special. Ardant is a breath of fresh air although she is given little
screen time. Although an enemy, she is the warmest character. Outstanding is
Rush as Elizabeth's icy enforcer. More of Walsingham's exploits would have
been appreciated.
The film's major flaw is that the numerous plots and maneuverings are
difficult to follow. Fifteen years of history are compressed into a couple. As
conspirators move in the shadows, many look alike and it would be difficult to
tell the players even with a scorecard. Although the general plot is
understandable, individual scenes are confusing. Without a strong background
in English history, it's often difficult to tell what is going on. After the
film was over, I understood what happened, but I wasn't sure exactly who did
what or even who was who.
[This appeared in the 12/3/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Michael Dequina
In 1558, the young, naive Princess Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett) is
proclaimed Queen of England after the death of her devoutly Catholic
half-sister, Queen Mary I (Kathy Burke).  Being Protestant and illegitimate
(she was borne of an extramarital affair by King Henry VIII), Elizabeth
arrives on the throne with a fair share of enemies within her country as
well as abroad.  As forces ranging from French queen Mary of Guise (Fanny
Ardant) and the Duke of Norfolk (Christopher Eccleston) plot against her,
Elizabeth takes a stand with the help and guidance of ever-loyal Master of
Spies Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush).
Anyone expecting a typically stately, in manner and in pace, British
historical drama will be jolted by Shekhar Kapur's stylish and fast-paced
"historical thriller," in which Queen Elizabeth I's rise to the throne and
resulting loss of innocence plays not unlike that of--yes--Michael
Corleone's in _The_Godfather_.  Michael Hirst's screenplay does not offer
any true insight into what made Elizabeth tick, Blanchett's effortlessly
commanding Queen is no less a fascinating character.  Blanchett is just one
of a uniformly excellent cast, which also includes Joseph Fiennes as
Elizabeth's love interest, Lord Robert Dudley.   Even if I did not
particularly learn anything from it, I was completely engrossed by
_Elizabeth_, which not only makes the traditionally stuffy and aloof
British costume drama accessible, but entertaining and exciting as well.
(opens November 6)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Ssg722@aol.com
If President Clinton watched this film, he might find a way out
of his current dilemma using historical precedent. He could simply
declare himself a virgin! That's what Queen Elizabeth I did when her
lover betrayed her. Not only did she repudiate all her previous romps
between the sheets but, according to screenwriter Michael Hirst, she
never indulged in pleasures of the flesh again! Directed by
Dehli-based Shekar Kapur ("Bandit Queen"), this Tudor tale begins with
three Protestants being burned at the stake. If you weren't a
Catholic, that was your fate under zealous Queen Mary I. Mercifully,
after Mary's death in November, 1558, her half-sister Elizabeth,
daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, was proclaimed Queen of
England. This young girl (Cate Blanchett), returns from exile along
with her childhood sweetheart, Lord Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes) to
attend to matters of state - which include her country's bankruptcy,
lack of army, and serious threats from abroad. Her chief advisor
(Richard Attenborough) quickly warns her, "Until you marry and produce
an heir, you will find no security."  But she's not eager to do either
- in fact, she never does, despite proposals from both Spain and
France. Instead, she relies on her dour, enigmatic Master of Spies
(Geoffrey Rush) to guide her from sensual dalliances into developing
her supreme authority, which eventually includes chopping off her red
hair, painting her face dead white, and eschewing men. "How many
people have worshipped and died for this woman?" she muses, gazing at
her inspiration: the Virgin Mary. Filled with incessant intrigue and
boudoir betrayals, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Elizabeth"
is a powerful, pungent 7. Consider this: Queen Elizabeth I bathed only
once a year and even that was considered excessive.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
What provides 'Elizabeth' with a good deal of tension? As a viewer, it 
is not being sure that the woman who lends her name to the period will 
survive.  
We know she flourished, of course, but the early days of her reign were 
assailed by divers types of intrigues:  social, political, even sexual.  
And it is always fascinating to follow a figure when failure is not yet 
an impossibility.
We are quickly introduced to the religious persecution that went on in 
Great Britain in the 1550's.  Three Protestants are brutally shaved and 
tied to a mammoth stake, the square filled with onlookers.  A bishop of 
the Roman Church presides at the spectacle, and his very words, directed 
to the victims of the impending auto-de-fe, show the terrible results of 
politics mixing with religion.
Princess Elizabeth appears first outdoors, dancing with her ladies in 
waiting.  But she soon suffers the wrath of her half sister, Mary Tudor, 
the ailing Queen.  Imprisoned and then released, Elizabeth is warned not 
to consort with anyone perceived as dangerous to the Crown.  Various 
factions form, a Catholic one led by the Duke of Norfolk (Christopher 
Eccleston), a Protestant one led by Sir William Cecil (Sir Richard 
Attenborough) and Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush).  There are 
other players in the political intrigue, such as Mary of Guise (Fanny 
Ardant), and various ambassadors and underlings. After Elizabeth ascends 
the throne, she continues her affair of the heart with Sir Robert Dudley 
(Joseph Fiennes), but the reality of ruling sobers her attitude 
considerably.  The realm's coffers are depleted, its army and navy 
ineffectual.  France and Spain are enemies waiting for a chance to 
consume the entire island.  Does she have it in her to transform her 
callow and impish demeanor?  She is the daughter of Henry VIII, after 
all.
Already the recipient of a Best Actress Award from the Online Film 
Critics Society (OFCS), Cate Blanchett is riveting in the role of the 
Virgin Queen (the film's slightly sarcastic subtitle).  Blanchett's 
Elizabeth is vibrant and principled, spirited and sharp, beautiful and 
bitter.  In a very demanding role, Blanchett is able to assume an air of 
originality, a quiet determination to find or create the inspiration she 
will need to preserve the traditions and power of the monarchy.  Look 
for Blanchett's face on the big screen for years to come, and her name 
on many nomination lists.
Geoffrey Rush is just as strong.  As Francis Walsingham, a man returning 
to court after a period of exile, Rush depicts consummate dedication to 
Queen Elizabeth I.  Walsingham is charged with protecting the Queen, and 
he immerses himself in the arduous task of security.  There's a slight 
resemblance between Walsingham and Inspector Javert, whom Rush played in 
the recent remake of 'Les Miserables.'  Javert is nearly psychotic in 
his pursuit of the quasi-saint, Jean Valjean;  Walsingham's hunting of 
those disloyal to the Crown is almost as obsessive.  Much is implied by 
the script, perhaps a weak point:  perhaps we could have seen more of 
this early Renaissance knight commanding his forces.  We see him only 
once giving orders to a spy.  Still, Rush assists in a steady building 
of plot, until the film resonates with the overtones of power and 
ambition and love of country.
As Sir Robert Dudley, Joseph Fiennes gives a sturdy performance.  His 
part demands him to be first a sincere lover and later a treasonous 
outcast.  Fiennes plays the range well, except that at times he seems 
too arch, his chin beard and cocked brow the harbingers of cliché.  He 
is good here, but better as the Bard of Stratford in 'Shakespeare in 
Love', a fortuitous companion piece whose humor compliments the 
historical tone of 'Elizabeth'.
'Sumptuous' is an apt word for the costumes and cinematography.  They 
function in tandem to create a visual banquet of images.  The few 
peasants we see are appropriately scruffy.  More noticeably, the 
noblemen who are the focus of 'Elizabeth' are outfitted expertly.  The 
retinues of Queens Mary and Elizabeth are stunningly coordinated, and 
all the accoutrements worn by Blanchett are painstaking in their detail.  
My only criticism is the black leather look of the traitors, 
particularly the garb of the main villain, Norfolk.  But the look of the 
film is memorable, to say the least.  Like the momentum of the plot, the 
beauty of the photography causes the viewer a degree of awe;  toward the 
end there is a retrospective montage, almost a collage of greatest 
visual hits, that summarizes the rise and, more importantly, the growth 
of Elizabeth into a mature head of state.
Shekhar Kapur has accomplished a remarkable feat for a director with 
only a few films behind him.  The scenes are well shot, especially ones 
that exploit the mood of such a period piece - bishops held in a dingy 
cell, Walsingham looking down on them from a low-angle vantage.  And at 
the end, as Elizabeth assumes the aspect of born-again virgin, she 
becomes an icon of power and pallor, her servants applying the lead and 
arsenic to her skin.  As the undisputed ruler she crosses a roomful of 
admiring subjects, and for an instant she gets almost too close to the 
camera.  For an instant we are too close to this monarch.  Then we cut 
away to see the young but stern Elizabeth more distantly, and we glimpse 
the bright future of the British Empire.


Author
David Dalgleish
"I am not your Elizabeth; I am no man's Elizabeth."
Watching ELIZABETH is like watching history dissolve before your very 
eyes.  It retrofits the reign of Elizabeth the First (Cate Blanchett) 
so that it becomes no more than a spectacle for our amusement here at 
the end of the twentieth century.  The poverty and the sickness, the 
abuse of the working and servant classes; the philosophies and habits 
of thought, the alchemical sense of world and being--all these and 
much more are ignored, while our own supposed interests are transposed 
into another era.  This is the story of Elizabeth as we would like it 
to be: all politics, sex, treachery, a "Dynasty" for the 1500s.  It's 
not exactly a bad movie, just an appallingly unsubtle one.
It is, however, craftily told and well played, charting Elizabeth's 
rise to power and assumption of responsibility.  When we meet her, she 
is just another well-bred lady with no sense of what it takes to be a 
ruler; shortly thereafter, she ascends to the throne, bastard 
half-sister of Queen Mary, who is now dead.  By the end, she has 
settled into that throne as the Virgin Queen, red tresses shorn, face 
masked in white greasepaint, ice-cold, diamond-hard.  The path she 
takes is a difficult one.  She has to tiptoe through the minefields of 
political expediency: Spain and France vie for her affection, hoping 
to subsume England through marriage; the factions in her own court 
plot her downfall, principal among them Lord Norfolk (Christopher 
Eccleston); she tries to balance her love for Lord Robert Dudley 
(Joseph Fiennes) against the nation's need for her to marry wisely and 
well and bear a child.
Elizabeth is unique among this dramatis personae: not only is she a 
woman, she's a time-traveller too.  She is not a historical figure, 
but a refugee from today, a mouthpiece for comfortably liberal PC 
beliefs: she's a feminist, she advocates freedom of religion, she's 
sexually liberated.  It's not that Elizabeth wouldn't make a good 
feminist icon--she does--but refusing to implicate her in her own time 
and its attendant prejudices means that her iconic status remains 
unearned.  It is too easy to identify with her, to root for her.  A 
woman who embodied progressive ideals despite the burden of her own 
assumptions and weaknesses would be a genuine icon.  A woman who 
retroactively embodies contemporary ideals--and their attendant 
prejudices--becomes merely a vehicle for the scriptwriter.  She has no 
interior life, no sense of human complexity.  She is perfect, 
transcendent: she is all surface, all illusion.
Blanchett's performance does make it a very convincing illusion, and 
the other actors too impart a zest and engagement to material that 
doesn't really deserve it.  They brood, they strut, they emote, they 
connive, all on cue, all by the numbers, with that impeccable sense of 
not-quite-overplayed theatricality that the Brits do so well.  
(Australians do it well too, apparently: Geoffrey Rush is deliciously 
wicked as Walsingham, an utter bastard but a loyal advisor.)   But the 
performances, and Remi Adefarasin's sumptuous photography, are rather 
spoiled by Shekhar Kapur (BANDIT QUEEN), whose direction seems 
inspired by a nigh-unbreachable diktat: never let a shot last more 
than five seconds, or, if you do, make sure the camera is always 
moving.  Coverage of a scene is one thing; this is smotherage.  It 
betokens a nervousness about the material, a refusal to let it stand 
on its own merits, and serves as a smokescreen to hide the hollowness 
of the thing, the lack of any authentic historical perspective.
It may seem rather unfair to criticize the movie for its 
ahistoricity: it is not an uncommon problem in period pieces, and it 
is to some extent a forgivable one.  We want to see the bright 
costumes, the sprightly dances, the hallowed rituals.  We don't want 
to see the dirt, the squalor, the disease.  We want story, not 
sociology.  But still: the sense in ELIZABETH that history exists 
solely for our entertainment is persistent and aggravating.
Consider a love scene in Elizabeth's bedroom: the bed happens to be 
veiled by translucent silk hangings, of the kind found in your average 
soft-core sex flick, so that the coyly half-shown lovemaking has that 
hazy-focus art-porn look.  Maybe Elizabeth's bedroom really did look 
like that, but I doubt it.  That's a minor quibble; the opening 
sequence is something else entirely.  It is a brutal depiction of 
heretics (i.e., Protestants) being burned at the stake.  While he 
elswhere opts for a sanitized version of Elizabethan life, Kapur's 
mise-en-scčne here is graphically bloody, sooty, grimy, real.  The 
scene's inclusion can be justified by only the flimsiest of pretexts; 
it is in effect being used for shock value, as a hook.  But real 
people died, real people burned, once upon a time, and there is 
something spurious and dishonest about Kapur's lackadaisical treatment 
of them.  ELIZABETH not only ignores the past, it exploits it.
The argument in favour of this approach may be that modernizing the 
material makes it more relevant: but the effect is precisely the 
opposite, for nothing has been learned.  By refusing to deal with 
Elizabeth I in her own terms, by dealing with her solely in our terms, 
the movie is of no interest to us, here, now, in 1998, except as 
diversion.  And it is, at times, a spectacular diversion, even if it 
is all overstatement.  If it were a book, all the key passages would 
be underlined, with exclamation marks--but, oh my, what fine-looking 
exclamation marks they would be.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
I had held myself back from seeing this prestigious film, a spicy
historical narrative on the early years of Queen Elizabeth+s reign,
because I perceived that it was going to have certain anti-Catholic
elements.  For the record, I don+t participate in industry-wide
boycotts, (nor do I condemn such), but I am sensitive in what I consider
to be personally offensive.  A critic being _offended_?  Mmm hmm.
But ultimately, my voice was being demanded to be heard, especially from
some close friends who (1) saw it/liked it, (2) pointed out that history
can+t be debated with.  The cheapie theatre had it playing.  The
nominations came in, and it unseated _Truman Show_.  Okay, okay, twist
my arm.
The movie opens with a tragic scene: three individuals, devout
Protestants, are being burned at the stake for heresy.  We don+t know
who they are.  Immediately our hearts go out to them.  Dying for
ideological differences is unheard of in the free world (but still
commonplace in Communistic and Islamic societies), and besides, they+re
praying.  And burning is gruesome.  Such is the opening point of the
film; controversial, but a sad truth.
For this to be the beginning, it is assumed that the film will keep the
religious element strong throughout the entirity of the film.  Not so.
The auspicous beginning is only a MacGuffin.  As the film progresses, it
loses interest in the ideological elements, and gains interest in
Elizabeth+s transformation from promiscuous lover to "virgin queen."
Violence first, and when it gets talky, switch to sex.  And back again.
Does that make the screenwriters unfair to Catholics?  Hmmm...  Late in
the film, another public execution occurs.  This time, three Catholics
having their heads chopped off and put on sticks.  It is clear that at
least one of them is very devout, and was in this dilemna because he
followed through with his religious convictions.  Fairness in
translation?  Not quite.
They were sentenced, not for heresy, but for being secretive political
adversaries of the Queen.  (Note that we don+t know if the ones killed
in the beginning had done the same).  Also, by this time we are jaded,
and the focus of the story at this juncture is far more interested in
the Queen+s personal love history than in the "deeper issues" of
ideology.  When one of the Catholic martyrs says, that they expect to be
remembered, Geoffrey Rush+s character smirks... "No they won+t."  Sadly,
he+s right.
This isn+t the only incident of awkward jabs where the Catholics are the
"bad guys".  They are scattered throughout, with little pricks, here and
there, as if they weren+t big enough to warrant a notice.  Take the
initial scenes at the Vatican.  You hear that ominous minor-key chord.
The rooms are dark and gloomy.  The bottom text is in Bigger letters, in
CAPS, THE VATICAN.  You see the Pope, played by John Gielgud, who+s not
Italian, and who sneers his way through the brief cameo.  Not a mention
is made about the historic changes about to occur in Trent, where a
Catholic Counter-Reformation revival was about to occur.  It is there
that reforms were made to stop the abuses that occurred in the clergy,
such as the misuses of indulgences.  But you wouldn+t know that from
this film.
Then there+s this Spanish friar, wearing a black garb, has a disheveled
appearance and is at times walking in slow-mo, with that same droning
minor-key chord.  Technically, this character+s only sin is that he+s
Spanish, and represents a threat to the queen that she will marry the
Spanish Duke.  And the sins of the Duke?  That he is crazy, has an
obnoxious laugh, and is a transvestite.  Yep.
I+ve heard Evangelical Protestants praise the film, but it does no
justice to them either.  Elizabeth+s chief aide, played by Sir Richard
Attenborough, is initially a powerful ally, but he degenerates into an
inept politician.  A nice guy, means well, but consistently making the
wrong calls.  He persuades the Queen to fight France in one scene, and
little children soldiers are killed.
Who+s the positive point-of-reference?  It+s not the Catholics, they+re
the ominous enemy.  Not the Protestants, they+re inept.  And not
Elizabeth.  She is totally dependent upon her aides.  The only character
who understands the fullness of the political dilemnas is Rush+s
character, a scheming, murderous, lothario.  Because he+s agnostic,
thus, not tied to any religious affiliation, he is the strongest hero in
the film.  And all Elizabeth does is rise up to the challenge of
trusting him.
I do not doubt that Elizabethan history has its high and low points, as
does Christian history.  But what _Elizabeth_ does is it takes all the
most campy elements of that historical period, and display it as much as
a sexual thriller as possible.  It+s the _Insider Edition_ hitting the
textbooks.
This is unfortunate, because there is something very deeply profound
that occurred during that period.  Elizabeth, in establishing
Anglicanism, declared perhaps the most major political and ideological
settlement in world history.  The phrase "VIA MEDIA" (In the Middle),
long the anthem for Anglicans and Episcopalians, is not uttered, not
once.  It means that the Anglicans are schisming with Papal authority,
but they are retaining the liturgy.  It means that they become Catholic
_and_ Protestant.  It is the triumph of compromise.
For a film that begins with the burning "heretics" at the stake, it
loses its focus.  The proper climax would be the instituting of
Anglicanism, the power of "Via Media", and the ensuing political calm.
But it doesn+t.  Instead, it shifts focus once it gets too talky, so
that when this issue is finally resolved, apathy had already settled in.
When the three Catholics are beheaded, we could care less whether they
had deep religious devotion or not.
I must re-emphasize: I am speaking for myself, and not for any existing
watchdog group.  If it sounds that I am reactionary, or overly
sensitive, so be it.  I recognize that art criticism is a subjective
experience, and there is no doubt that there may be devout Catholics out
there who have seen this film, and probably enjoyed it.  Subjectively
speaking, what I saw is enough for me to be lukewarm, in the worst of
ways.  The acting is great, the direction is unique, the cinemotography
is colorful... YAWN.  So what.  _Birth of a Nation_, among the most
racist movies ever made, is an artistic triumph too.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ELIZABETH (Director: Shekhar Kapur; screenwriter: Michael Hirst;
cinematographer: Remi Adefarasin; editor: Jill Bilcock; cast: Cate
Blanchett (Elizabeth I), Geoffrey Rush (Sir Francis Walsingham),
Christopher Eccleston (Duke of Norfolk), Joseph Fiennes (Lord Robert
Dudley, Earl of Leicester), Richard Attenborough (Sir William Cecil),
John Gielgud (the Pope), Vincent Cassel (duc d'Anjou), Fanny Ardant
(Mary of Guise), Kathy Burke (Queen Mary Tudor), James Frain (Alvaro,
Spanish Ambassador), 1998-UK)
Shekhar Kapur, an outsider from India, who admittedly knew little about
Elizabeth when assigned this film, offers his frisky but inaccurate
account of the young and fearful Elizabeth Tudor's ascension to the
throne, telling only what happened in the first five years of her reign.
The director is clearly more concerned with artful flourishes,
Elizabeth's lustfulness, and the modern ways to look upon a queen trying
to be a ruler of men, rather than exploring further the tragic and
specific drama of the times. This one's primarily a costume piece
melodrama that enjoyably emphasizes the conspiracies surrounding the
so-called Virgin Queen, who is destined to rule England's Golden Age for
some 40 years.
The film opens in 1554 on the last days of Bloody Mary's Catholic reign
and shows Protestants being burnt at the stake by orders of Mary (played
by Burke with spleen). The Protestant Elizabeth (played by Cate
Blanchett with ashen face and aplomb) is taken to the Tower. Elizabeth
is the half-sister to the barren Mary and is an enemy of hers because of
faith. But Mary is soon to be deceased and the crown is Elizabeth's by
1558.
The 25-year-old queen has to watch her back because of many foreign
conspiracies afoot,Vatican interference, the country's state of
bankruptcy, and the politically loaded marriage proposals from the
Spanish and the French. She receives full protection from the worldly
and ruthless Sir Francis Walsingham (in an underwritten role for
Geoffrey Rush), who will do anything to make sure she survives. One of
his best deeds for her, is to catch the powerful Duke of Norfolk (played
by Eccleston with proper villainy) in an act of treason, as he conspires
with the Vatican to overthrow the heretic Elizabeth, and for his effort
to exert his faith on the throne, he will be beheaded.
Elizabeth is full of zest, enjoying herself with her friend and lover
Lord Robert Dudley (Fiennes). She actively dances in front of the royal
court with Dudley, in a manner that is both shocking and courtly. It was
a scene that seemed out of place when compared to the rest of the film,
even though it was a striking and memorable scene.
Eventually, Lord Robert becomes a reminder to her of how close she came
to danger, as his loyalty to her comes into question.
Elizabeth is a film with a propensity for depicting spacious castles
that have dark interiors and characters who have dark intentions. The
director takes advantage of that, to take many overhead camera shots
that seem to dramatically capture the intrigues taking place, and all
the busywork being done by the Queen's attendants and her inept but
faithful adviser Sir William Cecil (Attenborough), whose chief advice is
for her to marry and become secure through an alliance. What transpires
after all the plots against Elizabeth are put down, including the
assassination of her rival in Scotland, Mary of Guise (Ardant), is that
Elizabeth is transformed from an unsure young girl, trying to rule with
a female heart, to someone who has forsaken earthly pleasures to marry
her country. She exemplifies someone who has common-sense in ruling the
country, and has forever given England one church, the Anglican church
of England, which is not beholden to Rome. It could best be said of her,
that she grew up when she learned to behave like a queen.
Elizabeth creates a panoramic view of 16th century England and its
intrigues. It is a film that does a better job making Elizabeth a vivid
characterization, than it does of providing unforgettable dialogue and
good storytelling. Cate Blanchett becomes Elizabeth, giving her a modern
feminist voice and a dark look inside her soul, in a daring performance
that works out rather well, considering the film was emotionally flat
and uninvolving.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Brundage
Starring Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Joseph Finnes, Richard Attenborough,
and Christopher Eccleston
     Of all of the things that Whoopi Goldberg said at the Academy Awards,
outrageous, often unfunny, and definitely uncreative as s most of them were,
the one most true was her opening.  Her opening stated, while she was
dressed in full Elizabethan regalia, that `this is a year about movies made
to honor me.'
     Elizabeth is one of the two movies with the Virgin Queen (hah!) of
England in them, the other, and far better one being Shakespeare in Love.
It follows Elizabeth, portrayed by a much thinner Cate Blanchett, through
being a princess to being the target of multiple assassination attempts to
eventually marrying herself to England.
     I will grant the film a point of merit on the account that, in my four
years of work as a film critic, I have never once watched a political
thriller set in the 16th century.  I will also grant it a few kudos on
performances, on costumes, on lighting, cinematography, and rather skilled
direction all together.  But, please, Best Picture?
     Normally, when viewing the nominations for the awards, some of them
(i.e. Sound F/Xs Editing and Special F/Xs) have only three nominees, three
films which were judged to be the best.  Why can't they do Best Picture the
same way?  This year we deserved tie between Saving Private Ryan,
Shakespeare in Love, and Life is Beautiful, three excellent films that all
equally deserved the prize.  However, as our shoo-in nominations we gave The
Thin Red Line, a nod (which it didn't deserve, although I maintain my
support of the film) and we also gave Elizabeth a tap on the shoulder.
     I can understand The Thin Red Line.  For one, it is a much better film.
For two, it was directed by Terrance Malick, a man who is the J.D. Salinger
(or Thomas Pynchon, if you prefer the truly postmodernist trend) of
filmmaking.  Here is a person who hasn't made a film in 20 years and still
hasn't lost his touch.  Counter this with the Shekhar Kapur, a man who has
never made a film I have heard about much less seen.  Not to say that a
first major work of a director isn't always a bad thing (i.e. David Lynch,
Jim Jarmush, Kevin Smith, Gus Van Sant), but please make it something that
just doesn't ride Hollywood's latest binge of the costume drama.
     I am not saying, mark you, that the film was bad.  Far from it, it is
actually one of the best films of the last year that I saw, but let us
contrast this with the concept that, in order for a film to be nominated for
Best Picture, it should display a mastery, not a plain old good job, of all
aspects of filmmaking.  Elizabeth, although featuring outstanding
performances, falters on storyline.  Were this political thriller set in
modern day, with the same performances, I would review it terribly.
However, it is not.
     Elizabeth does have certain interesting qualities, which are the only
aspects that make the film enjoyable.  For one, it displays a brilliantly
dark character in Geoffrey Rush's portrayal of Sir Francis Walsingham, a
cold-blooded killer.  Christopher Eccleston similarly gives an excellent
performance of the `villain' of the film, although with a movie like
Elizabeth, Mr. Hyde would seem like a nice guy.
     The biggest flaws in the film are very simple, and the same mistake
that A Perfect Murder made: all of the characters are so utterly unlikable
that the story has no hold over you.  Even knowing the ending (based on
history), I personally wanted Elizabeth to get killed.  It's not bad acting:
the acting was great.  It's bad parts.
     I will spend my last little bit complaining about the writer.  The
writer, a no one named Michael Hirst, will be completely forgotten after
this review.  Aside from people like Stephen Zallian, no one knows who
writes the movies, and thus this man will be forever forgotten for taking a
movie that had excellent potential and sinking it like a submarine in
`Battleship.'

Author
Tim Voon
Director: Shekhar Kapur
Writer: Michael Hirst
Cast: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Christopher Eccleston, Joseph
Fiennes, Richard Attenborough, Fanny Ardendt, John Gielgud, Terence
Rigbby, et al
In one of the most engrossing history lessons I've come to experience
this year, ELIZABETH brings to life the tale of a princess who overcomes
the adversity of the Catholic Church, to become the greatest Queen of
her time. She is Elizabeth the First, Elizabeth the untouchable,
Elizabeth the virgin, Elizabeth the servant of her country. She set
herself immeasurable standards and never married. She rescued the
flagging English economy and pushed it in the direction of power,
despite being constantly under the threat of war from France and Spain.
Without her there may never have emerged such great writers like William
Shakespeare, for art flourished under her regime.
Her tale is set mostly in court, where the stuff of murder, intrigue and
deceit are woven into a web of suspense. We watch how perilously close
she comes to death, when her enemies had no greater wish than to see her
beheaded. Neglected by her father, the incorrigible Henry the 8th,
betrayed by her lover Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes), it is not
surprising she clearly states that I am the mistress of this house and
no man will be my master'. In this context, we are shown why the Queen
suppresses her femininity and does not allow herself to love or be
loved, for treachery waits for her at every doorstep. In a time when
women were deemed inferior to men, she boldly tells the House of Lords 
I may be a woman, but I have the heart of a man, if I so choose.' And
so destiny was paved, when Elizabeth proved herself a worthy ruler, by
choosing to serve her country above herself.
This is a fine performance by Cate Blanchett, a talented Australian
actress, who deserves nothing less than an Oscar nomination for her
portrayal of the Queen. Jeffrey Rush should not to be overlooked, as he
gives another solid performance as the cunning Sir Francis Walshingham,
the Queen's most trusted confidante and adviser. This may be considered
a slow ride for some, but so are novels and they usually read better
than movies. Like a novel, this story comes across more finely paced
than most of the rushed 2 hour jobs out there today.

Author
Victory Marasigan
Elizabeth is a potent historical drama set in England in the mid-1500s.
It is a time when stately royal ceremonies are as commonplace as public
burnings.  Internally, the Catholics wage war against the Protestants.
Meanwhile, Spain, Scotland and France strategize their next moves in the
struggle for power.  Little does England know that a young woman named
Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett)  will be their greatest hope for survival.
The film charts Elizabeth's tumultuous struggle to gain true power over
her kingdom.  As a Protestant, she is the last person any of the Catholic
royalty would want to be Queen.  But her half-sister Queen Mary (Kathy
Burke), deathly ill and unable to conceive a child, pleas with Elizabeth
to take over the throne.  Mary gives her her blessing on only one
condition: that Elizabeth renounce her faith and uphold the teachings of
Catholicism across the land.  Once declared Queen, Elizabeth immediately
finds herself under assault, both by her own subjects (including the Duke
of Norfolk, played with steely-eyed grace by Christopher Eccleston) and by
forces abroad.  Slowly but surely, the neophyte ruler takes England by its
reigns and forges a new path for her kingdom.
Elizabeth is surrounded by a keenly drawn cadre of subjects and advisers.
Her closest ally is the mysterious Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush,
in a perfectly subtle performance).  Also on her side is Sir William Cecil
(Sir Richard Attenborough), her well-meaning but misguided chief adviser.
With few people she can trust, Elizabeth must prove her self-worth any way
she can, even if it means being the iron-fisted ruler she secretly
despises.   
Blanchett deserves an Oscar for her performance as Elizabeth.  She
portrays the young Queen with just the right balance of gawky
self-consciousness and shrewd charisma.  Though not a classical beauty,
Blanchett is able to entrance the viewer with just a coy smile or an
impish smirk.  She is at home with her character's playful tendencies,
particularly in one scene where Elizabeth dances unabashedly with
childhood friend and lover Lord Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes).  Whether
fending off unctuous suitors or "playing" the Houses in court, Blanchett's
Elizabeth radiates a confidence which impossible to dislike.
Almost as interesting as the character of Elizabeth are Shekhar Kapur's
visual delights.  He and cinematographer Remi Adefarasin have crafted a
film with a rich color palette that is a feast for the eyes.  Rolling
green hills, extravagant ceremonial galas, dark and foreboding corridors
-- all are depicted with a real sense of artistic appreciation.  The
castles and cathedrals of Europe have rarely been doted on so lovingly as
they are here. 
Though writer Michael Hirst's script gets a little murky at times, and his
injections of humor get a little overplayed, Elizabeth pulses with the
right amount of dramatic and cinematic verve to make it just deserving of
a theatrical viewing.  As a whole, the story survives because Elizabeth's
struggle is one which deserves attention.  By the time she makes her
shocking (but very sensible) final declaration, we're ready to bow to
Elizabeth as our own Queen.  

Author
Murali Krishnan
Being a monarch during times of prosperity and stability is safe and easy,
but when there is discord and dissatisfaction then it can be treacherous.
This is the story of the ascent to the throne by Henry VIII's daughter,
Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett). Although Henry had broken with the Catholic
Church, his daughter, Mary, who followed him reestablished Catholicism as
the official faith. She earned the nickname "Bloody Mary" for her relentless
persecution of Protestants, usually having them denounced as heretics and
burned at the stake. Mary's half sister, Elizabeth, is next in line for the
crown, but she is a Protestant and thus a potential threat, so Mary has her
imprisoned in the Tower of London, and Elizabeth's survival is placed in
doubt. Ultimately Mary's health fails and an almost unprepared Elizabeth
becomes the ruling monarch. However, her reign is anything but certain. The
country is bankrupt, the military is weak, foreign powers are threatening,
and there is internal dissension.
Being a novice at governance, Elizabeth is forced to rely on the opinions of
her advisors. The elder Sir William Cecil (Richard Attenborough) is
stressing that the safest action Elizabeth can take to stabilize her reign
would be to marry a foreign royal to establish a political alliance and to
produce an heir. However, Elizabeth's love interest is her longtime friend
Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes). Beyond that, she does not wish submit
herself to another man, and also wants England to remain strong and
independent. To help stabilize her authority, Elizabeth has the help of her
advisor Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush), who through guile and an
intelligence network, seeks to find and destroy all who threaten Elizabeth's
reign.
Elizabeth's fate is known through any reading of English history. Not only
does she survive the unsteady early days of her rule, she remains fiercely
independent, she never marries or produces and heir, and under her reign,
England enters a "Golden Age" and once again flourishes. The film ends when
an experienced and hardened Elizabeth establishes her power base, and it
stops short of her rebuilding of England. And although the manner in which
that was accomplished would have been interesting to see, the drama of her
ascendence to power is compelling enough to provide enough substance to
anchor the story.
One difficulty of telling a historical story is the necessity to condense
several different occurrences from a large time period into a story that
fits the running length of a film. The result of this is that characters and
events can become oversimplified in their presentation. This film has this
problem with several characters. Queen Mary is portrayed as nothing more
than a repulsive and spiteful boor. In his introductory scene, Walsingham is
presented as a ruthless and cold-hearted, and the character never evolves
beyond this single dimension. As an advisor, he is conveniently all-knowing
and all-powerful. Rush does not even play the character with anything
besides a single, stoic facial expression. Elizabeth's royal French suitor,
Duc d'Anjou, is presented as an exaggerated, foppish buffoon.
Although the direction of Shekar Kapur is mostly successful, there are times
when his directorial flourishes become distracting. The injection of jump
cuts when Elizabeth is practicing her speech before Parliament is jarring
because it does not fit with the mood of the rest of the film. The washing
out to white between the scenes when Elizabeth learns of her inheritance of
the crown served no purpose, and only made the direction apparent.
The strength of the film is the well written and well performed role of
Elizabeth. Blanchett credibly shows the character's evolution from a strong
willed but naive young woman, to the capable and inspired monarch who would
lift her country to prominence. Ultimately, the real story of Elizabeth is a
fascinating one, and the film successfully translates it to the screen.
Recommended. The film is hampered by exaggerated characters and gaudy
direction, but tells the interesting story of a fascinating individual.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Matt Williams
Elizabeth is a loose biopic of the early years of Queen Elizabeth I. It
may be a period piece, but it sure doesn't feel like one.  Thick with
intrigue, and even thicker with strong performances, Elizabeth is
actually more thrilling than many modern-day "thrillers".
The film starts when Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett) is merely a princess,
and one in considerable danger.  The problem, you see, is that she is
next in line for the throne...and a Protestant.  She constantly awaits
an execution order from her half-sister, the dying Queen Mary (Kathy
Burke).
Things don't get any easier when Elizabeth becomes queen herself. The
country is in horrible shape, and the political atmosphere is positively
deadly.  She relies on the advice of the cunning Sir Francis Walsingham
(Geoffrey Rush) to avoid the most turbulent encounters:  particularly
the schemes of the Duke of Norfolk (Christopher Eccleston), who is
constantly plotting her overthrow.
The chief concern of many, including another trusted advisor, Sir
William Cecil (Richard Attenborough), is that Elizabeth marry and
produce an heir.  Only then will her reign be secure.  But the question
remains:  whom to marry?  Marriage alliances with France and Spain
present themselves, but Elizabeth's heart is with Robert Dudley (Joseph
Fiennes), the Earl of Leicester.
Elizabeth is not your typical period piece.  In fact, it has a much more
Godfather-ian feel than the traditional costume drama.  Politics, sex,
murder and deceit are everywhere in this film.  It's not just haughty
people in strange attire...there's a tangible sense of danger that
permeates the film.
The film owes much of its success to the stunning performance by Cate
Blanchett.  She is the heart and soul of the film, and her exciting
portrayal of the young queen proves that it is a strong heart and
vibrant soul indeed.
That's not to diminish the contributions of the remainder of the
splendid cast.  Joseph Fiennes is appealing as the forbidden object of
Elizabeth's desire.  Christopher Eccleston triumphs over a rather flat
character by imbuing him with a truly sinister side. But the true scene
stealer is Geoffrey Rush, whose plots and machinations are a delight as
they unfold.
The sets of Elizabeth are truly a marvel.  Gigantic and sparsely lit,
the shadowy castles, damp corridors and opulent rooms help to establish
the film's moody atmosphere.
Director Shekhar Kapur has created a lush, atmospheric picture, which
(though it takes a few liberties with history) paints an captivating
picture of the slippery slopes of royalty.  Elizabeth is truly a
fascinating film to watch.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Elizabeth (1998)
Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Christopher Eccleston, Joseph Fiennes, 
Richard Attenborough, Fanny Ardant, Kathy Burke, Kelly MacDonald, Sir 
John Gielgud, Eric Cantona, Vincent Cassel, James Frain, Daniel Craig. 
Produced by Alison Owen, Eric Fellner, Tim Bevan. Music by David 
Hirschfelder. Cinematography by Remi Adefarasin. Screenplay by Michael 
Hirst. Directed by Shekhar Kapur. 124 minutes. 
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
She's coquettish. She's defiant. She's a somnolent rag doll. She's a 
fiery feminist. She's Elizabeth I of England, self-proclaimed Virgin 
Queen and star of "Elizabeth," a revisionist historical drama that 
manages to entertain and annoy all at the same time. In his first English-
language film, director Shekhar Kapur tries to satisfy the Masterpiece 
Theatre and MTV crowds simultaneously. The result is an interesting, 
often frustrating work that suffers from a case of cinematic multiple 
personality disorder. 
Cate Blanchett, so wonderful in "Oscar and Lucinda," plays the monarch 
who took the throne in 1558 and ruled England for 45 years. Emulating a 
statue of the Virgin Mary, she assumed the Virgin Queen moniker following 
a bizarre change in her physical appearance. After hours of work by her 
handmaidens, she stunned her subjects by striding out in a stylized wig 
and regal clothing, with an application of make-up turning her skin a 
stark, unearthly white. Basically, she became the 16th century equivalent 
of Michael Jackson.
The film is dripping with intrigue, as damn near everybody plots to 
either kill Elizabeth or co-opt her reign through marriage. Along the way,
 Kapur employs a variety of self-conscious stylistic tricks to give the 
film a hip feel. He's quite fond of rotation. During many sequences, if 
one character isn't circling another, the camera is circulating everybody 
(sensitive viewers may wish to bring some Dramamine). The twirling 
cinematography, as well as several fade-to-white segues, gets old fast. 
The most annoying camera gimmick comes when Elizabeth nervously prepares 
for a speech and Kapur uses quick jump-cuts to show her anxious rehearsal.
 The effect is wildly out-of-place for a historical piece, resembling the 
flubbed line outtakes that pop up during the closing credits of an 
episode of "Home Improvement." 
Why Kapur felt compelled to jazz things up is beyond me. God knows 
there's enough drama in the screenplay's Byzantine plotlines. While 
virtually every major character in the film is scheming against Elizabeth,
 the Catholic Church serves as the prime villain, with Kapur helpfully 
supplying ominous music whenever the political intrigue moves to the 
Vatican. Speaking of characters, the film boasts some very colorful ones, 
ranging from the reptilian Duke of Norfolk (Christopher Eccleston) to the 
Duc d'Anjou (Vincent Cassel), the cross-dressing brother of the King of 
France.
While the supporting players are certainly interesting, the film centers 
on only three characters. Joseph Fiennes is bland as Sir Robert Dudley, 
Earl of Leicester, Elizabeth's duplicitous lover. Much more interesting 
is royal hatchet man Sir Francis Walsingham, a dark figure who casts a 
long shadow despite limited screen time, thanks to an extremely focused 
performance from Geoffrey Rush. And then there's Elizabeth, given a 
decidedly peculiar, but mesmerizing presence by Cate Blanchett. With an 
odd combination of side glances and secret smiles, Blanchett's Elizabeth 
often seems preoccupied, as if listening to distant voices or remembering 
happier times. 
"Elizabeth" is full of lavish set pieces, violent imagery and eccentric 
personalities. The film may be messy, but it certainly held my attention. 
Ultimately, though, the story is so emotionally detached that I found it 
difficult to fully invest in the fates of the players. If Kapur had spent 
less time on jazzy camera moves and more time exploring the passion 
behind the characters' facades, "Elizabeth" might have packed the desired 
punch. As is, it comes off as merely a sterile, historically inaccurate 
period piece with way-cool visuals. 

Author
Nikki Lesley
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Christopher Eccleston,
Joseph Fiennes, Richard Attenborough.
Well, everything good you've heard about Elizabeth is true. It's a
visually stunning movie with the most incredible performances
from everyone involved. This is definitely a masterpiece with only
one or two minor quibbles. Most certainly something that must be
viewed on the big screen. 
Cate Blanchett, as everyone has noted, is magnificent in the role of
Elizabeth. She's fun, she's haughty, she's naive, she's strong at all
the right times, making an Elizabeth who's believable and
sympathetic while at the some time being something of a hero. 
And Geoffrey Rush is the best I've ever seen him, with perhaps the
exception of A Little Bit of Soul. His Walsingham is a wonderful
mentor for Elizabeth, with the ruthlessness necessary to get the job
done. Similarly, Christopher Eccleston and Joseph Fiennes play their
roles magnificently. I had a minor problem with Richard
Attenborough, mainly because I feel he plays the exact same role,
no matter what movie he's in. As I watched him in Elizabeth, I kept
having visions of the guy who owned Jurassic Park! 
The biggest problem I have with this film is a problem inherent
with almost all historical movies: what is truth? To tell a good
story, often facts need to be manipulated, or extra people added.
Douglas Adams once said that he never got his books from real life
because although real life provides interesting little incidents, it
rarely produces a beginning, a middle and an end. So, for Elizabeth,
choices need to be made as to what to show and what to leave out;
which bits of the life of Elizabeth are going to make up the movie;
what is the beginning, the middle and the end? Similarly, if
Elizabeth is our hero, who is our villain? 
Elizabeth makes Norfolk (Christopher Eccleston) and the Catholic
Church the villain. While not arguing with the atrocities committed
by the Catholic Church in that and many other eras, this movie
suggests very strongly that any evil our heros did, they were driven
to by villainy of others. My history of this period is not good enough
to know for certain, but I doubt that Elizabeth was quite as
blameless as shown. I imagine it would be possible to make a
movie of the life of Norfolk, making him a hero and Elizabeth the
villain if we make different choices about what to show. 
While on the topic of historical accuracy, one wonders whether
there were quite so many tall, willowy females in the court of
Queen Elizabeth. 
Also, at times, the music threatened to swallow us all. There were
moments in the film when a less strident approach would have
been more suited to the moment. Any time where I notice the
music in a way that distracts from whatever is happening on the
screen is a bad music moment for me - and there were half a
dozen such moments in Elizabeth. 
Be warned, however, this is not a Jane Austen period drama; this is
very gory stuff. The opening scene, for me, was the worst, more in
tone than gore. It begins with three people being burnt alive at the
stake. Very horrific. Later scenes of heads on sticks, slashed throats,
beatings, all contribute to a very dark mood for Elizabeth, matching
probably the mood of the times. If you can stomach the
gruesomeness of this move, I wholeheartedly recommend it. 

Author
Pierce Dalton
 A costume drama set in the 1500s, England, Elizabeth is a lush, romantic,
political masterpiece about the upset over the crossing of a Protestant Queen
from a respected Catholic one.
 When the court and country are a whole after the passing of the queens, the
royal family, so to speak, are upset that a Protestant should be crowened, and
not another Catholic, plus, the new queen, Elizabeth I (Cate Blanchette), was
the bastard baby of the previous Queen Mary's father.
 The persecution over Catholics and Protestants isn't the only majority in
Elizabeth.  Elizabeth I must face the decision to give up personal pleasures,
and her lover (Joseph Fiennes of Shakespeare in Love), in order to rule,
successfully, the country, which she did for 40 more years.
 Both Elizabeth and Shakespeare in Love are set in the Elizabethian era, and
both feature a Queen Elizabeth I (Judi Dench plays her in Love), or course. 
Yet, I found Elizabeth more stimulating and involving than Love, not just
because Elizabeth features a great deal more of Elizabeth I, but because I
found Blanchette a more powerful, hypnotic sense for the role.
 Elizabeth, also featuring Geoffrey Rush and Richard Attenborough, is my pick
for the best picture of 1998 award.
 It's a dynamic, important, breathtaking film of loyalty, power, greed, and
trust.
 Shakespeare would die for the book rights.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It's really rather a slick conceit when you stop to think about it --
telling the tale of the early years of the reign of Queen Elizabeth I
(Cate Blanchett) with the Virgin Queen turned into Michael Corleone.  This
lavish paean to court intrigue begins in 1554, as the ailing Don -- er,
Queen Mary (Kathy Burke) -- faces an uncertain future for her empire.
Dissension between Catholic and Protestant factions breeds internal
conflict; external threats to the near-bankrupt empire loom from both
Spain and France.  Caught in the middle is Elizabeth, the Protestant heir
apparent to her childless Catholic half-sister, who faces losing all
semblance of a personal life once she wields responsibility for protecting
the interests of the family -- er, nation.
     It's all played as grand opera, with the initially uncertain monarch
surrounded by advisors of every possible motivation.  The Duke of Norfolk
(Christopher Eccleston), a Catholic advisor to the late Queen Mary, plots
to join with Mary, Queen of Scots to overthrow Elizabeth.  Sir William
(Richard Attenborough), Elizabeth's consigliere, pleads with her to wed
and produce an heir as soon as possible to solidify her rule.  Sir Francis
Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush) schools the young queen in the necessity of
ruthlessness in the political arena.  Even the Pope (John Gielgud) gets
into the act, offering what amounts to a heavenly bounty on the queen's
heretical head.  And then there is Lord Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes),
the love of Elizabeth's life who may turn out to be part Kay and part
Fredo.
     Screenwriter Michael Hirst and director Shekhar Kapur manage to keep
all these balls in the air quite deftly, moving back and forth between the
machinations of various factions while keeping all the players clearly
defined.  Ultimately, however, ELIZABETH is more a well-crafted plot
structure than a great tragic drama.  Only occasionally does Kapur allow
us inside the heads of his characters, as he does when Elizabeth shakily 
rehearses a crucial speech proposing a uniform Church of England.  In
general the players move from this place to that like pieces in a
historical board game, psychology and motivations giving way to who wants
to kill whom.  As solid as most of the cast members are, they aren't asked
to do much more than furrow their brows and skulk.
     At least it's all quite a spectacle to behold.  ELIZABETH slips back
and forth between dark cavernous halls and banner-draped pageantry,
allowing a sharp contrast between the private and public life of the
queen.  The radiant Blanchett makes a wonderful Elizabeth, though her
chemistry with Joseph Fiennes isn't nearly as invigorating as it was with
brother Ralph in OSCAR AND LUCINDA.  It's a consistently engaging film,
but one which never crosses over into being truly captivating.  While
aiming for the epic sweep of a GODFATHER film, the film-makers seem to
have forgotten that Coppola created an epic of relationships, not just
political alliances.  ELIZABETH is that rare film that would have been
much better if it had been much longer.  If it had offered the chance to
feel the personalities of history as well as watch them, it would have
been an offer you couldn't refuse.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 25 November 1998 with Byron and Andrea at the SONY 19th Street for
$8.75
A problem with historical epics is that you already know the ending of the
movie before you've even seen it. So the viewer can only be pleased if the
story shown is enjoyable and elucidates the hidden details that lead
deepen your understanding of history.
Director Shekhar Kapur's Elizabeth wisely focuses on the years immediately
preceeding the Virgin Queen's ascension to the throne and the years
immediately after. It's a wise choice, as covering her entire life is
almost impossible in the time a feature-length film can offer. (Indeed, it
took six hours last to do just that in the 1972 miniseries Elizabeth R,
starring Glenda Jackson.)
This period in English history is one of its most tumultuous, as
successive reigns swung the country from Catholicism to Protestantism
several times, setting England on the verge of yet another civil war
(Elizabeth's grandfather Henry VII had ended the War of the Roses once and
for all). By the time she is crowned Queen, the country is also virtually
bankrupt and beset by the Scots and the French on one side, and the
Spaniards on the other.
The movie begins in the doomed reign of her half-sister, Mary I (Kathy
Burke), who is hoping for an heir so she can keep the country Catholic.
She is also busily burning heretics at the stake.
Legally, Elizabeth must succeed her (as prescribed by a lay of their
father's--Henry VIII). She does, but her court is full of intrigues and
there are few, perhaps none, she can trust. Just about everyone has a
hidden agenda. One agenda that is not hidden, though, is her advisors'
desire that she marry and produce an heir. They underestimate her because
of her sex, and consequently, she surprises them all.
Elizabeth is forced to prove herself in a very short time. Cate Blanchett
moves Elizabeth from unfettered joy and innocence to world weary and worn
with great skill. Her joyful radiant Princess is reduced to a worried
sovereign and it's all thanks to, yes, Acting!
Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes) is Elizabeth's lover, played with swagger
and sex appeal, and giving us a sexuality not often seen in portrayals of
the Virgin Queen. He is clearly jealous when advisors suggest she marry
the Duc d'Anjou (Vincent Cassel), the brother of the King of France.
Meanwhile, Alvaro de la Quadra (James Frain) is advancing the proposal of
his own sovereign, her brother-in-law King Phillip II of Spain. The
venemous Duke of Norfolk (Christopher Eccleston) is a staunch Catholic,
and happily receives the aid of a nefarious, homicidal priest dispatched
by the Pope (John Gielgud) as a hitman, to bring England "back to the true
faith." 
Meanwhile up in Scotland, Marie de Guise (played with an elegant
viciousness by the usually kind Fanny Ardant) is plotting away also.
Sometimes it seems like the only person she can trust is the recently
returned expatriate Protestant Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush). But
you know what? You can never be completely sure who she can trust. Neither
can she.
Elizabeth is rewarding on many levels--visually, historically,
emotionally, and even in terms of plain entertainment. Cate Blanchett (of
Oscar and Lucinda) holds it all together, but the supporting roles are
also rendered well. Director Shakur does make a few mistakes, and the
ending seems very forced and unrealistic, but overall it's a great effort,
visually and narratively, and worth seeing. Shakur uses skillful editing
and camera movement and placement to avoid giving us the typical
stagey-and-stodgy period piece. Two scenes to watch for: Elizabeth's
showdown with the bishops, and the dinner during which she comes to her
*own* conclusions, and determines her own course of action.
Also starring Richard Attenborough as Sir William Cecil. Costume Design by 
Alexandra Byrne.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: The first hour is beautifully realized.  In the second
hour the writing gets a little muddled and the style becomes less
original.  Still, this story of the coming to power of Queen Elizabeth
is enthralling.  She is a bit too much a 1990s woman, but the
photography is very good.  Rating: 8 (0 to 10), high +2 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Shekhar Kapur.  Unusual to see an Indian directing a
     film about a British monarch.
   - Very powerful telling of the rise to power of Elizabeth I.  The
     first hour was spellbinding.  The director filmed with real power.
     By the second hour the writing had gotten a little muddled.
   - David Hirschfelder (SHINE) provides a very melodic score.
   - Many overhead shots to show the size of the buildings and
     smallness of people.  Photography kept dark.  Many scenes done in
     rich blacks and reds.
   - Somehow reminiscent of a Hieronymous Bosch painting with some of
     its weird and powerful images.
   - False move in showing Elizabeth practice an argument using a
     technique like would be used to show outtakes.  It seems like too
     modern an editing technique.
   - Elizabeth begins as a pawn and learns to fend for herself.
     Deciding best way to be rid of Elizabeth, Queen Mary instructs a
     bishop, "Your Grace will find some proof of her treachery."
   - Very harrowing and haunting scene of an execution by burning.  Do
     not bring young children.
   - Wolsingham (Geoffrey Rush) is Elizabeth's Secret Service and is
     ruthless in protecting her.
   - I like films of this period and few are done as well as ELIZABETH.
   - She may be written a little too much like a modern woman.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Gramercy Pictures
 Director:   Shekhar Kapur
 Writer:  Michael Hirst
 Cast: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Christopher Eccleston,
Joseph Fiennes, Richard Attenborough, Fanny Ardendt, John
Gielgud, Terence Rigbby, et al
    Bill Clinton should declare himself to be a virgin.  His
current problems would be over.  The American people would
unify behind him and Ken Starr would be defending clients
with parking violations while his witch hunters would go back
to shuffling papers.  This is the implicit counsel given by
director Shekhar Kapur in his new film "Elizabeth."  It's not
that Shekhar's subject, the long-reigning, British monarch
knew the American president, either personally or via the
news broadcasts.  After all she was crowned in 1558 when
Native Americans ruled over what became the United States,
more concerned with conspiracies fomented by other tribes
than by the libidinous cravings of their chiefs.  But Elizabeth I,
beset by conspiracies from nobles of her own country, the
machinations of a gaggle of followers of Mary of Guise, and
covetous looks at the sceptered isle from France and Spain
eager to take advantage of England's weakness, knew how
to solve these difficulties.  She cut her long and lovely
vermilion locks, donned a short rug, and had her make-up
crew paint her face a deep and eerie white.  She then re-
ascended her throne amid an open-mouthed, transfixed court
which appeared to believe her to be the reincarnation of the
Virgin Mary.  "How many people have worshipped and died
for this woman," Elizabeth remarked while gazing at a statue
of the Holy Mother before taking this brazen step.  The
English people united behind her.
   "Elizabeth" is the creation of Bombay-based director
Shekhar Kapur whose films had been seen only by people of
his native India, with the exception of "Bandit Queen'--a
messy, melodramatic adventure study of the notorious Robin-
Hood-like outlaw Phoolan Devi who emerged from poverty to
become a kidnapper, robber and killer.  Kapur, reportedly
bent on breaking the canons of historical compositions, has in
fact put together a colorful but cold, distant, detached and
fragmented film which emphasizes a queen's quandary with
coup-bent conspirators in much the way that the superior
"Mrs. Brown" underscores another sovereign's controversial
camaraderie with a commoner.  
   The story opens some years after the death of King Henry
VIII, the fellow whose split with Anne Boleyn was the goriest
that history had known, and remained so until this day when
even Ed French (David Schwimmer) acknowledges in the
movie "Apt Pupil" that he is "in the middle of the messiest
divorce since Henry VIII."  The termagant Bloody Mary (Kathy
Burke) is on the throne, so-called because she tends to order
the burning of subjects who are not ardent Catholics like her. 
In the only scene that indicates that there are indeed people
in England who are not of the nobility, three such heretics are
kindled: when one apostate gripes that the dying is moving
ahead too slowly, a helpful citizen throws another bale of hay
into the flames.
   After Mary dies of cancer, unable to convince her half-
sister Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett) to pledge to Catholicism and
yet unwilling to order her execution for treason, the film vaults
hither and fro from conventional court-sponsored cotillions to
scenes of political machinations and assassinations.  The
balls feature strange dances involving clapping hands,
bouncing feet, and women lifted into the air in a truncated
interpretation of 1950's rock-and-roll frolics.  The intrigues are
of both romantic and combative skullduggery.  In the former
sense, handsome Sir Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester
(Joseph Fiennes) proves that the term The Virgin Queen,
when applied to Elizabeth is as accurate as Bill Clinton's
claim that he never had sex with Monica Lewinsky.  Elizabeth
is pursued as well by the asinine Duc d'Anjou (Vincent
Cassel), whose idea of courtship upon meeting the queen is
to whisper pornographic suggestions into her ear as a more
fun thing to do than kissing her hand and who believes he is
impressing Her Majesty by wearing a dress.  The intrigues
are handled by Elizabeth's lifelong, trusted confidant, the 007
of the era, Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush). 
Walsingham thinks nothing of bedding his employer's leading
female opponent, Mary of Guise, and making war, not love,
when the lights are down low.
   The fate of her country changed dramatically when
Elizabeth shed her girl-next-door image to become a
thundering feminist.  Like America's current chief executive,
she abhors the view of her advisers that the leader's body
and person are no longer her own property--that they belong
to the state.  Nor does she pay heed to her counselors to
marry.  Michael Hirst's screenplay focuses on the early years
of Elizabeth's rule and underscoring the conspiracies
bedeviling the court with all of that subject's contemporary
resonance.  But Shekhar Kapur misses the opportunity to
provide a more intimate, fleshed out production with which his
audience could connect.  Cate Blanchett has a singular
appearance which is exploited well, particularly in the stagy
finale when she emerges as quite the likeness of Elizabeth I.  
The Australian actress, who turned in an appealing
performance as the edgier, craftier, more passionate misfit in
Gillian Armstrong's "Oscar and Lucinda," comes across as
oddly bland this time around, resembling only slightly the
more regal posture of Judi Dench in last year's more
absorbing story, "Mrs. Brown."  Geoffrey Rush, positively
amazing as the over-the-edge pianist David Helfgott in Scott
Hicks's "Shine," is wasted here, going through the motions of
protecting the queen with a dour face and no sign of the
fervor that drives him to live out his chosen career as he
does.  Perhaps most unfortunate of all, "Elizabeth" appears
claustrophobic, giving few signs that a civilization exists
beyond the palace walls.  Contrary to Mr. Kapur's ardent
mission, the film comes across as a didactic history lesson.

Author
Joy Wyse
The story of Queen Elizabeth I begins when she is a teen-age princess,
and her half-sister, Mary, is ruling England, Ireland and France.  Both
girls were the daughters of King Henry VIII.   Although Henry had severed
relations with the Catholic Church, Mary and her husband Philip of Spain,
tried to stop the Reformation and bring England back under the power of
the Pope.  It was this struggle between Catholics and Protestants and the
supporters of each that dictated the life of Elizabeth.
Elizabeth was a fun-loving girl who wanted to love and be loved.  She
adored wearing the very finest of clothes and that trait is well portrayed
in the film.  Although Elizabeth came to be known as `The Virgin Queen'
this plot explains how that title came to be bestowed on her.  According
to this script, she did lose her virginity, only to `reclaim' it.
The film successfully describes a period of history that is not that
well known.  The religious issues are graphically depicted, and the
intrigues of the period become better understood.  The acting is excellent
but no character is totally likeable, not even Elizabeth.  Cate Blanchett
matures beautifully as the Queen.  John Gielgud appears in only one scene,
as the Pope.  It is sad that we didn't see more of him.  All of the other
male stars are wonderful in their parts.  
There is some nudity, although it is handled well.   There are also some
very bloody scenes that several people found difficult to watch.  It will
help you enjoy the story if you are up on your English history, especially
the lineage of the Tudors.   The motto of the film is `Absolute Power
Demands Absolute Loyalty'.  It does explain itself.
I would love to see this again, mainly for the lovely scenery, costumes
and inventive camera angles.  I give it a B+.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Joseph Fiennes, Richard
Attenborough, Christopher Eccleston, Jamie Foreman,Edward Hardwick,
James Frain, Emily Mortimer, Kelly MacDonald, Amanda Ryan, Kathy Burke,
Terence Rigby, John Gielgud
Director: Shekhar Kapur
Screenplay: Michael Hirst
Australian theatrical release: October 22, 1998
It's somewhat of an irony that the first English speaking film directed
by Shekhar Kapur is, indeed, very English.  Set in the 1500's, it's the
true story of the reign of Elizabeth I, Queen of England.
My philosophy regarding period dramas is simple: if a production crew is
going to bother to dress up in old clothing and film in periodic
settings, make it worthwhile.  Don't just look the part and frolic
around wearing leggings and tights, or - god forbid - we might get
another Sense and Sensibility.  But thanks to some tightly woven
screenplays, there have been times when period dramas can prove
blisteringly powerful.  Wings of the Dove, for example, developed its
setting and characters hand in hand and proved to be an excellent
experience.  As was The Crucible - an adaptation of the classic play -
which reeked of raw energy and almost overwhelming tension.  Elizabeth
does nothing remarkable, and only a few things wrong.
After the death of Queen Mary (Kathy Burke) the crown is passed along to
her sister, Elizabeth (Cate Blancett).  England is in a disastrous
state - bankrupt, has no army, and is under threat from the French.
Chief advisor Sir William Cecil (Richard Attenborough) urges Elizabeth
to marry - either the French Duke of Norfolk (Christopher Eccleston) or
her dead sister's husband, King Philip of Spain - to secure the future
of England.  But Elizabeth is enjoying a steamy romance with her
childhood sweet heart Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes).  She values the
opinions of her Master of Spies, Sir Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush), even
though he is disliked at court.  With the responsibility of a nation of
aggressive Protestants and Catholics, Elizabeth must steer her country
out of a crisis, and exposure those plotting against her.
Michael Hirst, who has been writing screenplays for around fifteen
years, penned Elizabeth's script with a messy innocence, of which is
often greatly simplistic.  A considerable portion of this film is
dedicated to the romance between Elizabeth and Dudley, and Hirst makes
it clear that the attraction between these two is based on social
status - the queen having a jolly time seducing a young man, and vice
versa.  We are amply told why they are attracted to each other, but
given no insight into what they actually feel for each other.
Rush's Walsingham eats up another portion, a dark and enigmatic
character who gives a good amount of credibility to the picture.  The
paradox of his personality is given in one moment when Walsingham
explains to a young boy that he has all of his life ahead of him, just
before neatly slicing his throat.  It's that sort of irony which gives
infinite possibilities to his character, but Kapur fails to complete the
difficult task of really bringing him to life.  Geoffrey Rush is well
suited to the role and gives a plausible if not pleasing performance,
looking carefully restrained without appearing as lifeless.
Speculation has risen over Cate Blancett's performance as "The Virgin
Queen", and Polygram Filmed Entertainment is pouring millions of dollars
into promoting her for an Academy Award.  She is bound to please many
viewers, but for me, she never quite fitted the bill.  Blancett has a
look of opaqueness and transparency, and plays her part bit by bit,
seemingly waiting for her next chance to look opaque and transparent.
Critics are no doubt going to praise Elizabeth for its obvious
excellence in visuals and a few very good scenes (balancing some pretty
awful ones). But as people after the media screening began consulting on
how good they thought it was ('That was brilliant, just brilliant,' I
caught one critic saying), I was left cold. I hadn't been able to invest
emotionally in the protagonist because I didn't understand her motives
I didn't know where she was coming from, or what she was after. That's
strange, since Elizabeth is largely a character study, and if I didn't
get a good insight into the main character, it could have only been
moderately successful.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Jeffrey Huston
Elizabeth I: Cate Blanchett
Sir Francis Walsingham: Geoffrey Rush
Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester: Joseph Fiennes
Duke of Norfolk: Christopher Eccleston
Sir William Cecil: Richard Attenborough
Mary of Guise: Fanny Ardant
Queen Mary Tudor: Kathy Burke
The Pope: John Gielgud
Directed by Shekhar Kapur. Produced by Alison Owen, Tim Bevan and Eric
Fellner. Screenplay by Michael Hirst.  Distributed by Gramercy Pictures.
Running time: 124 minutes.  Release date: November 20, 1998 in limited
release; November 25th nationwide.
(to read this review, complete with pictures from the film, go to:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/elizabeth.htm )
It is refreshing to see a film made from a slightly different perspective
from what is usually seen in its given genre. It may not be completely
different, but it stands out amongst similar efforts. "Elizabeth" is such a
film. It takes the art house, period costume piece and skews a dark edge to
it. This is not a revolutionary feat by any means, but it is a unique vision
that sets it apart from many historical dramas of recent memory. This dark
look, in coercion with a gripping story and bold performances, makes
"Elizabeth" one of the more enthralling cinematic ventures of the year.
Set in mid-1500s England, "Elizabeth" is the dramatization of Queen
Elizabeth I's rise to power and the daunting opposition she faced once
having ascended to the throne. It is a cloak-and-dagger tale where loyalties
are always in question; one that climaxes to a conclusion that could be
classified as Britain's version of "The Godfather". Director Shekhar Kapur
has assembled an impressive piece of cinema here with his keen artistic eye
and restrained, suspenseful character exposition.
The story of "Elizabeth" is essentially a power struggle with a ribald
streak. In spite of threatening enemies, Queen Elizabeth chooses to rule and
abide by Protestant teachings as opposed to the Catholic reign that preceded
her. As a result, a potential Holy War looms over England as influential
members of the Catholic Church join forces with coup-minded Royal advisors
in an attempt to overthrow Queen Elizabeth, whom they see as heretical and
blasphemous.
Coupled with this, there are foreign countries that look to capitalize on
what they see as weakness in England, creating a truly daunting wall of
opposition that surrounds Elizabeth on all sides. It is a tricky endeavor as
people tend to say one thing while meaning another, with every conversation
depending not on truth but rather the company of people assembled. With the
exception of a few individuals, director Kapur keeps the motives of his
characters veiled and uncertain. From this uncertainty rises gripping
suspense and surprising revelations that keep the viewer glued in
anticipation.
The cast is first-rate, displaying some of the year's best performances.
Leading the way as Queen Elizabeth I is Cate Blanchett ("Oscar & Lucinda",
"Paradise Road"). Blanchett commands the screen with power and nobility. It
is a multi-layered performance as Blanchett allows us to see Elizabeth's
weaknesses and fears; but while in the company of both loyal subjects and
threatening foes, she only reveals an intimidating resolve and
uncompromising strength. Blanchett excels in every regard. Expect to see her
name on next spring's Oscar ballot.
Oscar winner Geoffrey Rush ("Shine") is the other standout with his turn as
the mysteriously sinister Sir Francis Walsingham. A security advisor
assigned to protect the Queen, Walsingham is the story's greatest enigma.
Rush's subtle portrayal is chilling and ominous.  From one scene to the
next, we never really know where his loyalties lay. Are they with the Queen?
Her enemies? Or just himself?  Walsingham's actions eventually tell the
tale, but the fact that we don't have a clue prior to those actions is a
testament to Rush's performance and Kapur's direction. Walsingham is the
polar opposite of Rush's frenetic portrayal of trouble pianist David
Helfgott in "Shine", making his Oscar win for that performance seem all the
more worthy.
Joseph Fiennes is impressive in his American debut. Over-shadowed in the
past by his more famous brother Ralph Fiennes ("Schindler's List", "The
English Patient"), Joseph puts himself on the cinematic map with his
portrayal of Lord Robert Dudley, the charming Earl of Leicester who has won
the heart of Elizabeth. Like his brother Ralph, Joseph has a strong screen
presence as he exudes romantic passion and quiet strength through Lord
Robert. These walls eventually give way to vulnerability, allowing Fiennes
to showcase his range in this complex role.
Acclaimed director Sir Richard Attenborough ("Gandhi", "Shadowlands")
moonlights as an actor once again (with previous roles including the
"Jurassic Park" films) with his portrayal of Elizabeth's most trusted
confidante Sir William Cecil. His is the only character whose moral
uprightness is apparent throughout. Attenborough's Cecil is a noble servant
who humbly submits all that he is to the Queen and her Kingdom. Christopher
Eccleston's Duke of Norfolk is a rare cinematic villain in that he actually
acts from personal conviction, not caricaturized hatred or anger. He is
intense without being over-the-top as he allows his passion to rise from his
beliefs, not mere prejudices. Eccleston's performance adds a level of depth
to the story that could have been so easily missed.
"Elizabeth" is a sumptuous visual spectacle. The costumes designed by
Alexandra Byrne (Kenneth Branagh's "Hamlet") are arguably the best seen all
year. Rich in color and astounding in detail, Byrne's elegant costumes are
truly impressive creations. John Myhre's ("Immortal Beloved") production
design is a medieval gothic realm. High arches of cold gray stone embody the
castles seen here, also replete with strong pillars and ornate decoration.
All of this is captured quite well in Remi Adefarasin's ominous photography.
With sweeping overhead shots and candid close-ups, the camera work by
Adefarasin (assistant DP on "The English Patient") creates moods of
oppressive power and mysterious darkness. The combination of these talents
result in the most visually breathtaking period film since 1995's
"Restoration".
Composer David Hirschfelder ("Shine", "Sliding Doors") provides a music
score that is powerful and haunting. With full classical orchestrations and
spiritually dark choral voices, Hirschfelder's bold compositions are as much
of a force as the film's passionate performances and arresting imagery.
Michael Hirst's screenplay is an excellent mix of historical overview and
dramatic complexity. As alluded to in earlier segments of this review, Hirst
's screenplay never shows its full hand until the very end. This poker face
storytelling always keeps us guessing.  People's loyalties and motives
seemingly change from one scene to the next without their actions ever
appearing disjointed or out of character. One scene we may think a person is
good, then we're not so sure the next (with the converse also being true).
This mysterious complexity of characters makes up for the few lulls within
the story itself.
Shekhar Kapur has shot and assembled this story to near perfection. Most
directors forecast a characters motives right off the bat, holding on
lengthy close-ups so that we can "tell" if a person is bad or not. Kapur
doesn't stoop to this amateurish level, therefore we cannot label most of
the characters as "good" or "bad" until the film's final quarter.  But even
so, Kapur shows wisdom with his inclusion of the ethically sound Sir William
Cecil. In doing so Kapur doesn't leave us completely adrift, giving the
story a moral center as well as someone solid and trustworthy for us (the
audience) to look to.
"Elizabeth" is an epic film that showcases one of the most courageous
heroines to be seen on film in many years. It is a stirring account that is
sure to engross those far beyond its core audience. To flippantly
characterize this as "middle-aged Girl Power" would be to sorely
misrepresent this film and the moral challenges that Queen Elizabeth faces.
With depth, ambiguity, visual spectacle and sheer emotional power,
"Elizabeth" is one of 1998's most captivating experiences.
(to read other reviews by Jeffrey Huston, visit his film review website
"Believe Me" at: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm )

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Shekhar Kapur
Writer: Michael Hirst
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Christopher Eccleston, Joseph
Fiennes, Richard Attenborough, Fanny Ardant, Kathy Burke, Eric Cantona,
James Frain, Vincent Cassel, Daniel Craig, Kelly MacDonald, John Gielgud
Flat out, "Elizabeth is a wonderful flick: as gorgeous to look at as a
Peter Greenaway film and as delightful to follow as a Stephen Frears
movie.  It's bold, lavish, mischevious, and downright entertaining, but
those aren't the reasons it's so good.  At the center of this film is a
performance of such immense power and complexity that perhaps we don't
fully comprehend the greatness now.  Cate Blanchett's performance as the
title character has already won her tons of accolades, a Golden Globe
nomination, and an almost sure-fire bet at nabbing an Oscar nod (she
better look out, though - back in 1995, when Nicole Kidman was
considered a sure-fire bet for an Oscar, she was snubbed come February
from even a nomination), but her performance still isn't as
well-received as it should be.
I think it's such a good performance because it's one of the few
performances by an actress in quite a while to actually be really
complicated.  She doesn't allow her character to be easily defined by
audiences and critics - she shows all her flaws, all her strengths, and
puts her character up for complex scrutiny and still remains
mysterious.  She does it all without overacting or underacting - she's
just right on.  She's sympathetic yet still a bit untrustworthy.  She's
definitely a force to be reckoned, but seems easy to crush.  And she
acts like the coolest person in the world, tossing out jokes to those
she works with, but is still a little frightened girl underneath.  Maybe
the best scene in the movie is one where we see two scenes juxtaposed:
one where she's speaking to parliament, cracking sarcastic jokes, and
winning them over; and another where she's preparing for this, nervoulsy
trying to come up with the right thing to say and the right way to say
it.
She's also the anchor in this entire film, which isn't, admittingly, the
greatest film I've ever seen.  The problem I think is that while the
film is setting up her character and her situations, it never truly
functions as a real cohesive story.  I said it was fun to follow, but
it's not the plot you're to follow, but rather the fact that deeds like
the ones that transpire in this film transpire at all.  Deceptions,
beheadings, burnings, and other sorts of treachery abound, and all with
the perfect visual flair from director Shekhar Kapur (I especially liked
the scene in the beginning where a group of protestants are burned alive
- the camera sweeps up, then cuts to various scenes below as members of
the audience react with either displeasure or with just the right amount
of taste that they toss another log onto the fire).  For a lot of the
film, I wasn't even exactly sure why they were being killed or people
were being avenged - I was just along for the ride.
This biopic on Elizabeth I deals with her first years on the throne,
following her half-sister's demise, and it perfectly captures the
turmoil England was in at the time, when Henry VIII had brought the
country to near Civil War between the Protestants and the Catholics, and
both sides were fighting eachother for power.  Elizabeth claims the
throne after a fit with her sister of her possible execution for being a
suspected Protestant, when all the time she was really just in the
moderate view on things, and once there, is forced to bring peace
between the two groups, and to learn her way around the country as she
went.
Equipped with many advisors (including one Richard Attenborough) and one
extremely devious assistant who helps her manipulate her way to peace,
Sir Francis Walshingham (Geoffrey Rush), who is so incredibly evil that
we can't help but love him for being evil for Elizabeth.  All this plays
around for two hours, as we watch these characters play off one another,
try to figure out how the pull the country out of a state of disaray,
and punish those who need to be punished (including the Catholic with a
vengeance Duke of Norfolk, played with intensity by Christopher
Eccleston).  All the while, she has to balance all that with her
relationship for an older lover, Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes, brother
to Ralph), who may not be around in her life much longer.
That said, "Elizabeth" is a wild ride, albeit a confusing one.  The plot
moves without stops and there is much that is a) not explained very well
(what the hell happened to Robert?), and b) is historically inaccurate
(a bit involving the death of Mary of Guise is hilariously askew).  But
despite this, "Elizabeth" is about as fun a film to watch as "Dangerous
Liasons" or "L.A. Confidential," if solely because the things that
transpire are handled with wit, and strong visual flair.  And at the
center is Cate Blanchett, who shows Elizabeth to be a real human being,
flaws and all: she's not a terrifically great person, but she's smart
and quick to learn, and has the lack of self-involvement to realize that
the problems with the country lie in the fact that the Catholics and
Protestants are too hell-bent on both being right, and if she has to
pervert things to fix this up, she better damn well do it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Walter Frith
Down the halls of a royal palace lies a story based in fact about the
very essence of ancient English royalty and how its impact led to a
revolution of religion and a major turn in world history.  It's also a
story that makes for one of the best dramatic films of the year, if not
the last decade. Queen Elizabeth I ruled for 45 years beginning in 1558
and her reign was one of the most successful in the history of the
British monarchy.
'Elizabeth' begins in 1554 and Queen Mary, a Catholic, and daughter of
Henry VIII is on the throne.  Dying and fearing that the country will be
turned over to a Protestant revolution once her heir assumes the crown,
she has her half-sister Elizabeth (Cate Blanchett in an Oscar-calibre
performance), put into the Tower of London.  Elizabeth, in a show of
strong will, survives the punishment and assumes the throne upon Mary's
death.  Instantly, there are many problems such as a bloodline heir that
her advisers feel must be produced.  England's army is very weak and the
treasury is virtually empty.
Elizabeth is aided by three loyal advisers who help her even when it
comes to her life being threatened in her attempt to change the
country's religion.  There is the head strong William Cecil (Richard
Attenborough), the no-nonsense and most loyal Francis Walsingham
(Geoffrey Rush), and her lover Lord Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes).
The film's dramatic structure is impeccable.  Michael Hirst contributes
a wonderful script of authenticity. The performances are stellar and
this film is very well staged by director Shekhar Kapur who takes the
subject material in hand and never compromises an ounce of its impact
for the sake of any comic relief.  What's interesting is that another
film out at the same time, 'Shakespeare in Love', is a rousing,
humourous, romantic and feel good production that also features
performances by Geoffrey Rush and Joseph Fiennes.  The two of them
demonstrate their range in a most convincing manner and illustrate the
beauty of the English craft of acting which is perhaps the best in the
world.  I remember seeing an interview with an English actor who will
remain nameless and he said he felt that American actors were better in
the movies while English actors are better on stage.  While that is
somewhat of a generalization, I relish the opportunity to see actors of
their own ethnicity demonstrating parts of their own history.  'The Man
in the Iron Mask' from early in 1998 featured American and English
actors doing a take on French history and somehow it just wasn't
convincing and no accents were implemented to even make it sound
convincing.  This is the reason many critics were harsh on 1984's
'Amadeus'.  That film, as great as it was, had an Americanized version
of European culture which didn't cut it for many.  1985's 'Revolution'
was a disaster for Al Pacino as his New York accent spoiled the entire
production and likewise for Robert De Niro who just didn't have the
credibility for appearing in 1986's 'The Mission'.
'Elizabeth' has a look that shows its roots are in the English theatre.
The film has few special effects, plenty of dialogue for its period and
a rigid depiction of why some nations today live under the separation of
church and state.  This is a highly respectable looking film that has
its appeal geared toward the high brow movie fan.  Casual fans will like
it if they accept its heavy drama for what it is.....factual.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Christopher Null
     Seeing ELIZABETH on the day of the impeachment of President Clinton
was a bit strange, but it did put things in perspective.
     450 years ago, no one would've thought a thing about a little
intern boinking. Today, that's obviously big news, and it should have
made the sexual, political, and religious escapades of ELIZABETH all the
more thrilling.
     Too bad it doesn't. The tumultuous tale of young Elizabeth I's
(Cate Blanchett) rise to power in the mid 1500's, we are treated to a
two hour trip through her battles with the French, a number of suitors,
the Pope, the Spanish, underhanded lords, and other nefarious types.
     The problem is this all comes off as too cliquish, with Britons the
obvious wink-wink insiders in all of this, as is typically the case with
movies about roylaty. Despite a rash of good performances, lush
camerawork, and great costumes, ELIZABETH is just too stand-offish to
really get into.
Director: Shekhar Kapur
Producer: Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Alison Owen
Writer: Michael Hirst
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Christopher Eccleston, Joseph
Fiennes, Richard Attenborough
http://www.elizabeth-themovie.com
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Joeseph Fiennes, Christopher
Eccleston and Richard Attenborough
Though it is a fine piece of filmmaking, there's something about
Elizabeth...that left me a bit cold, and I think it is something that
bugs me quite often in films, particularly these days; I just didn't
care about the characters. To me, the first and foremost job of a
filmmaker is to create characters (be they imagined or historical as
the case may be) that the audience gives a hoot about. And though
Elizabeth works well on many levels, it falls short of excellence
because of that very reason.
Elizabeth takes place in England in 1554, as Queen Mary, half sister
of Elizabeth and a monarch on the side of Catholicism is dying. Before
she dies, though, she cannot bear to sign a document which would
condemn her half sister to death because of her heretical Protestant
beliefs. As a result, amidst much anger within the council, Elizabeth
becomes the Queen of England. The film chronicles her rise to power as
she fights for a unified Church of England and tries to bring order to
her personal and political life.
Much of the film deals with Elizabeth's love for Lord Robert, a
mysterious man who thrusts his lordship onto many a woman as he
continues to proclaim his love for the queen. There is much ado about
her lack of a husband, and political pressures from Spain and France
enter into the equation. The problem with the film lies with this as
its centerpiece, as love interests are such a character driven
element. I didn't much care about the characters (perhaps aside for
Elizabeth who is played quite well by Blanchett) and so I didn't have
much interest in who would join her in her nuptials. The cast is
rounded out well with the marvelous Rush who plays the queen's most
loyal advisor, Sir Francis, and Attenborough as a well-meaning but
old-fashioned lead council.
Why then, you must be asking, do I recommend Elizabeth? Simply because
it is the result of a perfect pairing of director and
cinematographer. Kapur and his cinematographer Remi Adefarasin
(neither of whom I have heard) create a beautifully realized piece of
filmmkaing from the technical side. The light streams through each
frame as in any painting from the period and beautifully captures the
realistic light sources that would have been found in churches,
cellars and castles in 16th century Europe. Each frame is rich with
color contrasted with blackness or blown-out white light from
windows. The costumes by Alexandra Byrne deserve a mention as they are
such an inportant aspect of each shot. Indeed, Elizabeth is one of the
most visually beautiful films of the decade, ranking with Kundun and
Braveheart. Watch also for the incredibly "Godfather-esque" mass
murder scene. It made me think in retrospect of the similarities
between the two films.
