Title
Review for Quest for Camelot (1998)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Michael Dequina
With the visually spectacular and entertaining Anastasia, Fox declared
itself a worthy contender to Disney's feature animation throne.  Now comes
the Warner Bros. stab at animation riches, Quest for Camelot, and if this
shoddy enterprise is what it considers topline animated entertainment, the
studio is a mere pretender to the Mouse's throne.
As is the case with most underwhelming live action films, one of the roots
of Quest's mediocrity is the script, written by Kirk DeMicco, William
Schifrin, Jacqueline Feather, and David Seidler from Vera Chapman's novel
The King's Damosel.  The story is just about nonexistent, boiling down to
an extended, uninteresting search for a sword.  Dastardly former knight
Ruber (voice of Gary Oldman) steals King Arthur's (Pierce Brosnan) magic
sword Excalibur, only to lose it in the forest.  Ruber and his crew of
baddies search for it, as does the courageous daughter of deceased knight
Lionel (Gabriel Byrne), Kayley (Jessalyn Gilsig), who is joined in her
quest by the blind loner Garrett (Cary Elwes) and the two-headed
(conjoined?) dragon(s) Devon (Eric Idle) and Cornwall (Don Rickles).
Anastasia set the bar for non-Disney animation high with its opening
glimpse of a stunningly realistic, computer-animated music box.  Quest
counters with a shot has become cliche in live action features: the trusty
camera-travelling-over-water shot.  But this is a minor quibble in a film
teeming with visual problems.  The art is strictly Saturday morning-level,
a point which is underscored further a scene where Kayley and Garrett face
a computer-generated giant ogre; unlike in Anastasia or any given Disney
effort, the CGI and the traditional cel animation do not mesh convincingly
at all.  The ogre, as impressive as it looks, looks completely out of
place, appearing to have wandered in from a better, bigger-budgeted film.
The worst visual sin committed by director Frederik DuChau and the
animation crew is the sloppy lipsynching, especially during the musical
numbers, where the voices often do not match the characters' mouth movements.
Even more distracting is the noticeable difference between the characters'
singing and speaking voices.  In Disney features (or, for that matter,
Anastasia), the singing and speaking voices can plausibly originate from
the same set of vocal cords.  Although there are a couple of
exceptions--Gilsig and Andrea Corr sound remarkably similar as Kayley; and
the Jane Seymour/Celine Dion teamup for Kayley's mother, Lady Juliana,
works surprisingly well--too often the voices are wildly dissimilar.  When
Garrett breaks into song, Elwes's soft, Brit-accented tones suddenly change
into those of raspy Yank country-western singer Bryan White.  The biggest
stretch of all is the tandem for King Arthur: current 007 Brosnan and...
former Journey frontman Steve Perry?!  The stretch casting would be
forgivable if David Foster and Carole Bayer Sager's songs were the least
bit memorable.  Suffice it to say, they aren't.
Quest for Camelot follows the tried-and-true Disney formula fairly
closely--"I Want" song, villainous scheme number, love duet, final
confrontation--but DuChau fails to realize that the key to Disney's success
in animation is not necessarily the formula but a generous helping of
imagination and magic to go with it.  While their Anastasia was not a
complete triumph, directors Don Bluth and Gary Goldman were able to create
some superb, haunting moments that rank with, if not surpass, some of
Disney's.  If Quest is any indication, Warner Bros. Feature Animation,
which enjoyed a successful launch with 1996's Space Jam, is severely out of
its depth.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
NANETTE AGUIRRE
As some of you may know... this is the movie that is "supposed to" compete
with Disney's Mulan.  I saw an advanced screening of the movie three weeks 
ago.  My original reaction to the movie was that "IT SUCKS" but the more I 
think about it, it's not that bad actually.  And I bought the soundtrack 
yesterday just for the heck of it.
First impression:      The songs were produced by David Foster, thus Celine
Dion's appearance in the movie.  the songs are not "Broadway-like", the
singers don't act out as much like Disney musical features.  The folks at
Warner Bros are trying to get away from the traditional Disney music.  It's
a fresh start but it's still not as good as the music as in
say...Pocahontas.  The people singing do not go over the board as they would
again like Broadway.  
With the singing kept at bay, the emotional aspect of the songs are
compromised. Sometimes, the instrumental are louder than the voices so as
you can tell, the voices are not as emphasized.  Warner Bros might have
thought it was a good move, but I don't think so because the songs seem dull
and boring compared to Disney standards.  One thing that they made sure of
is that most of the songs are very radio-adult-contemporary-friendly.
I'll go through the songs one by one in order as they appear in the CD.
1. Looking Through Your Eyes by Leann Rimes
this song is the love theme in the movie.  I expected more from this Grammy
winner.  She delivered, but still not enough.  I also wanted more of a
distinction between the duet in the movie and Rimes' rendition.
3. The Prayer by Celine Dion
this is definitely the best song in the movie.  This is actually the song
that is played in the feature.  Celine is the singing voice for Lady
Julianne.  Celine is surprisingly effective and affective.  Very emotional.
She doesn't get very loud.  She's actually very subtle and her "prayer" is
believable.  When this song was played in the movie, it is the only song
that I felt truly involved in. Lyrics are good.  This song may be forgotten
because it's not catchy or memorably funny. While the other songs are really
dull, this one comes the closest to "Disney".
4. United We Stand - ensemble
opening anthem.  it pales in comparison to "Virginia Company" and "Steady as
the Beating Drum" anthems in Pocahontas.
5. On My Father's Wings - Andrea Corrs
Although her voice is limiting, she has a really nice soothing voice.  No
doubt about that.  The first part of the song is okay, but then it gets
routine-like. Needs more variation within the song.
6. Looking Through Your Eyes - Andrea Corrs and Bryan White
Same song that Leann Rimes sings.  After awhile through out the duet,
Bryan's voice gets a little irritating.  But then, Andrea's voice saves it
with her high-pitched singing.
7. Ruber - Gary Oldman
Bad.  Bad.  Bad.  More focussed on the plot than on the melody, but I don't
fault them for that.  But it's still bad.  Could've been more interesting.
Could've been better.  And as for Gary Oldman, not a bad job!  You were
pretty good at being bad!
8. I Stand Alone - Bryan White
I dont fault Bryan White... actually I kinda do. His delivery is not
believable.  What ever happened to Garrett's "Inner pain" for being blind?
Lyrics are not bad, but because the singing is softer than the instrumental,
it can't be emphasized or heard as much.  To me, it's not distinctive
enough.  Sounds very the same as Steve Perry's rendition
9. If I Didn't Have You - Eric Idle and Don Rickles
Not bad.  I found this song funny in the movie.  But it is no "Hakuna
Matata" or "A Friend Like Me".  But it's better than "A Guy Like You"
10. Dragon Attack/Forbidden Forest
11. The Battle
12. Looking Through Your Eyes (Instrumental)
all of these three are forgettable
I don't see a point why they had to make an instrumental version of Looking
Through Your Eyes.  The "orchestra" sounds like digital synthesizers to me.
Not a good arrangement.  Get away from the keyboards, Mr.David Foster.
13. The Prayer - Andrea Bocelli
great voice.  I like the translating parts.
Do I recommend seeing the movie?  Well... for little kids, sure why not?
I'm not too thrilled with the movie.  I give it a "B-".  But there are
certain redeeming aspects of the movie that I liked and took note of.  To
tell you the truth, I actually plan to see it again and I'm taking my little
brothers with me.  
Do I recommend buying the CD soundtrack?  I give the CD a "C"...well... go
see the movie first.... then decide.

Author
Matt Williams
Everybody wants a piece of the Disney animated pie.  It's too bad that
most of the newcomers, such as Warner Brothers' Quest for Camelot,
concentrate more on replicating the Disney formula of story elements,
and less on the overall quality of animation.
Quest for Camelot tells the tale of Kayley (Jessalyn Gilsig speaking,
Andrea Corr singing), a young girl who dreams of being a knight of the
round table in Camelot, just like her father, Sir Lionel (Gabriel
Byrne). She gets a chance to prove herself when the exiled knight Sir
Ruber (Gary Oldman) hatches a plan to steal King Arthur's famous sword
Excalibur, along with Kayley's mother, The Lady Juliana (Jane Seymour).
But when Ruber loses the sword in the Forbidden Forest, Kayley sees it
as her chance to recover the lost weapon for the King. (The film never
quite explains why all the knights of the round table are simply sitting
on their thumbs back in Camelot.)  Evading Sir Ruber and his legion of
half-human half-weapon henchmen, Kayley teams up with the blind hermit
Garrett (Cary Elwes speaking, Bryan White singing), his seeing-eye
falcon, and a two headed dragon, Devon and Cornwall (Eric Idle and Don
Rickles).
The animation of Quest for Camelot is very inconsistent.  There are a
few key shots which are done very well (The Forbidden Forest vs. the
Griffin, for example, or the attack of the fire breathing dragons).  The
rest of the film is shortchanged.  It ranges from barely passable to
glaringly awful.  Kids who watch the film may not care, but apparently
neither do the filmmakers.
The story follows a standard formula, and there's not much to surprise
anyone here.  They might be trying to score some points by having a
female hero and a blind sidekick (who only acts blind on the rare
occasions the script calls for it), but that's about the only thing
unusual in the film.  Even the songs seemed tired and routine, having no
individual flavor or style.
There are a few nice touches here and there (the liveliness of the
Forbidden Forest is interesting, and a few passing moments of humor, but
for the most part, Quest for Camelot is dull and lifeless (particularly
when compared to the average Disney cartoon, or even Fox's Anastasia.)
Children may get a kick out of seeing the film once or twice, though it
doesn't bear the hallmarks of being a child's favorite must-watch film.
Adults, on the other hand, will simply have to suffer through.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: May 15, 1998
The Voices of: Jessalyn Gilsig, Cary Elwes, Gary Oldman, Pierce Brosnan,
Jane Seymour, Eric Idle,
Don Rickles, Bronson Pinchot, Gabriel Byrne, Jaleel White, John Gielgud
Directed by: Frederik Du Chau
Distributed by: Warner Brothers
MPAA Rating: G 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/questcam.htm
Once upon a time, not too long ago, it used to be that one film company
held a vertiable monopoly on the animated feature film market. Disney,
and moreover their distributing company Buena Vista Pictures, has long
since lost the monopoly, but their success there hasn't quite been
overcome. QUEST FOR CAMELOT, Warner Brothers' entry, and 1997's
ANASTASIA, Twentieth Century Fox's product, still do not compare to
Disney's films. Although Fox's parlay was excusable because of their
lack of animation history, this WB attempt should've had the feel of a
finely-tuned machine. After all, it's the same company that turned out
timeless characters like Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, and Wile E. Coyote.
Unfortunately, it falls well short of benchmark. 
There's a lot of formula and a lot of "girl power" in this movie,
although the target audience - loveable little scamps in the coveted
ten-and-under bracket - won't be quick to realize either. Of course, the
little ones in pink will be more attached to the lead character of
Kayley (Jessalyn Gilsig) than will the little ones in blue, but there's
enough comedy and action to go around. As for formula, the typical crowd
is about: there's your generic, chivalrous good guys (in this case, King
Arthur, voiced by Pierce Brosnan) who are generally helpful but stand to
encounter a setback early on. This starts the plot in motion. Then you
have your over-the-top cartoon villain, who is the inspiration of said
setback (in this case the disgruntled knight Ruber, voiced by Gary
Oldman). Finally you have your unlikely hero(es), who will take the
place of aforementioned good guys in the face of adversity - in this
case, Kayley, the tomboyish daughter of a knight, and Garrett (Cary
Elwes), a blind hermit. 
The movie begins with some enjoyable scenes that get to the action right
away. Ruber sends a giant griffin (Bronson Pinchot) to Camelot to steal
Arthur's magical sword Excalibur, but the beast loses the weapon while
returning it back to his boss and it's lost in the Forbidden Forest.
Kayley learns of this when Ruber kidnaps her mother (Jane Seymour) as
ransom for his entry into Camelot, and the girl escapes, being chased by
Ruber's henchmen into the Forbidden Forest. It's there that she meets up
with Garrett, and while being persued by Ruber and company, they come
upon Devon and Cornwall, a two-headed dragon with an appetite for
comedy. The four- er ... threesome then locates the sword and makes
their way back to Camelot just as Ruber arrives, too. 
There is the music, which is included in homage to the extensive line of
Disney films which have employed the stuff since the inception of the
animated feature. Unfortunately, it lacks a lot of the drama and
flamboyance of typical Disney music; rather than looking like a stage
production, it appears to be what it really is - an entire township
singing in unison. It might almost be laughable, but most who watch this
movie will be caught up in the kiddish atmosphere. The characters here
are an improvement on the rather dry ones found in ANASTASIA, although
it'll be quite some time before they're up to the standards of Disney's
sketches. The star rating for this movie is all based on effort; this
surely won't compare when MULAN thunders into theaters later this year.
FINAL AWARD FOR "QUEST FOR CAMELOT": 2.5 stars - an enjoyable movie.

Author
Jamie Peck
QUEST FOR CAMELOT
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The story revolves around the adventures of free-spirited Kayley (voiced 
by Jessalyn Gilsig), the early-teen daughter of a belated knight from 
King Arthur's Round Table. Kayley's only dream is to follow in her 
father's footsteps, and she gets her chance when evil warlord Ruber 
(Gary Oldman), an ex-Round Table member-gone-bad, steals Arthur's 
magical sword Excalibur and accidentally loses it in a dangerous, 
booby-trapped forest. With the help of hunky, blind timberland-dweller 
Garrett (Carey Elwes) and a two-headed dragon (Eric Idle and Don 
Rickles) that's always arguing with itself, Kayley just might be able to 
break the medieval sexist mold and prove her worth as a fighter on 
Arthur's side. 
"Quest for Camelot" is missing pure showmanship, an essential element if 
it's ever expected to climb to the high ranks of Disney. There's nothing 
here that differentiates "Quest" from something you'd see on any given 
Saturday morning cartoon -- subpar animation, instantly forgettable 
songs, poorly-integrated computerized footage. (Compare Kayley and 
Garrett's run-in with the angry ogre to Herc's battle with the Hydra. I 
rest my case.) Even the characters stink -- none of them are remotely 
interesting, so much that the film becomes a race to see which one can 
out-bland the others. In the end, it's a tie -- they all win.
That dragon's comedy shtick is awfully cloying, but at least it shows 
signs of a pulse. 
At least fans of the early-'90s TGIF television line-up will be thrilled 
to find Jaleel "Urkel" White and Bronson "Balki" Pinchot sharing the 
same footage. A few scenes are nicely realized (though I'm at a loss to 
recall enough to be specific), and the actors providing the voice talent 
are enthusiastic (though most are paired up with singers who don't sound 
a thing like them for their big musical moments -- Jane Seymour and 
Celine Dion???). But one must strain through too much of this mess to 
find the good. Aside from the fact that children will probably be as 
bored watching this as adults, "Quest for Camelot"'s most grievous error 
is its complete lack of personality. And personality, we learn from this 
mess, goes a very long way. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     QUEST FOR CAMELOT, Warner Brother's first full-length,
fully-animated motion picture, is loaded with well-known stars doing
the voices.  It retells the Camelot legend from the perspective of a
girl named Kayley, who says she wants "to be a knight, go on daring
adventures, and rescue damsels in distress."
     Since Warner Brothers is probably hoping for another SPACE
JAM-sized hit, perhaps we should review for them a few of the requisite
ingredients of a successful cartoon movie.  First, the animation needs
to be colorful and well drawn.  Second, the story needs to be lively
enough to interest the kids while having enough intelligence to keep
the adults awake.  Third, at least some of the songs have to be
memorable.  Last, and certainly not least, the script must have some
genuine humor.  QUEST FOR CAMELOT manages to fail all four of these
simple tests.  Although not a bad movie, it is an almost terminally
bland one.
     Opening to flat two-dimensional drawings, the story introduces
Kayley, who is soon joined by a blind hunk named Garrett.  Garrett,
like the blindfolded Luke Skywalker, can battle without benefit of
sight.  The setup for the story is that Excalibur is lost, and, if it
is not found, Camelot is doomed.  Our heroic Kayley and her side-kick
Garrett go in search of the lost sword.
     Unlike the lively and funny trailer, the lethargic movie slinks
along at a snail's pace with the first half being sort of a dreary
history lesson and the last being a failed attempt at comedy.  The
voices are done by Pierce Brosnan, Gabriel Byrne, Cary Elwes, Sir. John
Gielgud, Jessalyn Gilsig, Eric Idle, Gary Oldman, Bronson Pinchot and
Don Rickles, but the script by first-time screenwriters Kirk Di Micco
and William Schifrin, based on the book by Vera Chapman, doesn't give
them any to say worth hearing.
     The songs by David Foster and Carole Bayer Sager range from the
eminently forgettable to the truly awful.  If you can remember any a
few minutes after leaving the theater, then you're probably a music
teacher.
     With literally hundreds and hundreds of animators listed in the
five minutes of credits, why did the animation have to be so boring?
The drab colors of dingy blues, browns, and grays are singularly ugly,
and the images are drawn with little detail or imagination.  The only
exception to this rule is a very three-dimensional looking Ogre, who
was probably created with computer graphics.
     The first part of the film is basically devoid of humor.  In the
second half the comedy duo of Cornwall and Devon are introduced.  They
are two heads of a smart-mouthed dragon - "Frankly we're the reason
cousins shouldn't marry."  With only a few jokes and a couple of nice
visuals -- the best has them as Elvis impersonators -- their impact on
the picture is limited.  In our theater, which was crowded with kids,
there was precious little laughter during the movie.  And if there ever
was a movie in need of a little comic relief, it is this one.
     QUEST FOR CAMELOT runs, thankfully, just 1:23.  It is rated G and
would be fine for the entire family.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, was fairly unenthusiastic about the
picture.  He gave it ** and said he liked the Ogre and the two-headed
dragon best.  He pointed out that the Ogre has square feet but leaves
long human shaped footprints.  He doesn't think the movie will do very
well at the box office.

Author
Frankie Paiva
I challenge any film reviewer to find an animated film that is more sickeningly
bad, predictable, and stupidly sappy than this one. The winner (if one finds a
film worse than this) will receive the chance to remove this movie from all
video shelves across America.
Kayley (Jessalyn Gilsig) has always dreamed of becoming a knight of the round
table just like her father Sir Lionel (Gabriel Bryne) so when the evil Ruber
(Gary Oldman, who's character is scarier than he is) has his Griffin steal
Excalibur, he plans to rule all, but the Griffin drops it in the "Forbidden
Forest."
Kayley runs away from her mother (Jane Seymour) to find the famed sword where
she meets up with a blind man (Elwes) who has magically lived his entire life
in the forest alone with a falcon that helps him see.
Throw in a two-headed wisecracking dragon and you've got probably one of the
worst family films ever made. Never mind that the animation is pretty, and
Kayley always remains pretty and clean throughout the entire movie, this is
just plain bad material (that doesn't deserve this long of a review) and for
that I give it a paltry * 1/2 stars.

Author
Scott Renshaw
QUEST FOR CAMELOT
(Warner Bros.)
Voices:  Jessalyn Gilsig, Cary Elwes, Gary Oldman, Eric Idle, Don Rickles,
Pierce Brosnan.
Screenplay:  Kirk DiMicco and William Schifrin, based on "The King's
Damosel" by Vera Chapman.
Producers:  Dalisa Cooper Cohen, Frank Gladstone.
Director:  Frederik DuChau.
MPAA Rating:  G (some scary action)
Running Time:  80 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There are plenty of good reasons why I try to write reviews as soon
as possible after seeing a film.  Some are purely practical, like the
deadlines that stack up one against the other as Friday release-date
approaches; some are philosophical, like the desire not to be influenced
by any other opinions I might hear.  QUEST FOR CAMELOT has provided me
with yet another reason, perhaps the best yet -- when you're dealing with
a film as hopelessly bland as this one, you'll be lucky if you can
remember a single detail 48 hours later.
     Thank heaven for press notes, without which I might not recall that
QUEST FOR CAMELOT is the story of Kayley (Jessalyn Gilsig), a
strong-willed young woman in the time of King Arthur.  It seems that a
cruel and ambitious knight named Sir Ruber (Gary Oldman) has stolen
Excalibur from Arthur (Pierce Brosnan), then promptly lost the magical
sword in a dark and dangerous forest.  In an attempt to prove herself
worthy of knighthood and to help save her kidnapped mother (Jane Seymour),
Kayley ventures into the forest alone, where she eventually joins up with
a blind young man named Garrett (Cary Elwes) and a two-headed dragon named
Devon (Eric Idle) and Cornwall (Don Rickles).  Together they must battle
the dangers of the forest, find Excalibur, defeat Ruber, restore order to
the kingdom, blah blah blah.
     And I do mean "blah."  QUEST FOR CAMELOT is one of the most
ennervated animated films in recent memory, a lifeless conglomeration of
elements each more instantly forgettable than the last.  Visually, it
offers uninspired settings and lackluster character design until the
appearance of a nifty computer-generated ogre.  The comic relief isn't
much of a relief at all, serving up a volley of pop culture pot shots
(TAXI DRIVER, DIRTY HARRY, FRIDAY THE 13TH, SUPERMAN), banal bickering
between the dragon's two heads and cringe-inducing voice casting like
Bronson Pinchot and Jaleel White.  Of course we also need to have songs,
which means a truly awful bunch of David Foster/Carol Bayer Sager
compositions alternating between middle-of-the-road piffle and soporific
show-stoppers.  Director Frederik DuChau can't even manage to get his
voice talent to sound vaguely enthusiastic; Brosnan reads the legendary
King of the Britons as though he needs a Prozac far more than he needs
Excalibur.
     QUEST FOR CAMELOT's story seems well-intentioned enough, empowering
its misfit heroes despite the various obstacles to success they face.
Unfortunately, that's about all the story offers.  The film moves with a
deadening listlessness, as DuChau bungles the few genuine bits of action
with bizarre decisions like scoring a tense chase scene to the big love
ballad.  The choice of Elwes as the voice of Kayley's guide through the
forest proves to be a huge mistake, reminding viewers familiar with THE
PRINCESS BRIDE of Westley's infinitely more engaging romantic adventures
through the Fire Swamp with Buttercup.  Eventually, the failure of the
rest of the story makes even the empowerment message annoying, playing
like an anachronistic scolding of the Round Table for including only
fully-abled white male humans.  
     As I vainly searched for something to hold my attention, I kept
noticing the children in the theater wandering up and down the aisles, or
engaged in conversations far more lively than anything on the screen.  I
can't imagine why a parent would subject their children to being bored
silly by a film like QUEST FOR CAMELOT, especially when adults will 
probably be bored even sillier.  Then again, I suppose there would be a
bright side:  two days later, they'll never even remember what they had to
sit through.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: 
Kirk De Micco, William Schifrin, Jacqueline Feather, David Seidler from
a novel (THE KING'S DAMOSEL) by Vera Chapman.
Starring the voices of: Jessalyn Gilsig, Cary Elwes, Gary Oldman
(Singing voices for Kayley and Garrett are: Andrea Corr, Bryan White)
Synopsis:
In this animated feature, beautiful Kayley (voice of Jessalyn Gilsig)
wants to become a knight of the Round Table - - like her father, the
late Sir Lionel (voice of Gabriel Byrne), who was killed defending King
Arthur (voice of Pierce Brosnan) from the rogue knight Ruber (voice of
Gary Oldman). One day, Ruber's monstrous flying pet griffin (voice of
Bronson Pinchot) steals King Arthur's magical sword Excalibur and
accidentally loses the weapon in flight, dropping it into the forbidden
forest. Ruber, who has recently kidnapped Kayley's mother Juliana (voice
of Jane Seymour), seeks the sword, and also plots to attack Camelot with
enchanted metal warriors. 
On a quest to find the forbidden sword, Kayley enters the forbidden
forest. There she meets a blind and handsome boy falconer Garrett (voice
of Cary Elwes) and a friendly two-headed dragon (voices of Eric Idle and
Don Rickles). Will Kayley, Garrett, and pals recover Excalibur and foil
Ruber's attack?
Opinion: 
Warner Brothers' QUEST FOR CAMELOT is similar to 20th Century Fox's
ANASTASIA in that both movies are attempts by non-Disney studios to
capitalize on the Disney-watching crowd. 
The best modern animated films include a sharp script, great songs, and
detailed artwork. Many use rotoscoping - - a technique where one takes
live action footage, and inks it into the animation by copying each
frame onto animation paper (ex: for SNOW WHITE, Disney hired Marjori
Belcher to do the dancing). Thus, even with a cartoon you can mimic
interesting camerawork: having the viewing angles zoom in, spin, and
move around. 
But don't expect any of the above from QUEST FOR CAMELOT, which is a
middle-of-the-road movie. Actually, I get the impression QUEST FOR
CAMELOT was hurriedly created, because the film lacks attention to the
story's finer details. The blind falconer doesn't act convincingly
blind; the two-headed dragon tries rapidfire comedic patter (like Robin
Williams' genie in ALADDIN) but sounds irritating rather than cute; the
hero gets hit with an arrow and two seconds later sings a song (and
stumbles on a magical plant that heals all wounds); the protagonists
tramp through dangerous forests when they could just as easily ride
magic helicopter plants; they mosey along with no sense of urgency
during life-threatening situations where they should be running in fear
for their lives: et cetera. In other words, QUEST FOR CAMELOT is
contrived rather than compelling. And as for music, coming out of the
theater, nobody could remember a single song from the soundtrack. This
is mediocre stuff.
On the bright side, QUEST FOR CAMELOT soundtrack features songs from
Celine Dion and LeAnn Rimes. QUEST FOR CAMELOT also features the voices
of a star studded cast. Very young children probably won't notice the
numerous plot holes, and it has a happy ending.

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of: Jessalyn Gilsig, Cary Elwes, Gary Oldman, 
      Pierce Brosnan, Gabriel Byrne, Jane Seymour, Eric Idle, 
      Don Rickles, John Gielgud, Bronson Pinchot
Director: Frederik Du Chau
Producers: Dalisa Cohen, Frank Gladstone
Screenplay: Kirk Di Micco, William Schifrin based on "The King's 
      Damosel" by Vera Chapman
Music: Patrick Doyle
Songs by: David Foster and Carol Bayer Sager
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     With new, high-profile animated features being produced by 
Twentieth Century Fox, Warner Brothers, and Dreamworks, movie-goers may 
have reason to be upbeat about the future of big-screen animation.  The 
line of thinking goes something like this: now that the competition has 
upped the ante, Disney will be shaken out of its complacency, and this 
will result in a return to the quality evident in their early '90s 
productions, such as BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  Fox's entry, ANASTASIA, 
proved that Disney-like animation can be achieved by a corporation not 
associated with the Magic Kingdom.  So, it was with great interest that 
observers watched to see what Warner Brothers would do with the baton 
that was passed to them for THE QUEST FOR CAMELOT.  The result is simple 
and disheartening:  they dropped it.
     Back in the late '80s and early '90s, as Disney began to realize 
profits from THE LITTLE MERMAID and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, a number of 
other studios rushed a series of low-budget animated efforts into the 
pipeline in an attempt to siphon off a few dollars from unsuspecting 
viewers who might mistake any motion picture cartoon for a Disney 
effort.  (Remember FERNGULLY?  If you don't, count yourself lucky.)  
Sadly, Warner Brothers' much-hyped THE QUEST FOR CAMELOT seems like one 
of those second-rate features.  It's dull, uninspired, and, worst of 
all, characterized by artwork that could charitably be called 
"unimpressive."  Its no exaggeration to say that the Disney direct-to-
video animated sequels to ALADDIN and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST possess a 
more polished look than THE QUEST FOR CAMELOT.
     The story, which is likely to make Arthurian purists sick to their 
stomachs, focuses on a dark period in the history of Camelot, when King 
Arthur's fabled sword, Excalibur, is lost as the realm comes under 
attack by the evil Sir Ruber (voice of Gary Oldman), whose goal is to 
supplant Arthur (voice of Pierce Brosnan) on the throne.  Meanwhile, off 
in a remote village, a young woman named Kayley (voice of Jessalyn 
Gilsig), the daughter of one of the Round Table's most honored knights, 
the late Sir Lionel (voice of Gabriel Byrne), embarks on a quest for the 
sword when her mother, Lady Juliana (voice of Jane Seymour), is captured 
by Sir Ruber's men.  Along the way, she gathers a diverse group of 
companions, including a blind recluse (and love interest) named Garrett 
(voice of Cary Elwes), a silver-winged falcon, and a two-headed talking 
dragon (voices of Don Rickles and Eric Idle). 
     If the surprisingly poor level of the animation was THE QUEST FOR 
CAMELOT's lone failing, the movie might still have been entertaining, 
but the problems only begin there.  Almost every aspect of the 
production has an obvious flaw of some sort, and the overall impression 
is that not a lot of care went into the crafting of this particular 
animated adventure.  To be frank, what THE QUEST FOR CAMELOT offers 
isn't much more impressive than what can be found on TV every Saturday 
morning.
     The film's ripping off of stock Disney elements is blatant.  Kayley 
is presented as a heroine struck from the same mold as Ariel and Belle 
(especially Belle).  Cornwall and Devon, the two-headed dragon, are 
replicas of THE LION KING's comic duo of Pumba and Timon.  And, like in 
ALADDIN, there are numerous quick references to easily-recognized 
Hollywood movies (including, amongst others, TAXI DRIVER and SUPERMAN).  
The story that these elements are grafted onto is not especially 
invigorating -- it's basically a group of characters running around in a 
forest, dodging perils, and looking for a lost sword.  The Disney 
animated screenwriters may not be masters of plot and characterization, 
but their efforts eclipse these.
     The songs are another misstep.  THE QUEST FOR CAMELOT would have 
been considerably improved without the lineup of about a half-dozen 
treacly, completely forgettable tunes by David Foster and Carol Bayer 
Sager.  As far as I can tell, they serve three superfluous purposes:  
(1) to pad the running length, (2) to interrupt any flow generated by 
the sputtering storyline, and (3) to sell soundtracks.  Worse still, the 
"actors" providing the singing voices (Andrea Corr, Bryan White, Celine 
Dion) don't sound anything like the actors providing the speaking 
voices.  
     In all honesty, kids in the under-10 range will probably enjoy THE 
QUEST FOR CAMELOT, and, since it's aimed at them, it's difficult to be 
too harsh on the film.  Keep in mind, however, that most children will 
contentedly watch just about anything that resembles a cartoon.  One of 
the big selling points of the Disney animated features is their appeal 
to viewers of all ages.  In this case, those who are more discriminating 
than the average 9 year-old will discover that THE QUEST FOR CAMELOT 
rapidly grows tiresome.  Consequently, any adult on a search for the 
holy grail of animated pictures is advised to keep looking.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Jeremiah "Spassvogel" Rickert
     When I first had heard of this project, about a year ago 
or so, the first thing I thought of was poor animation.  I am not 
totally sure why. Warner Bros. Of course has a long tradition of making
animated shorts, starring charicatures and animals, but I couldn't see
them attempting to do realistic humans.  Now logically, no matter who
produces a film, the art is going to depend on the animator.  In this
case, however, I turned out to be correct.  Disney has set a high standard
and Quest For Camelot cannot compete.  Anastasia was at least a bit
original in some of its animation sequences.  (The impressionist paintings
as set scenes during the Paris number, for example) and featured songs
that actually moved the plot along.  
     Quest for Camelot opens with what looks just like the beginning of
Disney's  most successful animated movie, the Lion King, complete with
what sounds like  an African chant and a big rock. That immediately set
the tone for the whole movie,  grasping at Disney.      The thin plot
concerns a young girl's yen to be a knight like her father, Sir Lionel
(Gabriel Byrne) who is killed defending Arthur from the vicious  Ruger
(voiced by Gary Oldman).  Arthur (Piers Brosnan) tells her widowed mother
Lady Juliana (Jane Seymour) that she's always welcome at Camelot. (which
looked a big pile of rocks, rather than a grand castle, so who'd want to
go there anyway?)  The now grown up little girl, Kayley (voiced by
Jessalyn Gilsig)  is a real corker and acrobatically jumps around her
mother's farm training herself to be a knight.  Ruger shows up with a
magic potion (that we never find out the source of) and starts to make an
army of odd mechanical soldiers to help him overthrow Camelot, he kidnaps
Kayley's mother to take advantage of her all-access pass to Camelot.
Ruger sends a Gryphon to steal Excalibur from Arthur, which he does,
because the knights all holster their swords on the backs of their chairs,
and Arthur isn't the quick draw he used to be.  (a 6yr old in the seat in
front of me said --mommy, why didn't he just draw the sword when the
ceiling broke open?-- He was right, Arthur just sat there until the thing
was right next to him before he went for it...but it was too late. Merlin
(who has  practically no bearing on the plot at all) voiced by Sir John
Gielgud send a special falcon after the Gryphon (voiced by Bronson
Pinchot) who is able to disrupt things  enough for the sword to be dropped
in a magical and forbidden forest.  Upon returning to Ruger, Kayley hears
of the loss of the sword and her mother tells her that she is Camelot's
only hope.  The quest is on!
     The songs in this film have a rather high-quality pedigree, but still
don't quite measure up.  David Foster, the king of power pop, who
contributed greatly to the 80s sounds of the likes of Toto and Chicago,
and Carol Bayer Sager have penned a collection of power ballads that seem
like music videos rather than musical moments.  They also enlist pop
uber-diva Celine Dion and former Journey front-man Steve Perry to warble
these over-produced pop creations, and that hurts because the singers
sound very little like the people they are portraying,   particularly the
singing voice of Garret, Bryan White.  Another beef, that the six year old
in front of me noticed as well, was the fact hat on half the numbers, it
seems they changed the lyrics at the last moments, because their lips do
one thing and their voice says another.  It's a bit disoncerting.  My
final beef with the music is the horrid attempt at injecting
Riverdance-esque step-dancing into the film.  My skin crawled.  
     The best aspect of this film was the comedy.  I found myself
chuckling fairly often in this film.  The token comedy relief, in the form
of a two-headed Dragon, voiced by Monty Python's Eric Idle and Hockey Puck
Don Rickles, is pretty darned hilarious at times.  Unfortunately, the
humor kinda gets lost in the shuffle, particularly the one-liners muttered
by Pinchot's Gryphon.  
     They put together an awesome cast, no bones about it, Jane Seymour,
Gabriel Byrne, Gary Oldman, Piers Brosnan, Cary Elwes, John Gielgud, the
songwriting team was top notch, responsible for millions of records sold,
but it all doesn't quite come together.  Perhaps the story wasn't enough
to hold the rest, or perhaps the studio just isn't experienced enough to
handle a project like this yet.  Warner Bros. may have a long tradition of
animation, but not of animated movies.  Fox you'll noticed drew on the
talents of Don Bluth and Gary Goldman, both of whom have a lot of
experience when it comes to animated feature films. (Rescuers, Secret of
Nimh, Land Before Time, American Tail, Pete's Dragon, Robin Hood) to name
a few.  Comparing the two films is natural, considering they're both
competing to cut in on Disney's market. Anastasia outshines Quest for
Camelot in every way.  
Of the $3.25 I paid for it, it was worth about $1.00


Author
Ben Hoffman
Warner Bros.  Studio's animation films go back to 1958 when it won an
Oscar for KNIGHTY KNIGHT BUGS.    The current offering is its first full
length animation, one that kids should like very much.
 Based on the Camelot legends and the sword of Excalibur, it makes a
departure from the story by having a girl as the protagonist   This was
the time of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table when Knighthood
was in flower, as the saying goes.     Sir Lionel (voice of Gabriel Byrne)
had a daughter Kayley (voice of Jessalyn Gilsig; singing by Andrea Corr)
who wished to emulate her father and to also become a knight.     When
Ruber (Gary Oldman) and his equally vicious aid Griffin (Bronson Pinchot)
steal King Arthur's sword Excalibur, it is Kayley who sets out on the
dangerous mission of recapturing the sword and saving Camelot.
Her adventure leads her through lush, beautiful  forests inhabited with
strange animals that lend themselves to talented animators.   There she
meets a young, blind man, Garrett (Cary Elwes , singing by Bryan White)
who joins forces with her.   Along with them is a comical two-headed
dragon (Eric Idle and Don Rickles).    They also meet up with old Merlin,
the magician, (Sir John Gielgud).   As well, they rescue Kayley's mother,
Lady Juliana (Jane Seymour).
While the movie is sure to please the young, it does lack a bit of
excitement. The drawings are well done; the story is excellent.  And the
cast behind the animation is perfect.  Still, it could have used some
spark to light the fire to all of it.  Unfortunately, it did not quite do
that.
The story is based on THE KING'S DAMOSEL by Vera Chapman. Original songs
composed by David Foster and Carole Bayer Sager. Musical score by Patrick
Doyle.
