Title
Review for Ransom (1996)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Steve Kong
A few months back I saw the preview for this film.  It looked exciting, 
thrilling, and cool.  And I really like Mel Gibson, Rene Russo, and Delroy 
Lindo.  Then I saw that I was directed by Ron Howard, what other great thing 
could this film have?  And this is when the waiting started.
Today, after my physics lab I stood in line for fifteen minutes to buy tickets 
to the very first showing of Ransom at Century 22 (San Jose, CA).  Then sat in 
a dimly lit theatre waiting for the projectionist to finish up loading the 
film.  Watched three previews (one being Star Trek:First Contact) and then the 
lights dimmed.  Was the film worth the wait?  A definite YES!
What a great film.  Ron Howard (also known as Opie) does a very good job 
directing this film, making everything work well together.  The well paid Mel 
Gibson ($20 million) does a great job at being a guy that has fast mood 
swings and almost seem to care only about himself.  Rene Russo looks great, as 
always, and does great as Mel Gibson's wife.  The characterizations in the 
film were somewhat thin, but the quick pacing of the film moves the audience 
along so fast that it really doesn't matter.
The plot of the film is about Tom Mullen (Mel Gibson), an airline tycoon, who 
did one nasty deed in his past.  The kidnappers, I won't reveal the 
identities, take Mullen's kid and ask for a $2 million dollar ransom.  We 
find later, how that nasty deed really fits into the situation.  
The film also stars Gary Sinese (Forrest Gump, Apollo 13)  as a NYPD detective 
and  Delroy Lindo (Broken Arrow, Get Shorty) as an FBI agent.  I really loved 
Delroy Lindo's performance in this film.
Though we all know how the film is going to turn out, there are enough twists, 
turns, and surprises throughout the film to keep the audience hooked all the 
way up to the end.  This is a great film.  Put it on your "Must-see" list!


Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z Rating: *** (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 121 minutes [2 hours, 1 minute]
[thriller]
starring: Mel Gibson (Tom Mullen), Gary Sinise (Jimmy Shaker), Rene Russo
(Kate Mullen), Delroy Lindo (Agent Lonnie Hawkins), written by Cyril Hume,
Richard Maibum, Alexander Ignon, Richard Price, produced by Brian Grazer,
Scott Rudin, Kip Hagopian, directed by Ron Howard.
"Ransom" is a typical Hollywood thriller, but it presents itself in a rather
original manner. It becomes overly dramatic and action-packed at times, but
everything is connected by such an interesting and suspenseful story it works
quite well.
Mel Gibson stars as Tom Mullen, a rich CEO of an airline company. Tom and
his wife Kate (Russo) host a science fair in New York's Central Park, and the
second they turn their back on their pre-teen son, he is gone. Suddenly the
story becomes fast-paced and the suspense element kicks into full gear. When
the kidnapper calls we hear a scary, distorted voice which works well.
However, I think the film tries too hard to be modern by having the Mullens
receive a picture of their son handcuffed to a bed via e-mail (couldn't they
just look at the address of the sender to find out who the kidnapper is?). 
The film does not focus solely on the Mullens, it also takes time to
establish the kidnappers and their efforts to extort $2 million from the
Mullens. The kidnappers themselves are the most surprising element to the
movie: they are both high and low tech at the same time. It's hard to believe
a handful of second-rate computer hackers would be able to elude the FBI as
they do. However, the fact they do not fit the organized crime mold is
original. We even get some comic relief and good characterization despite the
choppy story.
The film is able to balance the drama of the Mullens' grief with some
exciting action and an interesting crime story. Gary Sinise is excellent as
Jimmy Shaker, a corrupt cop who is the criminal mastermind. He seems to have
a personal vendetta against Mullen, but we never really find out why. You
love to hate him because he's always in control and there aren't any cheesy
evil laughs.
Mullen turns the tables on the kidnappers by refusing to pay their ransom,
and instead offers it as a reward for their capture and the return of his
son. I thought this plot device was great, the only problem it causes is lots
of melodramatic screaming arguments between Tom and Kate, between the
kidnappers, and between both. 
Twist endings are the backbone of great thrillers and crime stories, and
this film is no exception. The game of cat and mouse is essentially reversed
throughout the last act. It's difficult to describe all the details and
twists, but the final act is loaded with them.  Both sides win and lose at
the same time, unfortunately, this is accomplished through a completely
over-the-top sequence the film seemed to be avoiding all along.
It's difficult to make films that combine drama, crime, action, and
suspense, and although "Ransom" isn't perfect, it's still a good effort. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Michael Dequina
Every once in a while there comes a "can't miss" project that, once
it hits the screen, falls flat on its face.  Ransom isn't one of them.  The
involvement of director Ron Howard and stars Mel Gibson and Rene Russo add
up to a powerful, riveting thriller that engrosses from beginning to end.
Touchstone has advised the press to keep the lid on some plot points
(one of which, I think, is fairly obvious), so I will be as succinct as
possible.  Gibson and Russo play Tom and Kate Mullen, he a successful
airline magnate, she his glamorous wife.  They have it all--a penthouse in
New York, money up to their ears, and a young son, Sean (Brawley Nolte, son
of Nick)...  Alas, things fall apart when Sean is kidnapped and held for $2
million ransom, which Tom eventually refuses to pay and instead offers as a
bounty on the head of the kidnapper, much to the dismay of Kate and an FBI
agent (Delroy Lindo) dealing with the case.
It is always a disappointment when the filmmakers have a good thing
going then botch things up through carelessness.  While the makers of Ransom
don't botch the film, carelessness does lead to the film's two major
gaffes--the clear presence of boom microphones in two different scenes.
This is especially a shame, since both boom cameos take place during some
key dramatic moments; in one, the drama and passion of a Gibson monologue is
severely undermined by the boom.  Instead of listening intently to the
speech and paying attention to the story, the audience at the press
screening could not help but roar with laughter.
Unwanted booms aside, Ransom is first-rate entertainment.  Richard
Price and Alexander Ignon's smart script wisely does not make Tom into a
hero of impossible goodness; in fact, Tom is more than a little
unsympathetic and morally ambiguous.  His virtue--and sanity--is naturally
called into question when he offers the ransom as a bounty, but his values
are even more questionable when we learn that he paid a bribe to save his
airline... yet won't pay for the safe return of his son.  Gibson, in a fine
performance, does not sugarcoat anything and creates a complex, difficult
character.  We see and feel his genuine love and concern for his son and can
understand his desperation, but one cannot help but think that he's going
about the whole thing wrong, that maybe he's lost his mind.  What's more,
he's not exactly sure that he's sane, either.
Howard garnered many an accolade for his directing chores on Apollo
13, but I feel his work here is just as accomplished, if not more.  He
mostly shoots the film matter-of-factly, free of flashy edits, and this
restraint helps build the tension more naturally and makes the emotions feel
more real.  Howard's most notable achievement is with his cast, who all turn
in solid work.  In addition to Gibson, Russo also impresses, having more
than her share of standout moments.  Her role could easily be branded as
thankless, but here she's given an opportunity to show more of her acting
chops than ever before, painfully conveying the grief and anguish over her
child's disappearance and her husband's questionable actions.  Lindo has
perhaps the most thankless role as the stock fed, but he still makes a
lasting impression, and Gary Sinise is ideally tough and smart as an NYPD
detective who gets involved in the case.
"Someone has to pay," reads the tagline for Ransom.  After seeing
this smart and, yes, thrilling thriller, it is no mystery  who that
"someone" is--the moviegoing audience, who is sure to pay some major bucks
to see this surefire box-office winner.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  /  mrbrown@thepentagon.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    RANSOM, director Ron Howard's underwhelming though thoroughly
plotted remake of the little-known Glenn Ford film, stars Mel Gibson as
a self-promoting, self-protecting, self-made billionaire whose world
comes crashing to a halt when his young son is kidnapped.  The catch?
As the ads have revealed for several months now, instead of given them
what they want, he takes their money to a television station and offers
a two million-dollar bounty on the kidnappers' heads.  This twist, which
comes about an hour into the film, is exciting in principle, but doesn't
send the story charging forward.  Instead of Mel gearing up with a band
of bounty hunters-- and wouldn't *that* be something to see!-- we get
even more talk, a couple of keen role reversals, and an entirely odd
final confrontation between Gibson and Gary Sinese, who plays the
mastermind behind the crime.
    Sinese is a waste, which I'll detail later, but Gibson gets to go
nuts and that's what we pay him for.  Other prominent players include
Rene Russo (TIN CUP), looking less plastic than usual.  She has little
to do as the trophy wife, but contributes to the overall suspense by
appearing shorter than her co-star.  (How did they do that, you'll
wonder.  Morphing?  Trick photography??) The ever-prolific Delroy Lindo
(BROKEN ARROW, CLOCKERS) plays the head FBI agent and he's always good.
Most interesting is the inclusion of Lily Taylor and Liev Schreiber,
established actors from the world of indy cinema who play two of the
grungy, Gen-X henchmen.  The presence of these unsavory young characters
in a Hollywood Event Picture-- not to mention in a Ron Howard film, for
gosh sakes!-- suggests that the new villain of the nineties may be of
the dirty, tattooed, cigarette-smoking, cereal-eating, cyber-phreaking,
rerun- watching variety.  Who's that guy with the nose ring, Robin?  I
don't know, Batman, better blow him away.
    Both heroes and villains get equal time and that makes for a well-
balanced story, with everyone giving a game performance, even when they
don't entirely fit in.  Like Ms. Russo.  The glaring exception is Gary
Sinese, who's horribly miscast as the cop-turned-criminal-mastermind.
Lieutenant Dan is a good actor who, here, has almost no tangible weight
as a heavy.  Frankly, he's about as threatening as Joe Pesci's Leo Getz.
Okay, okay, okay, but witness his hollow monologue about THE TIME
MACHINE to see what he's missing.  If the characters don't always work,
at least the plot machinery does.  It keeps churning away, like the
Morlock machinery beneath that future world.  The end result is a
reasonably entertaining popcorn pic-- two hours of multiplex filler that
only crashes and burns when it tries to take itself too seriously.  If
Ron Howard had recognized RANSOM as the potboiler that it is, he
might've trimmed some of the hokum.  (Or restored some of the logic.  Or
replaced that fuzzy score from James Horner.  Ugh.) Try not to giggle
when something serious is seriously funny, like when Sinese says with a
straight face to Taylor: "You know what you're scared of?  Your own
humanity." I laughed out loud.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
David Wilcock
Ron Howard teams up with Mel Gibson in what should be a fun packed,
action thriller. However, there is one word that really describes what
this film is like. And that word is 'Average'
This has to be one of the most 'ok' films I have ever seen. The plot is
about Mel Gibson trying to get his son back after he is kidnapped by a
group headed by a policeman (Sinese). However, halfway through the
film, instead of Gibson paying the ransom, he decides to make it a
'reward' to the first person who brings the kidnapper to him, dead or
alive.
Rene Russos part, as Gibsons wife, is underwritten, and hardly does
anything in this movie at all. However, the best role in the movie has
to Sinese. He has a real evil quality about him, and makes a very good
bad guy
Another major problem with the film is that it is terribly overlong.
The film goes on for 1/2 hour longer than it should. You're glad when
it finally ends, which is a bad sign for a thriller.
Overall, I was disappointed with this film. It's like Ron Howard had
nothing better to do, and made this to make some quick money. With a
bit more development, this could of been one of the best thrillers of
the year. However, it turns out to be merely average.

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Director : Ron Howard
Screenplay: Cyril Hume (story), Alexander Ignon, Richard Maibaum
(story), Richard Price.
Produced by:  Touchstone Pictures
Running Time: 120 mins 
Cast: Mel Gibson (Tom Mullen), Rene Russo (Kate Mullen), Gary
Sinise         (Jimmy Shaker), Delroy Lindo (Agent Lonnie Hawkins), Lili
Taylor         (Maris Connor)
Rating: **1/2 out of *****
In RANSOM, Mel Gibson and Rene Russo lose their son to a handful of
grungy kidnappers in Central Park and spend the rest of the movie
trying to get him back.
Gibson plays Tom Mullen, a Self-Made Airline Millionaire who's a bit
of a publicity hound, and Rene Russo, who is possibly the only
Hollywood actress capable of smouldering with a huge black bruise on
her temple, is his wife, Kate. While attending a Junior Science
competition in the park, junior Mullen (played by Nick Nolte's real
life son, Brawley) himself disappears and not much later, the Mullen
parents receive a ransom voice message, with a digitized film image
of their son taped and handcuffed, through email.
That's about the coolest and most interesting part of the film, other
than a nice bit at the end involving a lot of cut glass sticking out
of the kidnapper's throat in a police showdown. Director Ron Howard
takes us through the movements of the kidnapping with a good sense of
pace, throwing in a number of nice suspenseful moments, and even
introduces a Plot Twist that I suppose would be exciting if I (and
probably you too) didn't already know was going to happen from
watching the million trailers that have been running in entertainment
previews and the theatres.
Mullen sets out intending to pay the $2 million-dollar ransom
demanded, but a botched exchange situation (mostly due to the
over-eager FBI swat team that always botches things up in films like
these) soon convinces him that the kidnappers actually don't intend
to return his son at all. In a dramatic turn of events, he reverses
his decision and makes use of the one weapon that has served him well
in previous battles--publicity--to combat the kidnappers. Actually
it's only just that one Head Kidnapper who keeps in contact with
Mullen, and with whom Mullen develops an intensely personal,
adversarial relationship.
Eventually, though, things take the expected turn of events. If you
don't believe me, ask yourself these questions and see if you don't
think you already know the answers: will the Mullen son return safely
to the fold? Are the bad guys ultimately made to Pay For Their
Crimes? Will Ron Howard continue to make moving, powerfully emotional
human drama-type of films that make for Gripping Box Office
Successes?
RANSOM is a pretty OK film for S$7, mostly because director Ron
Howard does a good job of keeping the suspense up and there are some
genuinely likable bits in it. There's good dramatic support from both
the kidnapper and FBI-agent posses (played by Delroy Lindo, Lili
Taylor, Gary Sinise, Liev Schreiber, Evan Handler and Donnie
Wahlberg) that keep vigil on either side throughout the entire ordeal
(although there really isn't that much of a difference between either
side; as it turns out, they're all Basically Good People except for
the Evil Brains of the Outfit).  There are also number of nice
cinematographic points made by photographer Piotr Sobocinski, who
beautifully photographed RED.
In the end, though, RANSOM is just boring. The kind of film that
delivers everything it's supposed to, but makes you wonder why it
chose to be that kind of film in the first place. Mel Gibson, whose
face is even blander than Duncan Watt's on a bad day, dutifully runs
the gamut of emotions from determined to almost deranged parent, and
Rene Russo is charming as ever in her frantic, fragile disarray.
Still, watch this in the theatres only if you're into a jazzed-up,
fancifully rendered "Code Red" with production values beyond the
dreams of lowly TCS producers. Otherwise, turn up Jonathan Lim and
wait for the LD to come out.
Rebecca Wan enjoys "Code Red" because it is just like real life, only on
TV. She once kidnapped a relative's top but had to give it back almost
at once when a drastic cutting off of allowance was threatened. All in
all, it wasn't so different from RANSOM.


Author
George McAdams
Moviegoers have reasons to begin celebrating the early arrival of the
holiday season with the pre-Thanksgiving release of "Ransom (
http://www.movies.com/rn/shock.html ), Ron Howard's latest film,
starring Mel Gibson, Rene Russo, Delroy Lindo, and Gary Sinise. With the
expected glut of sugar-coated holiday films just around the corner, this
is one you'll be able to return to for repeated viewings; however, don't
get out your magnifying glass too much, or you'll find some scenes will
leave you with questions.
This emotional action/drama that centers around the kidnapping of the
son of an airline mogul, Tom Mullen, played by Gibson, delivers the
wrenching conflicts of parents faced with the dilemma of how to get back
their son from an abductor, played by Sinise, whose systematic plan to
obtain a ransom is second only in his desire to get plebe's justice from
the rich Gibson, which adds more psychological weight to the
teeter-tottering the protagonist and antagonist give each other with
each downward thrust of their human character. While most kidnappings
envolve around the waiting and wondering about whether the person
kidnapped will be released, Gibson takes control of the situation by
using the ransom as a $2,000,000 reward for the person who turns-in the
kidnappers.
The righteous indignation displayed by Gibson is similar to others in
films, Harrison Ford in "Patriot Games," and even Charlie Sheen in "Wall
Street," come to mind; but, Gibson transcends this one-level response by
his physical reaction to the dramatic landmind that explodes when he
collapses soon after he realizes his proactive actions may have led to
his son being shot by the kidnappers.
Ransom is a movie that fully delivers, with none of the actors giving a
weak, or even lukewarm, performance. Even young Brawley Nolte, Nick
Nolte's son, deliver's out-of-the-gate. The small twists of illogic that
crop-up from time to time, only serve as reminders of just how complex
movies are, but given that Howard has worked dramas before, "Backdraft,"
et.al., it is disappointing that they are there.
As for the Ransom ( http://www.movies.com/rn/mainmenu.html ) Web site,
there are:
 Background notes on Director Ron Howard ( http://www.movies.com/rn/ronhoward/ronhoward.html ),
 An interview with Howard (
http://www.movies.com/rn/ronhoward/interview.html ),
 Details about the premiere (
http://www.movies.com/rn/premiere/premiere.html ),
 Cast Interviews ( http://www.movies.com/rn/cast/cast.html ),
 The obligatory Shockwave trailer (
http://www.movies.com/rn/trailer/trailer.html ),
 An "ask the stars section (
http://www.movies.com/rn/askthestars/askthestars.html ), and
 AVI and Quicktime scenes with Howard discussing the story (
http://www.movies.com/rn/story/story.html ), the audience, and even the
Internet ( http://.www.movies.com/cpk/ron5.mov).
The Web Site gets a 4 out of 4 rating, but be warned, the amount of
information here is not fluff.  Give yourself at least an hour to just
read everything.
For other links to movie sites, be sure to check out the
Movies-in-the-Net site at
( http://www.primenet.com/~george )

Author
Michael Redman
If he doesn=92t watch out, Mel Gibson is in danger of being known as
someone other than Mad Max. Of course there are still a few big guns in
this film, but there=92s some accomplished acting too. Although Gibson
continues to shed his rough and gritty anti-hero skin as his career
progresses, here he explores a new genre: the businessman as action
hero.
In Ron Howard=92s latest film, Gibson plays Tom Mullen, a gazillionaire
airline owner whose son is snatched from the junior science fair by
kidnappers. Mullen at first agrees to pay the ransom, but when things
fall apart he rethinks the situation. A veteran of numerous hard-nosed
business negotiations, the tycoon realizes that in order to get his son
back alive, he has to play his hand differently.
The casting is what puts this film over the top. The trio of Gibson, the
kidnappers' mastermind (Gary Sinise) and FBI team leader (Delroy Lindo)
play off of each other wonderfully. Sinise is perfect as the driven
scheming sleezebag is right on the mark. His speech to Mullen over a
walkie talkie about H. G. Wells=92 Morlocks and Eloi reveal his vision of=
society. Mullen and the other glitteratti frolic up on high while Sinise
and the other lowlifes dwell below, feeding off the unsuspecting.
Gibson=92s character is an all-American hero with a few flaws. His cowboy=
tactics tend to work, but they are also what got him into this situation
to begin with. In a round about way, if he weren=92t known as a man who i=
s
willing to buy his way out of trouble, his son wouldn=92t have been
kidnapped. As Sinise says "You=92re a payer. You did it once and now
you=92re going to do it again."
One of the nicest elements of this film is that most of the characters
actually have personalities. Lindo calls home to talk to his kids,
obviously shaken at working this case. Even the kidnappers are real
people, arguing about the ultimate fate of Sean Mullen and feeding him
candy bars.
Gibson=92s break-down on the balcony of their penthouse apartment is
especially effective. It=92s one of the best filmed representations of a
man=92s world falling apart that I=92ve seen.
It=92s not all perfect. The shoot 'em  upending, while emotionally
satisfying seems tacked on to be just that rather than to provide a
powerful resolution. As well crafted as the scene is, we=92ve seen it
before. Mullen=92s wife (Rene Russo) has several good moments, but
occasionally just seems to be there. While adequate, Brawley Nolte
(Sean) doesn=92t provide much to the film other than occupying space to
build the story around.
But you=92ll ignore these problems as each minute of the movie builds on
the previous one. Forget about the large coke, you won=92t want to leave
for that five minute break an hour later.
[This appeared in the 11/14/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Ron Howard.
Screenplay:  Richard Price and Alexander Ignon.
Director of Photography:  Piotr Sobocinski.
Producers:  Brian Grazer, Scott Rudin, B. Kipling Hagopian.
Starring:  Mel Gibson, Rene Russo, Gary Sinise, Delroy Lindo, Lili Taylor,
Brawley Nolte, Liev Schreiber.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  121 minutes.
      I should note before anything else that RANSOM is not a spectacular,
classic piece of film-making, but simply a very well-crafted
action/suspense thriller.  It is only because so many of its genre
contemporaries have been so lackluster that RANSOM begins to look like a
jewel, because RANSOM is a textbook example of the little things which so
many bad to mediocre suspense thrillers could do to become better by
orders of magnitude.  In fact, the conventional wisdom in Hollywood --
borne out by the success of TWISTER, THE ROCK and INDEPENDENCE DAY as
recent examples -- is that suspense is actually counter-productive because
the establishment of suspense takes time, valuable minutes which will not
involve a 10 megaton explosion or a flying computer-generated cow.  RANSOM
is consistently tense because it is patient, patient enough to set up
characters and situations in a way which really pays off.
     Mel Gibson stars as Tom Mullen, a multimillionaire airline magnate
living a charmed life in a New York penthouse with wife Kate (Rene Russo)
and son Sean (Brawley Nolte).  That life is shattered one day when Sean
disappears, abducted by a group of kidnapers who demand $2 million for
his release.  Tom tries to play by the kidnapers' rules, but when the FBI
team headed by Agent Lonnie Hawkins (Delroy Lindo) makes a botched attempt
at a rescue operation, Tom concludes that they have no intention of
letting Sean go alive.  Desperate to even the odds, Tom takes drastic and
risky action to put the kidnapers on the defensive, the result of which
can only be either complete victory or the worst kind of defeat.
     RANSOM begins with the radical premise that its characters actually
matter, and uses that premise to build a story which matters from moment
to moment.  Mullen is far from a shining knight as our protagonist, but
rather a hard-nosed and occasionally unscrupulous businessman whose
rebellious stand against the kidnapers is perhaps as much a result of
guilt as logic.  The kidnapers themselves (Lili Taylor, Liev Schreiber and
Donnie Wahlberg among them) have distinct personalities, and the clashes
between those personalities show the cracks in their united front early
on; Gary Sinise, as Jimmy Shaker, the mastermind of the operation, is so
deeply embittered by his impression that the wealthy get away with murder
that he probably believes his actions are thoroughly justified.  These are
not spectacularly complex characters -- Rene Russo's Kate is actually
something of a disappointment as the wife who does little but sob -- but
they are real people, and they are directed by Ron Howard in scenes which
allow you inside their heads at critical, decisive moments.
     Howard also has the ability to take moments which in other hands
might have been quickly dispatched plot points and make them compelling.
The story would have progressed without the lengthy sequence in which Tom
and Kate realize that Sean is missing, but the tension and mounting dread
in Howard's direction are palpable.  Similarly, we could have gotten from
point A to point B without showing Jimmy's reaction to Tom's gambit, but
the growing realization that his plan is falling apart is spelled out on
his face.  Even minor details like the first notification from the
kidnapers -- a jittery video file sent to the Mullens via email -- is
given a spark which elicits a gasp from the audience.
     RANSOM does have its obligatory moments of action and violence, but
Howard refuses to treat those sequences as the purpose for his movie.
There is a driving tension and a natural rhythm to the structure of RANSOM
which doesn't make it feel like the director and screenwriters are trying
to exhaust you with set pieces.  Although there are flashy moments in
RANSOM, notably a telephone confrontation between Jimmy and Tom which is
edited to whiplash perfection, it is notable in its lack of devotion to
flash; it is that rare action thriller where you anticipate the moment the
characters _start_ talking instead of the moment they _stop_.  Gibson and
Sinise are both in fine form, and their battle of wills moves RANSOM like
a living motor.  RANSOM may cop out on giving us a climax which addresses
the more unsavory aspects of Tom's character, but it deserves recognition
as an example of professionalism in film-making, of what is possible when
someone seems to give a damn.  Too many thrillers swing for the fences
every time up, and end up striking out most of the time.  RANSOM is more
like a fundamentally sound contact hitter, banging out single after single
along with the occasional well-placed extra-base hit.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Ron Howard
Writers: Alexander Ignon and Richard Price
Starring: Mel Gibson, Rene Russo, Gary Sinise, Delroy Lindo, Lili 
Taylor, Donnie Wahlberg, Liev Schreiber, Brawley Nolte, Dan Hedaya
If I ever become rich, I will never have kids.  Simple as that.  You 
know you're probably gonna piss some schmuck off who will somehow 
vindicate his actions by giving you "a lesson," which will probably 
involve kidnapping someone, namely your kid, for a hefty sum.  That's 
what "Ransom" depicts.  It's a smart thriller because it has the balls 
to give us a flawed protagonist who we somehow doubt liking but 
nevertheless care about what happens to him because, well, it's Mel 
Gibson and his freaking kids been kidnapped by a group of schmucks.  
However, it never really becomes too smart, because that's when the 
audience starts hating it.
Gibson plays Tom Mullen, a multi-millionaire who owns the fourth biggest 
airline in the country.  He's rich, he's powerful, and he has a family, 
including his wife, Kate (Rene Russo), and his beloved son, Sean 
(Brawley Nolte).  One day at some kind of flying machine festival, Sean 
is kidnapped by two greasy haired psychos (Liev Schreiber and - get this 
- Donnie Wahlberg, I guess trying to earn some extra bucks following 
that whole "New Kids" spiel - or just a way to follow in the footsteps 
of his brother).  They can't find him and they soon get a high-tech 
e-mail showing his son and a ransom for 2 million bucks.
Tom has no trouble getting the cash but as he researches some cases he 
got from the FBI, who he's called in (led by the schweppervescent and 
gouteed Delroy Lindo), he begins to doubt that he'll ever see his son 
again.  After some botched drop-off attempts and some philosophical 
bashings from the kidnappers (cleverly led by a cop named Jimmy Shaker, 
played by Gary Sinise), he gives up his hope of truly getting him back 
and goes on the air to proclaim that he's switching the tables around, 
putting a 2 million dollar bounty on the kidnappers' heads unless they 
give the kid back.
A lesser film would have perished at this (it is pretty crazy), but the 
film turns into a psychological analysis, showing the kidnappers arguing 
over what to do and Kate and Tom worrying about his decision in their 
own ways.  The ending is kind of stupid but nonetheless satisfying since 
the film has depicted a psychological collapse of three sort of decent 
people.
The best part of the film is the character Tom and his portrayer, Mel 
Gibson, who has a tough part to play, since we learn he has made a very 
selfish and totally amoral business decision that has caused him to 
worry intensely.  Tom starts out as a man plagued with ghosts in his 
head that come erupting out in emotions.  Mel Gibson, one of the better 
of the well-paid actors in Hollywood, does it totally believably and 
makes him a complex individual.  His best scenes are when he's sitting 
in a car, thinking about what he's doing.  Also, his acting when he 
walks out to the balcony with suicidal thoughts going through his head 
is priceless.  His performance is so good that he got a well-deserved 
Golden Globe nomination.  An Oscar nomination would be going too far, 
but still, Mel rocks in this flick and he's the anchor for the whole 
film.
Rene is mostly weepy, but it's obviously understandable.  Gary is creepy 
and does a great job at it.  Delroy rocks, as he always has and will.  
Lili Taylor is good and all, but she's wasted in a crap part.  Remember, 
she was absolutely amazing in "I Shot Andy Warhol."  She's great in 
this, but you kinda feel cheated.
"Ransom" is tautly directed by Ron Howard, who's a very good director.  
It's far from his best film, but he nicely shows us the psychological 
collapse of a flawed entrepeneur.  And he wonderfully gives us the 
tenseness of having a person's kid being kidnapped by a bunch of greedy 
schmucks.  I reccomend this as a good film, but not a great one, 
unfortunately.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Christopher Heyn
Ransom has already received rave reviews, and is certain to be one of
the highest-grossing films of the fall season.  It may even be
nominated for a number of Academy awards.  Nevertheless, all the praise
heaped upon Ron Howard's latest effort is due not to Ransom's
brilliance, but to the noticeable lack of quality thrillers that have
been released in the last few years.  Despite the film's solid acting
and high production values, Ransom suffers from weak scripting that
sabotages what is otherwise an involving scenario.  In a word, Ransom
is overrated.
Ransom contains the same problems that plague all of Ron Howard's
pictures (yes, even Apollo 13), in that the film certainly isn't bad,
but it's nothing great, either.  However, Ransom does feature some of
the best directing of Howard's career, and Howard has overcome his
tendency to make a "nice" film.  Ransom is quite bloody and violent,
and does not shirk away from the unpleasantness of its subject matter. 
Ransom also features some great acting (most notably Mel Gibson and
Gary Sinise), and the film wastes no time jumping into the story. 
However, despite all these positive elements, Ransom has some serious
plot and character weaknesses that leave one asking a lot of questions
after the film is over.
The film's biggest flaw is the weak motivation of its antagonist, Jerry
Shaker (Gary Sinise).  A police detective who uses his experience to
mastermind what seems to be an airtight scheme to squeeze $2 million
out of the high-powered airline entrepreneur Tom Mullen (Mel Gibson),
Shaker's character motivation is never fully explained.  
At first, it seems Shaker is only after the money.  If so, why?  Is it
because he is deeply in debt to mob figures?  Because he and his
girlfriend/co-conspirator (played by Lily Taylor) plan to escape to a
desert island for the rest of their lives?  Who knows?  That issue is
never even touched upon.  Then when Mullen turns the tables on Shaker,
offering $4 million as a reward for his capture, dead or alive,
Shaker's determination to hold onto Mullen's boy indicates a personal
vendetta.  Mullen says so himself later in the film.  The audience is
then left waiting for Shaker's explanation as to why he would risk an
otherwise successful police career over such a high-profile stunt. 
This explanation never comes.
If Shaker's motivation *is* personal, then why doesn't he go ahead and
kill Mullen's son once it is clear that Shaker will never get the money
he seeks?  Best to realize it's a botched affair, kill the boy, and
call it a day.  When it looks like Shaker and his three co-conspirators
are going to be discovered, Shaker hides behind his badge, killing all
three of them in a shootout, claiming later to have acted in
self-defense.  Questions linger, but Shaker is nevertheless a hero, and
soon after goes to Mullen's home to collect the $4 million.  However,
when he does, he's armed with not one, but two handguns.  If all Shaker
wanted was the money to begin with, why doesn't he just play the hero
role, take the check and deal with any fallout later... even leaving
the country if the investigation of the case comes crashing down on
him?  Instead, Shaker risks killing a celebrity executive just when
media attention on the case is at its highest.  This would certainly
indicate Shaker's motivation is a personal one.  But again, we never
learn what it is.
What's most disappointing about Ransom is that with just one scene or a
few well-placed lines, this script flaw could have been easily
resolved.  
Another flaw in the movie is a result of director Howard lapsing back
into "nice" mode at the most inopportune time.  When Shaker is on the
phone with Mullen, threatening to kill his son, Mullen calls his bluff.
 Immediately, Shaker kills Mullen's son.  Quickly, Howard reveals to
the audience that no, Shaker just shot the gun in the son's direction,
but did not kill him.  Meanwhile, Gibson and his wife (Rene Russo) are
weeping out on the balcony over the "death" of their son.  As the
audience, we know their grief is misplaced, so the scene has no impact
whatsoever.  Up to this point in the film, we wonder whether Mullen
plays things too fast and loose, especially when lives are involved. 
If we also believed that Mullen's son was dead, it would give credence
to those of us that disagreed with Mullen's risky decision.  Instead,
Howard fumbles a potentially cathartic moment in the film.
One could continue on, giving examples of other logical plot flaws, but
that would belabor the point.  Ransom has its heart in the right place,
and the high emotional pitch of the film is what audiences will respond
to.  However, those of us who expect a film to not only emotionally
move us, but intellectually engage us, will come away from Ransom
disappointed.  It's unfortunate that the state of the modern thriller
is so poor that Ransom is considered brilliant by comparison.  One
longs for the return of Alfred Hitchcock.


Author
Nick Schaden
    Mel Gibson is an actor that's made his career by playing bad
boy/heartthrob in action movies ("Lethal Weapon"). Even in his deeper movies
("Braveheart") we see some serious spin off his original I'm-a-little-crazy
super cop Riggs character from the "Lethal Weapon" series. In "Ransom" while
Gibson is enshrouded in a softer character, the audience largely sees the
Mel Gibson we've come to know. Is this bad? No, as "Ransom" succeeds at
everything it attempts to be: a solid movie.
    Mel Gibson is Tom Mullen, the rich owner of a large airlines company,
and a devoted husband and father. The whole world comes crashing down
however when the Mullens son Sean (Brawley Nolte) is kidnapped for ransom.
Even though Tom's wife Kate (Rene Russo), the FBI agent (Delroy Lindo) and
almost everyone else wants Tom to give in to the kidnapper's demands, Tom
refuses. Instead, he goes on TV and offers the millions demanded for Sean
release as a reward for anyone who bags the kidnappers. Obviously this plot
gives plenty of breathing room for Mel Gibson and director Ron Howard to
throw in some clichéd action. As nearly demanded by the audience, we get to
see Gibson leap over cars, dive in pools, shoot at things, and run a lot.
    The movie has plenty of strengths. Luckily the action sequences are well
directed, and have many more traces of realism then 99% of the movies out
there: It's a lot better than watching Gibson blow away forty bad guys
without a sweat a la "Lethal Weapon". The plot is relatively original and
keeps the blood pumping like any good thriller should. Furthermore, director
Ron Howard ("Apollo 13", "Backdraft") is an expert at making us feel for the
movie's protagonists, and "Ransom" is no exception. Many scenes are devoted
to showing the love between Tom, Kate, and Sean and how the ransom
emotionally tears the family apart. It's a smart move, as it made me care
more about Tom's plight and drew me more into the story line. Acting (for
one notable exception I'll point out later) is another strong suit: Gibson
fills his role adequately, and Gary Sinise does a surprisingly great job
playing an ice cold villain.
    Not all is perfect in "Ransom". The biggest let down luckily isn't
incredibly crucial to the movie: Rene Russo. Most of the movie she's reduced
to gushing into over the top hysterics, it's almost laughable at times.
While on the subject of emotion, at times the dramatics get too high, in one
notable scene Tom and Kate cry and whimper over their son for what seems
forever.
    All in all, "Ransom" walks with a fresh perspective on the
drama/thriller scene. It's well directed, well acted, it's fun, and all
these elements make for a strong movie.

Author
Phil Curtolo
By Phil Curtolo
Mel Gibson (Braveheart) gave a gripping performance as the father of a
young kidnapped boy in Ron Howard's Ransom.
Gibson plays Tom Mullen, a wealthy business tycoon whose past actions
are coming back to haunt him as a deranged psychopath, played by Gary
Sinise (Forrest Gump), and his band of low-life thugs kidnap his only
son for $2 million. Tom and his wife, Kate, played by Rene Russo (Tin
Cup) were instructed not to inform the police, but they contacted the
FBI. Minutes later, an elite team of agents led by Delroy Lindo (Broken
Arrow) are in Tom's house and wiring every phone.
The plot sounds average, just like most other kidnap  movies that
you've already seen, and it  was nothing more than that. That is until
about half-way through the movie.
Suddenly, Tom goes to the Fox 5 news room and makes a live broadcast
saying, "This is your ransom. But this is as close as you will ever get
to it. Instead, I am offering this money as a reward on your head, dead
or alive." 
At this point, the plot thickened, and the unusually slow start of the
film turned into a suspense-filled action film with great stunts. The
last half of the film is very well done.
Another thing that carries this film are the superb performances by
Gibson and Sinise, as they collide in a game of wits over their cellular
phones for most of the movie. Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly  
commented   on   the subject: "It makes you wonder what kidnappers did
before cell phones."
Before this movie, Sinise played mostly "good guys," first in Of Mice &
Men, then in Forrest Gump, and most recently, in Apollo 13. But he was
surprisingly devilish and cold in his portrayal of a cop-gone-bad.
Gibson, of course, was just being Gibson, in an Oscar-worthy
performance.
Although most of the scenes were quite predictable, Ransom is a very
entertaining and suspenseful film.
Grade: B-, ***1/2 out of *****

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The coming attraction showed Mel Gibson getting on television and
making a statement to the people who had kidnapped his son.  "This is a
remake of a Glenn Ford movie," I whispered to my wife.  I had seen
virtually the same scene a film on television in the mid-1960s.  I
remember at the time I did not think that film was as exciting as I had
hoped.  But could I figure out what that earlier film was called?  It
was not difficult.  My copy of Maltin listed RANSOM as a 1956 film
starring Glenn Ford and Donna Reed.  I just barely remembered the
original.  Luckily the 1956 version ran on a cable station and I got a
chance to see it a second time.  One thing I had no reason to notice in
the 1960s but impressed me when I saw it recently was that RANSOM
(1956) was written by Cyril Hume and Richard Maibaum; one source said
it was a remake of a television play.  I am actually a bit surprised
the original was as low-key as it was with those two authors.  Cyril
Hume is most familiar to me for writing the films FORBIDDEN PLANET and
THE INVISIBLE BOY.  Richard Maibaum is second only to Ian Fleming for
making James Bond a household name.  Maibaum either wrote or co-wrote
all but about three or four of the Bond films and the ones he did not
write I generally consider some of the worst of the series.  Most of
the James Bond screen persona and its continuity from film to film is
Maibaum's doing, interpreting from the novels.  Yet the 1956 film is a
low-key story built on personalities.
     In RANSOM (1956) the CEO of vacuum cleaner company is faced with
handling the situation when his son is kidnapped--off-camera--from the
boy's school.  The focus of this film is the suspense and a bit of
social comment.  He and the police try to decide what the best strategy
is to deal with the kidnappers and complicated by his wife's mental
breakdown under the stress.  He finds that there is a moral way to deal
with the kidnappers and to increase the chances that his son is
returned alive.  In the original film that solution to his problem is
really the climax of the action.  The remake uses that decision as only
the springboard for its real story.  It asks, if the abductee's father
really took the same unorthodox approach, would it work and what would
happen next?  The new film examines the consequences of his action in
much greater detail, but at the same time throws in a lot of often
mindless action and violence.  It would be difficult to find a better
measuring stick of how tastes in film have changed over forty years
than to compare the quiet black-and-white original with the explosive
and bloody remake.
     Neither lead character is average, but the Glenn Ford father is a
lot more believable.  He is a fairly ordinary businessman, well-off but
a lot like thousands of rather plain leaders of rather modest companies
without much of a public image.  Mel Gibson's version of the same role
is the dashing and sexy founder of a new airline who through his
(somewhat narcissist) television ads is a familiar (and ruggedly
handsome) face to millions of people.  In the first film the police
tell the father that he has hard decisions to make but that paying the
ransom does not really improve on his son's chances.  The emphasis here
is that the man is a professional decision-maker and he has to make
some hard and very complex decisions about what to do about the
kidnapping.  The police lay out the facts and make no recommendations,
though it is clear that to discourage future kidnappings they would
probably prefer the father not pay the ransom.  In the remake the
writers wanted to paint the Gibson character as an indomitable maverick
so, somewhat out of character, Delroy Lindo tells Gibson very
definitely that he should pay off the kidnappers and Gibson decides a
very different strategy from what the police are recommending.  The
original film wanted to put the audience in the father's role, to show
them what it must be like to have a loved one kidnapped and to get them
thinking what they would do.  Gibson's character definitely is not
there for realistic identification value.  He is a hero and a mechanism
to allow a twisty plot, some exciting chases and gunfights, and some
bright red stage blood to be pumped.  As the wife in the original,
Donna Reed has a bit of a mental breakdown under the fear of losing her
son.  This ups the ante on the Glenn Ford father and makes his
decisions all the harder. As a 1990s woman, Rene Russo has her own
ideas about how to get her son back.  She is angered and fierce and a
long way from breaking down like the weak Donna Reed mother did.  In
the original the kidnappers are not the focus of the film and remain
unseen in the film.
     Neither Mel Gibson nor Glenn Ford played their father rolls
significantly differently from their previous roles.  Except for his
profession, Gibson is playing much the same character as he played in
the LETHAL WEAPON films.  Rene Russo has a little acting to do, but her
role is definitely a secondary one and not particularly demanding.  Of
four parents in two films the only actor whose part was a stretch from
previous work was Donna Reed.  It is not easy to play a weak character,
slowly disintegrating, without going into King Lear-ish histrionics.
It also makes for a role that often does not get much respect.  It took
a remake to show how good her acting was in the original and how
different it was from here standard roles in pieces like IT'S A
WONDERFUL LIFE and "The Donna Reed Show."  If there are any real acting
honors in the remake they go to Gary Sinese as a policeman who is
involved in the kidnapping case.  I could not help thinking throughout
the film how much more intriguing the film would have been if he and
Gibson would have traded roles and Sinese could have worked more drama
into the father's role.  It would be a real gamble with the gross, but
it would be a film that people would want to see again.
     The new scriptwriters Richard Price and Alexander Ignon have taken
a very personal look at a very realistic situation and turned it intoa
slick 1990s action fantasy.  The first film had a lot to say about
relationships and about how a fairly average person handles the most
stressful situations he will ever know.  The film is also a very simple
and straightforward story.  The remake with its car-fire and gun-chases
also has a lot more unexpected twists and a much cleverer plot that
takes a clear-eyed hero though a thrilling adventure with his own son
as a prize.  The one really common thread in the approach is that each
has negative things to say about how the media turns private crises
into public media events.  Each film has virtues that the other lacks,
but on balance they make films about equally good, just in very
different ways and for very different audiences.  Intentionally the
remake is a film that can be appreciated by a twelve-year-old.  The
original, not being violent or bloody, with no car chases or gunfire,
and stressing only human drama can probably be recommended only to an
adult audience.  I rate each about a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mel Gibson, Renee Russo, Gary Sinese, Delroy Lindo, Lili Taylor, 
      Liev Schreiber, Donnie Wahlberg, Evan Handler, Brawley Nolte 
Director: Ron Howard 
Producers: Scott Rudin, Brian Grazer, and Kip Hagopian 
Screenplay: Richard Price and Alexander Ignon, based on a story by 
      Cyril Hume and Richard Maibaum 
Cinematography: Piotr Sobocinski 
Music: James Horner 
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures  
     RANSOM is director Ron Howard's first venture into the action 
thriller genre, and, although he's working with a solid cast and an 
auspicious premise, his attempts to emulate suspense maestro Alfred 
Hitchcock fall short.  The reason is simple -- it's impossible to 
believe that Howard (PARENTHOOD, APOLLO 13), whose name is synonymous 
with epic adventures and feel-good comedies, would ever allow an 
innocent child to be murdered.  Hitchcock had no such compunctions (see 
SABOTAGE if you doubt this), and that's a trait that separates his 
thrillers from this one. 
     It's pretty unfair, however, to damn RANSOM by saying that it 
doesn't live up to Hitchcock's standards -- how many movies do, after 
all?  RANSOM isn't a bad thriller, it's just not a great one.  There's a 
little too much pointless running around, a subplot that leads nowhere, 
and a certain creeping predictability that argues for a shorter running 
length.  On the other hand, strong acting, smart dialogue, and a couple 
of neat twists counterbalance many of RANSOM's weaknesses. 
     The script, which is based on a 1956 movie of the same name, has 
been re-worked by novelist Richard Price (CLOCKERS) to bring it up to 
date.  The film's noir quality is supplied by the camerawork of longtime 
Kieslowski collaborator Piotr Sobocinski (DECALOGUE, RED).  There are 
numerous instances when Sobocinski's heavy atmospheric contributions are 
effective in enhancing the grim, almost-claustrophobic mood. 
     Mel Gibson, in his first role since BRAVEHEART, is Tom Mullen, the 
CEO of Endeavor Airlines, the world's fourth largest carrier.  He's a 
devoted family man, paying more than lip service to his love for his 
wife, Kate (Renee Russo), and son, Sean (Brawley Nolte, son of Nick).  
One day, at a New York City school science fair, Sean is kidnapped by a 
gang of four (Lili Taylor, Liev Schreiber, Evan Handler, and Donnie 
Wahlberg).  Handcuffed and blindfolded, the boy is held in a small, 
windowless room.  From this hideout, the group's ringleader, corrupt cop 
Jimmy Shaker (Gary Sinese), makes his $2 million ransom demand.  And, 
while money is the primary issue, the struggle between classes is also 
involved.  Shaker sees himself as striking a blow for the hard-working 
man against the rich and overprivileged. 
     Tom calls in the FBI.  The agent in charge of the investigation, 
Hawkins (Delroy Lindo), advises paying the ransom.  At first, Tom 
agrees, but, as time passes and the situation becomes more desperate, he 
begins to believe that Sean is already dead.  Finally, no longer 
trusting the cops and worried that he's being played for a fool, he 
makes a stunning decision. 
     Since there's no way Sean is going to be killed (or a Disney-owned 
company never would have released the movie), the most compelling 
questions relate to how he will be recovered and whether anyone will die 
attempting to save him.  Howard wrings a surprising amount of tension 
out of this cat-and-mouse material.  There are times when RANSOM is 
genuinely gripping, most notably during the scenes in and around Tom's 
fateful decision.  We can also be thankful that Howard spares us a lame 
whodunit.  We know the kidnappers' identities from the beginning, and 
this eliminates the necessity of peppering the plot with distracting red 
herrings.  The ending could have been steeped in unexpected irony, but 
the script opts instead for a conventional resolution. 
     At least one subplot is worthy of a more detailed exploration than 
it receives.  Early in the film, it's revealed that Tom participated in 
the illegal bribery of union officials to avoid a strike.  An accomplice 
went to jail, but, by denying involvement, Tom kept his hands clean.  
The kidnappers use this incident to peg him as a "payer", someone who 
would rather buy his way out of trouble than take a risk.  Beyond that, 
however, little is done with this information, and, eventually, it's 
forgotten about.   
     The strength of RANSOM lies in the performances.  Mel Gibson is 
easy to believe as a desperate father who will do anything to get his 
son back, and who is tormented by the potential consequences of a wrong 
decision.  Renee Russo, who has refined her acting skills since last 
appearing opposite Gibson (in LETHAL WEAPON 3), holds her own, although 
her role isn't especially meaty.  Gary Sinese fashions a chillingly 
complex villain who's both ruthless and intelligent.  And Delroy Lindo's 
effective secondary character reminds us of the stakes in Tom's "game". 
     With recognizable, popular names like Ron Howard and Mel Gibson 
involved, RANSOM is all-but-guaranteed to bring a huge financial 
windfall to Touchstone Pictures.  Only those who approach this film with 
expectations of something with a real edge will be disappointed.  The 
movie delivers the kind of mainstream entertainment likely to generate a 
positive buzz.  And, for better or worse, that's the most I've been able 
to claim for any of 1996's overhyped blockbusters. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Kidnapping is the fear of every parent.  Nothing strikes terror as
the thought that one minute your kid may be there, and the next he has
disappeared forever into a nameless crowd.  Consummate and always
reliable director Ron Howard (SPLASH, COCOON, PARENTHOOD, BACKDRAFT,
THE PAPER, and APOLLO 13) displays the skill of a Hitchcock in crafting
his thriller RANSOM.
     Let me cut to chase.  RANSOM really delivers the goods.  It is an
engrossing picture that sweeps the audience into its vortex.  I predict
that audiences will love the show, and the film will easily earn a
King's ransom for Touchstone Pictures.
     High on the list of what makes any picture a success is the
script.  Based on a story by Cyril Hume and Richard Maibaum and on a
1956 Glenn Ford movie of the same name, Alexander Ignon and Richard
Price's script is highly intelligent and is always one step ahead of
the viewers.
     Kidnapping stories have a canonical, linear structure.  First the
victim is kidnapped, then the ransom is negotiated, and finally there
is the payoff.  RANSOM follows a much more unusual organization.
Although the trailers and almost every review gives away one of the key
twists, I will not.  Suffice it to say that you should expect the
unexpected.  In a mark of confident writers, they are even willing to
set up blind alleys just to keep you on your toes.
     Wealthy and confident entrepreneur Tom Mullen (Mel Gibson) has
build his airline from a single plane into a billion dollar empire.  He
is on the cover of BusinessWeek as "Mr. Risk."  As his wife Kate (Rene
Russo) puts it, "He's so shy.  Next month he's doing the underwear
billboard in Times Square."  This is another beauty of the script.
Thrillers require carefully applied humor to relieve some of the
tension.
     One gorgeous day, the Mullen family goes to Central Park for a
science fair.  Their only child Sean (Brawley Nolte from MOTHER NIGHT)
is playing with a video camera attached to a balloon.  Since he is
about ten, his parents do not watch him every second.  As his camera
goes up, he is kidnapped.
     As they do throughout the film, the acting of panic and fear by
Gibson and Russo is genuine and touching.  They earn and keep the
audience's empathy.  Nick Nolte's son Brawley has a lot to learn and
his is the only weak performance in the show.  Not a bad one certainly,
and since he has only a small part, it makes little difference.
     The kidnappers, including Evan Handler (NATURAL BORN KILLERS) as
Miles, Donnie Wahlberg as Cubby, Liev Schreiber (DENISE CALLS UP) as
Clark, and Lili Taylor (GIRLSTOWN and I SHOT ANDY WARHOL) as Maris, are
a techno-savvy group.  The first note is sent via Email and is complete
with chilling pictures of their son bound and gagged.  They give Tom 48
hours to come up with a two million dollar ransom or they will kill
Sean.  They warn Tom not to tell anyone.
     Tom calls the FBI and soon kidnapping expert Agent Hawkins (Delroy
Lindo from GET SHORTY and BROKEN ARROW) and his team arrives incognito
to the Mullen's apartment.  Foiling the crooks is tougher than expected
since they scramble their messages and block the phone traces.  Lindo
gives a compelling performance.  On the phone to his wife, Hawkins
confesses, "I am so glad we are not rich.  You have to thank god for
what we have."  Yes, the rich do live in their penthouses, but with
wealth comes vulnerability.
     Tom is perplexed by it all.  Since he is worth so much more, he
wonders why they only want two million.  What does this mean?  In a
further complication, he is rumored to have paid off union boss Jackie
Brown (Dan Hedaya) to avoid a costly airline strike.  The payoff put
only Brown in prison, and Tom tells Hawkins that he thinks Brown may
have some part in the kidnapping.
     All along the way, the score by Academy Award nominated composer
James Horner (APOLLO 13 and BRAVEHEART) adds to the building tension
without ever overpowering it.  Similarly the images by Academy Award
nominated cinematographer Piotr Sobocinski (RED) provide maximum impact
without any cute tricks.  Only his highly effective slow motion, back
and white ending sequence is out of the ordinary.
     "These cuffs are a little tight," says a small time crook.  Local
cop Jimmy Shaker (Gary Sinise) tells him, "that's 'cause they're new.
They'll stretch.  You give 'em a little time."  Jimmy, you see, works
the beat near where the kidnappers have taken Sean into hiding.  In
this ensemble cast, Sinise and Gibson stand out as the best of the
best.
     As the terror of the situation sinks in on the Mullens, their
marriage begins to strain.  To extricate himself from the family
squabbles, Agent Hawkins tells them, "I'm not a marriage counselor.
I'm here to get your boy back."  In the best piece of acting in the
show, Gibson finally goes totally to pieces on their balcony.  Tom's
devastation is complete at this point.
     "Shouldn't be a problem," tells the kidnapper to Tom.  He
reassures Tom at the same time he is lecturing him on the haves and
have-nots in society with references to the movie THE TIME MACHINE.
Most films today would have overplayed this Robin Hood metaphor, but
not Ron Howard's.  His taste and timing are excellent.
     After an exciting and frightening adventure, the film finally
starts drawing to a close.  Just when you think all of the kidnappers
have painted themselves in a corner, you are surprised and surprised
again.  When the credits start to roll, you turn to the person with you
and go "wow!"
     RANSOM runs 2:01.  It is rated R for bloody violence and some bad
language.  There is no sex or nudity.   It would probably be fine for
most teenagers since the gore is reasonably contained, and the picture
is superbly crafted.  I strongly recommend the show to you and give the
film *** 1/2.  (This happens to be a picture to which I was not invited
to the press screening.  Too bad since this is the first one I am aware
of with the press kit on a CD-ROM complete with video clips.)
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
