Title
Review for Bottle Rocket (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Zak Forsman
In 1993, a group of young independent filmmakers submitted a black and
white short film titled, BOTTLE ROCKET for consideration at the 1994
Sundance Film Festival. It was accepted. There, the short film caught the
eye of Texas-based screenwriter L.M. Kit Carson. Two years later, we have
the feature-length version of the same film produced by James L. Brooks.
This is every struggling filmmaker's dream.
BOTTLE ROCKET, dubbed as "Reservoir Geeks", is one of the funniest and
most originally written films I've seen in a long while. We follow Anthony
played by Luke Wilson who is just getting out of a voluntary hospital for
what he describes as 'exhaustion'. From there he re-teams with Dignan and
Bob, his two old friends. I really would hate to ruin a single scene if
you haven't watched this film yet. All I will tell you is that nothing
leads where you'd expect it, the characters are simple, charming and
wonderful to watch, and the film has a great little ending that will leave
you with a smile on your face (and maybe some sympathy in your heart).
The film was written by its director, Wes Anderson and by Owen Wilson who
plays the character, Dignan. These guys bring to the screen a film-sense
all their own. The characters were certainly written to play for laughs,
but each is portrayed honestly and we almost begin to respect them for how
simply they approach their lives. There is also a great last line that
gives us a sense of closure--that things have come full circle. I'd like
to see this film up for Best Original Screenplay. It won't be.
The film was directed in the same manner by which it was written, which is
to say, it presents the visual imagery under the same mindset that
produced the dialogue. Half of what you laugh at in this film comes from
visual cues expressed by the director, Wes Anderson. He knows what his
actors are capable of and how to send an idea about a scene through use of
the camera, shot selection and editing. His film is kinetic, it feels
alive. Also, he has composed an ending sequence for this film that will be
in my memory forever. I was actually a little moved by it.
Every single person in this film was casted perfectly, perhaps because the
characters were written for them. If you think about the fact that three
brothers and a few friends (excluding James Caan) comprise the cast, it is
even more impressive. They really have to be seen to be believed. But
then, the writing lends itself to the character quirks that make them seem
more human. My favorite line happens when Future Man has been making fun
of Dignan's jumpsuit. Anthony tries to cheer him up by saying, "Don't
worry about it, Dignan. Did you see what he was wearing?"  And Dignan
replies sheepishly, "Yeah. It was pretty cool."
In closing, if you enjoy films such as THE HUDSUCKER PROXY or RAISING
ARIZONA, you will love BOTTLE ROCKET. And the choice of title is pretty
interesting, too. The idea of a bottle rocket--it's something vivacious
and alive, and prone to violence, but the thing is really relatively
harmless. This describes Dignan perfectly. You've got to see it. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Author
Christopher Null
     The moment you know that Dignan's really lost it is during the trio's
getaway from a not-so-daring bookstore robbery, when he excitedly states,
"We're heading back to Bob's, we're gonna split up the loot, and go on the
lam!"
     In this hilarious first feature from director Wes Anderson and
screenwriter Owen Wilson, a trio of young men with questionable work
ethics try in vain to become hardened criminals.  Anthony (Owen's brother
Andrew Wilson) has just "escaped" from a voluntary mental hospital with
the help of old pal Dignan (Owen), a neo-manic-depressive who's mapped out
his life with felt-tip pen in a 75-year plan.  Bob (Bob Musgrave) is the
group's timid getaway driver whose main qualification is that he owns a
car.
     After a practice robbery on Anthony's Dallas house, the plans for the
first big score, a strip center bookstore, are put into action.  With
literally *hundreds* of dollars, the men then find their way to a
middle-of-nowhere motel, planning to return for the job that will launch
them to the Big Time:  robbing a cold storage center.
     Filmed by Texans in Texas, BOTTLE ROCKET is a surprisingly funny look
at childish obsessions and "growing up" as a twentysomething.  Wilson's
dialogue is maddeningly comical and oddly realistic--we've all had a
friend like Dignan who doesn't quite have all his screws in.  The
performances by the principal actors are dead-on, too.  Throw in a
supporting role by James Caan (his best since HONEYMOON IN VEGAS) and a
bizarre final heist, and you've got yourself a pretty good film.
     The only time the movie is derailed is during an ill-thought-out love
sequence with a motel housekeeper (Lumi Cavazos).  It doesn't really seem
to belong in this picture, but at least it's somewhat entertaining.  The
picture's selection of music is a very unconventional one, too, and while
it's somewhat refreshing in its difference, it can also be distracting.
     Details aside, I recommend BOTTLE ROCKET to anyone who enjoyed last
year's THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN.  And while not the unequivocal success the
latter film was, BOTTLE ROCKET is still a phenomenal ride that manages to
be consistently funny, without once resorting to someone being struck in
the groin.
     *** Watch for an exclusive interview with the filmmakers at
http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/! ***
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BOTTLE ROCKET is a slacker crime comedy.   As a very quirky
comedy, it starts off well out of the gate.  Dignan (Owen C. Wilson) is
helping Anthony Adams (Luke Wilson) escape out of the window of a
mental institution.  Anthony has bed linen tied in knots so he can
climb out of his second story window.  Dignan is on watch with
binoculars in the bushes and is signaling him with a hand mirror.  This
is a bit of overkill since this is a voluntary hospital where Anthony
checked himself in for exhaustion and can leave anything he wants.
Later his sister Grace (Shea Fowler) wonders how he could suffer from
exhaustion since he never had a job in his life.
     After the big "breakout", Dignan explains the life of crime he has
planned for Anthony and himself.  He has a college spiral notepad with
criminal goals in different colors as if he was trying to get an A for
his project in Burglary 101.  After the movie's fresh start, Dignan's
loquacious demeanor soon began to wear thin on me.  I have a low
tolerance for obnoxious people, and Dignan is the type that you would
run from at a cocktail party.
     Dignan has a plan for them to get in shape with lots of exercise
and all of the right foods so that they will be ready for their heists.
They do a couple of small jobs first including robbing Anthony's house.
Their goal is to join the big time gang run by Mr. Henry (James Caan).
Mr. Henry is the owner of a front operation called The Lawn Wranglers
gardening service.  James Caan's acting in BOTTLE ROCKET has to be the
worse he has ever done.  Embarrassingly bad.  To be fair, most of the
other actors were only acceptable except for one sweet one performance,
but I'll get to that later.
     For their little larceny jobs, Anthony and Dignan need a get-away
man.  Dignan formally interviews Bob Mapplethorpe (Robert Musgrave) and
chooses him because of his qualifications - unlike them, Bob has a car.
The name of the story comes from their habit of shooting off bottle
rockets and other fireworks from the windows of Bob's car as well as in
fields.
     Other than the very beginning, the only other part of the film
that has some attraction are the scenes at the cheap motel where they
stay in hiding after their first real robbery.  At the motel Anthony
meets and falls in love with Inez (Lumi Cavazos).  Cavazos manages to
rise above the pedestrian material and gives a lovely performance as an
almost non-English speaking Paraguayan maid who works at the motel.  I
could not remember where I had seen her until I looked her up.  She was
the wonderful lead who played Tita in LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.  In my
opinion, she is the only reason to see BOTTLE ROCKET, and she is the
only character about whom I cared.  I was kind of hoping the rest of
them, especially Dignan would be run over by a truck.
     The script by Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson has all of the makings
of a half baked idea.  After the humor at the first, they seem devoid
of follow-up ideas.  They tried sight gags like having all of the
crooks dress up in bright banana yellow jump suits for the big heist
and have them wait to put on their masks until after everyone had seen
their faces.  This came across more ridiculous than funny.  I do not
remember any memorable lines from the show.
     BOTTLE ROCKET runs 1:35.  It is rated R for some violence and bad
language, and it would be fine for teenagers.  I do not recommend this
fairly boring show, and I award it a single * solely for a good start
and for some delicate acting by Lumi Cavazos.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
