Title
Review for Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
IF THERE WERE WAS A REAL DOCUMENTARY ABOUT A TRUE EXPERIENCE, AND ONE
ESCAPES IT TO TELL THE STORY, THIS IS IT.  THERE AREN'T VERY MANY BETTER
DONE DOCUMENTARIES THAN THIS ONE.
 I happen not to be a great fan of Francis Ford Coppola.  After the first
Godfather film, I dropped out.  The sequels, can gather all the accolades
and reviews, I am not going to see them.  Peggy Sue was fun.  Pennies from
Heaven I fell asleep on.  But the stuff he has produced for others, now that
is something else.
While being extremelly receptive to world cinema, he also tries to invest in
as many foreign film makers as he can, probably hoping Hollywood will notice
someday.  Unfortunately, when is all said and done, and  written about, the
real genius behind his work is not Francis at all, and his ideas, or
intellectual pursuits.  This documentary is even better than Francis' own
work.  And the reason why is because she doesn't quit because there has to
be an explanation.  She keeps going, and one gets to see more action, than a
script has ever seen.
Essentially, this is a documentary about the making of Coppola's now famous
'Apocalypse Now' film, and its incredible problems during the shooting of
the film, which had to be done in an area where the rebels were fighting the
Marcos government, and that was devastated by a monsoon, by Martin Sheen's
heart attack, and by a preponderance of an over stuffed Marlon Brando.  But
it was Francis' ability to be able to match the fury, and beauty, of the
moment which made his film a success.  Despite the fact that he had to
ransack his house, and all his personal belongings, to achieve it.
The basic premise of 'Apocalypse Now' is Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness.
The real premise of this documentary is the real Joseph Conrad's Heart of
Darkness not the animated version found on the film.   And it takes  his
wife to see and notice the clear parallels of the story and book.  Here he
is having a breakdown, and she is talking in retrospect about watching a
man go through a cataclysmic event in life, and succeeding at it.
Eleanor's observations are incredible, and really show Francis as a smaller
person, because he is so emotional where she is so steady.  He is
extravagant.  Se says she could do without it all, the china and what not,
in fact she'd prefer that she didn't have it all, and enjoy a simpler
existence. and we are watching her husband nearly kill himself with his
vision.
It is an amazing little trek through the jungles of man's idealistic, and
often cruel mind ( sounds familiar Joseph? ) which results in an
achievement eventually.  There are no better parallels to make. this is it.
Where literature does not meet film, it's where it becomes film.
With added new music by Carmine Coppola, and touched up by the Grateful
Dead's Mickey Hart ( who did ALL the sound effects and percussion for the
original film, which tells you that Francis was aware of Hart's musical
curiosities, and expansion as a musician and person ) this film becomes
another impressive work.  It's hard to believe it isn't a real movie on its
own......it sure feels like it.

Author
Eugene Miya
     HEARTS OF DARKNESS is a two-hour documentary on the making of the
film APOCALYPSE NOW (by Francis Ford Coppola) by Francis' wife.
     Background: At the time it was released, APOCALYPSE NOW was the
most expensive film ever made.  Cost was not an issue as much until then
for this $30M film.  At the time, prior to release, I was helping a
friend with a struggling movie company (they made three films before
folding) as an unpaid consultant on the side.  Movies were pollyanna
artsy things.  Then a daily was released from APOCALYPSE NOW showing a
real Huey helicopter (hovering 10 feet off the ground) all of a sudden
blowing up.  What was that film?????!!!!  Of course now this is all old
hat.  APOCALYPSE NOW attracted a lot of attention (as some of this is
covered in the film).  APOCALYPSE NOW got my vote for picture of the
year in 1979 as well as my vote to cinematographer (the only two
categories I could vote).
     HEARTS OF DARKNESS was Francis Coppola's vision of adapting Joseph
Conrad's HEART OF DARKNESS (which I have to admit I only recently read).
It came about because Coppola, George Lucas, and John Milius had all
read Conrad and thought it was the best book they had ever read.  The
film features interviews with all three.  Lucas eventually bowed out;
Milius unhappily went off and produced an even more controversial war
film.
     The idea was born in the late 1960s, shelved as American Zoetrope
made a name for itself, then taken a look at again.  The film presents a
little insight into Coppola's (not necessarily the rest of the film
industry's) process.  Of course no one wanted to touch Vietnam war films
at the time.
     The documentary is not a great film, but it shows some of the
behind the scenes for the construction of the temples, the extensive
napalm and pyrotechnics, the orchestration of the helichoppers
(Philippine Air Force which were called away at a moment's notice when
they needed to be used against real guerillas [the expression on
Coppola's face is great]).  This is not like one of those shorty
documentaries used to describe the making of TERMINATOR 2, or ROBOCOP.
     We see the change of script when Martin Sheen is brought in to
replace an earlier leading man.  His heart attack is covered.  The toll
this film took upon the film crew over years, tropical storms, money
problems was amazing.  The film includes interviews with the actors
(Larry Fishburne, Sam Bottoms, etc.) that make you wonder where the
black actors are today.  The only person not interviewed is Marlon
Brando.
     The spoofs on APOCALYPSE NOW are noted (like one on SATURDAY NIGHT
LIVE with Martin Sheen).
     The R rating is due to several scenes on which the final water
buffalo sacrifice scene is based.  This is not for the squeamish.  It
happens more than once.  (first when Coppola's wife first finds the
ritual, then during filming.)
     Coppola is clearly one of these most important forces in American
movie making.  Other interviews include members of his family (noting
changes in hair length and fashion).  The film goes on and on, like 
APOCALYPSE NOW, and we get "sucked up the river."  It gets kind of
decadent and boring toward the end.
     The film closes noting that APOCALYPSE NOW has made some $135M.
Won numerous awards, and so forth.  This film is not SLEEPING BEAUTY,
but if you have worked for the business, you might find it intense and
dull.  Remember it is a documentary.
--eugene miya, NASA Ames Research Center, eugene@orville.nas.nasa.gov
  {uunet,mailrus,other gateways}!ames!eugene

Author
Kevin Wayte
     Movie fans: you know how we all have that list of "EPIC" motion
pictures that stand out as milestones--STAR WARS, THE EMPIRE STRIKES
BACK, RETURN OF THE JEDI, etc., etc.--those god-like hallowed movies
that we still buy or rent in video form still today, even though they
were made in the 1970s or early 1980s.
     One movie that most forget or overlook to add to their
epic-movie-list is APOCALYPSE NOW.  This movie, in my opinion, is the
greatest piece of true cinematography in the past twenty-five years.  I
have seen it over thirty times, and currently own the special
remastered version of the movie on VHS, which should be available at
your local video store.  This version is presented in letterbox format,
for the full widescreen view of the original negatives.
     I don't know where to start in describing this gem of a movie.
All of my friends have been invited to my viewings of APOCALYPSE NOW,
and all leave in awe.  Nobody believes this movie existed and they had
not seen or heard of it!  First off, the movie is two hours and twenty
minutes long.  The director is none other than the *god*, Francis Ford
Coppola.  The movie was made in 1979 (although it looks better than a
90's movie) Main actors are Martin Sheen, Dennis Hopper, Robert Duvall,
Marlon Brando, Larry Fishburne, Sam Bottoms, and little cameo
appearances by Harrison Ford and Francis Coppola himself!  The whole
picture took over years years to make!!!  The movie won Best Sound and
Best Cinematography at the 1980 Academy Awards.  It was nominated for
eight other categories, too!
     Based on the novel THE HEART OF DARKNESS by Joseph Conrad, the
movie is set in the Vietnam war zone.  A young US army captain (Sheen)
is ordered to travel up the Vietnam river into Cambodia to assassinate
the US army's best commander (who has gone insane and has a tribe that
worships him).  The length of the movie covers the entire adventure to
get to this commander, whose name is Kurtz (Brando).  Many strange
encounters are everywhere on the journey, and the movie never has a
dull moment--actually quite *far* from being dull.  The eventual
arrival at the location of Kurtz brings more suspense as we finally get
to meet this twisted man, who makes Anthony Hopkins's character in
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS look like a wimp.  Heavy philosophy for the
viewer, as the meaning of the entire picture pinnacles.  The ending
speaks for itself, and I won't reveal it here.
     Get a fairly large TV, hook your VCR to a big stereo, put out the
lights, invite your friends, crank it up, and get ready to blow your
mind with the most awesome photography, acting, and cinematography you
have ever seen!!!
     There is a 1990s movie called HEARTS OF DARKNESS which is a
two-hour documentary on the making of APOCALYPSE NOW (which took two
and a half years).  This movie in itself, a documentary, received 4
stars from every review I have seen.  And yes, I have seen this one
over fifteen times.  It's the best thing to watch Apocalypse and then
HEARTS OF DARKNESS right after it.  An evening of cinematography you
will never forget.
     Movie fans--I mean you true down-and-dirty ones--these two pics
are a must!  They are *huge*!  Makes TERMINATOR 2 look like
computer-generated candy.  These two films are epic movies in the
classic sense of true giant-scale filming.  You'll see.
- Kevin Wayte    901430w@dragon.acadiau.ca
