Title
Review for Faust (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Bizarre--to say the least--
     surrealistic semi-live-action, semi-animated retelling
     of the story of Faust from avant-garde Czech animator
     Jan Svankmajer.  Much of this film is irritating and
     off-putting.  There are, however, some funny moments and
     a lot of moments that just make no sense at all.  The
     film is at its most enjoyable when it is the least
     creative and is just quoting from one of several
     classical versions of the story: Marlowe, Goethe,
     Gounod, etc.  Rating: high 0 (-4 to +4)
     The film starts slowly even for a version of Faust.  A very
typical man, no Doctor Faustus by any means, comes out of a subway
tunnel and is given a leaflet with a mystical symbol and a map.  That
night there is a strange chicken in his room.  It leaves goose
droppings on the floor that he cleans up before he makes himself a
modest dinner.  In the center of his loaf of bread he finds an egg
which he cracks open to find empty.  As he opens the egg there is
thunder in the room and objects move around by themselves.  What does
all this have to do with telling the Faust story?  Not a darn thing
that I can figure out.  It is some mystical or pseudo-symbolic folderol
that Czech animator Jan Svankmajer uses to start this story that he
both wrote and directed.  It is not at all clear that episodes like the
egg scene help us to understand anything about the issues of the story.
     Our Everyman, played by Petr Cepek, recovers from the surprise of
the night before (or rather does not even notice it or he finds it
unremarkable) and follows the map to a theater, where the story of
Faust is being put on either as live action or in marionettes.  With
scenes contributed by the marionettes and by full-size actors, with
scenes going on backstage or entirely out of the theater, we piece
together bits of the classic story or at least of the Czech revision of
the story.  For example, our Everyman--Faust, it appears--starts
exploring this weird building and finds a back room with scientific
glassware and books.  In a retort he finds a clay baby.  For no obvious
reason our Faust copies a formula from the book and shoves it in the
clay baby's mouth.  The baby comes to life.  But while its body stays
the same the head reforms itself into more mature and older versions of
the same head--Faust's head we realize--until it turns into a skull.
Faust pulls out the paper.  After the fact we realize that Faust is
supposed to have made a golem in this version,  Well, in all versions
Faust was supposedly a learned man.  Presumably this version has the
knowledge to make a golem.  Svankmajer is Czech, and particularly in
Prague, people are very aware of golem legends.  But it is only after
the fact that this was supposed to be a scene from the Faust story and
not just something obscure like the hollow egg scene.
     There are certainly some creative scenes, particularly ones
involving the marionettes.  Svankmajer was earlier in his career a
puppetmaster, and this version relies heavily on puppetry.  But this is
mostly a version of Faust for the music video generation with a bit of
a Monty Python feel and not a whole lot of the original legend left.
At no point can Svankmajer's storytelling be said to be coherent.  We
are left with more of an ego piece than the classic legend deserves.
There is nothing wrong with telling a classical story in a new and
creative manner, but it is a mistake when the style gets in the way of
the storytelling.  This needlessly obscure version of the classic Faust
gets a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Brooke
Written and directed by Jan Svankmajer
UK/France/Germany/Czech Republic, 1994, 97 mins
Starring Petr Cepek, Jan Kraus, Vladimir Kudla
     A welcome corrective to the stiflingly literal brand of literary
transcription peddled by Merchant-Ivory et al--with FAUST, the Czech
animator Jan Svankmajer takes basic ideas from the plays of Christopher
Marlowe and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, an obscure novel by the
now-forgotten Christian Dietrich Grabbe, Charles Gounod's opera, and
old Czech puppet versions of the oft-adapted legend of the man who sold
his soul to the devil, and filters them through his own imagination,
which, as anyone who's seen even one of his earlier films will know, is
one of the most wildly inventive in Europe.  He tried a similar approach
to Lewis Carroll's work in ALICE (1988), which although intermittently
brilliant looked more like a collection of short films (the medium for
which Svankmajer is best known) than a coherent feature.  FAUST is far
more successful, blending live action with Svankmajer's trademark
claymation and the giant puppets he previously used in the mini-feature
DON SAJN (1970) to unnervingly dislocated effect.
     The unexplained shifts in style perfectly suit Svankmajer's
approach to the text, which only vaguely touches on the subtleties and
depths of the Marlowe and Goethe versions--but this isn't an attempt to
provide an alternative to Goethe, it's more of a late twentieth century
response to the theme.  And although uncredited, Franz Kafka and
Mikhail Bulgakov (THE MASTER AND MARGARITA) and indeed Lewis Carroll
lurk somewhere in the background (Faust's servant seems to change size
relative to Faust in almost every scene the two are in, and the opening
in which Faust enters a mysterious corridor off a side street is
straight out of the opening of ALICE IN WONDERLAND).
     Where Svankmajer's version differs radically from other
presentations of the Faust story is that Faust himself (or rather the
unnamed character representing him) is almost entirely passive.  He is
lured off the streets of Prague by two men handing out a mysterious
map, and ends up in an old theatre performing in a nightmarish puppet
version of FAUST (there are shades of Luis Bunuel's THE DISCREET CHARM
OF THE BOURGEOISIE in his realisation that an audience is watching and
he doesn't know his lines).  Wherever he goes, he is watched, either by
the two men at the beginning (who subsequently turn up to perform
miracles in a garden cafe), or by the theatre staff, or by
Mephistopheles, whom Faust summons because it seems like the logical
thing to do (and it's in the script).  Although Svankmajer never claims
that this is an explicit allegory of life in pre-Vaclav Havel Prague,
it's highly unlikely that he was unaware of the comparisons.  And this
whole theme of Manipulation From Above (or indeed Below) reaches its
climax in the final scene, a gloriously sick plot twist that both makes
perfect sense in context and provides an impeccably neat circular
finale to the film.
     The dialogue is in blank verse, with all the voices in the English
version provided by Andrew Sachs (best known as Manuel in "Fawlty
Towers," though you'd never guess from the range of voices on
display).  It sounds as though much of the text originates from Marlowe
(though it would be interesting to compare this with the German
version), though as the film is far more driven by its virtuoso visuals
this is largely irrelevant.  And these are frequently stunning--a pool
of nameless slime forms itself into a rapidly-aging baby, hordes of
tiny angels and devils do battle for Faust's soul, apples wither into
maggot-ridden husks at the devil's passing, while an old tramp carries
a badly-wrapped package that might just contain a severed leg--and
Svankmajer throws in plenty of knockabout comedy to emphasise the
story's theatrical origins: a fiery chariot from Hell causes problems
for the theatre's fire safety officer, a devil is repeatedly summoned
and banished by Faust's Punch-like servant until he collapses with
exhaustion (running to and from the theatre past
surprised-looking--genuinely unprepared?--Prague passers-by), while a
Gounod-scored opera/ballet interlude with ballerinas raking fields
beautifully parodies the socialist realism that the old Czech
government was so fond of.
     Above all, FAUST demonstrates just how the seemingly catch-all
adjective "surreal" has been so debased since its introduction 70-odd
years ago by virtue of its being used to describe anything even vaguely
unusual.  As one would expect from a 25-year member of the Prague
Surrealist Group, FAUST is a Surrealist film, and as such manages a
more effective attempt at capturing dream-logic than almost any film
since Bunuel passed away.  It isn't for everyone--even some Svankmajer
fans have expressed disappointment with it, presumably because it isn't
animated throughout, or they have a problem with the puppets (this is
because Czech culture recognises puppets as a serious art form, while
in most Western countries they're strictly for children)--but anyone
who approaches it with a genuinely open mind should lap it up.  It's
Svankmajer's longest, most inventive and quite possibly weirdest film
to date.
