Title
Review for Sirens (1994)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Hugh Grant, Tara Fitzgerald, Sam Neill, Elle Macpherson,
           Portia de Rossi.
Screenplay/Director:  John Duigan.
     I'm no marketing whiz, but it would appear that someone made a
serious error in the advertising campaign for the new Australian import
SIRENS.  The posters prominently feature the bare back of
co-star/supermodel Elle Macpherson accompanied by the line, "Be
seduced."  One might be inclined to believe that the target audience is
men, and that SIRENS is simply some soft-core porn throwaway.  In fact,
SIRENS has more in common with ENCHANTED APRIL than it does with
EMMANUELLE.  Writer/director John Duigan, creator of the wonderful
coming-of-age films THE YEAR MY VOICE BROKE and FLIRTING, has fashioned
another tale of sexual awakening, this time focusing on an adult, and
it's a delightfully acted and beautifully filmed comedy-drama.
     SIRENS is a fictional story based on the true-life 1930s artist
Norman Lindsay (Sam Neill), a free-thinking Australian whose nude
studies, particularly "The Crucified Venus," created a stir in
conservative British circles.  When the Anglican church becomes
concerned about the "blasphemous" painting's inclusion in an
international exhibition of Lindsay's work, it sends clergyman Anthony
Campion (Hugh Grant) and his wife Estella (Tara Fitzgerald) to convince
Lindsay to withdraw it voluntarily.  The very proper British couple is
invited to stay at Lindsay's wild and lush compound, where they meet
his three principal models:  lusty Sheela (Elle Macpherson), socialist
Prue (Kate Fischer) and innocent Giddy (Portia de Rossi).  While
Anthony works to persuade Lindsay, Estella is left to discover the
untamed world of the Australian Blue Mountains.  Gradually, a change
comes over her, as the influence of the uninhibited models opens
Estella's eyes to desires she didn't know she had.
     SIRENS skillfully interweaves two themes without seeming
overstuffed.  The principal story, that of Estella's response to the
liberated and liberating world of the Lindsay estate, focuses on how
that world interacts with the restrictive female sexual mores of the
time.  Tara Fitzgerald does an impressive job of conveying Estella's
growing curiosity through her open face and subtle body language, and
our view of an Australia only just on the edge of "civilization" comes
through her eyes.  That world is populated by wombats, insects and even
flowers which take on a kind of personality.  However, most
significantly, there are snakes, and the Linday compound is established
as a kind of reverse-Eden where humans have the chance to return to a
state of nature through acknowledgement of sensuality.  The characters
native to this world are frequently shown eating apples, practically
wallowing in their connection to original sin.  Lindsay challenges the
Christian notion of sin as linked to female sexuality, and SIRENS is
largely the playing out of that challenge.
     At the same time, the issue of artistic censorship is very much
part of the subtext.  The dinner table debates between Anthony and
Lindsay frame the argument, and while it is clear where Duigan's
sentiments lie he doesn't turn Anthony into a dogma-spouting
stereotype.  He presents the Church's case with a respect for its
views, and Hugh Grant is a charming and surprisingly hip spokesman.
While the arguments are nothing special, and in fact tend towards the
cliche, Duigan treats the issue of art, its influence on the public and
the artist's responsibility as a legitimate subject of debate.
     If there is any fault to be found with Duigan's script, it's that
he does skimp on his characters in the interest of establishing his
analogy.  The relationship between Anthony and Estella is not as
well-established as it might be, and Lindsay himself is little more
than a catalyst for Estella's transformation.  Macpherson and Fischer
look good, but they're given too much to say and it's never all that
interesting when they do speak.  However, SIRENS does quite a lot with
its visuals, highlighting its glorious Australian settings, and it
maintains a frisky sense of humor about its sensual subject matter
without sniggering over it.  Those who might be looking for a leering
sex romp should look elsewhere; SIRENS is lyrical, lively and
thoughtful and always a feast for the senses.

Author
David Cowen
     SIRENS has been spoken of highly by critics as being a rare mix: a
film that is just as intellectually appealing as it is titillating.
Given the promise of the much ballyhooed nude appearance by Elle
MacPherson, it would seem that if SIRENS could live up to that sort of
praise, it would be one heckuva film.  Amazingly enough, the film turns
out to be considerably more intellectually appealing than
titillating--the film does a good job of exploring the theme of whether
censorship of obscene or blasphemous art is beneficial to the would-be
viewer of that art.  However, the film drags so much in the second and
third acts as to make it overall only a bit better than the average
coming-of-age or sexual awakening film.
     Hugh Grant stars as Antony Campion, a young British priest who is
sent by the Anglican Church to discuss the showing of a painting
featuring Venus being crucified at a Sydney exhibition with the artist,
Norman Lindsay (an underused Sam Neill).  The church would like to see
Lindsay's art displayed, but object to that particular painting, and it
is Campion's task to convince Lindsay to substitute it with another,
less blasphemous painting.  Campion and his frigid wife, Estella,
travel to Australia to meet with Lindsay.  They arrive at his estate
where they find he lives not only with his wife and two daughters, but
three models.  Two of the models embarrass the Campions with their
brazen attitudes towards sex, nudity, the bourgeois, and eating cheese
with one's hands.  The third, Giddy, is a young innocent who won't pose
with her clothes off.
     Lindsay and Campion argue about the censorship of art--or
rather, Campion does.  Lindsay throughout the entire film shows only an
air of bemusement to his guests, simply continuing with his work and
not backing down to the church's requests.  Campion tries his hardest
to argue for the church with a "non-fundamentalist", contemporary point
of view hoping to reach Lindsay, but he ultimately fails miserably.
Campion believes that the displaying of such offensive work as
Lindsay's would make a permanent impression in the mind of the viewer
and corrupt them.  Lindsay and his cronies believe that to be
nonsense.
     In the meantime, the Campions learn they must stay another week at
the Lindsay's, the train they were to travel back on has derailed, and
the track needed to be rebuilt.  Estella, while they wait at the
Lindsays, gets to know the models and, while originally repulsed by
their attitudes and actions, slowly begins to warm to their views on
life, love and sex--and ends up having a affair with the blind
handyman.
     The film never breaks from its investigation of the two different
lifestyles and views on sex, nudity and blasphemy portrayed by the two
families--often this theme takes on a ironic nature and is fascinating
and ultimately thought-provoking.  However, when the film gets into
Estella's "awakening," and she goes from being frigid to being one of
Lindsay's sirens, the film loses a lot of its drive.  We've all seen
the image of the frigid schoolmarm or librarian seduced into letting
her hair down a hundred times, and SIRENS doesn't put a new spin on
it.  We follow this thread of the story for almost half of the film,
and it gets tiring and predictable.  The main driving force of the
story is Antony Campion, and while Estella's sexual awakening is
necessary to the plot, one leaves wishing there had been more plot or
discussion and less of Estella's inane, unexiting fantasizing or sexual
encounters.
     The acting is uniformly good, especially the surprisingly good
performance by Elle MacPherson.  MacPherson's brazen model is so
abrasive as to be stomach churning at times, and shows her character to
be significantly more than a brainless body.  Sam Neill's tired,
bemused performance as Lindsay is well performed, though he is on the
screen very little--it is like his character in UNTIL THE END OF THE
WORLD ... his character is a guiding force of the film but appears very
little.  Hugh Grant as Anthony Campion is just right as the
contemporary young priest, getting enthused and perturbed over all the
right things, all the while displaying a peculiar innocence.  Only Tara
Fitzgerald's unexciting Estella and the mindlessly bad acting of
whoever the blind handyman was (reducing the performance to that of one
of those robo-hunks in soft-core porn) were standouts in an otherwise
good cast.
     Ultimately, I wish the plot would have gotten more into characters
that are presented as being interesting--Lindsay and the models are
fascinating sketches of characters, but we fail to get into them
because the film spends too much time with Estella.  However the
symbolism presented in the film, the subtle ironies of the plot, and
the theme of the film kept me thinking about it long after I had left
the theatre, so it certainly wasn't a waste.  I just wish that the
parts meant to be seductive and sensual were as well done as the parts
which were mentally stimulating.
     5 out of 10.  SIRENS had a chance of being an excellent film,
but squanders that chance in foreign art-film coming-of-age pretension.

Author
John M. Bozeman
     The movie reviewer for the Charlottesville regional arts newspaper
hates most new movies, so when he called SIRENS a "cheesy bit of soft
core porn [that] masquerades as a meditation of repression and sexual
liberation," I thought that he was exaggerating.  Unfortunately, he was
not.  Not since the unfortunate film adaptation of LADY CHATTERLY'S
LOVER (starring Sylvia Crystal) have I seen such a slick, high-budget,
and clumsy attempt at dealing with sexuality on the silver screen.
     The basic story goes as follows: an Australian painter (played by
Sam Neill) is creating a stir as a result of his voluptuous paintings
of classical subjects.  The Church dispatches an English minister (Hugh
Grant), accompanied by his wife (Tara Fitzgerald) to try to persuade
him to tone down the brazen nudity found in the artwork.  In the face
of cavorting, flirtatious, unbelievably beautiful models, the minister
remains affable but resolute in his quest--but wait!  His wife, against
her will, comes to appreciate the earthy passion on display here,
eventually sharing a night of ecstasy with the seemingly handicapped
(supposedly almost blind and perhaps mute) handyman with the body of
Adonis.  We also see the prejudice and hypocrisy of the nearby
townspeople, who shun the artist and his models while clandestinely
longing to engage in the very acts that he portrays in his work.
     When it comes to symbolism, this film surely puts the "b" back in
"subtle."  Like THE FISHER KING, SIRENS is laden with pretentious
symbolism that hits one in the face again and again; one can almost
hear the film's creators patting themselves on the back over their own
cleverness.  On the one hand we have the minister, representing dry,
intellectual, passionless, asexual, conventional, dull traditional
reason; on the other we have joy, passion, intensity, sexuality, and
artistic spontaneity represented by the artist and his crew of
mischievous vixens.  I suppose that the minister's wife is supposed to
represent us, the audience, who for a while partakes of the sublime
essence of raw art, but who in the end goes back--though leavened a
bit, and even perking up her rather bookish husband.
     In spite of these limitations (along with a few sex scenes so
pretentious as to be embarrassing), this movie does have some redeeming
qualities--but probably not the ones that the film's creators
intended.  Far more than the silly, prevalent ideology of sexual
liberation, the most impressive aspect of the film was the occasional
humanity that creeps in:  the frustration of the models with their
being shunned by the townsfolk; the superficially silly, but in
actuality profound devotion of the minister for his wife, despite his
knowledge of her participation in activities with lesbian sexual
overtones; the minister's liking and apparently honest concern for one
of the younger models.
     Indeed, I suppose I am a bit of a conservative, but I found the
minister to be the most enviable person of the bunch, and for this I
commend the producers.  Rather than being portrayed as a stodgy,
doctrinaire fuddy-duddy, he is intelligent, well-read, honest,
generally faithful, and (within his context) tolerant of the
narcissistic, hedonistic silliness going on around him.  Both he and
his wife retain an honest ability to care for others, in the face heady
passions with strong undercurrents of insincerity bordering, in some
cases, on duplicity.
Overall grade:  C+ (OK for a half-price matinee)

Author
James Berardinelli
     On the surface, it's easy to assume that SIRENS is a lighthearted
erotic romp through the secluded wilds of Australia's Blue Mountains in
the 1930s.  Like in some modern-day garden of Eden, there are snakes,
ripening fruit, and plenty of naked bodies.  However, SIRENS is not
content merely to churn through the frothy waters of a sex comedy.  By
introducing the issue of religious repression, John Duigan's script
ventures into an area it is unprepared to deal with.
     A young Anglican clergyman, Anthony Campion (Hugh Grant), and his
somewhat naive wife Estella (Tara Fitzgerald) have recently arrived in
Australia from England.  At the request of the Bishop, the pair pause
in their journey to Campion's new parish to visit artist Norman Lindsay
(Sam Neill), whose paintings are threatening to create a scandal at the
opening of an upcoming exhibition.  They are to attempt to persuade
Lindsay to withdraw something called "The Crucified Venus."  Once on
his estate, however, Tony and Estella find that life is far different
from anything they have previously experienced.  There are few taboos,
and the presence of three young models (Elle MacPherson, Portia De
Rossi, and Kate Fischer) begins to exert an influence on the visiting
couple.
     Filmed on the actual land once owned by Norman Lindsay (who died
in 1969), SIRENS does not attempt to be autobiographical, but instead
to draw upon the reputation of the artist to furnish background.
Writer/director John Duigan readily acknowledges that, with the
exception of Lindsay and his family, all of the characters are
fictitious.
     The potential is here for a delightful comedy/fantasy with a
decidedly erotic edge, but certain elements of the movie work against
that aim.  There is an underlying current of mean-spiritedness that
feels inappropriate in a film striving for a light tone.  The most
sympathetic character emerges from SIRENS with the "short end of the
stick."
     Also, the serious discussions involving the Church's repression of
eroticism suffer from two problems.  Not only are these weightier
portions of the script at odds with what the rest of the film is trying
to accomplish, but they're too sketchy and incomplete to add anything
noteworthy to the overall story.  They appear to have been included to
inject an intellectual aspect into what is an otherwise lightweight
motion picture.
     The acting is top-notch.  Hugh Grant and Sam Neill are both
excellent as friendly adversaries.  Tara Fitzgerald, who played Nancy
in HEAR MY SONG, gives an effective rendering of a woman caught between
two worlds.  Elle MacPherson's performance is limited in scope, but the
role thankfully doesn't require the model-turned-actress to overextend
herself.
     Atmosphere is another major element of SIRENS, and that's handled
well, aided by numerous shots of undulating snakes and lush vistas.  As
might be expected, nudity abounds, but most instances avoid seeming
excessive or gratuitous, and men as well as women are displayed in
various stages of undress.
     Nevertheless, by trying to do perhaps too much with this film,
Mr. Duigan has limited its effectiveness.  As a vehicle for examining
the subject of religion versus the freedom of artists, SIRENS is
shallow, but the presentation of the issue dampens some of the
lighthearted fun.  Sometimes, it's better not to try for substance with
a basic premise this earthy.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Craig Good
     Okay, let's get this first part out of the way.  Yes, Elle
Macpherson appears nude in SIRENS.  Starkers.  Rumor has it that she
gained a little weight for the part.  Yes, she looks fabulous.  There's
much better news about this new film from Australia, however.  Not the
least of which is that Elle turns out to be a rather natural,
unaffected actress.  She may be one of the happy few fashion models to
successfully make the transition to the big screen.  I suppose we'll
know after she gets some other parts to play.
     SIRENS is the story of a young cleric and his wife on their way to
an assignment in Australia who are asked by the Church to stop by the
remote home of an artist.  The artist's paintings of nudes, which range
from the silly to the profane, have caused a bit of a stir, and the
vicar has the task of convincing the painter to withdraw the more
objectionable works and replace them with something more in line with
the taste of the public and, of course, the Church.
     I'm a bit of two minds on SIRENS, because the movie and I have
wildly divergent ideas on what sort of things will strengthen or weaken
a marriage.  But there is so much good in the movie, I'll concentrate
on that.  The greatest strength is a cast of characters who all feel
like real, thinking, feeling human beings.  The story is subtle, but
deftly told, and set with a good sense of place.
     It would have been easy to take the cheap route in a movie which
contains so much nudity, and it would have been easy to take cheap
shots at religion by making the vicar a twit or a close-minded prude.
Instead, we witness the rare treat of a lively, passionate discussion
between him and the painter in which each make valid points, leaving us
to feel that it is indeed possible for reasonable men to disagree.
     SIRENS doesn't shy away from allegory, and the artist's Australian
retreat is at once an Eden repleat with serpents, and a rocky shore
awaiting the ships of sailors bewitched by the song of the Sirens.  In
an interesting turn, it is the vicar's wife, and not the vicar, who
ends up with the most pronounced character arc.  Perhaps, as so long
ago in Eden, Eve leads the way to a new life, one fraught with perils
but filled with new kinds of joy.

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Traveling with her husband, Rev. Anthony (Hugh Grant), Estella
(Tara Fitzgerald) discovers an unfamiliar and initially unwelcome side
of herself in the Australian retreat of controversial artist Norman
Lindsay (Sam Neill).  While Anthony debates the moral implications of
art with Lindsay, Estella hangs out with the uninhibited models, Stella
(Elle MacPherson), Prue (Kate Fischer), and the child-like Giddy
(Portia De Rossi), and finds the SIREN within her.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     Australian director John Dugan (FLIRTING) summarizes SIRENS very
well: "I wanted to make a film about sensuality and repression and the
church's attitude towards sexuality."  I'll give him an A+ then.  Like
HENRY & JUNE, SIRENS is extremely sensual and focuses on one woman as
she grapples with this powerful emotion.
     SIRENS shows heaps of unabashed, and occasionally very sensual
nudity.  Except for Lindsay, who is always clothed, all eight
characters (male and female) are seen butt-naked or half dressed, and
not just briefly.  The painter's models Stella (Elle MacPherson) and
Prue (Kate Fischer) use sensual nudity to their advantage.  They
delight in making the English reverend and his wife uncomfortable.
     SIRENS does an wonderful job of showing female sensuality.  The
women are passionate, playful, and powerfully aware of their
sexuality.  Traditional Hollywood male sexuality is missing, replaced
by something much more arousing.  Even with the debut of super-model
Elle MacPherson (who gained twenty pounds to lend her body a Boticelli
contour), the "beauty myth" woman has been replaced by real women.  As
an added treat, there's a turn-about--a fake male, "Devlin: the
odd-jobs man," subject of many a Harlequin and cheap porno.
     And yet, SIRENS is not a preachy movie.  Lindsay's painting
reflect his statements that the female body is beautiful.  He believes
the church suppressed sexuality, and women as its embodiment, to gain
power over pagans who worshiped fertility and celebrated sexuality.
"How do you compete with something that popular?  You suppress it."
His painting attempt to reclaim that time and feeling of sensuality.
     The visuals were great.  His estate reminded me of an Olympian
glade--sensual, playful nude statues, fountains, riotous colors, and
a naturally beautiful nearby swimming hole.  All in stark contrast to
the unrelenting brown of the nearby town.
     And animals are everywhere, giving it a garden-of-eden feel.  The
characters fearlessly encounter snakes, kangaroos and insects.  I was
startled to see a moving koala bear--did you know they sort of hop?
Maybe "gallump" is more accurate.  In one scene Estella is awakened by
noises at night and encounters a strange animal ... and even *I* didn't
know what the hell it was!  I can't remember the last time I saw a new
creature.  It was the size of a large pig, and looked sorta like a
compact gerbil.  Very odd.  If anyone knows what this is, drop me a
line, I'd love to hear about it.
     NOTE: Although there was a real Normal Lindsay, this is *not* a
biographical study, nor was it intended to be.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     Sensual.  That's the word for SIRENS.  I used it nine times in
this review and that's almost the limit there.  I fully intend to watch
it again, this time with my girlfriend.  I can't wait for this one to
hit video as well.  Then I won't have to wait 'til I get home.

Author
Brian Koller
"Sirens" is a drama set in circa 1930 Australia.  Hugh Grant
plays a minister given the task of stopping an eccentric painter
(Sam Neill) from showing a blasphemous painting.  Along with
his beautiful but inhibited wife Tara Fitzgerald, he visits Neill's
estate.  While Grant argues for the painting's removal, Fitzgerald
becomes involved with Neill's stable of models, which include
smug Elle MacPherson, wicked Kate Fischer, waifish Portia De Rossi
and blind mute Adonis Merk Gerber.
Neill is asexual in all areas except painting.  But all
his paintings feature nudes, especially nude women.  "Sirens"
has a great deal of frontal nudity.  (If you have always wanted
to see MacPherson's body beyond what the Sports Illustrated
swimsuit issue shows, this is your opportunity.)  The models
are not content merely to bare all for Neill, and their
eroticism leads to lesbian imagery, and (especially) fantasies
with buff Gerber.  Predictably, the reserved Fitzgerald becomes
caught up in their sensual world.  Surprisingly, Grant isn't
too disturbed by this, perhaps because he consideres himself
a progressive.
Assumedly, Neill's character has inherited a large fortune.
Otherwise, it is difficult to believe he can afford his lifestyle.
He lives in a fantastic estate with woods, cliffs, and lakes,
and has at least eight dependents including himself.
The liberal attitude of the estate extends to the raising
of Neill's twin toddler daughters.  They have the run of the
house, and no notice is taken of their perpetually rude comments.
"Sirens" manages to be a marginally good film despite its
many problems.  The story lags at times, De Rossi's innocent
character isn't completely credible, and plot turns are
both predictable and unlikely (a train derailment strands
Grant and Fitzgerald at the Neill estate, and prim Fitzgerald
becomes involved with the decadent models).  Still, production
values and casting helps, and there's plenty of eroticism
served up to maintain interest.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
The author of this review, same as any other heterosexual
male, doesn't mind seeing beautiful women in the state of
partial of complete undress. However, when such sights are
appearing in the movies, enjoyment of these particular
scenes is sometimes spoiled when it becomes obvious that
they don't make any sense apart from pleasing male audience.
Movies with non-exploitative nudity seldom appear and even
rarer are those where nudity itself becomes one of the main
elements without which the film wouldn't make any sense. One
of such examples is SIRENS, Australian comedy directed in
1994 by John Duigan.
The plot of the film is inspired by the incident in the
biography of Norman Lindsay (played by Sam Neill), 20th
Century Australian artist who gained controversial
reputation by challenging moral standards of the time by
using explicitly erotic images in his paintings. In 1930 one
of such paintings, "Crucified Venus", is about to be
exhibited in Sydney. Anglican Church authorities view the
painting as too blasphemous for public exhibition and young
Rev. Anthony Campion (played by Hugh Grant), who had just
arrived from England, is sent to visit Lindsay at his estate
in Australian Blue Mountains and try to talk him over from
displaying the controversial image in public. When Campion,
accompanied by his young wife Estella (played by Tara
Fitzgerald), arrives to Lindsay's home, he would find the
artist, his wife and two children living together with three
young beautiful girls that serve as models. Soon it becomes
obvious that Lindsay won't change his mind, but the train
derailment forces Campions to prolong their stay at
Lindsay's home. During that time, in a hedonistic and
carefree atmosphere of the estate surrounded by enchantingly
beautiful Australian landscape, both Anthony and Estella
experience events that would start changing their views on
love, marriage and sexuality.
Many critics were tempted to view SIRENS as nothing more
than soft core pornography wrapped in the package of
"serious" film. At first glance, those critics might have a
point - the plot is weak or almost non-existent and in many
instances the conflict between sexuality and conventional
morality is illustrated with rather predictable situations
and gags, recycled from Bocaccio, D.H. Lawrence or even West
European "sex comedies" of 1970s. But Duigan justifies that
with the great sense of style and generally humanistic
approach to the story and characters. SIRENS doesn't feature
any sort of villains - even the conservatives, who are
supposed to be adversaries to Lindsay and his liberal views,
are presented as misguided but generally nice folks - Church
uses diplomacy instead of trying to force its way, and
Lindsay's redneck neighbours compensate their bigotry with
common-sense approach to life and manliness of their local
boys. The humour in the film seems incredibly restrained and
decent, at least compared with average Hollywood films that
would tackle sexuality as one of its subjects.
The two best known actors of the film - Sam Neill and Hugh
Grant - are something of a disappointment in this film.
Neill barely appears in the film, except in the scenes in
which his character fights ideological wars with the priest,
while Grant plays the same character he had played in dozens
of 1990s films. The pleasant surprise of this film are
actresses. The best known of them is fashion supermodel Elle
Fitzgerald. This was her first major role and she gained
extra pounds in order to give Rubenesque proportion to her
figure and thus her character physically resembling the
beauty standards of 1930s. The acting job in the role of
mischievous model Sheela was perhaps not as impressive, but
it was more than decent as far beyond the accomplishments of
other supermodels that tried acting. Portia de Rossi was
also good in the role of Giddy, the most naive and the least
"corrupted" of all three models. But the greatest acting
asset of the film was Tara Fitzgerald, who again appeared
with Hugh Grant one year later in THE ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP
THE HILL AND CAME DOWN THE MOUNTAIN. Here Fitzgerald
presented a lot of her acting talent, as well as her body.
Her figure, that seems so small compared to voluptuous
figures of Macpherson and Kate Fischer (who played Pru,
model who embraced Communist ideology), is used by Duigan as
a tool of character development - final liberation of that
character comes when Estella starts seeing that body as
equal to the models. The last shot of the film neatly
combines the beauty of Fitzgerald, Macpherson and other
ladies with the beauty of Australian landscape. Duigan had
the eye for such pretty sights, and he also utilised
Lindsay's real life home as authentic location. In some
instances, the symbolism was too obvious and some jokes
(like the stories about citizens of Australia being killed
by various wild animals) didn't exactly work, but SIRENS is
nevertheless very stylish and entertaining film that should
be recommended even to those viewers who are indifferent
towards seeing beautiful women naked.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SIRENS is a witty, fanciful, and wonderfully upbeat comedy with a
dramatic side as well.  It is the story of a painter (Sam Neil) who
paints nudes that enrage the church because some are deemed
blasphemous.  A young enlighten Anglican priest (Hugh Grant) is asked
by the Bishop of Sydney (Vincent Ball) to get see if he can get the
artist to send just the non-blasphemous nudes to an upcoming big
exhibit.
     The important characters, however, are the 3 nude models (Elle
Macpherson, Portia de Rossi, and Kate Fischer), the painter's wife and,
most of all, the priest's wife (Tara Fitzgerald).  The women, I
believe, are all relatively newcomers to the screen.  The show starts
off appearing to be about the painter, but ends up being about the
priest's wife breaking out of her shell and coming alive.  All of the
performances were delightful.  The nude models were played like pixies.
When they smile, joy leaps through your heart.
     Many great scenes in the show.  The pixies swinging in the
glimmering moonlight was magical.  There was a drunk who said an
unprintable 2 word phrase again and again that was very funny.  The
scene in church where the priest's wife realized how much she wanted to
be young and free was full of great images.
     The cinematography (Geoff Burton) was superb.  The night scenes
with the exaggerated back lighting of the moon were lovely.  The
direction (John Duigan) was perfect.  Duigan directed them so that it
seemed as if these actors and actresses had been working together
forever.
     SIRENS runs a well edited (Humphrey Dixon) fast and lighthearted
1:33.  It is rated R.  If a lot of female and male full frontal nudity
is a problem for you, then skip SIRENS since it is best described as a
very nude ENCHANTED APRIL; otherwise, I recommend this show to you and
give it ***.  It is a fine show for teenagers unless they are sensitive
to nudity.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
