Title
Review for Don Quixote (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
     On and off for seventeen years, Orson Welles, worked on an
adaptation of Cervantes' DON QUIXOTE.  While he worked on other
projects, he would shoot pieces of DON QUIXOTE here and there, in the
hope that some day he would have the financing necessary to complete
the project.  However, the film was not complete when Welles died in
1985.  In 1992, a Spanish team undertook the project of turning the
existing footage into a completed film.  They have done Welles' memory
a tremendous disservice in the process.  DON QUIXOTE is a monumental
disappointment, with only glimpses of Welles' brilliance emerging from
an exercise in editing butchery.
     Welles' DON QUIXOTE opens with the familiar story of the Spanish
nobleman (Francisco Reiguera) who becomes fascinated with the tales of
chivalry he reads about in novels.  He decides that he is to become a
knight errant himself, and, accompanied by his squire Sancho Panza
(Akim Tamiroff), sets off to do great deeds in the name of his
idealized love Dulcinea.  Soon, however, Don Quixote comes into
conflict not only with sheep and windmills, but with the modern world.
Sancho runs with the bulls in Pamplona, discovers television, and even
finds himself being captured on film by the great director Orson
Welles.
     This collision of eras is the heart of Welles' vision for DON
QUIXOTE, and to the extent that it survives the film is thought-
provoking.  It becomes an instant validation of Quixote's belief that
through his exploits as a knight errant, he might achieve some measure
of immortality.  And we see that this is what has occurred; Welles
skillfully frames shots that include a billboard for "Don Quixote
Cerveza" and the Restaurante Don Qixote, emphasizing the character's
nature as an icon.  He is not an object of ridicule, but a dreamer to
be respected for being true to his vision.  As Welles places himself in
the narrative, we also see how he identifies with the knight, and
considers his own immortality through his filmmaking.
     Unfortunately, DON QUIXOTE takes nearly an hour to get to its
contemporary setting, and that hour occasionally borders on the
unwatchable.  It is not simply that the quality of the print is
sometimes horrible.  There is simply no rhythm to the story, and it
feels for all the world like pieces of film stuck together at random.
As striking as some of Welles' images are, editing director Jess Franco
simply had no idea what to do with them, and apparently even changed
some of the editing Welles *had* managed to complete before his death.
     Another huge problem with the film involves the dialogue dubbing.
Although two other actors portray Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, their
parts were filmed silent, with Welles himself to dub both voices.
However, only portions of Welles' dialogue were recorded, and where his
dialogue doesn't exist, two other actors were used to provide the
voices.  Not only is the shift between Welles' voice and that of two
other men jarring, but the two other actors do not even come close to
the spirit of the vocal performances Welles was providing.  Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza are not even the same characters from one scene to the
next, and at times the appalling modern voiceovers are simply
laughable.
     The version of DON QUIXOTE which screened at San Jose's Cinequest
Film Festival is not the same as the one which made its American
premiere at the Museum of Modern Art.  Oja Kodar, Welles' companion
during the last years of his life, and frequent Welles cinematographer
Gary Graber trimmed a 113-minute version to just under 90 minutes, and
it would be an easy knock at the film to say that any changes which
made it shorter still would be a further improvement.  But there's
really no way of knowing, and that's the real point.  Using guesswork
and very little talent, a bunch of well-intentioned film buffs tried to
piece together a lot of raw footage into something resembling the work
of one of the greatest filmmakers of all time.  They failed.

Author
Raymond Johnston
DON QUIJOTE DE ORSON WELLES (DON QUIXOTE OF ORSON WELLES)
Produced, written, directed by Orson Welles
Cast: Francisco Perez, Akim Tamiroff, Orson Welles, 
Editor and head of post production: Jess Franco
Mexico/Italy/ Spain 1955-1969, Post Production Spain 1992
     When Orson Welles died almost ten years ago he left several nearly
finished but unreleased films.  Most Famous of these is THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE WIND, tied up in a legal dispute with Iranian financiers.  Other
projects included the fragments of IT'S ALL TRUE, his aborted
documentary on Brazil; and a film called THE DEEP, apparently similar
to the recent DEAD CALM.  Most legendary and speculatively exiting of
the projects is DON QUIXOTE.  Over the years this unseen project has
gained a reputation as one of his best films, because the match of
Welles and the character of Cervantes' novel seemed perfect.  Welles
used his own money, completely, and between 1955 and 1969 filmed enough
footage to make at least three films, changing his concept constantly.
If any of these films would have been a masterpiece, it is impossible
to say.  The project currently being screened by his former long time
companion Oja Kaddar, who has the rights to his unfinished projects, is
an insult to the memory of a sometimes brilliant director.
     Technical considerations make this film close to unwatchable.  A
film consists of nothing more than a visual or image track, and a sound
track.  The visual track of this film is incredibly poor.  It seems as
if, and this is a guess, an early rough cut of  film was transferred to
primitive home video some time in the sixties.  This poorly focused and
washed out video then was retransferred to film.  The result is
something not as good as the "Lost Episodes" of the Honeymooners TV
show.  Cut into this are a few better quality close-ups.  An occasional
original quality shot sneaks in, reminding one of the great visual
quality of other Welles films.  This poor footage makes up most of the
film.  About three quarters of the way through, there is a very good
twenty minutes of high quality footage of the running of the bulls in
Spain.  Welles appears in this, making a film called DON QUIXOTE.
Henry Fonda can also be seen briefly.  The film the returns to poor
quality images as the editors struggle to make an ending out of the
available footage.  The running of the bulls section seems to be edited
by Welles, or at least a professional.  The rest, the mixture of poor
quality footage, lacks any sense of pacing or focus.  The cut in close
ups are obviously left over scraps used to stretch out the scenes to
accommodate the narration.
     The audio track of the film is even worse.  Bad sound plagued
Welles later works.  Why a film maker who got his start in radio and
made sound innovations on his early Hollywood films used such poor
sound technique in later life is a subject of speculation among film
scholars.  Many film makers shooting in Spain and Italy in the sixties
did not use direct sound, since the films would be dubbed for different
markets.  As a result, Welles shot most of this film silent, hoping to
use his own voice for the English language version.  He recorded about
ten minutes.  The rest of the sound was created in post production.  It
is an incredibly poor dubbing job that would not pass muster in a
kung-fu film.  The head of modern post production was Jess Franco.  His
own films include the women's prison film 99 WOMEN and horror opus
NIGHT OF THE BLOOD MONSTER.  His team added a flat and hollow track
of bored actors trudging through the dialogue, making no effort to
match the lips of characters.  It is difficult to tell if some lines
are supposed to be narration or dialogue.  This is accompanied by stock
sound effects and almost no music.  It is like watching the 'Here's
Harold' television versions of Harold Lloyd shorts.
     The climactic scene of the film, jousting the windmills, is
created by matting a long shot of the actors on their burros over
stills, similar to some of the "restoration" Georgio Moroder did on
METROPOLIS.
     I doubt that this version will get any distribution in the US.
For Welles fans I will recount the basic storyline.  The story of the
film, as it is in this version, has Don Quixote and Sancho Panza in
armor wandering through the landscape until all of a sudden they
encounter a woman, (Oja Kaddar) on a motorcycle.  It is Franco-era
Spain.  They encounter several modern people, mistake sheep for an
army, joust windmills, etc.  Don Quixote and Sancho Panza then split
up.  Sancho Panza hears that Orson Welles is making a film about Don
Quixote.  Panza wanders through the running of the bulls looking for
Orson Welles, who might know where Don Quixote is, or have a use for
him in his film.  After encountering Welles, Sancho Panza finds Don
Quixote.  People recognize him Don Quixote as the guy from the book.
He passes a Don Quixote restaurant and a Don Quixote Beer sign.  They
wander off again into the distance.
     If the images can be digitally cleaned up, and the sound recorded
by true professionals, with a solid score and convincing sound effects,
this film would make an interesting footnote to Welles career.  As it
is, this version should be avoided by all but serious film scholars
that need to see what Welles possibly had in mind.  Compared to the
brilliant OTHELLO; recently cleaned up and restored; DON QUIJOTE DE
ORSON WELLES looks like PLAN NINE FROM OUTER SPACE.
