Title
Review for Sex, Lies, and Videotape (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Steven Soderbergh
Starring: James Spader, Andie MacDowell, Peter Gallagher, Laura San
Giacomo
In an age where sex is shown in its entirety, where graphic sex scenes
seem to populate more and more movies, it's a blast to see a film that
blatantly talks about sex but never features any actual skin.  And it's
even more of a shock that not only is there no skin and very little
actual sex, but that it's actually more erotic than all of those little
cheapie films.
"sex, lies, and videotape" was the film that basically made the indie
film chic, back in its early days of the late 80s.  Writing the
screenplay in about 7 days, Steven Soderbergh made this very talkative
film, sent it to Cannes, and came home with the coveted "Palme D'Or." 
Truthfully, it's not a masterpiece, really, but really a fantastic
character study out to prove a point: talking about sex is more of a
turn-on than actualy sex.  And it makes its point wonderfully.
The film is about, well, sex, lies, and videotape.  Centering around
four characters, all with some screwed-up aspects of sex in their
individual respects, it's a fascinating film that holds one's focus for
its full 100 minutes.  It unfolds like a wonderfully-written novel,
introducing us to characters one-by-one, then tying them together
brilliantly.  This is not only brilliantly written, but also brilliantly
directed and acted, with all four leads giving no less than amazing
performances.
James Spader plays Graham, who basically lives in his car, and roams the
country like a drifter or nomad.  We learn very little of him at a time,
and he's the most intriguing character in the whole film.  Anyway, the
film's plot takes off when he arrives at the home of his old college
roomate's, John (Peter Gallagher), a lawyer who's married to a sexually
barren wife, Ann (Andie MacDowell, before she became moderately big),
who thinks sex his over-rated.  But John is really conducting an affair
with Ann's more liberal sister, Cynthia (Laura San Giacomo, from "Pretty
Woman" and the current sitcom "Fired Up").
Ann is as fascinated with the mysterious Graham as we are, and ends up
apartment shopping with him one day.  Following this little shopping
excursion, they have lunch together, where they do a bit of flirting,
and begin confessing a bit, where Graham announces he's impotent.  He
ends up buying an apartment, and when Ann goes over to see him, she
finds a bunch of tapes he's made with woman.  At first, she thinks there
kinky tapes of him having sex with woman (then she remembers he's
impotent), but he kind of calmy announces that they're his personal
project: videotaping women talking about sex.  She, and we, are
disturbed (and with good reason), but are undeniably fascinated by
what's going on.  She leaves awkwardly, turned off, but, of course, not
being able to put this away in the back of her mind.
Thins happen with the four characters, and soon, not only does Cynthia
find Graham's little fetish intriguing as well, but she has soon made a
tape for him, finding it much more of an actual turn-on than actual sex
with John.  When Ann makes a tape, it's probably the best scene in the
movie, since it becomes the enzyme which fuels the characters to come
out in the end the way they do.
This is, of course, a film primarily fueled by characters.  The plot is
moved only by characterization, not some cheap plot device.  The use of
videotaping sexual confessions is not a cheap plot gimmick, but rather
an outlet that is created by one of the characters to compensate for a
lack of interest in sex.  This is really true-to-life, since sex is
basically interesting for a while, but gets old, but talking about it is
pretty much immortal.  The scene where Graham interviews Ann for the
camera is one of the greatest film scenes in recent film history, as it
shows the characters opening up in ways they wouldn't before.  Each
character is mysterious, but soon shows they are human and unique.
The acting is superb from all four leads.  James Spader, who has never
made it big, but is pretty much a great actor in most of what he does,
has created a role which would be laughably bad if done by a lesser
actor, but he hits all the right notes, making him mysteriously
seductive, yet still human.  Spader's one of the more underrated actors
around, but shows us here that he is a fantastic actor.  Andie
MacDowell, who is often criticized for her acting, is also amazing here,
and also hits all the right notes in her character.  She seems like she
would be the wrong choice for the role, judging by what she usually does
in her work as of late, but shows she's a very talented actress, making
her character multi-leveled and human.  Peter Gallagher, who's also very
underrated, has the tough part in the respect that he's the least
likable character in the film.  He's the adulterous, lying husband, who
never really fully understands the videotaping, but is nevertheless
brilliantly acted by Gallagher.  And Laura San Giacomo, who also never
made it big (I'm sensing a trend here), rocks in the free-spirited role
of Cynthia, making her likable even though she's doing a horrible thing
to her sister.
Alas, this film is brilliant, but is probably not one of the greatest
films of all time like it may seem.  It's definitely one of the most
important films, and one of the best executed films I've seen, but it's
not a film that has a ton of depth to it.  But the message gets across,
and it gets its job done, and gets it done with flying colors.  It's
mildly erotic, but always interesting.  So, it might not have absolutely
deserved the "Palme D'Or" (I have no clue what else was up that year),
but it's a landmark film in indie history, and it's just a great film to
watch.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  An intense film about a cold, sterile
     marriage that is put under pressure by the husband's mistress
     and by his college roommate who now makes a hobby of
     interviewing women about their sex lives.  An award-winning
     film made on a shoestring budget. Rating: high +1.
     SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE is an independent production that could well be a
hit like EASY RIDER was.  Both films were longer on style than on budget yet
used their low budget to give the film a more authentic feel.  Just as the
youth movement used EASY RIDER to define itself to itself, yuppies may will
find this film defining their feelings about sex for themselves.
     At the core of the film are Ann and John Millany, played by Andie
MacDowell and Peter Gallagher.  They lead a sterile, colorless life together,
each married to the other's image as a status symbol.  Neither has much passion
or even affection for the other.  In very proper fashion Ann regularly sees a
sterile, colorless therapist with whom she discusses her sterile, colorless sex
life.  But John is seeing another woman on the side, one who does not think of
sex as if it were a spider that crawled into her house.  And Ann is puzzled by
Graham (played by James Spader), an old friend of John's who now makes his
hobby interviewing women privately about their sex lives.  This activity as a
symptom of Graham's disturbance forms the psychological basis of the story.
     SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE is an intense film about people with sexual
problems.  It is more about attitudes and discussion about sex than it is about
sex itself.  The film has a cold sexual tension that is mostly devoid of
eroticism.  Viewers will leave having less of an urge to have sex than to talk
about it.  In fact, for better or worse the film is very likely to spawn a fad
for amateur Kenseys all across the country to go out interviewing people about
their sex lives.
     First time writer and director Steven Soderbergh undoubtedly made a very
hot commodity for a modest $1.2 million budget.  He creates not so much
characters we have some feeling for as a set of walking case histories that are
intriguing without being appealing.  The characters have a depth that saves
what would otherwise be a very soap-opera-ish plot  While I cannot say that
detailed films about people's sex lives are really my cup of tea, I would still
rate SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE a high +1.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Steven Soderbergh.
Cast: Andie MacDowell, James Spader, Peter Gallagher, Laura San Giacomo.
1989 - 99 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed October 28, 1998.
Steve Soderbergh's "sex, lies, and videotape," which won the Grand Prize 
at the Cannes Film Festival in 1989, arguably began the resurgence of 
independent films. Made on a shoestring budget of $1.2 million, with 
then relatively unknown actors, it is a provocative, thoroughly original 
drama.
The film mostly focuses on the four central characters, all in their 
late 20's-early 30's. Ann (Andie MacDowell), an unfulfilled housewife, 
is married to John (Peter Gallagher), an insensitive lawyer, who, 
unbeknownst to her, is having an affair with her younger sister, Cynthia 
(Laura San Giacomo). Complicating matters even worse is Graham (James 
Spader, who won Best Actor at Cannes), John's old college buddy, who 
comes to stay at their house. Ann is absolutely won over by him, even 
though she clearly has stated that she has very little interest in sex.
That is the set-up for the last hour of the picture, and since the film 
is entitled, "sex, lies, and videotape," it is best to keep the rest of 
the story developments at bay so that they will come as a genuine 
surprise. 
Director Steven Soderbergh has proven to be a wildly offbeat filmmaker, 
ranging from the independent, to the mainstream (1998's "Out of Sight"), 
to the downright Kafkaesque (1997's "Schizopolis"). He is the type of 
director who obviously takes a lot of chances, and believes in the work 
that he does, and, "sex, lies, and videotape," is probably his most 
confident, and maybe even best, to date.
The performances are superb from all four leads, but MacDowell stands 
out in what is probably the main character. She is always a very winning 
actress, but this is probably her most three-dimensional role that she 
has had (with a close second being Altman's 1993 mosaic, "Short Cuts"). 
The other parts are perfectly cast as well, from Spader's ominous 
Graham, to Gallagher's self-involved John, to Giacomo's outspoken 
Cynthia.
The final act of the film, especially, comes right out of left field, 
and turns out to be both shocking and oddly touching, and it would be 
criminal to give away the film's secrets. Suffice to say that, through 
one powerful sequence, Ann is able to somewhat come out of her shell, 
and John learns a valuable lesson about honesty, as well as deception.
The film has one fault , however. The characters are almost all 
emotionally cold and isolated from one another, and often unlikable. If 
there had been a few extra scenes with Gallagher, it probably would have 
helped, since his relationship with MacDowell isn't quite as explored as 
I would have liked.
"sex, lies, and videotape," although minorly flawed, is still easily a 
brave and adult motion picture that is far more mature and honest about 
its subject matter than the usual film. Soderbergh clearly knew what he 
was doing while he was making it, and the final product certainly proves 
this. 
   - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
     Dustin Putman's
Film Haven >

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPES (director/writer/editor: Steven Soderbergh;
cinematographer: Walt Lloyd; cast: James Spader (Graham), Andie
MacDowell (Ann), Peter Gallagher (John), Laura San Giacomo (Cynthia),
Ron Vawter (Ann's Therapist), Steven Brill (Barfly); Runtime: 100; 1989)
This debut indie film for director Steven Soderbergh is a stimulating
but perverse psychological drama. It is set in Baton Rouge, La., and
tells the story about four lost souls aged thirtysomething whose problem
lies chiefly in their sex lives. The film is invasive sexually, but not
in an explicit way, as there is no nudity and the film eschews
sensationalism for an honest verbal character study. It is more
interested in telling about the gulf between what is felt and what is
perceived, as the main characters try to articulate what is at the root
of their problems. At the Cannes film festival, this low budget film,
made for about $1.2 million, deservedly won La Palme D'Or for best film
and the best actor award for James Spader.
Ann (MacDowell) is seeing a therapist about her repression problem. She
mentions to the therapist that, as of late, she stopped having sex with
her successful lawyer husband John (Gallagher), saying she thinks sex is
overrated. She further says that she feels repulsed when he touches her.
Her immediate concern is that he invited a college friend over, Graham
(Spader), whom he hasn't seen for the last 9 years, and she doesn't feel
she is up to having a visitor at the present time.
Graham appears as a changed person to John, having affected a casual
dress code, mysteriously wandering around the country for the last 9
years without a job while living in his car to stay mobile, not seeing a
woman, and he has no ambition to succeed. What he does is videotape
women who talk intimately to him about their sexual experiences, and he
watches them later on in his privacy, getting sexually off on what they
say. He also mentions to Ann that he is impotent.
John is a longtime philanderer, currently having a torrid sexual affair
with Ann's extroverted sister Cynthia (Laura), who works as a bartender.
She has a strained relationship with her sister, thinking of her
disrespectfully as too good to be true and too uptight about life for
her to feel comfortable talking to.
Ann is at first repulsed by how strange Graham is, but his words excite
her, as they both have severe sexual problems to overcome and can't
relate to others as easily as they do to each other. She also finds out,
to her utter dismay, that John is having an affair with her sister and
that he has lied to her about it, which she considers even worse than
the affair.
No character is as pure as driven snow or without their psychological
hang-ups, but through confronting themselves when forced to listen to
the tapes or the lies they get caught in, they view themselves as having
lost sight of what is important and try to decide on how to take
responsibility for their actions.
This is much more than a voyeuristic film, as everything becomes
personal. It stresses the morality needed to live a normal life and ends
by trying to make sense of what is going to happen to them after they
confront how they lied to others and themselves.
The script is intelligent; the acting is superb; and, the director has
elicited spontaneous and natural performances, weaving it into a film
where having a conversation about masturbation is as natural as talking
about the weather. This is a film where sex is always kept as an
intriguing mystery and a part of the story that adds spice to the wry
humor of the events. When the intense Spader videotapes Cynthia, she is
completely open about her life and it disturbs her that she can
communicate with a stranger but not with her lover. When Spader
videotapes Ann, she turns the tables and puts him on camera, and the
dynamics between the two becomes emotionally charged, bringing them as
close to a satisfying climax as they have ever had. She realizes how
empty her marriage is when asked by Graham on videotape: What do you
like about your marriage? And the trophy wife, can only respond, "I like
the stability and John's promotion."All the sexual ambiguity they both
have for each other changes into a real liking they have for each other
and an acceptance of how they are damaged goods but have the possibilty
of changing for the better. The clever story becomes very emotionally
satisfying, even if it ties things up a little too neatly.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
