Title
Review for Revizor (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Felix Kreisel
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Director: Sergei Gazarov. Script: Sergei Gazarov, Andrei Dmitriiev. Based
on the play "Revizor" by Nikolai Gogol. Photography: Mikhail Agranovich.
Editor: Irakly Kvirikadze, Galina Patrikeieva. Music: Alexander
Eisenshtadt. Sound: Alexander Khasin, Irzhi Gora. Cast: Nikita Mikhalkov,
Oleg Yankovsky, Yevgeny Mironov, Anna Mikhalkova, Marina Neiolova, Zinovy
Gerdt, Armen Dzhigarkhanian. Producer: Sergei Gazarov, Nikita & Piotr Film
Company, Most Group.
In a small, provincial Russian town in the middle of the 19th century, Ivan
Khlestakov, a young rake from St. Petersburg, and his valet Osip stop and
put up at the local inn. Khlestakov has lost all his money gambling and has
nothing left to pay for travel or accommodations. Still, he demands to be
served. As it happens, the local governor had been waiting for a visit by
an inspector from the capital and rumors are that the official will be
traveling incognito. The local government is thoroughly corrupt and,
terrified of being found out, they imagine that it is Khlestakov who has
come to conduct the inspection. The governor invites the young man to his
house and gives a luxurious reception in his honor. At first a bit
embarrassed by all the attention, Khlestakov soon warms to the role. He
gladly accepts the extravagant hospitality as well as all the bribes, not
to mention opportunities to flirt with the governor's wife and daughter.
The deception is eventually uncovered but this only adds to the
mortification and embarrassment of the governor and his cronies. (The
famous satire by Gogol had its premiere in 1836 and has been revived in
numerous productions around the world, including a 1949 film adaptation
directed by Henry Koster and starring Danny Kaye).
This movie, despite its cast of brilliant actors in every role, is a coarse
and vulgar debasement of the biting social satire written by Nikolai Gogol
one and a half centuries ago. Gazarov eschews appealing to the viewers'
intelligence and turns every scene into a lightweight farce.
   Gazarov added a large number of farcical scenes and strokes to Gogol's
script. The roles of Bobchinsky and Dobchinsky have been combined and this
Bobchinsky-Dobchinsky has been told to act the part of a lunatic with a
split personality, always accompanied by his alter ego
Dobchinsky-Bobchinsky. While Gogol wanted to satirize the
interchangeability of the petty landlords, their lack of uniqueness,
Gazarov just goes for the physical laughs.
   There is much stumbling and falling throughout the movie, especially in
the scene of the first encounter between the governor, played by Mikhalkov,
and Khlestakov, played by Mironov. There is a ridiculous scene of duck
shooting from the window of the hospital in which Khlestakov shoots a
couple of ducks, then a fish. This scene is worthy of The Three Stooges.
The scene of the town gentry meeting with Khlestakov at the governor's
house was turned into a vaudeville number: the governor's wife whistles,
his daughter plays the harp, Khlestakov sings and dances, everyone else
stumbles, jumps and applauds.
   The discussion between Khlestakov and the hospital administrator about
the ill "getting healthy like flies" is emphasized and expanded. Where
Gogol wanted to show the callousness of the tsarist administrators for the
public, Gazarov does not see this point of view at all. Average people do
seem to be flies to him, "expensive medicine or medical treatment is not
needed, if they are fated to die, they will die". On the other hand, the
final scene of the movie has been designed to evoke sympathy for the
governor, to somehow make him out to be an innocent victim.
   There was an hour long press conference with the director, Gazarov and
the two leading actors, Mikhalkov and Mironov. The first question quite
obviously referred to the lack of social satire in the movie, although the
journalist went out of her way to compliment the director by finding some
parallels (invisible to the rest of us) between the tsarist bureaucracy
portrayed in the movie and the Soviet or post-Soviet regime. In response,
Gazarov took the bit between his teeth and vehemently declared: "There is
in principle nothing political and social here, this is a pure comedy 
 I
took all the politics out". The audience was taken aback at this outburst
since normally the directors and actors try to do just the opposite and
impute some deeper meaning to their work. But questions of official
corruption and theft of state assets obviously strike a nerve in present
day Russia, and Mikhalkov and Gazarov see their job as deflecting any such
discussion.
   Mikhalkov went at length about art being pretense, developing the idea
that "both the director and the actors must fool the viewer". The idea of
Art being Truth is these days taken for an obvious truism, so Mikhalkov's
and Gazarov's rationalization of misleading and desensitizing the public
comes as a shock when expressed so directly and unequivocally. The Montreal
audience of journalists and movie goers included, however, a large number
of celebrity hounds and middle class yahoos. Mikhalkov skillfully played up
to their mood of uncritical adulation and acceptance of status quo. When
one hostile critic asked about Mikhalkov's own fake political campaign
(Mikhalkov supported Chernomyrdin during the parliamentary elections),
Mikhalkov refused to discuss politics. Instead he claimed that since this
movie needed special sets and costumes, it required a special kind of civic
courage to stage, that the director (and by implication, Mikhalkov also)
were heroes for staging it. Not a single journalist present pointed out
that such "courage" was quite commonplace, since most of the movies
presented at the Festival were historical costume films (Baryshnia, Return
of the Battleship, Road to the End Of the World, etc.).
   At times it seemed that both the critics and these hack director and
actors were united by a common goal: to distract the viewing public from
any discussion of contemporary problems of the Russian society, to leave
hidden the destruction of popular culture taking place in the former Soviet
Union and the regime's responsibility for this catastrophe.
   Sixty years ago Trotsky noted that the cultural efforts of totalitarian
Stalinism "in the last analysis 
 came down 
 to taking care that art
assimilates its (the Stalinist bureaucracy) interests, and finds such forms
for them as will make the bureaucracy attractive to the popular masses".
With Trotsky we exclaim: In vain ! No literature can fulfill that task. No
movie director's tricks can make Khlestakov attractive to the Russian
people.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html
