Title
Review for Newsies (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is New York City, 1899.  Life is hard if you are a boy on your own
with no money.  But if a boy is poor and needs work, he could buy newspapers
at a cent each and sell them on the street for two cents a piece.  You might
earn a dollar a day that way.  Or you might not be able to sell what you
have and end up losing money.  A really good newsie might get $50 a week.
Joseph Pulitzer (played by Robert Duvall) decides to raise the price to the
newsboys by 10%.  Seeing their livelihood drying up, newsboys Jack Kelly and
David Jacobs (played by Christian Bale of EMPIRE OF THE SUN and David
Moscow) decide to organize the New York City newsboys into a strike against
the local newspapers.  Pulitzer, deciding he has a fight on his hands,
decides to play as dirty as he needs to win.  NEWSIES is the story of that
strike.
     Disney Studios tried something a little different with NEWSIES.  The
historical film is currently at a low ebb since historical education is also
at a low ebb.  For once more films being made are set *after* the 20th Century
than *before*.  Still, Disney did make a historical film about an 1899 newsboy
strike.  Then they tried to aim it at both adults and children.  Then on top
of that they decided to make it a musical.  This is an idea that is either
audacious or nutty, depending on your point of view.  So, does it all work?
Well, sort of.  My impression of the trailer is that it all sounded like a
good idea except for making it a musical.  Certainly once I saw the film I
would say that its biggest problem is that it is a musical.  The idea of a
big pro-labor musical has a nostalgic feel reminiscent of Broadway shows
like PINS AND NEEDLES.  This certainly is a more engaging theme for a
musical than "I'm in love" or "Let's put on a show" Like the vast majority
of musicals.  The problem here is that this is only half-heartedly a
musical.  There are only about six songs, so the viewer is generally
thinking straight drama when a character or group of characters starts
acting funny and with a jolt the viewer realizes they are going into a song.
It may well be that making this a musical was an afterthought after Menken's
success with BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  I noted without minding that the film
used Bale's and Moscow's real singing voices--if you really want to call
them singing voices.  David Fristrom, in a review of the film, noted the
dances were not very well filmed and he is probably right, thought I might
not have picked up on it.  I did like the song "The World Will Know," which
had almost some of the force of LES MISERABLES.  Incidentally, please note
that the name of Pulitzer's newspaper is "The New York World."  The script
has some fun with that name; if you miss the name, you miss the point of
some of the word-play.  When Pulitzer says, "When I created the World..." it
is intended as a subtle statement that Pulitzer is a megalomaniac.  Instead
it sounds like he is certifiably insane.
     As for the story of the strike, it has a minor Dickensian tone crossed
with obvious Disney touches.  Visually the old New York was created with
perhaps too many obvious matte shots, but maybe in a musical we expect a pat
plot and make allowances for some of the visuals being less than authentic-
looking.  In spite of the nits that can be picked, there is enough substance
to appreciate here.  I might not recommend NEWSIES but I rate it a high +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
David Fristrom
     Yesterday I saw a preview of the eagerly awaited (by me, anyway)
new Disney movie NEWSIES (opening April 10th).  NEWSIES is an original,
live-action musical, Disney's first in years, with music by Alan Menken
(THE LITTLE MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST).  It is based on an actual
strike by newsboys in New York at the turn of the century, although the
characters and incidents in the movie are fictitious.
     First the good news: there is a fair amount to like in NEWSIES.  To
begin with, an original movie musical is always a good idea, and I'm
glad to see that Disney seems to be putting some marketing muscle behind
it.  The cast is quite engaging, especially Christian Bale (the lead in
EMPIRE OF THE SUN, "boy" in HENRY V) as the ring-leader of the strike,
but all of the boys do a good job.  The basic story line is strong -- a
little obvious at times (do I have to tell you whether the strike
succeeds?), but a good structure and decent writing.  And I'm a sucker
for period costumes and back lot sets.
     Alas, there is also plenty that is wrong with NEWSIES.  Filming
dance is an art that appears to be lost, which is strange considering
how simple it is.  As Fred Astaire showed in his best movies, the way
you film dance is with long takes showing the full body.  Long takes,
because it is the dancer who is dancing, not the camera; full body shots
because dancing is done with the body, not the feet.  Of course, while
this approach is simple for the camera person and editor it is much
harder for the choreographer, who must actually choreograph a full
dance, with a definite structure building to a climax.
     That's not the way it is done in NEWSIES.  Instead, when dancing is
called for the screen is suddenly filled with athletic dancers
performing really amazing gymnastic feats or a bunch of people moving in
unison, with no take lasting more than a few seconds.  The dances have
no structure; they begin with a burst of energy, continue at the same
level for a few minutes, and then stop.  No emotion is expressed other
than a pseudo-excitement.
     Besides dance, the other crucial element of a musical are the
songs, and here NEWSIES fares somewhat better.  Menken is, of course,
best known for his work with the late Howard Ashman, and I'm sure he and
his lyricists will soon be sick of comparisons.  The unknown (whose name
I am afraid I don't remember) who has provided the lyrics for NEWSIES is
no Ashman, but he does a reasonably good job and has produced some
clever lines.  But while the songs are basically pretty good (although
the lyrics are hard to make out during some of the chorus numbers), they
don't really fit well with the story.  Choosing where to put the songs,
and then writing the lead-ins, is one of the hardest parts of creating a
musical -- especially nowadays, when audiences no longer accept the old
convention of stopping the story for a marginally related song.  It has
become a cliche that songs should advance the story, at least
emotionally if not in plot terms -- and the fact it is a cliche doesn't
stop it from being true.
     This integration of song and story is what is missing in NEWSIES.
Like the dances, most of the songs are just bursts of undirected energy,
which could largely be moved around interchangeably.  The one exception
is a more introspective song by Bale's character in which he dreams of
going to Santa Fe, and that songs comes dangerously close to
unintentional silliness.  Still, after seeing the movie only once I have
a couple of the songs bouncing around in my head, so maybe they pass the
dreaded hummability test.
     While basically sound, the plot does have a few oddities.
Inevitably, there is a love interest for the main character, but,
perhaps in deference to the intended audience of children, the love
sub-plot is so down played that it might as well not be there.  There is
really only one scene devoted to it, and that comes off odd because it
sets things up for a love song which never arrives.  Also, Ann-Margret
appears in a pointless role as a vaudevillian who implausibly owns her
own theater.  As she has no real plot function, you would think she was
there as an excuse to get in some musical numbers, but all we get are
fragments of a couple of songs.
     If I had seen a preview of a Broadway show instead of a movie, I
would be cautiously optimistic.  The book needs a bit of tightening, the
musical numbers need better lead ins, they need a new choreographer, and
a love song or two have to be written.  A lot of work, but just the kind
of thing that you have previews for, and there is good material here and
a great cast.  But since it is a movie it is too late to make any
changes, and we are left with an interesting failure.  Fans of musicals
will probably want to see it since it is the only thing going, and for
all I know children will love it (and their parents at least won't be
too bored).  But I don't think I can recommend it to the average
movie-goer.

Author
Frank Maloney
     NEWSIES is a film directed and choreographed by Kenny Ortega.  The
songs are by Alan Menken and Jack Feldman.  It stars Christian Bale,
David Moscow, Luke Edwards, Robert Duvall, and Ann-Margaret.  It is
rated PG for mature themes.
     NEWSIES is a live-action musical from Walt Disney.  After Disney's
recent successes with animated musicals, also featuring Alan Menken as
co-composer, no doubt encouraged Disney to try to revive this mostly
moribund genre.  The result is a thorough enjoyable renewal of one of my
favorite forms.
     The story is based on an historical strike of newsboys, newsies, in
New York City in 1899 against Joseph Pulitzer.  There is, despite the
irony of Disney's own anti-union history, a moral quality behind the
leaping, flips, splits, and jumps that characterize the choreography, a
protest against the exploitation of children and the anyone helpless in
the face of money and power.  There's a lot of uplift in this musical,
so watch out.
     The music is excellent.  It advances the story rather than
interrupting it, it is tuneful, if you will, and it avoids both the
cliches of Andrew Lloyd Weber pseudo-operas and MTV dance videos.  The
director, Kenny Ortega, took on a big job in staging and filming several
very large, busy production numbers; this is his first directing job,
having been a choreographer only before, and some awkwardness is
inevitably apparent.  But still, he is more to be praised than cavilled.
It is by and large very impressive technically and artistically.
     The dance numbers are energetic, even athletic, as befits a cast of
young boys and teenagers, and heavily populated.  Christian Bale has one
solo dance number, which is charming and surprisingly good, with smaller
gestures and its own narrative vocabulary than the big production
numbers.  The performances are delivered with a fine conviction, a
purity, that won me over from the opening number.
     Christian Bale, by the way, is the wonderful boy star of Stephen
Spielberg's EMPIRE OF THE SUN (1987), who is mostly grown up to a
talented manhood now.  He is still a master of the mixed message, being
at once vulnerable and malevolent.  He backed up by David Moscow, a more
conventional kind of star, but still quite appealing in his own way.
Robert Duvall shows up sporting a patently false beard as Joseph
Pulitzer, whom Duvall brings to life through his vast and perceptive
treasury of shtick; in this case, Duvall accents Pulitzer's Jewishness
with a perhaps distracting repertoire of gestures right out of I
REMEMBER MAMA.  Of course, even Duvall can only do so much with a script
that largely reduces Pulitzer to two-dimensional villain.  The show is
rife with juicy villains and they provide a lot of the fun.
     One should also mention the appearance of Ann-Margaret as Medda the
Swedish Meadowlark.  She has a couple of numbers and gets to strut her
stuff behind a purple ostrich fan.
     On the technical side, a side I am barely competent to even refer
to, one has to be impressed by the detailed and authentic-looking sets
and costumes of fin-de-siecle New York, especially the Lower East Side.
But especially stunning are the mattes, especially one of the Brooklyn
Bridge that so amazing that it gets its own credit.  Surely, it will be
remembered next Oscartide.
     Disney deserves a lot of thanks for taking on the risking business
of reviving the live musical and in doing it in such a grand manner.  It
is not without reason that one of the persons particularly remembered in
the credits, along with Howard Ashman (Menken's late partner), is Gene
Kelly.
     I'm not saying the film is perfect, especially in the editing and
shooting of the dance scenes.  I am saying it's pretty darn good and
better than anything that's come along in a long while in this genre.
     If you like musicals, you will like NEWSIES, and you will gladly
pay whatever it takes to see it.  If you don't think you do like them,
you might want to risk a matinee ticket and give this one a try.  It
might very well surprise you.  It did me.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
125 min., PG, Musical/Comedy, 1992
Director: Kenny Ortega
Cast: Christian Bale, David Moscow, Luke Edwards, Max Casella,
      Marty Belafsky, Arvie Lowe, Jr., Aaron Lohr, Trey Parker,
      Gabriel Damon, Robert Duvall, Bill Pullman, Ann-Margaret,
      Michael Lerner
     In 1899 in New York City, newspaper publisher Robert Duvall decides
to raise the cost of his newspapers to the "newsies," the people who
stand on street corners selling the papers.  The "newsies" won't be able
to survive with the new price.  Christian Bale, the leader of the
"newsies" with the help of smart David Moscow and newspaper writer Bill
Pullman leads a strike of the "newsies" until the price is brought back
down.
     NEWSIES is a very good film in the grand Disney film tradition.
Definitely one to bring your kids to, or yourself if you don't have any
kids.  This is one film that I recommend that you definitely don't miss.
On a scale of zero to five, I give NEWSIES a five.  NEWSIES is rated PG
for violence.
     I saw NEWSIES in a sneak preview at one of my local theaters.  It
is being released to theaters everywhere on April 10.  NEWSIES is the
latest film by the Walt Disney Studios.  The music is written by Alan
Menken, who most recently did Disney's THE BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (with
Howard Ashman), and the lyrics were written by Jack Feldman.  The music
for NEWSIES is very good.  The choreography for this film was done by
Kenny Ortega (who also directed the film), and he seems to have done a
very good job.  It reminds me of all those old musicals where many
people are on the screen dancing and singing.
     Like in most Disney films, the villains are totally evil and the
heros are totally good.  In NEWSIES, the villains are Robert Duvall, the
newspaper publisher, Michael Lerner, the newspaper distributor, and the
person who runs the local juvenile detention center.  The heros of the
film are Christian Bale, the leader of the "newsies," David Moscow, his
friend and fellow "newsie," and newspaper writer Bill Pullman.
     The performances in NEWSIES were great, but the person that I felt
was the best actor/actress in the film was Michael Lerner.   His
character was a real weasel (in fact the "newsies" have nicknamed his
character Weasel), always looking out for himself first and nobody else
second.
