Title
Review for Ko dou gai bei (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jun Yan
I was hesitant to rent this movie, because I know Ringo Lam has the
capability of depressing me and affecting me.  And this time he did not
let me down, either.  
Lau Ching-Wan plays inspector Pao, the leading officer of the Serious
Crime Squad of Hong Kong police, investigating a crime involved with a
body of an architect found in the water tank of a resident building.  Soon
the murderer is captured, and we learn that a big robbery is going to
happen.  A police officer dies on duty while pursuing the gang of robbers.
The suspect Mak Kwan, who is an essential member of this robbery, escapes
from the prison with the help of his devoted girlfriend.  Pao is on the
trail of the criminals, while both he and the escaped villain are haunted
by their experience of killing.  Hence, the cat-and-mouse game goes on
around a safe room full of cash.  
Some of Ringo Lam's style of his crime dramas remind me of "French
Connection" and the good parts of "Heat".  It's a cold, gruesome and
almost documentary-like fashion to display violence and danger.  There is
a genuine intensity and suspense hanging over the entire film.  There are
very very few scenes in which the action sequences do not feel real.  The
cinematography remains dark throughout the film, never losing the mood and
atmosphere of tension.  There is a great sequence of Lau pursuing the
suspect on foot and almost shot a motorcyclist passing by.  It's long and
realistic, unlike any similar sequence done in the usual way.  There is
very little music, and many of the intense scenes are carried out in
complete silence.  It works wonderfully in Ringo Lam's gritty, almost
brutal style of filming the actions.  
The screenplay is very well-written, too.  Although the setup sounds
routine with cop-and-robber stuff, it makes the process fascinating
because neither side is particularly smarter than the other, and the
police remains only half a step behind the robbers.  Almost perfect pace
of unfolding the plot of the crime, the script never loses its realistic
touch.  Some very intriguing action sequences, but they never feel staged
or crafted.  The screenplay does not glamourize either side of the law.
Both the cops and the criminals are immersed in a sense of desperation and
weariness.  The mood is shown with minimalistic fashion most effectively.  
However, the very best thing about this movie is not the style, nor the
story, but the characters, especially Inspector Pao, who is a
soft-hearted, vulnerable man with very few words.  He is tired of the
ugliness of his job and of the world.  He loves his wife and baby son and
feels guilty for the danger caused by his job.  He is every bit believable
and intimate as a character can be.  Lau Ching-wan is at his very best as
I have seen playing such a real and complicated family man.  There is a
thin line between being stoic and being subtle.  Although he had been
accused of being wooden before, Lau is most competent and subtle in this
role.  He successfuly mixes all the toughness and gentleness, sadness and
pride, and all the inner conflicts, then presents it in a subtle but
convincing way, but not so subtle that you'd miss it.  The numerous
memonts where he let his vulnerability out are the most moving and
refreshing, yet never ever one bit overdone.  The amazing strength of this
film is its pricision in handling both the violent scenes and the tender
scenes, never feeling a bit over-the-top or manipulative.  It's done just
right.  
Compared to Lau Ching-Wan, Francis Ng's Mak Kwan is far less impressive,
thus one of the few flaws of this film.  The main villain does not carry
the same weight as the main hero, as was better done in Lam's other
classic "City on Fire".  His relationship with the girlfriend, which is
obviously intended to mirror Pao's family ties, do not work nearly as
convincing and effective.  Although written in a relatively ambiguous and
sympathetic way, this character pales in comparison of Danny Lee's in
"City on Fire" and Ng's performance did not hold his own opposite Lau.
This flaw may not be severe, but it does hurt the power of the finale of
the face-off between the two.  
Subtlety and realism are Ringo Lam's strength, and Lau Ching-wan is the
perfect cast to fit in this style.  I even consider his performance here
rivals that of Chow Yun-Fat's in "City on Fire" as well as the writing.
At the last shot with Lau breaking down in tears, I almost had tears in my
eyes too.  
