Title
Review for Twins (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        TWINS, directed by Ivan Reitman and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger
and Danny DeVito, is the epitome of high-concept, disposable entertainment.
        In this check-your-brain-in-at-the-door movie, Schwarzenegger and
DeVito are fraternal twins, the result of a genetic engineering experiment
gone awry.  Schwarzenegger as Julius is the twin who received all the
"good" genes.  Raised by a scientist on an isolated tropical island, Julius
is intelligent, well-educated, physically fit, and good-natured, but he
lacks experience in the real world.  DeVito as Vincent is the twin who
received the "leftover" genes.  Raised in an orphanage in L.A., he is a
good-for-nothing car thief and general hoodlum.  Separated at birth, the
two brothers finally meet for the first time after Julius leaves his
island-home to track down Vincent in L.A.
        Given the brilliant casting and talent involved, TWINS has very
little ambition.  Although the movie is consistently entertaining, it never
really rises above the level of high-concept formula. TWINS is far too
willing to milk easy laughs from the striking dissimilarity between the
twins and far too reluctant to develop its characters.  The strength and
heart of TWINS is the relationship between the two brothers, who grow to
love and respect one another.  Unfortunately, the film's action-oriented
subplots distract from the strong chemistry that develops between Julius
and Vincent.
        The most pleasant surprise in TWINS is Schwarzenegger's knack for
comedy.  His performance as a fish out of water unfamiliar with American
culture is convincing and endearing.  His social ineptitude and
inexperience produce the movie's funniest moments.
        DeVito, on the other hand, is exactly what you'd expect.  He plays
the standard loud-mouth, smart-alec character that we've come to know and
hate.  This incarnation of the character is not much different from his
past roles; he's as obnoxious, immature, and irritating as ever.  Kelly
Preston also deserves mention; she gives TWINS a healthy dose of
pulse-raising sizzle as the sexy and stunning beauty who takes interest in
Julius.
        Fortunately, despite all its predictable and uninspired humor,
TWINS delivers a lot more fun and entertainment than you might expect.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Two winning comic actors, DeVito and
     Schwarzenegger, overcome a severely problem-ridden hodge-
     podge of a script to make a comedy that is at least
     enjoyable, if little more.  Rating: 0.
     Hollywood long ago discovered that film formulae carried with them
built-in audiences.  Make a film in the formula, you get the audience.
Frankenstein movies had a built-in audience that was interested in seeing
any film about Frankenstein.  Abbott and Costello comedies had a different
built-in audience.  If you make a film like ABBOTT AND COSTELLO MEET
FRANKENSTEIN you get both audiences.  Never mind the fact that Abbott and
Costello film style is really incompatible with Frankenstein film style.
The technique of crossing formulae was usually restricted to "B" films; "A"
films seemed not to need it.  But in the 1980s, while the distinction
between "B" films and "A" films is much less obvious, most films made are
what used to be "B" films.  And crossing formulae is done in clever ways,
but is more prevalent than ever.  That's why Tom Cruise's young, high-gloss
smoothie characters--teenage audience pleasers--appear opposite serious
characters from serious adult dramas.  In THE COLOR OF MONEY Cruise plays
opposite Paul Newman's Fast Eddie Felsen from the realistic, gritty film THE
HUSTLER.  Then Cruise plays opposite Dustin Hoffman's autistic savant in
RAIN MAN.  These are films trying to bring in more than one pre-made
audience.  But the most blatant formula-mixer in recent history is TWINS.
This film is a Danny DeVito comedy, an Arnold Schwarzenegger action film, a
science fiction film, a warm human relationship film, a crime story, a bit
of CROCODILE DUNDEE, and much more.  How do they fit all these things
together?  Not very well.  TWINS is more a pile of plot elemnets than an
actual story.
     To read the credits, TWINS seems to have been made from two different
scripts and the result was a film with two different plots going on
simultaneously.  One is the story of how two brothers created by a
scientific experiment go out in search of their origins.  The other story is
how DeVito gets involved with industrial espionage, ends up in over his
head, and is rescued by his large, powerful brother.
     The plot of TWINS is full of coincidences which range from unlikely to
absurd.  It has problems of casting: Arnold Schwarzenegger could be the
required age of 35, but DeVito is too old for the part.  It assumes that one
person could  have six different fathers.  That is dubious even with modern
gene-splicing technology, but it is ludicrous with 1953 technology.  And
then the concept of the six fathers is never really used in the plot.  The
climax of the film occurs with DeVito inexplicably knowing how to use a
piece of equipment that does not make any sense even when you know what it
does.  (Sorry, that statement probably will not make sense until you see the
film, but people who have seen the film should know what that is all about.)
The script of this film is a mess.  Any chemistry between DeVito and
Schwarzenegger seems forced, but each has talent as a comic actor in his own
right and that, together with a pacing that keeps things happening, is what
makes the film as watchable as it is.  Rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
