Title
Review for Mosafere jonub (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
[Screened at the Cinequest Film Festival 9, San Jose]
[3.5/4.0]  (dialog in Farsi, English subtitles)
Reza Amri is a 14 year old boy making a trip from his home in southern Iran
to Tehran to stay with his cousin and have a vacation. On the same train, in
the next compartment to Reza's, is the elderly Mrs. Nasiri, who is
travelling to Tehran to catch a flight to Germany so she can visit her son
whom she has not seen for many years. Reza is initially put off by the
cranky old woman, but during a brief train stop, he has a conversation with
her and sympathizes with her plight. He has no set schedule, so he figures
he could make himself useful and help her to the airport, because she seems
to be in poor health and generally appears uncomfortable getting around by
herself.
What initially appears to be a gesture of goodwill leads to a larger
adventure. When Mrs. Nasiri collapses at the airport we learn that she has a
serious heart condition. Reza is able to get her taken to the hospital but
finds that since she has no insurance, she will have to pay cash for the
necessary treatment. With the old woman now incapacitated, Reza takes it
upon himself to become her temporary guardian. He must manage her
possessions and try to exchange her Deutsch Marks and pawn her jewelry to
raise the money she needs for her medical care.
With this simple story, director Parviz Shahbazi has created a moving and
convincing picture of life in modern day Iran. Westerners have a very
limited exposure to Persian culture, and Americans especially have kept a
stilted view of it since the Islamic Revolution and accompanying American
hostage incident. It is refreshing to see a perspective from inside that
nation that gives an insight to many of the mundane aspect of daily life.
Like in many other developing countries, it is necessary to have street
smarts and a good knowledge of how the system operates in order to get
anything accomplished. Reza is an extremely resourceful person and genuinely
enjoys the challenge of haggling fares with taxi drivers and negotiating a
place to spend the night with a hospital night watchman. Still, despite the
amount of ruggedness required of individuals, there are many small acts of
generosity and hospitality on the part of strangers that is often absent in
other cultures.
An unbelievably strong performance is given by the young actor Reza Moghadam
as Reza. A tremendous challenge presented by the role is the sparseness of
dialog. Much of the story consists of Reza navigating the city and most of
the time Moghadam must use solely his physical expressiveness to sculpt the
character. He aptly defines the character of the quiet but plucky boy who
shows maturity beyond his years by taking on responsibility that is in no
way required of him. From his ability to negotiate resourcefully with store
clerks and hospital administrators, to his fierce pride in his cultural
background, we see a character of tremendous depth that is a result of both
superb writing and acting.
Because most of the action is filmed on location, there is the feeling that
what is being watched is not a narrative film but rather a voyeuristic
documentary. Just as one would expect if one were following a person around,
we see Reza simply gazing out the window of a bus, small children running
around playing or picking their nose. Given its basis, the story could have
easily become a melodramatic tragedy, or an uplifting morality tale.
Thankfully it avoids both of these and simply tells the story of charming
boy, and a charming country.
Highly recommended, a must-see for anyone interested viewing daily life in
another culture. It is a simple but poignant story, and a brilliant
performance by a young actor. It is a very compelling portrait of life in
Iran. Deservedly, this film won the Maverick competition at Cinequest.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
