Title
Review for Twenty Bucks (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
     Date Released:  10/22/93 (in NY, LA, and Seattle)
     Running Length:  1:31
     Rated:  R (Mature themes, nudity, language, violence)
It isn't often these days that a movie comes along with this many 
oddities about it.  In fact, there is little that could be described as 
"normal" about TWENTY BUCKS, either on or off screen.  With a script that 
has literally been in development for fifty-eight years, this movie 
follows the progress of a single twenty dollar bill as it's passed from 
hand-to-hand.  During the course of the ninety minute journey, it gets 
run over by a car, stuffed in a stripper's g-string, bloodied in a 
robbery, and stuffed into a fish's mouth.  Each of these occurrences has 
its own story and a group of characters to go along with it.
One thing that sets this movie aside from the few other films that have 
followed the progress of an item is that while TWENTY BUCKS strings 
together a series of short stories, few of these are independent of one 
another.  With characters crossing over and re-appearing (sometimes in 
the most unexpected of places), this becomes more than a traditional 
anthology.  Few people show up once never to re-surface.
Coincidence plays a strong role in TWENTY BUCKS, much as it did in Martin 
Scorsese's AFTER HOURS.  In fact, in some of the bizarre ways that 
various stories intertwine, there is a feeling of that earlier film here.  
Much of the enjoyment of this picture is in watching the cruel 
machinations of fate.  When used as a plot element in a drama, 
coincidence can be fatal, but when forming the foundation of a story that 
doesn't take itself too seriously, this can be a marvelous asset.
In assembling and working with this impressive ensemble cast, first time 
feature director Keva Rosenfeld has accomplished a task worthy of Robert 
Altman.  In fact, keen viewers will spot an Altman-like influence on the 
movie.  To have one's debut compared favorably to the works of two of 
America's most influential and talented directors (Altman and Scorsese) 
is no mean feat, but Rosenfeld has managed to make an impressive impact 
with an offbeat motion picture.
Don't take TWENTY BUCKS too seriously.  There are moments of unexpected 
power, but most of the script is more intent on wry, witty interaction.  
Cliches are rigorously avoided.  A bachelor party, complete with 
stripper, shows the discomfort that many feel during this somewhat-absurd 
rite of passage.  A crime spree displays the seductive influence of 
getting away with something.  A young woman discovers that she has more 
in common with her estranged father than she could ever imagine.  And a 
bag lady discovers that fate has a vicious sense of humor.
Following a twenty dollar bill, you're never quite sure what you're going 
to get, or what different side of a familiar character you're about to be 
exposed to, and that's part of the charm of this movie.  Character depth 
is necessarily limited, but there's enough inherent cleverness in how the 
central idea is handled that this isn't a major detriment.  However, as 
the many studios that turned down TWENTY BUCKS pointed out, the audience 
for this film is likely to be highly specialized.
The script went through a mammoth eighteen re-writes, the first draft (of 
which very little remains) having been penned in 1935 by Endre Bohem, the 
father of Leslie Bohem, who was eventually responsible for the final 
version.  TWENTY BUCKS impressed a lot of people in Hollywood, and that's 
the reason that it has such a high-profile cast despite a budget under $6 
million.  
Of all the actors involved in the project, only Elisabeth Shue isn't 
consistently up to the challenges of her character.  There are a couple 
of scenes where her performance seems forced.  Perhaps the most 
impressive job is turned in by Steve Buscemi as a small-time con artist 
turned convenience store robber.  Some of his dialogue is positively 
Tarantino-like.  Christopher Lloyd, who plays his gentlemanly partner-in-
crime, is given an opportunity to play a role straight, with no hint of 
going over-the-top, or even near it.  Spalding Gray, that pinnacle of 
"secular humanism", is an interesting choice to portray a priest.
TWENTY BUCKS is worth seeing if only for its differences from most 
currently available films.  Those viewers with an eye for such things 
will appreciate its attention to detail.  The film is receiving a 
platform release, starting in New York, Los Angeles, and Seattle, then 
moving on from there.  TWENTY BUCKS is certainly worth the seven you'll 
have to pay to get in.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Tak
Press Release:
--------------
     A favorite at this year's Seattle International Film Festival,
TWENTY BUCKS features an illustrious cast of characters who come into
contact with a particular $20 bill, from its withdrawal at a bank
machine through its inevitable demise.  The journey of the greenback
touches the lives of a struggling young writer (Elizabeth Shue); a
street-person obsessed with winning the lottery (Linda Hunt); a
blue-collar fiance (Brendan Fraser) about to marry the boss' daughter
(Sam Jenkins); a priest who runs a Bingo game (Spalding Gray); a kind,
fortune-telling grandmother (Gladys Knight); her young,
rap-singing-Craig Clairborne-wannabe grandson (Kamau Holloway); and two
ill fated hold-up thieves (Christopher Lloyd and Steve Buscemi).  To
some, the $20 bill brings power, to others a symbol for their dream.
As it weaves a path providing food for the hungry, evidence for murder,
inspiration for the working class, and a tip for a stripper, this
twenty bucks touches the lives of many people, and in some way, changes
the future of them all.
TV-Guide(tm)-Review 
------------------- 
     A twenty-dollar bill serves as a device to examine an unexpectedly
inter-connected group sf people.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     Yet again, a movie exploring an idea that I've wondered about ...
what happens to that $20 I just changed?  I had just assumed I'd never
see or some into contact with a particular $20 again.  Well, you've
heard of the expression ".. keeps showing up like a bad penny?"  Now
we've got a $20 bill instead of a penny.  Inflation I guess.
     Initially when the twenty showed up in the presence of someone I'd
already seen, I thought "Waita minit' here, do you expect me to believe
that?"  I put that aside and just decided to watch the movie.
     After the show, I realized that the implausible re-occurrence of
the $20 is what makes this movie work so well.  It gives you a chance
to identify with the characters.  With so many characters and
relatively short times with each, it is a real testimony to the
screenwriters that they were able to engage my feelings.  In particular
I'm thinking of the article-in-the-wallet scene (no spoiler, so siree)
between Emily and her mother.
     My favorite scenes are with Christopher Lloyd and Steve Buscemi as
thieves, followed closely the entire plot-line with the struggling
writer played by Elisabeth Shue.
     I went into this movie expecting to see a SLACKER-ish film with
lots of characters passing briefly on-screen, never to be seen or
thought of again.  And although SLACKER was an interesting film (taken
in moderation--I'm definitely OD'd at one willing and three captive
viewings) it was boring.  I didn't *care* about the characters.  There
wasn't much situational variety--generally one small group after
another being accosted by a ranting loon.  Instead, TWENTY BUCKS
delivered an interesting and engaging movie with "main characters" that
I cared about, and only the minor players serve to pass the buck. (I
just *HAD* to put that in here somewhere. Sorry. -tak)
     You may be tempted to get up and leave a little early (you can see
the end coming, as two characters almost literally walk off into the
sunset) but there *IS* another minute or so after the old fashioned
"The End" script where the fate of the twenty is revealed.
Technical Notes: 
-----------------
     I don't really like looking for technical stuff, it tends to get
in the way of me watching the film.  The technical stuff should operate
in the background for the most part.  And that's what happened with
TWENTY BUCKS--no obvious "film effects" to interrupt your immersion
in the story line.  Which was just fine by me.
Talk with ScreenWriter Leslie Bohem:
------------------------------------
     After the screening, the local promoter introduced the
screenwriter, Leslie Bohem.  He fielded questions from the more than
half-full theatre that remained to hear him.  His responses were
elaborate, frank and informative.  We stayed for about twenty minutes
before they had to clear the theatre for the regular programming.
     The script was originally written by Leslie's father, Endre Bohem,
in 1935 (possibly the longest film in development).  After it was
accepted it was rewritten ten more times during the two-to-three year
filming process.  Most of the rewrites were not of the main plot, but
better ways the twenty could move around.
     This is his first screenplay that has made it to the SilverScreen,
though he said he's written 35+ screenplays and was paid for 25 of
them.  He has other film credits. After some arm-twisting from the
audience, he said they were mostly stuff in the horror genre--NIGHTMARE
ON ELM STREET V (the one with the baby), and some others.  He joked
about liking to exploring the father-child relationship (which he does
quite a bit in TWENTY BUCKS).  He appeared sort of embarrassed that he
worked in that genre, though not because he regretted the work, it
seemed he didn't want us to hold it against him.
     The movie was produced on a smallish budget (he jokingly said
"... 1/3 the budget of DEMOLITION MAN ...").  He was amazed at the quality
of the actors they were able to attract.  "They all worked cheap."  Many
of the actors were particularly drawn to the roles, especially Linda
Hunt, who relished her role as the street-person.
     He had not seen RESERVOIR DOGS, nor did he have any real say in
the casting.  So the irony in Steve Buscemi's (Mr Pink, the
"professional") role is particularly good.
     Christopher Lloyd's thief character was written as being extremely
pragmatic, but Bohem was pleased that the character turned sinister as
well.
     The only scene that remained constant through the two-to-three
years of intensive rewrites was the thieving scene.  This scene is
Leslie's favorite and was written by Leslie over a twelve-hour period
and is essentially unchanged.
     Much of the film has real life incidents from the life of Leslie's
father and co-writer, Endre Bohem.  These include the immigration
story, the bubble-gum thing, and the story-in-the-wallet.
     In response to a question about gratuitous nudity in the bachelor
party scene, he said that he didn't remember if he'd written it in to
be gratuitous or not (but he has no qualms about telling us if he
did).  The scene was written primarily to show the embarrassment and
awkwardness of such activities.  He remembers writing mainly to show
one character's (Buddha) bluster turn to embarrassment when dealing
with the stripper alone.
     This movie only opens in selected areas (San Francisco, Seattle
and New York) so if you're lucky enough to live in these areas go see
this movie.  The local promoter and Leslie Bohem both indicated that
its wider distribution depends on good box office performance and
reviews.  It certainly has my blessing.

Author
Mike Church
     TWENTY BUCKS follows a twenty-dollar bill in its passage from a
cash machine, through the hands of a startlingly variety of people, to
its penultimate fate of being torn into tiny pieces.  Along the way it
gets stolen about four times, lost a couple, pushed into a stripper's G
string, inherited, swallowed by a fish, mailed, driven over, and so
on.
     There's lots of good acting, notably by Linda Hunt who plays a bag
lady.  Like many of the characters, she keeps popping up in one
scene after another.  The result is a series of sub-plots that are
woven together by their shared characters and by the double sawbuck.
     An interesting side note: the script was written decades ago, and
has been rejected by various studios many times over the years.  As it
appears here, the script has been re-written by the original author's
daughter -- there's a scene in the movie which will probably remind you
of this fact.
     The acting, directing and so on all seemed great to my novice
eye.  It has a great sense of humour, and of the cruelty of fate.  I'd
recommend this movie to any of you who find yourself in a video store
with intent to kill an evening.
