Title
Review for Slam Dunk Ernest (1995) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I used to love Ernest movies. When the vest-clad redneck 
got torn apart by an unseen badger in ERNEST GOES TO CAMP, I 
laughed my elementary school head off. When he got into the fight 
with the electric floor buffer in ERNEST GOES TO JAIL, I chuckled 
my junior high head off. When he triumphed against the troll in 
ERNEST SCARED STUPID, I at least smiled my high school head 
off. But my college head mostly shook back and forth in disgust 
during SLAM DUNK ERNEST, the direct-to-video feature in 
which Ernest becomes the token whitey on a city-league 
basketball team.
        Not that I expected SLAM DUNK ERNEST to be any good. 
My friends and I rented the video because we love to watch really 
bad movies and crack jokes during them, and as far as that goes, it 
more than served its purpose. That's why I have to stress that this 
isn't a bad review -- a movie like this can only provide a very mild 
and cheap form of entertainment, which SLAM DUNK ERNEST 
does. For you parents of small children out there, this will most 
likely entertain anyone who hasn't reached puberty. But if you 
don't fall into either of those two groups, I don't have to warn you 
to stay off the SLAM DUNK ERNEST court.
        Ernest P. Worrell (alter-ego of Jim "Jed" Varney) this time 
plays a janitor who works with a group of stereotypical jive-talking, 
basketball-playing black men. All his life he's wanted to gain 
acceptance in macho circles by playing basketball with the guys, 
and he finally talks his way into their locker room, which he refers 
to in awe as the "temple of testosterone." They don't let him play, 
but Ernest -- in all his incompetence -- manages to lose the game 
for them from the bench. So needless to say, the jive talkers are 
mad, and they hit him where it hurts. "You're not just white, you're 
a redneck!" one of them yells.
        But the redneck soon has the upper hand when his Angel 
of Basketball, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, shows up in the temple of 
testosterone and gives him a pair of magic basketball shoes. "Don't 
misuse the shoes," he warns before heading off to cash his check 
and try to forget he ever signed up to appear in this movie. So Ernest 
is left alone with the shoes, which attach themselves to his feet and 
squeak-talk to him like the cockroaches in JOE'S APARTMENT, an 
even-worse movie than this.
        You can guess what happens after that. One of the jive 
talkers gets sick and Ernest gets put in the game, flying all over the 
court like his feet are made of flubber. He becomes the star of the 
game and gets an ego, actually trading in his vest and hat for a 
tuxedo. Egging him on the entire time are an evil NBA scout and 
the mousy lotto employee he's always had a crush on. Predictably, 
there's a scene in which she takes off her glasses, lets down her hair 
and suddenly becomes gorgeous.
        Meanwhile, the son of one of the jive talkers begins 
emulating Ernest (in a tragic case of race defection), going so far 
as to steal a pair of the same $250 shoes (ironically, the price of the 
shoes exceeds the entire budget of SLAM DUNK ERNEST). Luckily, 
Jabbar shows up in an ice cream truck -- the Ice Kareem Man -- to 
help talk him out of it. The movie is stupid, shallow and predictable, 
just how an Ernest movie should be. And if you can watch it with 
a group of joke-cracking teenage boys, I strongly recommend it.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
