Title
Review for Forever Fever (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael Dequina
_That's_the_Way_I_Like_It_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
This '70s-set import from Singapore may be named after the song by K.C.
and the Sunshine Band, but that dominates the film is that of the Bee
Gees--namely, their contributions to the _Saturday_Night_Fever_
soundtrack.  In fact, that emblematic film of the disco era dominates
this film about Hock (Adrian Pang), a young man who ends up stumbling
into a theatre playing _Forever_Fever_ (the film's thinly veiled stand-in
for the real thing) and redirects his adoration for Bruce Lee toward John
Travolta and the disco scene.  As Hock enters a dance contest with his
longtime friend Mei (Pam Oei), every plot development can be seen a mile
away; the contest's outcome is never in doubt.  
But when the execution is as spirited as it is here, it doesn't matter. 
What is especially delightful is how writer-director Glen Goei in paying
tribute to the culture of the glitter ball era, he doesn't downplay the
kitschiness of it all; in fact, Goei embraces it.  The Tony Manero
stand-in (Dominic Pace) that comes off the screen to give Hock advice
neither looks nor sounds anything like Travolta, and a climactic Bruce
Lee-style martial arts sequence is over-the-top ridiculous, but it it all
feels pitch-perfect in this funny and immensely charming trifle.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Pedro Sena
(Seen at the 22nd Portland International Film Festival, in Portland, Oregon)
 The opening of this film states what it is really about. Singapore's
official language is English, official utensil is the chopstick, and the
official dance is the disco?
 It's the mid seventies in Singapore, and the youngsters are trying to find
their way in this culture on their own. The one thing that is vastly clear
is that western culture has had a serious effect on it, and that Saturday
Night Fever did not escape. The only unfortunate thing about this film is
that the same critics that panned the original will also pan this film as
boring and full of it. These same critics probably have no clue as to how
much influence American films have the world over, and how so many people
take on those ideas and personalities as a way to grow into their own,
probably as a sign of revolt against the past and its old ways that still
has a hold on things.
 Ah Hock's hero is Bruce Lee and he has all the moves down pat and spares no
moment to practice them, even at work. His group of friends has other ideas
and takes to the dancing clubs for fun, and eventually Hock joins them, only
to find a brand new obsession. The disco rage is on, and it catches him. And
here he finds a chance to gain something so that he can acquire the money he
would like to have to be able to come up with his dream, a motorcycle that
is way beyond his means and wages. with his childhood sweetheart he starts
dancing and appears to be learning very well, clumsily at first, but then
full blast. Eventually it leads him into the competition that will be
providing a nice prize which would allow him to acquire the motorcycle he
wants. But competition is fierce and there is one person that is in the way
and is making things difficult for him. He has befriended another girl who
just happens to be the girl friend of the hood that drives the MG and makes
life difficult for anyone in his way. Hock loses his job on account of this
guy.
 But all is not lost. While practicing the dance, he spends the rest of his
time seeing the movie so he can study the moves, and comes to meet the Tony
in it, that comes out of the screen to give him advise on life, love and of
course dance.
 With the new girl, he gets to the dance competition, but not before he has
to suffer one indignity. He is beat up by the hoods, friends of the bad guy.
He manages to win the dance with the girl, and on the way out he is again
encountered by the same hoods, and this time Hock takes on the Bruce Lee
character and teaches them a lesson. He leaves and finally gets to talk to
his sweetheart and make things get back on track. In the end caption, the
film says that they went to Norway, danced in another competition and then
won the prize that allowed him to buy the motorbike of his dreams and take
his sweetheart on the trip that he had promised.
 This is not a great film, but it is a lot of fun to sit through. The
dancing is very good, and the fun added to the routines are very enjoyable
and make for a film that is a lot of fun to sit through, even if nowadays we
think that disco stunk and is dead. In other places it was not dead, and was
a very important scene, one that had much more meaning than anyone in
America could ever conceive. Here, these things are just another trend. When
it dies it is over. In other places, it is the justification and the impetus
for social change, and this film does not spare us this point. Hock's
brother, is having a personality crisis, and he finally admits to the whole
family what he wants. None of this could have happened in a society that had
no western inspirations or had no idea that the world out there is very
different from the old line that still lives. Their parents are shocked and
the situation is dangerous. And the brother eventually pays the price. Hock,
escapes these things, probably because his dream is not so drastic, or much
more difficult to achieve. Leslie's dream is dangerous in any way that he
can look at.
 A fun film to sit through, that has plenty of laughs all the way through.
The stuff with Tony coming alive to talk to him is the same stuff that we
love to see in movies, and this time it is important, and meaningful to the
society that this is, an dis becoming since the English have left.
 With some very enjoyable acting, and well defined characters, the film is
in English, and is very difficult to follow sometimes because they all speak
so fast, but one rarely needs to worry about it, since one knows what is
going on. Few films can do that well. This one makes the grade, even if it
is a bit of a fantasy. But rest assured, from a foreigner, that much of this
is not a fantasy. America just rarely looks at any other culture for
inspiration or learning. If they only knew how others look at it, if they
only knew ....
Fun film about what may have been to grow up in Singapore in the 70's after
the English left.
4 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1999. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Ross Anthony
Shot in Singapore, "That's the way I like it" is in English (or as they say
.. "Singlish") with no subtitles. We follow Ah Hock as he matures from a
rather selfish young adult into a caring individual with a wider view of the
world.
Still a kid at heart, Ah Hock is in love with Bruce Lee and a Triumph
motorcycle his job at the grocery store could never support. But it's 1977
and "Saturday Night Fever" finally dances into Singapore. Hock grabs
gal-buddy Mai and the two take lessons in hopes of winning a dance contest
so Hock can buy the bike of his dreams.
The movie follows the classic plot line of US golden oldie films: underdog
goes for a dream, gets advice from imaginary friend, is forced to take on
the advisory and ultimately learns a greater lesson for the effort.
Starting out kind of sticky (like a student piece), the film slowly matures
(much like it's primary character). Ultimately schmaltzy, you'll leave the
theater and feel good all night.
That's the Way I Like It. Copyright Š 1999.
Starring Adrian Pang, Madeline Tan and Pierre Png.
Written and Directed by Glen Goei.
Produced by Glen Goei, Jeffrey Chiang and Tan Chih Cong at Tiger Tiger.
Distributed by Miramax.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The ayatollahs, the Saddamites, and the French
nationalists can holler from the rooftops all they want about
the influence of American culture on their traditional values. 
Ultimately these spokesmen will not prevail.  From at least
1945, when the Yanks captured the hearts and minds of
Europeans with their generous offerings of chewing gum to
war-torn youngsters, American culture has triumphed big
time.  In the Far East, for example, tensions between the
majority ethnic Chinese and Malaysians in the Malaysian city
of Singapore led to a pact granting Singapore the full status
of an independent country in 1965.  But the nationalism of
Singapore's largely Chinese population did not stop that small
nation from copying and maintaining Western culture from
Burger King to the English language itself.  In fact in director
Glen Goei's semi-autobiographical movie "That's the Way I
Like It"--which gets the title from one of the songs on the
soundtrack--the characters speak English 95% of the time
using the local Malay and Chinese dialects only occasionally
with no rhyme or reason.  In the director's words, the story
"captures my own journey from an Asian culture to a Western
one," the action taking place in the year 1977.
   During the year that the Son of Sam was creating mayhem
in New York City, forcing people in some neighborhoods to
lock their doors and avoid city streets at night, the folks in
Singapore had other ideas.  While New York was suffering
from feverish heat during that summer, a large percentage of
young Singaporean people were suffering from a fever of
their own--their passion for disco music and dance and their
appetite for the style of John Travolta as shown in his
groundbreaking "Saturday Night Fever."  Though the
government of Singapore--like many ruling forces throughout
the world today--may have made every effort to hold on to
traditional values, the death of Bruce Lee led the young to
search for a new hero.  Travolta was their man and at least
one film featuring a Western dancer with an all-purpose
southern accent captured the notice of sizable audiences of
young people.  The lead character (Dominic Pace) steps out
of his movie in a touch of magic realism to become a
guardian angel to one Ah Hock.
   Ah Hock (Adrian Pang) is a young man who would not
have dreamed of being taken in by the dance.  A 20-
something guy with a dead-end supermarket job, a provincial
family, and a vivid imagination, hangs out at night with a
typical bunch, including Hock's childhood friend Ah Mei
(Madeline Tan).  They bowl, they brag, they act in much the
way young adults behave almost everywhere.  Hock's life
turns around when, inspired by the Travolta-like hero of the
movie, he and Mei take dance lessons, later to enter a
competition whose prize money could allow him to buy the
motorcycle of his dreams.  When the beautiful Julie (Anna
Belle Francis) becomes attracted to Hock, Julie's rich and
abusive boy friend Richard (Pierre Png) becomes enraged
and takes steps to break up the budding romance.
   In a subplot that further shows the freedoms that these
Singaporeans are reaching for, Hock's 21-year-old brother,
Leslie (Caleb Goh) shocks his family by expressing his desire
for a sex change operation, which wholly alienates the lad's
father while delighting his pulp fiction-addicted kid sister.
   In writing and directing the film, Goei was obviously
inspired in part by "Saturday Night Fever," but a good deal of
his stimulus comes from the Australian cinema, particularly
from the movie "Strictly Ballroom."  In Baz Luhrmann's 1992
entry, a young ballroom dancer outrages his mother and the
establishment by insisting on dancing his own provocative
steps.  He takes on a homely partner who blossoms under
his guidance.  By contrast, Hock appears to break his
partner's heart by ditching her for a more sophisticated and
accomplished dancer, thereby inciting violence against
himself.  
   By the conclusion of "That's the Way I Like It," young Hock
comes to regret his lack of ethics and good common sense,
demonstrating his born-again ways in a remarkable show of
altruism.  The film challenges credibility by its view that a
fellow with no interest in anything besides bowling, stacking
cans in a supermarket, and dreaming of taking the place of
Bruce Lee, could even think of entering a major nationwide
competition with only a few weeks of lessons.  Yet Adrian
Pang convinces us that the experience of entering the contest
has transfigured him from an unambitious wastrel frequently
late to his dead-end job to a celebrity who learns the meaning
of love and commitment.  
  Since Pang is not a professional dancer, the movie features
abrupt editing (also an attribute of "Saturday Night Fever")
and the scenes of violence are particularly unconvincing--as
though the performers had to pull their punches at a
performance on a live stage.  A slight film throughout, "That's
the Way I Like It" may lack the charm of Masayuki Suo's
"Shall We Dance?"  but profiles a dynamic, if familiar,
soundtrack, with the repeated, obligatory rendering of the
Gibbs' "Staying Alive."  Brian Breheny's photography barely
exploits the city-state's topography, his camera concentrating
on indoor locations like Hock's household, a bowling alley,
and a disco.  Should any viewer be tempted to travel to
Singapore, the film may dissuade him: what we see of that
major port is little more than a modern metropolis devoid of
Far Eastern exoticism.

Author
Steve Rhodes
After a single night at the movies, Hock's life is forever changed.
Dragged by his buddies to see what he thinks will be just a silly disco
movie, he is mesmerized by the lead character, a John Travolta clone.
The film called FOREVER FEVER (think SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER) pulsates
through every bone in his body.  He's ready to put aside his Bruce
Lee/Kung Fu passion and take up a life of disco dancing.  When he comes
back alone the next night to see the film again, the guy playing the
Travolta character comes out of the screen to offer him advice in proper
Brooklynese.
Writer/director Glen Goei's THAT'S THE WAY I LIKE IT (called FOREVER
FEVER in some countries and DON'T CALL ME JOHN TRAVOLTA in others) is
set in Singapore in the 1970s, when disco fever there was red hot.  The
film's wonderful sound track is full of good 70s tunes.  (Singapore
speaks a version of English that they call Singlish, according to the
press notes.  The Brooklyn accent proves the harder of the two accents
in the movie to understand.)
Since there is a dance contest coming up with a $5,000 top prize, Hock
(Adrian Pang), who takes the stage name of Tony after his hero, figures
he can use the proceeds to buy the motorbike he has always wanted.  In
daydream sequences, he envisions himself barreling down the highway with
a good-looking woman riding with him.  As she runs her fingers through
his hair, the song "Everybody's Talkin' to Me" blasts away.
Of course, he has to learn dancing first and hook up with a talented
partner before he has any hope of winning.  The story, which works best
when it's on the dance floor, has Hock going too fast from clumsy to
accomplished, missing many humorous opportunities to show him learning
his new skill.  Anna Belle Francis plays Julie, the seasoned partner
that he needs.
Instead of more dance numbers we get some subplots out of left field.
A major one is about Hock's brother, who needs money for a sex-change
operation.  A minor one concerns his sister's obsession with
bodice-ripper romance novels, which she likes to read out loud as Hock
trains.
One of the funniest scenes has Hock trying on various outlandish disco
wardrobes.  Finally getting the right polyester shirt and tight pants,
he's ready to strut his stuff with Travolta's classic swagger from
SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER.  Like the much better SHALL WE DANCE, the film has
us rooting for him, even if the outcome of the big competition is never
really in any doubt.
"Remember the more you dance, the more you romance," the dance
instructor lectures Hock and the rest of his pupils.  The movie should
have taken his advice.  Way too much time is spent in lame comedy off
the dance floor.  Turn on the disco ball and crank up the music, and the
film sizzles.  Otherwise, it drags like an old Lawrence Welk 78 record
played on 33 1/3.
THAT'S THE WAY I LIKE IT runs 1:32.  It is rated PG-13 for momentary
language and some violence and would be fine for kids 10 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ Movie Reviews: That's The Way I Like It
Rated [PG-13] , 95 minutes
Starring Adrian Pang, Madeline Tan, Pierre Png and Anna Belle Francis
Written and Directed by Glen Goie
website: www.miramax.com
Try to imagine this: Bruce Lee as John Travolta in Saturday Night Fever.
While you furrow your brow in consternation and confusion, Cranky'll
describe That's The Way I Like It, which he adds to his list of required
viewing for filmmaker wannabees. It's not that That's The Way I Like It
is a drop everything must see flick. It's a perfectly average popcorn
flick, set in Singapore during the rage of disco, back in 1977. Watching
Caucasian culture/movie iconography dropped into a Chinese/Western mix
yields a couple of belly laughs of recognition, one big surprise, and an
attempt to toss the light comedy, "what is my place in all this?" kind
of story with some fierce mob-style brutality. Luckily, the budget is so
low, there are no big blood effects or shootings, just a beating or two.
But I'm getting ahead of myself.
Ah Hock (Adrian Pang) is just an average guy in a low paying dead end
job, stocking shelves in the local grocery store. He still lives with
his parents, and they lavish praise on his med student younger brother
Ah Beng, who has taken the "Western" name Leslie (Caleb Goh). For the
twenty-something Hock, there isn't much to do in Singapore, other than
hang out with his friends at the local bowling alley or movie house,
where Bruce Lee flicks run almost continually. Hock is such a Lee
devotee, that he can lip-synch and hip-synch (i.e. do the moves) of
every movie.
One day though, Fists of Fury is no more at the local cinema, having
been replaced by some disco monstrosity called Forever Fever, an obvious
knock off of Saturday Night Fever, right down to the white suit, music
and camera shots. As Fever's song hits "Staying Alive," "Jive Talking,"
"You Should Be Dancing" and "How Deep Is Your Love" pour off the screen,
something in Hock is stirred. He wants to be the disco king. He wants
the hair. He wants the clothes. He wants the moves. But, most important,
he wants the $5000 cash prize being given away by the local discotheque
to the best dance team in the land. The cash will more than pay for the
brand spanking new Triumph motorcycle sitting in the dealer's window
that he passes every day on his way to work.
And I betcha thought you had seen this before; that these internal
revelations would turn Hock "gay". Nope. Sorry.
Guided by his Guardian Angel (Dominic Pace as the John Travolta clone
who steps out of the screen to advise Hock) he enlists gal pal Mei
(Madeline Tan) to secretly take lessons with him. Mei is greatly
attracted to Hock, though he's ignorant of it and has his eye on fellow
student Julie (Anna Belle Francis). Julie's partner, Richard (Pierre
Png) is ego-personified, totally jealous and not above having his rival
beaten to a bloody pulp. There you have it, folks, enough story to fill
any movie. Friendships are strained. Rivalries explode, both on the
dance floor and in violence, and local family values are severely tested
(which is the surprise in the film that I wrote about above, but will
not spill).
Last year, Cranky blasted the disco flicks 54 and Last Days of Disco for
not spending the bucks on rights to the songs that best exemplified the
era. So, how does That's The Way I Like It manage all them Bee Gees
tunes, plus the title, and other disco staples such as "Instant Replay,"
"Rock The Boat" and non-disco smash "Kung-Fu Fighting"? They bought the
rights and produced imitations of the original hits. Just like K-Tel did
with their record collections back in the 70s, or teevee producers like
Glen Larson did on their shows in the 80s. It's just another lesson on
how low budget productions can get by. For those of you who aren't
filmmaker wannabees, the copies aren't so close to the bone that you
can't tell the difference, but the songs are strong enough that you
won't care.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to That's The Way I Like It, he would
have paid...
In one word, it's "cute". A perfectly adequate rental. Had we seen
anything like this before now, the rating would've been much lower. Than
again, watching Bruce Lee moves in a Travolta white suit is worth the
price of the rental.
