Title
Review for Firelight (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Susan Granger
         Oscar-nominated screenwriter William Nicholson ("Nell,"
"Shadowlands") makes his directorial debut with this historical
romance, starring beautiful Sophie Marceau ("Braveheart," "Anna
Karenina") as a Swiss governess who, in 1838, agrees to a secret pact
with the only son (Stephen Dillane) of a British aristocrat. He is
married to an invalid who cannot conceive and he desperately wants to
sire an heir, while she needs to pay of her father's financial
debts. They meet at a picturesque yet remote hotel in France, sharing
three days and nights of passion. Nine months pass and she gives birth
to a daughter who is immediately taken away from her. Seven years
later, she is unwittingly hired as a governess to a snobbish spoiled,
stubborn young girl (Dominique Belcourt) on a remote Sussex estate. Of
course, the hateful child is her own and the stunned aristocrat swears
her to secrecy - as their clandestine affair begins once again. With
the help of cinematographer Nic Morris, most of the pivotal scenes
take place in that haunting time when the sun has gone down and the
candles have been extinguished, creating a lush, intimate atmosphere
as flames flicker in the fireplace. This is one of those
old-fashioned, slow-moving, over-wrought bodice-rippers that once were
the staple of Gainsborough Studios in England. It's like a screen
version of a paperback Harlequin romance. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Firelight" is a melodramatic 4, a soap opera targeted
specifically at women.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director: William Nicholson
 Writer: William Nicholson
 Cast:Sophie Marceau, Stephen Dillane, Dominique Belcourt,
Kevin Anderson, Lia Williams, Joss Ackland
   One of the reasons that critics and general audiences do
not often agree is that professional reviewers do not generally
like highly sentimental movies.  Stories that might give a
susceptible person a diabetic attack are too often the stuff of
daytime TV soaps, sketchy dramas designed purely to evoke
tears of pathos and cries of joy from their viewers.  The
problems of mushy productions are customarily unoriginal, the
conclusions predictable.
   Though "Firelight" may be guilty of swirling with Victorian
suds, its story is a far cry from General Hospital. "Firelight"
features exceptionally fine acting from Stephen Dillane and
Sophie Marceau as the story's lovers, two people whose
chemistry is so robust that you can feel them bursting within
as they struggle to maintain a properly British restraint.  As
Elisabeth (Sophie Marceau), a Swiss woman who eventually
becomes a governess to the prosperous English landowner
Charles (Stephen Dillane), she must at first appear to be
immune to his charm just as Charles must seem wholly
businesslike in her magnetic presence. As their outer shell
gradually cracks, their passions burst forth.  We breathe a
sigh of relief when their mutual affinity is fulfilled.  Despite a
predictable ending that leaves all loose ends happily secured,
the picture casts a spell over its audience with director William
Nicholson's gauzy lensing and his repeated, opportune use of
the titled firelight.  As Nicholson writes in his screenplay for
the film, "In the firelight you do what you want, say what you
want, be what you want. When the lamps are lit again, time
starts again, and everything you said or did is forgotten.  More
than forgotten, it never happened."
   This quote sums up the central theme of the narrative.  The
action is motivated by a strictly business arrangement made
between Charles and Elisabeth, one with contemporary
resonance, as Charles needs a woman to bear an heir to his
estate.  The surrogate mother must not know his name or
habitation in this anonymous transaction.  Whatever goes
down, so to speak, must be absolutely forgotten.  For the sum
of 500 pounds--a princely amount in the England of the
1830's--Elisabeth is to submit to Charles's sexual advances
for just three nights.  She is to present him with her child nine
months later and for that she will receive money she needs to
pay her father's debts in Switzerland.  Held apart by the
conventions of the time (Charles may not marry her since his
own wife is in a coma but yet alive), they are freed "in the
magic of the firelight."
   William Nicholson, who both scripted and helms the lush
bodice-ripper, is known for his creation of "Shadowlands" and
has a background with BBC for restrained dramas.  We thus
expect a picture much like the elegant and witty "Mrs. Brown,"
a movie with romantic overtones to match its intelligence. 
That is what we get.  The initial scene is the most effective
one.  Charles and Elisabeth meet for the first time to work out
the details of the contract and act thoroughly businesslike
during their initial coupling.  The very next evening, Elisabeth
has shed the last article of protective clothing and has begun
to enjoy her new, albeit temporary, job.  By the third night the
sparks are flying.  Yet throughout, Charles and Elisabeth
seem in denial, refusing to admit their mutual infatuation.
   The supporting roles are splendid, particularly those of Joss
Ackland as Charles's father, Lord Clare, whose profligate
spending throws the estate into a Chekhovian bankruptcy;
and little Dominique Belcourt as Louisa, the hell-raising heir to
the estate who does not suspect that the woman who is
serving as her governess and teacher is her own dear
mother.  Kevin Anderson is on screen for a disappointingly
shor time in a role too small fo his talents--as the American
sheep farmer who is negotiating a business deal with Charles
and who, after his proposal of marriage to Elisabeth is turned
down, replies with the most un-1830's comment, "It doesn't
hurt to ask."  
   The lovely and ultra-refined Sophie Marceau is a true find
in her first English role, one which could be a major
breakthrough for her career.  Christopher Gunning's score
may be saccharine but is absolutely effective in pumping up
the electric atmosphere of this carefully-paced tale, which
involves such contemporary concerns as class
consciousness, euthanasia, surrogate motherhood, and even
the proper upbringing of children.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The impoverished Elisabeth has been paid 500 pounds, which in the 
early 1800s when the story FIRELIGHT is set would have been a 
considerable fortune.  All she has to do is travel from her native 
Switzerland across the sea to England and spend three nights with a 
stranger in order to conceive his child.  (Apparently getting pregnant 
was easier and more certain in days gone by.) They are never to be seen 
together then or after.  And she has to give up the child immediately 
after its birth.
     All goes according to plan until Elisabeth, played with fetching 
beauty and intense conviction by Sophie Marceau from ANNA KARENINA and 
BRAVEHEART, decides to find her long lost daughter.  After composing 
numerous unsent letters to her "English daughter," she arranges to 
become her governess.
     The seven-year-old child, Louisa (Dominique Belcourt), has become a 
hellion who goes through several governesses a year.  Her overindulgent 
father, Charles Godwin, is played with tenderness by Stephen Dillane 
from DEJA VU and WELCOME TO SARAJEVO.  Charles doesn't seem to mind that 
his child throws one temper tantrum after another.  He just wants her to 
be happy, and disciplining her seems cruel to him.  John lives with his 
comatose wife, his spoiled daughter, and an understanding sister-in-law, 
who runs the house for him with the expectation that he will want to 
marry her when her sister finally dies completely.
     When John realizes whom he has accidentally hired as Louisa's new 
governess, he orders Elisabeth to leave immediately, but he finds out 
that governesses need a month to find a new situation.  During that 
month, Elisabeth is determined to make Louisa want to learn how to read.  
She uses a tough love approach, locking them in the room together.  She 
promises John that anything she does to Louisa, she will do to herself 
as well.  When she throws paint at Louisa to punish her, she does the 
same to herself.
     Kevin Anderson has a minor part as the sincere sheepherder from 
Ohio, John Taylor, who is visiting his friend Charles.  With his 
wide-brimmed felt hat, John is dashingly handsome and would like nothing 
better than to take Elisabeth home to America as his bride.
     The best and most touching scene comes when Louisa realizes that 
her teacher is her mother.  Handled delicately but movingly, it is 
likely to reduce many to tears.
     The writer of NELL and SHADOWLANDS, William Nicholson writes and 
for the first time directs in FIRELIGHT.  Although the film is pure 
formula, it is so well executed that the audience soon forgets that 
they've seen all of this before.  The actors make the characters so 
genuine and touching that one doesn't mind the film's being so 
predictable.
     Nicholson devotes careful attention to the smallest details.  "All 
these huge rooms, and we live less than three feet from the fire," John 
reflects, reminding us how cold those large estate homes must have been.
     The movie focuses on three questions.  Will John throw the new 
governess out after a month as he promised?  Will his old passion for 
her be rekindled?  And will Louisa break out of her shell and end her 
defiance?  Yes, these are all easily guessed, but the beauty of 
FIRELIGHT is that it still radiates a special magic in its presentation.
     FIRELIGHT runs 1:43.  It is rated R for sex, nudity and brief 
profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
