Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Michael Millhollin
It was a hot day here in Las Vegas (100 degrees) so I decided to see a
matinee.  The movie Breakdown, starring Kurt Russell and Kathleen Quinlan,
was my choice and a choice I'm glad I made for the cheaper matinee ticket
prices.  Yes, I thought it was a movie made only for the matinee crowd as I
didn't find it worth a $6.50 ticket.  Kathleen Quinlan is beautiful and
probably a fine actress (why do actresses wear thin tops with no bras
underneath?) but this role didn't give her much of a chance to prove that. 
Kurt Russell has had better acting parts, but this one fell short of
expectations.  I found his acting, well, somewhat over acting!!  There is a
lot of action packed scenes, but in my opinion, far too many for the story
line.  I just could not imagine half the stuff that was going on from scene
to scene, especially the one where he catches up with a rolling 18 wheeler
on foot and finds the means to crawl from the spare tire rack to the front
of the trailer, all without being seen by the driver, or falling off.  I
found myself shaking my head from disbelief through most of the last half
of the movie.

Author
Vallejo
  Imagine this  scenario: you and any of your family members are scudding
through one of those long, excruciating cross-country car trips, far from the
city and into the deserted rural routes. So far, the trip is idyllic when,
abruptly, your car malfunctions and you are stranded in the middle of nowhere.
It is not an easy situation, but a perfectly plausible one, the panorama in
which BREAKDOWN musters it's throbbing suspense and skillfully executed
tautness. It is not easy to cobble a distinct and gripping thriller nowadays,
but  BREAKDOWN doesn't bungle into rudimentary plot holes or cliches and it
derives a masterful, titillating climax that by it's finale, engrosses a
viewer with total absorption. 
   The plot is somewhat reminiscent of 1988's THE VANISHING. Kurt Russell and
Kathleen Quinlan respectively play Jeff and Amy Taylor, a Massachusetts couple
en route to California for a brand new job. When they stop for gas somewhere
in the arid Southwest, Jeff is confronted by a pugnacious driver, who later,
will be an important player in the plot department. Minutes later after that,
their brand new, strikingly red, Jeep Grand Cherokee unexpectedly stops. Jeff
cannot detect the car's problem, so he allows Amy to take a ride with Red (J.
T Walsh), a heedful truck driver who will convey her to the nearest town,
where Jeff will meet her at a local diner. It is facile for the film to turn
into a pseudo-suspenser , but instead it opts for maximum fervor.
   Jeff manages to re-start the car himself, but when he arrives at the diner,
she is nowhere in sight. Disconcerted, the coffee shop's bartender informs
Jeff where to search for his wife, a town about twenty miles from here. There,
trouble arises. And I shall not reveal anything else, since that would be
spoiling the fun of what's head.
   There are many involving, tight scenes in BREAKDOWN but the final climactic
period which includes a magnificent chase with three cars and a huge truck,
will have you feeling as if your legs are made out of pure foam. It is a
pleasure to be part of a classic confrontation of good Vs evil, and rooting
for the good guys, in this case Jeff. 
 Kurt Russell is one of the few top-notch Hollywood actors which doesn't
overblow his acting, and gradually gains reliance on his role as it
progresses. So you can assume his alteration in BREAKDOWN is letter-perfect.
Suffice it is to say he undergoes a transformation, from a jolly man, to a guy
frantically pursuing a loved one. Not many well-paid actors can deliver these
type of performances, but Russell is one of them. As an everyday man , he
pulls it off extremely convincingly, what also surprised me more was his
rigorous physicality, which he effectively practices almost all throughout the
films 93 minutes. 
  Although the film is blotted with a couple of portentous action sequences
(very well done) yet the tightness is generated by the subtle circumstances
this man is presented with. Faced with an enigma about his wife's whereabouts,
the movie succeeds by conveying us in realistic territory with veritable
characters, including the cryptic villains, who in essence, make the movie
what it is.
  What's most  impressive however, is the feature debut by writer/director
Jonathan Mostow. Mostow, hitherto directed the Showtime thriller FLIGHT OF A
BLACK ANGLE, alleviates the contrivances and generics of the script by
gingerly pursuing the trajectory of the plot, efficiently letting the tone and
the mood of the story generate that nail-biting suspense sought for in a well-
made affair. Contrary to most American thrillers, he doesn't rely on visual
flair, but on aesthetics and substance. After BREAKDOWN,  he should gain vast
notoriety. 
   The villains in the movie aren't your routine out-of-this-world
idiosyncratic psychos that are harming for no particular objective. The
baddies in BREAKDOWN, all well acted,  are normal, seemingly inoffensive
townspeople who beneath their trustworthy layer, conduct an amoral business of
corruption and murder. The movie smartly portrays these men as loathsome
rednecks, and, of all things in the world, it is becoming rather easy to root
for villains (Jon Voight in ANACONDA) in today's movies. Worth a special
mentioning is J.T Walsh (who previously worked with Kurt Russell in EXECUTIVE
DECISION ) as the leader of the gang, he renders a deliciously wicked
performance, temporarily stepping out of the minor roles he is known for. 
   Alfred Hitchcock used suspense--and action-- not only to stimulate, but as
a way of aiding his audience's fascination in his stories, which were slowly
realizing man's biggest fears. BREAKDOWN yields exactly that. It magnificently
taps into the psyche of an ordinary man,acting like an ordinary man, looking
like an ordinary and some sort of superhero. Despite one or two iffy moments
even Hitchcock, I think, would approve of  BREAKDOWN. (1:33)

Author
Michael Redman
My favorite scene in this film comes near the end. A huge vehicle
crashes through a bridge, falling to the rocks below. And it doesn't
explode into a fireball! That episode is so satisfying that it more than
makes up for an earlier conflagration.
Bostonian Yups Jeff (Kurt Russell) and Amy Taylor (Kathleen Quinlan) are
heading to new jobs in San Diego. Driving across America in their new
Jeep Grand Cherokee loaded down with all their worldly possessions, they
stand out like the city dwellers that they are in the Arizona
wastelands. The contrast between the clean cuts with their cell phone
(which doesn't work in the isolated wilderness) and the rugged rednecks
in their dirty beat-up pick-ups is one of the less than subtle aspects
of the movie.
When their car breaks down on a deserted highway under the blazing sun,
the Taylors are overjoyed to see good Samaritan trucker Red Barr (the
ominous J.T. Walsh) who offers Amy a ride to the nearest diner. Soon
after she leaves, Jeff reconnects two loose wires and solves the
problem. Everything seems to be working out well until he walks into the
cowboy bar where his wife supposedly awaits him only to discover that
she's not there and probably never has been.
Panicking, he roars down the road and conveniently for the film, finds
Red. Mysteriously the trucker claims not to have ever seen the couple.
Later, back at the bar, everyone seems to be a part of the conspiracy:
the cops, the uncaring cafe country boys, the surly owner and even the
simple-minded kid washing a car in the parking lot.
About half way through, the movie changes it's approach and moves from
mystery to action as Jeff takes on the bad guys. Both portions of the
story work well and fit together fairly seemlessly. The first pulls you
in and the second gives you a chance to cheer for the hero.
Russell has played two very different roles in recent years. Sometimes
he's Snake Plissken ("Escape From This City Or That One"), but here, as
in "Executive Decision", he's Everyman. Jeff becomes something other
than who he has been as he  bulls and blunders his way into becoming a
warrior. There are a few unbelievable bits, but even they are relatively
acceptable. After all, we bought Harrison Ford's stunts in the Indiana
Jones movies. 
Ordinary people forced into heroics by extraordinary situations is a
tried but true theme. It's much easier for the audience to relate to
their next door neighbor than to Rambo. That it could happen to you
makes the film even more suspenseful.
The film "borrows" from a number of others. The story comes from "The
Vanishing", the class conflict from "Deliverance", the mood from
Hitchcock and the truck menace in the beautiful but bleak southwest from
the very early Spielberg "Duel". But, as has been noted often before,
there's not much new under the sun and "Breakdown" does well with the
recycled ideas.
More disturbing is the apparent underlying theme of "us versus them"
where us are the wealthy well educated and them are the blue collar
ne'er do wells. Nearly everyone except our friends from Massachusetts is
evil, scowling, suspicious or a combination of all the above. Even the
one heroic Arizona hick is decidedly unfriendly. This geocentric view of
society seems like a cheap shot.
[This appeared in the 5/12/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
David N. Butterworth
"Breakdown," a top-notch thriller in which the protagonists act sensibly
and responsibly throughout.  Credit goes to director Jonathan Mostow, who
wrote the compelling story that never lets up, draws a terrific performance
from leading man Kurt Russell, and gives this tale a sensational,
white-knuckled ending.
When Jeff (Russell) and Amy's (Kathleen Quinlan) car breaks down in the
vast, desolate landscape of America's southwest, a friendly truck driver
Red (J.T. Walsh) offers them a ride into town.  Jeff is reluctant to leave
the vehicle, so Amy goes on ahead, arranging to meet her husband at the
local diner.  However, when Jeff discovers the problem with the car (a
loose wire under the hood) and next meets up with Red, the trucker claims
never to have seen him before.
To reveal any more of the plot would be irresponsible.  Suffice it to say
that the twists and turns of the script mirror those of the road ahead for
Jeff and Amy.
The film has many strengths yet perhaps its greatest is that, at its core,
it's extremely believable.  What befalls this hapless couple, who are
driving across the desert as part of a West Coast relocation, and how they
react to the situations, ring true.
Russell, who often plays swaggering, larger-than-life macho figures (in his
work with John Carpenter, for example), tones things down considerably
here.  His Jeff is an everyday Joe, clearly scared by increasingly bizarre
and frightening circumstances.  These circumstances do eventually drive him
to boiling point, yet it's understandable when he's forced to fight for his
and his wife's survival.
An example of the film's maturity is a scene in a bank.  Russell's
character, desperately trying to find a way out of his predicament, digs
around in a janitor's closet looking for a weapon.  The best he can come up
with is the handle of a sink plunger.  Jeff throws it down in disgust; the
search has come to nothing, but we can clearly relate to Jeff's frustration
and growing anxiety.
Superior acting, writing, and directing:  keys to an excellent movie.  And
"Breakdown," a smart, compelling, and absolutely plausible road thriller,
has got all three.

Author
Seth Bookey
  Seen at the SONY/Loews Bay Terrace on 23 May 1997 with Lynne and Sandy for
  $8.
   There is a lot to be said for escapist entertainment. Even if it
   amounts to a 90-minute courteous, if it is done well, if it is a "taut
   thriller," it will work. Especially after the latest round of
   downsizing at work before a three-day weekend. It also teaches us a
   few things, like don't take your cell phone out of range, and don't
   worry about your Grand Cherokee Jeep more than you worry about your
   wife.
   The action starts fairly quickly when Jeff Taylor (Kurt
   Russell) and his wife Amy (Kathleen Quinlan) narrowly miss sideswiping
   a beat-up pick-up truck in the Arizona desert. Soon after a tense
   confrontation at the next gas station, the Taylor's spanking new Jeep
   breaks down in the middle of nowhere, and "helpful" trucker Red Barr
   (JT Walsh) offers to take them to the next truck stop, Belle's, where
   a tow truck can be contacted. Jeffrey finally figures out what is
   wrong with his new Jeep, fixes it, and goes to Belle's. However, Ann
   is nowhere to be found, and no one recalls seeing her or the trucker.
   The police are not all that helpful, and the adventure continues apace
   from there.
   The film has two major assets. First, the story never lets
   up. Despite many calls for suspension of disbelief, the suspense and
   tension are constantly keeping the viewers wondering what will happen.
   My sister-in-law almost didn't make it through the viewing, and our
   seats were stationary. The second major asset is the location
   shooting. The entire movie is set against the vastness of the American
   Southwest's desolateness, and its highways. For example, as the film
   opens, the car is humming along at 80 mph but the rocks out the driver
   window never seem to move--they are huge mountains so far off but so
   massive that the car practically stands still.
   Even the rather interesting opening credit sequence echoes
   that very bizarre feeling of a detailed map to the middle of nowhere,
   with names of towns that you have never heard of and will never
   see--and that you wouldn't know how to leave if you were suddenly
   plunked down there. The biggest town in the movie is Population 200.
   Kurt Russell succeeds in playing the Boston yuppie lost among small
   town people, none of whom he can trust, and JT Walsh as the malefactor
   who relishes taking advantage of just such folks. Also noteworthy is
   Jack Noseworthy, who plays Billy, a co-conspirator of Red's. Most
   audiences can identify with Russell, since most people in the same
   situation would feel just as helpless as he does through a lot of the
   movie.
   The general lawlessness of the road and west make the conclusion
   inevitable, but even so, viewers are left as the film began--desolate
   on the road. [Compare this film to La Ceremonie.]
------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        BREAKDOWN is a typical reality-breaking action flick, but 
it isn't marketed as such. The slogan for BREAKDOWN is "It could 
happen to you." Conceivably, I guess, I could end up hanging under 
the spare tire holder of an 18-wheeler doing 70 on the highway, but 
I probably have a better chance of marrying Strom Thurmond. For 
the first half-hour, BREAKDOWN is completely believable and 
utterly compelling, but takes a turn toward the absurd once Kurt 
Russell drives his Jeep off a cliff and ends up floating it down a set 
of river rapids.
        The set-up is a good one. Russell and his wife (Kathleen 
Quinlan) are on a cross-country trip, in the middle of a desert 
highway. They almost run into a redneck pickup truck, then are 
accosted by the selfsame rednecks at the nearest gas station. 
Plausible in real life -- them rednecks is rude. Then the new car 
breaks down on the side of the highway and a trucker (J.T. Walsh) 
stops to help them. Russell has Quinlan accept a ride with Walsh to 
a diner up the road, where she can call a tow truck. Also plausible.
        After awhile, Russell realizes what's wrong with the Jeep 
and fixes it. Then comes the interesting part. He reaches the diner 
and no one has seen or heard of his wife. Russell's panic button goes 
off as a million possibilities cross his mind. We assume the 
possibilities are crossing his mind, at least, because Russell isn't the 
most versatile actor in the world. It's all still plausible as Russell 
races up and down the highway and soon spots the bigrig that 
picked up his wife.
        Walsh denies ever having seen his wife, and the town 
sheriff is no help in believing one's story over the other. I was 
wondering at this point just what kind of intelligent explanation 
they'd have for Quinlan's disappearance, and how Russell could find 
her again in a believable, roundabout way. To say the people 
involved in BREAKDOWN took the easy way out is a huge 
understatement. Instead of giving us some massive conspiracy 
theory, it turns out it was a kidnapping and the redneck captors want 
only $90,000. It's THE VANISHING meets DELIVERANCE meets 
DIE HARD.
        BREAKDOWN is one of the smallest-scale action movies of 
recent years, one that doesn't even deserve summer release status 
next to the likes of Schwarzenegger and Willis. Still, it's a decent 
warmup for summer once you get over the fact that the movie, 
which seems original at the beginning, is just another story about an 
unlikely hero who has to kill bad guys and escape death to rescue 
someone close to him. In the world of crazy action movies, there's 
no room for character development and no time to stop and make 
sense of what we see onscreen. The BREAKDOWN people use that 
to their advantage.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Jeff Shooman
Kurt Russell -- Kathleen Quinlan -- J.T. Walsh 
A Jonathan Mostow Film
Now, while this is a qualm of mine, it is my only qualm about this slick
piece of filmmaking by Jonathan Mostow.  Breakdown is a gripping movie and
Mostow should be praised.  While his ideas for the film aren't original (he
borrows elements from THE VANISHING and DUEL, while also using other ALFRED
HITCHCOCK devices), he crafts them into a film which doesn't once let up on
the thrills and the chills.
J.T. Walsh's character kidnaps Russell's wife, Amy, played with an appealing
vulnerability (like Drew Barrymore in SCREAM) by Kathleen Quinlan.  He and
his other kidnappers then engage in a series of evil doings and Russell must
solve the problem by a) getting back his wife and b) maybe knocking off the
bad guys while he's at it.
While it does seem a stretch, the film's catch phrase, "It could happen to
you" made me think.  I thought how nieve Mr. Russell's character was in
letting his wife head out alone, with a stranger, in an 18 wheeler, in the
middle of absolutely nowhere.  This predicament had (and still has) an eerie
effect to it.  Trust no one, I think.  This element of the film is very
useful.
What also is hauntingly chilling is the crime itself.  Ms. Quinlan is kept in
a small compartment of a truck, with only inches of breathing room.  I got
the chills when I saw the way she was entrapped, and I thought of myself if I
were in that situation.  It was at that point which I knew Mostow had done a
great job of startling the viewer.
All in all, Mostow crafted a great film here.  Not quite a "white-knuckler",
I left the theatre in a sweat.  A //cold// sweat no less.  The movie ended
very effectively.  IT was one of those deals where one thinks the movie will
further resolve itself, but it doesn't.  Funny, my friend sarcastically
remarked to me before the credits, "And that's it...the END."  He was
obviously expected more.  And then when the credits rolled, he sat there
stunned.  Whoa, it's over?  he remarked.
Absolutely, I replied.  And what a way to end it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Attention shoppers.  Behind this door at your local multiplex we
are featuring two shows for the price of one, but not a double feature.
     BREAKDOWN encompasses two competing movies.  One, a taut thriller
will keep your attention wondering how the hero will get himself and
his wife out of their predicament.  Nothing worthy of a Hitchcock, but
a substantive, even if highly derivative, mystery.
     The other movie, which could go by the handle of KILLER TRUCK,
believes that satisfaction comes from car chases and crashes, with
maximum highway carnage being the chief metric of success.  This part
moves surpasses the absurd on its way to the truly ridiculous.
     The movie opens with Jeff and Amy Taylor, played by Kurt Russell
and Kathleen Quinlan, driving on a remote road in a desert canyon in
one of the western states.  They have sold their Massachusetts home and
are almost broke except for their shinny red, new Jeep Cherokee.  They
quit their jobs and are off to find new ones just like the Howards did
in LOST IN AMERICA.  The Taylors, however, run into a bit more trouble.
     Their car dies in the middle of nowhere, but luckily, or perhaps
unluckily, a friendly trucker named Red Barr (J. T. Walsh) passes by
and offers a hand.  Jeff suggests that Amy go with Red in his
18-wheeler to Billie's Dinner five miles up the road so that she can
call a tow truck.  Meanwhile, Jeff will keep an eye on their prized and
only major possession to ensure that it is not stolen.  (His cell phone
has proven useless since they are too far from a cell site.)
     Jeff discovers a wire that has pulled loose so he starts the car
and goes to find his wife.  The unfriendly natives at the dusty dinner
can't abide strangers asking questions, but none of them claims to have
seen Amy.  The owner's carefully worded response is that he has been
busy and hasn't seen her, but that he cannot say for sure if she has
been there or not.
     When Jeff drives off to go looking again, he finds Red, but Red
claims to have never seen Jeff or his wife.  The polite local cop stops
by and searches Red's truck without finding any evidence.
     This is merely the setup for the mystery.  I will not discuss it
further so as not to give anything away.  If you've seen the trailers,
you already know more than I've told you.
     Kurt Russell sweats and sweats as panic sets in.  His heavy
breathing transmits a palpable sense of fright.  As his eyes glaze over
while looking at a board of flyers about missing people, his fear and
feeling of helplessness engulf the screen.
     Kathleen Quinlan, who received an Academy Award nomination for her
part as Marilyn Lovell in APOLLO 13, puts very little into her role in
BREAKDOWN, but she gets minimum screen time.  Quinlan needs more subtle
roles to bring out her talent.  Here she is wasted.
     Best is J. T. Walsh as the cool, but deadly trucker.  Walsh has
had small but important assignments in a whole host of films from GOOD
MORNING, VIETNAM to EXECUTIVE DECISION.  He has the aura of an
explosion about to happen at any moment, even when he is completely
composed.
     The film's pacing is fast and the tension in the show mounts,
thanks to the editing by Derek Brechin and Kevin Stitt.  They love to
shock the audience with a quick cut from a quiet scene to the loud
noise of something bad happening.  The frequently overpowering music by
Basil Poledouris keeps the film from ever being in danger of having a
subtle moment.  Director Jonathan Mostow, whose only other theatrical
film was BEVERLY HILLS BODYSNATCHERS, has talent but needs to exercise
more self-restraint when it comes to creating action sequences.
     I promised to reveal which movie won.  In an ending that seems
like it will never finish, the car chase part overwhelms the mystery
part.  Watching one action cliche after another, the audience's natural
reaction to the film's conclusion has to be, "Yeah, right!"
     BREAKDOWN runs 1:36.  It is rated R for terror, violence, and 
profanity.  The show would be fine for most teenagers.  Until the
ending, I was favorably inclined toward the film, but after the
demolition derby, I could not recommend this movie to anyone.  I give
the film ** since the thriller part was well done.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Phil Curtolo
Imagine that you're driving along unfamiliar mid-western roads, desert
on both sides of you.  Your faithful and loving wife rests near you in
the passenger seat. 
Imagine, now, that your car breaks down.  A friendly trucker is happy
to lend a helping hand.  Your wife takes a ride with the polite and
innocent fellow to a nearby diner, leaving you to wait, unaware of the
world, in the car.  Finally, imagine that your wife never returns.
This is the horrifying situation that average, everyday guy Jeff Taylor
(Kurt Russell) faces in the epic suspense masterpiece Breakdown.
Taylor takes a closer look at his car after waiting for his wife, Amy
(Kathleen Quinlan), to return for about a half hour and finds a
disconnected cable.  He reconnects the cable and the car is mobile
again.
He drives to the diner where his wife was supposed to have been taken. 
Amy is nowhere to be found, neither is the trucker who gave her the
ride.  The chef at the counter knows nothing.  Taylor is baffled and we
can feel his frustration.  He leaves a message with the cook to tell his
wife to stay at the diner if she happens to show up, and he speeds off
in the direction of the next town.
His course is altered, however, when he spots the truck his wife had
hopped in driving along on a side road.  Taylor follows behind and
catches up.  He signals for the man to pull over, and the trucker
ignores him.  Taylor pulls in front of the trucker, forcing him to pull
his vehicle to the side of the road.  When confronted, the trucker (J.T.
Walsh) disputes that he's never seen Taylor or his wife.  What's going
on?  That's the question that drives Taylor through a convoluted maze of
terror.
Russell is good at getting the audience on his side, so it's easy to
understand him.  He plays a common, regular guy driven by desperation to
find his one true love: his wife.  That type of dramatic drive can
destroy a film if done incorrectly (Mel Gibson's love for his son didn't
help the already flawed Ransom), but in Breakdown, the audience falls
for Russell and wants to follow him in his pursuit.  
Perhaps what makes Russell's struggle work is the masterful style of
the film.  Director Jonathan Mostow keeps the pace quick, and
cinematographer Doug Milsome keeps the visuals sharp.  The film shows us
a beautiful landscape with plenty of snakes along the road.
Breakdown is so well done that it plays out like an old Alfred
Hitchcock film.  The terror isn't Texas Chainsaw Massacre scary, it's
real.  What happens in Breakdown could happen to any one of us.  That's
what evokes horror in an audience.  There's nothing scarier to me than
feeling disoriented and desperate.
Breakdown's physical make up is a reminder of another successfully
horrific film, The Hitcher; in which, Rutger Hauer stalked the
unsuspecting C. Thomas Howell.  Breakdown's break-neck pacing and
inclusion of human emotion is comparable to Speed.  However, Breakdown
doesn't steal from these films, it has its own style and heart. 
Breakdown is put together with such brilliance that it proves to be
superior to all three of the fore-mentioned films.
Kurt Russell is a good choice to play Jeff Taylor.  Russell has a
down-to-earth quality.  Although he's rich and living it up in
Hollywood, he seems like a regular guy you might run into at the local
mall.  That is why he works in the lead.  Since this story can happen to
any regular Joe, a regular Joe was the right person to cast.
Kathleen Quinlan plays an exceptional part as Russell's missing wife. 
She's cute, smart, and innocent.  She too, is someone you could imagine
seeing in your neighborhood.
The villains in this film are impressive as well.  J.T. Walsh, who has
had dozens of roles as someone's brother, or another guy's uncle,
finally gets to show his stuff as the not-so-innocent trucker.  He's
convincing as a liar, as a murderer, and as a loving father.  Those
three elements are tough to juggle in one film, but Walsh pulls it off.
His crew of criminals are the most unappealing crowd since the
hillbillies from Deliverance, and they're almost as scary too.
Breakdown is a wonderful mix of style and heart that will keep you on
the edge of your seat from start to finish.  It's easily one of the
year's ten best, and it should turn a decent profit.  I hope, at least
for Russell's sake, that it does; his last effort, Escape from LA,
breezed through theaters.  I wish him good luck on getting back on top. 
After seeing this masterpiece, no one deserves it more than he does.
Grade: A+, ***** out of *****

Author
Walter Frith
White knuckler!  That's the term that first came to mind when figuring out how
to describe 'Breakdown'.  Kurt Russell and Kathleen Quinlan play a young
couple traveling across the United States as Russell is in the process of
changing jobs and their journey from Massachusetts to California takes an
unexpected and nightmarish jolt in the Arizona desert when they are set up by
a team of criminals (led by J.T. Walsh) who trap and extort money from upper
income and wealthy people using kidnapping and murder to get what they want.
The casting of Kurt Russell in this motion picture is most effective as
Russell is a perfect portrait of the everyday man and doesn't ruin the film
by becoming a macho and unbelievable wrecking machine which is the trademark
set by stars such as Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sylvester Stallone and Bruce
Willis.  
The set up, midsection, and conclusion of 'Breakdown' are all extremely vivid
and credible and the movie is also vividly surreal in telling a story that
can happen to anyone.  Director Jonathan Mostow has selected a captivating
and borderline macabre tone to the entire film paying tribute to the master
of macabre himself, Alfred Hitchcock.  While the film never crosses the line
into macabre storytelling, it certainly plants its toes on the finish line.
 'Breakdown' is also spellbinding in keeping the audience guessing as to what
exactly is going on until you figure things out at about the halfway point.  
The talents of under rated character actor J.T. Walsh are executed
brilliantly in this movie as Walsh's portrayal of evil is as mind numbing and
bone chilling as any villain in recent memory.  I would have liked to have
seen his character utilized a bit more on an expanded level in 'Breakdown'
 but he is terrific nonetheless.  
While 'Breakdown' borrows from a number of motion pictures such as
'Deliverance' (1972), and most recently 'The Vanishing' (1993), it manages to
establish its own identity by creating an acceptable amount of violent
tension relevant to the story and an adult theme that will keep you on the
edge of your seat for its entire running time courtesy of the screenplay by
director Mostow and his writing partner Sam Montgomery and keeping an
audience on the edge of their seats is what movies are all about.

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) BREAKDOWN is a very good, tense thriller that makes
very few mistakes. From the beginning, the movie grabs your attention
and doesn't let go. 
Other reviewers have compared BREAKDOWN to THE VANISHING, an excellent
Dutch-French thriller, remade (poorly, so I hear) under the same name in
America. The story is similar to THE VANISHING, and by comparison,
BREAKDOWN is not as good. But BREAKDOWN is not THE VANISHING, and on its
own terms, it excels. 
Jeff and Amy Taylor (Kurt Russell and Kathleen Quinlan) are driving from
Massachusetts to California. They make it as far as Arizona before their
brand-new Jeep breaks down. Amy catches a ride to the nearest phone
booth with a friendly trucker, then disappears completely. 
A bit of luck leads Jeff to the very truck that was supposed to have
taken Amy to the diner. He stops the truck and questions the driver, who
claims never to have met him before in his life. Another bit of luck
brings the local police to the scene. The cop listens to each man's
story, searches the truck, then, finding no incriminating evidence,
sends the trucker on his way. 
Jeff, now confused, frustrated and angry, heads back to the diner to
demand some answers. But nobody's talking there, either. He's about to
call the police again when a local feeb drops a clue. Jeff follows the
tip and starts tracking down the kidnappers. 
Kurt Russell gives a seamless performance as the frustrated husband. His
performance, combined with a well-timed screenplay, elicits empathy from
the audience. When he is afraid, we fear for him. When he gets the upper
hand, we are righteously pissed too. Also, Russell comes off as a
regular guy. That is to say, he does not come across as some
wisecracking action-movie hero. Though there are action sequences, this
is not an action movie; it's a thriller. Russell realizes this and plays
his role accordingly. 
But since it came up, I have to say that the action sequences are top
notch. One sequence involves Jeff holding on to, and moving around in
the undercarriage of a moving semi. The sequence is genuinely tense
without coming off as a superhuman feat. Another sequence involves two
cars and a semi chasing a utility truck. The driving stunts appear to be
genuine which not only adds to the tension, but is a refreshing change
in this age of sterile, computer-animated action scenes. 
The action scenes bothered some critics. They say that the movie is
ambiguous: that it tries to be both a thriller and an action movie.
Comparing it to THE VANISHING, they are right. But as I said, BREAKDOWN
is not THE VANISHING. 
THE VANISHING has a dark, psychological ending. BREAKDOWN has an
explosive physical ending. Perhaps this is the difference between French
and American cinema. I like both, but neither should be the standard by
which the other is judged.  
A few other details struck me as particularly well thought out. 
First, the villains are not dumb or reactive. They have their own
motives and schemes, which makes the story much more complex and
interesting. What appears to be coincidence is often careful planning on
the part of the villains. 
Second, the last real dialog in the movie is a few minutes back from the
end. There is nothing anyone could have said to make the ending any
better or more meaningful, so Mostow gives us a few moments to react to
the story and to "come down" from the tension. There is some ambient
sound, but music doesn't even come up on the credits for several
seconds. It's a nice rest after a loud and tense 90 minutes. 
There are a few flaws in the movie. They certainly don't overshadow the
movie's strengths, but I will mention them in the spirit of fairness. 
For example, the kidnappers had Jeff exactly where they wanted him about
halfway through the movie. The right action on their part could have
guaranteed their victory. The reason for their inaction is never
revealed. [ON SECOND THOUGHT, AND AFTER A REASONED EXPLANATION FROM MY
BROTHER, I REALIZE "THE RIGHT ACTION" COULD HAVE BEEN THE WRONG ACTION.
THAT'S ONE LESS FLAW WITH THE MOVIE.] 
Also, the kidnappers, though smart, were a bit stereotyped. Someone else
aptly compared them to the inbred hicks from DELIVERANCE. Also, their
operation didn't seem big enough to justify the magnitude of their
crimes. The risks didn't seem to be worth the rewards (though this could
be my flawed view distorted by other, more exaggerated movies). 
These are minor flaws, though, in an otherwise engrossing and riveting
movie. 
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
David Wilcock
RUNNING TIME: 1 HOUR 35 MINUTES
STARRING KURT RUSSELL, J.T WALSH AND KATHLEEN QUINLAN
DIRECTED BY JONATHAN MOSTOW
Breakdown is an moderately entertaining, if underwhelming, thriller. Kurt
Russell and Kathleen Quinlan play couple Jeff and Amy Taylor, taking the
scenic route to California through redneck country. However, while in the
middle of nowhere, their jeep decides to break down, leaving them stranded.
A friendly truck driver, Warren (Walsh), offers to give them a lift to town.
Although Jeff rejects the offer (he wants to stay with his car), Amy agrees,
hops into Warren's lorry, and promptly disappears. Jeff wonders where the
hell she is, and when he later catches up with Warren and Warren says he has
never seen Amy in his life, the plot thickens and Jeff goes on a chase to
find his wife.
Although comparisons can be made with this film to Deliverance (1972) and
The Vanishing (1993) plot wise, the latter two are far superior character
and script wise. Kurt Russell is O.K as Jeff, although he can seemingly only
pull of one expression, which is angry. Throughout the whole film, he looks
angry (or just pissed off.) Quinlan is O.K again, but again she can only
pull off one expression, which is looking dorky. Throughout the whole film,
she looks dorky. J.T Walsh (who, sadly, recently passed away) is fine as
Warren (who we soon find out is a kidnapper) although his actual character
is pretty weak, and not really menacing enough. The supporting cast do their
best aswell, with Rex Linn as a doubting sheriff, and the other kidnappers.
The story, written by first-timer Jonathan Mostow (who also directs) is O.K,
if surprisingly familiar and sometimes extraordinarily stupid. Some of the
things the characters do in this movie is beyond the bounds of idiocy. There
are some flaws with the plot also, as the characters do the complete
opposite to logical (presumably to keep the story 'exciting') and also the
fact that the story just isn't strong enough to sustain the audience's
attention. The picture moves along very slowly also. It almost threatens to
drop dead. The picture does pick up towards the end, but by then it's too
late. Mostow directs the action sequences well enough, however. The film
doesn't really come to a satisfying conclusion, either. The ending tries to
be bleak, but just comes off annoying.
Breakdown could of been a far more enjoyable picture had it had a stronger
cast and director. Instead, it just turns out to be merely average. A missed
opportunity.
OVERALL RATING= ** OUT OF  *****
REVIEW BY DAVID WILCOCK
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!

Author
Jeff Walters
        This little movie seemed to sneak up on me out of nowhere. And
when a movie with a cast like this 'sneaks' up on you - it usually
means that no-one is talking about it for a reason....that is - it
sucks! But not this movie. I'm sill trying to work out why this movie
received little press. Because it's a terrific film. In a year when
most movies have tried to thrill the audience with whizz bang effects
and progressively bigger and bigger explosions, this film
manages to out thrill them all through a chilling story and the
occassional terrific stunt.
           I knew from the clever opening sequence where seemingly
random spinning lines eventually form into a map of where the movie is
set, that I was going to like this flick. Very nicely done.
          Kurt Russell is perfectly cast as the frantic husband
willing to do anything to find his wife. What makes his character even
better is that he is very realistic. He makes mistakes, is often
outsmarted and does not jump to a fight, but rather is intimidated by
violence......at the start of the movie anyway.
       The villian's shoes are filled by a man who seems to be in
almost every single movie and tv show - the late great J.T. Walsh. .
He leads the small group of kidnappers and does a sterling job. The
rest of the kidnappers also preform well. In particular, Jack
Noseworthy, who was also in Event Horizon.
          I did have a few minor complaints with the film, where there
were a couple of huge coincidences. For instance when the wrapper of a
donut his wife had been eating just *happens* to float past whilst he
is drifting in a river. I don't think so. But as I said, the errors
are minor and should really be overlooked due to
the fact that the rest of the movie is scripted so well.
        Unlike many movies this year which have looked promising but
failed to deliver in the final 30 minutes, it is during this time
that Breakdown really shines. And it is also during this time that
you'll see the best stunts. The scene where the truck is tettering on
the edge of the bridge is one I'll not soon forget.

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Geregisseerd door Jonathan Mostow.
Geschreven door Jonathan Mostow en Sam Montgomery.
Speeltijd: 96 minuten.
Iedereen kent wel 'Het gouden ei', dat bekende boek van Tim Krabbi.
Het gaat over een Nederlands echtpaar dat door Frankrijk rijdt. De
benzine van hun auto raakt op en dus stoppen ze bij een benzinestation.
De vrouw besluit wat bij het winkeltje te halen, maar ze komt niet meer
terug. Haar echtgenoot wordt radeloos en onderneemt een grote zoektocht.
Totzover 'Het gouden ei'. De Amerikaanse film "Breakdown" heeft dezelfde
opbouw als dit boek en als je dacht dat 'Het gouden ei' spannend was,
dan heb je deze film nog niet gezien.
Jeff (Kurt Russell) en Amy Taylor (Kathleen Quinlan) vormen een
doodgewoon echtpaar, dat door de woestijn rijdt om zo in San Diego te
komen. Onderweg valt de auto stil, maar gelukkig stopt er een
vrachtwagen. Ze maken kennis met de vrachtwagenchauffeur, die zich
voorstelt als Red Barr (J.T. Walsh). Na een paar discussies besluit Amy
met Barr naar 'Belle's Diner' te gaan, een restaurant waar zij een
sleepwagenbedrijf kan bellen. Jeff gaat hiermee akkoord en blijft alleen
achter.
Al snel wordt Jeff het wachten beu en gaat zelf aan z'n auto sleutelen.
Na enige tijd weet hij z'n wagen weer te starten en rijdt daarna met
volle moed naar 'Belle's Diner', waar hij Amy verwacht. Helaas is ze
daar niet. Sterker nog, de barkeeper heeft z'n vrouw niet binnen zien
lopen. Jeff begrijpt er niets van en gaat verder op zoek, nadat hij aan
de barkeeper gevraagd heeft om naar z'n vrouw
uit te kijken. Met minder moed stapt hij de auto in. 
Jeff verkent de dorre gebieden van de woestijn en ontdekt in de verte
een vrachtwagen, die er precies hetzelfde uitziet als de wagen van Red
Barr. Enigszins kwaad laat hij de vrachtwagen stoppen met een paar rauwe
rijtechnieken. Jeff heeft gelijk, want het is inderdaad de wagen van Red
Barr. Barr stapt georriteerd uit de wagen, maar hij herkent Jeff niet.
Ook beweert hij Amy nooit meegenomen te hebben. Jeff is nu hopeloos en
heeft geen idee hoe hij ooit nog z'n vrouw terug kan zien. 
Ongelooflijk. Mensen met een zwak hart moeten deze film absoluut niet
zien, want "Breakdown" is bloedstollend. Jonathan Mostow, regisseur en
schrijver van deze film, haalt alle mogelijke middelen uit de kast om de
suspense en de spanning tot ongekende hoogten te voeren. De, prachtig in
beeld gebrachte, verlaten landschappen dragen daar een steentje aan bij.
Net zoals de bijna voelbare spanning in 'Belle's Diner' en de schne in
de bank.
"Breakdown" vervalt gelukkig niet in clichis en kent zelfs een originele
schurk, die na het moorden en stelen er nog een gezin aan overhoudt.
Zijn relatie met vrouw en kind wordt goed uitgewerkt. Ook zijn er veel
verrassende plotwendingen, zodat je je niet snel verveelt. En Russell is
als de wanhopige echtgenoot weer in topvorm.
Dat het meer dan een jaar duurt voordat deze film eindelijk in Nederland
te zien is, is niet te begrijpen. Want "Breakdown" kun je zonder meer
fantastisch noemen. Ik heb er van de allereerste schne tot de
allerlaatste minuut van genoten. Ein ding is zeker: na deze film denk je
wel twee keer na voordat je met een vreemdeling meerijdt.

Author
Steve Kong
Breakdown is a tense, tight and lean thriller.
To summarize the story in this review would ruin the movie for those who 
haven't seen it. But, I can, carefully, tell the premise without giving away 
the film. Kurt Russell and Kathleen Quinlan play a married couple, Jeff and 
Amy Taylor. They are on a cross-country road trip in their new red Jeep Grand 
Cherokee. As Jeff is driving, out from nowhere swerves a pick-up truck and 
barely hits them. Jeff speeds up to put some distance between him and the 
pick-up truck. But at the next gas station, the guys in the pick-up truck meet 
up with Jeff. They exchange a few words and that's the end of that. At least 
that's what Jeff thinks. As he and Amy speed off from the gas station, they 
get so far and then the Jeep dies in the middle of the desert. They don't know 
what to do. And to make matters worse, the guys in the pick-up just past them, 
and are perched somewhat further up the road watching Jeff and Amy like 
vultures. That is until a good Samaritan 18-wheeler truck driver stops by and 
helps push the Jeep off to the side of the road. The 18-wheeler truck driver, 
played by J.T. Walsh, looks at the Jeep, but is unable to fix it. He then 
offers to drive Jeff and Amy to the next rest stop. Jeff wants to stay with 
the Jeep but Amy wants to go to the next stop to make a call to have a tow 
truck get the Jeep. So they split up. Jeff staying with the Jeep and Amy going 
off to the rest stop. Jeff quickly finds the problem to the Jeep and drives 
over to the rest stop to pick up Amy. But, she is not there. The owner has not 
seen her. Jeff, now frantic, drives around and spots the 18-wheeler. He forces 
the 18-wheeler to stop and questions the driver he says he doesn't know who 
Jeff is and has no idea what he is talking about. And it is here where the 
story goes full speed ahead.
There are enough twists and turns in this movie to make one's head spin. The 
collection of bad guys is more than enough. The movie takes a very basic 
approach to get the audience to follow along, and that is with the question, 
will Jeff find his wife? And it is this basic approach that gives the movie 
it's tense, tight and lean feel. Kurt Russell does a good job at portraying a 
desperate man with a strong want to find his lost wife. And worth mentioning 
is Basil Poledouris' haunting score to the film. The director and co-writer 
Jonathon Mostow does a good job at keeping the film moving and keeping our 
attention focused on Jeff's problem at hand.
Breakdown is a great thriller released in a slow season. If you have a chance 
to catch this film in the theatres, do so. If not, be sure to put this film on 
your video must-see list. 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Kurt Russell, J.T. Walsh, Kathleen Quinlan, M.C. Gainey, Jack
Noseworthy, Rex Linn, Ritch Brinkley Director: Jonathan Mostow
Screenplay: Jonathan Mostow and Sam Montgomery based on the story by
Jonathan Mostow
There are important lessons to be learnt from this movie. In the event
of a motor vehicle breakdown in the dust filled, lonely roads of
countryside, ALWAYS carry a mobile phone which covers more distance than
metropolitan, and NEVER allow your wife to hitch a ride with a stranger.
Enough said about common sense, or the tale of your BREAKDOWN may not
have a happy end.
A holiday in the country is reminiscent of lettuce and tomato sandwiches,
dreamy picnics, catching butterflies, gone fishing and endless sunny
days. On the same note, it can also be ruined by the smell of a burning
engine, the explosion of a flat tire, or harassment from several male,
lunatic country bumpkins, who kidnap your wife before giving you a hell
of a beating. Stranded and without mechanical assistance, you become
lost in a world where the sky is actually as blue as the textbooks
describe; man made buildings are replaced by God given trees, and the
concrete floors of suburbia play second fiddle to the green grass of
Wyoming. Take a man out of a city, remove his mobile phone and he'll end
up a nervous wreck in the country.
Kurt Russell is the object of our jibes. He plays a non-to wise,
ordinary city boy Jeff Tyler, who does the unthinkable by allowing his
wife to get help when their 4-Wheel drive stops running. His excuse,
`I'll stay with the car in case anything happens' Which becomes the
understatement of the entire movie. His wife is kidnapped, and what
follows is this film's most harrowing scene. A frightened man, with a
missing wife gazes up at a bulletin board filled with the impersonal
faces of missing persons. His most cherished lover, has just become a
meaningless number on the growing list of lost and not found. Their
legacy is an understated, glossy photo on the wall of a police outhouse.
His torment is heartbreaking as he begins to realise the futility of his
situation.
Kurt Russell is often a B actor in an A role, or an A actor in a B role;
but on occasion he will surprise us all and turn up a solid performance
as an A actor in an A role. He is quite convincing as the naive,
peaceful city dweller, who is transformed into a resourceful, angry
country visitor by the intensity of his circumstance. Kathleen Quinlan,
also known for her role as one of the mutilated bodies in "Event
Horizon", makes a likeable appearance as the kidnapped housewife. J.T.
Walsh, carries the misleading deception of an honest face, his role as
the kidnapper will forever mar one's trust in the friendly looking
trucker.
So I did enjoy this tense tale of driven fears. Where the once innocent
passive driver, becomes the now aggressive front seat passenger. The
final scene is something reminiscent of road wars, and gives monster
truck madness a run for its wheels.

Author
Christopher Null
     It's Rednecks 1, Yuppies 0!  At least it is for most of BREAKDOWN,
a film that pits hapless Massachusettsans against wily Arizonans in a
battle of automotive might on America's highways.  If you've seen THE
VANISHING (either one), you've essentially seen BREAKDOWN.  In this
incarnation, Kurt Russell finds his wife (my nemesis Kathleen Quinlan)
abducted by the brilliantly evil J.T. Walsh and gang, and a cruel
conspiracy is revealed that is designed to separate the happy couple
from the fortunes that -- it turns out -- they don't really have.  The
film has a few interesting twists (that I won't spoil), but the movie's
main flaws are its over-reliance on wild coincidences to advance the
plot and a pace that is overwhelmingly slow until the very end.  With
that said, BREAKDOWN gets a big so-so... but if I were driving, I
would've just left Quinlan at the truck stop.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kurt Russell, J.T. Walsh, Kathleen Quinlan, M.C. Gainey,
      Jack Noseworthy, Rex Linn, Ritch Brinkley
Director: Jonathan Mostow
Producers: Martha De Laurentiis, Dino De Laurentiis
Screenplay: Jonathan Mostow and Sam Montgomery based on the story by
      Jonathan Mostow
Cinematography: Doug Milsome
Music: Basil Poledouris
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     BREAKDOWN is the latest in a seemingly endless traffic jam of
thrillers that opens strong but finishes abominably.  Although the first
reel-and-a-half tantalizes with the possibility of a tense, high-octane
ride, the film veers off course and runs out of gas all-too-quickly. 
Actually, if BREAKDOWN had started more weakly, I probably wouldn't be
quite as harsh on it, but it's difficult to watch a motion picture
you're beginning to enjoy devolve into a stupefying example of "crowd-
pleasing" rubbish.  (The film makers may have miscalculated here -- the
crowd I was with laughed their way through the supposedly-taut climax.)
     Kurt Russell, who has blasted his way out of New York and L.A., is
now stuck trying to escape from the middle of nowhere.  He plays mild-
mannered Jeff Taylor, a man who has little in common with Snake Plisskin
except the facial features.  Jeff and his wife, Amy (Kathleen Quinlan),
are on a cross-country trip from Boston to San Diego when their car
breaks down on a lonely highway wending its way through the bleak-but-
beautiful landscape of the American southwest.  (Cinematographer Doug
Milsome's glorious scenic shots are easily BREAKDOWN's highlight.)  But
that's not the worst aspect of the situation -- Jeff and Amy think
they're being stalked by another driver (M.C. Gainey), so it's a relief
when the friendly operator of an eighteen-wheeler, Red Barr (J.T.
Walsh), pulls over and offers to help.
     Jeff decides to stay with the car while Amy accompanies Red.  The
plan is for him to drop her off at the nearest diner where she can call
a tow truck.  Time passes and Jeff manages to get the car started.  He
drives to the diner, but Amy isn't there, nor is there any sign that she
ever stopped in.  Suddenly frantic, Jeff drives off in pursuit of Red,
but, when he catches up to him, the trucker claims that not only didn't
he pick up a woman, but he doesn't recall having ever met Jeff.
     I have just described about the first thirty minutes of the movie,
and it doesn't sound bad at all.  Take a little Hitchcock, a dash of
Steven Spielberg's DUEL, and a pinch of THE VANISHING, and you get a
fair approximation of the level at which BREAKDOWN begins.  That's a
lofty perch to start from, which means that it's a long way down, and,
unfortunately, BREAKDOWN plummets the entire distance.  The ending has
more in common with sloppy, cliched, psycho-killer thrillers like
UNLAWFUL ENTRY and BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT (the setting reminded here me of
that one) than with anything fashioned by a respectable director.
     The three leads -- Kurt Russell, J.T. Walsh, and Kathleen Quinlan -
- do the best they can with cardboard, one-dimensional roles, but the
script's banality defeats them.  Of course, they can't be held entirely
blameless for this debacle, since they agreed to appear in it.  Given
his recent track record, which includes the white-knuckler EXECUTIVE
DECISION, I would never have guessed that Russell was so hard up for a
job that he'd have to accept something of this sort.
     Thrillers don't have to be realistic to work.  Take SPEED, for
example.  There's no way that the bus could have cleared the gap in the
road.  But we believed it because the movie had painstakingly created an
"alternative reality" in which such gravity-defying feats were possible. 
BREAKDOWN never does that, and, as a result, its increasingly-
preposterous turns come across as laughable.  Film maker Jonathan
Mostow's work behind the camera is a complete bust (this apparently is
his second feature, following the memorable BEVERLY HILLS
BODYSNATCHERS).  His pedestrian direction and unoriginal script diffuse
any tension that BREAKDOWN might have generated.  The film turns into a
long, drawn-out bore where the fate of each character is all-but-
inscribed on his or her forehead.  If this movie was a car, it would
have been hauled off to the junk yard as soon as it started falling
apart -- a process that is well underway by the half-way point.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Eric C. Robinette
Starring Kurt Russell, J.T. Walsh, Kathleen Quinlan
Written by Jonathan Mostow and Sam Montgomery. Directed by Jonathan Mostow..
I find myself saying that a lot at action movies. The funny thing about it
is that during Breakdown, I *meant* it when I said it.
Breakdown is that rarity: a fast, efficient, nuts-and bolts thriller that
is both fun and believable at the same time. It's mix of  Spielbergian
action and Hitchcockian suspense is so well constructed, that even when
the screws came a little loose toward the end, I happily hung on to my
seat as giant semi-truck teetered perilously over a bridge.
I must admit, when I first saw the trailers for the movie, I wasn't that
enthralled; it looked like a retread of "The Vanishing," which worked none
too well in it's American incarnation and was even a bit overrated in its
original form. In all these films, a man loses his significant other, then
sets on a seemingly futile pursuit populated by a lot of creepy-looking
people. 
What sets Breakdown apart, though, is that it's story, unlikely as it
sounds, feels like it could really happen. Thanks go largely to Kurt
Russell, who has to carry the entire picture and make us believe that he's
an ordinary guy who can do extraordinary things when provoked. He does,
because he changes from concerned husband to avenging husband gradually,
showing the increasing desperation in his face as the bad guys close in on
him.
Kudos also go to first time helmer Jonanthan Mostow, who displays
surprising confidence in his debut. First-time directors often make the
mistake of blatantly copying their idol or having no style at all. Here,
Mostow deftly steals from two of the greats: Hitchcock and Spielberg. By
combining the suspense of Hithcock's "wrong place at the wrong time" theme
with the suspense of Spielberg's frenzied pacing, Mostow has created an
engrossing blend of realistic suspense and  kinetic action, which
complement each other and keep the picture down-to-earth. Even the
villains have a human dimension, with one caught between an unsuspecting
family and a despicable scheme, just like some real-world villains are.
Only at the end does Mostow lose his grip a little and the action become a
little too outlandish, but by then, I was so carried away, I didn't care.
A movie that can make something great out of such an average premise earns
the right to get carried away.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Here's something that you don't see every day:  a Hollywood action-
thriller that knows when to say when.  Never-aging actors Kurt Russell
and Kathleen Quinlan play a California-bound couple, whose bright red,
brand-spanking-new Jeep Cherokee (with Massachusetts plates) breaks down
on a secondary road, somewhere in the Southwest.  A trucker (J.T.
Walsh, Our Favorite Heavy) stops and offers them a ride.  She goes, he
stays, and, not much later, she's nowhere to be found.  Russell goes
slightly nuts, flags down the trucker, and hears those words that we
never want to hear outside of a movie theater:  "I've never seen you
before in my life." And you can take it from there.  (Or watch the
trailer, which reveals a bit more.)
     BREAKDOWN is balanced on every front, from pacing to photography to
suspense to sound effects.  (Is there a sweeter music than that of the
shifting of truck gears?) Most impressive:  director and co-screenwriter
Jonathan Mostow actually allows his everyman hero to *behave* like an
everyman.  (Well, okay, Russell does impersonate Indiana Jones in one
scene.) This guy has to think on his feet and, often, he's at a loss for
what to do.  And while some of his decisions are better than others,
*all* of our hero's actions are based on such determined determination
that you may catch yourself trying to talk back to the screen!  "No,
don't do that, do this!" Just rent the whole damn theater for yourself.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Paramount)
Starring:  Kurt Russell, J. T. Walsh, Kathleen Quinlan, M. C. Gainey.
Screenplay:  Sam Montgomery and Jonathan Mostow.
Producers:  Martha DeLaurentiis and Dino DeLaurentiis.
Director:  Jonathan Mostow.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Jonathan Mostow is a thief.  As it turns out, he also happens to be
a very talented thief.  Hollywood is obsessed with The Idea as the
defining element of a film, with the pitch meeting as the defining moment
in the creative process.  Even critics can fall into the same trap of
equating The Idea with the complete film.  When a film with a familiar
premise appears, you're likely to see dismissive reviews which perpetuate
the notion that the real culprit is lack of originality, rather than lack
of craft.  Of course, by those standards William Shakespeare would be the
most reviled plagiarist of all time -- how dare he steal his plots from
antiquity, from English history, from other writers?.  A great idea works,
but it can work more than once.  It's the mark of a talented artist when
he can take that recognizable idea and make it something original and
exciting.
     Take BREAKDOWN, for instance. The Idea is straight out of THE
VANISHING:  Jeff Taylor (Kurt Russell) and his wife Amy (Kathleen Quinlan)
are driving from Boston to San Diego when their car breaks down in the
middle of the Arizona desert.  An amiable truck driver named Red (J. T.
Walsh) stops to offer help, and Amy goes with him to call for a tow truck
while Jeff stays with the car.  Then Jeff notices that a couple of wires
under the hood are disconnected, and he drives the now-functioning car to
the diner where Amy and Red were supposed to make their call.  No one
there has seen either Amy or Red, however, and Jeff begins to fear foul
play.  A search which begins with fear then becomes compounded with
confusion and frustration as people turn out not to be what they seem, and
as Amy's disappearance begins to look like part of a more sinister
conspiracy.
     Writer/director Jonathan Mostow doesn't restrict his "borrowing" 
to THE VANISHING.  The malevolent trucker and desert landscapes owe a debt
to Steven Spielberg's DUEL, and there is a recognizably Hitchockian
quality to Russell's ordinary guy in extraordinary circumstances.  All of
this might have left me shaking my head, if BREAKDOWN hadn't been so good
at leaving me shaking all over.  BREAKDOWN is as viscerally effective
as any thriller Hollywood has turned out in the last few years, because
Mostow understands what works.  The hero is a slightly paunchy Everyman,
smart and resourceful enough for us to believe he has a chance at 
survival, and Kurt Russell does a nice job keeping the anger and
determination from becoming one-note.  The situation is just plausible and
unnerving enough to get under your skin, with a creeping sense of paranoia
which could affect the audience as much as it affects Jeff.  Mostow also
has a pair of wonderfully sadistic  villains in J. T. Walsh and M. C.
Gainey (clearly men who go by their initials have _something_ to hide).
Walsh in particular has the chilling ability to make a word into a weapon,
and to make a stare as brutal as any of the pistol-whippings which
permeate BREAKDOWN.
     Over and above all that, Mostow demonstrates a keen sense for how to
construct a gripping, efficient thriller.  The opening half hour is a
subtle rumble of mounting dread, which in turn becomes a roller-coaster
series of set pieces, which in turn becomes an all-stops-pulled finale,
all in the course of 95 minutes.  BREAKDOWN is most definitely intended as
a crowd-pleaser, peppered as it is with frequent opportunities for the
audience to cheer Jeff turning the tables on his tormenters.  It is also
a remarkably effective crowd-pleaser, one which doesn't throw common sense
or continuity to the wind for the sake of a punch line.  By the time
BREAKDOWN builds to a climactic four-car chase -- a somewhat excessive
conclusion to an otherwise lean thriller -- Mostow has demonstrated a rare
talent for grabbing an audience and refusing to let go.
     There is another stolen idea in BREAKDOWN which isn't entirely
Mostow's doing.  Advertising for the film ominously warns "It could happen
to you," a nod to thrillers which became pop culture phenomena by
appealing to our collective 20th-century conviction that every stranger is
a serial killer waiting to happen -- call this one the "Good Samaritan
Truck Driver from Hell."  Mostow actually goes a bit farther, playing the
conflict in BREAKDOWN as class warfare, and it is disappointing to watch
such a solid film resort to back-brain prejudices.  If you think about
BREAKDOWN long enough, you'll probably discover some things which bother
you -- why, for instance, Jeff didn't seem at all concerned about his wife
riding with a stranger, or why the villains seem to thwart their own plan
at the outset.  You may even think about the fact that you've seen
something like BREAKDOWN before.  And it may not matter, because the Idea
is only the frame for a vehicle.  Jonathan Mostow has given this one an
engine with a heck of a kick.

Author
Nigel Bridgeman
I must say from the outset that I have never been much of a Kurt Russell
fan. I've seen some of his films (Silkwood, Backdraft, Unlawful Entry) and
while he gave adequate performances, I have never been impressed with his
work.
Breakdown, then, is something of a surprise. Russell gives a fine
performance, as do most of the cast, one that is not upstaged by the action
orchestrated in the second half of the film. To say that he holds the film
together would not be completely true, but he does it no harm.
Russell plays Jeff, one half of a married couple travelling with his wife
Amy (Kathleen Quinlan) cross country to San Diego to start a new job and a
new life. While journeying through the desert their car breaks down and,
left helpless and stranded, Jeff waves down a passing truck driver (J.T.
Walsh) who offers to take them to a nearby diner to call for a tow truck.
Because of a nasty incident earlier with a couple of ruffians, Jeff decides
to stay with the car while Amy gets help. That, it seems, is the last time
Jeff (or anyone else) sees her.
Breakdown has been compared to several movies: George Sluizer's The
Vanishing (the original, hopefully, not his appalling Hollywood remake),
Steven Spielberg's Duel and any number of Hitchcock films. As with these,
Breakdown does not, for the most part, stray down the conventional path of
the American action-thriller. Jeff does not become a gun-toting vigilante
on the hunt for his wife, but instead becomes a scared, confused everyman
who has no idea what the hell is going on. When we do find out what has
happened to Amy, it does come as a slight disappointment, if only because
it's too early in the film; I for one could have done with an extra twenty
minutes or so of mystery and bewilderment, but this affects the film little.
Russell, as mentioned earlier, is very good in his role, and Kathleen
Quinlan is nowhere near as annoying as she was in Apollo 13. J.T. Walsh, as
the possibly evil truck driver, is terrific; he is one of the best of the
fine batch of character actors Hollywood doesn't seem to know what to do
with, but director Jonathan Mostow is on the right track here. The reason
he makes such a great villain is that he actually looks like a real person,
one anyone would be able to trust, which makes the plot that much more
believable.
Breakdown is what Hollywood doesn't make enough of, a great thriller with
believable characters and scenes that do, indeed, have viewers on the edge
of their seats. One of the most genuinely exciting films I've seen in a
long time.
Nigel Bridgeman (nigelb@powerup.com.au)
The Movie Pages - a movie page: http://www.powerup.com.au/~nigelb/movies

Author
Paul Miller
Well...I must admit this movie definately lived up to my expectations,
but in a deferent way that I had hoped...
The movie begins with Kirk Russel and his wife Katholan Quinlan as
"rich" Bostonites trying to make a fresh start in California.
Mysteriously, theit car breaks down and they are left at the side of the
road.  A man it an 18-wheeler comes by and offeres a ride into town.
Kirk is skeptical but lets his wife go while he stays behind.
Eventually he fiqures out what was wrong and goes about finding his
wife.
Hmm...this is where the action stops and it's my duty to stop telling
you plot details....
This movie (as I said) did live up to my expectations.  It showed the
length that a man would go to save his wife.  But so much of the movie
involves him getting revenge that I think the movie loses a little
focus.  Thats not that big of a deal.  I just think that if not for that
the movie could have been better (although at already was great).
