Title
Review for Breakheart Pass (1975)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the 1970s Charles Bronson was a synonym for the action
movies about a man who could eat bad guys for breakfast,
regardless of the circumstances. The name of Alistair
MacLean was a synonym for novels whose elaborate and
complicated plot served only as an excuse for numerous and
spectacular action scenes. The combination of two happened
to be BREAKHEART PASS, 1976 Western directed by Tom Gries,
director who obviously liked both of those concepts.
The movie begins on the train destined to Fort Humboldt,
distant U.S. army post in the Rocky Mountains. The fort is
plagued by diphtheria, and territorial governor, doctor,
priest and small detachment of soldiers are going to deliver
the medicine and other supplies. U.S. Marshall Nathan Pearce
(Ben Johnson) boards the train, together with his prisoner,
former doctor and wanted murderer John Deakin (Charles
Bronson). Soon after the train begins its journey through
mountainous wilderness, strange and frightening things start
to happen; some of the passengers are getting killed and it
turns out that almost nobody on the train is what he seems
to be.
In the first half, BREAKHEART PASS looks less a like
action-oriented Western and more like an Agatha Christie's
whodunnit mystery. It is also painful opportunity to watch
capable character actors like Richard Crenna, Charles
Durning and Ben Johnson unsuccessfully trying to breath some
life in their one-dimensional roles. Same is with Bronson's
late wife Jill Ireland, whose character should have been
left out of script. Of course, the viewer knows that, since
this is a Charles Bronson movie, his character won't stay
the bad guy until the end of the film. So, one huge element
of surprise is wasted. Luckily, in the second half Bronson
gets teamed up Ed Lauter, more believable as his sidekick,
and director Tom Gries saves the day with few impressive
action scenes, with the stunts co-ordinated by legendary
Yakima Canutt. All in all, BREAKHEART PASS is an average
Bronson actionfest, with the good Canadian exteriors and
Jerry Goldsmith's music as additional attraction.
