Title
Review for Price of Milk, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ross Anthony
Director Sinclair states, "So this film is my dream about New Zealand, 
this make-believe country that seems almost empty of people, where love 
stories are played out in silence and loneliness, where white farmers 
make deals with indigenous Maori people, where the land is like a vast 
quilt of fields, where life seems perfect but we find ways to make 
ourselves unhappy ... But like a dream, I wanted this film to have no 
obvious message, more of an invocation of symbols. And mostly it's about 
love, and what it's worth." 
The film begins with a young farming couple pulling a quilt back and 
forth while they sleep, the credits are sown in. The dramatic 
"Fantasia"-esque music plays as awkwardly over this picture as a cowbell 
hung from a kangaroo. 
She loves him, he loves her, but doesn't want kids. Perhaps the kid 
issue prompts her to feel that the fire has slipped from the 
relationship (though the film seems to depict just the opposite). In 
search of sparking the flame, she pisses him off completely and spends 
the rest of the film sorting that out. Not a very interesting story, but 
it's told beautifully, haphazardly, magically, impossibly. 
Planted like seeds in the earth, surrealisms sprout: Two lovers taking a 
bath in a tub in a field, they finish dinner in the tub, then wash the 
dishes in their own bath water. Their dog, afraid of daylight, romps the 
fields in an appliance box. 
Other scenes I enjoyed: Singing by the fire, house moving as she 
"chases" him from the window. The picture is well paced, from the 
standpoint of intensity and comic relief placement. However, it's still 
a film that can be reduced to three crazy women conspiring to drive one 
nice guy crazy. And though Sinclair acknowledges the film has no point, 
I certainly felt one would have been nice. 
Price of Milk. Copyright Š 2001. 
*  Starring Danielle Cormack, Karl Urban, Willa O'Neil, Michael 
Lawrence, Rangi Motu. Written and directed by Harry Sinclair. Produced 
by Fiona Copland at Lot 47 Films (C)2001. Rated PG-13. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   People still marry largely on the basis of the chemistry they
feel during their courtship period.  In other words, hormones
rule.  But if hormonal changes go southward at a fortunately
gradual pace, the initial half-crazed passion of two lovers is
bound to fade somewhat after a year or two--which is good,
because if people felt toward each other the way they did
while first discovering each other's bodies, nothing much of a
mundane nature could get done.
   With "The Price of Milk," New Zealand filmmaker Harry
Sinclair ("Topless Women Talk About their Lives")
investigates a similar phenomenon, which is, how do you
know that the person you are about to marry really and truly
loves you in the first place?  The obvious answer is to test
that love.  In medieval times, the nobility would prove their
affection by drinking fair maiden's bathwater out of her
slipper, but in New Zealand, the pixies are relied on more
frequently.  In this fairy tale, in fact, Auckland-born director
Sinclair positions a couple, Rob (Karl Urban) and Lucinda
(Danielle Cormack) amid the rolling hills of his country, pretty
much a unit unto themselves except for their heads of dairy
cows and an agoraphobic dog named Nigel (Pirate).
   Rob is a natural as a dairy farmer, possessing $400,000NZ
or cows who reply to his greeting of "good morning" every
day with a chorus of thunderous moos.  His girl friend,
Lucinda, appreciates Rob's talent with the animals but
despite their passion under the sheets (or in this case under
a colorful quilt), she wonders whether his affection toward her
is at least as much as his attractive to the bovine.  As quickly
as you can say "Taumarunui," Lucinda literally runs into the
fabulous Auntie (Rangi Motu), who because of a lack of
heating in the boonies needs as many quilt blankets as her
golf-crazed nephews can produce.  When Auntie's Maori
nephews steal the blanket in the dead of night, Lucinda is
required by Auntie to swap her most valuable possession to
get the comforter back.  The tradeoff leads to a severance of
her relationship with Rob, who is seduced by Lucinda's so-
called best friend Drosophila (Willa O'Neill).
   Despite the unobtrusive but effective presence of an
enchanted soundtrack produced by the Moscow State
Orchestra, this "Milk" is frightfully skimmed.  Though Danielle
Cormack sports long, curly locks giving her the appearance of
a Rapunzel. and conveys her naivete by widening her eyes
as though as student of Rodney Dangerfield, she is
unappealingly masculine.  One can easily see what the
comely Karl Urban sees in the competition. Though Willa
O'Neill's Drosophila drives a wreck of a car, she has far more
charm and allure. The real trouble, though, is in the script,
which comes across as though Mr. Sinclair simply allowed
the ensemble to improvise and settled for the first take in
each scene.  If it's true that only a Western urban audience
can appreciate the humor of the highly metropolitan Woody
Allen, then perhaps logically enough the waggery allegedly
present in a pastoral "The Price of Milk" became shipwrecked
somewhere in the Tasman Sea.
Not Rated.  Running time: 87 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
The opening credits of THE PRICE OF MILK, a sweet, romantic fairytale 
from New Zealand's writer and director Harry Sinclair, are slowly 
revealed as a sleeping couple fights for control of a quilt.  As mounds 
of material are smoothed out, the embroidered names appear.  The quilt 
itself turns out to play a pivotal role in a movie that is so completely 
original that it's hard to describe.  Think of it as a wonderfully 
romantic Irish leprechaun story -- heavily scored with classical Russian 
pieces played by the Moscow Symphony Orchestra -- about missing quilts, 
cows and voices.  
Having trouble forming that vision in your head?  I'm not surprised, as 
this cute little charmer is a film to be experienced, not analyzed.  
Some of its best humor makes no sense whatsoever if you apply logic, but 
it sure is funny.  Nigel, for example, is the farm's dog, but, since he 
suffers from severe agoraphobia, he is seen only as a moving, barking 
box that is used to allay his fears.
Lucinda (Danielle Cormack) and Rob (Karl Urban) are two free spirits in 
their twenties who live together in relative poverty and absolute bliss 
on Rob's dairy farm.  They are hopelessly, head over heels in love.  
Lucinda, with her long curly, blond hair, looks like a cross between a 
doll and a hippie.  The disheveled Rob has a resemblance to Brad Pitt's 
gypsy in SNATCH.  In a New Zealand version of the California hot tub -- 
an old bathtub set out in the open and heated by coals -- Rob proposes 
to Lucinda by passing a ring under the water to her.  I thought she was 
going to wear it on her toe.  It's that kind of story.
In place of leprechauns we have "The Jacksons," whom everyone knows 
about, but no one is quite sure what they look like or even what size 
they are.  Some people think that they are tiny, and others believe that 
they are giants.  Rangi Motu plays a pixyish character known only as 
Auntie, who is clearly one of the infamous Jacksons.  She and her 8 
grown nephews, who are all about the same size and age, keep getting the 
upper hand in a series of encounters with our young lovers.  These 
confrontations put a strain on Rob and Lucinda's relationship, allowing 
the story to move beyond its comedic roots.  
The whimsical, romantic and dramatic music so makes the movie that it 
would be hard to envision the film without it.  Besides Nikolai 
Rimsky-Korsakov, there is music from lesser known Russian composers, 
including Alexander Tcherepnin.
I can't think of any movie quite like THE PRICE OF MILK.  In a time in 
which every movie seems as fresh as microwaved leftovers, THE PRICE OF 
MILK proudly stands alone.  And speaking of microwaves, Lucinda swears 
by them.  Nothing like nuking a big bowl of previously frozen English 
peas to satisfy her man.
THE PRICE OF MILK runs a breezy 1:27.  It is rated PG-13 for drug use, 
sensuality and brief nudity and would be fine for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
