Title
Review for Best Laid Plans (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BEST LAID PLANS (director: Mike Barker; screenwriter: Ted Griffin;
cinematographer: Ben Seresin; editor: Sloane Klevin; music by Craig
Armstrong; cast: Alessandro Nivola (Nick), Reese Witherspoon (Lissa),
Josh Brolin (Bryce), Rocky Carroll (Bad Ass Dude), Michael G. Hagerty
(Charlie), Terrence Dashon Howard (Jimmy), Jamie Marsh (Barry), 1999)
Nick (Alessandro Nivola) and Bryce (Josh Brolin) are college friends who
haven't seen each other since their recent college days. When Bryce
arrives in Nick's hometown of Tropico, some place that could be
anywhere, U.S.A.,  he shows him the beautiful ultra-modern posh house
where he is house-sitting rent free, all he has to do is water the
plants. They later on meet in a bar, and while there, an attractive girl
(Reese Witherspoon) comes into the place and the drunken Bryce gets to
know her as Kathy. The next shot is of Nick receiving a frantic call
from Bryce at 2 a.m. that he should hurry over to his place.
Upon his arrival he learns from Bryce that the girl accuses him of date
rape. When she tried to leave, he beat her up, has her gagged and bound
in chains to a pool table downstairs in the recreation room, and finds
while going through her purse that she is underage. He is afraid that he
will be accused of statutory rape, even if it comes out that she was
willing. He laments that his life is ruined, that he will never get
tenure in the college teaching job he just obtained, and that his career
is over. He asks his friend Nick, What should I do?
When Nick is alone with the girl, we learn that this was a setup, that
Kathy is Lissa, they are a couple who planned this to steal a Lincoln
note valued at some $200,000. They do it because Nick is in deep trouble
after he agreed to help some workplace friends out in a setup robbery
that backfired. She does it to help the one she fell in love with. The
film flashes back four months earlier and the viewers are fully apprised
of what led to this situation.
Nick came back to town to take care of his sick father. When his father
died, he shows no remorse and becomes bitterly disappointed that his
father's promised inheritance has been seized by the IRS for back-taxes
owed. Lissa is someone sweet he meets while in a veterinary clinic, who
falls for the good-looking guy and puts her trust in him. Bryce, on the
other hand, is a spoiled rich kid, who has a history of ratting on
friends, and is a constant whiner. The story revolves around these three
uninteresting characters.
The mild attempt, in this B- film, to be a convincing noir film, never
materializes, as the film looks more like a sophomoric attempt to
imitate the genre than the real thing. There is no feeling for
characters or intensity in this story, it looks contrived from the
get-go. All the characters, except for Reese's, are slime balls, people
we could care less about. So when this film moves into its different
plot twists and all kinds of ludicrous situations develop, it wanes in
interest, as the characters were never developed and the film has a
cheesy look to it. It seems to have the style of a thriller but without
the substance.
The phoniest and dumbest scene in the film, was when a violent drug
dealer (Carroll) was seen torturing those who robbed his stash of coke
and explaining it like it was a lesson in economics. Its attempt at
humor alluded me.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Mike Barker's "Best Laid Plans" is an example of effective film
noir. A dark subject matter, plenty of moral dilemmas, good dialogue,
and stylish direction which makes for an entertaining, twisty
90-minute diversion.
Two buddies, Nick(Alessandro Nivola), who works at a recycling plant,
and Bryce(Josh Brolin), a high-school teacher, are meeting for a few
drinks at a local bar in Tropico(a small town in an unnamed state that
looks like Nevada). Nick has been living in Tropico his entire life,
and is depending on the inheritance which he will now receive, since
his father has just died. Bryce is fortunate enough to be
house-sitting for a wealthy family, and is looking forward to a bright
future.
All that is changed when Nick gets a phone call from Bryce after
midnight, asking him to come over to discuss a huge problem. A
woman(Reese Witherspoon) whom he met at the bar, and then had sex
with, accused him of rape. She also happens to be downstairs, tied up
in rope and handcuffed.  Bryce seems to be hazy about what exactly
happened, but he knows that a rape charge would ruin his career and
perhaps send him to prison.
Ted Griffin's script then flashes back three months, and although I am
tempted to let you in on some of the twists that occur after the
initial setup, I'm doing you a favor by letting you witness them on
your own. However, if you aren't paying attention to certain moments,
then some plot complications will fly over your head. It's called
challenging cinema.
"Best Laid Plans" won't grab you in the way that "The Usual Suspects"
does, but it is a fine homage to the way film noir used to be made;
with multilayered characters, strong-willed women, and people who
pretend to be something that they're not. "Best Laid Plans" is
sometimes rough-around-the-edges, but being Mike Barker's first
American film, it is quite an achievement.
Alessandro Nivola(Pollux Troy in "Face/Off") makes quite an impression
as the good-natured guy who gets corrupted by money, and Reese "Is
There Anyone Better" Witherspoon once again displays sheer talent in
her role of the girl who displays her love through the things she'll
do for her lover.
The look of "Best Laid Plans" reminds me of Paul Thomas Anderson's
"Hard Eight", and Danny Cannon's "Phoenix", and the tone of these
films is also similar. It's nice to see a well-made character-driven
suspense-thriller, especially when it has a cast of young
people. Nothing much goes awry in these "Best Laid Plans".
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com
this review is also featured at http://jump.to/moviepage 


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fox Searchlight Pictures/Fox 2000 Pictures/Dogstar Films
 Director: Mike Barker
 Writer:   Ted Griffin
 Cast: Alessandro Nivola, Reese Witherspoon, Josh Brolin,
Rocky Carroll, Michael G. Hagerty, Terrence Dashon Howard,
Jamie Marsh, Gene Wolande, Jonathan McMurty
   The twists and turns featured in Mike Barker's thriller "Best
Laid Plans" offer nothing new to the genre, yet only the
sharpest devotees of the contortions and distortions of the
category will guess the design of this cinematic pretzel. 
At times we think we're looking at a photographed play,
particularly since Ted Griffin's script focusses strongly on just
three people who plan and scheme to enrich themselves and
then diagram ways to extricate themselves from onerous
circumstances.  The best reason to see this drama--which is
really the sort of piece you might encounter on a decent
cable station in the late evening--is the quality of the acting. 
The always reliable Reese Witherspoon ("Pleasantville,"
"Election," "Cruel Intentions") is absolutely incapable of fault
in any role, while relatively unknown Alessandro Nivola
("Face Off") turns in a smashingly convincing job as a guy
who gets kicked around and yet is sought out to disentangle
a former college buddy from a most untenable situation.
   Appropriately using a flashback technique, Barker opens
the movie in a bar as an increasingly inebriated Bryce (John
Brolin) loudly relates unamusing jokes to his pal Nick
(Alessandro Nivola).  Shortly after a sexy young woman
slinks into the pub and casts an eye on Bryce, Nick
gets a frantic call from his buddy who desperately needs
help.  After having having gone home with Bryce--a college
English instructor who is house-sitting for a fabulously
wealthy contact--the woman accuses her new companion of
rape, threatens to bring in the police, and is chained to a pole
in the basement.  A frantic Bryce pumps Nick for advice on
how to save both his career and his freedom.  When Barker
flashes back four months, we find out that things are not what
they seem.
   Much is made about the barren town in which the
characters are living, a nowhere place out West called
Tropico, which both Nick and his girl friend Lissa (Reese
Witherspoon) are eager to leave.  Scripters like Ted Griffin
and also like "Mrs. Tingle"'s Kevin Williamson seem to
believe people living in decaying towns can leave only if they
come into some money--in the case of "Tingle's"
valedictorian, Leigh Ann Watson, by winning a scholarship to
a big-city college, and in the situation of Griffin's screenplay
by coming into insurance money.  When Nick finds out that
the money he expected from his dad's life insurance will not
materialize, he falls into a trap.  He becomes an accessory to
a crime, one which expected to net him $10,000, but ends up
actually owing money to people who put extreme pressure
upon him when his best-laid robbery schemes gang a-gley.  
   "Best Laid Plans" features an amusing role by Rocky
Carroll as the Bad Ass Dude, who demonstrates in graphic
ways his determination to be paid off by the increasingly
despairing Nick, and who possesses some of the cleverest
dialogue in the story.  He comes across as no paltry street
hood at all, but more like a finance major who relentlessly
and humorously quizzes his prey on Adam Smith's theories
embodied in "The Wealth of Nations" and demonstrates his
knowledge of the Benthamite Calculus as well. Though the
anxiety-ridden Bryce serves largely as a straight-man, a
sounding board for Nick's shenanigans, all three principals
turn in crackling good performances in a story marred only by
a cop-out sentimental finale.  "Best Laid Plans" may not be
sport the clever dialogue of some of David Mamet's films on
similar themes ("House of Games" comes to mind), but as a
puzzler that inventively blends humor with chills, Barker and
Griffin's film is more than worthy of our patronage.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Josh Brolin, Alessandro Nivola and Reese Witherspoon
Directed By Mike Barker
Running Time: 1 hour 33 minutes
Best Laid Plans is well made, well acted, well directed and a fun ride. The
film opens by introducing us to two friends, Bryce (Brolin) and Nick
(Nivola) talking in a cafe. The sexy Lissa (Witherspoon) walks in, and the
action cuts away from the cafe to Nick's answering an phone call from a
panic stricken Bryce asking Nick to come to his house straight away. When
Nick arrives, we found out that Lissa had accused Bryce of raping her, and
Bryce, in a state of confusion, has tied her up downstairs. Suddenly, the
film cuts away again, and we see how this situation came to arise.
Obviously, not everything is what as it seems.
Full of little twists and turns, Best Laid Plans is a film that can only be
watched once, but is good fun. The script is well written, and most of the
turns you won't see coming. Although the plot is nothing new,  the bulk of
the movie about a failed heist, it's done well enough to provide a lot of
entertainment value. There's also some intense scenes of tension, and the
film is paced well enough to make sure the audience is left waiting for the
next twist, and not falling asleep. This thriller gets off to a get start:
most of it is thrilling and engaging.
The largely unknown cast are also very good. Brolin is excellent as the
panicky, nieve Bryce, and while most actors would completely overdo the role
he's playing, Bryce makes his panic seem believable, not laughable.
Witherspoon, after an great turn in Pleasantville, is charming here,
although her role isn't beefy enough to produce an excellent performance.
She's watchable, however, and looks great as usual. This is an actress to
look out for. Nivola, as the cool Nick, underplays the role to great effect,
and is very watchable. His calm, cool collectiveness is great on-screen, and
he carries the whole movie. He is certainly the star of the show, in a role
that seems to be tailored made for him.
British director Mike Barker handles the film well, producing a stylish
effort. The lighting is moody, and the action is well done. There are some
great moments of direction where the audience is thrown off centre, and he
uses the camera well to heighten the moments of tension, such as the camera
swirling round a room or the characters. Unfortunately, style seems to be
slightly more important than story, and occasionally the story does suffer
due to the director working more on the look of the film. Therefore,
although the story is fun, it is also somewhat slight and shallow, and won't
be remembered for a long time after the film is over.
But, overall, Best Laid Plans is a pleasant surprise. I walked into the
movie 'blind', i.e not knowing what to expect, and I came out pleased. It is
an well made piece of filmmaking, and tells it's simple story in an
entertaining way. There's twists to keep the brain happy, visuals to keep
the eye happy, and some good dialogue to keep the ears happy. With a
talented young cast giving it their all, a great soundtrack, and good
production design, Best Laid Plans is the biggest surprise of the year so
far. If you're looking for a purely enjoyable little thriller, albeit with a
somewhat underdeveloped script,  Best Laid Plans, although no classic, is
recommended.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Best_Laid_Plans_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
I have much to say about _Best_Laid_Plans_, but I'm afraid that I can't
really say much of anything about it.  To go into detail is to ruin the
biggest pleasure the film has to offer--and if I did that, I'm afraid
there's not too much else left to enjoy in director Mike Barker's
interesting but ultimately underwhelming film.
The film opens with two old college buddies, Nick (Alessandro Nivola)
and Bryce (Josh Brolin), talking over drinks at a bar in their small
hometown of Tropico.  With the entrance of a fetching young blonde (Reese
Witherspoon), the film fades out, and when it fades back in, a few hours
have passed, and Bryce finds himself in a predicament that he feels only
Nick can bail him out of--Bryce had sex with the girl, who, as it turns
out, is underage, and in a panic, he tied her up and is holding her
hostage in the basement.
The rest of _Best_Laid_Plans_ should be left a mystery; needless to say,
as the title implies, there are some plans involved, and, in turn, the
implication that comes with calling them "best laid"--as in those of mice
and men, and, consequently, as in them going awry.  These plans, however,
are not what one would expect, and the series of twists upon twists that
writer Ted Griffin devises does keep one interested in what happens next.
The problem, however, is what appears to be the trademark of Griffin,
whose only other effort was the satirical cannibalism movie
_Ravenous_--that is, the blending of elements that aren't normally mixed.
 Grisly subject matter (with the bloody gore to match) and sometimes
broad satire were paired fairly uneasily in _Ravenous_, and here the odd
combo is that of a dark, mean-spirited thriller with straightforward
romantic elements.  It would take very skilled jugglers in the writing
and directing departments to mix these opposite ends of the emotional
spectrum without appearing to exhibit a split personality, which, I'm
afraid, is how _Best_Laid_Plans_ comes off; the most telling moment is
the film's resolution, which adds a lethally unnatural flavor of sugar to
the film's black bile.
The actors, for the most part, fare well under the circumstances; Nivola
is convincing (if unspectacular), and Witherspoon, who has never given a
bad performance, doesn't break her streak here.  The weakest link is
Brolin's annoying Bryce, but in his defense, a lot of that is the fault
of the writing; Bryce displays very few, if any, redeeming qualities,
making one wonder why Nick would keep him as a friend--and thus removing
any resonance from the whole "betrayal of friendship" theme.
Which brings us back to the title.  Barker and Griffin had some
interesting ingredients in place for this noirish thriller, and obviously
had an intriguingly twisty course clearly mapped out for themselves. 
Alas, much like those mice and men...
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

