Title
Review for Player, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE PLAYER is a film directed by Robert Altman and written by
Michael Tolkin, based on his novel.  It stars Tim Robbins, Greta
Scacchi, Whoopi Goldberg, Fred Ward, Brion James, Peter Gallagher,
Cynthia Stevenson, Vincent D'Onofrio, Dean Stockwell, Richard E. Grant,
Lyle Lovett, Sydney Pollack, with dozens of cameos.  Rated R for
profanity, mature themes.
     THE PLAYER opens with a witty and self-mocking "homage" to the long
tracking shot that opens Orson Welles's TOUCH OF EVIL, an even longer,
equally amazing tracking shot that scans an unnamed Hollywood studio and
introduces the major players by eavesdropping on the busy conversations,
especially the writers pitching their stories to Tim Robbins playing
Griffin Mill, enfant terrible on his way out.  In the process, we also
start the endless and fascinating succession of cameos that help give
this movie its inside/outside/upside/downside mixture of flick and
documentary as we encounter Buck Henry, the writer of THE GRADUATE,
pitching a sequel, and Altman's protege Alan Rudolph pitching a
"politely political psychic thriller with heart ... GHOST meets THE
MANCHURIAN."
     Before the movie is over, Altman and Tolkin have pitched the idea
of the movie to us, the very story we've just seen.  It is a dazzling
bright and cynical satire, if either shallow or accurate; in the
self-referant, self-absorbed Hollywood atmosphere of the film, it is
might hard to know the dancer from the dance, the satire or the thing
being satirized.  For example, what about the character of Greta
Scacchi?  Like so many Hollywood women, this one is all surface with no
past, no future apart from her relationship to her man or men.  Are you
going to be satisfied by the ending?  It is blunt and counters a lot of
rules.  You may like that, its cynicism,, its wit, its realpolitik, as
it were, or you may feel cheated.
     I think you will like Altman's direction.  He has returned to the
multi-leveled, half-improvised conversations, the imaginative camera
work, the witty references.  For one example, Altman shows us a plein
air breakfast meeting with Burt Reynolds and someone else talking at one
table in the foreground while the mike concentrates on the background
conversation of Robbins and his boss (Brion James); the camera shoots
through the gap between Reynolds and friend and moves right past them as
it closes in on the rear table.  When Robbins leaves, the camera pulls,
the mike pulls back, and Reynolds is still talking.  Did I explain this
at all understandably?  No matter, really, when you see it, you will
recognize and, I assume, admire it.
     For another example, there's a big charity party and one of those
Hollywood TV reporters commenting over the hubbub of the crowd and the
camera shows an amazing collection of recognizable faces; we learn this
a black-and-white party and there's Cher dressed in red.  Carole Lombard
gave the first black-and-white Hollywood party in the 1930s and Norma
Shearer, the reigning queen, showed up in red; Lombard chewed Shearer
out, even though Clark Gable, Lombard's future husband (whom she had met
for the first time that night) told her that one did not chew out Norma
Shearer, who was married to Irving Thalberg.  No one chews out Cher.
     THE PLAYER is filled with the constant tug between the history of
the Golden Era and the pressures of the current moment.  The head of
studio security (Fred Ward) praises the old movies (he talks about the
Wellesian tracking shot during the Altmanian one), but recognizes no
titles after 1950, it seems.  The walls are decorated by 30s movie
posters.  No one has time to go to movies, but they consider how to do
without writers altogether.
     The individual performances are uniformly excellent.  Tim Robbins
has never had a better role (except perhaps for the much smaller part in
BULL DURHAM).  His babyish face makes his ruthlessness all the more
alarming.  Peter Gallagher plays his rival Larry Levy as a handsome
serpent.  Vincent D'Onofrio is particularly effective as David Kahane,
an angry and not very successful writer.  And then there's very strong
and heartbreaking performance of Cynthia Stevenson whose fate is by all
reports, as well as her performance, painfully accurate.
     I also enjoyed the singer Lyle Lovett in a role that was a major
comic relief, but I wasn't too pleased with the performance of his
partner played by Whoopi Goldberg, not that she's any less than
wonderful, but she plays her usual character to such a degree that it
hard not to think we're looking at another cameo.  In addition to the
multitudinous as-themselves appearances (Bruce Willis and Julia Roberts
are especially witty and self-parodying), there are many small roles
filled admirably.  For example, there are Dean Stockwell and Richard E.
Grant as the agent-writer team who manage to send up the pieties of the
message script with a brilliant sell-out.  Then there's Sydney Pollack,
the director, playing a lawyer as the very model of detached and
charming cynicism.
     THE PLAYER is a film of great richness and (perhaps) depth, of
admirable technique and successful results.  I think that for the
critics and film students the question will be to what end was all this
brilliance served up.  THE PLAYER is so intricately self-referential
that I despair of trying to decide whether it is a first-rate satire, a
celluloid noose, as Jeff Shannon in the Seattle Times wrote, or whether
it is less subversive than it is part of the mainstream it appears to
attack.  Altman, Tolkin, and their army of stars are the establishment,
the Industry, major players who are showing us Hollywood As It Really
Is,, acerbically, wittily, the ultimate inside joke, after all.  In the
film, one character lists the ingredients a successful movie must have:
suspense, laughter, hope, heart, nudity, sex.  THE PLAYER has all of
these, by the strangest of coincidences.  I suspect the film is like the
worm Ouroboros that swalloweth its own tail, both in structure and
intent.
     In the meantime, whatever the meaning, cynical or absurdist, THE
PLAYER is a great film, as good as Altman has ever made, including
M*A*S*H*, NASHVILLE, and McCABE AND MRS MILLER.

Author
Kevin Patterson
THE PLAYER is one of those rare films that succeeds brilliantly despite the
fact that the audience and the filmmakers probably hate most of the
characters. A clever, sometimes humorous, and probably all too realistic
satire of the movie industry, the film follows the ups and downs of studio
executive Griffin Mill (Tim Robbins), an aloof businessman who cynically
manipulates the filmmaking process to serve his own interests and undercut
those of his rival Larry Levy (Peter Gallagher). The extent of his coldness
is revealed when he accidentally kills a disgruntled writer whom he
believed was sending him death threats and smoothly manages to cover up the
death. Everything from the selfish arrogance of the executives to their
retuning of a movie for mass consumption to the pretensions of a
self-important "message film" is skewered on the satirical sword of
director Robert Altman and screenwriter Michael Tolkin. If you ever want to
try to talk someone out of getting into the movie business, show them THE
PLAYER.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A new film about how back-stabbing and
     unforgiving Hollywood is, from the director of BUFFALO BILL
     AND THE INDIANS, QUINTET, and POPEYE.  There are some nice
     self-referential touches but over all the film is just a
     little too much into muck-raking.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     Hollywood's worst-kept secret is that there is a lot wrong with the
film industry.  It seems that everybody who has ever had everything to do
with film-making cannot wait to tell anyone who will listen how everybody
else in Hollywood--especially a close friend or co-worker--is a back-
stabber.  The key quote from last year's documentary NAKED HOLLYWOOD was
that Hollywood is a town in which people wish you well only if you are
dying.  People just love to write about Hollywood Babylon.  I suspect that
the Hollywood restaurants have to close at noon for lack of business
considering how many people "can never do lunch in this town again."  And
nobody loves stories of how bad things are in Hollywood as much as people
actually in the industry.  They hear the stories, they tell the stories,
they build the stories into tall tales and folklore.  I seriously doubt that
there is much wrong with the film industry that is not wrong with the auto
industry, or the chemical industry, or the clothing industry.  It is just
that of these industries only the film industry's primary business is
telling stories.  Hollywood has always turned out a lot of bad films and a
few very good films.  It certainly appears that there are fewer good films
coming out than there are were at one time.  But how many theatrical films
these days are as bad as a "Blondie" or "Mexican Spitfire" film?  For that
matter, how many pre-1950s films have the impact of THE KILLING FIELDS?  I
guess that is why I have never had a strong interest in Hollywood's dirty
linen.  And even in the days I think Hollywood was its greatest, it was
making films about how far Hollywood had deteriorated.  SUNSET BOULEVARD was
a pretty good dirty linen film.  THE BAD AND THE BEAUTIFUL, ALL ABOUT EVE,
HOLLYWOOD BOULEVARD, THE BIG PICTURE, BARTON FINK, and THE PLAYER are all
decent Hollywood dirty linen films.  But THE PLAYER is what I should be
writing about.
     THE PLAYER is a deep-focus film.  You are expected to keep an eye both
on the foreground and the background.  In the foreground we have a story of
murder in the film industry; in the background we see Hollywood with all of
its faults and blemishes.  We hear writer Mitchell Tolkin's criticism of the
film industry coming a bit at a time out of dozens of mouths.  They describe
a typical bad film.  And sure enough the foreground story has everything the
characters in the background complain about.  The film moves in a tight
circle describing all the faults of modern Hollywood films and then
exemplifying them.
     Tim Robbins plays Griffin Mill, a somewhat slimey film executive being
eased out to make way for Larry Levy (played by Peter Gallagher), another
slimey executive.  This might be enough to put Griffin's nerves on edge, but
Griffin is also getting sinister postcards with death threats because of the
shabby way he has treated writers.  It is when Griffin decides to try to
play detective and find the angry writer that he really becomes embroiled.
     THE PLAYER is not just about the film industry, it is about film
itself.  Wherever Griffin goes, he is surrounded by film posters and lobby
cards that match his mood or the plot.  There are references to the long
tracking shots of TOUCH OF EVIL and ABSOLUTE BEGINNERS during a long
tracking shot in THE PLAYER.  And there are the now famous cameo
appearances.  VARIETY lists 65 famous people who play themselves in this
film.  Identifying people in the background becomes a major distraction.
     Robert Altman has through most of his career been a maverick filmmaker,
but I cannot help feeling that this film is a little ungracious albeit with
good nature.  Altman has done some good films and a few real stinkers.  He
certainly cannot blame the failure of QUINTET on the studio trying too hard
to make it commercial.  And even after having made losers, he seems always
to find work.  This alone shows that the film industry has not always been
so unkind to him.  And on top of that, THE PLAYER was made only a short time
after a similar and in some ways better film, Christopher Guest's THE BIG
PICTURE.  That film is recommended for fans of THE PLAYER.  I rate Altman's
film just a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon Conrad
     What sheer unadulterated joy.  I loved THE PLAYER from start to
finish.  I don't think a movie has plunged me into this kind of bliss
since... well, since NASHVILLE possibly.  (Okay, there have probably
been a few others since 1977 for me.)  Once Robert Altman was one of my
favorite people on earth; he lost me somewhere around QUINTET and A
PERFECT COUPLE, but he sure has won me back now.  He still has It.
     I guess that to enjoy THE PLAYER you have to enjoy "the movies" as
an idea.  Both to enjoy a story that, for all its wider applicability,
is definitely about the Industry as it exists at this moment, and to
enjoy all the in-jokes and self-reference with which the movie is
stuffed.  All of these were so deftly done that I don't think I ever
stopped grinning foolishly.  (Damn, I have to go again soon!)
Definitely don't be late; if you are, you'll miss an amazing 8-minute
tracking shot in which the plot exposition takes place in several
locations simultaneously, without a single editing cut (and we hear
snatches of a conversation about famous long tracking shots that open
favorite movies -- there goes that self-reference again).
     One problem remains unsolved, I guess.  With several dozen big and
medium-sized names appearing "as themselves," it's sometimes hard to
tell whether a fairly well-known actor, turning up later in the movie,
is playing a role or not.  (Whoopi Goldberg, Fred Ward, Sydney Pollack,
Dean Stockwell all evoke this kind of momentary disjuncture.)  But it's
not a huge problem, and Altman again gets extraordinary performances
from all his cast.  Tim Robbins, Greta Schacchi, Peter Gallagher have
never been better on-screen.  How does a director who simply seems to be
sitting back and letting performers do their thing, work this kind of
magic so consistently?  (The first time Carol Burnett really released
her special qualities on film was in A WEDDING.  Think also of Ronee
Blakley and Lily Tomlin in NASHVILLE, Julie Christie and Warren Beatty 
in MCCABE AND MRS. MILLER, and many many more.)
     The story takes unexpected turns and doesn't take turns one would
expect, but all of that turns out in retrospect to be exactly right.
The ending is both offhandedly perverse and exactly, hilariously right.
I saw M*A*S*H in theaters maybe 15 times, NASHVILLE perhaps 20.  I
wonder what kind of total I'll rack up for this newest addition to the
Altman canon.  It'll be fun finding out!

Author
James Brundage
Directed by Robert Altman (Short Cuts)
Written by Michael Tolkin (Deep Impact), based on his novel
Starring Tim Robbins (The Shawshank Redemption), Greta Scacchi (Presumed
Innocent), Fred Ward (Dangerous Beauty), Whoopi Goldberg (Sister Act), Peter
Gallagher (To Gillian on Her 37th Birthday), Brion James (D.O.A.), Cynthia
Stevenson (Forget Paris), Vincent D'Onofrio (Men In Black)
>From the master of independent cinema, Robert Altman, comes the blackest of
satires, The Player.  Postmodern, intelligent, suspenseful, funny,
brilliant.  All of these very useful adjectives apply to this film.  There
is no way around it: The Player is great.
The Player, as I stated, is a black satire from the director of Short Cuts,
M*A*S*H, and Nashville.  It follows Griffin Mills (Tim Robbins), a villain
we love to hate, and, ironically, our main character.  Mills is getting
postcards.  Each one is a threat on his life, and telling others, due to the
fact that his position as a studio exec is threatened by up-and-coming
producer Larry Levy (Peter Gallagher), is a threat on his career.
At the beginning, Mills is charismatic, even likable.  But he's quickly
shown for the snake that he is.  In the words of Tim Robbins, who deserved
but was not even nominated for an academy award for his role, `he's
manipulative, he's a son of a bitch.'  It's true, it's all true.
The threatening postcards lead him to believe that a writer is sending them.
A rejected writer.  However, in the cruel industry of movies which kills
more ideas than W.W.II killed people, this does not narrow it down.  What
does narrow it down is one of the more bizarre moments of the film.  He's in
the hot tub with Bonnie, story editor and girlfriend (and, by, the way, the
only moral character of the movie), when he asks her about his own life.
However, unable to formulate it into his own life, he explains it through
movies.  He gives her a pitch, asks her how long it will be before the
writer-in-question becomes dangerous, and she narrows the selection of
writers down by providing a five-month time period before danger arrives.
 Using this, he selects David Kahayne, hack-writer of the bubonic plague of
Hollywood: the unhappy ending.  David's what movie people call `unproduced',
a writer who's a member of the WGA (Writer's Guild of America, which holds a
fairly good monopoly on writers in Hollywood) but who hasn't sold a script.
He calls his girlfriend June Gudmundsdottir (Gretta Scacchi, pronounced good
man's daughter) and finds out where to find him.  The surprise there, of
course, is that his nickname is, according to June is `the dead man'.
Kahayne is in Pasadena, enjoying himself at the Rialota watching The Bicycle
Thief.  Mills confronts him about the postcards, and, in a fit of rage,
kills him in a parking lot.
Of course, fitting with the Hollywood that it satires so well, he didn't
kill the right person.  And now, Griffen Mills is being investigated by the
police, is falling in love with June, is trying to secure his position as
head of the studio, and, on top of it all, fearing for his life.
The movie is artistically brilliant and interestingly postmodern.  In a very
ironic way, the ending is the beginning: a pitch by the mysterious psychotic
writer of a movie called The Player, about the events you have just seen.
It references itself: naming the record for a tracking shot in an American
motion picture (formerly held by Orson Wells' Touch of Evil) while breaking
it.  Having a main character from D.O.A. being asked if he remembers the
film.  Talking about eliminating the writers from the artistic process the
day after Mills has murdered the writer.
There normally isn't much I can say about a film.  In my life, there are
maybe ten films I could go on and on about, and you have the luck to
hopefully see this one.  It makes statements.  It predicts things.  It was
ironic at the time it came out and is ironic now.
For instance, Griffin Mills is quoted as saying `movies are art, now more
than ever' while, at the very same time in the real world, movies were
flocking back to the existence of the art film.  It is sheltered in a unique
ambiguity: June discovers the Mills killed her boyfriend and doesn't care.
The good are punished, the bad survive: Bonnie is fired and left for
proverbial dead while June and Mills live happily ever after.
This is the film for movie buffs.  It makes you stop and think about what
speeds in front of your face at 24 frames a second.  It states things about
the industry in a uniquely detached manner, where people talk about all the
dark things of the industry as if they were drinking cappuccinos.
For instance, another quote by Griffin Mills, asshole producer but satiric
god, addresses the elements needed in a modern studio film: `Suspense,
laughter, violence.  Hope, heart.  Nudity, sex.  Happy Endings.'

Author
Brian L. Johnson
125 min., R, Comedy, 1992
Director: Robert Altman
Cast: Tim Robbins, Greta Scacchi, Whoopi Goldberg, Kathy Ireland,
      Julia Roberts, Fred Ward, Sydney Pollack, Dean Stockwell,
      Peter Gallagher, Brion James, Cynthia Stevenson,
      Vincent D'Onofrio, Richard E. Grant, Lyle Lovett, Buck Henry,
      Burt Reynolds, Cher, Bruce Willis, Dina Merrill, Angela Hall,
      Anjelica Huston, John Cusack, Lili Tomlin, Nick Nolte,
      Elliott Gould, Peter Falk, Karen Black, Robert Carradine,
      Jeff Goldblum, Ray Walston, David Alan Grier
     Movie executive Tim Robbins is receiving hate mail from a writer.
Robbins thinks that he has figured out who is doing it.  Accidentally
the man gets killed.  Robbins finds out that the wrong man died, and he
has to make sure he doesn't get caught.
     THE PLAYER is well worth watching, and joins a line of films that
successfully make fun of Hollywood, one of which is the very recent
HOLLYWOOD BOULEVARD 2 with Ginger Lynn Allen and Eddie Deezen, and the
not so recent THE BIG PICTURE with Kevin Bacon and Jennifer Jason Leigh.
On a scale of zero to five, I give THE PLAYER a four.  THE PLAYER is
rated R for female nudity, brief male nudity, violence, explicit
language, and adult situations.
     I have never really been taken with the characters Tim Robbins
plays, or Tim Robbins, himself, for that matter.  I especially hated him
BULL DURHAM.  In this film though (and in CADILLAC MAN), I feel that he
did a really good job.  Maybe if he keeps acting like this I will start
to like him.
     The biggest problem with the film is that some of the cast, like
Fred Ward, Tim Robbins, and Whoopi Goldberg, play characters and others,
like Julia Roberts, Burt Reynolds, and Bruce Willis, play themselves.
When a character comes on, at first you don't know whether they are
playing themselves, or somebody else.  I think that if they had
straightened this out, the movie would have run smoother.  I don't know
how they really could have fixed it up other than having unknowns
playing the characters and the knowns playing themselves.
     The cast does a great job, although I don't know how many were just
being themselves, and how many were really acting.  The story was well
written, and the film was great fun to watch.  Earlier this year THE
PLAYER was playing at major theaters.  Now it is in small second run
theaters, and soon it will be coming to video (and laser disk).  If you
want to see this film, I suggest that if you can see it in a theater on
the big screen that you do so, because on a small screen you might miss
something happening.  That may no longer be a possibility for you.  If
you haven't seen this film I suggest that you do, because it is
definitely worth it.
[Moderator's note: In the line of pictures that make fun of Hollywood,
there is also HOLLYWOOD BOULEVARD itself, to which HOLLYWOOD BOULEVARD 2
is a sequel.  The original was co-directed by Joe Dante and is his first
film.]
.


Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
I saw 'The Player' when it was first released in 1992 and I viewed it at
a 2nd run art house (that's a term used to describe a movie theatre that
shows films that don't make a lot of money), and I didn't hear one
chuckle from the audience in a building that was more than half full for
its first evening performance so it's puzzling to me how the film can be
called a "black comedy" by numerous other critics that have reviewed
it.  Black comedies are usually highly uneven because the comedy is so
sharp and penetrating that it has to let up at some point to prepare you
for the next strike by pounding your funny bone with a hammer.  When I
think of the term "black comedy" and ironically it's another film that
examines the movie industry, Blake Edwards' 1981 film 'S.O.B.' comes to
mind.  That film threw in everything but the kitchen sink in its
slapstick presentation of Hollywood politics and manipulating, and
Edwards put his own trademark silliness found in many of his 'Pink
Panther' films into the film's key moments.
Director Robert Altman's films are like documentaries in many cases but
they always retain the academic flare that rank right up there with the
most studio oriented films that are produced.  Altman is perhaps best at
developing the themes of his pictures in a very even fashion and the
climax of all his films aren't executed to detract from the enjoyment of
any other part of the film.
'The Player' is the type of non-Hollywood movie that almost every
celebrity wanted to be in.  It features literally dozens and dozens of
cameos by big stars that I'm sure had their share of nasty studio
politics and decided to slap the movie industry in the face by appearing
in this big winner of a movie.  The film's cynicism is so well hidden by
its main plot that it comes off not only as a smart film but one that
plays its main characters better and in a more realistic fashion than
almost any other film made in the 1990's, so far.
Having worked for many years at the corporate end of the entertainment
industry, I can tell you without hesitation that the type of wheeling
and dealing, back stabbing, decadent behaviour and day to day operations
in the movie industry are complete and on target throughout the entire
film and hit a truthful note in every frame.
In 'The Player', we are shown one of the most ingenious opening scenes
ever filmed as a long tracking shot (about 8 minutes) pans across the
lot of a movie studio as various characters interact.  Tim Robbins stars
as a movie studio boss who is receiving threatening post cards in his
office that contain death threats and he is determined to find out who
is sending them.  He tracks down who he believes is the culprit stalking
him with the threats and he may or may not be correct in his assumption.
Without telling you who does what to who (you can discover that when you
see the film), the film contains an old fashioned murder plot that fits
into the context of the movie's suspense and complex character study and
its story doesn't sell itself out at the end but rather has an ending
that you may not like on the surface but deeper thought will convince
you it's the right one.
'The Player' received three Oscar nominations (Best Director for Altman,
Best Screenplay for Michael Tolkin based on his own novel and Best Film
Editing).  Understandably, it didn't get a nomination for Best Picture
in a year that featured 'The Crying Game', 'A Few Good Men', 'Howard's
End', 'Scent of a Woman', and the winner, 'Unforgiven' as the selected
finalists.  There was no way the Hollywood crowd was going to nominate a
film mocking their industry and perhaps  become the representative (if
it won) of an award that is suppose to sugar coat the film industry, not
show its darker side.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
