Title
Review for All That Jazz (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ryan Kohler
You'd think that a musical with Roy Scheider as the lead would probably 
not be very good. You know, because when I think of singing and dancing 
I think of Roy Scheider.  In that aspect, Bob Fosse's 1979 film, "All 
That Jazz", is one of the best film musical films of the last thirty 
years and one of the best films of the late 70's. 
Scheider plays Joe Gideon, an overstressed stage/film director who is 
pushing himself toward an early grave.  He overworks himself, is 
constantly smoking, and does various other things detrimental to his 
health.  This character is clearly the celluloid Bob Fosse, an 
overstressed stage/film director.  This autobiographical film seems to 
infer that Fosse knows what he did right and wrong during his life.  He 
presents those episodes with Scheider as his surrogate persona.   
Gideon runs into trouble with his professional AND personal life.  He is 
seen many times laboring over the editing of a film based on a 
controversial stand-up comedian (re: "Lenny", Fosse's 1974 film, 
starring Dustin Hoffman.)  The edit is not going well and the studio is 
soon on his back.  Then there is the stage production Gideon is in 
charge of; we see a musical sequence he has created, titled "AirRotica". 
 Involving VERY permiscuous flight attendants, it soon angers the plays 
backers.  It is obvious that Gideon is in trouble. 
Fosse's directoral skills come to light during the dance sequence 
involving "AirRotica".  He combines his cinematic skills with his 
theater background to create an almost disturbing number.  The 
scantily-clad dancers in compromising positions combined with the 
lighting that Fosse chooses creates a decided air of decadence.  It is 
very easy to see why uptight producers and backers would get upset about 
it.  As theater its controversial, as film, however, this sequence it is 
brilliant. 
Gideon doesn't have a great family life either.  Obsessed in his work he 
is perhaps not the best father to his daughter, Michelle (Erzsebet 
Foldi).  He is not a bad father, it seems, because when he is with 
Michelle they get along great.  It simply seems that he is a father who 
may love his work more.  He is still on speaking terms with his ex-wife, 
Audrey (Leland Palmer), a Broadway star in her own right.  Thrown into 
the mix is Kate Jagger, (played by Ann Reinking, who may be playing her 
own alter-ego), a younger dancer that Joe is involved with.  One more 
woman is around, too, though not in a conventional way.  Angelique, an 
apparition played by Jessica Lange, is around to advise Joe on his 
problems and his future.  If Clarence from "It's a Wonderful Life" had a 
kid, Angelique may have been her. 
Much of the dancing involves the women of Joe's life.  All the female 
stars, with the exception of Lange, sing and dance with much style and 
grace.  Reinking and Palmer perform their acting roles teriffically as 
well, though it is in the musical segments they shine.   
Gideon has a major heart-attack near the end of the film and as he lies 
unconscious he has a dream.  He dreams of a television show, hosted by 
the gregarious O'Connor Flood (Ben Vereen), that celebrates his upcoming 
death: call it "This Is Your Death."  Many of the people Gideon has been 
involved with in his life are there and various musical numbers come 
about. 
 Fosse kicks the style into high-gear at this point.  Neon lights are 
abound on the stage, characters don different costumes, and, for a death 
march, it is quite upbeat.  Even Gideon/Scheider gets into the 
singing/dancing act near the end, echoing the sung refrain during this 
segment: "Goodbye my life, goodbye."  This masterful sequence combines 
all of Fosse's talents into one last shot of adrenaline and cinematic 
brilliance. 
Roy Scheider gives the performance of his career in "All That Jazz." 
 Since this film isn't a "conventional" musical (i.e. people don't 
randomly burst into song in this film, the musical sequences are logical 
and fit into the plot), Scheider doesn't have to sing or dance.  All he 
has to do is to act, and boy does he!  He captures all the pain the 
Gideon has inside of him as things happen to him.  Gideon is a 
passionate man, especially about his work.  Scheider shows us how Gideon 
cares deeply in all his work, the painstaking brilliance that goes into 
creating what he creates.   
Fosse was a great filmmaker.  "All That Jazz" is the zenith of his film 
work, a film that is entertaining and introspective.  Bob Fosse made a 
movie about himself, about things that he believes in.  The material is 
truthful about what is going on, as most of it happened to Fosse 
himself.  With his film, "All That Jazz", Fosse's execution was 
flawless. 
"All That Jazz" (1979).  Directed by Bob Fosse.  Written by Robert Alan 
Aurthur and Bob Fosse.  Cinematography by Giuseppe Rotunno.  Original 
music by Ralph Burns.  Produced by Robert Alan Aurthur.  With Roy 
Scheider, Ann Reinking, Leland Palmer, Jessica Lange, Ben Vereen, 
Erzsebet Foldi.  Running time: 123 minutes.  Distributed by 20th Century 
Fox.  Rated: R.  Available on home video. 
Visit my Film Review Multiplex: http://pages.prodigy.com/XWKZ01B/index.htm
