Title
Review for Pollock (2000)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
I didn't know too much about Jackson Pollock before seeing Ed Harris'
impressive biopic.  I knew he was an artist.  I had heard of his wife, but I
didn't know she was an artist as well.  And I remember Patti Smith referring
to him as a "nigger" in one of her songs.
After seeing Pollock, I'm still not that familiar with the celebrated
American artist, but I do know that Harris and screen wife Marcia Gay Harden
act their asses off in the film and were justifiably honored with Academy
Award nominations for their performances.  Pollock is almost good enough to
transcend the typical tale of a tortured artist, only occasionally slipping
into clichéd scenes showing the artist sitting alone with his head buried in
his hands or curled up in the fetal position.
For those of you as uneducated about art as myself, Pollock (played by The
Third Miracle's Harris) was a true original, blurring the line between
Surrealism and Expressionism in post-war America.  He married a fellow
artist named Lee Krasner (Harden, Space Cowboys), and the couple struggled
with both finances and Pollock's manic-depression until he went down in a
blaze of drunken glory.  Don't get pissy about me spoiling the ending - when
is the last time you saw a movie about an artist that didn't die?
The film opens in 1942, where Pollock and Krasner are both up-and-comers in
New York's growing art world.  They're a couple of WPA kids, getting monthly
stipends from the government to sink into their paintings.  Neither is
particularly well-known outside New York, especially in Europe, which, at
the time, was still the center of the art world.  One day Krasner drops by
Pollock's apartment to look at his work.  She's assertive and almost
robotically emotionless, giving him unsolicited advice about his work.  They
fall in love and move in together, where Krasner blindly supports her man,
even if it means his career will overshadow her own.
Things start happening when Pollock's work is seen by the influential Peggy
Guggenheim (Harris' real-life wife, Amy Madigan).  As his career begins to
pick up steam, however, Krasner watches Pollock become unhinged by mental
illness and alcoholism.  A move to East Hampton (filmed on Pollock's actual
property) temporarily helps, but before long, Pollock ditches gardening for
binge drinking.
The Hamptons was where Pollock abandoned traditional painting style and
accidentally discovered a technique that involved drizzling and splattering
paint onto a canvas from above - a move that landed the artist in Life
magazine and established him as one of the country's premiere modern
artists. Typically, the success only leads to more problems in his life.
The story of Pollock's rise and self-destruction barely matters in the long
run.  It's much more gratifying to watch Harris wield his paintbrush like a
weapon while he creates startling images identical to those of the real
artist.  But the bizarre relationship between Pollock and Krasner is the
real highlight here.  Harris, who also directs and produces, has probably
never been better, but even his performance takes a backseat to Harden's
stellar turn as Krasner.  Admittedly, this role is probably the biggest
she's had to tackle, but Harden is head and shoulders better here than in
anything else I've ever seen her in.  She barely sounds like or resembles
herself physically.  It's like they spliced her DNA with Jeanne
Tripplehorn's looks and Rebecca Pidgeon's vocal mannerisms.
Technically, Pollock is a real treat to watch, thanks to Harris' careful
direction and some snazzy photography from Buena Vista Social Club
cinematographer Lisa Rinzler.  The film is based on a novel called "Jackson
Pollock: An American Saga," written by Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith
and adapted for the screen by Barbara Turner and Susan J. Emshwiller.
2:03 - R for language and brief sexuality

Author
Bill Chambers
POLLOCK
***1/2 (out of four)
starring Ed Harris, Marcia Gay Harden, Tom Bower, Jennifer Connelly
screenplay by Barbara Turner and Susan J. Emshwiller,
based on the book "Jackson Pollock: An American Saga" by Steven Naifeh and 
Gregory White Smith
directed by Ed Harris
-a review by Bill Chambers | bill@filmfreakcentral.net
***For more film, DVD and books about movie reviews, plus annual coverage 
of The Toronto International Film Festival, visit _Film Freak Central_ - 
http://filmfreakcentral.net  | Now with search engine***
"How do you know when you're finished making love?" -Jackson Pollock to a 
LIFE Magazine reporter on recognizing when you've completed a painting
Jackson Pollock's "making love" quote is famous, but in practically the 
same breath, he said a more constructive thing, "It's like looking at a bed 
of flowers--tear your hair out over what it means." It took him sixteen 
words to do as whole dissertations have tried and failed: equate God and 
abstract art and offer a kind of backhanded comfort to those confused to 
the point of resentment by the concept. The biopic _Pollock_, actor Ed 
Harris' directorial debut, reflects the second soundbite in how it accepts 
Pollock's creations as part of the order of things, and should similarly 
disarm haters of fine art.
Arguably more than any other living actor, Harris, who also plays 
_Pollock_, embodies the archetypal Working Stiff, and his blue-collar 
demystification of Pollock's labour-intensive art, both as performer and 
director, makes for unpretentious cinema. (From what I know of Harris, he, 
like Pollock, was not born gifted or lucky; instead, a strong work ethic is 
the seed of his success.) Granted, it's possible that _Pollock_ will 
alienate those same viewers perplexed by the imponderable "purpose" of 
Pollock's splatter series: the common thread between them is a lack of 
editorializing. The movie _Pollock_ is all purposeful gazes and silent 
exchanges dotted by tantrums, but the motivations are left to our own 
perceptions. And it is a sympathetic yet not altogether forgiving film, as 
illustrated by a disheartening conclusion.
_Pollock_ encapsulates the period in which he fought a losing battle 
against personal demons (alcoholism, depression, and the general attendant 
miseries of an artist) while finding a place of subconscious expression. A 
brief introduction to Pollock's raging drunk side segues into his getting 
accosted by a fellow New York artist, Lee Krasner (Marcia Gay Harden, 
awarded a Best Supporting Actress Oscar for this brilliant portrayal), who 
works from the outside-in, pre-intellectualizing every stroke of her brush. 
In a scene after they have moved in together and established adjoining 
studios, she asks what he hopes to achieve on his latest canvas, grilling 
him about the interplay of cubism and surrealism until he says, "You paint 
the fucking thing," and leaves in a huff. By the time they wed, she has 
become his de facto manager; it is form marrying function and chaos 
marrying discipline, a most harmonious collision. (Krasner denies him a 
baby, indicating that it would upset the balance.)
Such a union is destined to implode, and I hope I'm not ruining the 
_Pollock_ experience by saying that it does. While it is never depicted as 
a very romantic matrimony to start--Pollock and wife channel their passions 
elsewhere--their symbiosis leaves each other picked dry after several 
years, and it comes down to Krasner suffering one of Pollock's conniptions 
too many: "You are killing me! You are killing me! You are killing me!" 
(Aside: Harris' own wife, Amy Madigan, is unrecognizable and exceptional as 
gallery diva Peggy Guggenheim.) Pollock himself moves on to dalliances with 
younger women like Ruth Klingman (the scorching Jennifer Connelly), hoping, 
one supposes, to catch the revitalizing whiff of youth.
I love Jackson Pollock's stuff and I am enamoured of Harris' _Pollock_ as 
well. It's scrappy and observant; no coincidence that its minor failings 
are the occasional invasive flourish, such as Jeff Beal's hummable but no 
less lamentable score--I can't imagine that Pollock, or anyone, would paint 
to this music, which puts filling soundtrack voids ahead of complementing 
the images. One of my favourite sequences is an eerily quiet re-enactment 
of Hans Namuth shooting that famous Pollock footage in East Hampton, Long 
Island; the mounting tension is almost comic, as Namuth keeps interrupting 
Pollock's process to reload his camera or take a dinner break. A more 
seasoned director might've been too arrogant to admit that not all artists 
or mediums are created equal.
Š Film Freak Central (http://filmfreakcentral.net/). This review may not be 
reprinted, in whole or in part, without the express consent of its author.

Author
Steve Rhodes
POLLOCK, about the renowned and controversial modern artist Jackson 
Pollock, is at once intriguing and insightful as well as boring and 
baffling.  Ed Harris, who stars as Pollock, makes his directorial debut 
with the film.  Although clearly a labor of love on Harris's part, the 
film amply demonstrates why most actors need someone other than 
themselves giving them guidance.  Harris delivers one of his best 
performances, indeed, another Oscar worthy one, but his director spoils 
what could have been a masterpiece by letting scenes drag on and on.
Still, for anyone interested in the creative process, the movie can be 
quite rewarding.  It is difficult to show exactly how an artist goes 
from a blank canvas to a fully realized vision.  POLLOCK tries by simply 
letting us observe Pollock at work.  With the intense performance by 
Harris as a troubled artist, the creative tension is almost palpable.
Suggesting a Van Gogh-like relationship between art and madness, the 
story paints a picture of Pollock as an alcoholic who received a 4F in 
World War II because he was "too neurotic."  Acting like a 
manic-depressive, Harris portrays Pollock as a troubled soul.  Drinking 
from morning till night, with the exception of one two-year bout of 
sobriety, Pollock is a walking time bomb.  That he was able to create 
anything memorable through that alcoholic haze is quite surprising.  
One well-staged drinking-and-driving episode best illustrates the depth 
of Pollock's troubles.  As he bikes back from the local grocer, having 
swapped a painting to pay his debt and buy a new case of beer, he can't 
wait until he gets home to pop open another cold one.  Inebriated, he 
tries to hold the case on his handlebars while opening a beer.  Weaving 
in the road, he crashes, losing all of his precious brew to the hot 
asphalt.
Pollock accidentally discovers his signature style of drizzling and 
flinging the paint.  Spilling paint on the floor, he likes what he sees 
and decides never to touch the brush to the canvas again.  Although his 
work was frequently criticized as consisting of little more than random 
splashes, Pollock defends his technique.  "I don't use the accident, 
because I deny the accident," he says during an interview.
A genius when it came to paint, the sullen Pollock is awkward and 
insecure when communicating with fellow humans, probably because of his 
years of boozing, although an argument could be made that it was the 
other way round.  Perhaps he hated human interaction so much that he 
resorted to drinking as a fast means of escape.
Basically a one-man show, it does have many other characters in 
complementary roles.  Marcia Gay Harden (SPACE COWBOYS) plays fellow 
artist Lee Krasner, who takes Pollock in as she might a wounded puppy.  
Nurturing him with motherly advice and support, she eventually demands 
to be his wife.  He agrees but flaunts his subsequent infidelity.  
Towards the end of the picture, Jennifer Connelly, who was so 
spectacular recently in REQUIEM FOR A DREAM, plays another of her more 
typical throwaway roles as the beautiful but vapid Ruth Klingman, the 
last of Pollock's mistresses.  Amy Madigan, Harris's wife, looks plump, 
old and pasty as Peggy Guggenheim, Pollock's first patron.
Luck is shown to be the key difference between obscurity and fame.  Only 
after Pollock happens to be featured in a Life magazine article is his 
genius recognized and his poverty transformed into wealth.
Is POLLOCK a beautiful failure or a flawed success?  Like his paintings, 
it is in the eye of the beholder.  For me, it was better than a 
documentary on the History Channel and well worth seeing.  In an 
unsympathetic and enigmatic performance, Harris creates a fascinating, 
flawed man of flesh and blood, who throws temper tantrums like a toddler 
one minute and acts like a recluse the next.  If you can stay awake 
through the long dull periods, you will learn a lot and get to witness 
one of the best performances of the year in the process.
POLLOCK runs 2:02.  It is rated R for language and brief sexuality and 
would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Ross Anthony
Ed Harris paints a striking portrait of this talented artist/butt-hole. 
A docu-drama (with the accent on drama), "Pollack" follows the ten last 
years of the life of American abstract artist Jackson Pollack who died 
in 1956. 
It's a story of splashing paint, sobering love, anger, self-doubt and 
spilt and broken liquor bottles. Filmed in one strong arch-like stroke 
that peaks in the middle then splatters off the canvas in an untimely 
manner, the production, like Pollack's life, feels truncated and 
unfulfilled. 
Paced well, aside from a laboriously slow introduction, Harris is 
intoxicating. Marcia Gay Harden, as his lover, endless supporter, is as 
steadfast as a whipping post. It's great to see Bud Cort again (Harold 
and Maude) though his bright-eyed smile too soon leaves the screen. 
Kilmer's brief appearance adds little. 
I loved the artistic moments of creation. Harris staring at his shadow 
on a huge white canvas (so huge he knocked down a wall in his apartment 
to erect it). Harris finally finds inspiration to contrast his stillness 
with sharp confident motion pulling the emotions from his chest to the 
end of his brush. Simply awesome, simply beautiful. 
When asked, "How do you know you're finished with a painting?"
Pollack replies with a question, "How do you know when you're finished 
making love?" 
But more often than not, this portrayal captures a bottle at the end of 
his arm, not a paintbrush. And an unforgivably belligerent mood, that 
rushes like red pigment into the lives of those around him. 
Probably an excellent depiction ... if so, Jackson seems a man, I'd have 
not enjoyed getting to know. Hence, this intimate movie ... of me will 
not a friend make. 
Pollack. Copyright Š 2000. 
*  Starring Ed Harris, Marcia Gay Harden, Amy Madigan, Jennifer 
Connelly, Jeffrey Tambor, Bud Cort, John Heard, Val Kilmer, Stephanie 
Seymour, Tom bower, Robert Knot, Matthew Sussman, Sada Thompson. 
*  Directed by Ed Harris. 
*  Written by Barbara Turner, Susan J. Emshwiller. 
*  Produced by Fred Berner, Ed Harris, Jon Kilik a Sony Classics 
Release(C)2000. Rated R. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Jerry Saravia
The most innovative of the Abstract Expressionists was Jackson Pollock whose 
surrealist paintings gave way to "action paintings," the idea that paint 
could be dripped onto the canvas and create vivid splashes of color. Pollock 
created the drip technique and thus, a sense of freedom within the canvas was 
born where space became largely ambiguous. Pollock is world reknown, so much 
that American film directors like Martin Scorsese or Oliver Stone are often 
referred to as the "Jackson Pollocks of cinema" for their often seemingly 
free form styles. Such an innovator is given a fairly conventional though 
often harrowing treatment by Ed Harris in his directorial debut. 
Naturally, Ed Harris plays the tortured, neurotic, manic-depressive Jackson 
Pollock. The film begins in New York City in the postwar era of the 1940's 
where Pollock is still an unknown. He meets with another painter, Lee Krasner 
(Marcia Gay Harden), who hears of Pollock through word-of-mouth and becomes 
interested in his work. After all, if you are a painter in New York who is 
talked about in circles, you must make your appearance through the proper 
channels. Lee Krasner knows the proper channels. She is acquainted with Peggy 
Guggenheim (Judith Ivey), the owner of the Art of This Century Gallery, who 
is ticked off when climbing five flight of stairs to find Pollock is not 
home. Nevertheless, she sees his work and commissions it to be show in her 
gallery. 
Pollock also finds a willing romantic partner in Lee Krasner who knows of the 
man's faults and still decides to be with him. Pollock is an alcoholic and 
usually finds himself sleeping outside tenements. His solution is to get away 
from the city, and so Krasner offers him an option - get married and move or 
she walks. They move to the Hamptons near the beach for tranquility. This is 
also beneficial for Pollock who can find himself locked in his work rather 
than in alcohol. As time goes on, Pollock eventually discovers his drip 
technique and becomes a sensation in New York and around the world. And when 
does Pollock know that his work is finished? "How do you know you are 
finished when you are making love," asks Pollock when interviewed by Life 
magazine. 
"Pollock" occasionally finds the painter at work in his studio but the film's 
screenplay devotes more time to his turbulent relationship with Lee Krasner. 
Lee puts up with Pollock through his affairs and endless drinking bouts 
because she wants him to be the great painter that he is. It is clear that 
Lee is devoted to him and tries to help him, thus putting her own career on 
hold for his sake. They frequently have their arguments, some more harsh than 
others, but they still manage to stay together for several years. 
By the 1950's, Pollock grows into a bearded, fat, obnoxious, unlikable man. 
He retreats from his "drip" style to his original abstract paintings. He also 
has an affair with a luscious art groupie (Jennifer Connelly) and largely 
detaches himself from Lee. The brief romance is mostly dull as compared to 
his emotional bond with Lee, and the film meanders a bit whenever Connelly 
shows up, whom I do admire as an actress overall. 
My complaints of the film are largely relegated to the depiction of Pollock's 
own status in the art world. The recent "Before Night Falls" did not dwell on 
why the famous writer, Reinaldo Arenas, became a writer, it only showed his 
surroundings and how they affected him. But Pollock is a more complex, 
larger-than-life character. He seems to lack communication with his mother 
(Sada Thompson - the matriarch from the 70's TV show "Family") or his brother 
and his family - they attend his gallery shows but they never speak to each 
other, particularly at the dining table. Pollock's family life is given so 
little shred of introspection that we never understand why they ever visit 
him in the first place - consider that almost every scene with his family 
ends in a violent disruption. Does Pollock's temperamental personality and 
his seclusion in his work cause his family to be silent or are they unhappy 
with his artistic life? Whatever lack of communication exists may hint at 
Pollock's own troubled nature but the film never makes that connection. 
The two fantastic lead performances rescue whatever character limitations 
exist. Ed Harris is powerful and harrowing as the troubled Pollock - he even 
looks like the painter judging by recent photographs I have looked at. Marcia 
Gay Harden is the strong, sympathetic, tough and direct Lee Krasner (she 
deservedly won an Oscar for Best Supporting Actress for her work here). They 
have several great scenes together but my favorite is when he asks her if 
"they can make a baby." She says no, claiming that fulfilling his needs is 
enough and all she ever wanted. It is indeed. 
If "Pollock" had dwelled on the artist's personal, familial side and if the 
fleeting world of Abstract Expressionists had been developed, the film might 
have been a stunning masterpiece. As it is, it is a hellish, demanding work 
with two ball-of-fire performances that will rattle your nerves, shake up 
your senses, and largely disorient you. Just like Jackson Pollock did. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust668@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 POLLOCK  (director: Ed Harris; screenwriters: Barbara Turner/Susan J.
 Emschwiller/based on the book "Jackson Pollock: An American Saga," by
 Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith; cinematographer: Lisa Rinzler;
 editor: Kathryn Himoff; cast: Ed Harris (Jackson Pollock), Marcia Gay
 Harden (Lee Krasner), Jennifer Connelly (Ruth Kligman), Tom Bower (Dan
 Miller), Bud Cort (Howard Putzel), John Heard (Tony Smith), Val Kilmer
 (Willem de Kooning), Robert Knott (Sande Pollock), Amy Madigan (Peggy
 Guggenheim), Matthew Sussman (Reuben Kadish), Stephanie Seymour (Helen
 Frankenthaler) Jeffrey Tambor (Clement Greenberg), Sada Thompson
 (Stella Pollock, his mother), Norbert Weisser (Hans Namuth); Runtime:
 117; Sony Pictures Classics; 2000)
This is a superior film based on the troubled life and career of
Abstract Expressionist artist and manic-depressive Jackson Pollock. It
highlights his artistic genius, his tormented inner being, his
drunkenness, and his self-destructive behavior. The struggling artist
eventually reached financial success, but that offered him no peace of
mind. The script concentrates on a relatively short period of his life,
beginning with him being discovered by the art world in 1941 and
climaxing with his tragic car accident in 1956, when he was driving
while drunk, killing his girlfriend and injuring her girlfriend. Art
biopics are rarely successful ventures but this film approaches those
high caliber art films, such as Jacques Rivette's La Belle Noiseuse and
Paul Cox's Vincent: The Life and Death of Vincent Van Gogh, but falls
short by a good country mile due to the film's inability to get a handle
on how to tell about the taciturn artist's inner demons in a significant
way rather than in the traditional bleak and trite way Hollywood films
usually illustrate an artist's failings. In this case, his downfall was
because he always remained self-absorbed, was childishly irresponsible,
and took  himself and his loved one down with his uncontrollable inner
sufferings.
The strength of the film is in the tour de force performances of both Ed
Harris as the Action Painter Pollock, a role that he is well-suited to
play, and Marcia Gay Harden's understated but brilliant performance as
his Brooklyn-born wife and main supporter, Lee Krasner. She won the
Oscar for Best Supporting Actress, in a lengthy role where she was
actually the co-star. But this is Ed Harris's film, a film he wanted to
do as long as 15 years ago after reading a book about Pollock and
noticing from a photo how closely he resembled him and how he had a
certain vibe for him. He not only directs and stars in the film, but he
financed it.
The film opens in 1950, 9 years after Pollock's rise out of obscurity,
as he is in Betty Parsons' gallery, meeting the idolizing Ruth Kligman
(Jennifer Connelly) who was later on to become his girlfriend passenger
killed in the car crash. She timidly asks the artist to autograph the
Life magazine article that called him America's greatest artist and made
him famous, as she holds the magazine next to her heart. From there the
film flashes back to his struggling years in the Greenwich Village of
the early 1940s -- to his affair with fellow artist Lee Krasner which
begins after she comes to his apartment to admire his experimental art.
He later married her; the couple will move in the mid 1940s to East
Hampton, Long Island, and that was followed by Pollock's blazing rise
and then his sudden decline due to alcohol and pressing mental problems.
Things move so fast, that on one day he owed $56 for grocery money which
he paid for with his painting and on the next day he was featured in
Life magazine and became rich, famous and critically admired.
In his Village days, Howard Putzel (Bud Cort) liked Pollock's
experimental art and introduced him to wealthy art aficionado and patron
Peggy Guggenheim (played by Amy Madigan, Harris' real-life wife), who
begrudgingly walked up the 5 flights of stairs of his tenement apartment
to see his art. Because of her patronage -- she displayed the unknown
artist in her gallery and offered him a monthly stipend -- he would
become a recognized figure in the art world, even though his Greenwich
Village days were filled with bouts of drinking and being nurtured by
Lee, as he needed her encouragement to bolster his sometimes sagging
confidence and his ability to screw things up because of his sour
disposition. It was also a difficult time financially, as his paintings
did not sell. It was noted art critic Clement Greenberg (Tambor) who
gave legitimacy to Pollock's work and more or less authenticated
Abstract Expressionism as a real art school, and made it possible for
art critics who despised him earlier on to come around a few years later
and now call him a great artist.
In East Hampton, he develops the drip technique, which Harris duplicates
in the intensive way Pollock actually painted. These scenes were
brilliantly executed by Harris and made the film a labor of love for
him. What it showed was physically how Pollock actually made his
paintings while standing on them as they were on the floor and pouring a
can of paint over them or controlling his brush to drip the paint on
canvas. Harris was absolutely convincing playing the artist, he looked
as if he was a real artist at work.
With success coming his way while in the Hamptons, came material
comforts and for a two year period he layed off booze, but all the
adulation went to his head. When he was forcing himself to go through
the motions of Action Painting for a film showing how he creates his
art, he suddenly realizes that he's a phony and soon gets drunk turning
frighteningly violent in front of his household guests.
Pollock is not an overwhelming film, as much as it is a superbly well
acted one. It shows how Pollock found freedom only when he painted, as
his outside life was that of a flawed man, a very difficult man to get
along with, who didn't have much to say about art or life that was
particularly interesting. Harris as a director, had a love affair with
the artist that was much too respectful to get beyond what we already
know about him. Yet he does not play down his flaws or resort to clichés
to link his art to his life, but he nevertheless fawns over him much too
much and thereby fails to link his driving madness to his artistic
visions. In my opinion, Pollock became recognized as a great artist due
to a good press and is someone who should be honored because he broke
through the traditional way art was perceived, but he should not be
honored for being a great visionary artist. He was someone who lived out
the artist fantasy trip by achieving more in style than in substance,
even though the film wants us to believe he was truly a great artist.
The most perceptively amusing thing Pollock said, was when asked by a
Life reporter: How did he know when his painting was completed?" He
responds: "How do you know when you finish making love?"
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jonathan Curiel
Please, please, please, please, please read the book that formed the
basis of the movie Pollock.  Jackson Pollock: An American Saga won the
Pulitzer Prize for a good reason: It's a 934-page masterpiece that gets
into the guts of the artist now being celebrated on celluloid by Ed
Harris.  Published in 1989 and written by Steven Naifeh and Gregory
White Smith, the tome contains everything about Pollock that was left
out of Harris' up-and-down movie -- and, unfortunately, that means 99
percent of the demons, doubters, friends, and forces that inspired
Pollock to drink, paint, drink, and paint again.
A good example: Pollock was suicidal, maniacal and violent throughout
his 44-year life.  The first sentence of Naifeh's and Smith's book --
the very first sentence -- is this quote from Pollock: "I'm going to
kill myself."  Explains a lot, but for some odd reason, Harris only
hints at Pollock's suicidal tendencies in his long-anticipated film.
What Harris does best is show us Pollock painting.  Over and over, we
see Harris dripping paint on large canvases and throwing around the oils
like they were enemies that need to be splattered dead.  Reds, yellows,
blues, and grays come alive in Pollock, letting viewers exhilarate in
the glory of creating great abstract art.  For people not familiar with
Pollock's paintings, Harris' movie will be a revelation.  Much of the
movie was filmed on Pollock's former Long Island estate, where he did
his most celebrated work.  Harris, who directed himself, deserves praise
for effectively recreating Pollock's last years and for learning to
actually paint like Pollock.  Harris isn't faking it when he hunches
over a blank canvas and splashes paint everywhere.
Harris is also good at capturing some of Pollock's notorious rages. 
It's chilling when Harris starts yelling at a pushy filmmaker and
practically stalks him to the family dinner table, telling him, "I'm not
the phony!  You're the phony!  I'm not the phony!  You're the phony!" 
There is genuine fear in that scene, and it was fear that followed
Pollock from his birth in 1912 to his death in 1956.
In the role of Lee Krasner, Pollock's wife, Marcia Gay Harden is
perfect.  With her thick, New York accent and controlling tendencies,
Harden's Krasner helps drive Pollock's artistic career at a crucial
period.  Unfortunately, there is no context.  Krasner wasn't the only
one who propped up Pollock.  Though patron Peggy Guggenheim, brother
Sande Pollock, and art critic Clement Greenberg are portrayed in
Pollock, missing are the long line of backers that date back to
Pollock's early years.  Where are artists Thomas Hart Benton and John
Graham, whose influence on Pollock is well-chronicled in Naifeh's and
Smith's book?  And where are the legions of therapists and doctors who
worked with Pollock for so many years -- therapists and doctors who
tried getting Pollock to open up about his sexual confusion, his
love-hate relationship with his mother and his lifelong abuse of
alcohol?
None of that is in the movie, which begins in 1941, when Pollock is 29
and starting to make a name for himself.  Pollock ends with a written
note about Pollock's and Krasner's life, but -- at the very least -- the
film should have started with a written note about Pollock's early
years, when his dysfunctional family formed his sense of self.  Too
bad.  Harris had a good chance to flush out the real Jackson Pollock. 
Instead, we get an interesting glimpse of the man who became "America's
first art star."
A final note: Over the years, many people apparently told Harris that he
looks like Pollock, and he does.  The physical resemblance may be one
reason Harris was so devoted to making this film.  (It took 10 years to
bring Pollock's life to the big screen.)  So obsessed was Harris that he
put on 30 pounds to accurately portray Pollock's heavyset last year of
life.  Like Elvis and other artists, Pollock's weight gain was a portent
of a greater physical breakdown.
Director: Ed Harris
Producers: Fred Berner, Ed Harris, Jon Kilik
Writers: Barbara Turner, Susan J. Emshwiller
Starring: Ed Harris, Marcia Gay Harden, Amy Madigan, Jeffrey Tambor,
Robert Knott, John Heard, Bud Cort, Val Kilmer
http://www.sonyclassics.com/pollock
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
POLLOCK (2000) ***  Directed by Ed Harris. Written by Barbara Turner 
and Susan J. Emschwiller, based on the book "Jackson Pollock: An 
American Saga" by Steven Naifeh & Gregory White Smith. Photography, 
Lisa Rinzler.  Editing, Kathryn Himoff. Production design, Mark 
Friedberg. Music, Jeff Beal, Dondi Bastone. Produced by Fred Berner, 
Ed Harris, Jon Kilik, James Francis Trezza.  Cast: Ed Harris (Jackson 
Pollock), Marcia Gay Harden (Lee Krasner), Jennifer Connelly (Ruth 
Kligman), Tom Bower (Dan Miller), Bud Cort (Howard Putzel), John 
Heard (Tony Smith), Val Kilmer (Willem de Kooning), Robert Knott 
(Sande Pollock), Amy Madigan (Peggy Guggenheim), Matthew Sussman 
(Reuben Kadish), Stephanie Seymour (Helen Frankenthaler) Jeffrey 
Tambor (Clement Greenberg), Sada Thompson (Stella Pollock), Norbert 
Weisser (Hans Namuth). A  Sony  Classics release. 117 minutes. Not 
rated.
I bet that if one were to ask the person-in-the street in any country 
to name some famous American painters, the answer would be "Andy 
Warhol" (1938-1987) and "Jackson Pollock," (1912-1956), most likely 
in that order. That's assuming that there would be an answer.
Those two artists were mega-stars in their day, but memory shrinks 
faster and faster; the past fades, and, most ironically, 
information,  while increasingly available in this Information Age, 
is seldom correctly digested.  (This state of things has its own 
logic, but that's another story).
Pollock went through several artistic phases. He was initially a 
figurative artist  (after studying with Thomas Hart Benton); then a 
semi-abstractionist; a surrealist; an major abstract expressionist; 
and more. (I am simplifying his complex and complicated career). The 
thread that runs through most of his stages is that the unconscious 
is the source of inspiration.
Starting in 1947 he innovated totally with "drip" painting which made 
him famous in many circles. In 1949 he was consecrated by a Life 
Magazine issue headlined by "Is he the greatest living painter in the 
United States?" Stardom and world-wide celebrity followed, as well as 
derision in certain quarters, including some artistic ones. He had 
exactly seven years left in his life.
Pollock was also an alcoholic and a manic-depressive who went through 
hospitalization and several psychoanalytic therapy sessions.
The admirable, versatile Ed Harris directs here his very first movie. 
When he read the 1991 Pulitzer Prize winner biography of Pollock by 
Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith, he became obsessed with 
turning it into a film. After more than a decade of planning, raising 
funds, going through the usual Odyssey that is the fate of many a 
non-moronic project. He was so influenced by Pollock's work that he 
started to paint.  Harris came up with a winner. Not the kind that 
pack in audiences and get showered by enough dollars to make  Brinks 
truck sag. --unless one believes in miracles--gets a large audiences 
and dollars that might make a Brinks truck sag. Not the  conveniently 
arranged,  fanciful biography genre that Hollywood calls "a biopic." 
Not a systematic, documentary or educational analysis. But a 
selective recreation of the life and times and above all the art of 
Jackson Pollock.
A flashforward of the now successful Pollock in 1950 leads back to 
the early 1940s. In convincingly recreated Greenwich Village, he 
lives and works in a modest apartment. There, Lee Krasner  who also 
lives and works in the area, suddenly appears to look at his 
work--and have a look at the painter too. Lee, also an artist, falls 
in love with the paintings, and with the man.
She becomes his advisor, companion and unofficial agent. I am 
reminded of Roman mythology's nymph Egeria who counseled King Numa 
Pompilius.  Pollock however is no king, and needs help from the 
artistic Establishment. Lee knows the ropes. She arranges a visit by 
Howard Putzel. He is fat, pleasant man, played by a totally 
unrecognizable Bud Cort.
Cort who will forever be in movie mythology as the suicidal young man 
who loves ever-young (at 79) Ruth Gordon in the now classic "Harold 
and Maude" (1972). And in 1970 he was in two Robert Altman cult 
movies, "MASH" and  "Brewster McCloud" in which he is Brewster who 
wants to fly inside the Houston Astrodome.
I wonder if the very good choice of Cort is not also a devious homage 
to Robert Altman who made "Vincent & Theo" (1990) one of the very 
best movies about a painter (Van Gogh), along with Maurice Pialat's 
"Van Gogh"(France, 1991).
Putzel is the talent spotter for millionaire art patron, collector 
and gallery-owner Peggy Guggenheim (the niece of Solomon G, She is 
played by Amy Madigan who is Harris' wife)  Peggy G. is a ball of 
fire. She may kvetch, she may think highly of herself ( in capital 
letters, as it were), but she unlocks the door to glory after seeing 
what Pollock can do. The film intimates that without the two women, 
Lee and Peggy, Pollock may not have made it. A cruciall and enjoyable 
sequence has Howard Putzel taking Ms. Guggenheim to see Pollock's 
works in the man's digs. After climbing several floors they find no 
one there. Jackson and Lee duo arrive late, when the visitors have 
returned to street level. Tenacious Lee has to push (metaphorically) 
peeved Peggy back upstairs.
The visit is the colorful start of success for Jackson. I'll skip 
details, except that later, at a reception in Peggy's luxurious 
dwelling, the inebriated fellow urinates on the burning logs in the 
fireplace, then has sex with Peggy. The act is not shown.(One wonders 
what the laws are about defamation of character -- even when the 
facts are true).
Lee proposes. She and Jackson marry. Later they move to a farmhouse 
in East Hampton, Long Island --where the movie's exteriors were shot. 
The in-film  chronology can be muddy at times. My clue to the effect 
that the move away from New York came after the war was provided by 
newly settled Pollock's first visit to a rural grocery. There, the 
owner mentions the splitting of the atom as well as the A-bomb. It's 
the script's gauche.way of orienting the audience.
Life for Lee Krasner is no bed of roses. Not because of material 
problems that are there but do not come up in the dialogue, but 
because Pollock is a psychological mess,  drinks and cannot hold his 
liquor,  chain-smokes (but not a single cough is ever heard),  blows 
hot or cold according to the turns his mental illness takes. By and 
large,  except for a couple of scenes with his artist buddies, he is 
taciturn, moody, inarticulate. He may suddenly insult his guests or 
behave terribly with Lee, do both at the same time.
Lee 's suffering wife is a particularly sad case. A very good painter 
in her own right, she apparently has given up her own work, or at 
least effaced it before Jackson's.  Her main raison d'etre is an 
almost fanatical belief in the man's talent.
When he first saw her work he told her "You're a damn good woman 
painter" which today is like saying "Some of my best friends are 
Negroes." Setting aside considerations of evolving semantics, the 
fact is that Pollock meant it. Yet he scarcely shows any interest in, 
or make mentions of,  her career, talent or possibilities. His mental 
problems are no alibi for this.  But then it is blindingly clear that 
the man is totally art-focused and unaware of his own self. After 
all, his is not a unique case -- or even a very unusual one. Many 
people obsessed with their mission or with art or science or, or, or 
(a long list) have a kind of tunnel vision (and tunnel feelings?) of 
the world around them. There is logic in the mostly comic movie 
characters such as the absent-minded professors, the inventors with 
their heads in the clouds, the musicians who. away from their 
instrument reside in another planet.
I last saw Ed Harris giving a wondrously multi-layered performance in 
Agnieszka Holland's fascinating "The Third Miracle" (1999), a  film 
which, deplorably, I have heard no one mention to this day. . In 
"Pollock," Harris is very good again, he IS Pollock--and does all the 
paintings himself, down to the much-awaited, inevitable Big Scene, 
that of "discovering" dribble or spatter or drip painting.
Harris paintings remind me of Van Meegeren's Fake Vermeers that 
fooled many an expert..  There's not an original Pollock in  sight. 
It's impressive.
But while demanding, the Harris role is not an involving one.. The 
key to this was given way back by Gertrude Stein speaking about 
fictional characters.  I quote from memory:  :"I always prefer the 
normal to the abnormal. The normal is so much more complex and 
interesting"
Both Harris and Marcia Gay Harden were Oscar nominations, as they 
should have been. Their performances are of the cumulativr kind : you 
don't so much recall vividly this or that scene as you get an overall 
feeling.
The movie is beautifully but not "artsily" photographed. Blessedly, 
it eschews protracted scenes or sequences. It is also somewhat 
disjointed. It does give us an idea about the couple, far more about 
Pollock's painting process than about his "inner" self. But we cannot 
ask it to succeed where psychoanalysis obviously failed. The bottom 
line is that we, the audience, are, or shoud be, far more attentive 
to the paintings and their processes than to Jackson's mercurial 
behavior, his fits, his weirdnesses, or his calm moments.
The unloquacious Jackson's mind and soul are all in his work, period. 
A mini-series would  have fleshed out the period but could probably 
not take Jackson any farther. ( And it would certainly be a 
commercial fiasco.)
Relatives and friends do come and go as if they were on short subway 
rides and not for the whole trip. The first place goes to the 
influential art critic Clement Greenberg who championed and helped 
Pollock, yet was later critical of his work. He is played by Jeffrey 
Tambor, unusually changed and aged since his terrific Hank in "The 
Larry Sanders Show."
Most other characters make short, lightweight appearances, including 
Val Kilmer who shows twice in the walk-on (better, the sit-on) part 
of Willem de Kooning, Pollock's friend as well as his main rival.
A note for cinephiles.  Co-scriptwriter Susan J. Emschwiller is the 
daughter of Ed Emschwiller who made his mark as an important 
avant-gardist during the glory days of Underground cinema.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Susan Granger
     Actor/director Ed Harris's wrenching study of Jackson
Pollock, one of the greatest American painters of the 20th century,
reveals him as a complex, pathological alcoholic. In the late 1940s,
Pollock thrust "splatter" abstractionism into modern art and then
drank himself into misery, finally perishing in a car wreck. During
his rise to fame and fortune, the notoriously self-promoting, yet
inwardly self-doubting, Pollock met up with feisty, tough-talking
fellow painter Lee Krasner (Marcia Gay Harden) when he was living in
Greenwich Village and, together, they moved to rural Long
Island. Their domestic arrangement was far from tranquil and,
eventually, Pollock acquired a younger trophy, Ruth Kligman (Jennifer
Connelly), while Krasner emerges as a bitter, enabling wife.  From his
lying on the grass staring at the sky and clamming in East Hampton to
his precise methodology of drip-painting canvases and his drunken
revels at Jungle Pete's, the watering hole near his home - Pollock's
abusive, mercurial life is up there on the screen. The weakness is in
the simplistic, sequential screenplay with its cliche-ridden
exposition and dialogue, along with its lack of character insight, by
Barbara Turner and Susan J. Emshwiller. Val Kilmer lends support as
rival artist Willem de Kooning, as does Amy Madigan (the real-life
wife of Harris) as idiosyncratic heiress Peggy Guggenheim, with Bud
Cort as her art scout, and Jeffrey Tambour as art critic Clement
Greenberg. Kudos to cinematographer Liza Rinzler, production designer
Mark Friedberg and costumer David Robinson for the evocation of the
'40s-'50s era. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pollock" is a
stylish 7, distinguished by Oscar-caliber performances by Ed Harris,
Marcia Gay Harden and Amy Madigan.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
POLLOCK (2000)
Rated R; running time 119 minutes
Genre: Drama
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/pollock/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0183659
Written by: Susan Emshwiller, Barbara Turner (based on the book by
  Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith)
Directed by: Ed Harris
Cast: Ed Harris, Marcia Gay Harden, Amy Madigan, Jeffrey Tambor,
Robert Knott, Bud Cort, John Heard, Val Kilmer, Sada Thompson,
Tom Bower, Jennifer Connelly, Sally Murphy, Molly Regan,
John Rothman, Annabelle Gurwitch, Isabelle Townsend, Barbara Garrick,
Everett Quinton, Stephen Beach, Jill Jackson, David Leary,
Donna Mitchell, Frank Wood, Julie Anna Rose
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamspollock.html
There's an ex-brother-in-law of mine who, like Jackson Pollock at one
time, was a starving artist (and not ever much more than that), and who,
like Pollock, drank heavily when he decided The World Was Against Him.
There's a good reason he's an "ex-"; and there's an equally good reason
that this ex- will probably never achieve even a small fraction of
Pollock's notoriety in his lifetime (or - sadly, more apropos for the
career of a painter - after his death).
Not that this ex-relative of mine is anywhere near the status of a
Jackson Pollock, mind you.  It's just that having known this wasted man,
helped me to see beyond the strange monotone drone this movie at times
had for me, and understand the demons Pollock faced, a wee bit better.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Let's get the largest spoiler out of the way now, so that anyone who
isn't familiar with The Life And Times Of Jackson Pollock, can start
hating me right away: Jackson Pollock is dead.
Though of course, this movie deals more with his life, than his death.
POLLOCK begins with a woman, bearing a copy of "Life Magazine", seeking
an autograph from a man who looks like the troubles of the world lay in
his steely eyes; then it flashes back to Greenwich Village, New York in
November of 1941, 9 years earlier.  At that time, Jackson Pollock (Ed
Harris) spent as much time drinking, walking through life in a daze, and
complaining to his brother Sande (Robert Knott) about the attention his
fellow artists were getting ("F*ck Picasso!", he raged), as he did
painting - much to the consternation of his pregnant sister-in-law.
Enter abstract artist Lee Krasner (Marcia Gay Harden), who moves rapidly
into Pollock's life, his business, and his bed.  Impressed with
Pollock's work at the start, Krasner soon sets him up with gallery owner
Peggy Guggenheim (Amy Madigan), who allows Pollock to work on commission
for her gallery.  The world doesn't seem to be ready for him, though;
he's seen as an original, but that doesn't immediately translate to
sales, and he becomes frustrated, and drunk, in waves.  Pollock and
Krasner eventually move away from the big city, into a more peaceful, if
not prosperous, existence on Long Island.   But even after he recreates
his abstract art style of painting - using thrown and dripped strands of
paint in a style called Action Painting, in which the process of
painting becomes as important as the finished product - that doesn't
seem to be enough to take Pollock to the next level.
That is, until "Life Magazine" takes a notice of his work, thrusting him
into the limelight.  Bringing with it, its own new set of demons...
The Upshot:
The most subjective of the creative arts, Art, I fear, is one of those
things in life that you either Get, or you don't.  That goes double for
movies about Art.  And so I'll tell you true: for a large part, I just
didn't Get POLLOCK.
Oh, I understood the "starving artist" concept, and the "they don't
understand what I'm trying to Say here" concept and the "tortured soul
in another plane of existence" concept and all.  I just don't Get folks
sitting/standing around trying to decide what a given painting "means";
especially one that - let us be for real, here - looks like a child made
a mess on the canvas.  Similarly, I didn't Get the gist of what this
film was trying to tell the audience, past the madness that comes with
coloring outside the lines, so to speak.  But most of all, I didn't Get
what all the people in this cast - especially "names" like John Heard
(as Tony Smith), Val Kilmer (Willem de Kooning) and to a lesser degree,
Sada Thompson as Pollock's mother Stella - had to do with anything in
Pollock's life.  Yes, I *know* they were real-life people, but looking
at the cast of characters, I can't even remember who half of them were.
For all the interaction they had with him, the filmmakers could've pared
the cast down easily by half, and spent more time delving into the Whys
of Pollock's madness, and his genius.
All that said, I certainly groked the main performances by Ed Harris as
the artiste Jackson Pollock, and especially the tour-de-force by Marcia
Gay Harden as Lee Krasner, fellow artiste, and - for want of a better
term - Jackson's keeper.  I failed to see what, exactly, Krasner
could've possibly seen in Pollock that would allow her to take so much
of his crap for so long, but Harden brought an intensity to the role -
especially in her closing scenes - that definitely earned her every
ounce of Oscar gold that she got.  Harris and Harden made a dynamic duo;
where Harris' Pollock was moody and tempestuous, Harden's Krasner was a
whirlwind, sure of herself, with the no-nonsense attitude of a woman who
"knew her place" - and welcomed it.  Hard to believe they could've
stayed together as long as they did, but, Strokes For Folks.
Combined with good showings by Amy Madigan (Harris' real-life wife) as
gallery owner Peggy Guggenheim and Jeffrey Tambor as art critic Clement
Greenberg, and the outstanding directing of Harris himself (I loved his
use of quiet shadows throughout; Jackson's and Lee's first love scene
was nothing less than a work of art), POLLOCK was an enjoyable, if
slightly irritating, peek into a way of life that I don't I'll ever
fully understand.  I only wish that with as large a cast as this movie
had, I could've gotten more from the big picture.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I enjoyed POLLOCK more on the strength of stars Ed Harris and especially
Marcia Gay Harden, than the overall movie itself.  But I appreciated
this literal art flick for its glimpse into the tortured soul of an
artist, even though the artist it put me in mind of, deserved all the
torture that came to him.  Who, me, bitter?
POLLOCK (rating: greenlight):
But sorry, some of Pollock's paintings *did* look like nothing more than
just dribbled paint.  Maybe I'm just not meant to Get It.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Ed Harris
 Writer:  Barbara Turner, Susan J. Emshwiller, based on the
book "Jackson Pollock: An American Saga" by Steven Naifeh
 Cast: Ed Harris, Marcia Gay Harden, Amy Madigan, Jennifer
Connelly, Jeffrey Tambor, Bud Cort, John Heard, Val Kilmer
   Those who go to see "Pollock" without knowing much
about art (but knowing what they like) will be tempted at its
conclusion to ask the customary pair of questions about
painters: 1) Do you have to be nuts to be a great, creative
artist? (Van Gogh cut off his ear, you remember, consistent
with his production of terrific, violent works.) 2) Can't my
seven-year-old do that modern stuff with his fingerpainting
set?
   Writing and movies are my passion, not colors that stand
still on canvas, so I'm afraid I can't give you the definitive
answer to either query.  I'm tempted after seeing Carlos
Saura's imaginative film which opened just weeks before this
one, "Goya in Bordeaux" that a heck of a lot of painters are
not the happiest most stable of people...after all Goya, known
as the first modern painter, was racked by headaches, and
regularly hallucinated about his miserable later years.  In fact
Saura's morbid opening scene, that of a large carcass of
meat hanging in a slaughterhouse, stands in perhaps for
Goya's notion that this is just about all that human beings are
or will become.
   Let me make an assumption about the audience for
"Pollock."  Some, of course, will be art mayvens, a few in
particular fans of the boldly innovative style that Jackson
Pollock used when he split with Picasso, Miro and other
abstract painters and became (like Al Gore) his own man. 
Most will go because they heard that Ed Harris is giving the
performance of his career, an almost sure bet for an
Academy nomination.  Having quickly and deliberately gained
thirty pounds (as well as growing a beard) for just part of the
story--the portion that shows how dissipated the depressive
painter had become--kind of shows you the commitment the
actor had which led to his monumental performance.  That
Mr. Harris is the director surely added to his motivation.
   Using a script that Barbara Turner and Susan J. Emshwiller
carved out from the Steven Naifeh bio "Jackson Pollock: An
American Saga," Harris takes us through the ups and downs
in the man's all-too-brief life, and while the director is not too
modest to chew up the scenery, he certainly introduces us to
a LOT of characters--as though inspired by Alan Rudolph's
"Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle"--about yet another
unhappy creative person and her wide circle of friends.  While
there are occasional flights into fiction--Pollock's most famous
little quote, "I am nature" is uttered here in answer to his
wife's insistence that one has to paint from nature and not
about mere abstract visions--when in fact he had said this to
someone else.
  Opening toward the end of the subject's life, photographer
Lisa Rinzler closes in on the artist as a wasted man, his eyes
gazing sadly into space to expose his emptiness after he had
realized that the best is not yet to come.  Having spent a
good part of his life as a drunk (we catch a scene of the man
crawling up to his fifth-floor walkup in Greenwich Village in
1941 after a night on the town), Pollock had given up the
sauce for two years, but went off the wagon in a fit of self-
loathing when, during an episode in which he was being
filmed for a documentary, he realized that he no longer had
it.  He had been overtaken by still greater painters and was
no longer the world's golden boy.  His most important
relationship is with the woman who would become his wife, a
major painter named Lee Krasner--evoked with a stunning
performance by Marcia Gay Harden . Just weeks after
inviting Pollock to her studio around the corner, the two begin
to live together until Kranser insists that they marry.  She
would live to have no small number of reasons to regret the
decision, given her man's fits of anger in which he would
overthrow a table full of food while entertaining family and
friends.  (Allegedly Pollock's explosions were cover-ups for
his alarming sensitivity--which persistently led him in the
direction of reclusiveness much like Sean Connery's fictional
writer, Forrester.)
   If Pollock were a conventional painter sitting at an easel,
scenes of the man at work would hardly make for interesting
intervals.  But once Pollock chucked cubist-like abstractions
for his unique style--he would lay his huge canvas on the
floor and, without touching the brush to the cloth would
almost violently drip the paint onto the material.  This led to a
succession of dots which, put together, would represent a
unique American style.  Since quiet moments are quite
often broken up by fits of rage and given that the discharge
of the artist at his work is fierce, Ed Harris has the
opportunity throughout the two-hours to deliver nothing short
of an athletic performance well suited for Oscar
consideration.  A fine supporting cast including Jeffrey
Tambor as the critic who becomes his pal and in effect
leading publicist; Jennifer Connelly as his young and
energetic girl friend, and especially Amy Madigan (Harris's
real-life wife) as the wealthy and idiosyncratic Peggy
Guggenheim adds to the vivid texture of the work.
Not Rated.  Running time: 117 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When actor Ed Harris' ("The Truman Show") father saw the book 'Jackson Pollock:
An American Saga,' he initially thought he was looking at his son on the cover.
The father-to-son gift inspired the actor to make his directorial debut while
also starring in "Pollock."
As adapted from Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith's book by Barbara Turner
and Susan Emshwiller, Jackson Pollock is portrayed as a simple man, an unknown
artist and alcoholic leaching off his family in New York City until fellow 
painter and future wife Lee Krasner (Marcia Gay Harden, "Space Cowboys") took 
on the burden of selfless caretaker and nurturer.  Krasner put her own career
on hold to promote Pollock's because she believed in his genius.  She had the
connections he did not and was able to first get the attention of Howard Putzel
(Bud Cort, in an endearing performance) who led to the all important
sponsorship of Peggy Guggenheim (Harris' wife Amy Madigan, almost
unrecognizable).  Krasner also got Pollock away from the bottle and the city,
moving out to an old Long Island farmhouse where Pollock stumbled upon the
splatter technique which would become his defining style.  
As his fame rose and his ego swelled, Pollock drew the city to him and alcohol 
regained its grip.  He became abusive to the woman who saved him and began
openly having affairs until Krasner left for Europe.  Pollock's last affair
with the much younger Ruth Klingman (Jennifer Connelly) ended in tragedy when 
he lost control of his car, killing himself and Ruth's friend Edith Metzger 
(Sally Murphy, "Fearless").  Klingman survived the crash.
While Ed Harris captures the all the surfaces of Jackson Pollock, his subject
remains an enigma.  Pollock speaks simplistically ('You're a damn good woman
painter,' he tells Krasner on his first visit to her loft) or not at all.  His
eyes portray hurt and bewilderment when coming out of one of his drunken 
stupors, yet we never understand what drives him to paint nor what it is he's
expressing in his art.  (When Krasner first sees his initial splatter painting
and proclaims 'You've done it Pollock.  You've cracked it wide open.'  My 
reaction was 'huh?')  Pollock the man appears to get more pleasure out of
rubbing his extended family's noses in his fame than in the act of creation
itself.  His emotional connections to the women in his life, including his
mother Stella (Sada Thompson), are not explored.
Marcia Gay Harden's Krasner, on the other hand, is a complex picture of a
woman whose strong beliefs drive her to action.  Harden makes us understand
why this woman stood beside this difficult man for so long.  When she finally
breaks after Pollock throws a drunken Thanksgiving dinner tantrum, our 
sympathy is with her.  She's a muse grounded in hard-nosed reality.
Support is hit and miss with the aforementioned Cort ("Harold and Maude")
appearing all too briefly and Madison's Guggenheim coming off as a bit of a
circus freak.  Jeffrey Tambor is Clement Greenberg, Pollock's personal critic.
Val Kilmer is too attention-drawing an actor to disappear into the small
role of Willem de Kooning.  Jennifer Connelly, so affecting in "Requiem for
a Dream," is relegated to window dressing here.
Harris as director tells his story in what sometimes comes across as
disconnected snippets, although they're artfully framed snippets.  He does
capture the physical energy, if not the inspiration, that went into Pollock's 
painting.  Bright, colorful cinematography by Lisa Rinzler ("Three Seasons")
is particularly effective in the country locations.
When asked to comment on his art, Jackson Pollock tells a Life reporter 'It's 
like looking at a bed of flowers.  You don't tear your hair out over what it
means.'  That could be said of Ed Harris' portrait of Pollock as well.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
