Title
Review for Scent of a Woman (1992)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Eric Walker
     Martin Brest first hit the big time as the director of BEVERLY
HILLS COP, the movie that epitomized the Hollywood formula of "good cop
vs. evil drug dealer."  Every bit of the movie was predictable; if it
wasn't for Eddie Murphy's winning performance, it would have been a
piece of garbage.
     Brest scored again with MIDNIGHT RUN, another Hollywood formula
film--but once again the project was saved by winning performances from
its lead stars, Robert De Niro and Charles Grodin.  We watched the movie
for these characters, not for the chase-and-crash scenes, and as a
result it delivered handsomely.
     And now we have SCENT OF A WOMAN, which once again looks like a
Hollywood formula product: an innocent college student is whisked off to
New York City for a weekend of thrills by the gentleman he's supposed to
be caring for.  What's more, there's a subplot involving "honor" and
"loyalty" and "betrayal"--something milked shamelessly by this holiday
season's other politically correct "feel-good" movie, A FEW GOOD MEN.
     On paper, it looks like your standard Hollywood "buddy" movie.  But
when one of those buddies is played by Al Pacino, you know that
something good is going to happen.
     Pacino has been on a roll lately, after spending most of the
eighties in near-seclusion.  He's come back with a vengeance, and this
year we've already seen him as the sleazy real estate broker Ricky Roma
in GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS.  Now he plays a bitter, blind war veteran in a
performance that raises SCENT OF A WOMAN above the level of today's
inoffensive schmaltz and makes it a truly enjoyable experience.
     The setup is pure Hollywood: Chris O'Donnell plays Charlie Simms, a
meek, shy, poor college student who happens to witness a practical joke
played on the school's dean by a group of trouble-making pupils.  What's
more, he's been offered an ultimatum: either he squeals on the
perpetrators and gives names, or he'll be expelled.  (The dean is an
idiot, of course; the First Rule of Hollywood college movies states that
the principal must have the IQ and morals of a dung heap.)
     Now, Charlie has to raise some money for his Christmas trip back
home, so he takes what looks like an easy job: care for an elderly war
veteran over the Thanksgiving weekend.  The woman offering the job tells
him "it's the easiest $300 you'll ever make," but after Charlie meets
the fellow, he admits "I don't get an easy feeling."
     Here's where we meet Lieutenant Colonel Frank Slade.
     This is, of course, Pacino's movie: he takes command the second he
appears on-screen, controlling the lives of everyone around him.  Slade
is a complex man, who blinded himself by accident when he drank too much
one day and played with a hand grenade; now he tosses down Jack Daniels
as if they were water, never getting drunk.  He screams at everyone and
wants sits alone in the dark, hurting everyone around him because he
feels that it's the only way to survive without admitting how much he's
hurting inside.
     But the Colonel has a special plan for this particular weekend: as
soon as the folks leave the driveway on their Thanksgiving trip, he
practically drags Charlie onto a first-class jet, and the two are off to
New York City.  Slade wants only to feel the touch of a woman's arm for
one last time--but his plan for this weekend is destined to end in
tragedy.
     Now, in the hands of most other actors, this would be a typical
Hollywood "odd couple learns to trust each other and each is changed by
the experience" movie.  But Pacino turns Slade into a real human being,
able to tell a woman's brand of perfume just by taking a sniff, and
keeping the whole world on its toes when he enters the scene.  He's a
world-wise man, able to live by his wits.  He figures out immediately
that Charlie has a dilemma of his own; the advice he offers is to take
what you can, and forget the other people.  That's the code he's lived
by all his life, because the world is a tough place.
     One of the film's best moments occurs when he and Charlie drop in
on his brother uninvited for Thanksgiving dinner.  Slade walks in the
door and announces his presence with a roar, and his brother sitting
upstairs immediately recognizes his voice with a start; it's obvious
that he's been putting up with Slade all of his life.  When the Colonel
sweeps a shy young girl off her feet at a fancy New York restaurant, we
feel the magic in the air.  He can make things happen--but because he's
blind, he feels useless and wasted.  (The movie doesn't go out of its
way to present Pacino as a blind man; it's done naturally in a fashion
that doesn't force his disability on us.  This is one of the film's
strengths: it doesn't hit us over the head with the story, until the
very end.)
     Chris O'Donnell had his hands full keeping up with Pacino, one of
the greatest actors of our time.  It would have been easy for him to be
overwhelmed by Slade's character, especially since most of the script
calls for him to be quiet and meek.  But he holds his own, as he sees
the Colonel's time rapidly running out.  The old soldier is becoming
distraught and careless about himself, and Charlie knows that he has to
teach him to love life once again.  But because his character is
developed so well, we believe him as he asserts himself and does what he
can to help the Colonel.  Charlie's not as simple as he looks, and the
Colonel's desperate grasps for attention bring out the best in him, even
as he's changing the old man for good.
     But after all this buildup, it's a disappointment when the movie's
climax has Slade giving a corn-ball speech in Charlie's defense, trying
like so many other movies to capture the magic of MR. SMITH GOES TO
WASHINGTON.  After two and a half hours of wonderful character
development, to wrap everything up neatly in typical Hollywood fashion
is nothing less than a cop-out.  Even Pacino descends into overacting
here, and the film ends with your typical "I've been through a crisis,
but now my life is perfect" note that we get all too often from
Hollywood films.  If the rest of the movie wasn't so good, this would be
irritating.
     However, Pacino must have realized what a waste this final scene
is, however, because he caps it off with a one-liner that I won't
reveal, saving the movie from descending into pure kitsch the way A FEW
GOOD MEN did.
     The movie is a full two hours and forty minutes long, though there
are very few moments that don't contribute to the story.  I certainly
wasn't bored, and yet I had the feeling that the story could have been
shortened by as much as an hour.  Brest tried screening shorter versions
of the film to preview audiences, and they were confused or disappointed
with the results, so the movie was released at full length.  The problem
lies with the screenplay's pacing: it's leisurely paced when it should
be rushing forward at breakneck speed.  SCENT OF A WOMAN is an enjoyable
experience, but it could have been a truly great motion picture if it
picked up the tempo in the way Jonathan Demme's SOMETHING WILD did.
     Despite its length, however, you won't be looking at your watch
when you see this movie.  Brest may be a Hollywood director at heart,
but he cares about his characters, and because he does, we do.  SCENT OF
A WOMAN is a movie you won't regret seeing, thanks to a great
performance by Al Pacino that you'll remember for a long time.

Author
Pedro Sena
There are films that just stand out, and if it isn't because it is well
written, then it is because an actor just takes over, and delivers what is
undoubtedly one of the most deserving Oscar performances around.
Scent of a Woman, is a simple film, nothing complicated about it at all, and
the story is very easy to tell.  A college boy, Charles (Chris O'Donnell) in
a private institution in the east ( Boston ) gets in trouble with a few of
his friends, for which his future is at stake.  Since it  happens just prior
to the Thanksgiving holidays, there isn't much that  the school can do to
discipline anyone until the following Monday.  In  the meantime, he gets
himself a part time job to help take care of his financial needs for the
holidays.  And that job is to take care of a retired, and blind, career army
man ( played by Al Pacino ).  And what looked like an easy job turns into a
weekend in New York, where the real  story about the Colonel is unfolding.
He wants to have one more fling,  and then end his life.
The Colonel is alone, his own family doesn't like him, or his surprise
visit, and he is not known for being Mr.. congeniality, either.  But Charlie
is a well mannered kid, and his way eventually affects the aging Colonel.
Upon returning to the school on Monday, Charles is facing expulsion and a
ruined future because of his honesty, and integrity.  And in appears the
surrogate father who delivers the young man from the claws of defeat. And
the school's discipline committee takes a harmless stand, so not to hurt
anyone, which is the speech that delivers the young man from the claw of the
over eager administrator with revenge on his mind.
A magnificent film, really nicely done, well executed in almost every phase,
and it stimulates the feelings of the viewer, because we can not let go of
the character or the story.  The aging Colonel still has an eye for women,
and can smell them a mile away, and teases the younger Charlie about them.
There are many films that one should see on a large screen and this one is
one of them, but unlike them, this one is stronger, even if seen at home, on
the video ( as I just did ), where one's emotional edges are allowed to run
freely.... and this film is at least one of those that  requires a pause...
and then run back to it....

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Curiously, SCENT OF A WOMAN is a film of a man's journey from childhood
to adulthood.  Charlie Simms (played by Chris O'Donnell) goes to a very
upper-class private prep school where the nicest kids are super-snobs and
most others are worse.  Charlie has two problems over Thanksgiving weekend.
In the days just before Thanksgiving he saw some students setting up a prank
that went very wrong.  Now the administration is using both a big carrot and
a big stick to pry out what Charlie knows.  His other problem is Lt. Colonel
Frank Slade (played by Al Pacino).  Charlie has been hired to care for Slade
over the weekend.  Slade is very much like the Jack Nicholson character in A
FEW GOOD MEN, but now a blind alcoholic who hates the world.  What makes the
story curious is that it is Slade who must make the journey to adulthood.
Charlie learns a different lesson, that of seizing opportunity.
     Charlie's job is just simple baby-sitting, but Slade has other ideas.
He drags Charlie to New York City on a mission of Slade's own planning.  As
you could predict, the two men who start by hating each other have
adventures together and learn to respect and admire each other.  Their
togetherness is just what each turns out to need, to nobody's surprise.
     Much has been said about how good Pacino's acting is in SCENT OF A
WOMAN, but in fact he seems to overpower every sentence he speaks.  Like his
character, he forces himself to be the center of attention in every scene
where he appears.  If Chris O'Donnell is remembered for the film, it is for
the scenes where Pacino did not appear.  Incidentally, this film also
exploits the myth that blind people seem to develop their other senses to
super-human levels.  Pacino's Slade can judge the quality of a salute
without actually seeing it.  He also can identify the perfume and even the
soap a woman uses, hence the title of the film.  Bo Goldman's screenplay has
good dialogue but ultimately falls into the not uncommon cinematic irony of
pulling all the familiar strings and pushing all the familiar buttons to
tell the audience not to let themselves be manipulated nor should they
manipulate others.  I give this SCENT OF A WOMAN high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     SCENT OF A WOMAN is about Charles Simms (Chris O'Donnell), a Boston
prep school senior, and the Thanksgiving weekend he spends working as
the  companion of Lt. Colonel Frank Slade (Al Pacino), an embittered,
lonely, blind veteran.  The job, which doesn't seem all that enjoyable
to start  with, degenerates further when Slade decides to make an
unexpected visit  to New York City.
     There are certain actors that, when they appear in a film, are
almost  invariably indicators that the production is one of quality.
They are an elite few, with names like Nicholson, Hoffman, Hackman, and
Pacino.   Considering some of the roles that Al Pacino has played in the
past (THE GODFATHER trilogy, for example), it would be hyperbole to say
that he gives the "performance of a lifetime" in SCENT OF A WOMAN.
However, there's no doubting that for most actors, this would be a
career-capper.  And though Pacino has given performances of this
strength before, that in no way  diminishes the effort he invests in
SCENT OF A WOMAN.
     Chris O'Donnell, a fresh-but-not-unknown face, also does a solid
job in the more experienced man's shadow.  His role is
nicely-understated as well as  human, and he manages to fashion a
rapport with the audience.  This is necessary for the film to succeed,
since it's through his eyes that the story unfolds.
     In essence, SCENT OF A WOMAN is another in a never-ending series of
bonding  pictures where each person has something unique to offer to the
other.   However, this movie is special; it goes deeper than the average
film of its ilk, plumbing the depths of two superbly-rendered
characters.  There are  numerous dynamic scenes, along with a surprising
amount of comedy.  Director/ Producer Martin Brest knows how to blend
humor with drama.  His mix is nearly flawless, and he manages to do
almost the entire film without resorting to cheap, manipulative tricks.
Laughter, tears, and cheers are genuine - straight from the heart - not
the result of the movie-makers maneuvering us into  giving
pre-programmed responses.  Considering how sound the bulk of this film
is, the final moments are weak, but skillfully handled nevertheless.
Brest is also a master at encouraging viewers to suspend disbelief.
There's a scene in SCENT OF A WOMAN with Pacino and O'Donnell in a
Ferrari that, while  implausible, is natural in the context of the film.
     The movie is as long as its storyline demands.  It doesn't seem
like two and one-half hours, and less time with these characters would
have cheated the audience.  Aided by an emotive score from Thomas
Newman, SCENT OF A WOMAN is a masterful production and a superb way to
start 1993.  

Author
Andrew Hall
     In this new drama, a real departure for director Martin Brest
(BEVERLY HILLS COP, MIDNIGHT RUN), Al Pacino stars as Frank Slade, a
retired Air Force Lieutenant Colonel who happens to be blind.  Chris
O'Donnell co-stars as Charlie Simms, a poor kid on scholarship at a
well-to-do prep school.
     Unable to afford plane fare home for Thanksgiving, Charlie takes a
job over the holiday weekend taking care of Frank, who refuses to go
away with his daughter's family for the holiday.  Charlie is put off by
his first meeting with Frank, who has become an obnoxious, bitter,
boozing old man, but Frank's mother sweet-talks Charlie into taking the
job anyway.
     As soon as Frank's daughter leaves for the holiday, Frank reveals
that he has the whole weekend planned; a reluctant Charlie agrees to
accompany him in his travels.  Over the course of the weekend, Charlie
learns of Frank's unhappiness, and man and boy bond, in a way.
     This film is a journey for both characters:  for Frank, it is the
search for a reason to go on; for Charlie, it is the search for a father
figure.
     SCENT OF A WOMAN is mostly a drama, but there are a few good comic
bits here and there, mostly resulting from Frank's obnoxious behavior.
It doesn't resemble at all anything from MIDNIGHT RUN or BEVERLY HILLS
COP (which I liked), so just don't expect that.
     O'Donnell is convincing as the awkward, naive teenager who tries to
guide Frank.  But Pacino--well, what'd you expect?--gives a gritty,
realistic performance in probably the most challenging role of the year.
Don't bother to nominate Pacino for the Best Actor Oscar, just go ahead
and give it to him now (no need to disappoint the other nominees).
     Pacino manages to be obnoxious one second while being charming the
next.  And you really believe that he *is* blind.  I wonder:  did he
wear some kind of contact lenses to hinder his sight?
     But the film isn't without flaws.  My biggest complaint was the
ending, which (without ruining it for you) was just too sappy, too
resolute.  I also thought Pacino's speech was preachy and melodramatic,
thrown in for good measure, when it wasn't really necessary.  (The
speech reminded me of the ending to AND JUSTICE FOR ALL, where the
speech really *made* the film in that case).
     And Frank is sometimes unbelievable in the things he can do,
seemingly amazing for a blind person.  The dancing--*maybe*--but the
car, no way!
     Further, the film was a little long--a bit over two hours--but I
hardly noticed.
     All in all, SCENT OF A WOMAN is a pretty good film, a sometimes
intense drama with another great performance from Pacino.  I found it
very engaging.  See it.

Author
Jon Webb
     Al Pacino plays a blind former Lieutenant Colonel who, being
depressed and irascible, has been left in the care of an impoverished
prep school boy for Thanksgiving weekend.  The Colonel plans a trip to
New York City to experience the best life offers and brings the boy
along.
     I read a review that pointed out that this film was intended to be
a sentimental holiday heart-warmer--both the old Colonel and the young
boy learn from each other, etc.--but it turned into a much better film
because of Al Pacino's performance.  That is exactly right.  Pacino
refuses to give the Colonel the one-dimensional nature that would have
made this a superficial film.  His portrayal gets to the heart of the
character of the Colonel, who is not all bad and not all good, and not
completely healed at the end of the film.  He mouths the lines given
him, turning the good ones (about women) into poetry, and keeping the
bad ones (concerning the subplot of the boy's problems at the prep
school) from being totally sentimental trash.  He makes this film
entertaining and worth seeing.
     The prep school boy (played by Chris O'Donnell) is also pretty
good.  Perhaps it is just in reaction to Pacino's performance, but I
thought he'd captured the character of such a young man very well,
particularly in the early scenes.
     That said, there are numerous flaws in this film.  The script is
bad, and the editing often gives one no impression of time passing --
e.g., at the Thanksgiving Dinner they seem to sit down and have pie, and
when the boy is waiting in the car Pacino seems to take about five
minutes, which is something of a disappointing climax after such a big
buildup.
     Even worse, the direction of the Thanksgiving Dinner family is so
bad you don't have any idea what's going on.  Pacino shows up, and
everyone seems constipated.  What's going on there?  The film is best
when O'Donnell and Pacino are alone; at least then they seem to have
some idea of what they're doing.  Martin Brest, the director, doesn't
have a clue.

Author
Anton J. Panagos
     SCENT OF A WOMAN is one of the best movies of the year.  The main
reason for the above statement: Al Pacino.  This is Pacino's best film
role since DOG DAY AFTERNOON.  The role is a fully rich one for Pacino,
and he plays it to the hilt.  SCENT OF A WOMAN is the story of a college
kid, aloofingly played by Chris O'Donnell, who spends the Thanksgiving
weekend as a paid housesitter for a blind, and totally obnoxious,
Vietnam vet, Al Pacino.
     Without spoiling the movie's many wonderful surprises, the movie 
contains a nice mix of drama and comedy.  There is also beautifully
filmed tango danced by one of the principal characters and newcomer
actress Gabrielle Anwar.  (This is not a spoiler, just look at any movie
ad for SCENT OF A WOMAN in any newspaper!)
     What makes the story fascinating?  The explanation of Al Pacino's
character by others and Pacino himself.  His relationship with the young
and innocent O'Donnell, who becomes his protege in life.  Pacino
"teaches" O'Donnell about basic instincts of life and surprisingly
Pacino learns a few things as well.  The movie's ending was fittingly
great.  SCENT OF A WOMAN may  be nominated for an Oscar in April, but Al
Pacino definitely deserves an Oscar for this winning role of a lifetime.
I'd rate SCENT OF A WOMAN **** stars out of possible ****
The film is rated (R) for profanity.
