Title
Review for Lord of the Rings, The (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Sometimes,  it takes a very strange course of events to lead
somebody towards the literature or any other piece of art he
appreciates. In my case, it all began in mid 1980-s, when I,
like  many  of  my  classmates, got  hold  of  my first home
computer.  Our  parents believed that  those  new toys would
help  us  in study. They  were, naturally, wrong. Instead of
solving   mathematical   problems  or   taking  interest  in
technical  studies,  we were spending  months in front of TV
screens  playing  video games. One  of  the most popular was
"Hobbit",  adventure  game based  on J.R.R. Tolkien's novel.
"Hobbit"  was  great intellectual challenge,  and many of us
borrowed  the  book from the school  library only to get the
clues  to  solve the game. Sadly,  there wasn't any need for
the  book's  sequel  - famed fantasy  epic  "The Lord of the
Rings".  The  game was never  made, except for parody called
"Bored of the Rings".
Despite that, I was actually intrigued when "The Lord of the
Rings" was first aired on (then) former Yugoslav television,
couple  of  years later. That wasn't  the  first time I have
ever seen adaptation of Tolkien on the small screen - one of
the  children's  theatres in Belgrade  had  their version of
"Hobbit"  aired  (with some baby face  man trying to pass as
Gandalf).  I also saw segments of "The Lord of the Rings" in
a  form of comic book. So, when  I actually saw the movie, I
felt  somewhat familiar with the  material - story about few
brave  heroes,  members of the  different mythical races, in
the  mission  to  stop the  evil  all-powerful sorcerer from
taking  control  of  Middle  Earth.  Unfortunately,  due  to
circumstances  outside  of my control,  I was forced to stop
the  viewing somewhere in the middle of the movie. Lucky for
me, I had to wait only a year before the re-run, and finally
I  saw  the  whole  thing.  But,  shortly  after the closing
credits  I began to wonder "Is it all? First tale? It *must*
be the sequel."
A  year later, when I finally added three books of Tolkien's
masterpiece  to  my  collection,  I  began understanding why
Ralph Bakshi's THE LORD OF THE RINGS ended the way it ended.
Seeing  1200 pages of text, able  to keep me preoccupied for
weeks  and  moths,  I was again  reminded  of  an old wisdom
"Great  books  make  mediocre movies,  and  vice  versa". It
happens  mostly because sometimes it is simply impossible to
bring  the rich content of hundreds or thousands of pages of
the  book  in the hundred or  less pages of the script. Film
authors  who  try  to capture  book's  spirit  on the screen
usually   fail,  either  by   omitting  too  many  important
elements,  or  by  stuffing material  and  making  the movie
unwatchable  bore  (David  Lynch's DUNE  could  be  the nice
example).  Bakshi,  although he  somehow managed to condense
the  most important elements of  the "Hobbit" into the first
few  minutes of the film, knew  that he couldn't turn entire
Tolkien's  novel into two hour film,  was forced to use only
the  first two books - "Fellowship of the Ring" and parts of
"Two Towers".
Another  problem  that should face  any author ready to take
Tolkien to the big screen is the high cost. With today's CGI
and special effects, Peter Jackson's plans to make a feature
film  version  aren't  so wild.  Two  decades ago, making an
animated movie looked like the only alternative for producer
Saul  Zaentz. In doing so,  he employed Ralph Bakshi, author
of  sometimes controversial animated movies, responsible for
bringing adult content and sensibilities to this, until that
time, almost entirely children's genre.
Bakshi's  techniques  in  making  this  movie  are  somewhat
similar  to  those employed in  his WIZARDS - Sci-Fi/Fantasy
epic  he had made a year  earlier - combination of animation
with  rotoscoped live footage. Here  he used live actors and
managed  to combine them with  the drawn characters, perhaps
in order to make the events of the books more dramatic. That
backfired  a  little - unlike  Orcs, human characters seem a
little  bit  too  unrealistic, and  many  times, viewers are
forced  to  be engaged in "who  is who" game. Another thing,
that  might  be  a flaw,  is  amount of violence, especially
bloodletting,  which makes this film closer to BRAVEHEART or
CONAN  THE BARBARIAN than family entertainment. On the other
hand, Tolkien's original text, that was at times rather dark
and adult, can be also be responsible for that.
Anyway, although inferior to the book, THE LORD OF THE RINGS
is  quite  interesting and rather  original attempt to bring
literature masterpiece to the big screen. Although it mostly
failed  as  a standalone  cinematic entertainment, it served
its purpose by intriguing viewers enough to yearn after more
Tolkien, both on paper and on cinema.
