Title
Review for Saving Grace (2000)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Fox on May 19, 2000; certificate 15; 93 minutes; 
country of origin UK; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Nigel Cole; produced by Mark Crowdy.
Written by Mark Crowdy, Craig Ferguson; from a story by Mark Crowdy.
Photographed by John de Borman; edited by Alan Strachan.
There have been a lot of small British movies opening in cinemas over the 
past two years, thanks to industry aid from National Lottery funding. Most of 
them have been made by bad filmmakers with insufficient budgets. And they've 
been comedies -- which is the hardest genre to get right, and the most 
embarrassing to fail at.
It was therefore with a sense of dread that I entered "Saving Grace", yet 
another quirky little Britcom. While it has not been paid for by the Lottery, 
its financier is Sky Pictures, the television company that ran an ad campaign 
not long ago to boast about getting exclusive rights to "What Rats Won't Do" 
and "Gargantua". Things did not look promising.
You can feel the "but" coming on, can't you? Well, as I said, things did not 
look promising... but "Saving Grace" is actually a sweet, good-natured little 
comedy with strong performances and humour that emerges naturally from a 
story taken seriously. Funny, how things turn out.
As the film opens, we see Grace Trevethan (Brenda Blethyn) in her Cornish 
mansion, preparing for the funeral of her husband. Soon she discovers that 
the late gent has left her with a killer mortgage and other assorted debts 
that total almost half a million pounds. As she has never worked, lives in a 
tiny village and is a middle-aged female, her options on how to raise the 
money are limited to say the least. What can she do?
The one thing Grace does have a knack for is gardening, and when times get so 
desperate that the bank is on the phone non-stop and debt collectors and 
surveyors are constantly knocking on the door, she decides to make a risky 
proposition to her doobie-smoking groundskeeper Matthew (Craig Ferguson): How 
about the two of them use hydroponics to rapidly grow a huge crop of 
marijuana, then sell it in London, and put an end to their money problems?
Word spreads about the plan; nobody has conversations about it, but everyone 
in town comes to know what Grace and Craig are up to, and when their 
greenhouse lights go on full blast every night, the men in the pub all put 
their sunglasses on and let out a supportive cheer. There's a cute 
conspiratorial attitude in the air -- my colleague Harvey Karten, in 
reviewing "Saving Grace", made an interesting and appropriate comparison to 
last year's "Waking Ned".
In a way, "Saving Grace" is better than that movie, because its characters 
aren't so artificially 'colourful'; they're ordinary people, reacting in 
amusing ways to a mischievous situation. Any moments with the potential to be 
dreadful gags are turned into wonderful comic set-pieces by the director, 
Nigel Cole, who makes sure everything serves the story, and knows that even 
the silliest humour must seem genuine to get laughs. One scene late on in his 
movie -- in which two old ladies mistake Grace's plants for tea, drink it, 
and then get the giggles and munchies at work -- is hash humour every bit as 
funny as anything Cheech and Chong ever gave us. Far out, madam.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website at 
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Pete Croatto
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Pete Croatto.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/69b77585c9487f348825695500652d49?OpenDocument
There is comic potential in Saving Grace, but its two interesting main
characters and their unusual business arrangement are buried under a
mound of predictable, weathered material.
In the movie, a middle-aged English widow (Brenda Blethyn) is left with
a stack of debts after her philandering dope of a husband commits
suicide.  Her Scottish gardener (Craig Ferguson of the irksome Drew
Carey Show) needs help growing hemp and Blethyn just happens to have a
green thumb.  With his insistence, they soon grow tons of weed in her
huge greenhouse, turning it into a stoner's wet dream.
Writers Mark Crowdy and Craig Ferguson (who also produced) don't flesh
out this scenario, though.  Blethyn does a fine job in the title role
and makes the film palatable.  With her sing-songy delivery and matronly
looks, there is a good foundation for laughs.  The scene of her dressed
like Superfly's aunt when she looks for London drug buyers is a hoot.
But Blethyn, a two-time Academy Award-nominated actress, never gets a
chance to interpret or broaden the role.  The film opts to throw in a
bunch of drowsy, sitcomish subplots that dwarf development on all
fronts.  Ferguson's fisher girlfriend is pregnant, but can't tell him
the happy news.  Director Nigel Cole should feel proud.  That device has
now officially been used more times than penicillin.  Blethyn meets,
befriends and uses her husband's mistress to get connected with a drug
dealer.  The whole bizarre chain of events doesn't get played for
laughs-a botched comic opportunity.
Ultimately, this all leads to Blethyn and Ferguson being chased by drug
dealing thugs and a corporate boss who wants his debt paid.  Yes, by the
end it's officially become the next Love Bug movie-Herbie Gets High.
The worst thing about Saving Grace is that the drug aspect isn't used
with any flair, further highlighting the film's bland, uncreative core. 
Every reefer joke involves button-down people acting goofy-whether it be
Blethyn laughing uncontrollably when taking a hit of her own stash, or a
garden party getting funky when she burns her considerable cash crop.
Come on.  Don't Ferguson and Crowdy know the best drug jokes come from
the fried responses, but not people acting like Woodstock bozos? 
Remember Jack Nicholson talking about aliens in Easy Rider?  Or Rory
Cochran describing Martha and George Washington as America's hemp
harvesting pioneers in Dazed and Confused?
Those were funny, unforgettable scenes.  Saving Grace is so bent on
thinking that just getting high is a hoot, that Blethyn's and Ferguson's
scheme comes across as an opportunity to only showcase this stupid
behavior.  That's not good. 
The bottom line is that Saving Grace doesn't bother to try.  It goes for
the easiest way out, the least amount of effort.  It tries to float
solely on the notion of a spinster growing drugs, buoyed by recycled
subplots.
        Director:  Nigel Cole
        Producers: Steve Clark Hall (line), Mark Crowdy, Craig Ferguson
(co-producer), Torsten Leschly (co-producer), Xavier Marchand (executive
producer), Cat Villiers (executive producer)
        Writers: Mark Crowdy and Craig Ferguson
Starring: Brenda Blethyn, Craig Ferguson, Martin Clunes, Tcheky Karyo,
Jamie Foreman, Valerie Edmond, Leslie Phillips
http://www.saving-grace-movie.com/index_flash.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?=tagfilmcriticom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Lesley Abrams
There's a new genre of film appearing at the Plex these days. It's the
Quirky British Village That Comes Together genre. Think of THE FULL
MONTY, WAKING NED DEVINE and LOCAL HERO. They're all about how the folks
in the town support some ziggy plot that one of the locals has hatched.
They are contagiously genial and charming films -- the kind of movies
you watch with a little grin on your face the whole time.
Now comes SAVING GRACE, a sweet exploration of how the best things in
life are the things you don't necessarily plan for. Grace Trevethyn is a
rather proper, orchid-growing, middle-aged British lady. When her
husband dies suddenly, leaving her in debt, she decides to grow
marijuana in her greenhouse in a last ditch effort to save her home.
Using the same techniques she does with her pampered orchids, Grace
grows a crop of weed in her greenhouse that would bring Jerry Garcia
back from the Dead. When it's time to harvest and sell her crop,
everything goes wackily wrong, all at once. But the crusty lovable
townspeople save the day.
And there's the rub with SAVING GRACE. It's infectious and fun but it
doesn't really cover any new territory. It's not hard to see where it's
going. (Although the coda has a few undetected surprises) And everyone's
so predictably benign in their eccentricity.  Certainly there must be
one dullard or mutant or evildoer in the bunch. Maybe it's more of a
sub-genre than a full-fledged genre unto itself. Maybe it's an offshoot
of that big category I fondly call `British Humor' -- ranging from the
incomprehensibly successful Benny Hill to the sublime Monty Python to
those ladies-on-holiday films. It's all about the pluck and
determination of post-War Britain -- the Britain that remembers how
important it is to get along and just be nice.
Grace is played with spunk and kewpie-doll cuteness by Brenda Blethyn --
who deserves a lifetime supply of whatever vice she chooses for her
work. Each time this woman appears on screen, she is thoroughly someone
else. From SECRETS & LIES to LITTLE VOICE to A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, Ms
Blethyn offers up cinematic portraits of vulnerability and pluck.  Her
Grace glides seamlessly from grieving, frightened widow to giggly
co-conspirator to not-so-suave drug dealer to...well...that would just
spoil too much of the fun. Suffice to say, Ms Blethyn is convincing
every step of the way.
As in it's precursors, SAVING GRACE depends on its cast of small town
eccentrics to lift it above the ho-hum. There's the priest who loves
vampire movies and the doctor who reads Jackie Collins. The female love
interest is a fisherman and the male love interest  -- Grace's partner
in crime -- thinks being responsible is highly overrated. Two elderly
shopkeepers enjoy Grace's `tea'  quite a lot. A drug dealer has to pick
up his daughter after her flute lesson.
Inside these delightful characters are real-looking actors with spirit
and appeal. They work together like they've all lived in the same small
coastal town forever and ever and happily coexist with each other's
idiosyncrasies. They are the backbone of this new sub-genre. And they
make the two movie hours of your life perfectly satisfying. Even if you
have seen it all before.
People who inhale and people who don't need not fear: SAVING GRACE
appeals to anyone willing to go along for the high.  There's nothing
deviant or crude about marijuana in SAVING GRACE.  No evil pot-heads. No
lurking junkies. Just a bunch of really appealing folk from the
countryside of England, enjoying a romp. And a toke.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fine Line Features/Portman Entertainment
 Director: Nigel Cole
 Writer:  Craig Ferguson, Mark Crowdy, Story by Mark
Crowdy
 Cast: Brenda Blethyn, Craig Ferguson, Martin Clunes,
Tcheky Karyo, Jamie Forman, Bill Bailey, Valerie Edmond,
Tristan Sturrock, Clive Merrison, Leslie Phillips, Diana Quick,
Phyllida Law, Linda Kerr Scott, Ken Campbell
   A picture with the same amusing spirit as Kirk Jones's
"Waking Ned Devine," Nigel Cole's "Saving Grace" is one of
those insular comedies of people living on tight little islands,
having little contact with the outside world, only to be
compelled by misfortune to enter into the rough-and-tumble of
big city politics.  Such a situation is earmarked for whimsy,
and given the talent at director Cole's call, that's what we
get.
   The story is photographed in the Cornish city of St. Isaacs
in an area of the world that for Europeans could be called a
lands end--nobody just passes through and doubtless few
residents even bother to make the trip to London.  The
fanciful tone is set in the very first scene just after the
dissolute husband of Grace Trevethan (Brenda Blethyn) has
jumped or fallen out of a plane without a parachute and is
buried by people who mutter curses rather than
benedictions under their breath.  We soon find out why.  The
man--who proves to have had an affair unbenownst to his
wife--was heavily in debt, having mortgaged his home and
borrowed heavily to finance a series of disastrous business
ventures.  With creditors swamping Grace for payment and
taking away her furniture right down to the motorized
lawnmower which had been secured on time payments,
Grace, who is merely an amateur albeit remarkable gardener,
is about to become homeless.  Under advice from Matthew
("The Big Tease"'s Craig Ferguson), her now underemployed
gardener, she transforms her well-lit greenhouse into fertile
soil for the growing of marijuana.  Just as the entire village of
Tallymore (pop. 52) in Kirk Jones's fable is aware of and
hiding the fact that Ned Devine, winner of a lottery, was
dead, so are the inhabitants of this Cornish coastal town hip
to the desperate measures that Grace must pursue to save
herself from bankruptcy.
   While the plot is amusing enough, "Saving Grace" is too
derivative to stand on its own as a comedy the likes of Robert
Asher's 1960 movie "Make Mine Mink," about a former soldier
who organizes a band of fur thieves.  This film is driven not
by plot but by its inhabitants, who are far enough removed
from the pressures of urban conformity to cultivate their
separate eccentricities in much the way that Grace and
Matthew cultivate their plants.  
   In the sort of story that brings broad smiles to the faces of
the audience rather than loud guffaws, "Saving Grace"
subverts the idea that money does not grow on trees, as
director Cole uses his keen eyes and ears to supply each of
his personalities with erratic individuality.  Best of all is
Brenda Blethyn, who appears in virtually every scene and
who proves that she is as able to coax grins in this picture as
she had brought tears to our eyes in Mike Leigh's poignant
"Secrets and Lies."  We watch her grow from a naive and
accepting backwater matron unable even to express her
sexual frustration to her unscrupulous husband, to a
cosmopolitan women human being.  She does this by briefly
taking up a career in what is still ludicrously considered a
crime, making a trip on her own to London, and consorting
with an urbane international drug dealer (Tcheky Karyo) who
takes quite a fancy to this dauntless individual.  
   While the conclusion of this deft little comedy is scarcely
believable and, in fact, is resolved with an unforeshadowed
contrivance, we revel in the gentle fun the story makes at the
expense of village people, some of whom turn out to be not
as dumb as they appear.  Keystone Cop Sgt. Alfred (Ken
Campbell) could easily remind you of "Waking Ned Devine"'s
daft Michael O'Sullivan (played by David Kelly)--a
slightly bemused officer who dreams of the fame he would
receive if only he can catch the local salmon poachers. 
Martin Clunes as Dr. Bamford is the kind of physician we
hope to find, at least when we're not gravely ill--the sort who
hardly takes himself seriously and is up for a toke or a drink
at any time.  Among other comic scenes is one involving 
women who have the time of their lives when they
unknowingly down cups of tea made from marijuana leaves.
   Mark Crowdy, who wrote the story and is its producer, tells
us something about the history of the movie.  Crowdy, who is
from the very Cornwall of the narrative, heard about a man
driving a Land Rover who had a sneezing attack so bad that
his head pitched forwarded and got stuck in the steering
wheel.  His car swerved from the road, crashed, and the man
died.  In the hands of "The Ice Storm"'s Ang Lee, this could
be a take-off point for a tragic tale, but Crowdy uses the
inspiration to carve a daffy yarn of a woman who turns to a
crime of the most harmless kind to save herself.  
Not Rated.  Running time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SAVING GRACE (director: Nigel Cole; screenwriter: Craig Ferguson/Mark
Crowdy/based on a story by Crowdy; cinematographer: John de Borman;
editor: Alan Strachan; cast: Brenda Blethyn (Grace Trevethyn), Craig
Ferguson (Matthew), Martin Clunes (Dr. Bamford), Tcheky Karyo (Jacques),
Jamie Foreman (China), Bill Bailey (Vince, low-level drug dealer),
Valerie Edmond (Nicky), Tristan Sturrock (Harvey), Clive Merrison
(Quentin), Leslie Phillips (Vicar), Diana Quick (Honey), Phyllida Law
(Margaret), Linda Kerr Scott (Diana), Ken Campbell (Sgt. Alfred);
Runtime: 93; 2000-UK)
Another formula 'feel good' quirky comedy from the British Isles, much
like "Waking Ned Devine," and a host of other popular low budget movies
that turned a nifty profit off a thin story line. It is filled with
likable establishment types living in a quaint town, such as tolerant
vicars and policemen, plenty of eccentrics, and of locals who stick
together through thick and thin. The strength of this film lies in its
rational theme, that smoking pot should be legalized since it is even
less dangerous than drinking alcohol. The film is tolerable until after
its first hour, it then falls completely apart, becoming just too absurd
to consider as anything but sitcom fluff gone completely bananas.
But its long overdue message of decriminalization for certain drugs is
on target
and allows the film to, at least, be viewed as containing a pertinent
message. Its message is especially appropriate nowadays considering the
'War on Drugs' is about to be escalated into Colombia. The drug war has
been a total failure so far and with no hope of it being won by law
enforcement methods in the future, it has so far just ended up causing
America's jails to be overcrowded with non-violent drug prisoners and
offers zero hope of curtailing America's drug usage and drug supply.
Billions of dollars have just been allocated by Congress to get
officially involved in the Colombian Civil War, by backing a corrupt
government (Remember Vietnam!) with the idea that military might could
stop the cocaine and marijuana harvests in that country. Everything
about this proposed action smacks of Vietnam, with this scenario closer
to home, so what probably awaits such an effort is a more futile result
than the other war.
The film's mild theme of showing squares getting into the weed business
and finding it acceptable by the public, something that should have been
accepted some 40 years ago, is a theme long overdue for public
acceptance, but one that is better received late than never. There has
to be some common sense in distinguishing what drugs should be legalized
and how to educate the public on this, rather than making it a police
matter altogether.
The film opens in a quaint Cornish seaside village at the funeral of the
husband of a middle-aged woman, Grace (Brenda Blethyn), who fell out of
an airplane, evidently committing suicide. The widow soon finds out her
husband was a bigger bastard than she imagined. He left her with a stack
of enormous bills and put up, without her knowledge, their comfortable
300 year old house as collateral for a failed business venture by taking
out a second mortgage. The widow finds herself bankrupt and with no
marketable skills to pay back her husband's enormous debts and prevent
her from losing the house and becoming homeless. She also knows that he
was having an affair with a sophisticated woman from London, Honey
(Quick). What makes the affair doubly unsatisfying, is that when
conferring with Honey, she finds out that he was a tiger with her in bed
but refrained from having sex with her.
Even though the locals try to help the bankrupt widow out as best they
can, the creditors swoop down on her like vultures. Her gardener and
handyman, Matthew (Ferguson), decides to stay on with her, despite his
last check bouncing. Since she is an expert amateur horticulturist, he
convinces her to help him revive his hemp plants, which he grows for
private use. The two soon see this as a possibly big business
opportunity, as Grace works miracles with the plants which turn out to
be high-quality stuff. For Grace, this is a way to save her house and
get her out of debt; for the Scotsman, Matthew, it offers a chance for
him to continue to live in this beautiful village and earn enough money
to marry his fisherman girlfriend Nicky (Valerie).
The locals all let the illegal activities go on undisturbed: the police
sergeant (Campbell) pretends not to notice what the bright lights in
Grace's greenhouse is for, the friendly vicar (Phillips) counsels about
the wisdom of not taking action over something that you can't control,
and the doctor (Clunes) enjoys smoking the weed for recreation.
The story becomes incredulous when Grace decides to go to London and
score with a big-time drug dealer instead of having Matthew go, because
she finds out Nicky is pregnant and doesn't want Matthew to end up in
jail. It is interesting to note, that no one thinks smoking grass is bad
for you, only that one can go to jail.
The scene with Grace on Portobello Road in the Notting Hill section of
London, trying to find a drug dealer, while dressed out of place, in a
white dress and hat one would wear to a tea party in Cornwall but not on
the streets of Notting Hill while looking to make a drug deal, was
completely hokey and the film descended into a huge black hole, whereby
it never recovered its dignity.
The film moves into the formula mode, whereas Grace beats the odds
against her failing to survive, as she meets an international drug
dealer, a Frenchman (Tcheky Karyo), who is first seen threatening to cut
off her fingers but later becomes her business partner and husband as
she becomes a millionaire and writes a best selling fiction book about
her experiences, thereby becoming a celebrity. Things work out in a
ridiculous way, where there is a total breakdown in the character
development of Grace, where this matronly figure suddenly becomes merely
a cartoon figure instead of live flesh and blood. There are a lot of
silly giggles that come forth and the film has just enough of an acting
performance by Brenda Blethyn to breathe air into it before it comes to
its belated finale, as it drones on with its transparently gratuitous
upbeat tone, until it makes the audience feel good that the sweet old
lady succeeded. This 'unhip' film leaves one with the impression that
smoking and growing pot is silly, but should be tolerated as something
naughty middle-aged widows screwed by their terrible former husbands
must do in order not to remain destitute. Ummm!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Susan Granger
If you loved "The Full Monty" and "Waking Ned Devine," this is the gentle summer comedy for you!  Set in the Cornish city of St. Isaacs, it's about Grace Trevethan (Brenda Blethlyn), an ostensibly comfortable, conservative middle-aged widow who discovers she's, literally, penniless. Her late husband, who died while parachuting, had mortgaged their manor house to the hilt, not to mention philandering in London with another woman who had the gall to show up at his funeral. Hounded by creditors, she has no recourse but to utilize her only talent - gardening - to grow something that will make her enough money to pay off her debts. So when her Scottish handyman (played by Craig Ferguson, who co-wrote the script with Mark Crowdy) admits he's been struggling with some sickly marijuana sprigs hidden behind the vicarage, she concludes: "No light, no buds." But once Grace gets them into her greenhouse, using some hydroponics, the plants thrive. Soon she's off to the city to find!
 a buyer - and winds up in the clutches of a shady French drug dealer (Tcheky Karyo) who has more on his mind than her bumper crop of cannabis. In the meantime, Grace's proper garden club ladies are intrigued with her new "tea plants," sampling several with hilarious results. The psychedelic story takes an unexpectedly discordant and contrived twist at the end but, nevertheless, director Nigel Cole keeps the naughty shenanigans in high gear and you find yourselves rooting for gentle Grace to pull the hip, hemp caper of a lifetime. Like "The Full Monty" and "Waking Ned Devine," it's about ordinary people who find they must compromise their values in extraordinary circumstances. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Saving Grace" is a warm, wry, whimsical 9. It's outrageously good fun!

Author
Chad Polenz
Don't you love those cute British comedies that come out every year? They 
always have a quaint charm and tell a rather unusual story in a breezy, 
lighthearted matter. As a critic it's difficult to review these films because 
they're just so good overall you can't really narrow it down to the 
specifics that made it work so well. "Saving Grace" is a good example of what 
I'm talking about. Its story is approached with all the delicacy of a 
children's tale, but at the core it's a smart, mature black comedy Americans 
don't usually have the patience for.
If I were to break to story down to the basics you might think it was about 
poor people living in the ghettos of New York or Los Angeles, etc. It's about 
a woman whose husband just died and left her with so much debt she can't 
possibly pay it all back and is dangerously close to losing her house. Her 
friends are pot-smokers without much ambition who spend most of their free 
time drinking and fooling around. There's also an out-of-wedlock pregnancy, a 
police officer who looks the other way, a big drug deal at the end and many 
funny scenes of people getting high. 
But consider the circumstances of the film: it's set in present-day England; 
the protagonist is a very nice white woman in her 50s who has never really 
worked and is only good at gardening, making tea and playing cards with the 
other ladies. The pot-smokers and drinkers are her young housekeeper, his 
dedicated girlfriend and their friend who happens to be a medical doctor. The 
cop is a man who should probably have retired a long time ago, but then again 
this is the English countryside - not too much chance he's going to get into 
a shootout or a car chase with criminals.
As for the scenes of people getting high, well, that's what the film is all 
about - the last people you'd expect or even want to see smoking marijuana 
not only are but are also growing it! If you're conservative that idea might 
offend you, heck, if you're liberal you might be offended by the idea of 
people other than 20-something college kids smoking weed. But it's not like 
there's scenes of huge bong hits and blacklite posters and roundtable 
discussions of stoned philosophy. It's funny in that fish-out-water way only 
because this is the kind of situation in which that formula works very well.
This all comes about because the main character ,Grace (Brenda Bleythen), 
needs to raise at least Ł300,000 fast and can't think of a better way to do 
so than to put her gardening techniques towards growing a product that's 
worth a lot more than tea leaves and roses. She's a master gardner and the 
progress she makes with her crop is pretty amazing. I know nothing about the 
growing and cultivation of marijuana but what she does with it is really 
amazing (did I mention the funny scenes of people being stoned?).
Of course there's also a story going on throughout this whole thing. It's not 
"Cheech and Chong Go to England" - it's really not. What it is is a clever 
black comedy that approaches committing a felony as if it were nothing. If 
you believe marijuana is bad and should be illegal that's fine, but the story 
is presented in such a manner than you know Grace and her gang aren't hurting 
anyone. You're also hoping she can somehow pull off this scam of a lifetime 
and get away with it. You'll probably be surprised by what actually happens, 
especially at the end.
What it all comes down to is "Saving Grace" is a funny, enjoyable film with a 
smart story and despite its risque subject matter doesn't come off as 
preachy. That's an accomplishment we don't usually get with most of our 
Hollywood flicks.
Chad'z Movie Page is back 
after heavy renovation. Reviews of nearly all mainstream movies playing 
today! Get my reviews of everything playing at your local cineplex so you can 
better make an informed decision on what to see. Don't forget to vote on my 
poll and sign the guestbook!
Get paid to surf the web! More than $25,000,000 
Already Paid to Members -- Join AllAdvantage today! 

Author
Scott Renshaw
     How whimsical and amusing does a film need to be before it ceases to
matter that it lacks a center -- not just that its center is slight, but
that it has no center whatsoever? Such a question plagued me at the end of
SAVING GRACE, a comedy with that uniquely British quirky appeal. It was a
pleasant enough experience for most of its running time, but what in the
world was the point? There are certain kinds of comedies that can get away
with a complete lack of an identifiably human character arc. This doesn't
seem like it should be one of them. How does one reconcile 90 minutes of
grins with the nagging impression that the script was in some ways
terribly sloppy?
     Perhaps the best course of action is simply to roll with it. It's
fairly easy to roll along with the story of Grace Trevethyn (Brenda
Blethyn), a recent widow and amateur horticulturist whose husband
apparently committed suicide. A possible reason for his action soon
becomes apparent to Grace: He has left a mountain of debt from failed
business ventures, and nothing but the Trevethyn's Cornish seaside manor
to pay it off. Faced with homelessness, Grace turns to risky fund-raising
venture. After using her greenhouse to revive the failing marijuana plants
of her groundskeeper Matthew (Craig Ferguson, who also co-wrote the 
script), Grace figures she can erase the debt by turning her home into a
hemp plantation. Grace and Matthew team up, trying to keep a low profile
in a small town before facing the even more daunting challenge of finding
a dealer to buy their crop.
     From the outset, SAVING GRACE seems to have nearly every element in
place for a wonderfully entertaining piece of middle-brow humor. Blethyn
anchors the film with a performance that's more restrained than recent
outings like LITTLE VOICE, effectively playing incongruous moments like
her attempts to sell her product on the streets of London while dressed
like the Queen Mum. There are well-crafted supporting characters like the
town's pot-head doctor (Martin Clunes) and edgy conspiracy theorist Harvey
(Tristan Sturrock), and a strong sense of place from the wild Cornish 
coast. Perhaps most refreshing, there's an unapologetic quality to the
film's just-say-yes story line. This is not the place to look for a strong
message condemning Grace's illegal activities; it's more the place to look
for scenes of elderly ladies making tea from some special leaves they find
in Grace's greenhouse.
     It's all quite a bit of silly fun for those with no moral objections,
until SAVING GRACE winds to its conclusion and it becomes evident that
there's something missing -- namely, a third act. It could have been about
Grace coming to terms with her late husband's secret life -- including an
affair with a chic Londoner (Diana Quick) -- or about a sheltered woman
forced to confront the real world. It could even have been about Matthew's
quest for responsibility under pressure from his girlfriend (Valerie 
Edmond), with Grace serving more as a colorful supporting character
herself than as the protagonist. But SAVING GRACE doesn't bother with
developing its characters. Grace doesn't appear to grow or learn much of
anything, and Matthew's change of heart is tacked on almost as an
afterthought. There's no sense of consequence anchoring anything that goes
on in SAVING GRACE, like the unemployed FULL MONTY crew's search for a
renewed sense of their manhood. It all begins to seem like little more
than an excuse on which to hang a bunch of jokes about giggle fits.
     That hole in the third act is filled by an odd visit to a roguish
French drug dealer (Tcheky Karyo), and by a postscript twist that comes
out of absolutely nowhere. It would feel like a complete violation of
Grace's character, if not for the fact that Grace's character isn't
developed carefully enough for there to be that much violation. Such
carelessness should be enough to sink a frothy enterprise like SAVING
GRACE, but somehow it doesn't quite. Too many of the quirks work, and too
many of the giggle fits inspire similar reactions from the audience. It's
no masterwork of comic craftsmanship, but it does the job of taking you
somewhere goofy and free of responsibility even though you know it's not
particularly good for you. And maybe that's a fitting quality for a film
about unapologetic pot smokers. Ninety minutes of grins sounds about
right.

Author
Jon Popick
Mention the `pot comedy' genre to somebody and, depending on their age,
images of either Dazed and Confused or Cheech and Chong's Up in Smoke
will probably pop into their heads.  There seems to be a new `pot
comedy' in theatres every couple of years, and each is just a recycled
story full of the same jokes that you've already seen over and over
again.
Saving Grace such a breath of fresh air in the `pot comedy' genre.  When
was the last time you had to go to an art house to see people toke up
and act goofy?  Never mind that  when was the last time you saw a
British film written by a peripheral player from an American sitcom, and
featuring both a recent modern rock chart-topper and a two-time
Oscar-nominee?
Like The Full Monty and Waking Ned Devine, Grace is a lightweight comedy
that doesn't overcomplicate its story or overstaying its welcome.  The
film is about a horticulturist named Grace Trevethan (Brenda Blethyn,
Little Voice) who becomes a widow as the film opens.  One month after
the funeral, she learns that her late husband's bad business investments
have rendered his estate penniless.  To make matters worse, he's also
mortgaged their giant Cornwall home, and unless Grace can come up with
Ł300,000, the bank will take all of her assets.
In debt up to her eyeballs, Grace decides to scrap her hobby of growing
orchids in her giant greenhouse and, together with her pothead Scottish
gardener Matthew (Craig Ferguson, The Drew Carey Show), decides to move
her green thumb to marijuana.  That's right - Grace and Matthew hatch a
plan to grow dope and sell it by the kilo, splitting the profits after
she pays off her creditors.
Grace, which won the Audience Award at this year's Sundance Film
Festival, has only a couple of scenes where people are wrecked on dope.
There isn't anything funny about watching people get wasted in movies.
It's barely fun in real life, unless you're participating in the
shenanigans.  That said, I still laughed my ass off when two Cornwall
merchants that accidentally brewed marijuana with their tea, even though
I'd already seen that scene in the film's trailer several times.  I
found Grace to be more effective in its simpler moments, like when Grace
and Matthew nervously wait for credit card approval at a gardening
store.
Grace could have easily been a television sitcom episode (I can just see
Jack Tripper trying to hide his weed from Mr. Roper), or possibly a very
special Blossom, but it manages to stretch its humble story into a
ninety-minute film without adding superfluous scenes or dialogue.  There
are several subplots, involving everything from deportation to
salmon-poaching, but none get in the way of Grace and Matthew's story.
Okay, I would have cut out the part where Grace meets her husband's
mistress.
Credit the screenwriters (Ferguson, The Big Tease and debut screenwriter
Mark Crowdey) for not bogging the story down with enough deadweight to
make a typical running time.  Ferguson, who plays the slightly insane
Mr. Wick on television, doesn't hog all the good lines for himself, but
I think his character did manage to say each `F' word contained in the
film.
1:34  R for adult language, brief nudity and, of course, drug use

Author
Murali Krishnan
Films with a central plot revolving around marijuana use are not
uncommon, but they typically target a young, counter-culture audience.
This film is an oddity in that it is centered around marijuana, but it
is seeking a sedate audience that would want to see a cute, uplifting
sleeper.
The story begins with the newly widowed Grace (Brenda Blethyn) trying
to deal with the debt she inherits from her late husband. She has
lived a pastoral life on the English seacoast passing her time with
gardening, but she is suddenly faced with the prospect of losing her
house to creditors. The idea comes to Grace and her pot smoking
handyman, Matthew (Craig Ferguson), that they could solve the
financial problems by using Grace's gardening expertise to save
Matthew's dying marijuana crop.
It is not hard to guess where events lead. The rural neighbors are
supportive of the members of their clan, ignoring that they are
indulging in criminal activities. Matthew's girlfriend disapproves of
his irresponsible activities. The pair get involved in dangerous
circumstances, but never come across anything they cannot handle.
The positive aspect of the film is that it does have humorous moments,
even if those are merely plays on stereotypes. Director Nigel Cole
gets the benefit of a solid performance from veteran Blethyn, but adds
little of substance. The thin premise cannot support much, and hence
standard archetypes and story development are used to allow the
audience to follow along without expending much effort. Although the
combination of Waking Ned Devine and Cheech and Chong may sound
intriguing, this film is barely noteworthy.
Not recommended. The film uses standard characters in a formulaic plot
in an attempt to present the audience with a light, charming story.
The result is a tiresome, predictable adventure that only becomes more
silly as it goes along. If it were not for the quirkiness added by the
marijuana aspect, the film would have been devoid of substance. It
does occasionally elicit laughter, but is mostly boring.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
SAVING GRACE (2000)
Rated R; running time 93 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0195234
Official site: http://www.saving-grace-movie.com/
Written by: Mark Crowdy, Craig Ferguson
Directed by: Nigel Cole
Cast: Brenda Blethyn, Craig Ferguson, Martin Clunes, Valerie Edmond,
Tcheky Karyo, Phyllida Law, Jamie Forman, Bill Bailey, Tristan Sturrock,
Clive Merrison, Leslie Phillips, Diana Quick, Linda Kerr Scott,
Ken Campbell
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamssavegrace.html
When one speaks of The War On [some] drugs, at least here in the Un-tied
States, pictures of burnt-out crackhouses, doped-up kids, ghetto
drive-bys, and dealers dripping in gold, (stereo)typically come to mind.
Rarely does one conjure up a picture of a quaint little old lady Doing
What She Has To to get by.
SAVING GRACE conjures up that very picture, in its Veddy British way.
And as a lifetime Uhmerkin gal who grew up in a Uhmerkin Innercity
(Detroit), I had quite a time reconciling its images with those images
we're shown every night at 6 and 11 on this side of the Pond.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
In a small coastal town in Merry Olde England, Grace Trevethen (Brenda
Blethyn), a recent widow and avid horticulturist, discovers to her
horror that not only was her philandering husband screwing around behind
her back with another woman, he also had some Shady Dealings that left
her in serious debt.  With the threat of her home being taken away from
her, Grace turns to her former Scot yardsman Matthew (Craig Ferguson)
for advice.  Matthew, who partakes of Demon Weed on a regular basis with
local doc Dr. Bamford (Martin Clues), helps Grace hatch the idea to take
some of Matthew's dying marijuana plants and sell them.  That's right:
sweet middle-aged Grace will become a [gasp] drug dealer!
With Grace now reduced to "having" to sling dope to make ends meet, can
Hilarity still Ensue?
The Upshot:
The first thing you should know about SAVING GRACE is that, at least by
American standards, it's fairly absurd.  Maybe I live a Sheltered Life,
but within *my* circles at least, had The Whole Town known I was doing
what Matthew and Grace were doing, I dare say that neither of us would
be doing it for long; between that cop taking us in toot sweet, or the
neighbors stealing our brightly-lit stash, I have no doubt that here in
near-suburban Podunkville, the chances that we'd have a Grace in our
backyard are slim-to-none.  And yes, that _is_ considering the fact that
there are plenty of corrupt cops, and known dopehouses, to go around.
You should also know that it's a given that British Humor is
somewhat...drier...than what's commonly seen on TV tubes and theater
screens here in the States.  "Benny Hill" and "Monty Python" aside, I've
found Brit Humor to be interesting, but a lot more subdued, than the
general Laugh Out Loudedness that permeates so many American comedy
flicks these days.  Not that that's A Bad Thing per se; it's just
different.
All those caveats aside, the folks involved with SAVING GRACE looked
like they were having a bowl...er, a ball.  Though this movie stretched
the limits of my Disbelief at times, the major players involved with it
were quite pleasing to watch (one of the best things being that they
looked like people that'd live in such a place; no teased hair and
spoiled-brat acting on these actors' parts, no siree!) and root for.
Which raises Yet Another interesting question: is it kosher to root for
these - let's call a spade a spade, shall we? - for these drug dealers?
Is it ok to do so - as long as the person slinging the dope isn't your
everyday ghetto dweller (and only doing it because she "has to" - unlike
those ghetto dwellers, who must so obviously enjoy the fringe benefits
of living a life of crime that they don't follow their True Calling in
life)?  See, maybe it's Just Me, but I can't quite get around the
hypocrisy of the whole situation, especially in an era where (in *this*
country, anyway), there's little sympathy shown for people that do
exactly that: sell dope because, in their minds at least, they _have_
to.  Makes it kinda hard to laugh at someone doing it to keep a
300-year-old house, you know?
Maybe the humor is in the cute way that Grace takes her first drag, to
experience what it is she's selling, for her edification.  Maybe there's
humor in the Upstanding Town Ladies getting high from mistaking cannabis
leaves, for tea leaves.  Maybe the cuddly doc-as-dopehead is humorous.
They all are, humorous, really; the townspeople were folks I wouldn't
mind having as neighbors, the doctor could teach his American colleagues
a thing or two about how to work with their patients, and there's
something quite cozy about a town staying up each night to watch your
greenhouse light up like a bottle rocket.  And maybe SAVING GRACE is on
the same continuum as, say, a Cheech And Chong flick.  No?  Alright
then: if not, *why not*, hmmm?  Hey, I'm willing to listen; tell me the
difference, at base, between Grace lighting up, Cheech (or Chong)
lighting up, and Shaniqua From The Projects lighting up.  I'm all ears.
Anyway...the performances in "Grace" were all solid, even though near
the end the story started to get less and less credible.  The scenery
was beautiful, the actors comfortable in their roles, and the writing
was fairly tight (though I found myself lost at times, trying to compare
British/metric measures to the ones we silly Yanks use.  Hey, it never
caught on here; sue me).  As Grace, Brenda Blethyn mixed humor and
pathos quite well, and presented the audience with a performance that
puts some of our best and brightest young movie stars, to shame; given
her storyline, she could've easily stunk up the screen, and it is to her
credit that she was able to cultivate what might have been a pathetic
character, into what ended up as a beautiful blossom.  The same could be
said about much of the rest of the cast, especially Martin Clunes as the
dopey doc; and when his character uttered the line (paraphrased) "Why is
marijuana illegal, yet the drug alcohol, is not?", I wanted to shout
"preach, brudda!"
On the whole, the movie was enjoyable enough, and in a perfect world,
that would be all that needed to be said.  My problem is that the
ongoing War On [some] Drugs here in the New World, made SAVING GRACE
lose a little something in the translation.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
A quick recap, first: in my review of COYOTE UGLY a few weeks back, I
mentioned a game called "Spot The Spot", and suggested that interested
readers contact me by email to find out what the game was about.  "Spot
the Spot" is a pasttime The Diva and a friend hipped me to (and that I
wasn't very comfortable with at first).  The idea apparently came from
watching too many Woody Allen movies; you know, the ones where he's in
deeply-urban Manhattan, yet there's no Black or Brown folks to be found?
As most of you who emailed me guessed, "Spot The Spot" is a game where
you note the Black or Brown token in a movie, the one that you *know*
was put there for Inclusion's sake.  In "Coyote", it was the Black guy
abstractedly dancing with the White woman at wazzername's friend's
wedding (and no, Tyra Banks didn't qualify as Spot.  Three guesses as to
why - and the first two are wrong).
Another example, relevant to this weekend's movies: while watching
SAVING GRACE yesterday, I noticed Spot (in the form of an
offensive-looking - to me - and rather large, "pickaninny"-type doll in
one scene) primarily because there were no Blacks in the movie at all,
up until then.  Thing is, though, it was _natural_ for there to have
been no Blacks in that movie's setting, so Spot *was* out of place (and
particularly so in that scene.  For the life of me, I don't know why
that small town would have the Black equivalent of an Indian Chief Cigar
Stand in its window).  Contrast this with the other movie I saw
yesterday: Whipped.  This was a movie that took place in New York City,
where I'd fully expect to see an abundance of not only Black folk, but
all kinds of Ethnic People.  Yet, it wasn't until one of the last scenes
that I saw Spot, in the form of one of Mia's girlfriends.  In full
neck-twisting mode.
I don't know whether to be (more) offended by "Grace"'s version of Spot,
or "Whipped"'s .
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Yes, it's just jokes, I know.  Yes, British Humor is an acquired taste.
And yes, everything doesn't have to be about race and the assumptions
one makes based upon who is holding the joint at the time.  But my mind
keeps jumping back to this question, which I'd like to hear an honest
answer to: in America, at least, given our attitudes about The War On
[some] Drugs, and our (mis)perceptions and prejudices about who is a
criminal and who isn't, how different a movie would this have been if
the little old lady in question, wasn't a little old _White_ lady?
Never mind; I already know the answer to that one.  Time to call a truce
on this hypocritical War, I say.
SAVING GRACE (rating: flashing yellowlight):
You don't have to be high to enjoy this flick - but being English might
help.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Grace's life has gone to pot so she has turned to pot as the solution to
her troubles -- not the smoking of it but its extremely lucrative
cultivation.  In Nigel Cole's comedy, SAVING GRACE, Grace is
dramatically underplayed by two-time Academy Award nominee Brenda
Blethyn (SECRETS AND LIES and LITTLE VOICE).
And therein lies the problem with the British comedy SAVING GRACE; it is
so low-key as to be almost no-key whatsoever.  The situations in it are
sometimes cute but never funny enough to provoke actual laughter.  Think
of it as WAKING NED DEVINE run at slow speed.  There is even a brief
scene of a scrawny old man seen running around completely nude, much
like the naked, octogenarian biker in WAKING NED DEVINE.  Frankly, one
of those is enough.  I've seen it; I don't want to see it again.
As the story opens, the inhabitants of the small town where Grace lives
have begun to do her favors.  They will not accept her money because
they know that her dead husband has left her heavily in debt, something
that she is the last to learn.  She even discovers that the family has a
Swiss bank account, albeit an empty one.
As the bank is about to repossess her large estate, Grace, an
accomplished orchid grower, hits upon a scheme to raise the 300,000
pounds she needs to pay off the lien against her property.  With the
help of her gardener, Matthew (Craig Ferguson), she turns her gardening
skills to the growing of marijuana plants -- lots of them, enough for 20
kilos in their first harvest.
The movie's best scene occurs when Grace and Matthew turn on the massive
lights that they use to boost production in her greenhouse.  Lighting up
the night sky like the aurora borealis, their nightly light show becomes
as popular as fireworks on the Fourth of July.  On the first occasion of
the lighting, the movie plays "Spirit In The Sky" loudly.  It is a
moment worth a nice smile, even if no laughs.
The moments that produced the most laughter in our audience were when
the characters got giddily stoned with their weed.  As they laughed
uncontrollably on the screen, it became somewhat infectious.
Although it might seem that writers Mark Crowdy and Craig Ferguson were
painting themselves into a corner, they managed to come up with an
imaginative ending.  Even so, I'm an old-fashioned kind of guy.  I
prefer comedies that are funny.  And I like to laugh every now and then.
SAVING GRACE wasn't able to fill those simple requirements.
SAVING GRACE runs 1:34.  It is rated R for drug content and language and
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Screenplay by Craig Ferguson & Mark Crowdy
With Brenda Blethyn, Craig Ferguson
     There's an inexhaustible mine of humor to be found in the oddball 
characters of small-town Britain when the material is handled right, and 
director Nigel Cole does just that with this virtuously naughty tale of 
good folks and contraband horticulture.
     Grace Trevathan (Brenda Blethyn of Little Voice and Secrets & Lies) 
has no more than buried her husband when she finds out the bastard 
checked out with a mountain of debt that is now hers.  Pretty soon 
they're carting out the furniture, and she's about to lose the grand 
house in Cornwall where until now she's lived without a care in the 
world, tending her prize-winning garden.
     A way out turns up in the form of a sickly marijuana plant.  Her 
gardener (Craig Ferguson of TV's The Drew Carey Show, who co-wrote and 
coproduced) asks her advice on restoring his ailing cash crop to health. 
 Pretty soon they've got a greenhouse full of the stuff, grown 
hydroponically and thriving (the filmmakers got government sanction to 
use real marijuana, but no plants were harmed in the making of this 
movie.)  The next step is to get a dealer, and Grace travels to London 
to find one.  Protected by her impenetrable combination of pluckiness 
and naivete, not to mention a stunning white leisure suit, she beards 
the den of the enjoyably sleazy Jacques (Tcheky Karyo of Patriot), wins 
him over, and..
     To make a long story short, she lives happily ever after.  Of 
course, certain concessions to popular morality have to be made, but 
that's no problem for these folks.  Blethyn is a wonderful actress who 
hits every note with perfect pitch, Ferguson adds an appealing Scots 
scruffiness, and the supporting cast is filled with crafty pros who know 
just how to take this well-worn material and make you grin at it all 
over again.  Beautifully photographed Cornwall adds to the enjoyment.
     Saving Grace is in the tradition of movies like The Full Monty  and 
Saving Ned Devine, and the old Ealing Studio classics like Tight Little 
Island, and while it doesn't take that tradition to any new levels, it 
doesn't let it down.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Wistful, cheery and eccentric are three words that come to mind while 
watching director Nigel Cole's "Saving Grace." This is the latest in the 
"eccentric villagers" comedy staple, set forth by "The Full Monty" and 
culminating in the endearing if uneven "Waking Ned Devine." The difference in 
"Saving Grace" is that the villagers are even more wistful, cheery and 
eccentric thanks to a particular type of plant. 
Grace (Brenda Blethyn) is one of those villagers, living in the overcast, 
affable fishing village of St. Issacs in Cornwall. Grace is a recent widow 
who gets a lot of emotional support from her fellow neighbors. The problem is 
that she is liable to lose her home and all her possessions, including a 
rented lawnmower, thanks to her husband's financially risky ventures and 
ploys. What can Grace do? She has no money and no job skills, but she is 
fairly adept at maintaining her garden. 
This springs an idea in her charming gardener, Matthew (Craig Ferguson, who 
co-wrote the film), who is something of a marijuana specialist. He grows his 
own pot plants at the vicarage, and decides to start a joint business venture 
with Grace by growing several plants in her greenhouse. This leads to the 
film's funniest surprise where the greenhouse is lit with dozens of bright 
lamps each night, leaving an ethereal glow in the sky that keeps the 
villagers entertained in anticipation. One of them mistakenly sees it as a 
sign from God.
Still, since marijuana is illegal, how does one escape notice from the local 
police chief? And what about the agency that is ready to buy out her precious 
house? And what about the shady drug dealers in London who are skeptical of 
Grace's economical enterprise, including the dangerous yet suave Jacques 
(Tcheky Karyo, memorable as the icy agent in "La Femme Nikita")? 
"Saving Grace" is mostly a one-joke comedy, and the ending is false and 
unnecessary. Still, there are enough bright moments, a generous dose of 
laughs, and some perfectly-timed one-liners to compensate for what is 
essentially a wittier take on Cheech and Chong. It is also a pleasure to see 
Brenda Blethyn more restrained than usual (considering her over-the-top turn 
in "Little Voice"), and always an undeniable pleasure to see Phyllidia Law 
(Emma Thompson's mother) as a giddy shopkeeper. The characters are all as 
wistful, cheery and eccentric as you can imagine, but they do deliver a smile 
on your face after it is all over. I suspect for most viewers who loved 
"Waking Ned Devine," a smile may be enough. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Saving Grace
Starring Brenda Blethyn and Craig Ferguson
Screenplay by Craig Ferguson and Mark Crowdy; story by Crowdy
Directed by Nigel Cole
Another death in a small British town story, complete with a Steve
Harley song in the soundtrack, is Saving Grace. This film, which proves
that "intelligent dope humor" is not an oxymoron, is co-scripted by star
Craig Ferguson of the Drew Carey Show, who did a similar turn on The Big
Tease earlier in the year. This one is much funnier and allows us Yanks
to see a much lighter side of twice Oscar nominated actress Brenda
Blethyn. It also maintains a streak of small Brit films that, like
Waking Ned Devine and The Full Monty, are gangbusters comedy and sweet
as fine chocolate.
The talk in the town of Cornwall is that Grace Trevathan's husband was
looking for the loo when he stepped out the door of a plane and
plummeted ten thousand feet or so to his death. It matters not to Grace
(Blethyn), who has spent the last thirty or so years in her greenhouse,
cultivating hybrid flowers. After hubby shuffles off, the dear widow
discovers that her old man had mortgaged the house and all their assets
up the wazoo, leaving her half a million dollars (give or take) in debt.
With a minimum monthly nut of Ł2000 to meet -- and we haven't even
gotten to what the greedy banker in London wants -- this poor woman,
who's never worked a day in her life finds herself involving her
gardener Matthew (Ferguson), who also has never worked a day in his
life, in a very illegal scheme.
Y'see, Matthew has a small stash of hemp plants out behind the local RC
church which provides a poor quality smoke for the local bartender and
doctor and friends. But winter is coming in and his plants are getting
sick and he asks the best plant person he knows, Grace, for help. Grace
recognizes the plants. She knows they are illegal, but the beating
horticulturist heart within allows her to take one and only one plant
from its resting place, and save it in the quiet of her greenhouse.
There, the weed grows like gangbusters. Quite innocently, Grace askes
Matthew how much the plant is worth? "It's like gold" he says, and a
plan sprouts in Grace's head. Grace rescues the remainder of Matthew's
hidden stock and sets to work breeding new sprouts in a hydroponic
garden. That takes an enormous amount of capital, specifically, hours
and hours of the brightest light, which illuminates the countryside for
miles around. The entire town sees the lightshow. They set their clocks
by it and the local constable seems blissfully ignorant. The plants
which Grace has cultivated, when all is said and done, would win raves
from anyone who has ever had any exposure to raw buds on a stick. High
Times magazine could do a cover story.
Two things to emphasize here: Grace is not a dopehead. She doesn't have
anything to do with the stuff until she insists on a sample so that she
could know what this pernicious weed is doing to people. Second, Grace
doesn't want anyone taking a fall for her illegal actions, so she packs
up a couple of sticks and heads for London's sleazy market district on
Portobello Road, leaving Matthew far behind. She sticks out like a sore
thumb and is rescued from certain doom by her late husband's mistress.
There's little anger between the two ladies, though one has connections
the other doesn't. Then, in slam bang fashion, a street hippie is
praying to his God after two tokes on a sample, a connection is made
with a sleazy underworld type Dealer (Tcheky Karyo), and a breakneck
chase is on as Grace heads back up to Cornwall to fulfill her part of
the bargain. Following her is a lackey of the Dealer and the hippie.
Following them are the local cops. And waiting at her home is the
banker, ready to seize the estate.
Wrapping it all off is a surprising, and totally legal, pair of
sequences which have to be seen to be believed. So see it already.
Blethyn's Grace may be sweet and a bit naive, but she's got gumption.
Ferguson's Matthew is a perfect example of a lackadaisakle man who must
face up to his responsibilities as a life partner to Nicky (Valerie
Edmond), a woman who can gut a mackeral in ten seconds flat and the
mother of his forthcoming child -- he doesn't know about that, which
adds a nice layer to the story.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Saving Grace, he would have paid...
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
If you loved "The Full Monty" and "Waking Ned Devine," this is
the gentle summer comedy for you!  Set in the Cornish city of
St. Isaacs, it's about Grace Trevethan (Brenda Blethlyn), an
ostensibly comfortable, conservative middle-aged widow who discovers
she's, literally, penniless. Her late husband, who died while
parachuting, had mortgaged their manor house to the hilt, not to
mention philandering in London with another woman who had the gall to
show up at his funeral. Hounded by creditors, she has no recourse but
to utilize her only talent - gardening - to grow something that will
make her enough money to pay off her debts. So when her Scottish
handyman (played by Craig Ferguson, who co-wrote the script with Mark
Crowdy) admits he's been struggling with some sickly marijuana sprigs
hidden behind the vicarage, she concludes: "No light, no buds." But
once Grace gets them into her greenhouse, using some hydroponics, the
plants thrive. Soon she's off to the city to find a buyer - and winds
up in the clutches of a shady French drug dealer (Tcheky Karyo) who
has more on his mind than her bumper crop of cannabis. In the
meantime, Grace's proper garden club ladies are intrigued with her new
"tea plants," sampling several with hilarious results. The psychedelic
story takes an unexpectedly discordant and contrived twist at the end
but, nevertheless, director Nigel Cole keeps the naughty shenanigans
in high gear and you find yourselves rooting for gentle Grace to pull
the hip, hemp caper of a lifetime. Like "The Full Monty" and "Waking
Ned Devine," it's about ordinary people who find they must compromise
their values in extraordinary circumstances. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Saving Grace" is a warm, wry, whimsical 9. It's
outrageously good fun!

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Nigel Cole. Screenplay by Craig Ferguson and Mark Crowdy, from
a story by Crowdy. Starring Brenda Blethyn, Ferguson, Valerie Edmond.
Running time: 92 minutes. Rated AA by the MFCB. Reviewed on November 22nd,
2000.
"Saving Grace" is a cozy rural comedy -- about marijuana. That statement
by itself should convince you that either this is an incredibly 
poorly-conceived film... or else that it's British. And indeed, "Saving
Grace" is a delightfully amusing little English lark, possessing more than
enough charm to overcome any reticence viewers might feel about its
seemingly incongruous subject material.
Instead of relying on elaborate gags and set pieces, first-time director
Nigel Cole opts for the tried-and-true British practise of establishing a
familiar, comfortable setting which is just off-kilter enough to tickle
the funny bone. Much of the action is set in a small Cornish village in
the middle of nowhere, where everybody knows (and gossips about) everybody
else.
The town is populated by such unlikely -- but not absurd -- characters as
a police officer who searches doggedly for poachers while living in
ignorance of the barely-concealed local marijuana stash, and two
well-meaning old biddies who are hopelessly naive, and probably a little
dense to boot. None of these characters are gross exaggerations, but none
of them are entirely realistic. They're regular people reflected in a
slightly warped mirror.
As befitting their role in the movie, the major characters are somewhat
more believable (if only just). There's gentle but sheltered Grace
Trevethyn (Brenda Blethyn), recently widowed, who learns that her late
husband has bequeathed to her a massive debt she cannot hope to pay off.
Then there's Grace's gardener, Matthew (Craig Ferguson, who also co-wrote
the script), a man reluctant to seize the responsibilities that come with
age, despite the efforts of his girlfriend Nicky (Valerie Edmond).
Matthew is trying to grow a small marijuana patch in a hidden plot in the
garden of the local vicarage. When his crop begins to turn sickly, he 
turns in desperation to Grace, whose gardening skills are a matter of
local legend. Reluctantly at first, Grace nurses the plants back to health
-- better than ever, in fact. Gradually, she and Matthew hit upon the idea
of using Grace's greenhouse to grow enough pot to sell to a dealer and
make the money Grace needs to save her home (not to mention Matthew's
job).
What follows is a fairly typical sequence of events, as Grace and Matthew
try to keep their new line of work from the townsfolk, avoid Grace's
creditors, and find a drug trafficker to whom they can sell their haul
without getting their throats slit. There are very few surprises in the
narrative structure of "Saving Grace", but the material is nonetheless
well-written enough that this hardly seems to matter. It is difficult not
to watch the movie without a smile permanently creasing your face; that
the film only rarely provokes a huge laugh is almost irrelevant.
Blethyn gives a very even-handed performance as Grace. She has been given
no easy role, because Grace has to appear closeted and unworldly, yet not
overly stupid or childish. Occasionally, the script lets her down -- a
protracted scene in which Grace walks the back roads of London looking for
a dealer, dressed incongruously in her Sunday best, is more groan-inducing
than truly funny -- but for the most part, Blethyn holds steady. This
serves her particularly well in scenes such as her confrontation with
drug kingpin Jacques Chevalier (Tcheky Karyo). Their disarming tete-a-tete
would appear ludicrous in less skilled hands, but Blethyn makes it work.
Also very good is Ferguson, whose Matthew is probably the most
well-rounded character in the piece. He nicely captures a portrait of a
man trapped between his undisciplined younger years and the undesirably
mounting obligations of later life. He is paired well with Edmond, who
does a good job with her material; but unfortunately Nicky is just not
drawn well enough to match Matthew, and this dulls the energy of their
scenes together. Martin Clunes is also laudable as Matthew's best friend,
Dr Bamford, the village medic. As played by Clunes, Bamford is the sort of
man who looks at the world through ironic eyes, as though he never quite
believes what he is seeing. Clunes is consistently funny throughout 
"Saving Grace", and it's just a shame his role is not more integral.
"Saving Grace" proceeds well through its first two acts, but unfortunately
does come off the rails as it heads toward its conclusion. Whereas the
opening hour is carefully measured, slowly but assuredly building up the
intertwining stories of Grace, Matthew and Nicky, and the general
bemusement of rural life, the final thirty minutes is a cacophony of
different ideas. Beginning with Grace's spur-of-the-moment trip to London,
a slew of new characters are thrown at the viewer, and only some of the
resulting storylines emerge successfully. The ending of "Saving Grace"
feels very much like somebody throwing a cupboard-full of plates into the
air and seeing how many they can catch.
As a result, some subplots (including, sadly, Matthew and Nicky's) feel
abbreviated or abandoned altogether (one of Grace's creditors finally
comes to see her in person, gets hijacked into a separate thread, and is
then promptly forgotten). The main story of Grace's efforts to get out of
debt is handed an unforeseen and largely unbelievable resolution, as the
film fast-forwards ahead a year or two. It is the sort of ending that
makes you think the screenwriters were trying too hard to come up with
something that would both provide closure and send the movie out on an
uproarious note. In reality, it just comes across as odd and contrived,
and therefore accomplishes neither goal.
Still, "Saving Grace" is infectious enough that it is quite enjoyable,
on the whole. And despite its contentious subject material, it should
enjoy a wide appeal because it manages to be a movie about marijuana,
without really coming across as either pro- or anti-pot. "Saving Grace"
illuminates both the pleasant and unpleasant aspects of the matter -- and
pokes good fun at it all.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/SavingGrace.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |
