Title
Review for Belle noiseuse, La (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
I can only think of two countries where film is treated as pure literature,
and very often allowed to live as such.  RUSSIA has a history of film that
is always in the neighborhood of three hours long.  And FRANCE.
And the reason why these films are long, is because both of these countries
have a fascination with the artist's thoughts at its deepest....what drives
them, to create.  Or, as is the case in many Russian films, the character
studies always have to live out their
life, be it in pain, or in sweetness.  A little of the Dostoyevsky  style to
their film, if you will.
Jacques Rivette, has never made it as big as Francois Truffaut, or Jean Luc
Godard, or Claude Chabrol, or Eric Rohmer, but if LA BELLE  NOISEUSE is any
indication, he is better than those ever were.  To be  perfectly honest with
you, LA BELLE NOISEUSE is not a film, but really a special work in progress,
and you should only sit through the four hours, if you enjoy the suspension
of disbelief ( and belief ) to watch a film maker that allows the hand to
paint at its own pace, and an artist ( and model ) to go through their inner
changes... with the inevitable result at the end as a finished
piece.  THE FILM IS JUST THAT.  And even as the aging Frenhofer says
himself, it has no meaning, it just lives, there are no rights or wrongs,
just moments, where the sparks fly and the canvas is on fire, or nothing
happens.
And there is more open moments for ad libbing in this film than Godard ever
created.  It strikes me that the dialogue was set amid ideas, and the actors
were allowed to flow with it until a result was achieved.  And the director,
of course, has the same dilemma as Fronhofer, because he has to find those
moments. And indeed, HE DOES.
The story is really simple, and has nothing to tell us.  An aging artist
named Frenhofer ( Piccoli ) who has been living with Liz ( Jane Birkin ),
has stagnated for ten years since his relationship to Liz either has
softened, or lost its spark.  Before that he painted with wild abandon, and
spent much time with her.  And in many ways, the film immediately suggests
that it is the fact that they were involved which hurt his art, since now it
is
personal, intimate, and there is a tendency to be protective  so not to hurt
it ( which could have happened before ) along the way.  In comes a 'student'
who wants to learn, but it is his girlfriend  ( Emmanuelle Beart ) that ends
up being asked  to pose for the aging painter, much to the chagrin of her
lover.
And the film starts the process in motion.  We follow the hand as it draws
its very first lines in years, and it is shy, and unsure of itself.  And the
next two and a half hours are an incredible array of images of painter at
work, and resetting his model, in search of a special moment in time.  Just
about intermission time, the real battle shows up.   There is a certain
point where many artists have been, that can be a bit dangerous. And that is
called the 'point of no return' with a model, and the effect can be
invasive, and uncertain, and often extremely un-nerving to those involved.
Here, either the two continue the  work, or they get involved.  And the
consequences can destroy the work in progress.  The emotional bond
diminishes the work, or so it seems, and Frenhofer makes a point of saying.
It isn't her body he is after, and neither her ideas.  When he admits that
he is afraid of hurting his model, the young woman immediately jumps out and
demands that he continue.  She is not enamored with the job, but has come to
allow, and appreciate a little of his nature.  And in the end, when he has
found something, the model takes a look at it.  And she doesn't like it.
Here it could be
inferred that it showed the real 'her', and that she didn't like it at all.
He has succeeded.  But she is an internal mess. And totally unsure of
herself, not because she does not know anything, but because she has to
evaluate herself.  And she proceeds to do so.  She dissolves her
relationship with the student, the young man who wanted to learn from
Frenhofer, but didn't have the courage to go beyond a certain point in his
work.  The happy artist has done his job.  The frustrated artist ( the young
one ) , still can't figure out his job, or his relationship to it.
Using the hand of a real artist ( Frenchman Bernard Dufour ), doing  work in
real time, the life in the canvas begins to grow, from mere sketches to a
real piece of work.
STUNNING FILM.
IT WILL KEEP YOU THINKING THE WHOLE TIME.
BEAUTIFULL ART, and a chance to see an artist at it.
( If you get bored easily, forget this film ... )

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LA BELLE NOISEUSE ( director: Jacques Rivette; cast: Michel Piccoli
(Frenhofer), Jane Birkin (Liz), Emmanuelle Beart (Marianne), David
Bursztein (Nicolas), Gilles Arbona (Balthazar), Marianne Denicourt
(Julienne), Marie Belloc (Magli), 1991-Fr.)
Rivette has created a work of art from a short Balzac story about art,
"The Unfinished Masterpiece." Art and life are viewed as one and the
same problem, in this film about a wealthy, once successful artist
Frenhofer (Piccoli), as he searches for his sanity through his art, who
is now troubled that he can only paint a masterpiece or nothing, and for
the last 10- years the later was the result, except for some trivial
self-portraits. His wife Liz (Birkin), who modeled for his former
masterpiece, is concerned that something tangible has gone out of the
marriage, though they are still a loving couple, blessed with a young
daughter.
Frenhofer's art agent, Balthazar (Gilles), brings along a young
struggling artist Nicolas (David), to visit the Frenhofer mansion at
Languedoc. He is an admirer of Frenhofer's work and wishes to meet him.
There is also the young artist's attractive live-in girlfriend Marianne
(Emmanuelle), of the last three years, someone he met when he saved her
from throwing herself in front of the metro. She writes children's
books, but does not really consider herself a writer. It is just
something she does so she could be independent of Nicolas.
The two artists intellectually engage in a discussion of what art means
to them. But when Nicolas and Marianne are together, they try to picture
themselves living in Freno's mansion, the place is so enormous and
quiet, beyond what either of them says they are currently looking for in
life; though he offers no comment about what he really thinks, while she
openly disdains the place.
After being encouraged by a visit to Freno's atelier, a place he hasn't
been to in two months, the guests view his paintings and warm up to
their conversations with the host. The younger artist brashly states,
"That for him, art is about taking risks, it is a bold stroke, something
that stands out." Freno declares, "That art to him is when the forest
and sea submerge as one." For Freno, "In order for the truth to come out
of a work of art, there must be blood on the canvas."
Freno feels inspired by his guests' visit; he is especially taken with
Marianne, he sees something in her besides her lovely ass and breasts
and beautiful face, and when Balthazar suggests that he start again on
his unfinished masterpiece, using Marianne as a model, Nicolas agrees
for her without asking her for her permission.
La Belle Noiseuse, which we are told, is the title of the masterpiece,
is about a 17th century lady of the world who was kind of nutty in the
sense that she was difficult to figure out, who is referred to as being
someone who is a "ball-buster."
With Freno back at work and the air filled with tension, you might as
well say, let the games begin, and they do, but under Rivette's masterly
direction what happens is what you might expect to happen but not in the
way you expected it to happen, with the result being a fascinating look
at how an artist tries to get at the essence of what he is doing,
struggling with all the human emotions of passion and intellectualism,
as those around him become in one way or another part of his work, as
their jealousies, sexuality, and life ambitions come to the surface, in
what transpires over the three day period he works with the nude model.
Every character has a part to play in the dynamics of the artist's
creation, as he struggles to relate with his recalcitrant (she is
steamed at Nicolas for not consulting her, saying "you sold my arse")
and difficult model (this mansion reminds her of boarding school where
she was sick all the time, until they eventually kicked her out of the
school), as he finds that he must use his wits to get her to do what he
wants her to do, because she is determined to be who she is, that is,
until she becomes hypnotized under the artist's careful scrutiny and
finds it impossible to wear the mask in life she has previously worn.
The new question becomes, who is she now?
What makes for a captivating depiction of an artist at work, are scenes
such as these, where one's sense of time is lost, and the length of the
picture, (it is 240 minutes) does not seem wasted even for a minute, as
we watch and become part of the creation, starting from scratch, and
actually are hearing the artist's scratching sounds on the canvas for
minutes at a time with no action on the screen but to view him work and
watch him manipulate the model into the pose he wants, even when she
complains that he is hurting her.
That the truth is cruel might have seemed like bullshit to her when
Freno first said it, but now that Marianne is getting a grip on herself,
she is no longer scared of all the tension that is in the studio and
what is going on with her relationships-- that is, with Nicolas and Liz,
as well as with the strange attraction she has for the 60ish and much
older artist.
The girl-to-girl talks with Liz do not seem to do anything for her. She
is just curious how Liz met the artist. And when told, they met in a
cafe, and that he fell for her first before painting her, she seemed
satisfied in knowing this but showed no concern of ever becoming a
friend to Liz. Liz, on the other hand, is aware of what her husband is
like, she knows he will behave properly with the model while working
with her, she realizes that his work is everything, but she also knows
there is a danger in these two working together, that sparks could fly,
that he is looking for something in the model's beauty that he can no
longer find in her; and that's what is upsetting to her, as she tries to
play the role of supporter of her husband, by making sure Marianne feels
reassured to continue modeling, yet guarded that something could go
wrong that might upset her own relationship with Freno.
Marianne tells Freno that she is through with Nicolas, even though, he
is the only man she can live with, she must move on. Nicolas is consumed
with jealousy, admitting that it is he who needs Marianne now, not like
the reverse situation when they first met. He wants her to stop modeling
and return with him to Paris. She not only refuses, but she takes a
guest room in the Frenhofer's, leaving him alone in the inn they were
staying at.
Frenhofer is stuck. He is filled with self-doubt if he can ever paint
again. He says, "You get stuck in what you are searching for--- you get
possessed by it." But he explains, " it is fear that makes him paint,
for him painting becomes a tactile experience whereby his fingers are
led unconsciously."
Marianne asks him, "Why "me" naked in front of you, why not Liz"? She
goes on to say, "I need to understand this"... It seems the situation
has reached a point of no return. Every character is now playing out his
emotional trump cards. The artists are struggling with what is not clear
inside themselves, as their wounds are opened and their vulnerabilities
seem to be devastating.
Liz tells her husband, "You are sad because you are no longer young, 10-
years is a long time to stop painting and to now go on. You will only
destroy what happened before you start over." There is a hint of a
possible affair that might have taken place between Balthazar and her
ten- years ago, that seems to be the cause of the tension we feel among
the three of them.
In contrast to Freno, Nicolas can't stand the solitude, he is afraid to
be alone with himself. When left alone, he takes comfort in the company
of his sister (Denicourt), who joins him at the inn where he is staying.
Liz says, "for Freno, it is the art of it, it is the capturing of a
whole life in a painting--- it is that thing that makes art shameless,
that is what matters to him. It is as if one can see one's whole life
passing in a flash, like it might be for a person drowning."
While discussing their relationship, Nicolas states to Frenhofer, "the
only enemy of an artist is a bad painting." He gets his digs in by
insulting the artist's lifestyle as comical. So the camaraderie between
the two artists seems to be genuinely plausible, in the sense, that they
do understand each other, that is, as far as their work goes. With
Freno, in the position of control in his life, he is able to
patronizingly say to Nicolas as he departs, " I like you, don't ever
change."
The last shot is with the agent, talking numbers with Frenhofer,
deciding how much they will get for the masterpiece. The implication
being, as Balthazar invites Nicolas and his sister to dinner, that
Nicolas is next in line, he will profit from his art in due time.
The acting is exceptionally good by everyone. Piccoli as the artist is
mesmerizing, while Emmanuelle is both beautiful and intelligent,
offering a special quality about her that makes it possible for us to
believe that a masterpiece could come out of her poses. The only thing
that struck me as odd, is that the final masterpiece drawn, supposedly
by Bernard Dufour, did not appear to me to be a masterpiece, but a
rather ordinary work. The picture itself is the masterpiece; that is,
the creative process itself, was convincingly done, by a director who
has the skills and knowledge to tell such a story and never allow the
story to be wavering from its lofty position of significance, as
anything but an honest intellectual effort, a search for the truth
within.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
