Title
Review for Money Train (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Anthony E. Wright
     At the New York Transit Museum, a abandoned subway station in
Brooklyn that vividly shows the history of one of the finest and
largest public transportation systems in the world, a movie theater is
lined with photos of classic straphanger-oriented films from the past.
But the cinematic romance with the underground is still alive: this
impressive display (which includes THE FRENCH CONNECTION, THE WARRIORS,
and DEATH WISH) does not include the recent spate of movies paying
homage to public transportation, like DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE, WHO
FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?  and GHOST.  Sandra Bullock is single-handedly
making public transportation sexy, more than all the "Miss Subways"
pageants of old, with the big hits SPEED and WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING.
     The new exhibit at the Transit Museum last week, alongside subway
cars from the 1904 to the present, is the actual cab used in the
filming of the MONEY TRAIN, a new film focusing on a fictional train
which collect millions of dollars a day in token sales. (While the New
York Transit Authority does have 20 revenue collection cars, this shiny
fortress-like version is a Hollywood creation.)  A helpful tour guide
says that four such models were made, but the other three were blown
up.
     That fact is basically what you need to know about the MONEY
TRAIN: it's a thrilling action adventure where trains rollick around
quickly and blow up, like SPEED.  The other main fact is that it stars
Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson, doing similar action roles as in
their transportation-based thrillers PASSENGER 57 and THE COWBOY WAY,
respectively.
     But the reference is clearly to the similarly hip and urban romp
WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP, to which MONEY TRAIN is basically a sequel.  The
characters even seem similar: Snipes plays a trash-talking show-off who
is grounded in the urban scene; Harrelson plays a white guy who has a
black sensibility, which provides wonderful comic possibilities, but
the character has gambling, identity, and other problems.  In MONEY
TRAIN, the two are dubbed "the transit twins," as foster brothers doing
undercover transit police work.  Just to play it safe, Jennifer Lopez
is brought in to play the attractive Hispanic female, although without
the schtick of Rosie Perez. (Lopez would have stolen the movie away
from the male leads if not for a truly horrible characterization by the
writers.)  But even if the characters do seem awfully familiar, we get
enough plot, which offers more than just padding for the action.
     It's a good movie, action-packed with just enough sass, humour,
energy and seriousness to keep it interesting throughout.  It gets the
adrenaline pumping.  However, I must confess that as a mass-transit
buff, and a New Yorker with an admiration of the subways, I might be
biased.
     The question I asked when the film ended, and that my companions
did, and that the country is now asking given recent news events, is:
Why did the TA agree to help with this film? Not only does it make the
TA look like idiots, and portrays the subways as especially dangerous,
but also gives people some stupid ideas: running around on tracks,
riding on top of subway cars, torching subway token booths, jumping in
front of trains, and (oh, yeah) stealing money trains.
     With the recent torching of a token booth that could have been a
"copycat" act, the old questions about how the media affect society are
dramatized as a token clerk sits in the hospital with serious,
life-threatening problems.  The normal responsible line is to say that
violence in context is fine (a la SCHINDLER'S LIST) but violence for
pure titillation is not (a.k.a. RAMBO).  Shouldn't movies portray events
which do occur--like booth torchings, which happening a couple of times
in the 1980s? Or do we want a sanitized media, free from real-life
events and problems? Perhaps the torching was over-the-top: they didn't
show the consequences of a booth torching, as the token clerk survived
unscathed in the movie; and they didn't show that booth now come with
sprinkler systems, making it hard for that crime to occur.
     With the torching (and the preposterous money train hijacking,
which certainly isn't realistic), most of the action stunts in this
movie involve stupid and dangerous things.  But I must confess, that's
what makes the movie exciting: they do the taboo things that as a
life-long rider I wouldn't and couldn't do.  I've occasionally thought
about trying to jump onto the tracks to quickly get to another
platform; that makes it more fun when Wesley Snipes does it as a #5
approaches.  Sure it's an irresponsible movie (in more ways than one),
and unfortunately, that's half the fun.
     The other public issue is the question of cooperation: The Transit
Authority usually frowns on movies that show the system as
"out-of-control."  (From the movies, you wouldn't get the facts that a
subway station or train is always safer that the streets above it.)  Yet
the Mayor's Office policy is to let Hollywood do their thing,
especially if it means bringing money into the city.  Most of the film
was in fact filmed on a Hollywood set, due to some TA reluctance.  But
that's still leaves the question why Hollywood's money train currently
sits on New York subway tracks.  Perhaps it was stolen.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     In the New York City subways, and probably at other subway systems
as well, there is a special train that comes by each station every
night to pick up the day's fare that has been collected. There are
about a half dozen guards who accompany each train allowing Donald
Patterson (Robert Blake), the very tough chief of Metropolitan Transit,
to boast that never, but never, has one of his trains been robbed.
Blake, best known for the TV show where he starred as Baretta, has not
been in a film in about ten years.  That is a pity because he is in a
class by himself.  No one would ever mistake him for some other actor.
     Back to the story:  There are two brothers who, despite an unusual
situation, would die to protect the other.  When Charlie (Woody
Harrelson), who is white, escaped from an orphan asylum when he was
very young, he was taken in by John's (Wesley Snipes) family who is
black.  Charlie has always been on the wild side and foster brother
John has been kept busy keeping Charlie from getting into deep
trouble.   The two bicker but they love each other as siblings should.
It is that relationship that gives the film a real boost.
     Now grown up, they are transit police who work for a division of
Patterson's subway security.  Their job, however, involves much acting,
pretending to be drunk or asleep in the subway while the other watches
to see what petty thief will attempt to prey on the seemingly
defenseless . Their apprehending of criminals in the subway trains and
at subway stations is what keeps whatever safety there is.
     When Charlie runs up a $15,000 gambling debt that he will
obviously never be able to repay, his life is in danger.  A way out
occurs to him; what if he and John were to make off with some of the
money bags being transported by the Money Train?   Despite John's
strenuous objections, ("We are cops!  We don't steal!") Charlie decides
to take a crack at doing it himself.
     Up until then, MONEY TRAIN is very funny, with snappy, witty
dialogue (written by Doug Richardson and David Loughery from a story by
Richardson).  Add some love interest by the beautiful Grace Santiago
(Jennifer Lopez) who is a new recruit, and you have a very entertaining
film.
     So what went wrong?   A couple of things: the runaway subway train
scene seems to go on forever; too much of a good thing.  In addition,
like so many movies, the writers do not know how to end it.   MONEY
TRAIN, unfortunately, falls into that category.  The ending has much to
be desired, especially from a moral standpoint.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: An insult. A stupid and incompetent movie that doesn't even have
the benefit of being trashily enjoyable. Weslely and Woody would do well to
leave this off their resumes.
MONEY TRAIN is one of the worst movies I have ever seen. It's not simply
idiotic, it's contemptuous of its audience. It tries to make us swallow
things that a better movie would be stopped cold by or just plain omit
entirely. It's a waste of Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson, who are
enjoyable actors in their own rights but are nauseating here. It's not even
fun as trash.
Woody and Wesley star (maybe that's not the right word) as New York City
Transit Authority police. They have a job which could actually be the core
of a really interesting movie: one of them plays drunk possum to attract
chain-snatchers and the other does lookout. I had a whole headful of legal
and ethical questions surrounding this, raised by a documentary I'd seen on
the subject once, but the movie does not waste any time with being
intelligent or thought-provoking.
See if you can follow this. They chase a kid down the tunnel and into the
station where the "money train", the heavily armored car that picks up all
the cash from the token books, is parked. The guards on the train see this
kid running at them, lift their MACHINE GUNS, shout "Halt!" and then open
fire when the kid doesn't stop running at them. Blam, the kid's dead. Then
Woody and Wesley show up, and of course the other TA cops hate them (why?),
and a pushing match starts, and someone gets decked, and... I covered my
face. I'd seen enough. I've never seen a movie work so hard and in so little
time to destroy, systematically, any chance of being credible or
interesting.
Fed up with the BS at their job (most of it their own goddamned fault),
Woody and Wesley hatch this plot about how to rob the money train. Hence the
title, in case some of you (all two of you) didn't figure it out yet. Then
there's this subplot about a maniac who torches token book clerks, *and* a
love story, *and* a holdup -- no, two holdups, sorry, easy to lose track in
a movie this braindead -- *and* a mob boss who wants his money. There wasn't
a minute when I gave a horse's ass about any of it.
Neither Woody nor Wesley play characters that are interesting for a single
minute. We do not care about them. They are not interesting. They are noisy,
loud, stupid, foolish jerks who whould have flunked out of the police
academy. They deserve to get shot -- or run over, as the case may be. They
only exist to rehash the kind of dynamics that was *written* into a movie
like WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP, and which simply does not exist here. They are
idiots, and we're expected to root for them. Bullcrap.
The movie is completely schizophrenic in its tone and texture. What exactly
is this mess? A cop movie? Police procedure is not given a moment's genuine
thought anywhere. A thriller? The subplot with the Token Booth Killer is
inept, a throwaway that should have been ditched in the rewrite. A comedy?
The few jokes that do work are wasted. A drama? All dramatic tension between
both principals is freeze-dried and off-the-rack. There's not a moment in
the movie where I felt like I was listening to genuine human beings talk;
it's all Screenwriterese, that bizarre analect where every sentence ends in
a punchline and the primary mode of expression is the unique conjunctions of
four-letter words. (Actual dialogue excerpt: "Fuck you." "What?" "You heard
me: Fuck *you*." "No: FUCK *YOU*!")
Look. I'll be honest here. I've tried writing screenplays, and even *I*
suspect that if I tried to pitch this mess, I'd get laughed out of the
office. Anyone interested in hearing my ideas for a few good movies can
write me and hear my pitch, because God knows I know I can do better. I've
weasted enough time on this piece of tripe.

Author
Peter Wels
     Cashing in on the success of WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP and the failure
of most of their solo vehicles (including THE COWBOY WAY and DROP
ZONE), Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson have reteamed, hoping that
they can strike up the same success.  Sadly, if this dismal, cliche
ridden and mind-numbingly boring action pic is anything to go by, they
haven't got a chance in hell of even coming close.
     This time out, the duo play foster brothers who are transit cops.
Following several run-ins with their tyrannical boss (Robert Blake),
who is obsessed with the "Money Train"--a train which carries all the
subway's takings--and will let nothing stop it (now *there's* an
original plot device), Harrelson's character decides to try and take
off with the cash.
     Along the way, both of them fall in love with the same
woman--another transit cop who also hates her boss.  This leads to
the typical sibling rivalry crap that you usually find in a film of
this standard ('you were always the better brother' etc. etc. etc.),
and doesn't help to add anything to the film.
     Given a better script, better performers in supporting roles
and a shorter running time (the film almost went for two hours--or did
it just feel like it?), this film might (and I mean *might*) have
turned out okay, but as it is, it is stocked with the worst action film
cliches, whose only purpose appears to be to pad the film out to its
painfully long running time.
     Robert Blake, who plays the evil boss, has got to be the most
pathetic bad guy in film history!  He sounds like Wayne Newton, and
appears to think the best way to appear evil is to have your eyes
bulging as though they are about to burst out of their sockets!
     But this is only one of MONEY TRAIN's problems.  If you look at
the script as if it was an action film, it lacks originality and
suspense.  But if you try to look at it as if it were a heist film, it
is even worse.  The final robbery sequence is almost trivialised and
the characters definitely ain't Butch and Sundance.
     The film isn't all bad though.  Snipes and Harrelson, when they
aren't using the dumb cliches that the script gives them, make an
agreeable duo, and some of the stunt-work is indeed excellent.  But good
stunt-work cannot save a bottom-of-the-barrel action movie.
     If you're a really undemanding action freak, there's a chance
you'll like this.  But if you're looking for something original, or
suspenseful, try somewhere else--I doubt you'll find it here.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Wesley Snipes, Woody Harrelson, Jennifer Lopez, Robert Blake
Director: Joseph Ruben
Producers: Jon Peters and Neil Canton
Screenplay: Doug Richardson and David Loughery
Cinematography: John W. Lindley
Music: Mark Mancina
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Throughout the history of cinema, Hollywood has brought together
screen pairings whose natural chemistry and camaraderie have caused
instant acceptance by audiences.  Abbott and Costello. Laurel and Hardy.
Hope and Crosby. Martin and Lewis. Matthau and Lemon.  Woody and
Wesley... or at least that's what Columbia Pictures is trying to sell
with MONEY TRAIN (apparently banking on the success of WHITE MEN CAN'T
JUMP).  Personally, I'm not buying.
     It's probably not fair to blame the two leads entirely for the
utter failure of MONEY TRAIN.  While neither gives a performance that
pundits are going to rave about at Oscar time, none of the above duos
could have done much better with the drivel that passes for Doug
Richardson and David Loughrey's script.  And, as if that isn't bad
enough, Joseph Ruben directs this in the most stultified, poorly-paced
manner possible.  Call it "How to turn an action film into a Sominex
alternative."
     I went into MONEY TRAIN hoping for an action flick that wouldn't
require much thought.  What I got instead was a movie into which no
thought had been invested.  As for the action--well, it's there,
provided you're willing to sit through nearly ninety minutes of insipid
romance and routine sibling rivalry.  The bulk of this film isn't
clever, charming, original, dramatically successful, or humorous.
Laughable, yes, but not humorous.  There isn't even any nudity to liven
up proceedings.  Only the final fifteen minutes (with a runaway subway
train) generate any momentum, but that's a little too late to save the
film.
     MONEY TRAIN has one of those plots where it's fun to guess what's
coming next, because you'll always be right.  If you aren't, you haven't
seen many movies.  The film starts out by introducing us to foster
brothers John (Wesley Snipes) and Charlie (Woody Harrelson).  Not only
do these two share a history, but they're both transit cops assigned to
the subway beat.  The "subtle" rivalry between them erupts into open
warfare when both are smitten by their new partner, Grace Santiago
(Jennifer Lopez).  Meanwhile, Charlie has piled up some serious gambling
debts, and begins to consider robbing the Money Train (the train that
collects all the money throughout the New York City subway system) as a
way out of his situation.  The unremitting nastiness of Captain
Patterson (Robert Blake), who will sacrifice men's lives just to keep
the train on time, makes it easy for the audience to sympathize with
Charlie's criminal plans.  Most of that sympathy goes away, however, as
we see what a real jerk Charlie is.
     The best way to watch MONEY TRAIN, if you must watch it, is to
bring a bunch of friends to a late showing (when there's no one else in
the theater), then ridicule the movie MYSTERY SCIENCE THEATER 3000-
style.  Otherwise, the experience will be right up there with listening
to someone scrape their fingernails across a chalkboard for an hour and
a half.  As for Wesley and Woody, after this debacle, about the only
famous pair they resemble is Beavis and Butthead.  Take your pick which
is which.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
