Title
Review for Twonky, The (1953)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Curio from the 50s will be of interest to aficionados of SF fantasy.  
Teacher Hans Conried is given a television set by his wife to entertain 
him while she is out of town.  As he and friend Billy Lynn rightly 
guess, it is a television in appearance only - it may actually be 
technology from another time.  Part of the intrigue of Arch Oboler's 
film is that for most of it we are unsure of the purpose of the 
'twonky', as it is christened.  Is it benign or harmful?  The silly 
appearance of the twonky (not to mention its name), the comical aspect 
of several of the characters, and the whimsical, twittering woodwind 
score establish the film as a comedy from the opening scenes (Lynn's 
foggy football coach would be right at home behind the bar in CHEERS).  
but the same script, verbatim, could have been turned into a more 
sinister film if handled by a different director.
At first, THE TWONKY is a satirical swipe at television, the 'new' 
entertainment medium which became a significant threat to cinema in the 
50s: Conried flicks through a TV guide that contains only pap; the 
twonky/television controls his life; he becomes housebound; his tastes 
are directed from 'high' art to the mediocre; and thoughts of individual 
expression are discouraged.  And not only is television regarded as a 
poor substitute for cinema, it is also inferred to be an unworthy 
successor of radio.  Read between the lines: Writer-director Oboler was 
a prominent radio producer before switching to film, and it was he who 
changed the twonky (as it appeared in Henry Kuttner's short story ten 
years earlier) from a radiogram to a television set.  Oboler develops 
the Kuttner story satisfactorily, although the pace flags in places, and 
the anti-television theme loses its way.  The final scenes, however, are 
among the most enjoyable.  Special effects are unfortunately primitive, 
but given their simple requirements you'd think the studio would have 
ponied up some extra cash to make them a little better.  Ironically, THE 
TWONKY has a made-for-TV feel to it.  With a little cropping it would 
have made an ideal hour-long  episode for Rod Serling's TWILIGHT ZONE, 
and the domestic setting, comings-and-goings of peripheral characters, 
and gag ending follow standard sitcom conventions.  Dismissed with their 
usual smirking by the Medved Brothers in the Golden Turkey books - maybe 
they were running short of material. 

