Title
Review for Space Cowboys (2000)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Norm Schrager
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/358b2d18fee83172882569310002e41d?OpenDocument
The good news about Space Cowboys is that Clint Eastwood proves to be a
skilled comedic director.  The bad news is that only the first half of
the movie is a comedy - the second half is a sloppy attempt at a
heart-pounding, Apollo 13ish, mission-gone-haywire space drama that's
vague, oversimplified and unbelievable.  There's a gem of an
entertaining movie somewhere in there, but it's never fully realized.
The plot is solid high concept.  If you did a double-take when you first
heard that John Glenn would return to space, you'll love the basic
premise of Ken Kaufman's and Howard Klausner's script - four daring, old
Air Force codgers weasel their way back into NASA's space shuttle
program to attempt an equipment repair mission that only they know how
to perform.  Our movie visions of strapping, young astronauts (Dennis
Quaid, Bill Paxton, Ben Affleck, to name a few) are smashed once we see
an aging James Garner pull on an airtight suit.
The man behind the idea is Eastwood's Frank Corvin, a brilliant Top Gun
style troublemaker from the 50s who's bitter about his exclusion during
NASA's inception.  Once he pushes his unlikely proposal through the
space program, Corvin travels the South collecting his old flyboy
buddies - Tommy Lee Jones as the hard-headed Hawk, a widower who takes
unsuspecting thrill seekers on wild flights; Donald Sutherland as smooth
ladies' man Jerry, a roller coaster engineer completely unfazed by
negative Gs; and Garner as the humble Tank, an old navigator turned
pastor.  Meeting each of these guys in their natural habitat is a real
comedic treat, as Corvin's first mission of convincing them all to join
is a fun combination of Armageddon and The Blues Brothers.  And these
four actors are seasoned to the point of marinade, so they've got no
trouble digging in and getting the laughs.
When the movie stays light, dealing broad laughs and poking fun at
maturity and ageism, it's easy to suspend disbelief.  At times, when the
movie jumps ahead without much substance, or the characters seem a bit
too cookie-cutter, it's still passable and enjoyable.  But when the
quartet finally jump on the space shuttle, Space Cowboys dive bombs,
becoming just a tepid drama.
>From that point, Eastwood shoots for wide-eyed amazement from the
audience (hell, we've seen space walks since Kubrick did it more than 30
years ago), and all the forgivable weaknesses become glaring.  The
well-timed laughs of the first half become childish, predictable
dialogue.  William Devane, as a funny, wise-ass, gum-smacking flight
director, turns into a cheap imitation of Ed Harris' Apollo 13
character, bellowing lines into space like "Attaboy Frank!"  Cut to
worried, underdeveloped wife character.  Cut back to grimacing, troubled
Eastwood.  Oh boy.
There's no denying, though, that it is a roar seeing these guys get sent
through the ringer at NASA.  And it is refreshing to see a movie who's
youngest lead actor is 54.  But aside from the consistent laughs,
there's a lot missing.  There's a chance to see these men contemplate
the paths of their interesting lives.  There's the opportunity to learn
more about the families behind them.  And there's even more that
could've been done about respect of an older generation, and the fact
that mistakes and lessons can be learned at any age.  Instead, it's all
generally ignored as Space Cowboys opts for an easier, less demanding
path.
The brutal truth is that this movie was over for me once these guys hit
space.  The characters lose their energetic charm and begin to pale. 
The plot becomes wildly unbelievable but asks to be taken seriously. 
The longer the movie progressed, the lower my admiration.  There's a
better Space Cowboys than this two-part, 129-minute version - one where
an entire 90-minute film is just about four funny, respected men
reliving their former glory, blasting off to space in the finale, riding
into the sunset and out of sight.  
Director: Clint Eastwood
Producer: Clint Eastwood, Andrew Lazar
Screenwriters: Ken Kaufman, Howard Klausner
Stars: Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, James Garner, James Cromwell,
Donald Sutherland, Loren Dean, Courtney B. Vance, Aleksandr Kuznetsov
MPAA Rating: PG-13
Official Web Site: www.spacecowboys.net
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Scott Hunt
Cast:  Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, Donald Sutherland, James
Garner, James Cromwell, Marcia Gay Harden, William Devane, Loren Dean.
Writers:  Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner.
Director:  Clint Eastwood.
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Make no mistake about it, Space Cowboys succeeds due to the varying
iconic levels of three of its main leads; Eastwood, Jones and
Sutherland. Over the years, each man has arguably put a distinctive
stamp on American cinema. Dropped into the unsurprising, yet satisfying
Space Cowboys, their strength of personality lends the film it's best
moments. The script has no real unexpected moments and doesn't seek to
blast you with over the top special effects. It's quite simply a fun
movie that's as enjoyable as a home cooked meal.
The script pleasingly plays off the respective star's real life and film
images with varying degrees of success. Eastwood's first moments on the
screen, he's seen working in his garage, listening to jazz music, a nod
to his real life devotion to the music form. Sutherland spends much of
the film flashing his trademark loopy grin. It's that crafty smile we've
seen time and again in films such as M.A.S.H and Backdraft. Jones plays
off his acerbic, gruff screen persona to great effect, eliciting a
pathos from his role that is truly bittersweet. Garner, by comparison,
has a certain fuzziness to his character. His inclusion and role feels
more like an afterthought than an integral part of the film.
Frank Corvin (Eastwood), "Hawk" Hawkins (Jones), Jerry O'Neil
(Sutherland) and "Tank" Sullivan (Garner) are first shown as young men
in 1958. They are Team Daedalus, the country's top Air Force pilots. In
a gorgeously filmed black and white flashback, rebellious Hawk and rigid
leader Frank are seen test piloting a jet plane, soaring high enough to
see the moon, despite the blazing daytime sun. In a nice reference to
Greek mythology, like Daedalus' son Icarus, they fly too high and come
crashing to the earth. They have seen their prize, the moon, and both
men dream of someday visiting it.
Flash forward to modern day NASA. There is a crisis involving a
satellite of Corvin's design. It's in decaying orbit and falling towards
earth. The only solution is an in-flight repair and Corvin is the only
man who can do it. Realizing his strong negotiating chip, Corvin
leverage's his way into Team Daedelus making the space trip.
Most of the film's heart beats in the pre-flight training the geriatrics
must endure. There is an easy camaraderie between the stars and the tone
of the film slides into an almost TV sitcom-like quality. Due to
Eastwood's deliberate directing hand, the scenes play more sweetly
amusing than cloying. Frank and Hawk, despite their age, get into a bar
fight that plays like siblings venting life long grievances. The "Aw,
Mom, we weren't doing nuthin'" looks they give a team supervisor upon
explaining their shiners shows the actor's strength through subtlety.
Hawk, sans computer assistance, shows two young, hotshot astronauts, how
pilots flew in the old days. Jerry, with the practiced subtlety of a
snake charmer, hits on any women within range of his droopy shouldered,
coke bottle thick, be speckled sight. Eastwood sends the message that
old means nothing more than wiser, maybe a bit smarter and still
sexually potent.
There's almost an audible grate of metal on metal as the second half of
the film grinds gears from a character driven focus to adventure.
Although beautifully realized visually, the space rescue is truly
unremarkable. Nothing occurs that we haven't seen in other recent films
involving space travel. By shifting from the film's strong suit, its
leads, to straightforward action, a certain momentum is lost.
If you're not looking for any big revelations or insight into the human
condition, this is a movie for you. Space Cowboys doesn't try to present
itself as anything other than what it is: Fun, eminently watchable,
summer fare.

Author
Jon Popick
Clint Eastwood has had a pretty spotty directorial record since he won
an Oscar for 1992's Unforgiven.  The movie about the bridges aside,
Eastwood has stayed behind the camera for two fantastic period films (A
Perfect World and Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil) and directed
himself in two modern-day duds (True Crime and Absolute Power).  So the
prospect of the leathery legend helming himself in another contemporary
picture didn't exactly have me racing to get to the theatre.
But Space Cowboys isn't too bad.  The film is about four geriatric,
ex-Air Force pilots who get blasted into space to repair a Russian
satellite that is even more decrepit than they are.  If you liked Walter
Matthau and Jack Lemmon volleying jokes back and forth about
incontinence and false teeth in Grumpy Old Men, then you'll probably
love Cowboys.  Since they don't even make it into space until the film's
final thirty minutes, Cowboys is more about the men training for their
mission than the actual space undertaking.
Cowboys' first section might be its best, which is kind of odd
considering the fact that none of the four stars appear in this part of
the film.  The studio's colorless logo leads into a black-and-white
scene set in 1958, where two Air Force test pilots from Team Daedalus
crash a $4 million X-2 experimental airplane (their third accident in
ten months).  Young actors portray the near-ambulatory stars, who supply
only their voices to this section of Cowboys, in which we learn that the
Air Force is handing over the task of space exploration to the
newly-founded NASA and their space monkey.
Flash to 1999, where old codger Frank Corvin (Eastwood) is approached by
two NASA representatives that need his prehistoric expertise.  It seems
that Ikon, a Russian communication satellite that was created using
Corvin's antiquated guidance system created for the Skylab project some
four decades earlier, is on a collision course with Earth, and NASA
needs the ex-pilot to tell them how to fix it.
Corvin refuses to help NASA unless they let his Team Daedalus
participate in the mission.  NASA reluctantly agrees, and Corvin rounds
up his old cohorts  maniacal pilot-turned-crop-duster `Hawk' Hawkins
(Tommy Lee Jones, Rules of Engagement); former navigator `Tank' Sullivan
(James Garner, My Fellow Americans), who is now a Baptist minister; and
Jerry O'Neil (Donald Sutherland, Instinct), a skirt-chasing roller
coaster designer with Coke-bottle glasses who was a structural engineer.
Like I said, most of the film concentrates on the flock of fossils
training for their big mission, and most of Cowboys' laughs come from
these scenes.  It's funny to watch them go through the
turn-your-head-and-cough drill during their physical, and there's a
pretty good recurring theme in which the geezers find out that pretty
much everyone they've ever worked with is dead.
Once Team Daedalus gets up into space, Cowboys turns into a predictable
cross between Armageddon and Mission to Mars.  There's the obligatory
`I'm gettin' to old for this' line, as well as a really creepy romance
between Hawk and a NASA engineer played by Marcia Gay Harden (Meet Joe
Black).  Both would have been better left on the editing room floor.
It's just plain weird to see the effect-heavy finale in an Eastwood
film, but it's handled pretty well.
Cowboys' script was written by Ken Kaufman (Muppets From Space) and
first-timer Howard Klausner.  Almost all of the technical aspects of the
film (editing, score, cinematography, production design) were handled by
a crew that has worked on all of Eastwood's recent films.  One
surprising omission from Cowboys is the absence of the Steve Miller Band
song that shares the same name as the film's title.
On an interesting note, there's a nineteen-year real-life age difference
between Team Daedalus' oldest and youngest member (Garner is 72; Jones
is 53).  Even thought they're supposed to be similarly aged, Garner was
in college while Jones was in diapers.  The math gets even crazier when
you figure that Garner, Eastwood (70) and Sutherland (66) were getting
bossed around by superiors that were a lot younger than them (The Green
Mile's James Cromwell is 60, and Knot's Landing's William Devane is 59,
but both played NASA men that were around back in '58).

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
SPACE COWBOYS (2000)
Rated PG-13; running time 123 minutes
Genre: dramedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0186566
Official site: http://www.spacecowboys.net/
Written by:Ken Kaufman, Howard Klausner
Directed by: Clint Eastwood
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, Donald Sutherland, James Garner,
James Cromwell, Marcia Gay Harden, Loren Dean, Courtney B. Vance,
Barbara Babcock, William Devane, Aleksandr Kuznetsov (Russian Engineer)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamscowboys.html
There will be inevitable comparisons of SPACE COWBOYS to THE RIGHT STUFF
(though I liken it more to ARMAGEDDON meets MISSION TO MARS meets
COCOON).  I could most def groove on veterans Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee
Jones, James Garner, and Donald Sutherland bucking the "current" Youth
Fad in Hollywood; but I was less encouraged by Eastwood's uneven
handling of the humorous aspects in some of the movies he's directed or
starred in (cf TRUE CRIME.  ewww.)  Let's see which side of Eastwood
comes to the fore...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
A full forty years after being upstaged by a monkey for the right to
show they had The Right Stuff in outer space, retired Air Force pilots
Frank Corvin (Clint Eastwood), Hawk Hawkins (Tommy Lee Jones), engineer
Jerry O'Nell (Donald Sutherland) and navigator Tank Sullivan (James
Garner) are reunited in "Operation Dateless" when a Russian satellite,
"Ikon", malfunctions.  Much to the dismay of "Dateless'" former Air
Force commander, Bob Gerson (James Cromwell), Frank is found to be the
designer of a system much like the one found in the satellite.  And
since the technology he designed is too ancient for the current NASA
scientists like Sarah Holland (Marcia Gay Harden) to figure out, the
ball is in Frank's court, and he plays it: he'll gladly fix the
satellite - as long as he and his "Dateless" crewmates are allowed to go
on that long-awaited space mission along with reluctant current
astronauts Ethan Glance (Loren Dean) and Roger Hines (Courtney B.
Vance).
And the big question, voiced by both Frank and NASA Flight Commander
Eugene Davis (William Devane): just how did that "similar technology"
get into a Cold War-era Russian satellite?
The Upshot:
It seems like my fears were misplaced: it wasn't the humorous aspects of
the movie that were the problem at all.  In fact, the humor in SPACE
COWBOYS was what saved the day for me - and the better comparison there
was to the best parts of GRUMPY OLD MEN.
I'm an Old Skool kinda Chick, and in Hollywood, there's not much Older
than the likes of Eastwood, Jones, Sutherland, and Garner.  Each were
charming in their own way, none more than Tommy Lee [whose name alone
makes me want to make him an Honorary Brother].  Tommy Lee Jones puts
the Grump in "Grumpy Old Man", and manages to do so without coming off
either smarmy or as irritating as one would think his perpetual Good Ol'
Boy acting would play.  Jones is one of the most talented, natural
actors in the business, and it's almost always a pleasure to watch him
work.  RULES OF ENGAGEMENT, notwithstanding.
SPACE COWBOYS was Jones' and Clint Eastwood's puppy to play with.
Jones' Grump was matched by Eastwood's patented Grimace; I almost saw
Clint crack a smile...once...but I'd not have it any other way.  Where
Jones is at ease with his suthern drrrrawl, Eastwood Emotes through the
grit of his teeth; and though age has softened that grit somewhat, Dirty
Harry At 70 is still a force to reckon with.
Of the two remaining leads, Donald Sutherland fared much better than
James Garner.  I saw shades of Sutherland's younger self - no, not that
hack son of his; I mean his character in THE DIRTY DOZEN - in the
laid-back Jerry O'Nell.  Less a lecher than Walter Matthau's GRUMPY OLD
MEN character, Jerry's playful horniness was never laid on so thick as
to make that character unappealing.  Less successful was Garner; it
didn't help that his character was mistakenly hobbled to start with [I'd
like to throttle whomever decided that making him an uninspired preacher
was A Good Idea], and neither Tank the character nor Garner the actor,
were given much more to work with throughout the flick.  Garner looked
tired; certainly, he was a long way from THE ROCKFORD FILES and MURPHY'S
ROMANCE, two of the better projects I've seen him in.
And speaking of romance - what, you didn't know that Old Folks Need
Love, Too? - there was Love in the most unexpected of places.  The brief
flirtation scenes with Frank & Mrs. Corbin (I never caught Babcock's
character's name, but I smiled when I remembered her in the spicy role
of Sgt. Phil Esterhaus' paramour Grace in HILL STREET BLUES. Unlike many
of her contemporaries, she's aged very well) were only a teaser for the
more unexpected, yet somehow Obligatory, romance between Hawk and Sarah.
I didn't have a problem with that, per se - if anything, Harden brought
out even more of Jones' natural charm - but I'd like the name of Marcia
Gay Harden's hairdresser.  She (I assume) needs her butt whupped for
letting Marcia Gay go out in public looking like that.
I loved "Cowboys'" sense of itself, of how John Glenn and THE RIGHT
STUFF had to be acknowledged, and especially how it never really pushed
the age bit too far [well, almost never].  What I *didn't* like was the
illogic of Cromwell's character Bob Gerson and how he related to the
Russian Engineer [without giving too much away here, howthell was Gerson
kept on after...well, I guess that'd give too much away, so let me stop
there.  Watch it; you'll see what I'm getting at].  More to the point,
though, it was the second, serious half that almost broke "Cowboys'"
spell for me.  And, since I couldn't hear half of what was being said,
almost put me to sleep.
The comedic first half of SPACE COWBOYS certainly worked better for me
than the more serious second half; once the Cowboys blasted into space,
my initial estimation of the movie blasted out with them, and in fact, I
had originally given this movie a lower rating than what it ended up
with (see below).  Fortunately, I saw the movie a second time; and with
a better view of the screen and a better sound system in the theater, I
was able to understand the space stuff a bit more than the first time.
It still didn't compare to the first half, but certainly didn't drag the
movie down as much as I first thought.  Though I wish I'd left the
theater more excited about what I had just seen, I most def felt
Entertained...and ain't that what it's all about?
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I had to chuckle at the way Diva's "Brotha Rule" played out here.
Courtney B. Vance may be married to Angela "Born To Be Storm, I said!"
Bassett, but apparently her cachet hasn't done him much good, as far as
the usefulness of his Hollywood roles goes.  Can't fault a brotha for at
least showing up on the set, though - even if his fairly non-existent
part amounted to not much more than a playful shove to the back of the
shuttle by Tommy Lee.
[Oh...and please, Mr. Vance, bring back your mustache.  Your fans will
thank you for it.]
Bammer's Bottom Line:
This one was a tuffy.  I almost gave it a greenlight, for its sense of
humor (Tommy Lee Jones and Donald Sutherland kept me laughing), but the
serious outer space stuff left me rather cold, and I spent way too much
time straining to hear what was being said.  If you're in the mood to,
check it out if for no other reason than to see three-and-a-half good
old boys give it ye olde college try.
A rarity: upon second viewing, I've changed my mind.  Greenlight, it is.
Hey, it's a Chick's Prerogative...
SPACE COWBOYS (rating: greenlight):
Now if I could only get that infernal Bon Jovi song outta my head...

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SPACE COWBOYS (director: Clint Eastwood; screenwriters: Ken
Kaufman/Howard Klausner; cinematographer: Jack N. Green; editor: Joel
Cox; cast: Clint Eastwood (Frank Corvin), Tommy Lee Jones (Hawk
Hawkins), Donald Sutherland (Jerry O'Neil), James Garner (Tank
Sullivan), Marcia Gay Harden (Sara Holland), William Devane (Eugene
Davis), Loren Dean (Ethan Glance), Courtney B. Vance (Roger Hines),
James Cromwell (Bob Gerson), Rade Serbedzija (Russian General); Runtime:
126; 2000)
"Space Cowboys" opens in 1958 at Edwards Air Force Base in the
California desert. The black-and-white photography starkly highlights
the empty sky and the frolicking nature of four test pilots who are
breaking the sound barrier in the experimental X-2 rocket plane. But, in
the process of their daredevil tactics, the pilot and co-pilot have to
bail out and crash the expensive plane. As a result, the snaky officer
in charge of them, James Cromwell, grounds them from further space
missions, and to add insult to injury, announces that a monkey will be
the first to orbit space. He also announces that a new organization
called NASA will use astronauts for further space exploration, no longer
will the Air Force be in charge of the program.
Cromwell is faced with a crisis 42 years later, as a joint program
between the U.S. and Russia, has run into a problem-- the Russian
satellite communication ship Ikon has developed a failure in the system
and is about to crash. As a gesture of good will and political
diplomacy, Cromwell offers to send his team of astronauts to repair the
problem. But, it's not so easy, the system is an antiquated one and was
built by Clint Eastwood when he was the engineer designer for Skylab,
and it turns out that Clint is the only one who knows how to locate and
fix the problem in that obsolete system. These new engineers and punky
young astronauts have all been raised on computer technology and have no
idea about the old language used in space technology, to the chagrin of
Clint.
Cromwell, on the urgings of a space agency head, whose expertise is in
engineering, Marcia Gay Harden, decides to contact his old rival Clint
for help. When told about it in his suburban California home, Clint, who
is living in retirement, tinkering around in his garage and seemingly
happily married, tells Marcia he doesn't trust Cromwell. When he meets
with Cromwell, he tells him that he will not train the astronauts
because there is not enough time to do so, and refuses to budge from his
position, even when ridiculed for not being a team player. He says, I
will only fix the problem if my old Daedalus Team goes on the mission,
which is met by jeers from Cromwell. But they work out a deal whereby
the geriatric crew can go, with the provision being that they must pass
the physical and endurance tests. The crusty flight director of the
program, William Devane, also insists that two of his hotshot
astronauts, Loren Dean and Courtney B. Vance, also go along, especially
since the old codgers are not familiar with the new computer systems
that run the space vehicles nowadays.
To add some cold war paranoia to the story, Clint wonders how the
Russians got his equipment since it was classified information, only
available to the Americans.
When Clint's blackmail strategy works, he goes to gather the other
senior citizens to join the mission. He finds James Garner in Oklahoma
City, where he is a second-rate Baptist preacher; Donald Sutherland is
designing roller coasters, and though sporting a gray pony tail, wearing
glasses and having false teeth, and being pictured as a friendly wolf
around the younger ladies--he will be the flight engineer; Tommy Lee
Jones is at least twenty years younger than those other three seventy
plus seniors. He is not on good terms with Clint ever since they were
grounded from any further space missions as pilots in 1958 and Clint
blamed him for that, accusing him of being a reckless pilot, someone who
took too many risks. Tommy is now working as a stunt pilot on a
crop-duster, giving harrowing rides to those who request them. After
thinking about the chance to go into space, a dream all the men had,
Tommy decides to go along and make history with the other men. This
premise would seem improbable, but in the recent news of the geriatric
John Glenn going on a space mission for experimental purposes, it shows
that their mission is possible, though not in the manner as depicted in
this fantasy film.
The story takes the men through their training sessions, and each of
them, giving understated performances, tries to outdo the other. Tommy,
who is a widower, has a romantic spin with Marcia, who looks attractive
despite her official looking NASA hairstyle. Donald is prone to act like
the improvident reader of 1958 Playboy magazines he was back then,
showing that his lifestyle hasn't changed even with his advancing years.
While Garner has faith in God and his lucky dancing doll, but is given
the short-end of the script and therefore has only a few lines to chew
on in his competition with the others. There are a lot of good natured
jokes about aging and some friendly ribbing between the young astronauts
and the veterans, and it all seems pleasantly entertaining, though
somewhat staged. Clint even makes fun of some of his older pictures,
which I presume is why he has so much fun with the monkey in the opening
scene. Everything seemed smooth and compliable with a formula movie, and
it seemed as if the actors were having a good time acting together.
The heaviness in the story came about when America's old cold war
paranoia was introduced into the mission. The paranoia is a reminder
from those cold war days, when many Americans thought that the Russians
were looking for a chance to nuke America. The mission turns out to be
more dangerous than first perceived, as betrayal and nukes surface.
But through the wonderful special effects and the full cooperation of
NASA as consultants, there was a sense of awe in seeing the sights of
space travel. And, when Clint is able to make an impossible landing,
something Hollywood films are good at doing, there is a sense of relief
that the old timer, who now has a lined and craggy face and looks like
an American icon, is safe and sound. Since the film didn't take itself
so seriously, there was no undue tension and everything was fun, even
all the contrivances the film allowed for.
This is not one of Clint's top films, but if it is his swan song, as
rumored, there are a lot of reasons why this is not a bad film to end
one's career on. The love and affection from his fellow actors comes
through loud and clear, in this well-crafted production, which shows
Clint could direct with the skills that only the most competent
Hollywood directors possessed, even if Clint never reached greatness
himself, as he was unable to overcome his artistic limitations. What he
couldn't do in this film, was move beyond the easy humor and special
effects, and make a film that had something involving to say about old
age and those facing death.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Space Cowboys" is the antithesis to "Armageddon." Let me explain. 
"Armageddon" was over-the-top and mechanical, though still a fun trip into 
space, whereas "Space Cowboys" is primarily concerned with leisurely pacing 
and characters of depth and understanding. In the end, these grumpy old 
cowboys are action heroes at heart yet they bear the burden of old age and 
Medicare worries. 
Clint Eastwood (who also wrote and directed) stars as Frank Corvin, a former 
Air Force test pilot who later designed a pragmatic guidance system for a 
satellite. Apparently, such satellite systems that were innovative in 1958 
are no longer used in 1998, though one has apparently found its way into the 
hands of the Soviets. Unfortunately, this satellite is hurling towards the 
Earth's atmosphere and none of the latest whiz technicians know how to 
control it. Frank has an idea how, since he designed it in the first place, 
and he employs the use of his former crew of pilots to go into space and 
retrieve it. The former pilots include James Garner as a Reverend; Donald 
Sutherland as a ladies' man roller coaster expert; and Tommy Lee Jones, a 
hotheaded pilot who still flies planes and bears a grudge towards Frank from 
the old days. 
"Space Cowboys" marches along with a by-the-numbers plotline that includes 
the obligatory training session (including a sneak peek of these geezers's 
butts), the usual shouting matches and confrontations with the reluctant NASA 
officials, such as William Devane as one gum-chewing NASA bureaucrat and 
James Cromwell (the tallest of the whole cast) as another, and, well, you get 
the drill. Once these flyboys enter space, the film picks up with some 
snappy, humorous dialogue and excellent special-effects.  
Eastwood draws suspense in the film's action climax because he brings such 
vulnerability, pathos and dignity to the characters, including Tommy Lee 
Jones as the widower who has a passing romantic interest in a younger woman 
(Marcia Gay Harden). Sutherland is his quick-witted smooth old self, a sight 
unseen since Robert Altman's "MASH" or "Kelly's Heroes" (the latter also 
starred Eastwood). James Garner can draw laughs with the barest of facial 
expressions, though his role often feels truncated. And good old boy Eastwood 
may not be aging like fine wine, but he still has a commanding presence (and 
is far more believable than in "True Crime" as an aging reporter). 
"Space Cowboys" has sparkle and is illuminated by a fine cast. The story is 
old-hat to say the least and far too predictable, but these old pros still 
know how to put on a good show. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Chad Polenz
There really isn't a thing in "Space Cowboys" that isn't totally predictable 
and familiar, and yet it's a really
fun, feel-good movie that doesn't make you feel like you're being pandered 
to. 
Maybe that's because it's got four great actors or that it's got a good 
producer/director at the helm or that
it offers an original take on an otherwise paint-by-numbers summer popcorn 
flick. It's kind of a military
thriller, it's almost a sci-fi flick but not one of those movies aimed at a 
sci-fi audiences. It's a grown-up
adventure movie that knows how to execute its story. 
Clint Eastwood stars as a retired Air Force pilot and engineer who is called 
upon by his old boss at NASA
because a satellite is about to crash into the Earth and the technology is so 
obsolete even today's rocket
scientists can't figure it out. Yadda yadda yadda, Eastwood and his three 
old* military buddies are the only
ones who can fix it and must adapt to the new technology rapidly while at the 
same time showing up the
young hotshots who think they're geniuses. 
It's pretty easy to tell what's going to happen here right? Fish-out-of-water 
stuff, "Let me do it my way
junior"-lines and attitudes, an executive commander who's obviously a weasel 
and a really fantastic ending
involving "we'll just barely make it if our calculations are 
correct"-climaxes. But as much as it sounds like
"Apollo 13," "Space Cowboys" really has a lot going for it. Sending four old 
men into space doesn't seem
like all that far-fetched of an idea (not after John Glenn), and Eastwood and 
company seem to be having a
great time here. The screenplay is thorough with its characters and doesn't 
waste our time trying to explain
the details of the "real" conflict going on. It doesn't matter, everyone here 
is doing such a good job it's
actually, uh what's that word - enjoyable. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Screenplay by Ken Kaufman, Howard Klausner
     There are 261 years of charm and experience at the core of Clint 
Eastwood's immensely likeable geezer-pleaser -- to wit: James Garner, 
72; Eastwood, 70; Donald Sutherland, 66; and wandering in off the 
playground, Tommy Lee Jones clocking in at a mere 53.  Tommy Lee is a 
very appealing actor with a face that looks as though it had been left 
out in the rain and sun to weather, but as we keep observing about the 
love interests with whom these guys share their cinematic beds, couldn't 
they have found somebody of a more appropriate age? 
     Together they compose Team Daedelus, a reunited crew that had the 
right stuff but the wrong timing back in 1958, when they should have 
been the first men in space.  Now there's a Russian "communications 
satellite" that's coming apart and threatening to fall to earth, and 
there's only one man who understands its antiquated guidance system 
enough to fix it.  That man is Eastwood, and he understands it because 
he designed it, before it was stolen and wound up in the Cold War hands 
of the Russkies. 
     There's no time to train buff youngsters.  Clint will have to go up 
himself.  And the only way he'll do that is with his old Team Daedelus 
buddies.  When project director James Cromwell objects, Eastwood tells 
him to take it or leave it.  "The clock's ticking," he growls, "and I'm 
not getting any younger."
     What makes this movie so much fun is not just the Team Methuselah 
fantasy of four old guys showing they can still cut it with the young 
stallions.  It's the guys themselves.  In our disposable society, it is 
surpassingly great to see guys like Garner and Sutherland deliver the 
goods.  When a NASA scientist (Marcia Gay Harden, with a hairdo 
patterned on the Liberty Bell) asks what she should call them, 
Sutherland replies with a twinkling leer "You can call me.anytime."  
It's not a fresh line, but Sutherland serves it up like steak tartare. 
     Eastwood opens with a black-and-white sequence as four young actors 
(voices dubbed by the older stars) take us back to the days of '58.  
Then, like Dorothy landing in Oz, we burst into color as the present-day 
Clint accepts his assignment and proceeds, in the time-honored Dirty 
Dozen/Magnificent Seven tradition, to round up his geriatric compadres 
from their current walks of life.  We follow them through NASA training, 
and finally blast off with them on the mission.  At this point the plot 
thickens, the technology quickens, and the movie takes on the feel of 
another space adventure - and an entertaining one at that.  But where it 
earns its stripes is on the ground as it revels in the sly, understated 
craft of its all-star team of old pros.

Author
John Beachem
The guidance system on a Russian communications satellite, which has been in 
space for about 14 years, is finally breaking down and sending the satellite 
towards Earth. In about a month and a half it will burn up in the atmosphere 
and the communications break-down may plunge Russia into a civil war. No 
problem, right? We can just send some boys up there to fix it and it'll be 
as good as new. Wrong, you see the guidance system is so old that the only 
person who knows anything about it is the original designer, Frank Corvin 
(Clint Eastwood). Frank was originally supposed to go into space back in the 
fifties, but he and his team were replaced by a monkey. The man responsible 
for destroying Frank's dream of going into space was Bob Gerson (James 
Cromwell), who is still in charge of the space program, and is now in charge 
of trying to find a way to fix the Russian satellite. So Frank makes a deal 
with Gersen, whereby Frank will fix the satellite if, and only if, he and 
his original team members, Hawk, Tank, and Jerry (Tommy Lee Jones, James 
Garner, and Donald Sutherland respectively), are allowed to go into space 
together to do so. They will be accompanied by two young astronauts, Ethan 
(Loren Dean) and Roger (Courtney B. Vance), but all the repairs will be 
performed entirely by Frank and his team. The catch is, in order to qualify 
for this, Frank and his team must undergo all the rigorous training 
astronauts now go through.
Let me catch my breath after that plot summary. I know it sounded long and 
confusing, but the movie's plot is actually remarkably simple; it just can't 
be written down in simple terms (or maybe it's just me, but I must have 
re-written that summary a dozen times). In a summer full of utter 
disappointments, "Space Cowboys" stands out as the one movie that was 
exactly how I expected it to be. In other words, "Space Cowboys" was as 
cliched as it could be, but it was also a lot of fun, very entertaining, and 
it even had a few touching moments. The movie is bound to draw (possibly 
unfair) comparisons to "Armageddon", just as Michael Bay's film drew 
comparisons to "The Right Stuff". Both films feature a group being quickly 
trained for a space mission, having quite a few problems up in space, and 
unfortunately both lose most of their steam once the group actually makes it 
into space. That's right, just like Bay's big loud picture, "Space Cowboys" 
is an absolute blast while it's on the ground, but all the fun gets sapped 
out once the actual mission is underway.
In a movie with a cast like this, the high point is obviously going to be 
the acting. Where else can you see five great old actors get together for 
one last hurrah? As a result, I'm going to devote a lot more of the review 
to each of the actors involved than I normally would. Eastwood does a 
magnificent job playing an aged Dirty Harry like character, getting 
excellent lines like: "Go ahead, I've got medicare, take your best shot." 
For those of you worried about Eastwood taking his shirt off after that 
reportedly horrifying sight in "The Bridges of Madison County", I'm sorry to 
say he does just that. However, it's only for a split second, and he's bent 
over so you really don't see his chest too well. Why am I telling you this? 
Because I'd hate for you to miss an otherwise good movie because you're 
(justifiably) afraid of that sight. The only other actor to play a really 
major part in "Space Cowboys" is Tommy Lee Jones, playing Eastwood's on 
again - off again best friend, Hawk. Jones is clearly one of the best older 
actors working in Hollywood (though he's actually the youngest of the five 
featured in this movie), and he's great here because he's obviously having 
such a good time. Jones has a big goofy smile plastered on his face 
throughout the film, and as a result, we can't help but smile along with 
him.
The other three old-timers aren't given half the screen time Jones and 
Eastwood are, but at least two of them still manage to leave an impression. 
What type of impression does Donald Sutherland ("Outbreak") leave? Why, the 
same kind he always does of course: Eww, creepy (if you've seen Sutherland 
in anything before you should know exactly what I mean). The fact that his 
character is a womanizing old man doesn't help matters any. James Cromwell 
("LA Confidential") is gaining quite a reputation for playing sadistic old 
men, and he continues in that same vein as the hateful Bob Gersen. Does he 
play a hateful old man well? Disturbingly well, actually. The only one of 
the five who leaves no impression is the great James Garner ("Maverick"). 
How can that possibly be, you ask? Well, don't get me wrong, James Garner is 
certainly the man, but even he can't save a role where he's given no more 
than fifteen or twenty minutes of screen time. The only other people given 
enough screen time to leave any sort of mark are Marcia Gay Harden (that's 
right, from the masterpiece "Miller's Crossing") as Tommy Lee Jones's love 
interest, and William Devane (just seen briefly in "Hollow Man") as James 
Cromwell's boss who seems afflicted by a split personality.
Eastwood's skill behind the camera is a little hard to predict. It can be 
outstanding and frankly mesmerizing as it was in "Unforgiven"; or it can be, 
well, "True Crime". His efforts in "Space Cowboys" fall somewhere safely in 
the middle. Most of his scenes work quite well, like a bar- room brawl 
between Eastwood and a young skin head; or the scene where we first meet 
Hawk, who now makes his living teaching young hotshots a thing or two about 
flying in an old, bright red one prop plane. However, a few of the tricks he 
tried just didn't do it for me, like the actors' voices being dubbed over on 
younger actors in the first fifteen minutes. Eastwood's biggest strength in 
"Space Cowboys" is his ability to throw in slap-stick like humor without 
making the film feel campy. His biggest weakness is pacing, which is slow 
and leisurely while the crew is on the ground, but frantic and headache 
inducing while they're in space. I think things would have gone over a bit 
more smoothly if a half hour had been taken out of the script and Eastwood 
had directed the whole film in his trademark, meandering sort of way.
Other than the acting and a lot of really entertaining scenes, there isn't 
much to "Space Cowboys". The special effects are nice, but certainly nothing 
spectacular. The training scenes may run on far too long, but they're sure a 
whole lot of fun. The score from Clint Eastwood's favorite composer, Lennie 
Niehaus, is nice, but after Trevor Rabin's outstanding, rousing score from 
"Armageddon" (I said it was going to draw unfair comparisons), this one just 
doesn't stand up. Despite these factors, "Space Cowboys" is still enjoyable 
enough that it was well on its way to a full four star rating until the last 
half hour hit. In that last half hour every heart string tugging cliche in 
the book was hurled at me till I felt like knocking it down more than just 
one notch. "Space Cowboys" did force me to reconsider a statement I made 
earlier this month. I said that all movies in Hollywood should be restricted 
in length to one hour, because writers seemed to run out of ideas at that 
point. I'm changing that statement to all movies should be written and ready 
to go, and then have the last half hour done away with. Granted, there are 
exceptions, this year's "X-Men" springs to mind, but for the most part I 
think this would benefit Hollywood greatly. "Space Cowboys" runs a long 129 
minutes, and I recommend it to just about any age group, though senior 
citizens will probably get more out of it than kids. I give the move three 
and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE RIGHT STUFF told how U.S. Air Force test pilots who had the
so-called "right stuff" were nevertheless washed out of the space
program by the government bureaucracy.  That film was almost
certainly the inspiration for SPACE COWBOYS in which four of those
pilots, now in their seventies fly an important shuttle mission for
NASA.  The film opens with the four young test pilots, guys with the
smarts and the guts it takes to save themselves in an emergency,
being frustrated in their dreams to fly in space.  Locked out are
Frank Corvin, Tank Sullivan, Jerry O'Neil, and Hawk Hawkins, all
commanded by the marginally competent Bob Gerson.
     Flash forward to the present.  The Russian communications
satellite Ikon, dating back to the cold war era, is in a decaying
orbit.  For reasons not being clearly explained by anyone it is very
important that the satellite be placed back into a healthy orbit.
High people in both the American and Russian governments are anxious
that it not be allowed to simply re-enter the atmosphere as its
current course will take it.  A NASA mission is being headed by Sara
Holland (Marcia Gay Harden) under the management of program veteran
Bob Gerson (James Cromwell) to repair the guidance system and put
the satellite back in orbit.  Retired pilot Frank Corvin (Clint
Eastwood), previously washed out of the space program, designed a
guidance system in the Sixties and it is the one that was used
aboard the Ikon.  He is asked to come out of retirement and help
repair the Ikon's guidance system.  Frank asks the obvious question:
what is his guidance system doing aboard a Soviet satellite sent up
during the Cold War?  He does not get an answer.  Corvin's deal for
NASA: They can have his help only if his 1960s team of four pilots
get to fly the mission.  Gerson's response: they can go if they can
get through training.
     Corvin collects the other three members.  There is Tank
Sullivan (James Garner), now a Baptist minister.  Jerry O'Neil
(Donald Sutherland) now engineers roller-coasters, and Hawk Hawkins
(Tommy Lee Jones) flies biplanes.  Corvin reassembles the somewhat
startled and bemused team and they begin their training.  When it is
clear that they cannot possibly get through the training through
fair means, they resort to foul.  Somewhat irksome is the unlikely
device that the nearly blind Jerry O'Neil is able to bluff his way
so that nobody suspects.  The training is a major part of the movie.
The actual mission does not begin until about ninety minutes into
the film.  All the while the mystery of this enigmatic Soviet
satellite deepens as the questions begin to pile up.
     At the center of the story is Eastwood, not the world's most
emotive actor, and Tommy Lee Jones.  Donald Sutherland as an aging
Lothario who bluffs his way around his near-blindness.  Garner's
trademark is his low-key quietly amused performances.  Here he it
works against him as he frequently melts into the scenery in the
presence of the other major actors.  Marsha Gay Harden is a good
choice for the mission planner.  Many actresses would look a little
too glamorous in the role and she gives the impression of being more
an intelligent, no-nonsense sort of person.  William Devane, who in
other films frequently shows little more characterization than a
funny way of talking, for once has a role that he can sink his teeth
into as the gum-chewing Mission Control.
     Nicely handled is the prologue set in the 1960s.  It would be
impossible to make the cast look so many decades younger.  The
characters are played by look-alike actors with the real actors
voices processed to sound younger.  The sequence does not entirely
work to convince the audience these are the same people, but it is
close enough for the viewer to go with it.  The younger version of
Eastwood (Toby Stephens) looks close enough to Eastwood that there
may have been some digital processing going on.  In general the
space special effects are kept conservative and inexpensive.  Stock
footage seems to be used where possible.  But this film is not an
effects extravaganza.  You probably do not go to a film like this
dazzling effect, for excitement, or even believability in the
adventure.  You want to see the interplay of four elder stars, each
with proven comic flair from earlier films.  As expected they
deliver.
     SPACE COWBOYS will probably be classified by most people as a
science fiction film, though there is not much in it to make it
science fiction any more.  But it is a well-crafted film with an
accent on characters.  I rate it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"The Ripe Stuff," is what the newspapers called them when word leaked 
out about their secret assignment.  Four old codgers, who left the space 
program 40 years ago -- when NASA chose a monkey over a man to go into 
space first -- they are back for a quickly prepared mission to rescue an 
important satellite that will burn up soon on reentry if they don't get 
it back into orbit.  
If it hadn't been for John Glenn's recent space flight at age 77, the 
plot might seem completely ridiculous.  Instead, the script makes the 
old team's goal and flight seem remarkably plausible.  After all, the 
ailing, ancient satellite's guidance system was designed by Frank Corvin 
(Clint Eastwood), and no one still at NASA knows how to fix it anymore.  
Frank's only condition is that he gets to go into space to repair it and 
that he takes with him his old team: Hawk Hawkins (Tommy Lee Jones), 
Tank Sullivan (James Garner) and Jerry O'Nell (Donald Sutherland).  
Setting out a condition that he figures is unobtainable, Frank's hated 
ex-boss and current NASA project leader, Bob Gerson (James Cromwell), 
demands that the four pass all of the astronaut tests for physical 
stamina.  (These "geriatric" astronauts are supposed to be about 69, but 
you'll notice that in real-life Jones is a good bit younger at 53.  But 
with his usual weathered look, Jones convincingly plays a senior 
citizen.)
Beautifully directed by Eastwood, the movie has two distinct parts.  The 
first half is an inviting and good-spirited comedy, that is deliciously 
underplayed and that rarely dissolves into slapstick.  The second half 
is an exhilarating action drama set in space.
Just watching these old actors work together is worth the price of 
admission.  They have a blast, and we're there with them cheering them 
on.
The brightly written script by Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner 
successfully creates four unique lead characters.  Frank (Eastwood) is 
the team's cocky leader.  He's a take-no-guff kind of guy.  "I've got 
Medicare," he says, picking a fight with an unsavory younger guy at a 
bar.  "Go ahead, take your best shot."
Ethan Glance, played in a one-note performance by Loren Dean (MUMFORD), 
is the hot-shot new astronaut sent to recruit Frank.  "Dr. Corvin, your 
country needs you," Ethan argues.  "Put a sock in it, Sonny!" Frank 
shoots back.  The tension between them doesn't ease up during training.  
"Excuse me, I hold 2 Masters degrees from MIT," Ethan tells Frank, when 
Frank ignores his advice.  "Maybe you should try to get your money 
back!" Frank retorts with a classic Eastwood sneer that would melt 
steel.
Jerry (Sutherland) is a "babe magnet," and a roller-coaster designer, 
who likes to tweak his coasters himself.  With coke-bottle lenses, he 
has to cheat his way through the astronaut's eye exam.  The four's 
creative fudging supplies many of the best laughs.  There is also a 
fatalistic humor in that everyone they ask about seems to have died.
Rivaling Eastwood for the movie's best performance is Tommy Lee Jones, 
as daredevil pilot Hawk.  Hawk spends his days taking up college kids in 
loop-the-loops certain to make them puke.  No one can fly a plane as 
well as Hawk, but there's been bad blood between Frank and Hawk for 40 
years now.  
In the least developed role, James Garner plays Tank, a Baptist 
preacher.  Tank, the group's navigator, can't even find his way through 
his own sermons.
There are lots of subplots, including a romance between Hawk and a NASA 
engineer (Marcia Gay Harden), and most of them work quite well without 
needlessly complicating the story.
The film's special effects are quite credible.  Looking authentic but 
not overly glamorous, they nicely compliment the story rather than 
dominating it.
What a wonderful contrast this movie makes with typical movie fare these 
days.  Rather than having another in our weekly releases of 
bad-to-mediocre teen comedies, we have an intelligent and funny picture 
featuring people who have real acting experience that's measured in 
decades, not years.  
Let's hope that this starts a trend away from bad movies, whose only 
claim to fame is their demographics, and toward good films with 
experienced, really experienced, actors.  It's probably too much to hope 
for.  After all, we've raised a generation who thinks that all movies 
end in a prom sequence, and that all jokes must involve crude references 
to some bodily fluid.
SPACE COWBOYS runs 2:00.  It is rated PG-13 for some language and would 
be fine for kids around 9 and up.  It is also a good movie to take 
multiple generations to see.  My parents and my son are planning on 
seeing it together this weekend with us.  It's the kind of film that 
it's fun to view again.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Clint Eastwood. Screenplay by Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner.
Starring Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, James Garner. Running time: 130
minutes. Rated PG for mild language and mature theme by the MFCB. Reviewed
on August 7th, 2000.
There's always a certain appeal to a movie which brings together a group
of favorite actors. Regardless of the quality of the plot, the direction,
or whatever, there's an undeniable charm to watching stars of the screen
interact -- and the more, the merrier. A lot of it, I suppose, stems from
sheer fanboyishness (or fangirlishness, as appropriate). It's the same
spirit that makes us laugh with glee at, say, the "Stalag 17" references
in "Chicken Run". But it's also an acknowledgment of the class and skill
these actors bring to their profession, and of the enormous potential that
their banding together seems to promise.
"Space Cowboys" is this kind of movie, its big gimmick being the union of
several of Hollywood's top retirement-age actors. Headlining the film are
Clint Eastwood (70 years old), James Garner (72), Donald Sutherland (65)
and Tommy Lee Jones (still practically a baby at 53), joined by James
Cromwell (60) and William Devane (59). Eastwood plays Frank Corvin, former
member of Team Daedalus, a group of Air Force pilots who, in the 1950s,
were designated as the first men to fly into space. Then NASA was formed
and claimed the space program for itself, and Team Daedalus was
permanently grounded. Forty years later, a Russian satellite malfunctions
and slowly begins to plunge Earthward. The guidance system on board is so
old that none of NASA's current crop of engineers can understand it, let
alone construct software to interact with it, so project engineer Sarah
Holland (Marcia Gay Harden) turns to its designer -- Frank -- for
assistance.
Frank will help NASA on one condition: that he and the rest of Team
Daedalus be on board the space shuttle sent into orbit to repair the
ailing satellite. Grudgingly, Sarah's boss Bob Gerson (Cromwell) -- an old
nemesis of Frank's -- agrees to the scheme ("You sent up Glenn!" argues
Corvin). So Frank begins tracking down his former mates, including "Tank"
Sullivan (Garner), now a fumbling Baptist minister; Jerry O'Nell 
(Sutherland), a roller coaster designer with inch-thick glasses; and
"Hawk" Hawkins (Jones), whom Frank blames for the dissolution of Team
Daedalus. But in order to succeed at their mission, the oldtimers must
confront ageism on the ground and, worse, a deadly Russian secret awaiting
them in space.
What "Space Cowboys" does right, most of all, is that it collects together
a group of actors who know what they're doing. Eastwood, Jones, Garner and
Sutherland have starred in their share of classics, and they have more
than a few duds between them as well. But they're all classy veterans, 
entertaining to watch regardless of the situation. There is a nice
chemistry between them which overcomes the relative paucity of their
actual characters. Indeed, more thought seems to have been given to Team
Daedalus as a group than to each of the individual members, who are 
painted only in broad strokes. Sutherland is the ladies' man. Jones is
the wise guy. Eastwood is... well, Clint Eastwood, basically. They are fun
to watch, certainly, but there's not a lot of meat on their old bones,
metaphorically speaking.
This lack of characterisation extends to the supporting cast as well.
Particularly poor is Loren Dean, who plays astronaut Ethan Vance as though
he's a high school jock rather than a professional scientist ("I have two
Masters degrees!" he squeals at one point). Vance and Cromwell's Gerson
exist purely as opponents for the Daedalus crew; they are defined only in
relation to how they complicate the heroes' lives. There is little 
motivation to their actions, and as a result -- when the rather 
predictable truth about the Russian satellite is revealed -- they come off
looking pretty inept. Harden, meanwhile, is strong in her early scenes,
but is mostly pushed toward the background in the second half. Her romance
with Jones' character feels contrived and lacks chemistry, seemingly
inserted only because the movie would otherwise lack a romantic subplot.
The screenplay, by Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner, starts off well enough
while the astronauts are still on the ground. Certainly, there are plenty
of laughs -- witness Jones taking a dim-witted teenager for a wild
airplane ride, for example. But the going is slow, and the whole thing 
plays out all too convenient. For instance, the oldtimers overcome a plot
by Gerson to keep them on the ground not through any action of their own,
but instead thanks to the fortuitous presence of a press photographer.
Things get both better and worse once the action finally moves into space.
Better, because we get to witness some beautiful special effects shots of
the astronauts in space. Perhaps inspired in part by "2001", these are
quiet and majestic; the scene where Frank spins around to watch the Earth
revolving beneath him is simply gorgeous. This is one case where the
movie's lackadaisical pacing is to its advantage. There is a real
sensation of the weightlessness and absolute silence of deep space.
Unfortunately, the plot also becomes even more of a routine,
by-the-numbers exercise, coming across like a sort of dumbed-down "Apollo
13" (I was tempted to say "Armageddon", but nothing could be that dumb).
The ending is dull and cliched. There is no effort to provide a clever or
insightful conclusion to the character arc of the Daedalus teammembers;
instead, we just get another climax where it's up to the underdogs to save
the day.
Ultimately, "Space Cowboys" relies too much on the hook of seeing all 
these venerable actors together, as opposed to good old-fashioned 
storytelling and characterisation. Matters are not helped by director
Eastwood's pacing, which is more geriatric than the picture's stars. It
has its moments -- the middle third of the film is particularly delightful
-- and certainly exudes more charm in its first twenty minutes than in the
entire running time of most of today's teen flicks. But, like those early
efforts to reach Earth's orbit, "Space Cowboys" just never builds enough
momentum to work.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/SpaceCowboys.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Ron Small
Screenplay: Ken Kaufman, Howard Klausner
Starring: Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, Donald Sutherland, James Garner, 
James Cromwell, William Devane, Marcia Gay Harden, Loren Dean, Courtney B. 
Vance
SPACE COWBOYS is a middle age fantasy. It's the kind of film where the old 
guys get all the best lines while the young guys take it with sheepish grins 
or straight faced anger, and the audience laughs and cheers "You tell em, 
Clint!" Critics have taken to calling it GRUMPY OLD ASTRONAUTS, which it sort 
of is for its first two acts, then, once these grumps get into outer space we 
get a slowed down to pace maker speed ARMAGEDDON where everything goes wrong 
and one of the boys must sacrifice his life (it'll be increasingly obvious 
who'll do so by the forty five minute mark) to make things right. The final 
shot is as haunting as it is implausible as it is completely out of sync with 
everything that came before it.
Surprisingly, SPACE COWBOYS contains more self deprecating humor than you'd 
expect from a movie directed by Eastwood and featuring such "manly" men as 
Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, and James Garner, who grin and grimace amid a 
flurry of false teeth jokes, losing eye sight jokes, everybody I used to know 
is dead jokes, out of shape jokesâŚthese guys are truly too old for this shit. 
Much of the movie has the screenwriters devising one humiliating, torturous 
physical test after another; the senior citizens grunt and wheeze through 
eight mile jogs, they barely survive a bench press session, and at one point 
they're made to stand, sans trousers, in all their saggy assed glory before a 
young chick doctor. And by the way, if my ass looks half as good as 
Eastwood's when I'm seventy I'll surely die a happy man. But 
please, oh please don't give me Sutherland's ass.
The film commences with an old stand-by; a group of friends, none of whom 
have seen each other since their collective hey day, reunite to do another 
job on the ask of their unofficial leader Frank Corvin (Clint Eastwood, so 
damn grizzled I practically expected him to growl when he first appears). 
Corvin, in his prime, was a hot shot NASA rocket scientist (!) who designed a 
Cod War-era satellite that, today, is on its way to crashing out of orbit. 
It's such an antiquated piece of machinery that none of the "dim bulbs" 
currently counting the days to retirement at NASA have the foggiest notion on 
how to fix it. Corvin is asked to provide the information needed to repair 
the gizmo but he stubbornly refuses, countering with the suggestion that NASA 
fly him and his old crew up into space. Well, it at least makes more sense 
then beaming up a bunch of psychotic oil drillers.
This leads to the traditionally wacky encounters wherein the hero finds his 
old friends in unexpected positions, like the craggy James Garner as a 
bargain basement Baptist priest, a pony tailed Donald Sutherland as the guy 
who tests roller coasters for speed, and Tommy Lee Jones (bull necked as 
ever) as a nutty prop plane pilot. Following the intros, all the 
aforementioned grunting and wheezing commences, punctuated by wisecracks and 
shouting matches between Eastwood and the mission leader played by James 
Cromwell (LA. CONFIDENTIAL) who acts so downright despicable he might as well 
have a British accent.
Clint seems to have paid a bit of mind to some of the criticisms hoisted upon 
many of his films, particularly how he often seems to cast community college 
graduates as his love interests. Here he casts an older lady (Barbara 
Babcock) as his wife (though she isn't given much screen time), Tommy Lee 
Jones romances the mature NASA lieutenant Sara Holland (Marcia Gay Harden), 
rather than her daughter, it's only Donald Sutherland who chases young girls, 
though he's playing the part of comic lecher. Eastwood also seems more game 
than ever to goof on his tough guy image, though not so much as to have him 
be any less than a superhero who succeeds in spite of all odds.
In many ways SPACE COWBOYS is like a less mature, vaudeville companion to 
Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN, the most brilliant film Clint ever lucked into. That 
was more a middle age nightmare about men past their prime, coming to grips 
or in some cases embracing old haunts. SPACE COWBOYS is about goofing on 
clueless youngsters, and acting even more heroic than they when it comes down 
to it. Much of the movie coasts on the chemistry of its quartet; these guys 
are legends and it's tough not to derive some pleasure from seeing them send 
up their cut in stone images. But still, when I go to a movie I tend to look 
for more than a plethora of old timer gags
I can't say that I thoroughly enjoyed it but, nonetheless, I had a pretty 
good time at the showing. This is an amiable crowd pleaser that will probably 
appeal to youngsters dreaming of space travel as well as those middle aged 
men hoping to see Eastwood quit that whining he did through THE BRIDGES OF 
MADISON COUNTY, drop the negative character traits of his dogged reporter in 
TRUE CRIME, and just return to the figure of ANY WHICH WAY YOU CAN and 
HONKYTONK MAN; the tough straight man with a hint of comic wile.
SPACE COWBOYS is the last film in who knows how long that will sit privy to 
the sounds of middle aged laughter. And that's something that shouldn't be 
discounted when for the last two years film makers seemed to be trying to 
make stars out of the collective casts of the WB. These guys are like vintage 
wines, and while I didn't grow up idolizing them (I was born in '79, and it 
did take me a while to warm up to Eastwood's particular brand of wooden 
minimalism) I can certainly admire their ripened talents. The movie itself is 
more of a crusty homage to the old stars' personalities with silly space 
machinations thrown in. I didn't really care for that. I would have liked to 
see them at the service of an actual story. But many won't mind either way 
and if you're a long time fan you'll likely lap this one up.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Mark O'Hara
Some movies you go to see for the special effects or plot. SPACE COWBOYS you 
go to see for the actors.
The old factotum Clint Eastwood produced and directed this one.  He also 
stars as Frank Corvin, a man who has been frustrated since 1958 when the Air 
Force turned American space missions over to the newly-formed NASA, and 
Frank and his three pilot cronies were replaced by a chimp, the first warm 
body to reach space for this country.
So here's the deal:  Corvin was not only a brilliant flyer but also a 
brilliant engineer.  He happened to design a guidance system that somehow 
made its way into a Soviet satellite.  When the satellite's orbit begins to 
degenerate, officials at NASA ask Corvin to train young astronauts so that 
they might capture the satellite with a space shuttle's arm, repair the 
satellite and set it back in orbit.  Why not let the satellite burn up upon 
reentry, or land in the sea?  This is a mystery until late in the story.
Complicating matters, NASA project manager Bob Gerson (James Cromwell) was 
the nasty boss who fired the crew forty years ago, and he is still around to 
aggravate Frank today.  When Frank demands that the original foursome be 
allowed to complete the mission themselves, Gerson agrees;  his agenda of 
course is to have his men trained, and then to dump Frank and his fellow 
oldsters.
The storyline immediately brings the plot of ARMAGEDDON to mind.  Instead of 
a crew of young and wild oil drillers, we have these vintage flyboys, but 
the premise follows them through similar episodes:  Frank goes to the 
various residences of Tank Sullivan (James Garner), Jerry O'Nell (Donald 
Sutherland) and Hawk Hawkins (Tommy Lee Jones), and he does not have much 
trouble in persuading them to want to blast off.  Then we follow the guys 
through training and testing, the hype around the mission growing and making 
it virtually impossible to throw the old men out on their wrinkled duffs.
The movie has its share of bad science, though it does not match the 
absurdity of ARMAGEDDON.  In fact, the premise of an unlikely crew making it 
into space is as far as the similarities reach.  SPACE COWBOYS is missing 
the frenetic music-video pace of director Michael Bay.  Here Eastwood 
ignores briskness in favor of character development, and because he has 
gathered actors of such maturity, he succeeds in crafting some very engaging 
relationships.  This over-the-hill gang is simply the best thing about the 
movie, and the main reason for viewing it.
Eastwood is big enough as an actor to fool around with self-parody, 
squinting his eyes and never backing down from a fight.  He also refrains 
from taking too much screen time for himself.  His Frank is bent on reaching 
his dream of outer space, but ultimately not at the expense of his friends.
Hawk serves as the focal point of the four.  He's the only one who seems 
reluctant to mount the mission, though he quickly shows up to drink with his 
old buddies and confirm he'll indeed go.  Tommy Lee Jones is the only actor 
here who is too young (53) to have piloted experimental planes in the late 
1950's, but he still does a convincing job.  His wife has died of cancer, 
and Hawk slowly grows involved with Sarah (Marcia Gay Harden), another NASA 
official.  The romantic interest of the film, this relationship never fully 
develops, though touches us with moments conveyed by solid acting.
Tank Sullivan has been a Baptist minister; we see him in his pulpit 
delivering an Old Testament lineage, when suddenly he spots Frank in the 
congregation, and embarks upon a story that apparently was the highest point 
his life will ever attain  about young men coursing through the blue 
yonder.  Except when he intones the first words of a Catholic prayer, Garner 
is very good in the role of Tank, though it is the smallest supporting role.
Donald Sutherland's character Jerry is supposed to be the ladies' man of the 
bunch, though we see him only once with a younger woman, hanging around the 
roller coaster he has designed for a large amusement park.  Like Eastwood, 
Sutherland is strong at not upstaging those he shares the screen with.
The senior ensemble can go only so far in affecting the film's quality.  
Though most of Eastwood's pictures are known for their clipped and clever 
dialogue, this one becomes hokey near the end, especially when Frank orders 
his mates to bail out of a damaged shuttle, and Tank replies with `We're 
staying.'  Oh, and the climax is not as weak as that of ARMAGEDDON or the 
more recent MISSION TO MARS, but it's close.
The final word about SPACE COWBOYS is that it's light but fun summer 
entertainment.  It won't be taking home loads of awards, but it's a good 
showcase for some leading men turned character actors, and come to think of 
it, the special effects are not bad either.

Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Space Cowboys (2000) 2 1/2 out of 4 stars. Starring Clint Eastwood,
Tommy Lee Jones, Donald Sutherland, James Garner, Marcia Gay Harden,
William Devane, Loren Dean, Courtney B. Vance and James Cromwell.
Written by Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner. Music by Lennie Niehaus.
Directed by Clint Eastwood. Rated PG-13.
 Forget scientific accuracy. That's not what "Space Cowboys" is all
about.
 Its very title implies a boyish, larger-than-life fantasy. And that is
what is so darn appealing about this out-of-this-world tale; its
willingness to tap into a fountain of youth-like quality that we all can
identify with.
 "Space Cowboys" is a good ol' boy romp with the emphasis on old. It's
about four space program veterans dismissed - back in 1958 - before the
project literally got off the ground who have `the ripe stuff' and get a
second chance to fulfill their longtime ambition - go soaring into
space.
 The movie's main drawback is that - like its four protagonists - we
have to wait too long before liftoff.
 Beginning with a flashback to show how the four hot shots - Frank
Corvin (Clint Eastwood), Frank `Hawk' Hawkins (Tommy Lee Jones), Jerry
O'Neil (Donald Sutherland) and Tank Sullivan (James Garner) - were
dropped, the story flashes forward to contemporary times when the
services of the four are required to repair an old Russian satellite
that has a decaying orbit.
It seems the old Soviet satellite's design is one created by Corvin that
was stolen by the commies in the old days when they were our enemies.
 Director Eastwood wastes too much time on old age jokes as the four
comrades go through their training for the space mission.
 The film shifts into high gear when the quartet are blasted into orbit.
 Of course, complications arise when the satellite's deep, dark secret
is revealed.
But the plot - and its inherent clichés - take a back seat to the
winning interplay between the four veteran performers. That is what
truly fuels "Space Cowboys."
 It is a joy to watch the ease in which these wily actors work together.
They do become a team. No one tries to steal any scenes.
 Jones with his Texas twang and Sutherland with his 60s laid-back
persona are so marvelous to watch and enjoy. Not that Eastwood and
Garner are any slouches. They just seem so comfortable around each
other, that you'd think they were all longtime friends, instead of hired
actors.
 This is the reason to see "Space Cowboys." It is a film in which the
performers overshadow and blot out the shortcomings, of which there are
several. But you buy into the illusion because of their combined
charisma.
 The premise that four 70+-year-old men could learn the complicated data
in the short time period allotted is a bit far-fetched. But who cares?
 Just see "Space Cowboys" for a needed douse of old-fashioned
entertainment. It's charming, winsome and sentimental.
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Bloom's reviews can be found at the Internet Movie Database Web site
at: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Scott Renshaw
SPACE COWBOYS
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, Donald Sutherland, James
Garner, James Cromwell, Marcia Gay Harden, William Devane, Loren Dean.
Screenplay:  Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner.
Producers:  Andrew Lazar and Clint Eastwood.
Director:  Clint Eastwood.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     SPACE COWBOYS will be greeted with enthusiasm in a certain
demographic group simply because it dares to suggest that Americans over
the age of 60 exist. That's a fairly revolutionary notion in pop culture,
most of which is targeted at an audience that still gets graded in
"nap-time" and "scissors." It's also a rare opportunity for veteran actors
to get work in major roles, so you can't blame anyone involved for being
enthusiastic about the project, especially given its themes. It's fun to
watch a film like SPACE COWBOYS -- and probably even more fun for those
viewers in the stars' peer group -- because the film itself could be an
example of what its protagonists are trying to demonstrate: Sometimes,
wisdom and experience trump washboard abs.
     Clint Eastwood has been around the block a few times in Hollywood, so
you'd think that his experience would teach him the difference between a
good idea and a good script. Unfortunately, as he has done in most of his
recent films, he settles for the former. The story opens in 1958, where
the four members of the U.S. Air Force's Team Daedalus are preparing to be
the first men in space. NASA and a chimp usurp their place, however,
robbing them of their chance for space travel. But 42 years later, NASA
comes calling on Frank Corvin (Eastwood) when a Russian satellite with a
guidance system he designed is about to plummet to earth. The mission
requires in-orbit attention, and Frank takes advantage of his bargaining
position by insisting that his original team be allowed to join him for
the flight. And so Team Daedalus is re-united: master pilot "Hawk" Hawkins
(Tommy Lee Jones), engineer Jerry O'Neil (Donald Sutherland) and navigator
Tank Sullivan (James Garner).
     There's more than a little bit of GRUMPY OLD ASTRONAUTS to SPACE
COWBOYS, with screenwriters Ken Kaufman and Howard Klausner taking
advantage of time-worn senior citizen incongruities. Hawk and Frank are
still feisty enough to get into fistfights (chortle); Jerry is still a
skirt-chaser, even with his telescope-lens glasses (hoot); a female doctor
walks in to examine our drooping, totally nude heroes (big-time guffaw). 
It's cheap humor, but it's still amusing because the performers seem
dignified even when they're doing silly things, and because everyone seems
to be having so much fun doing it. They also get a chance to turn the
tables and mock the cocky younger astronauts (Loren Dean and Courtney B. 
Vance) on their mission, a development always good for a round of 
applause. In any other outer space adventure, the hour-plus wait for the
astronauts to get off the ground would be excruciating. Eastwood makes the
Daedalus team's detailed training regimen a chance to let his gifted
NASA-meets-AARP stars flaunt their ease in front of the camera.
     Then the astronauts finally do get off the ground, and SPACE COWBOYS
crashes to earth. It's bad enough that once the Daedalus mission is
underway, the good humor and cameraderie of the training center sequences
vanishes, leaving nothing but crisis resolution-based plotting. Worse
still is the mission itself, a ridiculous "surprise" that would have been
evident even if Eastwood hadn't filmed certain characters with ominous
slow-zoom close-ups to signal their soon-to-be-revealed villainy. Eastwood
doesn't even seem interested in the entire third act, racing through the
events at such a frantic pace (particularly for the usually meandering
director) that you may wonder if he was running out of film. More likely,
he understands that once the entertaining interplay between the actors
gives way to shaky-cam explosions, there's not much reason to wait before
sprinting toward the credits.
     SPACE COWBOYS builds up enough good will through its first 80 minutes
to carry it over the massive hump of its lame conclusion. Eastwood is
still one of the most uniquely evocative visual film-makers around -- a
director generally willing to linger where other directors would cut --
which generally makes his films worth experiencing. His style also makes
him a uniquely appropriate choice for a film about characters that have
reached the point in life where they'd rather amble than run. SPACE
COWBOYS ambles right along with Eastwood, Jones, Sutherland and Garner,
right up to the point where they amble into the conclusion of a generic
summer action film. This kind of veteran acting talent deserves better. 
Wisdom and experience should tell someone like Clint Eastwood that there's
plenty of kids' stuff out there without trying to make him and his 
co-stars part of it.
