Title
Review for Romeo Is Bleeding (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
     Even though it takes place in the 90s, the atmosphere is pure
40s.  The dialogue by Hilary Henkin could have been lifted from any
dime store detective story, and it's almost a surprise to see Gary
Oldman sauntering around instead of, say, Humphrey Bogart.  But ROMEO
IS BLEEDING isn't just an homage to the genre, it's a satire as well.
Unfortunately, it has a tendency to take itself too seriously, which
greatly limits its effectiveness.
     Jack Grimaldi (Gary Oldman) is a crooked cop.  Because his yearly
salary is only "Forty-two and change", he has decided to enrich himself
through several profitable deals with the local mob boss, Don Falcone
(Roy Scheider).  However, when one of those deals goes bad, he finds
himself caught in an underworld power struggle between Falcone and a
Russian assassin, Mona Demarkov (Lena Olin).  It's not long before the
shooting starts and Grimaldi finds himself and his wife (Anabella
Sciorra) trapped in a no-man's land.
     ROMEO IS BLEEDING certainly has all the elements:  the cop who
can't keep on the right side of the law, the cocktail waitress
girlfriend, seedy hotel rooms, the long-suffering wife, the high body
count, and the femme fatale.  Then there's the dialogue, which includes
some of the following "classic" lines:  "Can I tell you what makes love
frightening?   It's that you don't own it; it owns you", "Whoever you
shoot, you might as well marry, because you're tied together with them
until the end of life.  To the end of either their life, or yours", and
"A life's a life--moral distinctions can paralyze you."
     The atmosphere is black-and-white, even though the movie is in
color.  Dariusz Wolski's camerawork is evocative, as is the Angelo
Badalamenti-like score by Mark Isham.
     Unfortunately, the production runs into problems almost from the
outset.  While Gary Oldman is an excellent actor, either he's not right
for this part, or he's not playing it the way it was meant to be
played.  His portrayal is unrelentingly grim, which effectively
nullifies much of the satirical bent of ROMEO IS BLEEDING.  Not only is
Jack Grimaldi unlikable, but he's boring, and certainly not a match for
the villainess.
     Lena Olin gets the kind of over-the-top, totally nasty role that
is normally given to a male actor.  Her Mona Demarkov makes Sharon
Stone's Basic Instinct character look like a girl scout.  She's the
kind of woman that will laugh while garroting you, take a chainsaw to
her own arm, then ask if you want to make love with the prosthesis on
or off.  Ms. Olin steals every scene that she's in, although that isn't
difficult considering how easily Mr. Oldman blends into the
background.
     Juliette Lewis is, plainly put, annoying in what is thankfully a
small role.  She whines her way through her lines, and her attempts to
look and act sexy come across as ridiculous.  Anabella Sciorra fares
much better as the wife whom Grimaldi professes to still love.
     The voice-over is another problem.  It's certainly hardboiled,
which is in keeping with the overall tone, but it's also incredibly
long-winded and intrusive.  Whatever can be said in ten words is
dragged out to twenty or thirty.  It doesn't take long before the
viewer begins to wish Mr. Oldman would just shut up and let the story
get moving on its own.
     Comparisons with Quentin Tarantino's RESERVOIR DOGS and TRUE
ROMANCE are inevitable, but ROMEO IS BLEEDING comes across as an
inferior product.  Tarantino may operate in the same genre, and with
equally bloody scripts, but his characters have greater depth and his
stories are more energetic and powerful.
     Without Lena Olin's performance, ROMEO IS BLEEDING could have been
an ordinary, or even sub-par, film noir.  However, with a villainess as
fun as Mona Demarkov, it's impossible not to find some enjoyment amidst
Gary Oldman's dreadful seriousness and all the bloody corpses.  There
are some plot twists, and a few unexpected happenings, but in the end,
it's Ms.  Olin's character that keeps the audience in their seats.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Lon Ponschock
     It is also about Jack. Jack played by Gary Oldman (DRACULA, SID
AND NANCY, JFK and many more fine performances) is a dirty cop.  Jack
is a cop with dreams: dreams of money, power and women.
     In an erotic thriller, the people talk like we wished we talked,
like we wish a conversation out of thin air could happen--but never
does.  This does not mean that ROMEO IS BLEEDING is a bad film.  Peter
Medak (THE RULING CLASS, A DAY IN THE DEATH OF JOE EGG, THE SNOW QUEEN
and an extensive list of other credits) has crafted one of the new film
noir pieces: not a black comedy, but more of a feeling of low lifes.
     I have commented on the work of Mark Isham in film scores before.
Here, I'm afraid the Mark Isham style has become ubiquitous, over used,
and quite frankly--distracting.  While a sample of the Isham technique
in a film like TROUBLE IN MIND, a technique which uses trumpet solos to
set mood or the cool jazz knockoffs created for a picture like QUIZ
SHOW are interesting, these devices do not require endless repetition.
So here in ROMEO IS BLEEDING, Mr. Isham's work is *all* low key with
not much relief.
     It's a strange story, ROMEO is.  It takes you through turns which
are unexpected and provides just enough action and kink to keep you
watching:  take for instance the "with, or without" scene.  You'll know
it when you see it.
     Written and produced by Hilary Henkin, here is another example of
women as artists in the film world and what they do there.
     The story concerns Jack as a cop on the take and his involvement
with the mob, money and ... Mona (Lena Olin.) As trite as this may
sound and in comparison to what Quentin Tarantino (PULP FICTION) is
doing, Peter Medak has given us a thriller with an edge.
     It's about women and guns, like I said.  Mona is sublimely evil.
You see her face looking out at you on the rental box.  What you
*don't* see is her smile.
     Lena Olin is extraordinary in ROMEO IS BLEEDING.
     With all that trumpet skittering in the background, it takes a bit
of effort to stay with ROMEO.  But it is a picture with those sorts of
arresting images that this writer watches films to see.  I will leave
you with this: one of those images from Medak's THE RULING CLASS which
was made in the early 70's stays with me still.
     Oh yeah, that bit about "the hole" up there.  Well, like I said,
Medak's images can be very powerful indeed.

Author
Susan Fanelli
     ROMEO IS BLEEDING wants to carry the unusual flavor of RESERVOIR
DOGS or BAD LIEUTENANT. With director Peter Medak, whose previous
credits include the good films LET HIM HAVE IT and THE KRAYS, and
top-notch character actors Gary Oldman and Lena Olin, they seemed
likely to be a successful combination.  Those mentioned films, however,
brought something to the screen that ROMEO IS BLEEDING did not: a
solid, well-written screenplay. Call me cynical, but the jobs of writer
and producer don't seem to mix well.
     Gary Oldman plays Jack Grimaldi, a good cop turned bad, selling
information to the mob and cheating on his wife. His cheating is
obvious enough to obtain his nickname, although the name doesn't
provide any insight or analogy to the Shakespearean character. Jack has
become addicted to "feeding the hole", a hole in the ground where he
stores his payoff money. When he realizes his colleagues are being
shot, he feebly attempts to get out. Gary Oldman's performance is
disappointingly weak; he seems nearly bored.
     In the process, he also gets tangled-up with Mona Demarkov, a
Russian mobsterette who wants to take over the territory from top boss
Falcone, played adequately by Roy Scheider. Demarkov, played by Lena
Olin, is a tough but tremendously sexy woman with seemingly no problems
maneuvering within the mob world. This character is combination of both
Linda Hamilton and Arnold Schwarznegger from TERMINATOR 2. I can't
remember seeing a character quite like her. After being shot,
handcuffed, and thrown in the back seat of a car, she still manages to
cause an accident, kick out the windshield with her legs, grab a
suitcase full of money (plus some important documentation), climb
through the rubble, land on her shot leg, and still succeed at running
for safety. What a woman! Lena Olin's performance is the only glimmer
in this dismal film.
     Anabella Sciorra is wasted in her role as Romeo's wife. There is
little insight into her character. She's depressed, she makes obvious
references, she mopes around the house. Juliette Lewis, as Romeo's
girlfriend, is treated with the same cliche attitudes, although Ms.
Lewis' portrayal certainly didn't improve it. Both women were anything
but sexy or attractive.
     Poorly developed characters aside, the screenplay also suffers
from several logistical problems. It is so discouraging to watch a film
and want to shout at the main character (not) to do something. For
example, Jack and his friends attend a funeral to hang in the
background to scope-out the mob scene.  Fine. Jack spots the big boss
with his goons by the gravesite. Fine. What does Jack proceed to do? He
brushes his friends off by telling them he isn't feeling well, then
strolls over to the boss. Why? The boss had all ready threatened him;
Falcone simply takes the opportunity to issue more threats by ordering
his goons to take off some of Jack's toes by the gravesite. I guess
they weren't worried about any federal agents lingering around after
the funeral....
     Or here's another: Demarkov set-up her own death by cutting off
her arm with a circular saw. She proceeded to set the place on fire.
Wouldn't the flames burn off the fingerprints? Aren't dental records
more important?  As bright and resourceful as she was supposed to be,
couldn't she come up with a better plot? (And it took her no time at
all to get a good-fitting, functional prosthesis.)
     Lack of attention to detail certainly adds up in a film. This film
doesn't even add up the large details. There is little or no
consistency in the story-line. Not much makes sense.
     The direction lacks cohesion, surprising from a director whose
previous credits are impeccable. The moods shift, the styles shift, and
no one can seem to decide if it is a serious film or satire of one.  So
while it certainly isn't RESERVOIR DOGS, it certainly isn't DIVA.
     There's plenty more to tear apart in this film. My advice to
someone who hasn't seen it to to wait until it comes on video.  There
are some quotable lines that would provide a campy evening if not taken
seriously. It's not a boring film, just not a good one. Or an
intelligent one.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Sometimes you can learn a lot about a film from its ad campaign.
The television spots for ROMEO IS BLEEDING featured a high energy,
rapid-edit montage which made the film look like an all-out action
thriller; the print ads, on the other hand, featured stylized
renderings of the stars in a scene out of a 50's crime comic, with
critical blurbs in word balloons.  And that about sums up what's wrong
with ROMEO IS BLEEDING.  There's a fair amount of style and
black-humored mayhem, but underneath it is a film that really doesn't
seem to know whether it wants to be a noir thriller or a parody of a
noir thriller, and a script that is an absolute mess.
     Gary Oldman stars as Sgt. Jack Grimaldi, a New York cop with a
wife (Annabella Sciorra), a mistress (Juliette Lewis) and ethics that
are always for rent.  Although primarily assigned to watch over
organized crime figures preparing to testify against their bosses, his
big money comes from one of those bosses, a kingpin named Falcone (Roy
Scheider) who pays Jack to reveal where the stool pigeons are
roosting.  Falcone's latest target is Mona Demarkov (Lena Olin), a
psychotic "hit person."  Mona offers Jack $350,000 *not* to reveal her
whereabouts, and to help her stage her death.  Jack soon realizes he
can't have it both ways, as Falcone and Mona begin closing in from
opposite sides.
     Stylistically, ROMEO IS BLEEDING seems to be on the right track.
Director Peter Medak has two great films about British crime figures to
his credit (THE KRAYS and LET HIM HAVE IT), and shows he's studied his
American gangster classics.  The lighting is evocative, the air is
usually thick with cigarette smoke, and trumpets and saxophones wail
plaintively in the background.  A running voice-over narrative by Jack,
told in retrospect and in the third person, achieves the right Raymond
Chandler-esque tone of impending doom.  The stage is set to have some
fun with film noir conventions--the dumb blonde girlfriend, the
urbane mob boss--but that's not what happens.
     What does happen is that Medak and screenwriter Hilary Henkin
decide to serve up a freaked-out combination of 1940s and 1990s crime
film sensibilities, sort of a "what if Quentin Tarantino and Abel
Ferrara collaborated on a Phillip Marlowe adaptation." Consequently,
the tone of ROMEO IS BLEEDING is radically uneven, with moody
conversations slamming into blood-spattered confrontations, and
characterizations which don't make a shred of sense.  The most glaring
and gruesome example of this confusion is Lena Olin's Mona, who is part
femme fatale and part Terminator.  There is no consistency to her
actions, as she goes to a macabre extreme to make her feigned death
appear real, then kidnaps the man she was supposedly trying to fool,
has his henchmen work for her, and then turns herself in to the
police.  The only logic in ROMEO IS BLEEDING is the logic of excess, as
the filmmakers abandon all pretense of telling a story in the name of
the outrageous.
     Structurally, the script for ROMEO IS BLEEDING is a disaster.  One
of the key points to the story is that Jack sends his wife away for
safety, so that he can meet up with her later.  This conversion comes
out of nowhere; to that point we had only seen a vague tolerance
between them (in a single scene), and nothing to indicate that Jack
sincerely loved her.  Jack is developed in a careless, haphazzard
manner that left me without any concern for what happened to him.
Finally, ROMEO IS BLEEDING commits perhaps its most unpardonable sin
with a final showdown between Jack and Mona which was so anti-climactic
that I groaned out loud.  At times, the film seems to have been
improvised, as though in the middle of shooting someone would
periodically say, "Hey, wouldn't it be cool to do this?"  ROMEO IS
BLEEDING looks good, occasionally very good, and Olin's performance is
entertaining, but the film also appears to have been edited with a
knife and fork, and amounts to little more than a series of loosely
connected scenes with shock value.
