Title
Review for Wings (1927)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Sarah Elkins
Plot kick-off:  Mary loves Jack, who loves Silvia, who loves David.  David and 
Jack train to become fighter pilots and Mary joins the Women's Army Motor Corps.
Characters/acting:  Clara Bowe is engaging as Mary, the girl next door 
(literally, to Jack).  As in so many silents, some of the actors seemed (to me) 
to be overdoing it a bit more than necessary, but not her.  Gary Cooper has a 
small part.  
Cinematography:  One of the best reasons for seeing this film.  The biplanes 
seemed more like strange birds swooping and wheeling than machines, except 
during the battle close-ups.  There was an amazing shot of about ten planes 
trying to position themselves to fight each other.  It reminded me of Richard 
Bach's essay, "I shot down the Red Baron" about being a pilot for a film shoot, 
but it all looked pretty real to me.  I also liked the infantry marching 
scenes, which had battles greyed-out beyond the horizon.
Score:  I saw this at this the Kennedy Center's screening theater for the 
American Film Institute, and we were lucky to have a wonderful pianist playing 
for us.  I loved the score, which underscored and enhanced the moods of the 
film.  The sprightly plinkings during the funny bits, the furious agitato 
during the fight scenes, war songs, and other songs of the era (e.g. "It's a 
long way to Tipperary") were all woven together; I'd love to have a tape of the 
performance.
Violence/gore/language:  some may be puzzled/offended by the slang "Heinie(s)" 
for German(s).
Skin/situations:  a kiss, a brief flash (clothes-changing) of partial nudity.
Analysis:  I liked this film, though some parts (over-long scenes of a drunken 
Jack celebrating in Paris, the fourth or so shot of a plane's shadow passing 
over the training camp, the seventh or so shot of a plane trailing smoke as it 
plummets to the ground) could have used a sterner editor.  Though some of it 
was dated, the plot was enjoyable enough (sometimes cliched, but given life 
whenever Clara Bowe was in it), and the flight scenes were magical.  
Sarah Elkins (selkins@freenet.vcu.edu,
http://www.maxm.com/users/selkins/review.html)
