Title
Review for Replacements, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Replacements (2000) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Keanu Reeves,
Gene Hackman, Orlando Jones, Jon Favreau, Brooke Langton and Rhys Ifans.
Written by Vince McKewin. Directed by Howard Deutch. Rated PG-13.
 "The Replacements" is a difficult movie to dislike because its theme is
one close to the hearts of all of us: Fulfilling a dream, getting a
second chance.
 And tackling that theme hard and clean would have made for a very fine
feature.
 Instead, the brains behind "The Replacements" fumbled the ball, giving
us a mish-mash of comedy, male bonding, class strife and cheerleaders.
 The trouble with "The Replacements" is that you have mixed feelings for
these players. On one hand they're scabs. Of course the athletes they
are replacing are spoiled, overpaid dolts who complain that once they
give their commissions to their lawyers and agents or make the monthly
payment on their souped-up sports car, there's hardly anything left to
live on.
 But on the other hand, these replacement players are guys looking for
that elusive moment of glory, which is something we all can identify
with.
 So, from the outset your emotions are torn, which makes it difficult to
wholly root for former college quarterback standout Shane Falco (Keanu
Reeves) and his new teammates, thrown together by newly hired coach
Jimmy McGinty (Gene Hackman).
 Why the owner of the Washington Sentinels was forced to hire a new
coach just because his players went on strike is never really explained.
And that is one of the movie's many oversights and distractions.
 One of the others are the players who comprise Falco's teammates. They
are not really individuals, they are archetypes: a psycho SWAT team
member; a mini-market janitor with great speed and bad hands; two big,
black brothers who are former rock-star bodyguards; an ex-sumo wrestler;
a deaf athlete; and a Bible spouting wide receiver.
 All are played for comic relief and all are very cartoonish in
character. The idea that they can jell as a team within a week is
ludicrous and totally unbelievable.
 Nor does Vince McKewin's script do Reeves any favors. You never get a
clear focus on his character. He lacks that special spark that a
successful quarterback must have to lead and inspire. He's too laid
back, too quiet, too Keanu.
 And director Howard Deutch doesn't help matters much, wasting a lot of
footage showing fan reactions as well as the Sentinel cheerleaders
gyrating through their monotonous routines.
 I suspect Deutch was trying to pull a cinematic end run by shifting
attention from his weak script.
 What "The Replacements" needed was someone to intercept the script
somewhere between the time it was greenlighted and filming began.
Unfortunately, someone dropped the ball on this one.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier. in Lafayette,
IN He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
    Reviews by Bloom can be found on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
John Beachem
Just like back in 1987, the players of the professional football league 
(PFL?) are on strike. With only four games left in the season, and three 
wins needed to make the playoffs, the owner of the Washington Sentinels 
(Jack Warden) has decided to hire on replacement players to finish the 
season. They will be chosen and led by his old friend and former head coach, 
McGinty (Gene Hackman). McGinty decides to go with former college star Shane 
Falco (Keanu Reeves) as his QB, and a host of misfits as his starting 
players. His new players include: an ex-con; a SWAT team member; a sumo 
wrestler; two bodyguards named Jackson; a retired Welsh soccer player; a 
deaf man; and a janitor from a convenience store. Of course, the 
cheerleaders have also gone on strike (for some reason), and only their 
leader, Annabelle (Brooke Langton), remains. She decides to hire dancers as 
replacement cheerleaders, but the dancers neglect to mention that they are 
actually lap dancers. McGinty has to whip the players into shape and get 
them to win three of the next four games. Only two problems are facing him: 
one is that Falco has lost all his confidence since he lost the Sugar Bowl 
several years prior; and two is that the former players, led by QB Martel 
(Brett Cullen), are making things more than a little difficult for his 
players. Will McGinty and his team prevail? Will the sun rise tomorrow?
After reading that very generic sounding plot, these are probably a few of 
the questions running through your mind: Is "The Replacements" cliched? Is 
it formulaic? Is it coated by a nice, thick layer of cheese? And, most 
importantly, is it funny? The answers respectively are: yes, yes, yes, and 
oh god yes. In a summer thus far packed with humorless comedies ("Scary 
Movie", "Nutty Professor II"), Howard Deutch's ("The Odd Couple II") "The 
Replacements" is the only movie so far that had both the audience and me 
laughing so hard we couldn't breath. This is rather strange considering that 
the movie was released in August, that nesting ground for bad movies 
everywhere. One of the things that makes "The Replacements" such a rare 
comedy (particularly in this horrible year) is that it manages to keep the 
laughs coming nearly throughout its entire running time. In fact, the only 
times the laughs stop coming are when Keanu Reeves is alone on screen, with 
anyone, and the movie starts to get sappy and sentimental. Fortunately, 
Deutch never allows these moments to go on for too long, and you can always 
rest assured another hilarious scene is right around the corner.
In any screwball comedy like this, acting is not going to be all that 
important. Of course, in any movie with Gene Hackman, you're going to get 
some great acting regardless. Only Hackman could make some of the cheesy 
lines he gets sound great. For example, coming out of anyone else's mouth, a 
line like: "He doesn't have it all, he doesn't have heart. You do." would be 
ear-gratingly bad. Coming from Hackman, you don't even notice how cheesy it 
is. The problem is that standing next to Hackman you've got Keanu Reeves, 
the black hole of acting himself. Thankfully he does a decent enough job 
(for him anyway) and doesn't get in the way too often. The film's main 
strengths lie with the supporting cast. Granted, none of the supporting 
characters are developed in any way, but that really doesn't matter in a 
movie like this. You're not going to see a movie like "The Replacements" for 
deep, involved character development (at least I hope you're not). So if you 
put that aside and just have a good time, you should really get a kick out 
of some of these characters. The two that really stood out in my mind were 
Rhys Ifans' ("Notting Hill") Scottish kicker, Gruff; and John Favreau's 
("Swingers") completely insane SWAT team member, Daniel Bateman. Even if the 
rest of the movie were terrible, it would still be worthwhile just to see 
these two having a great time. John Madden and Pat Summerall show up playing 
two announcers named John Madden and Pat Summerall (hey, sometimes there are 
roles you are just born to play).
As much as I love both football and movies, it seems Hollywood is usually 
incapable of blending the two together. Let's think back here. The last 
attempted football movie was Oliver Stone's atrocious "Any Given Sunday", 
which managed to fail on every level. There was "Rudy", back in 1993, but 
while it succeeded as a dramatic film, it's hard to classify that one as a 
football movie. We've seen previous attempts at comical football movies with 
films like 1991's abysmal "Necessary Roughness" and Adam Sandler's somewhat 
amusing, though hardly hilarious "The Waterboy". What did these previous 
attempts lack that "The Replacements" contains? Simple enough, it contains 
not one, but several hilarious scenes which will stick in your mind for 
quite some time: A bar room brawl, the first training session, the two 
Jacksons talking to Martel about Falco's car, and a musical number in a 
prison cell which is just too funny to be described to name a few. If a 
movie can make that many of its scenes stick in your mind long after its 
viewing, then you know you got your money's worth.
The movie contains a few references only hardcore football fans would 
probably recognize. My favorite one was watching the pen happy John Madden 
be put to the test by one of Falco's bungled plays (if you're a football fan 
you know what I mean by that. If you're not a football fan, why are you 
thinking about seeing this movie?). The film's soundtrack isn't exactly the 
kind of music I care for, ranging from hard rock to oldies, but that doesn't 
mean it's inappropriate to the movie. I'd better warn all the parents out 
there (something I don't ordinarily do), while the film may carry a PG-13 
rating, the football violence can be a bit much, there's a significant 
amount of swearing, and the scenes involving the new cheerleaders can be a 
bit, um, much. "The Replacements" runs 118 minutes, though it doesn't feel 
anywhere near that long. I'd recommend it to fans of football movies and 
comedies. If you happen to be a fan of both, you should have a blast. I give 
the movie a well earned four out of five stars. By the way, the movie does 
leave us with a great moral. Pain heals, chicks dig scars, and glory lasts 
forever.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
THE REPLACEMENTS (2000)
Rated PG-13; running time 114 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0191397
Official site: http://www.the-replacements.com/
Written by:Vince McKewin
Directed by: Howard Deutch
Cast: Keanu Reeves, Gene Hackman, Brooke Langton, Orlando Jones,
Jon Favreau, Rhys Ifans, Faizon Love, Michael "Bear" Taliferro,
Ace Yonamine, Troy Winbush, David Denman, Michael Jace, Jack Warden,
Brett Cullen, John Madden, Pat Summerall, Mark Ellis
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsreplacements.html
[WARNING: SEMI-PROFANE RANT AHEAD]
I can't say that I remember the 1987 National Football League strike at
all; not being a sports fan, I don't care about these silly games that
men (and in some cases, women) play in general, and I certainly don't
give a rats ass about the Lifestyles Of The Sick And Shameless pus...uh,
babies who - come on now, admit it - get paid WAY too much as it is to
chase a ball up and down a field on Sunday afternoons, 16 weeks out of a
GOTdam year.  I may normally empathize with union workers, but no one
can tell me with a straight face that the spoiled brat primadonnas of
the NFL, NBA, and whatnot, were really striking with Their Oppressed
Underpaid [snicker] Brothers in mind.  Not when they could get an extra
mil to pay for their coke habit, nosirreebob.
So when I first saw trailers for THE REPLACEMENTS, I was hopeful that
its story of The Other Side - the "scabs" who played for the Love Of The
Game (yarite) while the pus...uh, babies, were on strike - would tear a
new one into those blowhards who offend their fans by whining about how
hard it is to be a millionaire when their owners are billionaires [oh
boo friggin hoo].  But I should've known better.  After all, movie stars
are millionaires, too.
[END RANT]
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
It's 1987, and the "Washington Sentinels" [peeve: sports movies without
the balls - or money - to give their teams real team names] no longer
wish to be Football Heroes; like the rest of the NFL, spoiled wimp
Quarterback Eddie Martel (Brett Cullen) and his teammates go on strike
because their millions are not enough to cover the necessities of life,
like insurance on a Mercedes and the like.  Team owner Edward O'Neil
(Jack Warden) calls on former coach Jimmy McGinty (Gene Hackman) to
recruit and lead a replacement team of players to a possible playoff
spot, if they can win their last 3 of 4 games; McGinty, who O'Neil
earlier fired under Suspicious Circumstances, agrees to this only if he
can have complete control over the short-lived team of ragtag unknowns,
coulda-beens, and never-weres.
The replacement team McGinty puts together includes QB Shane "Footsteps"
Falco (Keanu Reeves), currently a plankton-remover best known for his
disastrous Sugar Bowl game; Wide Receiver Clifford Franklin (Orlando
Jones), fleet-of-foot and non-catching comic relief; defensive Lineman
Daniel Bateman (Jon Favreau), an ex-Navy SEAL and current SWAT cop who
loves smashing things - and people; Kicker Nigel "The Leg" Gruff (Rhys
Ifans), Loveable Welsh Drunk and footballer on both sides of the Pond;
offensive Linemen Jamal Jackson (Faizon Love) and Andre Jackson (Michael
"Bear" Taliferro), brothers and bodyguards for rap stars; offensive
Lineman Jumbo Fumiko (Ace Yonamine), so huge he has to be a Sumo
wrestler, of course; Running Back Walter Cochran (Troy Winbush), with a
bible in one hand and a drink in the other; Tight End Brian Murphy
(David Denman), who could've been an NFL Great, except he's deaf; and
defensive Safety (I think) Ray Smith/Earl Wilkinson (Michael Jace) as
the Obligatory ex-player/current convict [yes, that's right; he's a
convict let out on a five-week furlough so he can play Strike Football.
It's all I can do to only be *semi*-profane.] whose double names were
never explained.  Add an ObLoveStory between Shane and head cheerleader
Annabelle Farrell (Brooke Langton), and you've got yourself a football
flick!  blech.
The Upshot:
Ok, let's bring the penalty flags out for unnecessary stupidity: THE
REPLACEMENTS is unoriginal, transparent, hackneyed, cliched, poorly
written and directed, and very funny in spots.
What's that?  Yes, I have to admit that it had its funny moments, most
of which were occupied by Jon Favreau as Daniel "SWAT" Bateman.  Try as
I might, I couldn't help but to laugh at the big lug as he proceeded to
rip up every scene he was in, with an all-out assault on every character
that came into his field of vision.  There's something weird about
laughing at an abusive cop cum footballer, I know; but dammit, Bateman
was funny - as was John Madden, either parodying himself or just playing
Madden straight.  Either way, it worked (and on the other hand, Pat
Summerall as himself is just as bad here as anywhere).  The other good
funny bits came from uncredited players: the hilarious (at first)
cheerleading squad (both the tryouts and the finalists), especially the
ditzy blonde who couldn't spell; and Mark Ellis as coach of the San
Diego team.  I damn near busted a gut when he asked the referee to make
the lap-dancing cheerleaders "stop shaking their asses" so his team
could concentrate on the game.
But the fun was interrupted by long stretches of dumb.  Gene Hackman,
bless his talented heart, truly gave it a shot, but the writer saddled
him with nothing but cliches, which even the most talented actor can't
easily get past (though he does have a great scene with SWAT; "get me
the ball"?  You betcha).  Orlando Jones made me want to spit! everytime
I saw his bug-eyes on the screen; his Big Scene (where he preens to
Gloria Gaynor's "I Will Survive") was cute for the first few minutes,
but lasted way too long [the writer and director repeated this pattern
throughout the movie], and his character's sudden bout of Bob Doleism
(calling himself "Clifford Franklin" over and over again) seemed a
desperate attempt to make sense out of a generally senseless character.
As The Warm Place To Put It, Brooke "Sandra Bullock, Jr." Langton didn't
seem to add much warmth, though the fault is again mostly attributable
to Vince McKewin's poisoned pen.  The leaps of (il)logic that Annabelle
makes with regard to Shane (the Put It part of the equation) were
laughable - in the "this is stoopid" sense of the term.   And of course,
Keanu "whoa" Reeves brings his own special brand of Dumb to most every
movie he occupies.  This isn't always A Bad Thing - it did wonders for
him in THE MATRIX - but here, he looked like he was sleepwalking through
the flick, waiting for "Matrix 2" to start filming.
The heaviest penalties should be assessed to writer McKewin and director
Howard Deutch; if it were up to me, neither of these hacks would be let
anywhere near a motion picture set ever again, especially not Deutch.
I've noted in the past that I don't notice directors in pictures very
often [which I see as A Good Thing; after all, I don't go to a flick to
see what the *director* is doing, I want to be dazzled by the story].
But in this movie, one couldn't help but notice the thrill Deutch got
from Being The Director, what with all those ridiculous and unnecessary
closeups, quick cuts, lingering on certain characters inexplicably while
the "action" is going on elsewhere, and most aggravating of all, the
combination closeup/Jumbotron shots in the stadium scenes.  Deutch is
apparently from the "if Less is More, then think of how much more More
would be!" (tm Frasier) school of directing.  blech.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
Let's look at that starting lineup again, shall we?
On defense, we have:
  -An intense SWAT guy who pounds people for a living, but it's all good
   because he's on The Right Side Of The Law (White guy);
  -A fun-loving Welshman who boozes and gambles a wee bit too much,
   but daggonit, he's Weeierry (White guy);
  -A Sumo wrestler who's main "fault" is that he's big, but he
   balances that out by being fun, Hip, and otherwise non-stereotypically
   Asian (Japanese guy);
  -A player who is deaf.  Not That There's Anything Wrong With That.
   (White guy).
And the offending line?
  -A swishy, cowardly, bug-eyed clown (Black guy);
  -A [and I'm sure I'll be roasted for this one] Jesus Freak (Black guy);
  -Two brothers (no doubt ME, MYSELF, & IRENE rejects) that are as
   thuggish as you can get without wearing Prison Blues (Black guys);
  -Someone who actually wears Prison Blues (Black guy).
Bammer's Bottom Line:
There's absolutely nothing new in THE REPLACEMENTS that would make its
lameness worth sitting through, other than a few hilarious Moments - and
in my book, a few Moments do not a movie make.  My sports-flick
recommendations?  Quality-wise, you'd be better off renting MYSTERY,
ALASKA or THE NATURAL (just to name two).  Or if you like more humor in
your sports, check out the original MAJOR LEAGUE; plot-wise, it was
about as transparent as THE REPLACEMENTS (which, when I think about it,
really ripped "ML" off big time), but at least MAJOR LEAGUE didn't take
itself too seriously.  Until parts two and three, that is.
THE REPLACEMENTS (rating: yellowlight):
I wonder when the real movie'll show up...

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/964fc1a61a259d6d882569380006014c?OpenDocument
I wish I could have been in the pitch meeting for this ridiculous notion
of a sports film.  I bet it was some hotshot Warner Brothers agent with
an dark Armani suit and manicured fingernails saying, "It would be a
very light comedic version of Any Given Sunday, and we could throw in
the Hoosiers angle with the casting of Gene Hackman as the tough but
determined coach.  Throw in that hunk of a guy Keanu Reeves and a cast
of wacky characters and poof!  We'll have a hit on our hands!"
The Replacements is a hokey mistake of a football film, a mishmash
collage of one-dimensional characters, rampant stereotypes of cultures
and races, cliched emotional statements of purpose, and Keanu Reeves
wishing for The Matrix sequel to start principal photography.  The story
is loosely based around the pro football players' strike in 1987 and a
rag-tag team of replacement football players taking up the reins of
professional play for a variety of teams with names like the Washington
Sentinels.  Keanu Reeves stars as Shane Falco, a has-been football
college player looking for redemption.  Gene Hackman dons a fedora like
Tom Landry and speaks with gusto like a certain coach in Hoosiers.
Rounding out the cast includes Swingers' Jon Favreau, 7-Up pitchman
Orlando Jones, gruff owner Jack Warden, and cast of wacky and unknown
actors who do amazing jobs of portraying perfectly stereotyped
characters: the drunken Welshman, the overweight Sumo wrestler, the
black convict, the violent cop, and the dumb, dumb cheerleaders.
This bunch of nobodies try to make something of themselves by taking the
team to the season playoffs with unbelievable football plays, Gene
Hackman yelling and asking himself where the hell Dennis Hopper is,
Keanu Reeves looking for his body double making him look good on the
football field, and cheerleaders hired from the local strip club making
the girls from Coyote Ugly look like waitresses from Denny's.
The usual things happen like clockwork.  The hero rises from the ashes
of failure, the team comes together in unity, the hero falls in love
with a conventional love interest, the football games are won with
enough schlock value to make the most ignorant of audiences cheer and
clap, and the cheerleaders make you want to go home and watch late night
movies on Cinemax.
It's also a shame when decent directors with good movies under their
belts go to seed and become television and sequel hacks.  Howard Deutch,
who was behind the camera for two of the best films of '80s - Pretty in
Pink and Some Kind of Wonderful, has since been doing Grumpier Old Men
and Caroline in the City episodes.  Obviously the problem is that
without a good script, any director will fail in the end.
Sports films are strong vehicles for cinematic glory, gritty tales
involving the honor of men and the valiant efforts taken for the
ultimate goal of victory in the face of insurmountable odds, the rise
and fall of gallant heroes, and stories of dramatic gusto painted with
blood and sweat on the battlefield of life.
The Replacements offers none of this.
Director: Howard Deutch
Writer: Vince McKewin
Producers: Jeffrey Chernov, Erwin Stoff, Dylan Sellers
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Jon Favreau, Orlando Jones, Gene Hackman, Jack
Warden, Brett Cullen
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Ross Anthony
A formulaic, root for the underdogs, football, feel good film that feels
good. Late in the season the Washington Sentinels hire on "The Replacements"
to fill the swelled helmets of the pro's picketing for larger bottom lines.
Gene Hackman comes out of retirement to hand-pick and coach this team of
misfits which include: a sumo wrestler, a convict, one over enthusiastic
SWAT cop, a deaf guy, a coupla gangsta body-guards, a soccer player and
Shane Falco (Keanu), the coulda-been that never-was.
Hackman throws for the heart and so does the film. It's just plain good fun,
good solid dialogue peppered with plenty of grins, and a lot of football
action.
Especially well done, the breaking of the picket line scene where our motley
crew watches as their heroes mock and taunt them, a lunchroom scene where
the boys bicker over race, and the opening sequence with Keanu underwater
scraping barnacles from boats. He comes across an old football trophy in the
muck and tosses a submerged pass while Lit rocks on, "If I could get another
chance I'd put it in a ziploc bag and keep it in my pocket."
Hackman: "You know what separates the winners from the losers?"
Reeves: "Yeah, the score."
Langton: "You get that bruise from the game or the fight afterwards?"
Reeves: "I'm not sure, it all kind of blurs into one big beating."
The only drawback ... a cheer squad made up of lap-dancers. Oh, they have
their moment, but the film never really explains why the cheer squad needed
replacements also - did the regular's strike as well?
Anyway ... Good music, good acting, good heart. One satisfied viewer
cheered, "Finally, a good guy film!" I'd add, "That everyone can enjoy."
The Replacements. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Keanu Reeves, Gene Hackman, Orlando Jones, Jon Favreau, Brooke
Langton, Rhys Ifans.
Directed by Howard Deutch.
Written by Vince McKewin.
Produced by Dylan Sellers at Warner Bros/Bel-Air.
Grade..........................A
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Christian Pyle
Once upon a time, the professional football players went on strike with four 
games left in the regular season.  The owner of the Washington Sentinels 
(Jack Warden) orders his head coach Jimmy McGinty (Gene Hackman) to find a 
team of replacement players.  His choices:  quarterback Shane "Footsteps" 
Falco (Keanu Reeves), who was headed for the pros before an embarrassing loss 
in the Sugar Bowl; defensive player Daniel Bateman (Jon Favreau), a psycho  
SWAT cop; kicker Nigel Gruff (Rhys Ifans), a Welsh soccer player; wide 
receiver Clifford Franklin (Orlando Jones), who runs like the wind but can't 
catch the ball; two gigantic guards (Faizon Love and Michael Taliferro); a 
deaf guy (David Denman); a preacher (Troy Winbush); a convict (Michael Jace); 
and a sumo wrestler (Ace Yonamine).  Meanwhile, head cheerleader Annabelle 
Farrell (Brooke Langton) is looking for a new squad and finds exotic dancers. 
"The Replacements" provides many good laughs.  My favorite is a scene where 
Franklin leads the team in a chorus of Gloria Gaynor's "I Will Survive."  The 
mixture of backgrounds and personality quirks among the players leads to some 
hilariously unconventional plays, made all the funnier by the running 
commentary from announcers John Madden and Pat Summerall.
Favreau steals the show.  He plays the psycho to the hilt, charging wild-eyed 
like a furious bull into the other players.  Jones, a veteran of "MAD TV" and 
the star of the "Make 7-UP Yours" commercials, also is a reliable 
laugh-factory.  The rest of the cast is considerably weaker, and several of 
the characters are barely developed.  I generally hate Reeves, but in 
"Replacements" he doesn't give me an excuse; he plays it straight up the 
middle:  no stoner dude, no cyberpunk messiah.  Hackman seems to be enjoying 
his vacation from real acting, and he dispenses nuggets of wisdom with 
authority.  
I wasn't too far into "The Replacements" before I began to compare it to 
1989's "Major League."  Although they're about different sports, the plots 
are the same (a bunch of misfits have to merge into a team in order to make 
it to the championship).  Of the two, "Major League" is by far the better 
movie because it devotes more time to developing not only the characters but 
also their relationships.  In "The Replacements," for example, there's an 
animosity between Favreau's cop and Jace's convict because of their career 
choices, but the filmmakers don't take it any farther.  However, in "Major 
League," Corbin Bernsen's snob hates Charlie Sheen's ex-con, and the tension 
is advanced when Bernsen's wife seduces Sheen.
On the other hand, "The Replacements" is much better than either of the 
sequels to "Major League."  
Bottom line:  In a laugh-free summer, this may be your only relief.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Chad Polenz
It's pretty amazing that we, the movie-going public, will still plunk down 
good money to watch a movie use the same story and the same jokes we've seen 
countless times before. There isn't many original ideas to "The Replacements" 
- a sports comedy about screwball amateur football players who get a chance 
to play in the big leagues - but at least it doesn't crash and burn because 
it does have its moments. 
How they got Keanu Reeves and Gene Hackman to star in a blatant rip-off of 
the "Major League" movies I'll never know. Those films were borderline 
B-movies and here we have two huge movie stars going through the motions of a 
run-of-the-mill zany comedy. But that's where the movie gets its charm - that 
it's so by-the-book in such an obvious way you can't help but laugh at 
predictable jokes and gags. 
Not that the film is the funniest movie ever made or anything like that. The 
fact remains it is unoriginal for the most part and actually tries to get 
away with a generic, totally unbelievable story with all the cliches plugged 
into the right places. 
What the movie does have going for it is that for every cliche there's a 
chance for a joke to work. The screenwriters apparently realized this and 
didn't bother to sketch out the characters and instead just give us 
caricatures. Reeves is the token aw-shucks hero, Hackman is the "We gotta 
win, you can do it"-coach. Then there's a large ensemble of supporting guys: 
a beserker cop who is uncontrollable; a pair of fat gangsters who take that 
mentality to the sport; a sumo wrestler; a prisoner on work release; a Welsh 
chain-smoking gambler; and a egotistical clown (played very well by Orlando 
Jones - the guy from those 7-Up commercials). 
It's a funny premise with quite a few jokes that pay off, but the screenplay 
takes itself too seriously. With sports movies you have to feel like you're 
watching your favorite team from real life going for the championship - 
that's something you really can't do here. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Replacements (2000)
Keanu Reeves, Gene Hackman, Orlando Jones, Jon Favreau, Brooke Langton,
Rhys Ifans, Jack Warden, Faizon Love, Michael "Bear" Taliferro, Ace
Yonamine, Troy Winbush, David Denman, Michael Jace, Gailard Sartain, Art
LaFleur, Brett Cullen, John Madden, Pat Summerall, Keith David.
Screenplay by Vince McKewin. Directed by Howard Deutch. 118 minutes.
PG-13, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"The Replacements" is a wacky underdog sports movie, the latest in a
long series of films that rigidly adhere to a crowd-pleasing formula.
Despite the presence of a talent like Gene Hackman, the Keanu Reeves
football comedy is a pretty anemic piece of work, which got me thinking:
Why watch a lame formula flick when you can crank out one of your own?
Just grab your camcorder, round up some buddies and create your very own
film, using:
THE DO-IT-YOURSELF WACKY UNDERDOG SPORTS MOVIE KIT
Instructions: Simply stick to the following story points. Feel free to
use your imagination, but don't get carried away. Remember, original
ideas don't go over very well in this genre.
Story Point One: The team needs to win in the worst way, and that's
probably the only way they could, because the owner is:
B. A cynic just going through the motions
Story Point Two: The owner hires a new coach; a great guy except:
B. He has a problem with anger management
Story Point Three: The coach must round up new players fast, because the
regular players:
C. Have lost their passion for the game
Story Point Four: He rounds up a colorful group of misfits, including
(select as many as you wish from the following):
B. A wildly over-enthusiastic kid whose bravado masks his fears
E. A gigantic man who practices voodoo
F. Three dorky brothers who turn into maniacs on the playing field
G. An over-the-hill former star whose body is giving out on him
H. A convict (former or current  it doesn't matter) who scares everybody
I. A noble athlete often picked on because he is deaf, gay or a hick
Story Point Five: Practice begins, with the ragtag team comically
screwing up on the field (accompanied by numerous classic rock songs)
and squabbling in the locker room. A crusty real life sports broadcaster
(sometimes two) provides humorous commentary, while inexplicably
following the team to all of their games. Meanwhile, the handsome rebel
player establishes a relationship with:
C. A plucky barmaid who moonlights as a cheerleader
D. His ex; hardened by their breakup, but secretly plucky
Story Point Six: Inspired by the burgeoning relationship and determined
to prove the naysayers wrong, the handsome rebel manages to pull the
players together. Despite their unorthodox methods, the team starts
winning games. The crusty broadcaster stops making fun of the team and
the empty stands fill with fans juiced by the sight of athletes who are
on the field for the "right" reasons. Unfortunately, on the eve of the
Big Game, the handsome rebel loses confidence because:
C. The evil owner, who secretly wants the team to lose, suspends or replaces him
Story Point Seven: Luckily, at the last moment, he receives an
inspirational speech from:
The speech will include at least one of the following statements:
A. "I look at you and see the man you are and the man you ought to be  someday those two are bound to meet."
B. "Go ahead and give up. But just remember that if you do, you'll prove that those jerks were right about you!"
C. "Don't you understand that you have a chance here that most men only dream of having, and you're on the verge of throwing it all away?"
D. "Hey, asshole! Have you thought about the endorsement possibilities?"
Story Point Eight: Invigorated by the speech, he rallies the team.
Against all odds, under the worst possible conditions, they hit the
field, employing their wildest (and most illegal) plays yet. Things look
bleak, but at the very last second, the handsome rebel suggests a play
that is impossibly outrageous and:
There you have it. Sure, you can watch "The Replacements" and get the
expected results or you can go out and make your own movie. I have a
pretty good idea what your decision will be, though, because when I look
at you, I see the man you are and the man you ought to be  and I think
today is the day the two will meet.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Howard Deutch. Screenplay by Vince McKewin. Starring Keanu
Reeves, Gene Hackman, Brooke Langton. Running time: 119 minutes. Rated AA
by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 26th, 2000.
There is a scene in "The Replacements" (actually, two scenes, since the
film has a tendency to repeat itself for the benefit of those with short
memories) where a dim-witted stripper-turned-cheerleader enthusiastically
joins in one of those "Give me an 'E'!" cheers, only to forget the letter
she's supposed to announce. Fortunately, though, she's so happy and so
dim that she just keeps going along with the others as if her gaffe had 
never happened in the first place.
This sequence is perfectly representative of "The Replacements" as a 
whole. This is a pretty dumb movie, but it is so cheerfully dumb that, in
the end, it's hard to really dislike it. It's got an embarrassingly 
recycled plot, tepid character development, and mostly lame humor. But 
Hollywood has produced far poorer movies, and maybe that's the best way to
think about "The Replacements" -- not great, but think of how it could
have turned out!
I can almost guarantee that you've seen the story before; it's the same
old underdog-team-makes-good template, just recast in a new setting. "The
Replacements" takes place during the 1987 professional football players'
strike, albeit in a parallel universe where the NFL teams have been
replaced by squads with different nicknames. Edward O'Neil (Jack Warden),
owner of perpetual also-rans the Washington Sentinels, is determined to
see his team finally make it into the playoffs after seven years. 
Washington just needs to win three of their last four games, and they're
in. O'Neil decides to finish off the season using replacement players, and
hires coach Jimmy McGinty (Gene Hackman) to assemble them.
Instead of bringing in a semi-pro team like some other franchises have
done, McGinty seeks out a group of has-beens and never-weres. This motley
group includes such notables as a sumo wrestler, a pair of gangsta
brothers, and a lightning-fast receiver with permanent butterfingers. The
quarterback is Shane Falco (Keanu Reeves), a college star who has never
recovered mentally from a crushing Sugar Bowl defeat. The movie proceeds
in typical fashion from there. We experience the trials and tribulations
of the scab Sentinels as they try to bond as a team, deal with the
resentful striking players they've replaced, and find themselves on a
collision course with the inevitable Big Game which will decide the
season. No points for guessing how it all pans out.
There is, of course, an obligatory romantic subplot, between Falco and the
head cheerleader (Brooke Langton). This scenes are excruciating in their
contrivance. It is painfully obvious that the romance has been added to
the movie because the filmmakers felt it was a necessity of the genre,
rather than a natural outgrowth of the story. It is telling that the
camera and film editor do more work to establish the relationship than 
Reeves and Langton. The scene where they first meet is particularly
embarrassing -- just count the number of times we cut back and forth 
between their wistful glances at one another. It would be hilarious if it
wasn't played so straight. Langton's is the most superfluous character in
"The Replacements", and the fact that she never develops any semblance of
an interesting personality doesn't help matters.
And this is unfortunate, because the other subplot involving the
cheerleaders -- namely, the fact that the hastily-assembled squad is
mostly made up of exotic dancers -- is surprisingly well-handled. It's a
very funny notion, and is not carried too far. The only thing that doesn't
make much sense is just why a new group of cheerleaders would have been
required in the first place; why in the world would a players' strike
affect them? (Of course, the same could be said about the need for O'Neil
to hire McGinty.)
Neither Reeves nor Hackman turn in particularly memorable work here. It
seems obvious that the part of their brain normally devoted to acting is
instead being put to work figuring out just why they agreed to appear in a
such a run-of-the-mill movie. Some of the supporting players are more
effective, simply because they seem to be have a lot more fun. Rhys Ifans,
as the Welsh kicker Nigel "The Leg" Gruff, is a delight. Jon Favreau as
SWAT-team-member-turned-blocker Daniel Bateman, who seems to share a few
branches of the family tree with Animal from "The Muppet Show", is
enjoyable as well.
But perhaps the most curious aspect of "The Replacements" is its treatment
of the whole strike scenario. If it had just been left in the background
as an excuse for a group of sadsack football players to wind up in a major
game, that would have been fine. But instead, the striking players are
presented as the movie's villains, particularly Eddie Martel (Brett 
Cullen), the Sentinels' regular quarterback. Cullen portrays him as
arrogant, seedy, and thoroughly obnoxious. No thought is ever given to
the players' side in the labor dispute. Right from the start they're
painted as lazy and greedy: a player gives up a possible touchdown in the
dying seconds of the last game before the strike, rather than risk injury.
Certainly, it seems absurd that people already making millions of dollars
should go on strike to protest their wages. But what must be borne in mind
is that the owners rake in significantly more money and -- most
importantly of all -- the fans are willing to pay inflated ticket prices
to watch the games. Player salaries have attained these exorbitant levels
not through some artifice on the part of their union, but essentially
because this is what the market has determined they can and should earn.
Unfortunately, "The Replacements" is so eager to have a group of 
characters that can be labelled as the bad guys that none of this is so
much as considered. And that is as good an indicator as any of the
complacency which grips this project. The result is a movie which is good
for an occasional laugh but, before long, will be mercifully forgotten.
Reeves and Hackman deserve better.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheReplacements.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Replacements_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
        Going into _The_Replacements_, one knows exactly what one is
going to see: a team of misfit football players comically getting their
act together for the big game, during which they enjoy their moment of
glory.  And, indeed, the only real surprise of this comedy is just how
content director Howard Deutch and writer Vince McKewin is with strictly
following expectations, not serving up one single deviation from the
given formula.
        It's for that very reason that I wouldn't be surprised if
_The_Replacements_ became a substantial late-summer hit; everything about
it is calibrated just so for broad audience "satisfaction."  Consider,
first, the characters that make up the replacement squad for the
fictional Washington Sentinels.  There is Daniel Bateman (Jon Favreau), a
violence-prone cop who speaks in a growl--leading to lots of easy
physical gags involving his penchant for tackling.  There's Clifford
Franklin (Orlando Jones), the wisecracking black guy.  Not to be outdone
are the big, tough black guys (Faizon Love and Michael "Bear" Taliferro),
who butt heads with the token Asian (Ace Yonamine)--who also happens to
be as large as a sumo wrestler, paving the way for the obvious fat jokes.
 Rhys Ifans' placekicker Nigel is basically a replay of his popular
character in _Notting_Hill_, a scruffy, layabout Welshman.  But with all
these caricatures, there has to be a straight man, and here he's in the
form of a cliché--quarterback Shane Falco (Keanu Reeves), who cannot
quite live down choking in the crucial final moments of his last college
game.
        Will Coach Jimmy McGinty (Gene Hackman) whip these boys into
shape?  Can Shane find redemption and deliver when put in a similarly
nailbiting situation?  Will there be a crucial injury before the last
game is through?  Should there be any doubt?  But before
_The_Replacements_ reaches its foregone conclusion, there is the expected
stream of hijinks.  The replacements get into a bar brawl with the
on-strike players.  Head cheerleader Annabelle (the warm and winning
Brooke Langton, who deserves more big-league roles) must preside over a
pep squad trained in a different type of spirit-raising--lapdancing. 
Clifford leads his teammates in a rousing electric slide to "I Will
Survive."  Yes, these set pieces are engaging enough to hold the
attention.  What they aren't, however, are original or distinctive enough
to hold long in the memory.
        Which is _The_Replacements_'s ultimate failing--the film is
competently done (though a few of the actors, namely Favreau, are
constricted by one-note roles), but there's nothing to distinguish it
from the pack of sports comedies and feel-good underdog stories.  Perhaps
that's exactly what the masses are asking for, but it's discouraging that
Deutch and his crew didn't even try to bring anything more to the tired
game.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Let's say that you're a person who works for a living, so
that whether you're a member of a union or not, you support
the activities of organized labor.  You wouldn't think of
crossing a picket line.  But then you witness an unusual
phenomenon that gets you thinking about your views.  A pro
football team is on strike, its players forming a line around the
stadium?  Why?  Some of the players who are making five
million dollars a year are asking for seven million.  Would you
sing "Solidarity Forever" as you pass them by, or would you
swear off professional sports altogether and put your efforts
exclusively into your Little League coaching job?
   This is the sort of question that Howard Deutch, at the
helm of "The Replacements," could have explored in Vince
McKewin's fictionalized version of an actual labor dispute
involving such a team in 1987.  The issue could conceivably
be examined even in a summer popcorn movie.  Deutch
could implicitly ask us in the audience whether we support
the striking team's conduct in throwing eggs at the bus of the
team which is crossing the lines to replace them, even
overturning the car of the quarterback on whose shoulders
rests the responsibility of getting the crew into the playoffs. 
Instead, we have to settle for a mind-numbingly predictable,
inane narrative which fills the screen with the most
stereotypical characters--losers all, who (surprise!) emerge at
the end of the movie as conquerors.
   The story turns on a strike by the entire Washington
Sentinels team in mid-season, an outfit owned by the crusty
Edward O'Neill (Jack Warden) and coached by the sincere
and enthusiastic veteran Jimmy McGinty (Gene Hackman). 
When the already expensive squad walks the line outside the
stadium, O'Neil and McGinty discuss what to do since, after
all, the Sentinels must win the next three out of four games to
enter the playoffs, and even a new group of cheerleaders
must be recruited to inspire the men.  McGinty hits on the
sentimental idea of hiring a bunch of losers to whom he will
give a second chance, even persuading Maryland's governor
to release a hardened criminal from jail, Earl Wilkinson
(Michael Jace).  He rounds up a chain-smoking Welshman,
Nigel Gruff (Rhys Ifans); a deaf player, Brian Murphy (David
Denman); a Japanese sumo wrestler, Jumbo Fumiko (Ace
Yonamine); and most notably a has-been quarterback who
screwed up badly in the Sugar Bowl a few seasons back,
Shane Falco (Keanu Reeves).  Though this group of scabs
become embroiled in several fratricidal fights, they make up
for their deficiency of adequate training with what the other
teams lack: heart--"miles and miles of heart," in the
expression of the coach--words which the majority of the
movie audience will have heard for the first time.
   In line with the demands of the summer sports genre, the
new group of Sentinels face the villainous opposition of the
regular quarterback, Eddie Martel (Brett Cullen), who
regularly rags the irregulars, even inspiring his teammates to
turn over Falco's car twice.  For the necessary love interest,
Deutch has the handsome and gentle quarterback, Shane
Falco, make eyes at the head cheerleader/bartender,
Annabelle (Brooke Langton), and for sex, we get the motley
group of cheerleaders recruited partly from the local strip
joints to do some suggestive dances while players on both
sides, and even the referees, have a difficult time keeping
their eyes glued to the ball.  
   Tech credits are OK, with DP Tak Fujimoto exercising
some long shots of the filled stadium with close-ups of the
men who repeatedly smash into each other, while keeping
the MTV fans in the movie audience busy moving from the
large-shouldered men on the field to the amply endowed
women delivering non-traditional cheers.  
   "The Replacements" is far removed from the more
penetrating "Any Given Sunday," Oliver Stone's terrific
football saga that castigates those who have made football a
business with its performers more interested in contracts for
commercials than in throwing touchdown passes.  Nor does it
possess the acting talent of Cameron Crowe's "Jerry
Maguire," which included the benefit of exploring a sports
agent's crisis of conscience.  In others, "The Replacements"
settles for mere fluff when a solid sports film could feature all
the bone-crushing body crunches while still investigating real
issues.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 110 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I know five million [dollars a year] sounds like a lot of money," 
whines one of the NFL players with a zillion-dollar ego who has just 
gone out on strike against the equally wealthy owners.  THE 
REPLACEMENTS, a surprisingly funny comedy, is inspired by the 1987 
professional football players strike.
Director Howard Deutch, who has directed films from PRETTY IN PINK to 
THE ODD COUPLE II, and writer Vince McKewin (FLY AWAY HOME) are perhaps 
an odd choice for a sports comedy, but they have come up with a 
thoroughly enjoyable piece of entertainment.  A good-spirited and 
energetic film, it flies by with few pretentious moments.  Only in the 
occasional serious interludes and in the throw-away romance does its 
momentum ever sag.  
O'Neil (Jack Warden), the owner of the Washington Sentinels, lets Coach 
McGinty (Gene Hackman) hire whomever he wants as replacement players 
until the "real" players return.  McGinty puts together a rag-tag 
collection of people who he thinks may have the right skill set 
regardless of their background or current place of "employment."  
Recruiting a prisoner, two body guards, a convenience store clerk, a 
gung-ho cop and a sumo wrestler with a monstrous beer belly (actually a 
boiled-egg belly) , the coach has a fearsome team that suffers from its 
lack of coordination and cooperation.  "I've seen monkeys at the zoo 
that were more organized that this," says O'Neil, while shaking his head 
during the disastrous start of the replacements' first game.  
As his quarterback, the coach taps a known loser, Shane Falco, played as 
a likeable and vulnerable everyman by Keanu Reeves (THE MATRIX).  "Hey, 
Falco," the team's normal quarterback, Martel (Brett Cullen), taunts 
him, "you're not even a has-been.  You're a never-was."  The coach tries 
his homespun wisdom on Falco, but he is a pragmatic who isn't impressed.  
"You know what separates the winners from the losers, kid?" McGinty 
asks.  "The score!" Falco retorts.
With characters that are walking clichés, the director doesn't apologize 
for them and lets us laugh with them and at them.  Since they are only 
going to be there a few weeks, the athletes don't take themselves too 
seriously.  They don't expect to be offered multimillion dollar product 
endorsements.  They just want to play ball.
Ignoring the axiom of the day that only crudeness sells at the theaters, 
Warner Brothers offers a PG-13 movie that, even if it has a few raunchy 
moments, can respectably display the PG-13 label.  Parents will not be 
embarrassed that they let their kids see it, which isn't the case with 
so many of the recent PG-13 releases that once would have been 
considered a definite R.
The film's sexual humor comes from its parody of professional 
cheerleaders.  Annabelle (Brooke Langton) has the task of replacing the 
cheerleaders.  The auditions are funny but nothing like the game 
sequences which are hilarious due to the background of most of the new 
recruits, whose normal jobs includes skills such as lap dancing.  They 
are so "good" that they prove an effective distraction to lure the 
opposing players' eyes away at a few crucial moments.
NOTTING HILL's quintessentially unsexy Rhys Ifans is perfectly cast as a 
Welsh soccer player named Gruff.  The out-of-shape, chain-smoking Gruff 
is a great place-kicker willing to try 65-yard goals.  Like the other 
members of the team, he's also quite funny.  Using the classic lines 
from BABE, he tells the sumo wrestler, Fumiko (Ace Yonamine), when he 
overachieves during practice, "That'll do, pig.  That'll do."
Unlike so many other recent sports movie, Oliver Stone's 
confusingly-edited ANY GIVEN SUNDAY, for example, the editing in THE 
REPLACEMENTS is lucid, and it is easy to follow the action and get 
involved in the details of the game.
Among the film's many delights include a dance number led by Orlando 
Jones.  As the team languishes in jail, he leads them in a rousing 
routine of Gloria Gaynor's "I Will Survive."  It is a fun moment that 
captures the essence of this sweet little picture.  The replacement 
players are having a blast with their brief moment on the stage, and we 
are vicariously enjoying it with them.
THE REPLACEMENTS runs 1:54 but seems much shorter.  It is rated PG-13 
for some crude sexual humor and language and would be acceptable for 
kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, had a great time watching it.  Giving it ****, 
he said it was hilarious.  He thought the plot was cool and the football 
was great.  He laughed loudly and cheered frequently.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Bill Chambers
THE REPLACEMENTS ZERO STARS (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Keanu Reeves, Gene Hackman, Brooke Langton, Jack Warden
screenplay by Vincent McKewin
directed by Howard Deutch
Did the makers of The Replacements realize that Major League had already 
been reinvented as a football movie, under the title Necessary Roughness ? 
(So indiscreetly, in fact, that the former's sunglasses-wearing baseball 
logo became a sunglasses-wearing football one.) Given how many other motion 
pictures The Replacements, which appears to have been edited in a blender, 
openly (and badly) plagiarizes, I'm sure the answer is "yes." "But," they'd 
very possibly tell you, "our movie has Keanu Reeves and Gene Hackman; 
theirs had Sinbad and Kathy Ireland."
"But," I'd very possibly reply, "your movie is from the director of The 
Great Outdoors, theirs The Man with One Red Shoe." In this example, Reeves 
and Hackman are nothing more than marketing advantages.
Reeves' casting does the product itself no favours; I never thought I'd 
find myself writing that he's too interesting an actor for Shane Falco, a 
character whose sole defining trait is his non-sports-related job of 
scraping barnacles from docked boats. When he leaves this task, to fill in 
for the Washington Sentinels' picketing quarterback (also white, natch), it 
seems to suck the life out of him; Falco observes the law of comedy 
screenwriting that says the leading man, unless a former stand-up, shalt 
not be granted the same funny dialogue and wacky affectations of his 
co-stars because he already has the looks.
This maxim is also common to producer Jerry Bruckheimer's schlocky 
actioners, which may as well be official comedies. (See Nicolas Cage in 
Gone in Sixty Seconds.) I searched for his name in The Replacements ' 
closing credits and was shocked by its absence; the film's requisite 
recruiting montage, once a staple of the sports genre and since co-opted by 
Bruckheimer, could be substituted by that of Armageddon and few outside the 
know would catch the switcheroo.
As the retired football coach returning to the field during a player's 
strike on a lost coin toss, Hackman handpicks the substitute team in a 
scene replete with headshots that could just as easily have unfolded in a 
casting agency. He rounds up, in no special order: a Sumo wrestler; an 
aggro SWAT cop (Swingers' Jon Favreau, discovering his inner ham); a gentle 
deaf guy; a college-football leaguer (Keanu); a Welsh soccer pro (Notting 
Hill 's Rhys Ifans); a Born-again; a grumpy convict; twin thugs; and, but 
of course, a Gloria Gaynor-loving sprinter (wiry Orlando Jones). These bad 
news bores are unfairly asked to win two out of three games. That they'll 
manage this, albeit with 'side-splitting' difficulty, is presumed (why 
break formula in the climax, of all places?); ergo, after they lost their 
first match, I wondered why a theatre should bother projecting the 
remaining reels at all.
It's not as if The Replacements is entertaining enough to supersede the 
foreordained, unless your idea of fun is not one but three prostitutions of 
Gaynor's "I Will Survive", or a nervous vomit sequence (if you saw Any 
Given Sunday, what you're now experiencing is called déjŕ vu ). The jokes 
are fusty and/or unpleasant--the filmmakers treat us like a Jerry Springer 
audience, cuing us to laugh dirisively at the sight of overweight dancers 
and whatnot. (Golden oldies include the love interest (Brooke Langton, 
redeemingly sexy) who drives so recklessly it scares Falco, a note-for-note 
update of a much wittier aside from Annie Hall.)
The Replacements also wears its moral heart on the wrong sleeve, and in 
doing so, actually perpetuates more clichés. We learn that football is for 
heroes, but cheerleading is a dishonourable trade--the head of the 
cheerleading squad must also ply in a more legitimate profession, as a 
barkeep in her deceased father's establishment, thus permitting moments in 
which she bonds with Falco by fondly fingering old photographs. And, as 
unsympathetic as I am to the demands of "spoiled multimillionaires" 
(McKewin's term for striking athletes), the film's promotion of 
union-busting shook me up a bit--I'm not warm to the idea of a young, dumb 
and full of come target demographic getting their socio-political 
discussion from big-studio bilge. (--- For more first-run, DVD, and 
books-about-movies reviews, plus contests and the proverbial "more!", visit 
'Film Freak Central,' @ http://filmfreakcentral.net ---)

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE REPLACEMENTS
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Keanu Reeves, Gene Hackman, Orlando Jones, Jon Favreau, Brooke
Langton, Rhys Ifans, Brett Cullen, Jack Warden, Ace Yonamine.
Screenplay:  Vince McKewin.
Producer:  Dylan Sellers.
Director:  Howard Deutch.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  116 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     If the theme of THE REPLACEMENTS -- and I use the word "theme" so
loosely that it may fall off at any moment -- is that certain overpaid
entertainers have grown complacent and lazy and that audiences prefer
seeing genuine effort, there's more than a teensy bit of irony in it. BAD
NEWS BEARS-style comedies have been the preferred brand of sports film
since ... well, since THE BAD NEWS BEARS. A lovable loser/band of lovable
losers eventually rallies around his/her/its underdog status and surmounts
impossible odds to emerge victorious -- what tale could be more
fundamentally American?
     Of course, the "work ethic" is supposed to be fundamentally American,
too, but you'd never know it from the sort of sleepwalking screenwriting
in THE REPLACEMENTS. Inspired by the 1987 NFL players' strike and the
teams' subsequent hiring of replacement players, the story is set in a
fictional professional football league about to experience its own work
stoppage. The owners, including Washington Sentinels owner Ed O'Neil (Jack
Warden), have decided to play with replacements, and O'Neil hands the job
of putting together his makeshift team to ex-coach Jimmy McGinty (Gene
Hackman). McGinty has plenty of players in mind, but the key to his team
is Shane Falco (Keanu Reeves), a former college All-American quarterback
now scraping barnacles off of fishing boats. Reluctantly, Falco joins the
Sentinels, and tries to rally his rag-tag bunch to a playoff spot.
     Three guesses whether they make it, and the first two don't count,
but never mind that. Never mind too that THE REPLACEMENTS doesn't exactly
treat the labor dispute with any complexity (owners and striking players
bad, cheerleaders and replacement players good). And never mind even that
the music supervisor appears to have been stuck in a time warp in which
nothing recorded after 1985 exists. Movies like THE REPLACEMENTS have
always been about the hijinks of the players, both on and off the field; 
the predictability of the formula has been part of its appeal. There are a
some fun characterizations -- Jon Favreau as an unhinged SWAT
cop-turned-middle linebacker, Rhys Ifans as chain-smoking Welsh soccer
player-turned-placekicker Nigel -- and some amusing confrontations with
the striking players. The losers get better, the bad guys get their
comeuppance, there are some decent chuckles along the way, everyone
applauds. No muss, no fuss.
    And no common sense. For a fairly simple comedy, THE REPLACEMENTS is
full of baffling plot points. What undefined cheerleader sympathy strike
required head cheerleader-and-Keanu-romantic-interest-in-waiting Annabelle
(Brooke Langton) to put together a new group made up of exotic dancers? 
Why was it necessary to bring in the vaguely blackballed McGinty to lead
the replacement team? Why do people keep referring to players on opposing
teams as All-Pros when the regular players are supposed to be on strike?
Why does a team that has been practicing together for less than a week
appear to be running complicated passing plays on every down? Even
ignoring the most obvious question of all -- why cast Keanu Reeves as the
lead in a comedy -- THE REPLACEMENTS appears to have been constructed with
no thought but getting to the big ending, when everyone can applaud for
the triumphant underdog.
     What it comes down to, really, is laziness. Veteran hack comedy
director Howard Deutch (GRUMPIER OLD MEN, THE ODD COUPLE II) is a
button-pusher, knowing how to get the most obvious laughs out of the most
obvious situations at the most obvious times. Mining the potential from
their premise appears way beyond the capacity of Deutch and screenwriter
Vince McKewin. For a "legendary" coach, McGinty sure ignores every
possible creative use of his team's unique abilities. How about a running
play behind sumo tackle Jumbo (Ace Yonamine)? Handing a kickoff return to
speedster receiver Clifford Franklin (Orlando Jones)? Quick-kicking with
the thunder-footed Nigel to get good field position? It doesn't take a
tactical gridiron genius to realize that the makers of THE REPLACEMENTS
just don't care. The concept is pre-sold, the fans are in the seats, and
the overpaid entertainers couldn't care less about giving their all for 
the people ultimately paying their salaries. Is anyone interested in
making a movie about replacement film-makers?
