Title
Review for Bill & Ted's Bogus Journey (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     BILL AND TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY is a film starring Keanu Reeves, Alex
Winter, and William Sadler, with George Carlin.
     Two Keanu Reeves movies in one week (the other being POINT BREAK)!
But first, let me salvage my reputation as a Serious Film Guy.  I never
saw BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE, but now I would like to.  (That
didn't help.)  How about this?  Lyndol and I *needed* to see film, it
was too daunting to drive all the way to the art-film district (20
miles) and we didn't want to see anything else in the 'burbs (that we
hadn't already seen), such as PROBLEM CHILD 2 or REGARDING HENRY.  But
mostly Lyndol's developed this thing for Reeves in the last week.
Really, I didn't have a choice, I was just following orders.
     Okay, the review (which I promise will not tax anyone's attention
span):
     BILL AND TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY is a totally silly flick, but it is
(if I have a handle on the jargon) totally non-heinous.  In fact, it's
rather charming and sweet.  And some of it is very funny.  There's a
certain amount of exposition that slows down the opening 15 minutes or
so, and a lot of references to the previous, aforementioned EXCELLENT
ADVENTURE, some of which were obviously lost on me and delightful to
most of the audience.
     Winter reminds me of Sean Penn's benevolent twin and Reeves may be
a little long in the tooth for the role now, but together they are
energetic, cheerful, well-intentioned, and unsinkable.  They confront
death, the devil, hell, heaven, the smartest being in the universe, and
God (who is not a rich Republican in a long beard).  They cover a lot
of territory and never so much as dent their air guitars.
     However, they are in danger of losing their movie to William
Sadler, who plays the Grim Reaper with a fine, absurdist sense of
anything goes.  He and the boys do a particularly satisfying send-up of
Bergman's chess-playing Death.  It's quite intellectual.  Really.
     So, unless you're terminally serious, you'll have a good time.
However, with this much fluff, I can't recommend you pay more than cheap
matinee prices.
