Title
Review for Maximum Risk (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Directed by: Ringo Lam
Written by: Larry Ferguson 
Cast: Jean-Claude Van Damme (Alain Moreau), Natasha Henstridge (Alex Minetti) 
Produced by: Columbia Pictures 
Running Time: About 102 minutes. 
Rating : *** 1/2 out of ***** 
Theatres : Cathay, Golden Village, Eng Wah, Riverside, UA Bugis Junction and Shaw Cinemas 
OK, let's get one thing straight right away: MAXIMUM RISK is no
BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN (although it does have some Russians in it!), but it's
not too bad, really.  It's the new film from Ringo Lam, the latest Hong
Kong filmmaker to defect to Hollywood, and stars that minor league
Schwartzeneggar from Belgium, Jean-Claude Van Damme (who, you will recall,
also starred in John Woo's maiden Hollywood effort, HARD TARGET). 
In Lam's film, Van Damme plays Alain Moreau, a French cop (at
least his accent makes more sense here than it did in Hard Target) who
discovers that he was separated shortly after birth from a twin brother
who was adopted by Russians.  These Russians defected to the United States
and moved into a black neighbourhood in New York (where, I suppose, they
thought they wouldn't be noticed).  This brother, Mikhail Suverov (played
in his few scenes by...well, you know), becomes deeply involved in the
Russian Mafia and the FBI (almost the same thing, I guess), and is killed
in France (in the movie, things happen so fast that you don't have too
much time to think about how weird this all is). 
Moreau does what any good surviving twin brother would do and
goes to New York to find out why Mikhail was killed, and why everyone in
France who knows anything about him is also being killed (we wonder the
same thing; I still do).  
In Little Odessa, he meets Mikhail's girlfriend, Alex (Natasha Henstridge, 
last seen in SPECIES), who helps him solve the
mystery and adds immeasurably to the mise-en-scene (she has very nice
breasts, and we get to seen them briefly in this movie; it was rated R in
the US but is PG here, so they must have seen more of her breasts than we
do). 
This film lacks the gloss and high production values of such
other action movies as BROKEN ARROW, THE FUGITIVE, HARD TARGET, or
anything starring Arnold, but that works to its benefit, I think.  After
all, one thing that's been missing from Woo's Hollywood films is that
certain Hong Kong funkiness that we all know and love (well, some of us
do). Movies like this shouldn't be too pretentious, and that is part of
the problem with some of these other films: they try to be too "big" in
terms of special effects and sheer spectacle. 
MAXIMUM RISK has its share of car chases and explosions, but
they don't overwhelm the movie or detract our attention from the narrative
(not too much, anyway).  The emphasis throughout is on the characters and
their interactions (even if, at times, they don't make a hell of a lot of
sense).  In fact, one of the more interesting aspects of the film is a
minor character, a rather overeager New York cabbie (Frank Van Keeken from
TV's "Kids in the Hall"), who begins as something of a joke but becomes an
important part of the story. Unfortunately, by the time we have come to
really get interested in him, he...well, you'll see. 
The movie also features some set pieces of the type that we have
come to expect from Lam and his Hong Kong compatriots.  One is a fight in
a Russian sauna, with lots of sweaty, muscular male flesh (this one will
appeal to certain parts of the audience more than others), bullets in
heads, and vodka.  Another, my personal favorite, is a fight in a meat
packing house, featuring pig carcasses and a chainsaw.  And even the
predictable car chases are more Hong Kong than Hollywood, as they trash
those quaint French cafes, vegetable carts, and, well, French people that,
we all know in our hearts, deserve trashing just for being so damn quaint. 
Of course, the movie does have its share of silliness.  For
example, while beating the crap out of an obnoxious Russian thug who
obviously deserves what he's getting, Alain stops long enough to look at
his own reflection in the cracked mirror with which he has been whacking
the guy on the head.  In an unnecessarily dramatic moment, he apparently
is shocked at what he sees, at what he has become.  But what has he
become?  A tough cop who beats the hell out of a guy who tried to kill
him?  Doesn't sound too unreasonable to me, considering the genre.  But
let's face it, any time Van Damme tries to be dramatic, he looks silly. 
So MAXIMUM RISK is a little different from most other action
films.  While watching it, I was surprised, and a little disappointed, in
the relative lack of pyrotechnics.  But watching some of these other
action films is sort of like experiencing a sugar rush; after the initial
excitement, there's not much left.  Although it's short on spectacle,
Lam's film leaves a better and more lasting impression, I think.  I'm more
impressed by it now than I was while watching it, and to me, that's a good
sign.  Go see MAXIMUM RISK, but don't expect a typical Hollywood action
movie; expect a sort of funky Hong Kong-Hollywood action movie. 
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.
 Dr T. White teaches Film at the English Language and Literature Department 
of the National University of Singapore, but we don't hold this against him.


Author
Yamamoto
There I was, trying to get out of an elevator.  And what happens?  This
woman tries to block my way by trying to get in, before I can get out. 
So, I said "excuse me", hopin' this pushy woman will at least let me get
out of the elevator.  Well, she side stepped and bumped me by the door
just so that she can get in.  Of course, the elevator ain't gonna go
anywhere until I get out.  Does this behavior make sense to anybody?  And
why is this not an isolated incidence?
Speaking of things not making any sense, MAXIMUM RISK came out and I had
to go check it out.  It's another one of Jean Claude's movies where he
kicks few butts but he's trying to put more acting in it.  I hate to say
it but he's not going to win any Oscar any time soon.  And yes, there was
actually something that resembles a plot but you had to look hard for it
after Jean Claude's twin gets killed in first 5 min of the movie.
One nakkid boob (yeah Natasha!).  4 Doz bullets.  2 doz dead bodies.  48 on
the vomit meter.  One moon shot (sorry, not Jean Claude).  What we got here
are:  Running-fu, jumping for life-fu, attack of killer car chase-fu,
mysterious dead body that flipped over-fu, funeral-fu, trip to the
lawyer's office from hell-fu, homeboy in the hood-fu, free drink-fu,
key from heaven-fu, attack of garbage can lid-fu, and of course attack of
killer cabbie-fu.  Video hall of fame nominations to Natasha Henstridge
for saying stuff like "you got harder since the last time" and to Jean
Claude Van Damm for saying stuff like "why didn't you tell me".  Two
stars.  Shaggy Bob says wicked!
Spoilers - Jean Claude's character's twin is getting chased by two guys
and well, he dies.  Enter Jean Claude.  Now, he didn't know that he had a
twin brother.  So, he wants to find out what kind of person his dead
brother was.  Of course the FBI and the Russian mob are mixed in the whole
mess.  Oh yeah, you can't forget about Natasha who acts like a guide
through the movie so the audience won't get lost.  No one is going to win
any awards for acting but some of the fight scenes were pretty cool.
If you're waiting for a call from Elizabeth Anne Holden, then stay by the
phone.  If she actually gives you call and wants to go out with you, don't
take her to this one.  If she asks for an action movie to get some release
but not too much brain dead beatings, then consider this one.  But only then.
Alien Alert!  I don't get it.  A part of a freeway was torn down and
effectively increased the traffic.  Of course, this particular stretch of
the freeway was the only link between northern and southern part of the
city during major event like a marathon.  Now, more freeway got torn down
and because there hasn't been any major gridlock, it's considered a
success and therefore, the freeway does not need to be replaced?  Hello? 
Is anybody with any synaptic activities in the city hall?  I used to be
able to get out of town in 8 min.  After the first demolition, I was able
to get out of town in 15min.  Now, it takes me 20 min just to get to the
freeway.  And that's success?  Hello?
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that reply key now.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     What is it exactly about Jean-Claude Van Damme that is so appealing
to Hong Kong directors?  His familiarity with the action genre in which
they made their names?  A common struggle with the English language?  His
refusal to let plot interfere in a stunt?  Whatever the reason, two of the
great action directors of the last decade have chosen Van Damme vehicles
for their English language debuts, John Woo in 1993's HARD TARGET and now
Ringo Lam (CITY ON FIRE) in MAXIMUM RISK.  And what else do the two films
have in common?  Uninspired situations and action which is unlikely to
make anyone forget the director's Hong Kong efforts.
     Van Damme plays Alain Moreau, a Nice police officer who discovers,
much to his amazement, that he had a twin brother who was given up at
birth and raised in New York.  That brother, Mikhail Suverov, turns out to
have been involved with the Russian mafia, and is killed in Nice by
unknown assailants for an unknown reason.  Alain is determined to find out
about the brother he never knew, and sets off for New York to investigate.
There he discovers plenty of people who mistake him for Mikhail, most of
whom are none too pleased to see him, like mid-level mafia boss Ivan (Zach
Grenier) and federal agents who have their own reasons for wanting Mikhail
dead.  The only person Alain can trust is Mikhail's girlfriend Alex
(Natasha Henstridge) as he tries to stay alive long enough to find out
about the mysterious contents of a safe deposit box which everyone wants
to get their hands on.
     I find myself at something of a loss as I try to come up with
something worth saying about MAXIMUM RISK, because it is such a resolutely
mediocre film.  From the screams-of-generic title (fill in your favorite
dangerous-sounding adjective and noun here) to the screams-of-generic plot
(they killed his brother...now he's going to make them pay) to the
screams-of-circa-1986-generic villain (he may not be a Russian spy, but
he's still Russian), MAXIMUM RISK is a film that takes absolutely _no_
risk.  It even wastes the presence of Natasha Henstridge, who may not have
proven herself to be a gifted thespian yet but still has nearly as much
impressive physicality at her disposal as Van Damme, and the only use to
which it is put is in a nude scene which may re-define gratuitous.  The
one possible interesting twist -- Alain is a military-trained crack shot
-- is mysteriously kept under wraps until only ten minutes remain in the
film, when suddenly he can shoot an eye out at 200 yards.
     Van Damme himself is making gradual strides as an actor, something
genre cohorts like Steven Seagal may never do.  It may be a sign of his
desire to be taken seriously that the obligatory shot of his bare backside
does not appear in MAXIMUM RISK, although he does participate in a
fist-fight in a sauna where towels remain strategically placed in a manner
defying all known laws of physics.  The problem is that, through his own
decisions or those imposed on him by the Hollywood hierarchy, Van Damme
performs in the kind of films where serious acting usually looks just
plain silly.  Alain may be deeply affected by learning of the existence of
his twin, but when he is forced to react to that knowledge by throwing yet
another roundhouse kick or, worse yet, staring into a metaphorically
convenient fractured mirror, it is like Van Damme is playing at acting
rather than really acting.
     Still, there is a certain atmosphere to MAXIMUM RISK which shows
Ringo Lam struggling to assert himself over his soggy material.  It has a
dirty feel which is atypical of glossy Hollywood adventures, and a few
action sequences have real crackle, particularly the opening chase through
the streets of Nice.  Lam clearly has the chops to put the action in an
action film, a knack for pacing and an awareness of where a camera should
go.  What he can't do is turn lead into gold, and in MAXIMUM RISK he is
working with a script that is about as leaden as they come.  John Woo made
the big time when he moved from Van Damme to Travolta in BROKEN ARROW;
here's hoping Lam gets the same shot some time soon.

Author
Michael Dequina
The latest vehicle for the Muscles from Brussels, Jean-Claude Van
Damme, is as nondescript as the tacked-on title (the film was originally
titled the more appropriate, though less slam-bang, The Exchange), fairly
devoid of any distinct personality that would set it apart from other action
flicks.
The film starts off promisingly enough, with Van Damme being bumped
off within the first five minutes, after a well-staged and edited chase.
Unfortunately for acting scholars everywhere, good ol' Jean-Claude
resurfaces as the twin of the dead J-C, and he heads off to New York to
investigate the murder and the life of the brother he never knew he had.
Needless to say, said brother was involved with some shady characters--the
Russian Mafia--and he soon finds himself running for his life with his
brother's lover (Natasha Henstridge, reduced to playing a typical action
movie "girl" after her maneating turn in Species) in tow.
Like 1993's Hard Target, Maximum Risk marks the American debut of a
celebrated Hong Kong action director--in this case, Ringo Lam, famous for
his On Fire trilogy.  Unfortunately, Lam isn't able to energize the
miniscule goods delivered by Larry Ferguson's tired, unexciting script.
Lam's visual style is a lot grittier and less flashy than John Woo's (the
flashiest bit is a shot that follows the path of a bullet), and thus the
script's flaws aren't concealed too well.  He does, however, competently
stage what brief snatches of action there are, though none of it is
especially exciting.  Van Damme also comes off slightly worse than usual,
appearing quite stiff, which is likely Lam's inadvertent doing.  In his Hong
Kong work, he usually coaxes understated performances from capable actors
such as Chow Yun-Fat;  Van Damme, on the other hand, isn't much of an actor,
and as such his attempted "subtlety" comes off as just plain wooden.
As junky as Hard Target was, its flash was enough for Hollywood to
take notice of John Woo.  I'm not so sure how Hollywood will treat Ringo
Lam.  He's a talented filmmaker, but without Woo's stylistic flair and a Van
Damme vehicle worse than Hard Target under his belt, his future Tinseltown
prospects, unfortunately, don't look too bright.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/

Author
Bryant Frazer
You've got to think twice before you go see a movie with a
title like MAXIMUM RISK.
The title is generic. It's meaningless. And I can't believe
it's good business. When you pick up the phone and dial
777-FILM, how in the world are you supposed to remember that
the new Jean-Claude Van Damme movie, the one that looked kind
of cool in the trailers and is directed by some Chinese hot
shot, is called, geez, MAXIMUM RISK? Yuck.
The movie itself deserves your attention. For sweet bloody
thrills, this one beats the summer blockbuster competition
hands-down. Only MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE came close to delivering
as skillful a thriller, and I'll give Maximum Risk the edge
simply because it's not as slick as the Tom Cruise picture,
and therefore more gratifying in its execution.
Much to my surprise, Van Damme continues to develop as a
pleasant, unpretentious action hero. His track record isn't
as solid as Schwarzenegger's, but he's a hell of a lot more
adventurous than Arnold. In 1993, Van Damme worked with Hong
Kong's premier hardcore action director, John Woo, on a
fairly lame movie called HARD TARGET. (If you can find a bootleg
copy, Woo's radically different director's cut is much better
than what was eventually released.) This follow-up is
directed by Ringo Lam (CITY ON FIRE, FULL CONTACT), whose
Hong Kong films are distinguished action pictures that have
consistently played second fiddle to Woo's more operatic
offerings. The surprise here is that MAXIMUM RISK is a more
effective Hollywood action flick than either HARD TARGET or
Woo's subsequent BROKEN ARROW.
Here's the rundown. Van Damme plays a French cop named Alain
Moreau who is shaken when a policeman friend (Jean-Hugues
Anglade) finds a corpse that's Alain's exact double. Turns
out Alain was separated at birth from his twin brother,
Michael, who has been killed by some Russian heavies (and
some strangely American looking cops). Alain does some
investigating. He finds that Michael had booked a flight to
New York City, and received a message from someone there
named Alex Bohemia. Assuming Michael's identity, Alain flies
to New York and gets tangled up with Michael's girlfriend
(Natasha Henstridge), the FBI, and the Russian mob in Little
Odessa.
That's as much as you need to know. The story is adequate,
but not overly involving -- and the major plot points are
basically explained to you twice, just in case you go out for
popcorn at the wrong moment. There's a love story, too, but I
didn't find it terribly convincing, partly because ex-model
Henstridge is too high-strung in her high-profile debut (she
had precious few lines as the alien ice queen in SPECIES).
She's great to look at, and she can certainly read a line,
but what she does here can't really be described as "acting."
Of course, "acting" isn't really what she was hired for (I
lost track of whether her shirt comes off more often than Van
Damme's).
The movie is exceptionally violent, bordering on gratuity.
(Keep that in mind when planning your date.) The stunts are
spectacular, and the fact that you can spot Van Damme's
stand-in makes his work no less impressive. There's only so
much you can do with a car wreck, but this movie makes crisp,
effective use of pile-ups in a handful of frenzied
destruction derbies. And Lam has a surprising, innovative
sense of exactly where the camera should go to catch any bit
of action.
The main difference between Lam and Woo, I believe, is that
while Woo relies on sheer spectacle to gas up his action show
pieces, Lam has figured out more about using cinematic space
and double-barreled points of view to make things run. Don't
get me wrong -- when Chow Yun-Fat soars through space pumping
bullets out of two pistols and chewing on a toothpick with
glass and confetti littering the air around him in Woo's
HARD-BOILED, it's an amazing moment. But it's a moment that's
hard to reproduce in Hollywood. (For one thing, Hollywood
doesn't yet have Chow Yun-Fat!)
While Woo's Hollywood movies look like the work of a talented
upstart, MAXIMUM RISK is a surprisingly confident picture.
The very first shot of the film is an awkward overhead view
of a chase through the streets of a European city, but Lam's
use of odd camera angles becomes more efficient later on. The
film editing is a particularly savvy complement to Lam's
shooting style, accentuating rather than amplifying the
action.
The performances could have used some fine tuning (in
particular, there's an annoying, overwritten Manhattan cab
driver in the early scenes who should have been toned down or
jettisoned completely), and the movie doesn't always overcome
the limitations of its genre. The story is a little mundane,
although there are some effective moments involving Van
Damme's unrequited feelings toward the brother he never knew
he had. But it's not often that Hollywood cranks out a truly
satisfying action picture, and it's doubly surprising that
this one should come with a mere whisper of publicity. Van
Damme fans should treat themselves to what may well be the
man's best movie, and international action buffs will no
doubt savor this flavorful Hong Kong/Hollywood hybrid.

Author
Justin Felix
Written by Larry Ferguson.  
Directed by Ringo Lam.  
Starring Jean-Claude Van Damme and Natasha Henstridge.  
Rated R (contains violence, nudity, and profanity)  101 mins.  
Synopsis:  Alain, a cop from "south of France," encounters the corpse of
his unknown twin brother, assumes his identity, travels to the USA, and
meets an annoying cabbie, the Russian mafia, crooked FBI agents, and his
brother's former lover, Alex.  After surviving car chases, street fights,
and near-deaths due to fires, Alain becomes nervous when he must introduce
Alex to his mother.
Comments:  MAXIMUM RISK's opening informs the audience that the scene takes
place "south of France."  The scene actually takes place in France, the
audience finds out, and I'd imagine the filmmakers probably meant "southern
France."  Why mention this?  Because I wanted to point out that one can't
apply logic to MAXIMUM RISK and expect it to work.  In fact, logic
immediately falls apart in this movie.  In order to enjoy it, ome must
throw logic out the window.  This movie, like so many other action movies,
is dumb.  Mindlessly dumb.  It competently delivers, however, a lot of
action in a slick manner; therefore, it manages to achieve what the
filmmakers set out to achieve.
In order to somehow justify one elaborate action sequence after another, an
action movie's plot must usually be contrived and contain many competing
factions.  Such is the case with MAXIMUM RISK, which is populated by
crooked FBI agents allied with the Russian mob, an alluring seductress, a
cop who has crossed the line, a cabbie who doesn't know better than to stay
away from dangerous people, and twins separated at birth, just to name a
few.  And, I haven't even mentioned the plot elements: fires, car chases,
chases through crowded streets with screaming pedestrians, lots of guns, a
chainsaw, and the obligatory sex scene (don't forget, Natasha Henstridge,
the femme fatale from SPECIES, stars in this film), amongst others.
Somehow, with a considerable suspension of disbelief, Larry Ferguson's
script manages to make most of these disparate elements work (occasionally,
something is so ridiculously implausible that you have to groan).
MAXIMUM RISK basically serves as a vehicle for martial arts star
Jean-Claude Van Damme, even though Natasha Henstridge prominently appears
on the poster and video box along with him.  Natasha Henstridge, a very
capable model-turned-actress, has surprisingly little to work with in this
movie.  She appears much later in the film than one would expect and
basically plays the damsel-in-distress who Van Damme must frequently save
from the bad guys.  Her role here comes as a surprise considering the other
movies she's been in to date.  (She played a tough cop in the awful
ADRENALIN: FEAR THE RUSH and a tougher, dangerous seductress in SPECIES.)
Those who are familiar with her "revealing" SPECIES character, though,
won't be surprised to find that she strips off clothing left and right in
MAXIMUM RISK as well.  She looks like nice in a beret too!  The main star,
however, is indeed Van Damme, and this movie features Van Damme fighting,
kicking, punching, and bleeding like he does in every other movie he's been
in.
The fights and the stuntwork are the true stars of the movie, of course,
and they're delivered frequently and entertainingly.  Occasionally, the
violence is slightly uncomfortable (in one scene, Alain slowly twists a bad
guy's hand which snaps when it breaks) and thus resembles Steven Seagal's
oftentimes disturbingly violent sequences.  For the most part, however, the
action is cartoonish enough to seem too unreal to be sensitive to.
Even if one were to excuse a number of faults due to its being an action
movie, MAXIMUM RISK still isn't perfect.  For one thing, at 101 minutes, it
plays too long for an action movie of this nature.  About 10 or so minutes
of scenes containing unnecessary plot details could have been shaved from
the running time.  Also, Larry Ferguson, for some reason, tried to inject
blatant humor, unsuccessfully, into the mix by introducing an annoying
cabbie with aspirations to be a novelist.  This character's lines aren't
cute or humorous (even Alain tells him to "shut up"), and the audience is
left feeling relieved rather than angry when he is killed by the bad guys.
Despite these criticisms, MAXIMUM RISK still delivers.  If you're in the
mood for a dumb action movie, you'd be better off risking this film than a
number of other turkeys out there in this genre.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Jean-Claude Van Damme; Natasha Henstridge; Jean-Hugues Anglade;
Zach Grenier & Paul Ben-Victor
Here's a concept -- Jean-Claude Van Damme gets killed within the first ten
minutes of the movie. Now if that isn't enough to get you to finally see a
Van Damme movie, I don't know what is. All sarcasm aside, it is certainly a
different way to start a movie, of course a few minutes later we find out
that the newly deceased had a twin brother -- so lucky us, we get to see
more of Jean-Claude. Van Damme #1 works for the Russian Mafia in the United
States and is killed by some of their operatives. Van Damme #2 is a police
officer in France who finds out that he had a twin brother he never knew
about after #1 gets killed in France. The remaining twin (the French cop)
goes to the United States to find out who killed his brother and avenge his
death. Once there, he hooks up with his deceased brother's girlfriend,
played by Natasha Henstridge, and the two of them set out to discover who
the murderers are.
Jean-Claude's acting abilities don't seem to be up to the usual lackluster
standards in this movie. In other words, just in case you missed the
sarcasm, his acting is worse than normal. On the upside, Natasha Henstridge
is in this film, and she does what she did best in Species -- she gets
naked. Sadly, this is probably the high point in the movie. She is actually
a decent actress, but didn't improve as much as I thought she would after
Species.
This is the typical Van Damme movie, with Jean-Claude doing a variety of
high end martial arts moves on his opponents. Nothing new here, and
certainly nothing we haven't seen in every other Van Damme movie. Simply
put, there is absolutely nothing new about this movie. It has a retread
plot -- this isn't the first time Jean-Claude has played twins. He still
can't act. We all saw Natasha's breasts in Species (although this is one
repeat performance I'm not complaining about). This is pretty much like
every movie that Van Damme has ever been involved in -- sub par.

Author
James Berardinelli
     All of the sudden, after years of languishing in art houses and=20
specialty film festivals, the luminaries of Hong Kong cinema are=20
breaking into the mainstream American market.  Jackie Chan, one of the=20
best-known action stars in the world, scored a modest financial hit with=20
RUMBLE IN THE BRONX. Actor Chow Yun-Fat has been working on something=20
called THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS. Director John Woo already has two=20
English-language features under his belt (HARD TARGET and BROKEN ARROW),=20
and there are more to come.  Now, another of Hong Kong's celebrated film=20
makers, Ringo Lam (director of CITY ON FIRE, which is the likely=20
inspiration for Quentin Tarantino's RESERVOIR DOGS), has reached U.S.=20
screens.  His Hollywood debut is called MAXIMUM RISK, and everyone=20
eagerly awaiting the film's release is in for a big disappointment.
     Watching MAXIMUM RISK, I had the feeling I'd seen the film before. =20
I hadn't, of course, but the generic nature of the plot and action=20
sequences, not to mention the presence of Jean-Claude Van Damme, made=20
everything seem all-too-familiar.  If I hadn't known beforehand that Lam=20
was the director, I never would have guessed it.  MAXIMUM RISK displays=20
little of the style that has gained the film maker an international=20
following.  This is the kind of job that a hack director could have=20
accomplished.
     The plot is rather convoluted, and frequently doesn't make sense,=20
but I'll try to present the cogent details here, for anyone who's=20
interested.  Van Damme plays a dual role.  He starts off as Mikhail=20
Suverov, a high-ranking member of the Russian Mob's American chapter. =20
When Mikhail is killed in a car chase in South France, a French cop who=20
looks eerily like the dead man is brought into the case.  As it turns=20
out, the policeman, named Alain Moreau, is actually Mikhail's twin=20
(screenwriter Larry Ferguson must have been watching a soap opera when=20
he came up with this twist).  The two were separated shortly after birth=20
when their mother realized she couldn't care for them both.  Now, with=20
Mikhail dead, Alain is determined to discover all he can about his=20
brother's life and death.  His investigation leads him to New York and=20
Mikhail's girl friend, Alex Minetti (Natasha Henstridge).  Alain also=20
meets a sadistic gangster named Ivan (Zach Grenier), a bunch of ugly=20
thugs, and a group of crooked FBI agents.  Soon, he and Alex are in over=20
their heads, and running for their lives. =20
     We're talking pedestrian action here.  There are all the usual=20
staples:  car chases, foot chases through moving traffic, foot chases=20
across rooftops, fist fights (with a little kick-boxing thrown in for=20
good measure), and shootouts.  I kept expecting Lam to do something=20
unique, but, by the time the end credits started rolling, I realized it=20
was a vain hope.  This is just another story of Van Damme hunting, and=20
being hunted by, a variety of stereotypical bad guys.  There's no room=20
in the formula for improvisation or originality.
     Van Damme's presence is an immediate disadvantage (just ask John=20
Woo; the action star headlined his American debut, HARD TARGET, which=20
went down in flames at the box office).  While the actor is capable of=20
handling action sequences, his acting range can charitably be described=20
as "limited", so any emotional component to MAXIMUM RISK is=20
irretrievably lost.   We're supposed to believe that Alain is distraught=20
over the death of the brother he never knew he had, but Van Damme's=20
wooden expression doesn't get the point across.
     Then there's Natasha Henstridge as The Love Interest.  In SPECIES,=20
she didn't show much in the way of acting ability, but wasn't shy about=20
displaying her physical attributes.  Here, this cookie-cutter role=20
doesn't exactly challenge her range, but it gives her another=20
opportunity to expose the assets that were much in evidence in that=20
previous outing.  Beyond that, however, there's not much to Alex, and=20
any romantic heat that might have been generated is diffused by the=20
complete lack of chemistry between the leads.  Henstridge and Van Damme=20
together couldn't light a cigarette.
     It's reasonable to hope that Lam agreed to direct this movie=20
because it was a means of entrance into the American film market.  Even=20
then, however, there's no denying that this is the most unpromising of=20
beginnings.  It took John Woo three years to recover from working with=20
Van Damme.  Let's hope the same misfortune doesn't befall Lam.  As for a=20
trip to the theaters=85 instead of seeing MAXIMUM RISK, rent one of Lam's=20
Hong Kong films.  They highlight the talent that is woefully unapparent=20
in this generic action flick.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
