Title
Review for Illtown (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Rapaport, Lili Taylor, Adam Trese, Kevin Corrigan, 
      Paul Schulze, Tony Danza, Isaac Hayes
Director: Nick Gomez based on the book THE COCAINE KIDS by 
      Terry Williams
Producer: David L. Bushell
Screenplay: Nick Gomez 
Cinematography: Jim Denault
Music: Brian Keane
U.S. Distributor: The Shooting Gallery
     With ILLTOWN, it's time once more to enter the seedy world of drug 
using and dealing, only on this occasion, at least there's a little 
variation on the theme (although it's not a very good one).  The drug 
dealers want out, and the turf war that starts to fill the vacuum of 
power is more about settling a personal grudge than it is about making 
the local crime boss rich.  However, while the storyline is not 
inherently uninteresting, writer/director Nick Gomez is determined to 
make this as much of a spiritual allegory as a small-time gangster 
drama.  This is a mistake, and the muddled result feels a lot like a 
failed Wim Wenders project.  
     When it comes to concrete characters, ILLTOWN offers Michael 
Rapaport's Dante (as classical allusions go, this one is a little too 
obvious) and Lily Taylor's Micky.  They're an upper middle class couple 
who have made their money by selling drugs for the local syndicate boss, 
D'Avalon (Tony Danza).  Now, sensing the inevitable approach of middle-
age, they want to go legitimate and start a family.  But, just as 
they're considering a way out, a new dealer by the name of Gabriel (Adam 
Trese), storms into their territory, spikes their drugs (causing six 
overdose deaths), and declares war on Dante and his best friend, Cisco 
(Kevin Corrigan).  The results are as predictable as they are bloody.
     Occasionally, Gomez (who previously brought the grim-and-gritty NEW 
JERSEY DRIVE to the screen) inserts strange, metaphysical images into 
his film.  Dead people re-appear on golf courses to give advice, a God-
like figure dispenses pearls of wisdom ("You're never going to find what 
you're looking for if what you're looking for is an easy way out," he 
tells Dante), and dreams occasionally intermingle with reality.  
Unfortunately, little of this stuff really works, and it all comes 
across as a rather pretentious and unwanted interruption in an otherwise 
humdrum story.  And, worst of all, the ending is so bogged down in 
spiritual imagery that it's virtually impossible to decipher what really 
happens.  The result of this bizarre ambiguity is an understandable 
sense of dissatisfaction.
     At least in ILLTOWN, I wasn't irritated by Michael Rapaport's 
abrasive (and overrated) acting style.  While this is by no means a 
complete performance, Rapaport shows flashes of promise and manages to 
forge a fragile emotional link between himself and the audience.  Lili 
Taylor's work, however, is more compelling.  With fewer scenes than her 
co-star, she develops the film's only consistently sympathetic 
individual.  Most of the other actors do adequate jobs playing standard 
types, although Adam Trese's Gabriel is a shell of a character with 
incomprehensible motives.  Trese never loses his annoying smile, even 
when he's being shot or beaten up.  I would also like to make mention of 
Tony Danza, who sheds his sunny, likable image to create a surprisingly 
effective villain.
     Clearly, I would have appreciated ILLTOWN if it had been more 
straightforward.  Gomez has tried something different, but the gamble 
doesn't pay off.  This isn't really a "deep" film; it's silliness 
masquerading as philosophy.  With all of the oblique references to 
redemption and salvation, there are times when the allegorical elements 
of ILLTOWN distract from the film's unremarkable, conventional aspects.  
With its painfully introspective tone, the movie is as low-energy as can 
be without threatening to lull audience members to sleep.  (However, 
anyone who dozes off will likely be awakened by gunfire as one of many 
high-school kids is blown away.)  As far as I'm concerned, the ending is 
ILLTOWN's biggest single flaw, but it's only one of many pieces that 
doesn't fit into the overall puzzle. 
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 23 January 1998 for $8.75 at the Village East CInemas with Laura,
Rob, and Michelle
*Illtown* is possibly the worst movie I have seen since *Excess Baggage.*
It started out promisingly, with interesting lighting and a dreamlike
quality. Then, the credits came, and that was the end of that.
Yet, I wanted to give it a chance. Laura turned to me and said, "Is this
the worst movie you have ever seen?" and I told her, "Ask me in five
minutes,"  but it didn't take that long. Once the vicious drug dealers
were hitting the links at the golf course, I gave up.
The plot is hard to follow since there is a lot of jumping back and forth
in time. Dante (Michael Rapaport) is a drug dealer who is genuinely in
love with his girlfriend Micky (Lili Taylor). Meanwhile, he has an
archenemy in Gabriel (Adam Trese) who proceeds to kill most of Dante's
drug runners, and then attacks his friends and family, in a typically
ultraviolent fashion that we have come to expect in general these days. 
Adding to the oddness is Tony Danza as D'Avalon. He seems to be the King
of the drug underworld down in Florida, who has a gay lover, or something
gay going on.  Note the scantily clad men posing like statues on
D'Avalon's lawn. Oh, and he "prefers to make his own mulch." His
dialogue, and that of so many others, was unbearable. For example: 
My goodness; this is what passes for writing these days?
I usually keep very quiet during the movie, but Illtown was just such an
incomprehensible mish-mash of plot and themes, I gave up wondering if it
was an allegory, a bad homage to David Lynch, or simply the worst movie I
have ever seen. Perhaps there's a reason it has taken so long for it to
get released. If you decide you really must see *Illtown,* bear these two
things in mind: 1)  It's okay to laugh hilariously whenever Tony Danza
appears; 2) remember that Micky's deaf little brother symbolizes the
audience--he's always trying to run away.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
ILLTOWN
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Releasing Co. tba
 Director:  Nick Gomez
 Writer: Nick Gomez
 Cast: Michael Rapaport, Lili Taylor, Adam Trese, Kevin
Corrigan, Angela Featherstone, Tony Danza, Isaac Hayes,
Paul Schulze, Saul Stein
   Like Spike Lee's "Clockers," "Illtown" features a cluster of
vicious teens teamed up with adult drug dealers.  But it's not
about drugs. A cop is on the take from the peddlers.  Still it's
not about drugs.  Merchants are assassinated for ripping off
distributors of cocaine and crack and for contaminating the
powders that lead to OD's.  Even then, it's not about drugs.
   According to Nick Gomez, whose previous features of
wayward youth are "New Jersey Drive" and "Laws of Gravity,"
this latest film which was selected for the 1996 New York Film
Festival is about nothing less than guilt, demons, and
redemption, even featuring one character, Isaac Hayes, who
is named George but is really God; another named Dante
who must suffer a daily inferno of his own consciousness; and
a brutal but charming criminal named Gabriel, who is, of
course none other than the archangel himself.  Mr. Gomez
has taken on quite a project for his relatively brief film, which
he made for a sum of less than five million dollars, and which
at the time of its film festival screening is looking for a
distributor.  While the Scorsese-like genre which includes
ruthless young people looks somewhat like his two previous
offerings, he has taken a sharp turn from making fairly
realistic works to moving into the Bunuelesque area of the
surreal.
   His "Laws of Gravity" (1991) is a chronicle of three
momentous days in the lives of a pair of young, blue-collar,
Brooklyn thieves and their girlfriends.  A gritty work.  His "New
Jersey Drive" (1995) deals with two teens from Newark, New
Jersey, who are drawn into the underground carjacking
network and find the weight of local police upon them.  Also
gritty.  But gritty is just an incidental way of describing
"Illtown," which is visually rich in an almost pious selection of
dreams, ghosts, and metaphysical encounters, but is
ultimately an unholy mess.  Presumably influenced by the
Spanish master of the surreal, Luis Bunuel, Mr. Gomez has a
way to go before he can approach that filmmaker's style,
techniques, and depth of social criticism.  
   His central character is Dante (Michael Rapaport), a tense
personality with a well-honed red beard, who is plagued by
guilt over his past participation in the drug trade.  Now a nice
guy who, like some of the younger pushers in the Miami
community, just wants to be a regular family person with his
woman, Suzanne (Lily Taylor), he finds himself overwhelmed
with hallucination and dreams of his dark days in the trade. 
He is alternately in a graffiti-strewn tunnel shooting up--or
facing down a young punk who wasted his best friend in a
shootout that seems out of the parched west rather than the
subtropical American south.  Another figure in his imagination
is a corrupt cop, Lucas (Paul Schulze), who shows up at
convenient times to collect what's his, and ends up getting
exactly what he deserves.  The worst of the bunch is the
ever-smiling, handsomely bland-looking Gabriel (Adam Trese),
who smiles when beaten and looks ecstatic when shot, as
though in being tortured he has attained redemption for once
ordering multiple assassinations and callously shooting down
people who he feels have ripped him off.  
   From time to time the drama--which is replete with
characters conjured up like apparitions--is presided over by
George (Isaac Hayes), who combines the righteousness of a
social worker with the vindictive threats of The Deity, while
Dante's woman, Suzanne (Lily Taylor), works out her own
conflicts with her mother over her brother--a deaf mute who
has run away from Boston and driven eighteen hours to her
place in Miami.
   On the one hand, writer-director Nick Gomez--whose script
is based only very loosely on the novel "The Cocaine Kids"--
insists that everything is metaphysical, that nothing is real. 
On the other, he punctuates his criticism of society for its
blase treatment of teen killings as merely fodder for the
evening news.  Unlike Bunuel he seems to have little use for
the sporadic light touch or moments of wit, so that the
repeated entries of ghostly figures and flashbacks guided by
Dante's unconscious mind become wearisome, even
pointless.  Rated R.  Running Time: 97 minutes.  (C) 1996
Harvey Karten
