Title
Review for When Trumpets Fade (1998) (TV)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
HBO has a reputation for making the best made-for-TV
films.  "When Trumpets Fade" won't change that
evaluation.  It is an intense, grim war drama based
on an obscure World War II battle with the Germans
that cost 24,000 American lives.  Continuing recent
interpretation, war is depicted as a grisly, evil
force in which there are no heroes or villains,
only the dead and survivors.
It is late 1944.  American GIs are pushing into
Germany, but are overextended, and the Germans are
putting up stiff resistance.  The casualties are
devastating: Private Manning (Ron Eldard) is the
only survivor from his squad.  Promoted to sergeant
over his own objections, he is now forced to share his
battlefield survival skills and experience, putting
his life at increasing risk.
Manning's character is open to interpretation.  He is
not exactly a coward, but he certainly prefers some other
guy to get shot instead.  This extends to his field
leadership; he has fresh-faced recruit Sanderson (Zak Orth)
take the risks as point man, and in the assaults on the
tanks and 88mm guns he waves the other soldiers forward.
This is perhaps as it should be, since the other soldiers
must be trained, and their lives are less valuable to
the Army.
"When Trumpets Fade" succeeds in its depiction of battle
scenes.  However, Manning's heated conversations with
his superiors aren't as credible.  Officers generally come
off poorly.  Captain Pritchett (Martin Donovan) prefers
to remain in safety while ordering his sergeant to lead
raw troops to their certain death.  Lt. Lukas (Timothy
Olyphant) comes off even worse, turning into a shell-shocked
coward on the battlefield.
"When Trumpets Fade" is a minor but respectable entry in
the crowded genre of war films.  While perhaps not worth
tracking down, it is worth seeing if it happens to be on
and your other cable movie channel is busy showing
"Bride of Chucky".
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WHEN TRUMPETS FADE (director: John Irving; cast: Ron Eldard (Manning),
Zak Orth (Sanderson), Martin Donovan (Capt. Roy Pritchett), Dylan Bruno
(Sgt. Talbot), Dwight Yoakam (Lt. Colonel), Frank Whaley (Chamberlain),
Timothy Olyphant (Lt. Lukas), Dan Futterman (Despin), 1998)
This is a gritty, workman-like WW11 HBO made for TV movie, that is much
better, surprisingly, than most of those kind of movies usually are,
taking place in a battlefield in the Hurtgen Forest, 1944, on the border
of Belgium and Germany, though it was shot in Hungary. This battle was a
precursor to the Battle of the Bulge, and is not as well known, but
24,000 U.S. troops did lose their lives there in bloody combat. The film
is seen through the eyes of Pvt. Manning (Ron), whose main purpose in
battle is to stay alive. In a year when two epic war films were made,
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN and THE THIN RED LINE, this low budget movie holds
its own with those films storywise, only lacking the great
cinematography of those films, but its  cinematography was realistic
enough, aiding in the clarity of telling the story, that is highlighted
by an engaging characterization by Ron Eldard and the other soldiers who
look as if they are really WW11 soldiers. Eldard's quiet toughness and
demeanor seems to fit his role as a non-conformist soldier, even though
Manning is not exactly a hero, but more of a man who is wrestling with
his conscience, thrust into a situation he didn't relish, due to
unforeseen circumstances and clever manuevering by his superior
officers, a role in which he comes through in the end with flying
colors, ironically getting killed in action, in the end, because of his
reward for previously surviving. Now this has been tried in many of the
older WW11 films, but for the most part, it didn't work because the
acting was not as convincing as these unheralded actors are.
We first see Manning in action trying to carry one of the badly wounded
survivors from his squad back to his company area, but is resisted by
the soldier, who is scared out of his mind. Manning is forced to shoot
him, rather than leave him behind in pain, with no chance of being
rescued. Upon his return to his company, his commander, Captain
Pritchett (Donovan), has the task of telling him he is the sole
survivor, and to his regret, even if he doesn't fully trust Manning, he,
at least, recognizes that he has an innate battle sense, which is why he
chooses to make him a sergeant; it will be his job to lead the new
replacements into the next battle, which is part of the big push toward
Germany. The heart of the movie revolves around the credibility of the
human drama involving how Manning is forced to take this responsible
position, even as he tries to talk the captain out of it, knowing full
well that he will now have to look out not only for himself but for
others, when his ability to survive before, just depended on how he
looked out for himself, which he proved that he was quite capable of
doing. In such a short time, we feel that we know Manning and know what
he will do, and that his tough mental attitude seems more realistic than
many of the other soldiers we see with a proper military attitude. It is
hard to say for sure if we can like a person such as Manning, but even
as we question his motives, whether or not they are selfish, we still
respect him as a man who will not blindly follow orders, even if he has
to be insubordinate. This fuzziness about his character holds our
interest throughout the film.
The replacement soldiers have no clue of what they are getting into,
having no battle experience, as they are now unfairly thrust into the
middle of some of the fiercest fighting taking place. One of the new
soldiers, Warren (Zak), is perfecto for this part. When on his first
tour in a foxhole, he asks the person he relieves of duty the most
sensible question he can ask, "What am I supposed to do here?" The logic
of that question and the inexperience of  his new sergeant in telling
him what to do on watch, and the natural snafus that are part of the
army, all come into play in the consternation written all over Warren's
chubby bespectacled, purely innocent American face, stuck in a war whose
ideology sounds good in the text books and newspapers back home, but has
a strange way of losing force in a foxhole.Warren was undoubtedly picked
on by Manning for this detail, because of his nerdy physical appearance
and his inability to hide his greenness and fear. Be that as it may,
Warren grows up rapidly and handles himself with dignity, and becomes
the sole survivor, as he becomes Manning's heir apparent.
There is some kind of friction between the field officers and the
regular soldiers, the ones who bear the brunt of the war and who are
asked to die for their country, if need be. Dwight Yoakam plays the Lt.
Colonel, who is acting the part of the hard-nosed, uncaring leader,
sending men into battles where there is little chance of them returning
in one piece. Thusly, he orders Capt. Pritchett to take a bridge the
Germans have heavy firepower on. Here the story gets a little
incredulous, as no squad volunteers for that detail, the captain tells
Manning he will give him a section 8 discharge if he volunteers for the
job. Manning had previously asked for that but it was denied him, but
here it sounds phony that Manning would accept, but he does, putting his
new replacements in a danger they really shouldn't have been in just for
his selfish interest. Everyone in the squad gets killed but Manning and
Warren, but the bridge is temporarily secured by the combat instincts of
Manning. A few things then happen, as this tightly drawn tale begins to
weaken into a predictable ending, as Lt. Lukas (Olyphant) has a nervous
break down after seeing all the casualties, and the Lt. Colonel orders
Manning to take his place and be a lieutenant; again, this is done
against Manning's wishes. Also, a Sgt. Talbot (Bruno), who resents
Manning's unwillingness to be a team player, accuses him of abandoning
his green troops and coming back again without a full squad.
Each of the recent war films I have seen has its own grit and dirt to
it, as they seemed to be made nowadays with a new determination to be
more realistic and less all apple pie than ever before, as most of the
pre-Vietnam War films were. I welcome this kind of realistic filmmaking,
and since war never seems to go out of style, it is worthwhile seeing
how young men fight in such wars, maybe some day all sides will figure
out that there is a better way to settle things. Until then, there is
nothing like a good war film to bring the war into our homes and
consciousness, and this one is a reasonably good one.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
S. Grom
Rating: *** (Well constructed and executed motion picture) Evaluation:
Gritty, gray and unhappy World War II movie revolving on one character.  A
man is thrust into a leadership position he dislikes and even fears, and must
perform or wastes the lives of himself and his men in an obviously silly and
worthless manner.  He is not portrayed as a hero, as no man really is, and
faces challenges which are trivialized in most other war movies.  No happy or
teary ending, things just happen, though predictably (and not unrealistically
considering the operation) everyone dies at the end. Unexpectedly good made
for TV movie. Scale: ???? - Unevenly done (Full Metal Jacket, Stalingrad) *
Poor or Unimpressive (The Sands of Iwo Jima) ** Worth Seeing (Saving Private
Ryan) *** Good, Solidly Constructed Film (Platoon) **** Excellent, a
Masterpiece (Das Boot)
        All qualitative judgments are IMHO. It seems that Hollywood has
recently reopened its interest in the Second World War (the more or less
undeserved success of _Saving Private Ryan_ will only strengthen this
interest: look for more war movies next summer).  There are at least three
WWII movies which will be opening in theaters in the near future. HBO, not to
be outdone, made the first entry into the WWII-fest on June 27 with _When
Trumpets Fade_, a character movie about an American soldier, Manning who is
split between his will to survive and his self respect when he is made a
squad leader, and forced to continue on in a battle he will most likely die
in.  The battle is the failed offensive in the Hurtigen forest, overshadowed
in most WWII accounts by the somewhat later Battle of the Bulge. I have only
seen one other product of director John Irving's, _The Dogs of War_.  Despite
the fact that almost every mercenary stereotype is used (morally questionable
mercs, corrupt leaders of authoritarian countries, weapons smuggled by boat,
etc.) and despite the rather amateurish ordinance-heavy combat footage, I
thought it was a reasonably good movie.  The stereotypes are justified,
because just about every modern day privately contracted mercenary story
involves most of them (the business in Angola, Mike Hoare's Congo, or even
the Congo of today, just about every issue of _Soldier of Fortune_).  The
ordinance is less justfiable. Irving makes good on this mistake in
_Trumpets_.  This is probably the most ordinance-light World War II combat
movie I've seen.  One sees little more than personal weapons; the usual
Garands, Tommy guns and Mausers.  Even squad machine guns are curiously
absent, aside from occasional glimpses of firing MG42s. Artillery is
occasionally seen.  The Americans are slaughtered by a well placed group of
88mm Flak cannons.  Tanks, armored cars, buildings, mortars, airplanes,
rocket launchers are all absent. This is not to say the movie isn't bloody. 
It rates among the more graphic depictions of a battle I've seen.  Most
prominently is a scene where a large group of soldiers (company IIRC) are
caught within the 88's fields of fire, and are naturally slaughtered in
droves.  If weapons are too expensive for this HBO production,        lots of fake
blood,        exhausted and grubby looking actors who perform well, and good
filming aren't.  Many of the "I've been shot" clips are powerful, even if
they're a dime a dozen in war movies.  This is due to the good
cinematography; the gray of the Hungarian winter is well paired with the red
of the blood.  Camera angles are well chosen, and the camera does not dwell
on each wounded soldier the way other movies do (eg _Full Metal Jacket_ when
Cowboy meets the sniper).  Of course, the actors contribute to this.  Many of
these factors also combine to give the movie it's gritty, unhappy look.  It's
a most appropriate look  for this movie. However, I did have a strong
objection to the cinematography in the night assault scene close to the end. 
It was obviously shot at night, but they also obviously used a floodlight to
illuminate the actors, creating a very artificial sort of effect.  I would
have prefered it if they left things dark, and let the natural confusion, and
fear of the unknown and the dark into the scene, which is undoubtably present
in a nighttime combat operation. The thing that makes the movie, despite the
cinematography which only sets the stage, of course is the performance of the
actors.  Invariably they all run around in worn and dirty fatigues; are
unshaven (to the point that many of them look almost the same), and have a
general bearing that matches. Manning is not portrayed as the hero most other
war movies seek to find.  He is dirty, unshaven and exhausted looking; and in
the opening scene the rest of his squad is wiped out.  He is made squad
leader by his company commander; though he is completely unwilling to perform
the task.  The company commander orders, and then uses the usual excuses
("you're the only one I've got") and praise("you have the potential to be a
good leader", "you're a smart survivor") to persuade Manning.  This is an
interesting point of the film.        The Captain's points, actions, and
indifference are completely justified by the situation, yet they also condemn
Manning to death and both of them know it.  Are they simply military lies? Or
are they the Captain's best attempt to get good performance out of Manning,
or a combination of many different aspects, good and bad, of a war? Manning
reluctantly is simultaneously forced and sweet-talked into the rank of
sergeant.  He receives a squad of completely fresh replacements.  An aspect
of this film that I have not seen done well in any other movie, replacements,
is done quite well here.  The green troops look fresh, happy, and even
physically unfit (especially in the case of one fat Private Pyle type).  They
certainly do not have the air about them the "combat experienced" actors do. 
One feels sorry for them. Manning treats them unevenly.  He is no heroic,
admirable John Wayne.  He frequently treats them roughly, without much
justification.        One sympathizes with his contempt to a degree, but one cannot
but draw the conclusion that Manning is not an experienced leader.  During
one of the combat missions, he even ends up intentionally shooting one of
them, though not unjustifiably. There is obviously an air of distrust and a
Sergeant Talbot in another squad whom he dislikes makes every attempt to
increase it.  After a while, he accepts his position, and establishes a
reasonable relationship with what subordinates survive after their first
combat mission. By the end of the movie, the big fat Private Pyle tries to
save Manning, dropping his weapon and carrying Manning back to friendly
territory.  However, Manning is dead, leaving Pyle the only survivor of his
squad and the movie ends there.  Perhaps Pyle is bumped to Sergeant like
Manning, to start the movie over again, perhaps he meets a Mauser round from
pursuing Germans.  This ending is probably one of the better ones, short of
sentiment (though one detects a trace of it in some of the camera shots and
in the fact that everyone else is dead) and ambiguous, though perhaps not as
good as _Full Metal Jacket_'s combination of burning cities, nonsensical,
selfish commentary, Mickey Mouse club, and a sped-up version of the Rolling
Stone's _Paint it Black_.  Both of them just end at a logical spot; they do
not seem as artificial as, say, the ending to _All Quiet on the Western
Front_ (though the ending in both the book and in the color 1960s version are
quite powerful). The officers in this movie do not come out looking good. 
The platoon commander is just plain stupid and the captain is rather
unsympathetic towards his men. Superiors are almost completely absent and
their absence is the subject of harsh words. One technical kudo I would like
to give this film: its use of actual US hand and arm signals.  Though this
was a minor point, and perhaps questionable historical accuracy (I don't know
if signals used then were the same as today), I was still delighted that the
producers included this little bit of detail which so many other war movies
forget. In all, this was an impressive beginning to a series of Neo-WWII
films.        The fact that it was made with no name actors, on a tight budget, and
for TV makes it even more so.  The strength of the movie is based on the
characterization and actions of Manning, its good cinematography and its
attention to minor detail (the men look convincingly dirty, exhausted, and
unhappy, no mean achievement).        _When Trumpets Fade_ have set a high hurdle
for further WWII movies to pass over.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum
