Title
Review for Apt Pupil (1998)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bryan Singer.
Cast: Brad Renfro, Ian McKellen, Bruce Davison, Ann Dowd, David 
Schwimmer, Elias Koteas, Joshua Jackson, Heather McComb.
1998 - 112 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and brief nudity).
Reviewed October 25, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
Bryan Singer made a big splash in 1995 with his surprising, 
critically-acclaimed, "The Usual Suspects," and after 
three years of hiatus, he is back with his sophomore effort, "Apt 
Pupil," based on a Stephen King novella, but I think his look has 
quickly run out.
The film is about an intelligent, but cold-hearted 16-year-old senior, 
Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro) who becomes interested in the Holocaust after 
he studies it in school, and discovers that a Nazi from the 
concentration camps in WWII is living in his own hometown under an alias 
name. That man is Kurt Dussander (Ian McKellen), whom Todd blackmails, 
telling him that he will turn him into the police if he does not do as 
he says. As Kurt begins to tell him horrific stories of killing the Jews 
and his experiences in the camps, Todd begins to become obsessed with 
it, starts to slack off in school, in which he was previously at the top 
of his class, and begins to look more and more likely of being capable 
of murder himself.
"Apt Pupil," has an intriguing story, and there are a few suspenseful 
moments that pop up every once in a while, but it is at the screenplay 
level that the film fails. There is no attempt at all to develop any of 
the supporting characters, and so they all come off as being underused 
and one-dimensional. Even Todd's parents, played by Bruce Davison and 
Ann Dowd, only appear in one scene in the first half, and the film would 
have you believe that Todd is practically living at Kurt's house. Todd's 
friend (Joshua Jackson) is also a wasted character, as is his potential 
girlfriend (Heather McComb). And so, because of this, what we have is 
basically a two-character film, which would be okay if there hadn't been 
so many open-ended subplots.
Renfro and McKellen are nothing short of spectacular in the film. Renfro 
especially could not have been any better, and he is thoroughly 
believable throughout, although his character is completely unlikable. 
They both work well together, and the dialogue between them is often 
well-written.
One subplot that I did kind of like, even though it also was not 
developed very well, concerns Todd's guidance counselor at school (David 
Shwimmer), that at first does not seem to be of much importance to the 
story until the climactic moments. Schwimmer usually plays the same 
character ("Friends," "The Pallbearer"), but here he is completely 
different, and shows that he is capable of actually having a lot of 
range as an actor.
But with all things considered, "Apt Pupil" just isn't a very well 
thought-out picture. The screenplay obviously should have went through a 
few more drafts, and it also should have decided what type of genre it 
wanted to fall into. Did it want to be a psychological drama, or a 
horror movie (as some scenes would have you believe, including a 
senseless murder in the last act)? Singer proved he was a talented 
director with "The Usual Suspects," but "Apt Pupil" is a highly inferior 
film in almost every way. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
The old "Alfred Hitchcock Presents" television series was masterful at
creating little, macabre stories packaged into self-contained 30-minute
doses.  It knew just how to take a simple story of seemingly ordinary
people, who looked like our next-door neighbors, and make us wait for
the ending punch.  With a few diabolical flourishes, the show's
conclusion would reveal the characters' hidden evil.  Trimmed of its
fat, APT PUPIL would have made an intriguing episode.
After director Bryan Singer's first mesmerizing and popular film, THE
USUAL SUSPECT, his second has been widely anticipated.  APT PUPIL,
adapted by Brandon Boyce from the Stephen King novella, was Singer's
choice for an attempt to repeat his first success.
In some ways an odd choice, the story has a paucity of material to work
with.  On the other hand, a Stephen King novel about the Holocaust
certainly has lots of potential for shock value.  For some reason Singer
downplays the shock while asking his audience to wait an hour and a half
before he lets the movie finally take off.  For those with suitable
patience the payoff is there, and the wait is made tolerable by a
fascinating performance by Ian McKellen.
McKellen plays the part of an old Nazi concentration camp guard living
in the United Sates under the name of Kurt Dussander.  With bad skin and
a scruffy beard, Dussander clutches his cigarettes in his grimy hands,
smoking them down to the last gram of tobacco.  His gruff voice hides a
cauldron of atrocities, hidden deep in the inner reaches of his memory.
In a lackluster performance, Brad Renfro plays a bored but brightly
inquisitive high school senior named Todd Bowden.  Todd's history class
has just finished their week on the Holocaust, but Todd is not ready to
move on to other subjects.  Obsessed, he researches the subject in the
library until he tracks down a previously unknown Nazi guard (Dussander)
living right in the town's midst.
Confronting Dussander with his crimes, Todd demands daily doses of death
camp stories, or he will turn Dussander in to the police.  Although
there are a couple of cheap exploitation scenes of the killing of
animals and a few spooky daydream scenes of concentration inmates, the
movie is remarkable for its moderation.  The script manages to make the
Holocaust seem almost trite.  The entire movie could be rewritten
without that aspect and be remarkably unchanged.  All they would need to
do is have Dussander be a serial killer who hasn't harmed anyone in
several decades.
The film, while eventually entertaining, takes little risks, following a
formula you've seen many times before.  It is worth seeing for Ian
McKellen's work, but, if you are waiting for director Bryan Singer to
demonstrate his brilliance again, you'll have to hope his third picture
is a charm.
APT PUPIL runs 1:51.  It is rated R for strong violence, sex, drug usage
and profanity and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
APT PUPIL
(Tri-Star/Phoenix)
Starring:  Ian McKellen, Brad Renfro, Bruce Davison, Elias Koteas, David
Schwimmer.
Screenplay:  Brandon Boyce, based on the novella by Stephen King.
Producers:  Jane Hamsher, Don Murphy and Bryan Singer.
Director:  Bryan Singer.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     APT PUPIL'S Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro) is practically the poster child
for an upstanding American teenager circa 1984.  He's a straight-A student
on track to graduate from high school at sixteen; he's a star baseball
pitcher; his parents (Bruce Davison and Ann Dowd) are successful, involved
and, astonishingly, still happily married.  It is this same Todd Bowden
who discovers that a man in his Northern California town named Arthur
Denker (Ian McKellen) is actually fugitive Nazi war criminal Kurt
Dussander.  It is this same Todd Bowden who blackmails Denker, threatening
to expose him unless he describes war-time attrocities to Todd in
unrelenting detail.  It is this same Todd Bowden who becomes obsessed with
the horrifying images of concentration camps, and who turns to strange
acts of cruelty.
     Creepy, disquieting stuff, to be sure, but there's one crucial puzzle
piece missing from director Bryan Singer's (THE USUAL SUSPECTS) adaptation
of the Stephen King novella:  why?  Why does Todd become so improbably
fascinated with the horrors of genocide and the wielding of absolute power
over the life of another?  Why do Denker's tales turn him alternately into
a nightmare-plagued wreck and a glassy-eyed borderline psycho?  There's
certainly a story to be told by making the teen demon of APT PUPIL a
golden boy rather than a troubled misfit -- perhaps to suggest the
capacity for evil within us all, perhaps as a commentary on how we make
the forbidden fascinating by hiding it from the eyes of children.  What's
missing is a motivation for this particular boy, something that makes him
more than a symbolic representation of good youth gone awry.
     That absence of motivation becomes even more glaring in the film's
second half, when the power dynamic between the two characters shifts back
in Denker's favor.  His life of quiet isolation shattered by re-living his
past, Denker begins to show that the rush he got from manipulating lives
was merely in hibernation.  McKellen's sharp performance shows Denker's 
icy confidence growing by the scene, until it's clear that the hunted has
become the hunter once more.  At that same time, Todd is trying to recover
from letting his grades slide through his frequent visits with Denker,
seemingly returning to "normal" until Denker forces him into an
acknowledgement of how far he's truly willing to go.  It's easy to
understand Denker's character and follow his twists, turns and changes.
By contrast, Todd's dark side seems to emerge strictly for bad seed shock
value.
      Even the gaps in Todd's characterization become less important as
Singer's taut direction takes over in the climactic thirty minutes.  As
circumstances threaten to expose the actions of both Todd and Denker, the
simmering tension begins building at an impressive clip.  APT PUPIL is a
rare example of a thriller that gets better as it approaches its
conclusion, rather than collapsing in a muddle of rushed plot points and
pat resolutions.  It's hard not to imagine how effective a film it might
have been if Todd Bowden made more sense as a character.  The token
glimpses of his friendships, romantic life and hobbies are maddening in
their mundanity.  Something significant happens in the space between Todd
spotting Denker on a bus and their initial contact, something reduced in
the film to a "One Month Later" title card.  That missing something is
what makes APT PUPIL merely morbidly intriguing, rather than truly
disturbing.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Apt Pupil (1998)
Ian McKellan, Brad Renfro, Bruce Davison, Elias Koteas, Joe Morton, David 
Schwimmer, Jan Triska, Michael Byrne, Heather McComb, Ann Dowd, Joshua 
Jackson, Mickey Cottrell. Screenplay by Brandon Boyce, based on the 
novella by Stephen King. Directed by Bryan Singer. 112 minutes
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Apt Pupil" is one of the more peculiar films to come down the pike in 
quite some time. While the psychological horror story of the relationship 
between a teenage boy and a Nazi war criminal is certainly creepy, 
director Bryan Singer maintains an odd sense of distance that blunts the 
effectiveness of the production. We expect a probing examination of the 
essence of evil, but the film stays too close to the surface to deliver 
any insight. As a result, using a Nazi as the bogeyman feels arbitrary 
and vaguely exploitative rather than dramatically justifiable. 
Set in 1984, the story (based on a Stephen King novella) introduces young 
Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro), a high school honor student who becomes 
fixated on Nazis and Holocaust imagery during sociology class and 
continues his private research at the local library. Bowden, a resident 
of Incredible Coincidences, California, notices that one of his fellow 
bus passengers bears a striking resemblance to a Nazi war criminal. 
Several weeks later, the boy shows up on the doorstep of Kurt Dussander 
(Ian McKellen), threatening to expose the man unless he tells him, 
"everything they're afraid to tell us in school." 
And so the relationship begins, with the grizzled old man recounting 
tales of atrocities while the kid sits transfixed, drinking in every word.
 As their symbiosis-by-blackmail continues, two things happen: Bowden 
becomes increasingly demanding and dictatorial as his obsession grows, 
while Dussander finds his long dormant sadism resurfacing. Clearly, it's 
only a matter of time before the wily old man figures a way to turn the 
tables on his young master.
The psychological study of Bowden and Dussander is very intriguing, but 
director Bryan Singer doesn't sufficiently explore the psyches of his 
characters, leaving us with an aged one-dimensional monster and an 
underdeveloped monster-in-training. The actors are definitely not the 
problem. The remarkable Ian McKellan is skilled enough to give his 
character more depth than the anemic script provides (although he moves 
into caricature during an over-the-top goose-stepping scene), and Renfo 
is no slouch, maintaining a fierce focus that makes his fresh-scrubbed 
innocent appearance all the more chilling.  
At first the Nazi imagery is appropriately disturbing, but as the film 
wore on, it felt more and more like a simple gimmick; just another in a 
long line of Stephen King creep-outs. The story's level of coincidence is 
absurd. After successfully eluding the authorities for decades, McKellan 
gets spotted not once, but twice during the course of the tale. I'm 
willing to suspend disbelief to an extent, but two separate discoveries 
doesn't just strain credulity, it snaps it in two.
Beyond the film's problems with structure and logic, I also found certain 
shots of Renfro more than a little disquieting. Early in the film there's 
an aerial view of the youth resting on his bed wearing only boxers. The 
camera moves over the smooth curves of his underage body, sensuously 
accented by moonlight. Later, in a shower scene, we get a teasing shot of 
the boy's rear, followed by a front view oh-so-carefully framed to barely 
conceal his genitals, while displaying as much of his perfectly lit body 
as possible. While I enjoy looking at an attractive physique as much as 
anyone, these loving displays of the body of a minor made me 
uncomfortable. If the filmmakers want to flash some beefcake, I'd prefer 
they use grown-up subjects. 
"Apt Pupil" shows evil as a force that is communicable, but doesn't 
provide the all-important character development that would explain the 
mechanics and motivations. It purports to be an examination of what 
drives humans to commit acts of indescribable horror, but barely scrapes 
the surface. By staying in the wading pool rather than taking a high dive,
 the film leaves us only with a compelling, if contrived, psychological 
cat and mouse story. Making matters worse, the story stretches on too 
long and even throws in the inexcusable cliché of a supposed corpse 
springing back to life for one more cheap scare. "Apt Pupil" had 
incredible potential, but in the hands of Bryan Singer and scripter 
Brandon Boyce, it ends up just a moderately involving creep show, and a 
veritable cavalcade of missed opportunities. 

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Bryan Singer
Cast: Ian McKellen, Brad Renfro, Bruce Davison, Elias Koteas, Joe
Morton, Jan Triska
Screenplay: Brandon Boyce
Producers: Jane Hamsher, Don Murphy, Bryan Singer
Runtime: 111 min.
US Distribution: TriStar
Rated R: strong violence, language, brief sexuality
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
A story about people should have sympathetic characters.  Bryan
Singer's Apt Pupil, which is based on a novella by Stephen King, is a
story that centers around a strikingly unpleasant teenager and a Nazi
general in hiding.  These characters are well-drawn and created with
charisma by the actors, but they're not nice people.  In fact, they're
both monsters in their own ways, and I think that this is the point of
the film.  But, by the end of the picture, I was left with a bad taste
in my mouth:   here is a story about a smart kid who acquires first-hand
information about the Holocaust, and becomes a beast of a human being as
a result.  
What happened to the old-fashioned lessons, like "learn from your
mistakes?"   Or, perhaps, "learn from the mistakes of others?"  Apt
Pupil, though a riveting cinematic experience, is a deeply cynical look
at human nature.  I really can't say why without giving away the end,
but I can say this:  the only thing the characters learn from their
mistakes are ways to escape consequences in the future.   I wonder if
this was Singer's purpose; his last film, The Usual Suspects, was also
about bad people, but most of them had likable traits.  The only people
who win our sympathy in Apt Pupil end up emotionally scorned or brutally
murdered.   
The teenager's name is Todd Boden, and is played by Brad Renfro.  Todd
is a straight-A student; the film opens just as he becomes obsessed with
Nazi Germany after his history class covers the subject for a week.  One
day, while riding the bus, he notices an old man get on and sit behind
him; Todd recognizes him as a Nazi general that he had seen in text
books.  One month passes, and Todd finally knocks on the old man's
door.  His name, apparently, is Kurt Dussander (Ian McKellen), and Todd
has a proposal for him.
He wants to know all about the Holocaust, about "the things they won't
tell us in school."  Why should Dussander tell him anything?  Well, Todd
has assembled pictures and fingerprints, and is giving him no choice: 
if he doesn't tell his stories, Todd will go to the police with his
evidence.  So Dussander agrees, and he tells Todd his stories.  Every
day, after school, Todd goes to Dussander's house, absorbing more and
more of the truly awful stories that Dussander has to offer.  Todd
begins to falter in school, and soon the tides turn -- Dussander takes
control of the situation.
It's an original premise, and a gripping film.  Singer is a sharp
director; his techniques are subtle -- scenes build tension without the
use of intrusive music or intricate camerawork.  But holocaust material
isn't exactly audience-friendly; there are scenes here that seem to lack
taste and judgement.  There's a scene in which Todd is showering and
imagining himself among Jews in a concentration camp; the men around him
are sickly and thin, and while it's an effective image, it seems present
more to manipulate than to inform.  Singer doesn't approach the subject
with care; in fact, the Holocaust really isn't under examination here. 
What's interesting is the dynamic between Todd and Dussander.
It's just too bad that both characters are so hateful.  Dussander is
supposed to an enigma, and, for a while, he is:  at first, it seems that
he believed that the experiments he was "forced" to perform were simply
things that "needed to be done."  Later, though, it's clear that he's
lying:  he enjoyed torturing the Jews.  This is never spoken outright,
but McKellen's performance -- which is one of the best this year -- is
so darkly clever that it's impossible to miss Dussander's true feelings
in the matter.  He is a Jew hater, and he always will be.
But Todd, played ambitiously by Renfro, is not a hero.  He forces
Dussander to tell his stories, blackmailing him with incriminating
information.  It's too soon to feel hatred for Dussander at this point,
so Todd seems more malicious than founded in his demands.  Later, Todd
comes across as downright sadistic -- one of the film's most perplexing
and most disturbing scenes has Todd forcing Dussander to put on a Nazi
costume and march by his command.  Singer films this segment with
perfect harshness, but, by the end of it, Todd seems more psychotic than
Dussander.
That's a crucial flaw when you're dealing with a story as intense as
this.  Only two characters win our affections by the end:  the school
guidance counselor (effectively portrayed by David Schwimmer), and a
homeless man (Elias Koteas) willing to sell his body for a shower and a
place to sleep.  Without a place to send our emotions, Apt Pupil strikes
as deeply unpleasant experience:  a disturbing, completely engrossing
film that makes you feel bad and doesn't manage to convey any solid
message.   It's a disappointment, really, given the talent involved.  I
don't recommend that you avoid the film -- no, it's too powerful to
dismiss.  Just be warned that Apt Pupil is meticulously unpleasant in
almost every way, and I'm not sure why it needed to be.  

Author
Edwin Jahiel
APT  PUPIL *  Directed by Bryan Singer.Written by Brandon Boyce,based on
the novella by Stephen King. Photography, Newton Thomas Sigel. Editing,John
Ottman. Production design, Richard Hoover. Music, Ottman. Produced by Jane
Hamsher, Don Murphy and Singer. Cast: Ian McKellen (Kurt Dussander, aka Mr.
Denker ), Brad Renfro (Todd Bowden), Bruce Davison (Richard Bowden), Elias
Koteas (Archie), Joe Morton (Dan Richler) and David Schwimmer (Edward
French). A Phoenix Pictures and Tri-Star Pictures release. 100 minutes. R
(violence, language)
Stephen King is the Bill Gates of contemporary fright fiction, the
Microsoft of text-to-screen adaptations --some 50 of them, counting TV
items.
The features have ranged from good (Carrie, Christine, The Shining, Cujo,
Stand by Me, Misery, Dolores Claiborne) to quite bad. The last of the
turkeys I remember seeing was Needful Things. Apt Pupil is just as
objectionable. Attempting to be a Holocaust Horror movie, it results in an
offensively dumb exploitation of the Holocaust (in Hebrew, Shoah).
In a small California town, 16-year old senior Todd Bowden is the shining
light of his class. After a History unit at school he becomes fascinated by
the Holocaust. He scours the improbably well-stocked (including old
photographs) public library. He also uses the Internet database of the
University of California at Irvine. (I have spent hours trying to locate
those files. Still trying.)
Unlikelihoods and impossibilities of the size of Titanic's fatal iceberg
accumulate without respite. On a city bus, Todd spots in a flash (!) a
heavily bearded, glass-wearing septuagenarian (Ian McKellen) as  Kurt
Dussander, a war-criminal SS officer of two death camps. That's 40-plus
years after the fact, but Todd remembers sharply the photographs of a
young, minor Nazi who did not even have especially memorable features!!!
The boy sleuths, learns that the old fellow is a Mr. Arthur Denker, a sort
of recluse whose ramshackle house is (how convenient!)  not far from
Todd's. Todd, has confirmed his identification by dusting the fingerprints
on the old man's mailbox. (That UC-Irvine database must be something!) He
forces his way in, and blackmails Denker-Dussander. In exchange for his
silence, the boy wants the still-wanted Nazi killer to go into the gory
details of death-camps: " "I want to hear about everything they're afraid
to show us in school."
Long tete-a-tete sessions follow, with the German gradually satisfying
Todd's morbid, sick, pathological curiosity for horrid details. If all this
could still be acceptable as a clinical case, the factual details of the
tale are pushed to the limits of fabrication. How did Denker subsist for
years in America? Why he is using an antique Victrola to play music? (Movie
Nazis, of course, all love grandiose music, especially Wagner's). Where
does Todd find a pristine SS uniform and cap as a Christmas gift to Denker?
He forces Denker to don the outfit and strut around as Todd barks orders.
The unsubtle point here is twofold. Denker, who just mayhave shown  (it's
all too vague) to Todd a smidgen of humanity, now gets a nostalgic taste
for his old Master Race, uniformed self. Traces of evil resurface. More to
the film's half-baked point, Todd himself is rapidly becoming corrupted.
That's  the bottom line of the movie: evil begets evil; the banality of
evil. So, what else is new?
More. Todd has told his family that, charitably, he reads for an old
fellow. Mr. Denker is invited to dinner. No longer unkempt, he looks and
sounds not like an aged Nazi but like a courtly, hand-kissing Jewish
gentleman. He states that during World War II his bad eyesight kept him
from active military duty. Yet even in old age he wears thin glasses. To
add cuteness to goofs, we later see Denker chortling at the nearsighted Mr.
Magoo on TV. Even the names "Todd" and "Dussander" may be in-"jokes" about
the German words for "death" and "other."
The plot gets exponentially creepy, unpleasant and dumb. Denker turns the
blackmail table around by telling Todd that he now has a bank box with
papers telling all about Todd. In way overdone resurgent cruelty Denker
throws a wandering cat into a lit gas-stove. That's  a pretty disgusting
reference to Jews in camp crematoria. Separately but equally Todd smashes a
bird that has a bad wing, This has to refer to the Nazis' "euthanasia"
program that predated the Holocaust:  killing people with physical or
mental defects.
Ugliness  mounts in irritating, obscure and arbitrary ways. Example: a film
projection is attended by laughing young students, and by Mr. Denker. The
movie is not shown but the German song "This is Berlin" is sung on the
soundtrack. Makes no sense.
Just as outrageously artificial is the appearance of a smelly bum (Elias
Koteas) who might also blackmail Denker. This (don't ask) leads to graphic
violence and murder, to knife stabbing, head-smashing by shovel, etc. It
involve the homeless fellow, Denker, Todd as well as a heart-attack --then
somehow leads to a hospital, to the FBI and the Mossad (the Israeli Secret
Services), to a providential hospital roommate of Denker's who just happens
to be a Jewish death-camp survivor, and enough more nonsense and cliches,
like the old favorite of the presumed dead rising up again.
There is just one semi-valid subplot. Todd's obsession and neglect of
schoolwork have brought his grades way down. Mr. French, the school's
guidance counselor, sends a notice to the boy's parents. It is swiped, but
Denker, unbeknownst to Todd posing as the kid's grandpa, makes a deal with
French, who has Todd cram,  get back to his straight A level in the last
three weeks of school and -would you believe it? --deliver the Commencement
speech!
At least, in the finale, the blatant fantasy of this ridiculous situation
manages to crown the distateful movie's mess with a show of Todd's
disturbing transformation.
Brad Renfro plays his feminine-looking Todd as an unpleasant type with aan
almost  imperturbable face. Britain's Ian McKellen does his part with
over-the-top theatricality. But his German accent seems pretty good.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Jerry Saravia
Stephen King's novella "Apt Pupil," part of the "Different Seasons" short
stories, is probably one of his most ambitious recent efforts. It is the story
of a young boy's growing fascination with an SS officer living in a typical
suburban American town, but the movie version shies away from its basic premise
and becomes a slightly baroque Gothic thriller. 
The apt pupil is a blank-faced high school student named Todd Bowen (Brad
Renfro), who is obsessed with the Nazis' tortures of the Jews during the
Holocaust. After some Nancy Drew-type investigating, Todd discovers that a
local resident named Arthur Denker is really a former SS officer named Kurt
Dussander (Ian McKellen). One day, Todd visits the old man's house and, at
first, the old man denies the kid's charges. Finally, Dussander succumbs, and
is coerced by Todd into telling him the detailed atrocities he committed. If
Dussander complies, the kid will not tell the authorities his true identity
since he is on a wanted manhunt list. In one eerie scene, Dussander puts on his
SS uniform and marches until the kid insists that he stop. The comfort of evil
has struck again. 
"Apt Pupil" begins promisingly, and I thought the film was going to show the
grim reality of the war through the spoken words of a Nazi who was just
following orders (this was one of the novella's high points). The film begins
that way, but then the machinations of the plot take over. For example, we see
Todd's fascination and obsession seeping into his life when his high-school
grades deplete, he loses contact with his best friend ("Dawson's Creek's"
Joshua Jackson), and he dreams of gas showers. Then there's the nerdy guidance
counselor (a fine comic bit of casting by a mustached David Schwimmer), who
tries to determine the root of Todd's school problems. Todd's basketball
playing, ironically, is better than ever. These are all fine details that
should be explored, but the problem lies in the casting of the lead character. 
Brad Renfro ("The Client") exhibits a blank, emotionless, cold-eyed stare as
Todd throughout the whole film, making him less than interesting or obsessive.
I also didn't feel the tension building or developing between him and
Dussander, considering how the film tries to show that a kid can be induced
into evil. Mostly we get elements out of your typical Gothic horror/slasher
movie: there's Dussander struggling to place a kitten in an oven; the
unnecessary inclusion of a homeless man (Elias Koteas) who suspects that
Dussander has homosexual tendencies; a bloody murder scene with Wagner's tragic
excerpt from "Liebestod" suffusing the background; and Dussander's attempts to
pass off as Todd's grandfather. All of these elements diminish whatever power
the crucial central story had of a boy's fascination with evil. 
The one redeeming factor is the superb performance by Ian McKellen as the
weary, gentle, menacing Dussander, but the film shows him only as a
one-dimensional monster. During the war, the SS officers were given orders and
they had to uphold them, but they were still human beings performing atrocious
acts of inhumanity. If the film tried to maintain a human, empathetic level
with Dussander's role in the war - to see ourselves in the face of
incomprehensible horrors - then it would have been a more cunning portrait of
evil. As it stands, he's a monster, nothing more. Think of the similar role
played by Armin Mueller-Stahl in "The Music Box" - he did it with shards of
humanity and understanding. 
Director Bryan Singer ("The Usual Suspects") and writer Brandon Boyce throw in
too many complacent, cinematic flourishes instead of trying to deal with the
nature of evil and how it breeds in small-town America, especially in
adolescent boys. Singer would have been more apt at showing how evil cannot be
easily pigeonholed or traced - now that would have been scarily profound.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Bill Chambers
APT PUPIL  *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (wchamber@netcom.ca)
(Visit my review archive, play some movie trivia, and more!
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers/ )
starring Brad Renfro, Ian McKellan, Elias Koteas, David Schwimmer
screenplay by Brandon Boyce, based on the novella by Stephen King
directed by Bryan Singer
"No man is an island," one character quotes John Donne in APT PUPIL,
effectively summarizing the movie's themes. While hardly a great film,
Singer's ambitious adaptation of King's short story* is challenging
nonetheless; perhaps the most shocking aspect of this inclement
psychological thriller is that a major studio got behind it. APT PUPIL
is a bleak picture destined to be misunderstood by the masses.
1984. Wonder-bred high school honours student Todd Bowden (Renfro)
conducts his own extracurricular investigation of Kurt Dussander, a Nazi
war criminal who fearfully fled Berlin in the 1960s and was never heard
from again. Bowden suspects Arthur Denker (McKellan), the lonely German
senior citizen who lives nearby, is actually a pseudonymous
Dussander-much research and dusting for fingerprints proves young Todd's
theory. Bowden strikes a deal with Dussander: in exchange for not
revealing his identity, Dussander must satisfy Bowden's intense
curiosity by recounting the atrocities of the holocaust from the Nazi
point of view. The stories he hears keep Todd up at night and haunt his
daydreams, but like a bystander at a traffic accident, Todd's desire for
gory details overrides his repulsion.
Bowden revives in Dussander feelings dormant since the end of WWII.
Marching in a mock uniform around his kitchen is wholly cathartic for
Dussander: it leads to his torture of a cat and the torment of his
"student", among other things. Bowden, who has taken on very hateful
qualities (he kills birds and doodles swastikas on his notebook),
engages the veteran in an endless game of one-upmanship. Dussander
stands to lose his freedom, and Bowden his credibility-in effect, his
post-secondary school future. All of this winds down to a fairly
unpredictable (and unsettling) conclusion, one which requires leaps of
faith from its audience yet is more satisfying than the source
material's excessive climax.
Singer has yet to get Keyser Söze out of his system. His The Usual
Suspects and APT PUPIL are both about evil masquerading as innocence
(Verbal's tics and Todd's golden-boy reputation are plausible ruses);
they showcase morally bankrupt anti-heroes to whom telling the truth is
not an option if they are to achieve their goals. APT PUPIL is a richer
film than The Usual Suspects, a movie famous and popular partly because
its plot machinations were not germane to the outcome-there was no way
you could see the ending coming, as it was all a hoodwink, anyway.
Thankfully, Singer has gotten most of The Usual Suspects' film-schoolish
geek theatrics out of his system. Some scenes in APT PUPIL feel
overdirected and/or obvious (the dream sequences were extraneous), but
the majority of the film is subdued-and Singer's handling of the violent
scenes is boldly restrained for a film about a murderer and a
murderer-in-training. McKellan's and Renfro's performances contribute
enormously to the overall  success of the film; while most people will
focus on British stage vet McKellan's finely-tuned realization, I'd like
to single out Renfro's daring work. He isn't afraid to play someone
largely unappealing and cold-hearted; he strips his character of vanity,
something many of his peers wouldn't do. (Can you picture Kieran Culkin
or Jonathan Taylor-Thomas in the same role?) Renfro was recently charged
with possession of cocaine-I hope he doesn't continue down that path,
because he has a big future in good movies waiting for him.
As guidance counsellor Edward French, "Friend" Schwimmer also deserves
mention. He wants to be the parent to Todd that Todd's own well-to-do
folks are not (Todd, like most modern kids-and only-children-has mom and
dad wrapped around his pinky finger), and his sincerity makes the apt
pupil's blackening-heart even more apparent. But one of the film's
ultimate questions, are we born evil or do we learn evil?, might be
answered in French, whose motives are the slightest bit ambiguous. No
man is an island, indeed-we all have the capacity to make the "right" or
the "wrong" choices. Schwimmer winningly plays one of a trio of
fascinating characters who make the unconventional APT PUPIL laudible.
     *The excellent collection King's stories called Different Seasons
spawned not only Apt Pupil, but The Shawshank Redemption (originally
titled Rita Hayworth and The Shawshank Redemption) and Stand By Me
(originally titled The Body).

Author
Michael Dequina
Bryan Singer's adaptation of the the Stephen King novella _Apt_Pupil_
opens with images one would associate with such a title.  A high school
student receives an "A" on a paper and then shuttles off to the library,
immersing himself in research as the opening titles unspool.  As this dark,
often disturbing psychological thriller progresses, the title's meaning
remains the same, except it gradually takes on a much more sinister
perspective.
The apt pupil seen at the opening of the film is 16-year-old high school
student Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro), whose intense extracurricular research
on the Holocaust leads him to discover that one Arthur Denker (Ian
McKellen), an old man whom he has seen around town, is really Nazi war
criminal-in-hiding Kurt Dussander.  But instead of turning him in, Todd
proposes an odd exchange: his silence in return for Dussander's first-hand
accounts of wartime atrocities.
Of course, dredging up the past brings to the surface Dussander's fascist
tendencies, but _Apt_Pupil_ goes one step further in that the stories bring
forth Todd's capacity for evil as well; it is this psychological seduction
that lends the film a queasy fascination.  Singer and screenwriter Brandon
Boyce also go against the populist Hollywood grain by boldly making the
already fairly unsympathetic characters _moreso_ as the film goes on.
While the absence of a likable lead character will certainly off-put many
moviegoers, and one contrived plot development is a bit hard to swallow,
audiences are nonetheless more than likely to remain riveted by Renfro and
McKellen's dead-on performances.  Renfro's evolution from curious
adolescent to hateful manipulator is unsettlingly believable while
McKellen, speaking with a perfect German accent, gives Dussander an air of
quiet majesty that is as frightening as it is deceiving.
While he heavily uses quick cuts and horrifying imagery, Singer admirably
eschews easy "shock" gimmicks to jolt the audience out their seats.
Instead, he appears more concerned with the collective effect of a variety
shocks, visual and otherwise, on the viewer's psyche.  As such, _Apt_Pupil_
gets under the skin like few thrillers do.  A mad slasher with an axe does
not necessarily constitute a successful frightfest; what does is the
feeling of terror that comes with being pursued by such a force of evil.
_Apt_Pupil_'s primary force of evil may be axe-less and of poor physical
health, but his--and the film's--subtle brand of cerebral terror cuts
sharper and deeper than anything found in a more conventional horror movie.
 (opens October 23)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 8 October 1998 with Lothlorien at the Sony Lincoln Square as a
Sneak Preview ($0)
What makes a honor student withdraw from his usual activities, his
friends, and his studies, and become antisocial, twisted, and flirting
with disaster? Some might say it's sociopathic behavior brought on my too
much curiosity into evil. Others might say, "confusion with his sexual
orientation." Apt Pupil says yes to both, and quite homophobically, I
might add.
While Apt Pupil does present the nuances of power, manipulation, control,
and evil very well, it does so in a way that manages to both trivialize
the Holocaust and bring us back to the good old days of the killer homo. 
The "fun" begins when said honor student Todd Bowen (Brad Renfro) for some
reason becomes enthralled by Hitler's Final Solution, does extensive
research, and does the one thing a 40-year-old manhunt cannot do: unearth
the identity and whereabouts of war criminal Kurt Dussander (played by Ian
McKellen), right there in his home town. Right there, on the bus! He has
fingerprint proof and everything. So he shoehorns his way into Dussander's
home and life. He visits every day after school, craving stories of the
good old days.
The sickening recounting of the inmate's final agonies do take their toll
on poor Todd, who starts to have nightmares and even hallucinations during
the day. His friend notices a change in him. So do his parents. So does a
caring social worker (David Schwimmer with a mustache drew belly laughs
from the audience). Boy, are *they* ever in for a surprise.
There's a lot not to like in Apt Pupil. The idea that an otherwise normal
kid will become sociopathic from an overinterest in Nazi deathcamps is
ridiculous. That a kid will turn to sociopathic behavior and homicide
because he's afraid he *might* be gay, and because one girl has gay baited
him during a failed bout of making out in a car, is pretty over the top,
and frankly, antiquated. That the drifter is HIV+, willing to trade sex
for lodging, and wearing fey clothing, is something I have not seen since,
well, I was too young to remember anything this appalling in my lifetime
(yes, I am that young).
The homophobia in the movie is offensive and disturbing. HOWEVER, the
movie does have a few redeeming qualities. The opening credits are very
good. The exploration of manipulation and control is
excellent--Machiavelli would be yelling "checkmate!" from his grave during
some of the scenes. McKellen and Renfro turn in very good performances as
the Nazi and his protege. There are some truly wonderful bits of
cinematography. The scene in which Todd is practically flying on and then
thrown from his bicycle reminded me of Zentropa (a movie I had finally
just gotten over). There is also a scene that is one of the most gripping
I have ever seen (don't want to give away the context); that such horror
begins with a cut-away to a seen from The Jeffersons is actually hilarious
and ingenious, not tacky. Despite all the badness, the movie has, in its
demented world, a very strong sense of humor.
Personally, I think we should have seen more of Todd before he unearths
his Nazi friend. Seen some of the murderous potential up front, e.g., the
scene in which Todd kills a pigeon should have been in the first twenty
minutes of the film, before meeting Dussander.
Directed by Bryan Singer; adapted for the screen by Brandon Boyce from a
story by thrillmaster Stephen King. Cinematography by Tom Sigel.
PS: The title is very amusing if you say it very loudly with a British
accent, emphasizing the consonants--aPT! Poo-Pil! Call me for a
demonstration.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "APT PUPIL" (Tri-Star Pictures)
Most screen adaptations of Stephen King novellas fall into the
macabre slasher/horror genre, but this evolves into a diabolically
chilling and profoundly disturbing psychological thriller. Adapted by
first-time screenwriter Brandon Boyce and directed by Bryan Singer,
the bizarre story begins in 1984 with a 16 year-old high-school senior
(Brad Renfo) who becomes obsessed with the Holocaust in history class,
spending hours in the library, immersing himself in documents and
photographs. Then, one day, he spots an elderly man (Ian McKellen) on
a bus and recognizes his face from his research. After methodically
acquiring fingerprints and other evidence, he accosts the accused
former SS officer with his conclusions and, over the next few months,
blackmails the mass murderer into graphically reciting the grisly,
gruesome, gory details of his past atrocities in return for preserving
his anonymity. "Boy, be careful," the old man warns. "You play with
fire." And, true to his word, the crafty ex-Gestapo officer engages in
his own duplicity as an insidious, deadly cat-and-mouse game
evolves. As in his previous film, "The Usual Suspects," Singer never
reveals too much about his characters, so you're not sure exactly what
motivates the perverse teenager as the tension mounts. "It's about a
boy who became a very good student but not in the way his teachers and
mother envisioned," concludes the Nazi war criminal. Both Renfro and
McKellen deliver impeccable performances, but exploiting the
Holocaust-related theme may be offensive to some. And, since both
leading characters are ultimately despicable, do you really want to
spend two hours with them? On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Apt
Pupil" is a morbid, sinister 6. If you don't believe in the existence
of evil, you have a lot to learn.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Bryan Singer
Writer: Brandon Boyce (based on the novella by Stephen King)
Starring: Ian McKellen, Brad Renfro, Bruce Davison, Ann Dowd, Joshua
Johnson, Elias Kosteas, David Schwimmer, Joe Morton, Jan Tríska, Michael
Byrne, Heather McComb, James Karen
There must be something about Stephen King's collection of novellas
entitled "Different Seasons."  From this collection, we've gotten "Stand
by Me" and "The Shawshank Redemption" (based on "The Body" and "Rita
Hayworth and the Shawshank Redemption," respectively), two of the best
King adaptations that have been filmed (which, if you can remember all
the King adaptations, isn't really saying a lot).  This collection
doesn't dabble in the usual King cliches, like supernatural monsters,
but rather stems from real human horror.  "The Body" is a poignant and
totally original coming-of-age story, and "Rita Hayworth and the
Shawshank Redemption" tells an outrageous story about a 19-year-long
escape from prison that deals more with the characters who have eerily
adapted to life there and can't function anywhere else.  Who thought
King was so philosophically interested in humanity?
"Apt Pupil" is sandwiched between both of these in the book, and deals
with a fascinating topic.  In it, a 16-year old genius high school
student named Todd Bowden blackmails a man he believes to be a Nazi War
Criminal in hiding into not giving him money but rather teaching him
about what it was like in the concentration camps.  I haven't read it
(yet), but the key to this film is Todd is already rather evil himself,
having taken the time to make sure the man is who he is, and then
forcing him to unearth his old wounds, and that by hearing about the
man's evil deeds from his past, he begins to get a better hold on his
own personal evil.
That's all well and good, but that doesn't mean this film is necessarily
very good.  Just because a film has a neat philosophy doesn't mean that
that cancels out all the problems with it, such as this film's main
problem, a weak script.  The film opens rather well, though, showing
Todd (played by Brad Renfro, the kid from "The Client," that painfully
mediocre Grisham film adaptation) as not totally at odds with his own
inner evil.  He's a senior, despite his age, and is rather shy though
slightly popular (he has to be: his best friend is played by Joshua
Jackson from "Dawson's Creek," and he actually looks like James Van Der
Beek's younger brother).  He's studying the Holocaust in his History
class, which piques his interest so much that he studies it after
school.
One day he sees a man on a bus that looks like an older version of one
of the pictures of a concentration camp torturer, and becomes obsessed
with him.  When we next see him, he's accumulated all the facts into one
folder, and has successfully blackmailed the man, one Arthur Denker,
who's really a man named Kurt Dussander.  He agrees to tell him all the
stories (which we never hear with one exception - and that exception is
about as creepy as the film gets), but soon the plot twists as Todd
grows more and more in control of his evil, and Kurt digresses into his
old state.
Well, that's how it should be.  The Dussander regression is rather good
for a bit, mostly because the performance comes from none other than
Brit actor Ian McKellen, a brilliant thespian who's performance in
1995's "Richard III" ranks among one of the best of the decade (and one
of the best villains of all time).  He represents all that's great with
the film, slowly allowing his old self to seep in, but at the same time
coming across so mysteriously that he may have been that way all the
time.  When he tells his stories, we sense that he really did enjoy it
and took a sick pride in his work.
But as good as McKellen is, the film suffers from being too much like a
sustained ascent to whatever in the first half, then an anticlimactic
anti-delivery in the second half.  The meetings go on for awhile,
without much insight, and Renfro, who's very good, is left with a
characterization which is too erratic for him to really get a good grip
on his performance, and therefore the first half allows us to be a tad
disappointed in what this film is really trying to tell us.  Is he
really getting a good grip on his own evil, even though he was able to
blackmail a man brilliantly when others couldn't?  Renfro goes all out
in his performance, making him a real bastard, and we wonder if we
should like him or the crotchety old man being blackmailed...and then
other times it's the other way around.
More conflicts are risen, like ones involving his presence at school,
and more importantly, his slipping grades, which are allegedly the
result of him having nightmares as a result of hearing those darned
stories (we can't really get into this because we don't hear the stories
either, but that would require, I guess, someone sitting down with an
actual Nazi War Criminal, which just isn't worth it if it's just going
to be in a silly little film).  Enter Guidance Counselor Edward French,
played by a moustached and surprisingly effective David Schwimmer
(looking like a dorkier Groucho Marx in a short-sleeved shirt), who
begins to try and help him, and only gets himself more involved in the
plot.
The second half, which should bring about the breaking point, instead
brings some really cheap moments of suspense tossed in for
suspense-sake, such as the murders of a wounded pigeon, a cat (this
isn't really resolved though, for whatever reason), and finally, a bum
looking for a drink, somewhere to sleep, and a couple bucks, and is
willing to do anything to get it (played by a very effective Elias
Kosteas).  All of these reduce the film to literal terms, rather than
really exploring the horror within, not to mention that they're there
for audience appreciation rather than anything deeper.  By the time the
film is quoting and misinterpreting John Donne, the film has become one
of those films that takes the easy way out after a perhaps promising
beginning, making the wait rather unworth it.
Still, there are good parts.  The acting is very good, especially from
McKellen and Renfro, who succeed despite some characterization problems
they had nothing to do with.  The direction and all things technical are
the real plus side.  Directed by Bryan Singer, who directed the
contemporary classic, "The Usual Suspects," the film just looks good.
His shots are well-developed, and his inclusion of a controversial high
school shower scene, which morphs between reality and Todd's images of
holocaust victims, is shallow but emotionally effective (just what is
this supposed to be telling us about his character?).  The
cinematography is excellent, and the juxtaposing finale is particularly
creepy.
Therefore, "Apt Pupil" is a modest failure.  It's moments are really
effective, but they fit like pieces from different jigsaw puzzles,
making up a portrait that doesn't quite work.  Still, it has some really
nice throaway moments that make it great, particularly the revelation
that all old German WWII survivors love American cartoons and comedy
(the sight of McKellen loosing it while watching Mr. Magoo is especially
amusing), which makes it just enough to be marginally likable, but just
not totally effective as a disturbing piece of insightful cinema...or as
part of the "Different Seasons" collection.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Tri-Star Pictures/ Phoenix Pictures
 Director:  Bryan Singer
 Writer:  Brandon Boyce, novella by Stephen King
 Cast: Brad Renfro, Ian McKellen, Bruce Davison, Elias
Koteas, Joe Morton, Jan Triska, Michael Byrne, Heather
McComb, Ann Dowd, Joshua Jackson, David Schwimmer
  To borrow a story that recently appeared in the New York
Times magazine...A Jewish fellow had just purchased a
Volkswagen.  Horrified that he would buy a German car,
especially from a company accused of using Jews as slave
labor during the Holocaust, he was confronted by a buddy. 
"How could you do this? How could you possibly buy a
German car?"  His friend replied (with a nod to Socrates),
"Would you buy a pair of Italian shoes?"  "Yes," the accuser
admitted.  "How about a leather jacket from Spain?"  "Without
hesitation, he responded.  "Well, you know what Spain did to
the Jews during the Inquisition, and of course, there's the
matter of how the Roman Empire treated the Hebrews."  "I
hadn't thought of that," said the denouncer.  "So you see,"
the buyer concluded wiping a speck of dust from the
windshield, "It's just a matter of time."
   The war is over, but some memories do no die so quickly,
and perhaps that's good.  As the good people say, if we
forget about the Holocaust, we're more likely to experience
such a disaster again.  Stephen King, who wrote the novella
on which "Apt Pupil" is based, has not forgotten, as he spins
a tension-filled tale of a 1940s calamity that has a visceral
impact on a Los Angeles suburb in 1984.  Transcribed to the
screen from a script by Brandon Boyce, Brian Singer's ("The
Usual Suspects") parable on the contagious nature of evil is
affecting, though the adaptation falls short of being cathartic. 
Essentially a two-character play expanded to take in the
ambiance of a high school and a wealth suburban
neighborhood, "Apt Pupil" is a dark story with an
appropriately somber conclusion, propitiously avoiding the
uplifting ending so popular in movies centering on high-school
kids.  It features Ian McKellen, the great British actor, who
adopts a believable German accent throughout, with young
Brad Renfro doing a creditable job playing off his talent
against that of a real pro.  "Apt Pupil" deals with what
happens when a bright 16-year-old discovers that a Nazi war
criminal is living in his immediate neighborhood.  If this were
a conventional chase drama, most of the action would be
centered on the pursuit of the offender by the L.A.P.D., the
F.B.I. and perhaps the Mossad.  What we get instead is an
intricate psychological drama pitting the ability of a bright,
ambitious, intensely curious boy against the skills of a man
accustomed to command in a see-saw battle for control.  In a
greater sense, "Apt Pupil" digs beneath the civilized veneer of
its two principals to expose the evil that lies dormant, ready
to spring into activity when the moment is right.  The Stephen
King signature is explicit in one scene of pure horror involving
the murder of a man who remains alive despite a serious
knife wound and several thumps on the head with a shovel
clutched by a strong and determined young man.
   "Apt Pupil" opens in 1984 on a high-school history class
which has just spent a week studying the Holocaust.  Todd
Bowden (Brad Renfro) actually does recommended research
on his own to further his knowledge of the event.  After
poring over pictures of Nazi commandants in the local library,
he believes he spots a man who, despite the passage of forty
years, strongly resembles one of the photographs he has
looked over.  Boldly introducing himself at the home of Arthur
Denker (Ian McKellen), he makes clear that he knows all
about the old man's wartime activities at an infamous death
camp, blackmailing him into revealing his first-hand
knowledge of the gruesome enterprise.  Over a period of
several months he and this aged citizen have a profound
effect on each other, the old man renewing his memories of
what must have been the most exalted years of his life while
he in turn arouses violent sensations in Todd that the boy
never knew existed.  As Todd continues to threaten the ex-
Nazi with exposure, Denker plays his own trump card to
intimidate the young man.  Ultimately, the competition, fierce
but without physical brutality, turns into an episode of
violence that would not otherwise have taken place.
   Bruce Davison in the role of Todd's dad and David
Schwimmer as his high-school guidance counselor provide
greater insight into the boy's social class, a privileged status
which, combined with his academic ability, would have
allowed him to pursue a successful, professional life.  The
particular advantage that Denker claims in order to keep
Todd in line is contrived and not believable.  Still, the
audience comes away from this movie certain that the
relationship savored by the two men will neither be forgotten
by Todd, nor will it do other than to harm his career and his
very future.  As much as people of good will would like to
bring every last Nazi war criminal to justice "Apt Pupil" is, at
base, a warning that some truths are best left undisturbed. 
The tense, skillfully acted--but never didactic--film will be of
particular value to adolescents who could not imagine being
so personally involved in an incident with roots in what they
probably consider ancient history.

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
It took me a little while to figure out why I didn't like 'Apt Pupil'.
At first, I was intrigued by its thoroughly original premise.  A high
school student (Brad Renfro) digs up some information about one of his
elderly neighbors (Ian McKellen).  He comes up with information that
proves beyond a shadow of a doubt that the old man is a Nazi war
criminal who escaped punishment after World War II and now lives in
America.  Renfro uses the information in his possession to essentially
blackmail his latest study.  Study, you ask?  Yes.  Renfro's plan is to
have the old man tell him stories about the Holocaust, perhaps things
that aren't in any of the history books that the Nazi himself remembers.
The tables are turned on Renfro in a way that will land him in a lot of
trouble if the authorities find out he knew about the old Nazi and
didn't report it.  There are some other plot twists that occur in the
film that are clever but they're only executed with about half the
strength they're capable of.
The film is directed by Bryan Singer ('The Usual Suspects') and Singer
has made a reasonably well crafted film that could have used a little
more thought in its writing (the screenplay is by Brandon Boyce based on
the novella by Stephen King) that it unfortunately relies too much in
some spots on the "schlock" value which is contained in many of Stephen
King's stories that are turned into films.  These elements of the film
undermine and undercut the value of the film's principal psychological
subject matter which are memories of the Holocaust.  The film,
unintentionally I'm sure but nevertheless cheapens the memory of this
historic injustice  One scene has McKellen cradling a cat from his
backyard and bringing in to the house and trying to throw it into his
gas powered oven and another scene involves McKellen's torture and
murder of a derelict male prostitute (Elias Koteas) to an extent where
he involves Renfro in the crime.  I still couldn't figure out what the
point of these two things were, significant to the film except to
illustrate that McKellen is shown to be an unrepentant Nazi, past
redemption and not seeming to care about it.
What's also upsetting is the way the adult characters are portrayed in
this film.  Renfro's father (Bruce Davison) is made to look like an
uninformed stooge, unaware of his son's activities which I suppose no
one can really blame him for but the situation is still annoying to
watch at times and Renfro's high school guidance counselor (David
Schwimmer) is portrayed basically as a jack ass whose job it is to
socially guide the students under him and he has the table turned on him
by a high school kid to the extent where he will be in serious hot water
legally.
I saw so many directions this film could have gone in and while I don't
usually judge films for what they COULD have been rather than what they
are, the paths of choice about the way the subject matter is handled in
every aspect from start to finish are so obviously the wrong ones that
in some respects, a first year film student could have diagnosed a
better treatment.
The film's saving grace from getting a thoroughly negative review is the
totally convincing and chilling performance by Ian McKellen.  His
performance as a former Nazi living with a soul that is no doubt damned
for eternity is so chilling because his character is one who would live
his life over again exactly the same way if given the chance without any
remorse for what he's done.  McKellen could get an Oscar nomination for
this role but it may be a long shot.
'Apt Pupil' is not a disappointing film to a large extent but it is a
disappointing after thought when you consider what might have been.
Another missed opportunity on celluloid to push a film's subject matter
to memorable proportions.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: October 23, 1998
Starring: Brad Renfro, Ian McKellen, David Schwimmer, Elias Koteas,
Bruce Davison, Ann Dowd, Joe Morton, Jan Tríska
Directed by: Brian Singer
Distributed by: Sony Pictures Entertainment / TriStar Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (scenes of strong violence, language, brief sexuality) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/aptpupil.htm
Movies that don't deliver are the worst kind. Like any method of
storytelling, the cinema follows a conventional pattern of events: an
expository period is followed by several consecutively more important
scenes which amount to a climax. The most important point of the film's
plot comes somewhere between the end of this rising action and the
climactic scenes themselves. It's at this pivotal moment when the script
ought to deliver the goods, and when it doesn't, it shows both lack of
scripting skills as well as a lackluster production squad. And APT
PUPIL, the latest thriller from THE USUAL SUSPECTS director Bryan
Singer, does not deliver the goods. 
The movie stars Brad Renfro (SLEEPERS) as Todd Bowden, a high schooler
at the head of his class. The current topic of discussion in his history
class is the Holocaust, and his interest leads him to investigate the
background of a hobbling old man on his block named Kurt Dussander (Ian
McKellen, THE SHADOW). With sleuthing skills and a bit of luck, he pins
Dussander as Nazi war criminal Arthur Denker, and confronts Denker with
this information. Rather than threatening to turn the man in, however,
Todd asks Denker to tell him stories of his experiences in the
concentration camps of Germany; and after Denker submits, these
narratives begin to have a decidedly negative effect on Todd's life.
That's when things all spiral toward the harrowing finish. 
The pacing is all wrong in APT PUPIL. It's based on the Stephen King
novella of the same name, from the collection called DIFFERENT SEASONS.
Although I haven't read it, I have no doubt that the source material was
a much more exciting thriller, as King is wont to write. In the movie,
however, too much of the plot and characterization is implicit. Todd
approaches Denker early on and seemingly without motive, and it's almost
impossible to believe the explanation Todd gives in these scenes (he's
fingerprinted and photographed Denker several times). There is also
relatively little time spent on the crux of the storyline: Denker's
horrific tales are the reason that Todd's life spins out of control and
makes the movie possible, but we only get bits and pieces of these.
Instead, Director Singer uses violent imagery for his shock value - and
loses much of the impact. 
Any criticism on the part of the characters themselves would be to
critique the novella rather than the movie, but even so, therein lies
one of the chief problems with the thrillerism. Neither of the two
headliners are good guys: as Denker, Ian McKellen gives us a pathetic
old man who has chronic flashbacks resulting in violence. Perhaps we
feel sorry for him, as the punkish Todd pushes him around, but that's
counterbalanced by his Nazi background. And, as for Renfro's Todd, he
*does* come off punkish, and instead of being a cat killed by curiosity,
he's just a sick teenager. Although both do well given the situation,
neither is impressive by any measure, and they're just one item in a
list of flaws. APT PUPIL is a spooky movie, but for nothing other than
shock value. Sure, if you don't believe in the existence of evil, you've
got a lot to learn - but you won't learn it here.

Author
greg king
APT PUPIL (M).  
(Phoenix Picture/Columbia Tristar)
Director: Bryan Singer
Stars: Ian McKellen, Brad Renfro, Bruce Davison, Elias Koteas, Joe 
Morton, Joshua Jackson, David 
Schwimmer, Jan Triska, Michael Byrne, Heather McComb, Ann Dowd
Running time: 111 minutes.
There were high expectations for Bryan Singer's follow up to
his Oscar winning crime thriller The Usual Suspects (1995), and Apt
Pupil doesn't disappoint.  Apt Pupil is the third story from Stephen
King's Different Seasons anthology to be filmed, following both Stand
By Me and the brilliant The Shawshank Redemption.  This is a superb
and unsettling psychological thriller, that again shows how good a
writer King is when he moves away from straight horror to explore the
darker potential of human nature.
The film deals not only with the knowledge that one generation
passes to the next, but also the attitudes, prejudices and hatred.
It's also a tale about the loss of innocence, and the seductive,
persuasive power of evil.
Sixteen year old school boy Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro, from
Sleepers, etc) is a brilliant student with a healthy appetite for
knowledge.  But after he discovers that an elderly man in his
neighbourhood is actually a Nazi war criminal, he becomes consumed
with sharing his experiences of the war and the concentration camps.
A symbiotic relationship gradually develops between the two as they
realise that they need to trust each other with their terrible
secrets.  Todd's curiosity eventually reawakens an old blood lust in
Dussander (played to perfection by Ian McKellen).  Events soon spiral
out of control, as Dussander's true identity is revealed.
McKellen's role is not all that far removed from the power
hungry fascist he played in the brilliant Richard III.  He delivers a
superbly chilling performance as Dussander, but he also manages to
bring some depth to the role, making the character far more complex.
At times he even manages to elicit some sympathy for Dussander, who is
smooth and charming on the surface.  In his best and biggest role to
date, Renfro is also superb, deftly suggesting a mix of youthful
innocence and guile and evil.  We witness his frightening
transformation from wholesome, clean cut all-American school kid as he
loses his sense of perspective.  As the final scene demonstrates, Todd
is indeed an apt pupil who has learnt his lessons from Dussander only
too well.
This is a creepy, tense and unnerving little thriller.  The
tension slowly builds under Singer's tight and assured direction.  The
supporting cast, which includes Bruce Davison, Joshua Jackson and
Friends' star David Schwimmer, are all good.
Apt Pupil reaches our shores almost a year after it was the
centre of some controversy in the States.  A number of concerned,
angry parents sued the producers over the treatment of their children
during the shooting of certain scenes.  Consequently, the film
features probably the most controversial shower scene since Psycho.
However, the outcry doesn't seem warranted, given the brief screen
time the powerful and evocative scene occupies.  But, as they say in
this business, any publicity is good publicity!

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
This film enraged me in ways that I find difficult to put into language.  I
was at first compelled to consign it to the "no stars" category, which I
reserve for films that are morally repugnant, but I held back -- if only
because I wasn't too sure if the filmmakers were aware of how badly they'd
botched their own story.  Let me explain.
APT PUPIL has been adapted from a Stephen King short story about a high
school kid who discovers that the old man living down the street is Kurt
Dussander, a former Nazi commandant.  He blackmails the old man into spilling
more and more of the beans about his life as a Nazi, and then, as we might
imagine, there is a transference of personality and intent.
The story seemed less exploitive on paper, I guess.  On film, it's appalling,
because it shows us things that in a more intelligent movie, we would have
felt repulsed by -- but in this movie, they're being used for shock value, to
lead us along and enlist our attention when it's already being kept.
Technically, the movie's credentials are solid: it was directed by Bryan
Singer, whose THE USUAL SUSPECTS was fascinating if a little too much like
the ultimate cinematic shaggy-dog story.  The acting is also solid: Ian
McKellan, who was magnificent in RICHARD III, is fine as Dussander, given the
limits of the script.  Brad Renfro plays the boy, and does a decent job.  His
character is not stupid, but morally bankrupt, and the movie tries to get its
mileage out of the idea that his moral vacuum may somehow be worse than
Dussander's.
But isn't this a futile effort? I kept asking myself.  The only reason one
would try to gauge which of the two is worse -- Dussander or the Renfro
character -- is so that one could mete out punishments, and the movie
indulges in precisely the kind of ham-handed eye-for-and-eye revenge
moralization that bad Hollywood movies of this stripe wallow around in. 
There is a particularly odious attempt to provide "balance" at the end of the
movie, when a concentration camp survivor is trotted out and made to recite
John Donne, as if on cue.
The film is littered with noxious episodes which are allegedly supposed to
portray both character's disintegrations, but which don't add up to much more
than ugly attempts to shock the audience -- probably because they're dealt
with in such an exploitive fashion.  For example: Dussander, in one of his
less tractable moments, tries to stick a neighbor's cat in the oven and gas
it to death.  The film's shifty editing allows us to draw our own conclusions
about whether or not the cat survived.        In other words, the movie wants to
have its cake (cheap shock of cat being gassed in oven) and eat it too
(larger "statement" about Dussander's evil).  The film even sinks to the
level of shamelessly milking the old He Isn't Really Dead ploy, which does
not belong anywhere near a movie of its alleged caliber.
I think I understand now why I hated this film.  I resented the movie because
it tries to use the subject of the Holocaust -- as well as many other kinds
of horrors -- to spice up a basically mundane story.  It gets to the point
where we are being asked to listen to details that add nothing to the actual
drama, but are simply there as a kind of emotionally pornographic embroidery.
Take, for instance, one scene where Dussander describes in loathsome and
graphic detail the process of gassing Jews.  The scene is squirm-inducing for
all the reasons I described above, but then it takes on another level of
audience betrayal.  Dussander is made to say that the gas came from nozzles
in the ceiling -- in other words, from the infamous dummy showerheads that
have been the subject of many a documentary of the gas chambers.  This is not
even factually correct: the showerheads were cosmetic and not attached to
anything. The actual gas (which came in the form of Zyklon B, a gravel-like
substance that released cyanide gas when exposed to air) was either thrown in
through doggable ports in the ceiling or introduced through wire mesh
devices.
I don't mean to digress forever on this point, but it is a strong component
of what I objected to about this movie.  The whole issue of the Holocaust and
its impact on people is not being explored per se, but is simply being
exploited as an attention-getting factor -- and what's worse, the filmmakers
and screenwriters didn't bother to do basic research beyond recycling
whatever obvious cliches of the Holocaust were floating around in their head.
 That's offensive.
I am now mentally comparing APT PUPIL mentally to another movie that I saw a
while ago -- BETRAYED, which was written by Joe Eszterhas and starred Tom
Berenger as a good ol' boy-cum-Klansman.  That film contained a scene which
brought the whole movie screeching to a halt -- a sequence where Berenger and
some of his Klan buddies kidnap a black man and use him in a live manhunt. 
If the filmmakers felt that to include such a scene in that movie was
"required" to establish how vile the Klansman were, then they are mistaken. 
BETRAYED was written on the level of a two-dimensional Hollywood
entertainment AT BEST. Putting a repulsive scene like that in it does not
"ennoble" the film, because the film has not earned the right to exploit that
imagery by dint of any understanding of those issues.
And now, at last, I think about a movie like the heart-stopping documentary
SHOAH, which contains an almost uncountable number of real details about the
Holocaust, or even HOTEL TERMINUS, which examined the Klaus Barbie affair --
both of which have infinitely more to say about the nature of evil than the
rancidly exploitive APT PUPIL.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Matt Williams
Apt Pupil is a very disturbing movie.  This cerebral thriller is very
much a monster movie. But, rather than the monsters being some
outlandishly implausible creature from the fringes of science fiction,
they are taken from the pages of history, and, indeed, from the very
streets around you.
>From the outside, Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro) seems to be the perfect
all-American kid. He's top in his class, and a good athlete to boot.
However, there's a part of him which he allows no one else to see.
After learning about the Holocaust in school, Todd becomes obsessed with
it.  Fed by an unknown hunger deep inside him, he devotes himself to
learning everything he can about Hitler's plan of genocide.
One day, Todd spots an old man, Kurt Dussander (Ian McKellan), riding
the bus. It takes a while, but Todd recognizes the man:  a Nazi war
criminal.  It seems that Kurt ran several concentration camps during
World War II, then vanished. Todd takes the information he has which can
prove Kurt's true identity, and then confronts him with it.  His intent
isn't to reveal the Nazi to the world, but to learn.
At first, Dussander is reluctant.  But the monster within him still
thrives, and as he recounts the horrors he inflicted to his young pupil,
it reawakens. At the same time, Todd's dark side is nurtured by
Dussander's tales.  He begins to shut out the world as the evil within
him grows.
On the surface, Apt Pupil may seem to be about the evils of the
Holocaust, or Nazism.  However, if you go in expecting the film to be
about either of those two, you'll be sorely disappointed.  Instead, the
film is an exploration of evil: evil in any form.
The two main characters are carefully concealed monsters.  They seem
perfectly normal: the kindly old man down the street, or the talented
young high schooler.  But in the right environment, they shed their
skins to reveal their true monstrous selves. Dussander found his element
among the horrors of Nazi Germany.  But the atmosphere doesn't have to
be that extreme...true evil can exist anywhere, even in our own
backyards.
Ian McKellan turns in a truly mesmerizing performance as the aging
Nazi.  He's almost likable, in a way, until you realize the depths of
evil in his soul:  the horrors he has committed before, and has the
potential to commit again.  Next to him, many actors would pale...but
Brad Renfro is able to stand his ground.  His Todd Bowden at first seems
rather flat, but there are layers to his character which are slowly
revealed as the film progresses.
This is director Bryan Singer's first film since the complex and
entertaining The Usual Suspects.  The storyline isn't as convoluted here
(which would have been a hard task), but he is able to create an eerily
distinctive mood.
Although based on a novella by Stephen King, this is not your typical
Stephen King movie. There is some violence (though toned down from the
book), but the horror is primarily psychological.  All in all, it makes
for an unsettlingly good film.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: A boy fascinated by the Holocaust finds a fugitive war
criminal living in his neighborhood.  What follows is a battle for
power of each over the other.  The theme of the Holocaust seems
misused.  Good performance from Ian McKellan (so what else is new?).
Rating:  6 (0 to 10), 1 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Bryan Singer though APT PUPIL is not nearly as good as
     his THE USUAL SUSPECTS.
   - Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro) is fascinated by the Holocaust and has
     memorized pictures of all the principles so he recognizes Kurt
     Dussander "the Butcher of Treblinka" (Ian McKellan) when he sees
     him on a cross-town bus.  With photographs and fingerprints he
     gets evidence that this Arthur Denker really is the Kurt Dussander
     whom he thinks he has found, then follows a game of power between
     the two.  Initially Todd just wants to hear an eyewitness account.
     But the game between the two becomes more serious.
   - We never find out why Todd is so interested or what his point of
     view is.  In the final analysis APT PUPIL has little to do with
     the Holocaust.  It is just there as an excuse why Todd knows
     something that had can blackmail Denker with.  In fact, it ruins
     some of the credibility.  Denker tries to blackmail Todd by
     threatening going public.  A war criminal would never do that.
   - Some shocking scenes where Todd uses Denker as a puppet.
   - Todd wants to understand the Holocaust better than he can from
     books but  the script does not have anything for Dussander to
     reveal about the Holocaust that is not already common knowledge.
   - When Todd's grades suffer, the guidance counselor makes an offer
     to Todd that no high school would ever offer.  It is convenient
     for the plot, but makes no sense.
   - Denker is fighting to defend a meaningless existence of drinking
     whiskey and watching cartoons.
   - It was not six million people killed in the Holocaust, it was six
     million *Jews*.  There were ten to twelve million *people* killed.
     And a pie graph on the board seems to show only about a third
     where it was really a much higher proportion.
   - A simple documentary about the Holocaust like "Night and Fog" is
     far more chilling than anything that Singer managed to get on the
     screen.  What is a single murder next to ten million murders?

Author
James Sanford

 Hollywood films are often condemned for stressing style over substance, but
that's not a charge that can be levelled at "Apt Pupil," an odd attempt at
combining a thriller about Nazism with a disturbing study of a teen gone
wrong. Director Bryan Singer's first film since his acclaimed debut "The
Usual Suspects," "Pupil" demonstrates Singer's eye for framing shots and his
skill in bringing out the best in his stars. Even so, there's something
amiss here.
 Exactly what's wrong is difficult to pinpoint. "Pupil" is crowned by a
relentlessly creepy, well-nuanced performance by Ian McKellen as Kurt
Dussander, a war criminal who eluded capture 40 years ago and is now alive
and well and living in suburbia under the name Arthur Denker. Rather than
milk Dussander for easy chills, McKellen fills out the man's psychological
profile to demonstrate how his long-dormant violent impulses slowly bubble
up to the surface after being reawakened by overly curious high school
senior Todd (Brad Renfro). For obvious reasons, Dussander is not itching to
relive his glory days and McKellen pulls off the difficult feat of actually
making viewers feel sorry for this man who sent hundreds to their deaths.
 Renfro also hits all the right notes as honor-student Todd slowly and
quietly slips into the grip of a dangerous obsession. In some ways, he's
even scarier than Dussander because his immaturity makes him less
predictable and prone to abrupt mood swings.
 The film's first hour sets up a potentially riveting look at the contrasts
and commonalities of these two men, both of whom have a penchant for fairly
twisted mind games. But since "Pupil" is based on a novella by Stephen King,
you know there's eventually going to be a whopper of a murder eventually; in
this case, the victim is an unlucky transient (played by the excellent
Canadian actor Elias Koteas from "Exotica") who calls on Dussander at the
wrong time. The rest of the movie is standard body-in-the-basement
melodrama, as a meddling guidance counselor (David Schwimmer), Todd's
blissfully ignorant parents and various investigators drift in and out of
the plot.
 "Pupil" is exceedingly well-made, beautifully photographed and sharply
edited, but it's not difficult to see why it's been sitting on the Sony
shelves for so many months (the film bears a 1997 trademark at the end). All
the artistry of Singer, Renfro, McKellen and company can't obscure the fact
that the movie never seems sure of what it's about or what it wants to say.
 Is this a cautionary tale about letting sleeping dogs lie? Is it a thriller
with a strong homoerotic bent? Is it a story that aims to contrast the
horrors of the Holocaust with the trendy anti-everything attitude found in
so many of today's kids?
 "Apt Pupil" wants to be all of these things but has no idea how to pull its
various parts together. Instead of leaving viewers shaken the movie is more
likely to leave them shaking their heads, wondering exactly what they've
been watching for the last two hours.
James Sanford

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, trivia and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A teenager discovers one of his neighbors to be an ex-Nazi from the World
War II death camps, and blackmails the man into telling him all about the
atrocities that he committed.
CRITIQUE:
It seemed as though the premise of this film had a certain amount of
promise, but the film lacks any real suspense or action, doesn't provide us
with any real sympathetic characters to care about, but does offer some
excellent acting performances by the main leads, Ian McKellen and Brad
Renfro. The one thing they never really explain in this film, which surely
lightened my intensity for it, was WHY the teenage kid wanted to hear all
those awful stories? Did he get off on it? Was he as sick as the Nazi man
himself? We are asked to commit to his plight solely on the fact that the
kid is interested in the subject. I for one, would have liked a better
background construction for the teenager, so that I could have appreciated
his character on another level. As it was, I disliked his character even
more than the ex-Nazi, and never really cared about the story, which didn't
provide for any real tension, save for the tacked on "incident" which occurs
near the end. And what's with all the homosexual undertones? Right over my
head. You know something strange is going on in a film review, when I
actually praise David Schwimmer for his role as well. Forgive me, father.
See it if the subject matter interests you, you like director Bryan Singer's
style, or you want to see some great acting performances from the two leads,
otherwise there is no real reason to see this movie. For a much better
story, greater performances and stronger characters, rent AMERICAN HISTORY X
(8.5/10) instead.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The novel by Stephen King has a much darker ending. The Brad Renfro
character of Todd goes mad and starts shooting innocent people on a highway!
It is also to note that Todd's high school mascot (the Pirates) and school
colors (green and gold) are the same as director Bryan Singer's old high
school. Also, the number on Todd's varsity jacket (85) is the year Bryan
graduated.
The first attempt to film this story in 1987 ran over budget and was
stopped. It starred Rick Schroeder and Nicol Williamson, and was directed by
Alan Bridges.
In real-life, actor Ian McKellen has been very frank about his preference of
the company of men to women. He is one of the few openly gay actors in
Hollywood.
The release of this movie was delayed for almost a year. It was in major
turmoil over a shower scene in the film that supposedly featured nude
underage males. It took about a year to clear everything up until it was
eventually released.
Director Bryan Singer graduated from USC cinema school in 1989, and has
named his production company, Bad Hat Harry Productions, after a line from
JAWS, one of his favorite movies.
Brad Renfro made his motion picture debut in the 1994 Joel Schumacher film
THE CLIENT opposite Susan Sarandon. He played the main lead kid. Before
that, he had acted in school productions, and was discovered in a national
talent search at the age of 10. In 1998, he was arrested for possession of
marijuana and cocaine. Es tu another Robert Downey Jr. in wait?
This film was originally titled GOLDEN BOY.

Author
Ryan Davis
        `I want to know everything.' That's what Todd Bowmen, a sixteen year
old high school student, tells Arthur Denker, a fugitive Nazi war criminal.
What Todd wants to know everything about is the Holocaust. Not only does he
want to know about it; he wants to know every graphic detail and to hear all
about Denker's involvement in the massacre.
        Denker has no choice but to tell him, because he is being
blackmailed. Todd has promised to turn Denker into the proper authorities, if
he doesn't tell him about his crimes. So Denker tells him everything. The
stories seem to be a little too much for Todd to handle and they begin to
affect his life. Slowly, at first, but then sure enough, his grades plummet,
he can't sleep, and he becomes anti-social.
        It is not long before his entire life revolves around Arthur and his
dreadful stories. The plot explores deeply the mentor/friend relationship that
Arthur and Todd have. There is always a veil of distrust between the two,
because they each are holding some secret over the other's head.
        If there was only one reason to see this movie, it would be Ian
McKellen's incredible performance as Arthur Denker. McKellen plays the part to
perfection and he definitely deserves an Oscar nomination for his work here.
The performance is reminiscent of his Oscar nominated work in 1995's Richard
III, but he takes his role in Apt Pupil a step further. Brad Renfo is quite
good as Todd, but he far overshadowed by Ian. The only other performance that
is given any screen time is David Schwimmer, who plays Todd's guidance
counselor. David does the best work of his entire career here; he is great.
        Bryan Singer, known for directing the incredible The Usual Suspects,
does a very good job here. His style matches perfectly with the material. The
film is based on Steven King's novella, but Brandon Boyce, a first timer,
wrote the screenplay.
        Apt Pupil is very dark and disturbing and shows that evil exists
everywhere. The most noticeable flaw is the running time. It ran about fifteen
minutes too long, and would have been better if it was slightly faster paced.
        Overall, the movie is entertaining, thought provoking, and well worth
seeing.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
David E. Smith
Apt Pupil: Brad Renfro, Ian McKellen, David Schwimmer, Elias Koteas
   The opening scene of "Apt Pupil" is set in a high school at the end of
   a week of studying the Holocaust in history class. The teacher reminds
   the students that if they want to know more, they can always turn to
   the library.
   Instead, Brad Renfro turns to experiential learning, leading to some
   frightening conclusions.
   Renfro is Todd Bowden, a bright, bored high-school student. Using
   leaps of logic that would impress even the Scooby Doo crew, he deduces
   that neighborhood recluse Arthur Denker (Ian McKellan) is in fact Kurt
   Dussander, who ran one of the Nazi concentration camps during the war
   and is still wanted by the Israeli government.
   For some reason, instead of turning Dussander over to the police, Todd
   blackmails him - firsthand information about the death camps in
   exchange for his silence. "Tell me what the schools are afraid to," he
   pleads.
   As Dussander's tales grow ever more glorious and graphic, Todd grows
   more and more unraveled - having gas chamber hallucinations in the
   shower, doodling swastikas in his notebook, falling behind in school.
   Then he grows truly disturbed, killing birds and the occasional
   homeless man.
   Based on a novella by Stephen King and directed by Bryan Singer (who
   helmed the Oscar-winning "The Usual Suspects"), "Apt Pupil" clearly
   had a lot of potential. King's story, and thus the screenplay, is
   sufficiently spooky if you can wade through the mounds of mediocrity -
   it doesn't get truly suspenseful until the second hour.
   McKellan, winner of multiple film awards, turns in an acceptable
   performance as the despicable Dussander, right down to the faux German
   accent. And the supporting cast, from David Schwimmer to Elias Koteas,
   is right on target as well.
   Renfro, however, is a disappointment. His character seems disturbed
   even at the start of the film, so his descent into depravity has
   little effect on the viewer. This lapse is inexcusable in the key
   character in the film. We should be mourning for his shrinking
   humanity, not for the movie.
   Few would argue that the Second World War and the Holocaust were among
   the greatest atrocities in history. Last weekend though, a new
   atrocity was unleashed upon the world - the mediocre, eminently
   forgettable "Apt Pupil."

Author
Luke Buckmaster
APT PUPIL
Cast: Ian McKellan, Brad Renfro, Bruce Davison, Elias Koteas, Joe
Morton, David Schwimmer
Director: Bryan Singer
Screenplay: Brandon Boyce based on the novella by Stephen King
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 and a half stars
Standard horror films keep characters and their actions in check.  They
produce shrieks and squeals from violence that is either meaningless or
irrelevant, and rarely look at what motives evil actions.  It is sort of
an irony that Stephen King - whom you may expect would produce this sort
of stuff - wrote the novella on which Apt Pupil is based.  Brandon Boyce
has skillfully adapted King's work and made it accessible for the big
screen, while director Brian Singer (who astonished audiences with The
Usual Suspects) and the film's performers give it impact.  The result is
a subversive and gripping experience; one that crawls under your skin
and stays there.  Sometimes disturbing, at other times merely
entertaining, this is a solid piece that grounds itself in a truly
frightening subject matter, but occasionally deviates into ordinary
urban scenarios.
Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro) is an apt pupil.  He is a straight A's student
who is destined to top his class.  After a week of learning about the
Holocaust, Todd is fascinated - so much so that he immerses himself in
extra-curriculum study of the era.  In his research, he discovers an
incredible secret that nobody else has: Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander
(Sir Ian McKellen) has been quietly living in Todd's hometown under the
assumed name of Arthur Denker.  Denker has lived a quiet, uneventful
life - until now.  Todd confronts Denker and blackmails him with a deal
he can't refuse - Todd will keep silent about his true identity, and in
return Denker must tell him about the atrocities he committed in the
war.  Thus a dangerous relationship begins, in which Todd learns
valuable lessons about having the upper hand.
The character of Kurt Dussander is one of the most fascinating in recent
years.  His fragile elderly body is deceiving, as is his serene
existence.  As Todd unlocks Dussander's memories, he also unlocks the
man's true character - his sinister actions have obviously only been in
hibernation.  Sir Ian McKellen brings Dussander to life with eerie
skill, and Brad Renfro is also great as a teenager whose world is turned
topsy-turvy.  McKellen and Renfro first appear to be a hostile odd
couple, but as the plot goes along Singer draws parallels.  There is no
hero in this story, nor is there a bad guy.  Apt Pupil makes it quite
clear that everybody has the capacity for evil - the temptation to
perform wicked deeds is as much alive in Nazi war veterans as it is in
youth.
The film's most chilling moments are when we learn of Dussander's dark
past.  In one scene he explains in explicit detail what the gassing
chambers were like - though it is purely dialogue, a painful visual
illustration is carved.  Had the film followed this rapid psychological
momentum, it may have been a mind-rousing classic. But Singer deviates
too often from his exhilarating central plot.  In comparison to the
nightmares of war told by one of its fomenters, the slip of Todd's
school grades seems woefully uninspired.  But still, this film is often
a powerful examination on what drives people to commit evil actions.
Apt Pupil is a must see for anybody who ever thought a horror film can't
have a brain or a heart.  Though far from perfect, this film evokes a
morbid fascination that is hard to shake.


Author
Frankie Paiva
Very dark, very disturbing, very good performances. These are all words used to
describe Apt Pupil, a new film based on a novel by Stephen King.
It begins as a quiet obsession, Todd Bowden (Renfro, who is extremely good)
wants to know more and more about the Holocaust, so much more in fact, that he
dusts the fingerprints off the mailbox of a man he thinks is a former Nazi
general. When he confronts the man, Kurt Dussander (McKellen, who is equally,
if not more excellent) he makes him tell him everything about what he did or he
will turn him in to the police. (The story's in gory, graphic detail too, and
with questions like, "How did it feel?")
When Todd buys him an old commander's uniform for Christmas and makes him wear
it and march around in it, he begins to discover the pure evil that had creeped
into the men's brains. As Todd's grades begin to slip, he finds the tables
turning, but the two remain friends until something happens. (I could tell you
but I want you to be as shocked as I was.) That makes then have a confrontation
with the law. 
The film is very, very good but the senseless (OK, maybe it's not senseless but
the film is already depressing and it doesn't need any more violence than it
already has) violence started making me like the film less and less. Yes, I do
realize that this film is about the horrors of the Holocaust, but (being a
twelve year-old) I just wasn't ready for some of the images that appeared on
the screen. The also extremely disturbing (but well deserved) ending still
makes me shiver.
Once again, this isn't to say it's not good (I swear I shook at least three
times, not to mention the haunting musical score that kept creeping into my
head afterwards) but it's also a violent film that could never (in no way
possible) have been made after Columbine. For that, and because I'm shaking as
I write this review now, I give Apt Pupil ** stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains lots of violence (some against animals and
most of the killings are accompanied by opera music) and some swearing. There
are a lot of naked teenage boys in a locker room scene, and at least three
extremely frightening scenes (and or nightmares) occur. For that, I do not
recommend this film for anyone under 15.
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
