Title
Review for Undercover Blues (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For timing reasons having to do with baby sitters, we recently
went to a multiplex and saw UNDERCOVER BLUES.
     I would give it one half of a star for guts.  Anyone in a movie
this bad would have to have guts.  I later read a NY Times review that
said Kathleen Turner and Dennis Quaid had gotten so plump they looked
like they had the mumps in the show.
     The script was the worst part.  They had characters who talked
with funny accents in an attempt to make you laugh. They had lots of
"great" sight gags like two people trying to go in a door together and
therefore bumping shoulders against the door.
     Turner and Quaid both kept smiling like some idiots on a game
show.  The good news is that we were smart enough to vote with our feet
and left.  Buy some tickets and give them to your worst enemies.  Tell
them the show is great and smile a lot.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 29, 1993
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Shane Burridge
Straightforward spy comedy runs on one gag but gets a lot of mileage out of 
it.  Not unexpectedly, it does run out of gas before the end, but there are 
plenty of bright spots along the way.  The title refers simultaneously to 
undercover cops and, more irritatingly, to the surname of husband-and-wife 
team Jeff and Jane (Dennis Quaid and Kathleen Turner).  What it definitely 
does not refer to are any 'blues' suffered by agents feeling down about 
their job, and it is the free and easy manner projected by Quaid and Turner 
that provides this film with its heart.
Their holiday in New Orleans interrupted by a plea to return to service and 
extradite a visiting terrorist, the Blues wander fecklessly through one 
confrontation after another, seemingly improvising the investigation as they 
go.  The central gag: this 'normal' married couple are trained undercover 
agents, and in the manner of a long cinematic history of secret agents, 
manage to turn the tables on every unsuspecting foe they cross.  It's been 
done before, but this time it's different.  Cast your mind back to every 
other spy film you've seen (barring the more outlandish, surreal spoofs) and 
you'll know that no matter how infallible the protagonist appears to be, 
there will always be a moment of reckoning.  It makes screenwriting sense - 
if the character is invulnerable, there can be no element of suspense.  
UNDERCOVER BLUES throws that rule right out of the window: the reason it is 
so enjoyable is precisely because we have absolute confidence in these two 
characters.  Quaid, with his huge aw-shucks grin, is completely insouciant 
as he walks into one bad situation after another; Turner's sense of fun is 
barely concealed throughout her performance.  The reason why this approach 
works in UNDERCOVER BLUES where it would fail in other films is because of a 
third element - the Blue's baby.  Wherever Quaid and Turner go, the baby 
accompanies them: it's a prop to show us that nothing bad is going to 
happen, that the comedy isn't going to turn sour with a dubious 'serious' 
scene or random act of violence.  It's not until the film's climax that it 
there is one moment where the Blue's savior-faire may be about to come 
undone, but it is so fleeting that we've barely time to doubt them.
The investigation element of the story follows an unhurried, meandering 
track that blends in with both the New Orleans setting (which otherwise is 
never exploited) and the holiday mood that Quaid and Turner refuse to 
abandon despite their reassignment.  Their juggling of babysitters, 
sightseeing, and 'business' make the act of espionage as ordinary as the 
lives of the married couple they befriend in their hotel.  It's inevitable 
that this incidental treatment of the story's motive might turn off some 
viewers, but it's a logical approach when weighed against the mood 
UNDERCOVER BLUES is aiming for.  To add a little spark, Stanley Tucci gives 
a hilarious performance as a small-time crook ("My name is Death!") pursuing 
a hopeless vendetta against the couple.  He'd all but steal the show if 
Quaid and Turner weren't so perfectly congenial as his adversaries.  Also 
with: Larry Miller as a local undercover cop in awe of the Blues, and Obba 
Babatunde as his less-than-impressed partner.  Favorite scene: Quaid's 
confrontation with Tucci at the zoo.


Author
James Berardinelli
     Husband and wife team Jeff (Dennis Quaid) and Jane Blue (Kathleen
Turner) have, during their illustrious career as spies, worked for both
the FBI and the CIA.  Now, with an eleven-month old baby, they're in
semi- retirement while vacationing in New Orleans.  Of course, there
wouldn't be a movie if a plot device didn't come along to re-activate
them.  In this case, it's a Czech terrorist, played by Fiona Shaw.
Simply put, Jeff and Jane have to locate, then stop, her.  Along the
way, the two are pursued by the incompetently villainous Muerte
(Stanley Tucci), who is intent on redressing past insults.
     Anyone who takes any part of this film seriously has missed the
point.  UNDERCOVER BLUES is pure farce, with no inconvenient things
like drama, characterization, or storyline thrown in to muddy the
waters.  The film frequently doesn't make sense and, on those occasions
when it does, its stupidity is so transparent that we almost wish it
didn't.  But that's part of the movie's limited charm.
     Most comedy spy stories try for a few dramatic or thriller-type
moments, but not UNDERCOVER BLUES.  In a way, it's refreshing never to
have to worry about the heroes being in danger.  You know from the
beginning that there's no chance of that.  The bad guys are straight
out of the comics, and they're not the only ones.
     The characters of Jeff and Jane Blue have absolutely no depth, but
their banter is frequently amusing, although not laughably funny.
Kathleen Turner and Dennis Quaid appear to be enjoying themselves
immensely in these frothy roles, and they mesh well together.  Whatever
term you want to use for their pairing, be it likable or appealing,
Turner and Quaid play off of each other as well as the script allows.
     Fiona Shaw is a little to shrill to be enjoyable, and her role
isn't a particularly large one.  Her Novacek is a nasty woman who never
elicits more than a halfhearted chuckle, and manages to get involved in
an embarrassing mud-wrestling match with Jane Blue.  Similarly, Obba
Babatunde (as the tough-as-nails cop who trails around after the Blues)
has few genuinely funny moments, and it's a little difficult to fathom
exactly what his character is doing in the movie.  More than
occasionally, he becomes an unwanted annoyance.
     The same cannot be said of Stanley Tucci, whose Muerte is by far
the best element of the movie.  Muerte, called "Morty" by the Blues,
gets into a knife fight with Jeff early in the movie.  Despite being
one of the most feared men in Cajun Country, the inept thug is beaten
soundly by Jeff, whose only weapon is a baby stroller.  After that
humiliating incident, he shows up time and time again, providing
several moments of hilarity amidst the sometimes plodding movement of a
pointless plot.
     A major weakness of UNDERCOVER BLUES is that it pays more than
mere lip service to its story (i.e., it actually allows events to move
along towards a recognizable conclusion).  There are numerous scenes
that simply don't work, and their presence slows proceedings to a
grinding halt.  This is pretty obviously a case of having too little
material to fill up the requisite feature film length.
     Nevertheless, UNDERCOVER BLUES is silly enough to deserve some
credit, and for those who see it, there will at least be a few laughs.
This is one of the most empty-headed comedies in a long while, and it
revels in its own admitted idiocy.  It's debatable whether anyone would
want to pay money for this picture, but when it gets to cable, it might
be worth a look for those in the right mood.  After all, there's always
a place for mindless entertainment, even if that place is on
television.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
