Title
Review for Bridget Jones's Diary (2001)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Bob Bloom

 BRIDGET JONESíS DIARY (2001) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Renee
Zellweger, Hugh Grant, Colin Firth, Jim Broadbent, Gemma Jones and
Embeth Davidtz. Screenplay by Helen Fielding, Andrew Davies and Richard
Curtis. Based on the novel by Fielding. Original score by Patrick Doyle.
Directed by Sharon Maguire. Rated R.
 With the first few words out of her mouth, Renee Zellweger has you
convinced that she is 32-year-old British ěsingleton,î Bridget Jones.
 A bit puffy, a mite too loud, a smoker who likes to down a vodka or
two, Zellweger embodies the heroine of Helen Fieldingís best-selling
novel, Bridget Jonesís Diary.
 Bridget works in the public relations department of a publishing
company. Her love life is like an unwritten novel ó blank pages.
 Bridget goes into the new year vowing several resolutions ó to lose
weight, to cut back on her drinking and smoking and to keep a diary.
 She also decides that it is the year to improve her love life. As it
happens, Bridget catches the eye of her boss, Daniel Cleaver (Hugh
Grant), and what begins as an office e-mail flirtation soon develops
into a torrid affair.
 Always in the background of Bridgetís life, though, is Mark Darcy
(Colin Firth), who grew up in the same neighborhood as Darcy. Newly
divorced, Bridgetís mother tries to play matchmaker for the pair, but no
sparks fly.
 In fact Bridget thinks that Mark, a barrister (thatís the English name
for a lawyer), is snobbish and arrogant. Meanwhile, he looks
disapprovingly upon her affair with Daniel.
 It seems Mark and Daniel have a history, which led to the breakup of
Markís marriage.
 More than a romantic comedy, Bridget Jonesís Diary is more a character
study of a young woman nearing that age when she begins to fear that she
will spend the rest of her life unattached.
 As Bridget, Zellweger puts on a brave public front as a sort of
flighty, happy-go-lucky single woman. But with her friends and when
alone she allows her guard to slip and you can see the loneliness in her
eyes and hear it in her speech.
Zellweger gives a full-bodied performance. Her English accent is superb,
and should silence those who groused that the role was not played by an
English actress. (Call it retributive karma for Vivien Leigh playing
Scarlett OíHara in Gone With the Wind.)
 You admire Bridgetís spunk and root for her to find happiness.
 Grant, meanwhile, throws off his image as the self-effacing, stammering
nice guy to portray a cad who sweeps Bridget off her feet. Grantís
Daniel is devilishly handsome, suave and charming, but heís also a
shallow rotter.
 Firth has the most difficult role. At the outset, he is an unlikable
individual, cold and judgmental. Yet, as he keeps turning up in
Bridgetís life he grows warmer, something in his eyes ó a kindness, a
sense of compassion ó attracts you to him.
 He is a calm, steadying, if a bit dull, influence; a settling force.
 As directed by Sharon Maguire, Bridget Jonesís Diary seems to cram
ending upon ending in its final reel, but that problem can probably be
laid at the feet of the three screenwriters, who included Fielding, as
well as Andrew Davies (Circle of Friends) and Richard Curtis (Four
Weddings and a Funeral and Notting Hill).
 But it is Zellweger, so good last year in the overlooked Nurse Betty,
who is the show here. She is the heart and soul of Bridget Jonesís
Diary, giving a warm and touching performance.
 Move over, Gwyneth Paltrow, thereís another Yank who has crossed the
Big Pond and scored a triumph.
 Is it too early to talk about an Oscar nomination for Zellweger?
Possibly. But at yearís end, she might be among those making the final
cut.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Datebase: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "BRIDGET JONES DIARY" (Universal/Miramax)
 Amid a cauldron of controversy, director Sharon Maguire cast an American, Renee Zellweger, in the title role in this witty, warm adaptation of the post-feminist best-seller. But with a pitch-perfect British accent, Zellweger is sensational! She's totally believable as the "verbally incontinent spinster who smokes like a chimney and drinks too much," which is how an eligible neighborhood bachelor, Colin Firth, bluntly describes her. (In the book, Bridget goes daft for Colin Firth in "Pride and Prejudice," and Mark Darcy is the name of his character.) Coping with a massive lack of self-esteem, the well-rounded Bridget easily falls for a cad, played by Hugh Grant, her sly, sexist boss at a London publishing company. Renee Zellweger combines strength and vulnerability with an irresistible smile. And if she hasn't won your heart already, she nails it when she answers the phone, "Hello, Bridget Jones, wanton sex goddess with a very bad man between my thighs" - only to disco!
ver it's her mother (Gemma Jones) calling. But mum's not too shocked because she's left dad (Jim Broadbent) to shack up with a sleazy TV shopping network pitchman. And if you're wondering why author Salman Rushdie ("Satanic Verses") does a cameo, it's because, when Helen Fielding's novel/diary was published in 1996, he called it "a brilliant comic creation, adding "even men will laugh." No argument here. Not only is the script by Fielding, Richard Curtis and Andrew Davies filled with hilarious one-liners but it captures the angst of lonely thirtysomethings. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bridget Jones's Diary" is a fast-paced, funny 9. To paraphrase a key concept of Bridget's hard-won self-worth, I love it just the way it is! And don't miss the amusing childhood shots in the final credits.

Author
Robin Clifford
Bridget Jones (Renee Zellweger) is 32 years old, 138 pounds, smokes like a
chimney, drinks too much and, worst of all, is still single. But, after
coping with a particularly nasty hangover following her company Christmas
party, she promises to turn over a new leaf in "Bridget Jones's Diary."
Book adaptations, especially one as narration heavy as Helen Fielding's
tome about a single woman in London, are a tough bet to put up on the big
screen successfully. It's nice to see the case where a good, entertaining
book is translated into a good, entertaining movie and director Sharon
McGuire and company give us exactly that in "Bridget Jones's Diary."
The story spans a year in the life of Bridget Jones, a researcher in a
publishing house who is constantly reminded by her family and friends that
she isn't getting any younger and it's time she found a man and settled
down. But this is not quite as easy as it sounds as the pool of eligible
single men dwindles with every passing year. When her boss, Daniel Cleaver
(Hugh Grant), begins to flirt with her via e-mail, she responds in kind and
a whirlwind romance ensues.
In the meantime, her mother (Gemma Jones) tries to set her up with a
barrister, Mark Darcy (Colin Firth), at Christmas, but he thinks that
Bridget is an unintelligent young woman who smokes and drinks too much. It
doesn't help things when Bridget's mom reminds them that, as a little girl,
Bridget used to run around Mark's yard stark naked. As time passes, Miss
Jones realizes that Daniel is a two-faced liar and Mark is the one she
should be with for the rest of her life. But, will it happen?
You don't have to be a fan of the book to enjoy the movie, but that
familiarity does add an interesting dimension. One always has a critical
eye when it comes to a movie adapted from a book you enjoyed. "Bridget
Jones's Diary" also had some negative publicity over the fact that
Texas-born Zellweger was cast to play the quintessentially British Bridget.
In both cases, adaptation and actor, there is nothing to fear. The
screenplay, by veteran scribes Richard Curtis, Andrew Davies and the author
herself, captures the tone of the book perfectly and brings a sweet
romantic comedy to the screen. The humor is funny throughout and  sometimes
bawdy, but there is virtually no nudity and the sex is almost chaste.
Renee Zellweger does a fabulous job as the weight and bad habit conscious
Bridget who decides that she will change herself and her life and begins
the title diary. Exercise and clean living are the keys to her change and
she makes a valiant stab at following through, but romance screws up her
plans when she falls for her slimy boss. Zellweger is perfect with her
understated London accent and put on weight to flesh out, so to speak, her
character. Within minutes of the start of the film, you see her as Bridget.
And Zellweger is willing to put, quite literally, her butt on the line, to
give a top comedy perf.
Supporting the inspired comic performance by the star are first class
showings by Grant, Firth and the rest of the cast. Hugh Grant does a turn
from his usual awe-shucks, bumbling nice guy and plays Daniel as a conniver
that will say and do anything to get his way. It's a good louse-of-a-guy
role and Grant does it justice. Colin Firth is also fine as the
stiff-as-a-board Mark who is initially turned off by the outspoken, brazen
Bridget. As he gets to know her, you watch his formality soften and he
falls, full smit, for the pretty Miss Jones.
Jim Broadbent and Gemma Jones provide dimension as Bridget's dad and mom
who are in the midst of their own marital crisis when mom leaves dad to
pursue a career as a shill for a sleazy salesman on a shopping channel.
Their side story helps to flesh out the life of Bridget into something that
feels genuine, even in its absurdity. Embeth Davidtz, Shirley Henderson,
Sally Phillips and James Callis, as Bridget's supportive and sometime
critical friends, fit the bill.
Production credits are first rate with crisp, clear lensing by Stuart
Dryburgh complementing Bridget's costuming, by Rachael Fleming, and
production design, by Gemma Jackson.
"Bridget Jones's Diary" is the best date flick to come down the pike in an
awfully long time and may well bring in a new generation of fans to Miss
Jones and her diary. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In the romantic comedy BRIDGET JONES'S DIARY, Renée Zellweger looks 
absolutely awful as Bridget Jones.  With a splotchy complexion, bulges 
everywhere and stringy hair, Bridget eats, drinks and smokes too much.  
She also dresses like a carpet.  Badly miscast as the British heroine, 
Zellweger, in a monotonic performance, never gives us much reason to 
care.
Although Bridget has a serious and supposedly hopeless crush on her 
boss, Daniel Cleaver (Hugh Grant), Richard Curtis and Andrew Davies's 
script has Bridget and Daniel quickly hopping into bed together.  In the 
role of the man clearly designed to be the only man to deserve her, 
Colin Firth plays the dour lawyer Mark Darcy like a man with a constant 
case of intestinal problems.  In a one-dimensional part, Embeth Davidtz 
plays Natasha, Mark's anal-retentive fellow lawyer and would-be fiancée.
Bridget, who writes in her diary in narration, is a 32 year old who 
worries about dying a spinster and being eaten alive by dogs.  (No such 
luck.)  Her television choices consist of things like the death scene 
from FATAL ATTRACTION followed by a nature program on humping lions.  In 
case we forget how we're supposed to feel about Bridget's aspirations 
and emotions, the film's heavy musical accompaniment is also there to 
remind us.
"Stay calm -- can't get worse," Bridget admonishes herself when she is 
having yet another social disaster.  I kept trying to remember that 
advice while waiting for the ending credits to arrive.
BRIDGET JONES'S DIARY runs a long 1:35.  It is rated R for language and 
some strong sexuality and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved. 
It becomes clear almost immediately that Bridget Jones's Diary is going to 
be a chick version of High Fidelity, complete with narration from its main 
character, not to mention the fact that both films were based on popular 
British Gen-X novels (although Fidelity's Rob Gordon never had self-esteem 
problems quite as bad as Ms. Jones).  Behind the slick veneer of the 
narration, this is a fairly conventional and entirely predictable story - 
pretty much the same story, in fact, as the recently maligned Someone Like 
You, which was also based on a popular book.  Diary probably worked much 
better as a novel, as it doesn't translate nearly as well as Fidelity. 
Renée Zellweger (Nurse Betty) plays the titular Bridget Jones, a single, 
32-year-old, London publishing house employee who is afraid of either 
turning into Glenn Close in Fatal Attraction or being eaten by a pack of 
hungry dogs after dying a sad, lonely death in her flat.  Diary takes place 
over one year, between Christmases, and begins with her mother's (Gemma 
Jones, The Winslow Boy) annual holiday party/Bridget fix-up festival.  This 
year, Mom's potential future son-in-law is a smarmy barrister named Mark 
Darcy (Colin Firth, Shakespeare in Love).  Even though Darcy is an old 
friend of the family who has known Bridget for most of his life, sparks 
don't fly, and the two go their separate ways. 
In the meantime (and like Zellweger's first big film), Bridget keeps lusting 
after her boss, Daniel Cleaver (Hugh Grant, Small Time Crooks), and, after 
trading some suggestive e-mail, the two begin a torrid affair until, exactly 
at the halfway mark, the wheels fall off.  Despite watching her father's 
(Jim Broadbent, Topsy-Turvy) relationship with Mom crash and burn, Bridget 
has to pull herself together, and, among other things, find a new job and a 
new man before her biological clock explodes (cue Aretha Franklin's 
"Respect").  And all the while she keeps the audience updated on her weight 
and consumption of both alcohol and cigarettes, which are all things Bridget 
keeps track of in her diary. 
This isn't as accessible as The Full Monty or Four Weddings and a Funeral 
(which shares Diary's producers Tim Bevan and Eric Fellner), but the one 
thing that Diary has that those Best Picture nominees didn't is Zellweger. 
She looks incredible and her performance is even better (leaving me to ask 
"Julia who?" just two weeks after the Oscars).  Fans of Helen Fielding's 
novel (especially the British ones) raised holy hell when the skinny Texan 
was cast as Bridget, but after gaining a well-publicized 20 pounds and 
working undercover (and completely unnoticed) as a real British office 
drone, they should all be amazed at her performance.  Zellweger nails it, 
delivering what should be one of the year's best performances.  From her 
impeccable accent (which almost puts Gwyneth's to shame) to her uncanny 
knack for physical comedy, Zellweger is so likeable and fun to watch, it 
doesn't matter what happens in the film. 
Grant, who plays his second sleazebag in a row, is also very good, as well 
as wiry and chiseled.  Firth does well, and well he should do, as it's 
actually the second time he's played this part.  In Fielding's book, Bridget 
falls madly in love with the real-life Firth after watching him in Pride and 
Prejudice (where he played a character named Mr. Darcy), so his casting is a 
bit of an inside joke for the novel's readers. 
Diary is the feature-film directorial debut of documentary filmmaker Sharon 
Maguire (no relation to Jerry) and was adapted from Fielding's book by 
Andrew Davies and Notting Hill's Richard Curtis.  The film probably sets a 
record for the number of times the word "fuckwit" is used (a good thing) and 
its closing credits are sweet and memorable (so stick around) 
1:32 - R for language and some strong sexuality

Author
Homer Yen
My favorite moment: two British blokes engage in a
street fight to see who is the better man.  This
sequence shows that when it comes to love, there are
no clear choices.  And in Britain where restraint is
the norm, two 'proper' men trying to slug it out look
amusingly like drunkards failing a sobriety test.
There's nothing like a cheery, romantic comedy to help
lift your spirits and reaffirm your love of life. 
Yes, a good romantic comedy is always welcome.  But
BJD, unfortunately and surprisingly, does not always
evoke the emotional highs that it constantly seemed
poised to reach.  It's almost effervescent.  It's
almost joyous.  It's almost magical.  And it came so
close to being great.  But something held it back.
The movie felt like a fervent throwback to the days of
Audrey Hepburn when there seemed nothing more
invigorating than a brisk ride down a country road
with the wind blowing through your hair.  Watching
this film, there are sequences that remind us of
timeless, romantic classics such as "Roman Holiday" or
"Sabrina."  
Renee Zellwegger is radiant as our heroine, Bridget
Jones, who seems to be the live comic strip character
version of "Cathy."  A little overweight and a little
bit neurotic (and very British), she struggles daily
with her sense of self-worth.  In a cute opening
sequence, Bridget droops in front of a TV and
lip-synchs to Celine Dion's syrupy "All By Myself." 
Will her life mirror the sad lyrics of soft rock FM
ballads forever?  Not if she can help it.  Armed with
a new attitude and a new diary to write down her
innermost thoughts and observations, she's ready to
make a difference in her life.  
Her life proceeds to take a series of life-affirming
as well as challenging turns as she becomes involved
with her handsome and successful boss, Daniel (Hugh
Grant).  He treats her like a movie star.  At the
outset, she's ebullient.  But doubts soon emerge.  To
add to her growing uncertainty, Mark (Colin Firth), a
childhood friend, seems to be waiting in the wings. 
More complicated, Daniel and Mark are bitter over an
episode that ended their friendship.  Who is the
better person? The audience will be somewhat divided. 
The film adeptly keeps us wondering who is good and
who is bad and who deserves to be forgiven and given
another chance.  
But there's also anxiety at home.  Her hilariously
dotty mom, infamous for her curry turkey dinners, has
left to be a presenter on a TV shopping network.  Her
dad has a perpetual vapid look about him and he always
seems to be in his pajamas.  These wacky characters
give this film a wonderfully offbeat quirkiness.
Despite its inherent appeal, the movie's magic falls
short.  At any given time, the film seemed like it was
destined to be a great romantic comedy.  But while
there's general gaiety, there's not enough emotional
pull.  Was the man that she chose truly Mr. Right? 
The "wow" factor behind her decision seemed muted. 
Most distracting and puzzling, though, was the
frequency of obscenities used.   With a little bit of
thought, this could have been retooled into a PG-13
version that could have been just as endearing.  BJD
certainly offers fireworks.  Yet they seem to be more
like the kind you'd see at a stadium after the home
team wins rather than the display during the 4th of
July by the Washington Monument, which is what we
deserved.

Author
Faust668@aol.com
Renee Zellweger is an actress whose sprightly charm and quivering, cutesy smile can melt moviegoers' hearts like no other. She is the girl-next-door type but her irresistibility breaks some new ground here - you get the feeling that she can be embarrassed and impish at the same time. She is the unique joy of "Bridget Jones' Diary," a fairly amusing if slightly misguided
romantic comedy with ample charm and considerable laughs. It just lacks the extra leap to take it beyond conventionality. 
Bridget Jones (Renee Zellweger) is the neurotic, lonely, uncouth heroine of the 1996 bestseller by Helen Fielding. She is so lonely that she drinks
heavily while listening to Eric Carmen's "All By Myself" (a touching, heartbreaking moment). At first glance, no one seems to take a gander at Bridget. She is plumpish and tends to say exactly what is on her mind, including at book receptions where everyone looks at her with slight bemusement. At dinner parties, she confronts men who see her as an unappealing spinster, including the rich Mr. Darcy (Colin Firth). Her boss,
however, takes a liking to her (he is played with irresistible glee by Hugh Grant), and the two begin having an affair. Of course, Mr. Darcy gets jealous
since he does like her. 
It is no surprise where the film is headed when we know Mr. Darcy will inevitably change his mind about Bridget. But the film takes on a knowing, self-conscious style at the beginning where we begin to think that it will poke fun at romantic comedy conventions. There is a moment where Bridget
makes an error in judgment at work and we see her unsaid obscenity splashed across the screen. "Bridget Jones' Diary," however, does not take as many
unconventional routes as one might hope. Bridget loves the two men but has to decide between one. Bridget tries to bring her parents back together after a
brief separation. Some of these episodes work better than others but they hardly figure cohesively as a whole. 
I have not read Fielding's book but I've been told that it truly maps out Bridget's insecurities and messy lifestyle with more depth. The film does
show her drinking and eating and smoking too much and we sense she is real obsessive and has trouble finding the proper man (she is also a bad cook, witness the strange coloring of her cooked meals). But all these qualities are painted in broad strokes. Bridget's biggest flaw seems to be her uncouth quality but I was not clear why everyone seemed so perturbed whenever she
made a speech (I found her speeches funny and engaging). As played by Zellweger, she has charm and an affable quality but her weight gain (reports
say she gained as much as 20 to 40 pounds for the role) does not exactly put her on the same scale as Conchata Ferrell (who I love no matter how much she
weighs). In other words, I get the sense that the film has been sanitized from its written form to accommodate all women in the audience. Where does this leave the women who are perhaps uncomfortable with their weight or who need someone like Bridget Jones as their role model, essentially saying it is
okay to be fat and still have Hugh Grant as your suitor? 
"Bridget Jones' Diary" has Zellweger at its center and she is as convincing and delightful as one can imagine. Kudos also go to Hugh Grant and Colin Firth in witty supporting roles (I could have lived without a cliched
fistfight between them). There is also a funny cameo by Salman Rushdie as himself no less. The film has pizazz to offer but compare this to any other romantic comedy, and I dare you to find the difference. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
Renee Zellweger is an actress whose sprightly charm and quivering, cutesy smile
can melt moviegoers' hearts like no other. She is the girl-next-door type but
her irresistibility breaks some new ground here - you get the feeling that she
can be embarrassed and impish at the same time. She is the unique joy of
"Bridget Jones' Diary," a fairly amusing if slightly misguided
romantic comedy with ample charm and considerable laughs. It just lacks the
extra leap to take it beyond conventionality. 
Bridget Jones (Renee Zellweger) is the neurotic, lonely, uncouth heroine of the
1996 bestseller by Helen Fielding. She is so lonely that she drinks
heavily while listening to Eric Carmen's "All By Myself" (a touching,
heartbreaking moment). At first glance, no one seems to take a gander at
Bridget. She is plumpish and tends to say exactly what is on her mind, including
at book receptions where everyone looks at her with slight bemusement. At dinner
parties, she confronts men who see her as an unappealing spinster, including the
rich Mr. Darcy (Colin Firth). Her boss,
however, takes a liking to her (he is played with irresistible glee by Hugh
Grant), and the two begin having an affair. Of course, Mr. Darcy gets jealous
since he does like her. 
It is no surprise where the film is headed when we know Mr. Darcy will
inevitably change his mind about Bridget. But the film takes on a knowing,
self-conscious style at the beginning where we begin to think that it will poke
fun at romantic comedy conventions. There is a moment where Bridget
> makes an error in judgment at work and we see her unsaid obscenity splashed
across the screen. "Bridget Jones' Diary," however, does not take as many
unconventional routes as one might hope. Bridget loves the two men but has to
decide between one. Bridget tries to bring her parents back together after a
brief separation. Some of these episodes work better than others but they hardly
figure cohesively as a whole. 
I have not read Fielding's book but I've been told that it truly maps out
Bridget's insecurities and messy lifestyle with more depth. The film does show
her drinking and eating and smoking too much and we sense she is real obsessive
and has trouble finding the proper man (she is also a bad cook, witness the
strange coloring of her cooked meals). But all these qualities are painted in
broad strokes. Bridget's biggest flaw seems to be her uncouth quality but I was
not clear why everyone seemed so perturbed whenever she made a speech (I found
her speeches funny and engaging). As played by Zellweger, she has charm and an
affable quality but her weight gain (reports say she gained as much as 20 to 40
pounds for the role) does not exactly put her on the same scale as Conchata
Ferrell (who I love no matter how much she weighs). In other words, I get the
sense that the film has been sanitized from its written form to accommodate all
women in the audience. Where does this leave the wom!
en who are perhaps uncomfortable
 with their weight or who need someone like Bridget Jones as their role model,
essentially saying it is okay to be fat and still have Hugh Grant as your
suitor? 
"Bridget Jones' Diary" has Zellweger at its center and she is as convincing and
delightful as one can imagine. Kudos also go to Hugh Grant and Colin Firth in
witty supporting roles (I could have lived without a cliched
fistfight between them). There is also a funny cameo by Salman Rushdie as
himself no less. The film has pizazz to offer but compare this to any other
romantic comedy, and I dare you to find the difference. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com
or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Bridget Jones (Renee Zellweger) is 32 years old, 138 pounds, smokes like a
chimney, drinks too much and, worst of all, is still single. But, after
coping with a particularly nasty hangover following her company Christmas
party, she promises to turn over a new leaf in "Bridget Jones's Diary."
Book adaptations, especially one as narration heavy as Helen Fielding's
tome about a single woman in London, are a tough bet to put up on the big
screen successfully. It's nice to see the case where a good, entertaining
book is translated into a good, entertaining movie and director Sharon
McGuire and company give us exactly that in "Bridget Jones's Diary."
The story spans a year in the life of Bridget Jones, a researcher in a
publishing house who is constantly reminded by her family and friends that
she isn't getting any younger and it's time she found a man and settled
down. But this is not quite as easy as it sounds as the pool of eligible
single men dwindles with every passing year. When her boss, Daniel Cleaver
(Hugh Grant), begins to flirt with her via e-mail, she responds in kind and
a whirlwind romance ensues.
In the meantime, her mother (Gemma Jones) tries to set her up with a
barrister, Mark Darcy (Colin Firth), at Christmas, but he thinks that
Bridget is an unintelligent young woman who smokes and drinks too much. It
doesn't help things when Bridget's mom reminds them that, as a little girl,
Bridget used to run around Mark's yard stark naked. As time passes, Miss
Jones realizes that Daniel is a two-faced liar and Mark is the one she
should be with for the rest of her life. But, will it happen?
You don't have to be a fan of the book to enjoy the movie, but that
familiarity does add an interesting dimension. One always has a critical
eye when it comes to a movie adapted from a book you enjoyed. "Bridget
Jones's Diary" also had some negative publicity over the fact that
Texas-born Zellweger was cast to play the quintessentially British Bridget.
In both cases, adaptation and actor, there is nothing to fear. The
screenplay, by veteran scribes Richard Curtis, Andrew Davies and the author
herself, captures the tone of the book perfectly and brings a sweet
romantic comedy to the screen. The humor is funny throughout and sometimes
bawdy, but there is virtually no nudity and the sex is almost chaste.
Renee Zellweger does a fabulous job as the weight and bad habit conscious
Bridget who decides that she will change herself and her life and begins
the title diary. Exercise and clean living are the keys to her change and
she makes a valiant stab at following through, but romance screws up her
plans when she falls for her slimy boss. Zellweger is perfect with her
understated London accent and put on weight to flesh out, so to speak, her
character. Within minutes of the start of the film, you see her as Bridget.
And Zellweger is willing to put, quite literally, her butt on the line, to
give a top comedy perf.
Supporting the inspired comic performance by the star are first class
showings by Grant, Firth and the rest of the cast. Hugh Grant does a turn
from his usual awe-shucks, bumbling nice guy and plays Daniel as a conniver
that will say and do anything to get his way. It's a good louse-of-a-guy
role and Grant does it justice. Colin Firth is also fine as the
stiff-as-a-board Mark who is initially turned off by the outspoken, brazen
Bridget. As he gets to know her, you watch his formality soften and he
falls, full smit, for the pretty Miss Jones.
Jim Broadbent and Gemma Jones provide dimension as Bridget's dad and mom
who are in the midst of their own marital crisis when mom leaves dad to
pursue a career as a shill for a sleazy salesman on a shopping channel.
Their side story helps to flesh out the life of Bridget into something that
feels genuine, even in its absurdity. Embeth Davidtz, Shirley Henderson,
Sally Phillips and James Callis, as Bridget's supportive and sometime
critical friends, fit the bill.
Production credits are first rate with crisp, clear lensing by Stuart
Dryburgh complementing Bridget's costuming, by Rachael Fleming, and
production design, by Gemma Jackson.
"Bridget Jones's Diary" is the best date flick to come down the pike in an
awfully long time and may well bring in a new generation of fans to Miss
Jones and her diary. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
I'm used to the e-mail: You're not a cheerleader so you shouldn't review
Bring It On!  Or If you don't like boring movies about Iraqi Kurds you
shouldn't review A Time for Drunken Horses!  Or If you've never heard of
Reynaldo Arenas you shouldn't review a movie about his life (Before
Night Falls)!
Sorry, folks, I don't buy it.  Do I need to be shot into space to review
Apollo 13?  A movie should stand on its own whether you're familiar with
the subject, whether you're fond of the topic in question, or whether
you're a member of the demographic that the film is about or is targeted
at.  If it especially appeals to a certain group (and what film
doesn't?), well, good for you.  But I'm going to review whatever I want
-- and if you don't want to hear what a white guy in his late 20's has
to say about cinema, well, that's just to bad.
So with that lengthy disclaimer understand that this review of the
celebrated adaptation of the novel Bridget Jones's Diary is written by a
non-British man who's never read the book.  Deal with it.  You'll also
have to forgive me for not writing this review in the "v. Bridget's
diary" style that I guarantee every other one you read will be written
in....
The story of Bridget Jones's Diary tracks our title character during the
32nd year of her life, one dominated by menial work, too much
drinking/smoking/eating, and most notably, the lack of a meaningful
relationship.  Renée Zellweger has clearly and bravely gained the 20
requisite pounds to play the chubby-cheeked Bridget, who repeated
resolves to get her life in order -- and pretty much mucks it up
miserably every time.
Central to her woes are her rakish boss Daniel Cleaver (Hugh Grant) and
her childhood friend Mark Darcy (Colin Firth).  Oddly, while Bridget
professes romantic woes, she soon finds herself with the two men to
choose from.  Hence the dilemma, and hence the need for a diary.
Hugh Grant's role as her scoundrel of a boss is quite delicious, showing
us some of his inner rogue that was responsible for memorably getting he
and Divine Brown together a few years back.  The humorless Firth,
however, is another matter.  Meant to be a rather stiff antithesis to
Cleaver's carefree loony, he comes off as unlovable and never makes a
case for why Bridget would genuinely be interested in him.  Students of
Hollywood won't find much surprise in the resolution, though, no matter
how thick the accents used to mask the movie's origin.
Fortunately, Bridget Jones is elicits a frequent giggle as it sets up
jokes and invariably pays them off, relying on Zellweger to deliver a
bravely out-there comedic performance, the talent for which she must
have picked up during her time as Jim Carrey's squeeze.  She shows up as
the only one in a hooker costume at a "tarts and vicars" party.  She
runs through a snowstorm in leopard-print panties.  Nice.  Zellweger
isn't afraid to show us her (expanded) skin, and she deserves credit for
it.  So much so, that I'll go out on a limb here and predict she'll win
at least one People's Choice Award next year!
But Bridget Jones isn't Annie Hall.  She's an archetype for modern
singles, sure, but her predicament is somewhat inaccessible while it
strives to be universal.  Her goofy antics are hilarious slapstick, and
I figure that's all the producers ever intended.  And that's fine with
me.  Even though I didn't read the book, it just goes to show that even
a v. married Yank can enjoy a little something silly about a troubled,
single British gal.
Director: Sharon Maguire
Producer: Tim Bevan, Jonathan Cavendish, Eric Fellner
Writer: Richard Curtis, Andrew Davies, Helen Fielding
Starring: Renée Zellweger, Colin Firth, Hugh Grant
http://entertainment.msn.com/bridget/default.asp
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Bridget Jones's Diary (2001)
Renee Zellweger, Hugh Grant, Colin Firth, Gemma Jones, Jim Broadbent,
Shirley Henderson, Sally Phillips, James Callis, Embeth Davidtz.
Screenplay by Helen Fielding, Richard Curtis and Andrew Davies, based on
the novel by Helen Fielding. Directed by Sharon Maguire. 94 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Bridget Jones is an easy target. Smoking and wincing almost constantly,
she stumbles from one social scene to another, always wearing her heart
on her sleeve. A walking, talking typographical error, she is the
perfect foil for those who traffic in withering remarks. Likewise,
"Bridget Jones's Diary" practically begs to be insulted. The film is
obvious and sloppy, filled with trite sitcom hijinks and overly broad
secondary characters. But the bottom line is that both the character and
the film are so charming that it's relatively easy to overlook their
flaws.
Not that they won't be listed, of course.
"Bridget Jones's Diary" is based on a book I've never heard of that is
apparently an enormous hit with women (that this female phenomena
escaped my notice is not surprising. I only recently learned that Oprah
Winfrey is using her talk show to start a religion). It debuted in 1995
as a British newspaper column by Helen Fielding, who turned it into a
novel the following year. Fielding also co-wrote the script along with
Andrew Davies, (who penned the television adaptation of "Pride and
Prejudice") and "Notting Hill" author Richard Curtis.
The story opens at Christmas, as Bridget (Renee Zellweger) strikes out
from London to spend the holiday with her parents. At a family party,
her mother tries to set her up with Mark Darcy (Colin Firth), the
visiting son of a neighbor, cheerfully explaining that when the two were
children, Bridget used to run naked through his wading pool. The
encounter goes terribly, with the oh-so-proper man treating her with
contempt (she hears him describe her as a "verbally incontinent
spinster"). Totally embarrassed, Bridget returns to her home and the
comfort of her friends. To begin the New Year, she starts a diary, while
vowing to settle for a "nice, sensible boyfriend."
Instead, she ends up exchanging saucy on-the-job e-mails with her boss,
Daniel (Hugh Grant). Almost as amusing as their messages is the computer
system itself, which was obviously purchased from the Movie Land
Electronics Boutique. Where e-mail on our world comes grouped together
in small type, Movie Land e-mail appears in very large letters, with the
appearance of each word timed for maximum comic effect.
Bridget and Daniel start dating, and she learns that Mark went to
college with Daniel and the two were friends until Daniel learned that
Mark was having an affair with his fiancee.
Meanwhile, on the parental front, things are getting wacky. Mom (Gemma
Jones) leaves Dad (Jim Broadbent) to become a product presenter on the
Home Shopping Channel and starts a romance with one of its smarmy hosts.
Bridget soon finds herself in the same boat as her father when she
catches Daniel in the arms of another woman.
Humiliated, the quits her job (with a perfectly splendid exit scene) and
sets out once again to better herself. In short order, she lands a job
as a reporter on a current-affairs TV show, where she becomes a success
despite some extraordinary bumbling. At a dinner party, she runs into
Mark, who knocks her off her feet when he states that he likes her,
"just the way you are."
As anyone who watches romantic comedies knows, this is far from the end
of the story.
I realize that, on paper, "Bridget Jones's Diary" sounds lame, but trust
me, it works much better onscreen. Well, most of it. A "Bridget can't
sing" bit in a karaoke bar is terribly overdone and a "Bridget can't
cook" scene is straight out of "Bad Sitcoms 101." Most of the secondary
characters are underwritten and the subplot involving Bridget's parents
plays as if a key scene is missing.
Yet the film still succeeds. Part of the reason is how easy it is to
relate to Bridget, the consummate uneasy goof trying, and mostly
failing, to break her bad habits and chart a better life. Sound like
anyone you know?
And then there are the lead players. Colin Firth is dead-on as a sullen
little boy residing in the body of an effete adult. Meanwhile, Hugh
Grant looks and acts healthier and more assured than I've ever seen him
before. As a suave leading man with questionable morals, he is letter
perfect. Both performers handle the physical comedy adroitly as well. A
fierce, wonderfully inept fight between them is one of the highlights of
the movie.
But best of all is Renee Zellweger. Her casting raised a stir in
Britain, where fans of the book questioned the appropriateness of an
American playing a beloved English character. They also questioned her
ability to pull off the accent. Skeptics be damned, Zellweger gets it
right. Her accent is fine and her performance, aside from the karaoke
scene, is flawless. She is the embodiment of insecurity, need, resolve,
failure and eternal hope. Few actors could flesh out such a character
without becoming either excessively cute or coy. Thankfully for "Bridget
Jones's Diary," they hired one who could.
