Title
Review for Mummy, The (1932)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://ofcs.org
Karl Freund's The Mummy is part of the triad of great horror classics 
of the early 1930's.  Along with Frankenstein and Dracula, The Mummy 
terrified early generations of movie-goers, and parts of it are still 
terrifying today.
A measure of the film's importance comes from its originality.  
Screenwriters of this time were not pestered with avoiding so many 
clichés;  so when The Mummy begins at the site of a spooky 
archaeological dig in Egypt, viewers saw an early treatment of 
discoveries that had been in the news for decades.  It had to be 
dramatic and scary to watch the mummified guardian Imhotep (Boris 
Karloff) commence to stir, break his arms free of their bonds, and 
send into madness one of the archaeologists who had invaded his tomb.
Years pass, and the plot alights on the life of another member of the 
ill-fated expedition, Sir Joseph Whemple (Arthur Byron).  His friend 
Dr. Muller is concerned that a young woman, Helen Grosvenor (Zita 
Johann), is in danger of being controlled by a tall, thin, mysterious 
Egyptian, who gives the name Ardeth Bey (Karloff).  While Helen is in 
a disturbed state, Frank Whemple is charged with calming her.  Quickly 
the two fall in love.  Heightening the tension,  Bey begins to pursue 
Helen, as he is convinced her body holds the reincarnated soul of the 
Egyptian princess Anckesen-Amon.  In an agitated fit of telepathic 
rage, Bey kills Dr. Muller.  Meanwhile, the Whemples are on to Bey, 
realizing he is Imhotep.  What's more horrific is their realization 
that Bey is invincible - he cannot be defeated without the 
intervention of the ancient Egyptian gods, the same gods that Imhotep 
offended so many years before.
The ending of The Mummy is also the forerunner of countless showdowns 
between mortals and immortals.  For its time the special effects are 
stunning, their power vitiated only by an abrupt cut to the ending 
credits.
Boris Karloff gets top billing, and rightly so.  His body is excellent 
in its attenuation, his square shoulders giving his character a 
striking ascetic quality.  Somehow we almost believe this man is a 
living mummy, his face crinkled by the ages.  Certainly one of the 
creepiest shots in the film is a close-up used many times:  the 
fez-wearing Imhotep/Bey glaring wide-eyed to a point just above the 
camera, in what seems like a still photograph.  No music accompanies 
this shot;  it is the character's intense concentration -- and the 
viewer's knowledge of his evil intentions - that lend the image its 
terrifying power.  Further, Karloff's subtle and masterful body 
language conveys a manner that takes its time in building menace.  The 
actor's demeanor was doubtless as singular at the time as it is nearly 
70 years later:  as we listen to his distinguished British lisp, we 
shiver in mute understanding.
An important issue is raised in the film - the idea that it is wrong 
for Egyptian artifacts to leave the country of their origin and appear 
in, say, an English museum.  At the time of the film's setting, the 
laws have been changed and all artifacts remain in the Cairo museum.  
The filmmakers are to be praised for nodding to this correct method of 
showcasing history.
Much of the film is slow, particularly when Karloff is offscreen.  
When his Bey is luring Helen to his side, or disabling her guardians 
with his lethal mind powers, the tension makes the film very 
watchable.  But the dialogue sags when the men are talking, or even 
when Frank is romancing Helen.  One scene, in which Bey explains to 
the semi-hypnotized Helen the reason for his cursed state, is 
riveting.  A flashback beginning in a pool of fog, the scene shows 
Imhotep, in love with the dead princess, trying to revive her body.  
Caught in his unholy deed, Imhotep is wrapped alive, and placed as a 
guard to the royal tomb.  Many modern viewers would deem the flashback 
tacky, but it is a risk in narration for which the director should be 
commended.  And the period costumes worn by the ancient Egyptians do 
lend a corny realism.  We feel Imhotep's pain, especially the spasms 
in the eyes of the expressive Mr. Karloff as the bandages are wrapped 
about his head.
The sequels to this film are easier to watch.  Though they are more 
Americanized, with the swaddled creature traipsing around, dragging 
his dusty leg, one arm still trapped in its rotting sling, sometimes 
an unconscious beauty in his arm, these follow-up films helped to set 
the patterns used in many "B" horror movies to come.  But the simply 
titled The Mummy was the first, and no matter how many times its 
themes are remade and re-invoked, its ground-breaking status is beyond 
question.

