Title
Review for American Werewolf in Paris, An (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Scott Renshaw
AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS
(Hollywood)
Starring:  Tom Everett Scott, Julie Delpy, Vince Vieluf, Phil Buckman,
Julie Bowen, Pierre Cosso.
Screenplay:  Tim Burns & Tom Stern and Anthony Waller.
Producer:  Richard Claus.
Director:  Anthony Waller.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, nudity, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  91 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It's a truly surreal experience, sitting through a film like AN
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS with your mind overwhelmed by a piercing cry of
"What were they _thinking_?"  John Landis' 1981 AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN
LONDON was hardly an inviolable classic, but it was crafty and creative, a
comic horror film which was both genuinely scary and genuinely funny. AN
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS, on the other hand, is genuinely unwatchable --
a collection of bad ideas thrown onto the screen without any apparent
consideration to little details like coherence or appeal to an audience.
     The tragedy is that director Anthony Waller proved he could mix
tension and comic relief quite effectively in his debut feature MUTE
WITNESS.  In PARIS, he merely regurgitates LONDON's premise of Americans
abroad, with protagonist Andy McDermott (Tom Everett Scott) and his
buddies Brad (Vince Vieluf) and Chris (Phil Buckman) replacing backpackers
David Naughton and Griffin Dunne.  The trio is on a "Daredevil Tour" of
Europe, tallying up their respective testosterone points for endangering
their lives or seducing women as college chums are wont to do.  It's not
part of the plan to get tangled up with a den of werewolves, but that's
exactly what happens when Andy saves the life of the suicidal Serafine
(Julie Delpy).  Soon Andy joins the ranks of the wolfen, and must try to
kill the wolf who bit him while also finding a cure for Serafine.
     What follows is so misguided on so many levels that it becomes
horrifying for all the wrong reasons.  The male leads fumble with inane
dialogue including such Gen X-authentic ripostes as "This is madness!";
Julie Delpy, meanwhile, is obliged to humiliate herself with one of the
lamest and most unnecessary nude scenes ever filmed.  The attempts at
humor range from turning a pair of undead characters into fourth-rate
rejects from THE FRIGHTENERS, to the wildly hilarious conceit that Andy --
get this! -- keeps bumping his head on everything in sight.  Waller
directs it all as though guided by the humanitarian desire just to get it
over with, with baffling unexplained resolutions, leading to a
cringe-inducing happy ending which looks like it was stolen from some
mid-80s shlock comedy starring Andrew McCarthy.
     It's all the more aggravating when a film this sloppy pretends to be
interested in making some sort of social statement.  The primary villains
in PARIS are a group of pseudo-skinheads who have intentionally infected
themselves with were-blood so that they might more efficiently rid French
society of its contaminating elements -- vagrants, junkies, American
tourists.  If the point was to make Americans feel better about
encountering mere attitude in Paris rather than flesh-rending canine
teeth, mission accomplished.  If Waller's intent was to offer some
metaphorical indictment of who-knows-what, it's lost in his frantic
story-telling long before we can nod in socially-conscious superiority.
     Some viewers will undoubtedly trek to PARIS simmply to see a genre
film, but even they are likely to be disappointed.  The computer-generated
werewolves are thoroughly unimpressive, and the transformation scene
tossed off so quickly you'll be instantly nostalgic for Rick Baker's
incredible makeup effects from LONDON.  the script makes its token
attempts to spice up the werewolf legend with a few new details and some
pseudo-science, but none of it generates thrills or scares (just a couple
of moderately effective gross-outs).  If they want to add a new twist to
lycanthropic mythology, here's a suggestion:  anyone who makes a werewolf
movie this bad becomes one of them.  The line to fire the silver bullets
forms behind me.

Author
Jamie Peck
Hollywood / 1:39 / 1997 / R (language, gore, brief nudity, muted sex)
Cast: Tom Everett Scott; Julie Delpy; Vince Vieluf; Phil Buckman; Julie 
Bowen; Pierre Cosso; Tom Novembre; Thierry Lhermitte 
Director: Anthony Waller 
Screenplay: Tim Burns; Tom Stern; Anthony Waller 
It's a sad, ironic thing when a werewolf movie lacks bite, but such is 
the case with "An American Werewolf in Paris." This pseudo-sequel's tiny 
feet fail to fill the sizeable shoes of John Landis' 1981 cult hit "An 
American Werewolf in London," and sorely missed is the original's deft 
one-two punch of dark thrills and darker humor. This effort is decent 
but could benefit from a Mike Nichols makeover -- his 1994 "Wolf" was a 
biting satire, a sizzling romance and a supernatural thriller, all of 
which "Paris" obviously aspires to be. The film dangerously courts 
disaster, but a few weirdly charming elements keep things watchable. 
The movie opens as a trio of horny college grads arrive in Paris, the 
latest destination in their "daredevil tour of Europe." Andy (Tom 
Everett Scott) plans to show buddies Brad (Vince Vieluf) and Chris (Phil 
Buckman) up by climbing to the top of the Eiffel Tower and swan-diving 
off -- bungee cord tied tight, of course. But Andy's stunt is 
interrupted by the presence of a beautiful, distraught French beauty 
(Jule Delpy) also prepared to pounce from the landmark, but with 
suicidal intent. He saves her, much to her chagrin, and escapes the 
ordeal with a couple of nasty bruises and one of the girl's shoes. 
Cinderella she's definitely not, though. Her name is Serafine, and when 
the moon is full ... let's just say she sprouts hair in more places than 
the armpits. But the recovering Andy thinks he has seen the love of his 
life, and devotes his vacation to tracking her down. The pursuit leads 
him into the underground of a Paris club -- actually a lycanthrope-run 
front to lure scum like American tourists to their snack-food doom -- 
where he is chased and attacked by a werewolf, and thus becomes one 
himself. Brad is killed in the ensuing havoc, and is doomed to follow 
Andy in the form of a decomposing nag, whose only release is the murder 
of the creature that mauled him. Andy, on the other hand, must eat the 
heart of his attacker to reverse his curse. 
The first half-hour or so is pretty solid silliness, but things take a 
turn for the worse once Andy begins his induction into the wereworld. 
"Paris"' agenda quickly becomes overstuffed; everybody's either a wolf 
or a zombie, and the movie seems so intent on delivering the bloody 
goods that it forgets to step back occasionally and let its audience 
breathe. It's good when a film moves fast, but not this fast -- it's all 
too easy to lose track of what's going on, who's after who, how 
character motivation relates to the unfolding action, etc. The hyper 
editing doesn't help, turning already-sloppy sequences into visual 
disasters (watch how abruptly and haplessly a particular bedroom 
interlude segues into an all-out chase through the streets). 
"American Werewolf"'s computer-generated creatures aren't as polished as 
those of recent fare like, say, "Starship Troopers," but I rather liked 
their design. These and other generally modest effects shots somehow 
manage to work despite being released in the year of "Titanic"; the 
afore-mentioned Eiffel Tower plummet (scored, by the way, to an 
excellent remix of Better Than Ezra's "Normal Town") isn't by any means 
spectacular, but is a nice, ludicrous scene nonetheless. Despite that 
famous Paris landmark's cameo, though, the movie utilizes none of the 
city's swank ambiance. If the natives didn't keep speaking with French 
accents, this might as well have been "An American Werewolf in Peoria." 
Also unwisely nixed is a stunner of a transformation scene -- "Paris"' 
prequel showcased both colorful London locale and creepy mutation 
effects that bagged it an Oscar. 
Tom Everett Scott (so wonderful in "That Thing You Do!") and Julie Delpy 
(ditto for "Before Sunrise") have a nice chemistry and are genuinely 
appealing performers. Vince Vieluf stands out among the supporting cast, 
displaying a goofy charm that will hopefully lead to future projects. 
There are some priceless sight gags (one involving a flying condom, 
another with a discharged eyeball) caught up in the middle of this mess, 
but their effect is muted by lengthy stretches of inane exposition. "An 
American Werewolf in Paris" isn't as horrid as last fall's forgettable 
"Bad Moon," but it's no howl either. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Anthony Waller
Cast: Tom Everett Scott, Julie Delpy, Vince Veluf, Phil Buckman, Julie
Bowen, Pierre Cosso
Rated R: Violence, gore, nudity
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Here's a note for any film maker intending to include a scene in
which characters bungee jump from the Eiffel Tower: the tower itself is
not composed of straight, vertical lines. The support beams curve away
from the center closer to the bottom, so anything that falls off the top
is likely to smash into the side of the tower no later than halfway
through the fall. So, in effect, people bungee jumping from the top will
not reach the ground until they collide with many steel girders,
bouncing their way down, down, down, until they reach the bottom as a
dead lump.
    The characters in An American Werewolf in Paris didn't have this
problem--they found an alternate version of the Eiffel Tower, which
represents more closely the Washington Monument, so they were not only
able to avoid hitting the side of the tower, but to clear every bit of
the building itself and land safely in the grass clearing hundreds of
feet away. I bet that Andy (Tom Everett Scott) didn't realize how his
life would change when he selflessly leaped from the top of the tower in
order to save a beautiful girl (Julie Delpy) attempting suicide. Of
course he saves her, in a stunt that makes every Schwarzenegger film
look realistic, and sets her on the ground, only to collide with a
girder on the way up (I suppose some points may be given for
understanding that there are, in fact, girders on the Eiffel Tower).
    The girl's name is Serafine, and she is a werewolf. Andy and his
friends find this out the hard way. When Andy becomes a werewolf
himself, he uncovers a plot in which a group of nihilistic werewolves
trap unknowing Americans and kill them. Their ultimate goal is to turn
the entire world into werewolves; Andy, with the help of Serafine, must
stop him at all costs! But only after he comes to terms with the fact
that he is a werewolf, and that the woman he loves is also a werewolf.
    Most horror films set up rules and guidelines by which the
characters act and ultimately destroy the evil bad guys. There are no
such rules in this film. I was under the impression that only silver
bullets could kill werewolves, but here they seem rather weak (many of
them die by multiple gunshots from a standard hand gun). Aside from the
concept not following what I know about werewolves, nothing else in the
film seems to be guided by any laws or rules.
    Take, for example, the Eiffel Tower bungee-jumping scene, which is
later upstaged by a Statue of Liberty bungee-jumping scene. There are
also tasteless moments in which Andy talks to ghosts. (These ghosts are
unique--they are the victims of werewolves, complete with the original
bloody wounds; they are damned to walk the earth until the werewolves
that have taken their lives die.) The entire idea behind the ghosts is
unfounded and absolutely pointless. The film also includes those
irritatingly dumb scenes in which Andy's friends try and get him ready
for a big date with Serafine by telling him what to wear and what to
say.
    All of this adds up to one big problem: in a film that lacks even a
hint of realism, it is impossible to care, or even get excited, about
the characters and the situation. There was not a doubt in my mind that
everything would be okay, not because it's a typical horror film and
everything is always okay, but because I knew the characters could just
cast an "Everything is Okay!" spell and everything would be okay. A
situation that appears to be certain death provides an escape when the
floor falls out from underneath a character for no particular reason.
Don't ask why Serafine loses all self-control when she turns into a
werewolf, and why the other werewolves seem completely aware of
themselves and others. Certainly don't question the pseudo-science in
which the bad werewolves synthesize a drug which can induce the werewolf
effects at any time during the day (which has a laughable, "scientific"
explanation having something to do with the moon cycles).
    As bad as this film is, I have to admit that it's not without guilty
pleasures. Director Anthony Waller should get someone to give him a real
script, because he could probably do some interesting things. And the
acting is rather entertaining, especially from Scott. There are also a
few really funny moments, and I actually liked the CG werewolves (they
don't look too cartoony). If you love werewolf or horror films, then you
might like this silly film. I'm not a big fan of either one, but I can't
say I wasted my money here. It's a bad film, yes, but it's charming in a
tasteless, lawless manor. I didn't like it, but I sat through it, and I
can't say I was disappointed. I got what I expected after seeing the
preview.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Anthony Waller
Cast: Tom Everett Scott, Julie Delpy, Vince Veluf, Phil Buckman, Julie
Bowen, Pierre Cosso
Rated R: Violence, gore, nudity
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Here's a note for any film maker intending to include a scene in
which characters bungee jump from the Eiffel Tower: the tower itself is
not composed of straight, vertical lines. The support beams curve away
from the center closer to the bottom, so anything that falls off the top
is likely to smash into the side of the tower no later than halfway
through the fall. So, in effect, people bungee jumping from the top will
not reach the ground until they collide with many steel girders,
bouncing their way down, down, down, until they reach the bottom as a
dead lump.
    The characters in An American Werewolf in Paris didn't have this
problem--they found an alternate version of the Eiffel Tower, which
represents more closely the Washington Monument, so they were not only
able to avoid hitting the side of the tower, but to clear every bit of
the building itself and land safely in the grass clearing hundreds of
feet away. I bet that Andy (Tom Everett Scott) didn't realize how his
life would change when he selflessly leaped from the top of the tower in
order to save a beautiful girl (Julie Delpy) attempting suicide. Of
course he saves her, in a stunt that makes every Schwarzenegger film
look realistic, and sets her on the ground, only to collide with a
girder on the way up (I suppose some points may be given for
understanding that there are, in fact, girders on the Eiffel Tower).
    The girl's name is Serafine, and she is a werewolf. Andy and his
friends find this out the hard way. When Andy becomes a werewolf
himself, he uncovers a plot in which a group of nihilistic werewolves
trap unknowing Americans and kill them. Their ultimate goal is to turn
the entire world into werewolves; Andy, with the help of Serafine, must
stop him at all costs! But only after he comes to terms with the fact
that he is a werewolf, and that the woman he loves is also a werewolf.
    Most horror films set up rules and guidelines by which the
characters act and ultimately destroy the evil bad guys. There are no
such rules in this film. I was under the impression that only silver
bullets could kill werewolves, but here they seem rather weak (many of
them die by multiple gunshots from a standard hand gun). Aside from the
concept not following what I know about werewolves, nothing else in the
film seems to be guided by any laws or rules.
    Take, for example, the Eiffel Tower bungee-jumping scene, which is
later upstaged by a Statue of Liberty bungee-jumping scene. There are
also tasteless moments in which Andy talks to ghosts. (These ghosts are
unique--they are the victims of werewolves, complete with the original
bloody wounds; they are damned to walk the earth until the werewolves
that have taken their lives die.) The entire idea behind the ghosts is
unfounded and absolutely pointless. The film also includes those
irritatingly dumb scenes in which Andy's friends try and get him ready
for a big date with Serafine by telling him what to wear and what to
say.
    All of this adds up to one big problem: in a film that lacks even a
hint of realism, it is impossible to care, or even get excited, about
the characters and the situation. There was not a doubt in my mind that
everything would be okay, not because it's a typical horror film and
everything is always okay, but because I knew the characters could just
cast an "Everything is Okay!" spell and everything would be okay. A
situation that appears to be certain death provides an escape when the
floor falls out from underneath a character for no particular reason.
Don't ask why Serafine loses all self-control when she turns into a
werewolf, and why the other werewolves seem completely aware of
themselves and others. Certainly don't question the pseudo-science in
which the bad werewolves synthesize a drug which can induce the werewolf
effects at any time during the day (which has a laughable, "scientific"
explanation having something to do with the moon cycles).
    As bad as this film is, I have to admit that it's not without guilty
pleasures. Director Anthony Waller should get someone to give him a real
script, because he could probably do some interesting things. And the
acting is rather entertaining, especially from Scott. There are also a
few really funny moments, and I actually liked the CG werewolves (they
don't look too cartoony). If you love werewolf or horror films, then you
might like this silly film. I'm not a big fan of either one, but I can't
say I wasted my money here. It's a bad film, yes, but it's charming in a
tasteless, lawless manor. I didn't like it, but I sat through it, and I
can't say I was disappointed. I got what I expected after seeing the
preview.

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: 
Three young American guys traveling in Paris, cute girl who is a
werewolf by night, a werewolf organization that wants to take over the
world
Synopsis: 
AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS is based on the mythology of an earlier
film: AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON (1981) by John Landis. For those of
you unfamiliar with the AMERICAN WEREWOLF ... formula, the basic
horror/comedy formula for this series is: some young American guys hang
out in Europe to backpack, travel, and meet women. One of them
invariably gets bitten by a werewolf, while another invariably dies. The
spirit of the dead friend is cursed to haunt and give advice to the
surviving friend, who now finds that he transforms into a hairy
man-eating creature at night when the moon is full. AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF
IN LONDON (1981) became an 80s cult classic because of its dark humor
and great special effects transformations. 
AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS does not have great special effects (the
wolf creatures don't have natural movement or balance), but it does
contain elements of the same plot formula as AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN
LONDON. In the first ten minutes, it's established that three immature
American main characters are bumbling around Europe daring each other to
do crazy stunts and meet women. When the geekiest of the travelers - -
Andy (Tom Everett Scott) - - tries to impress his friends with a bungee
jump off the Eiffel Tower, he accidentally ends up saving a hot French
babe named Seraphine (Julie Delpy), who is trying to commit suicide from
the top of the tower. Little do the boys know that Seraphine is really a
werewolf. Soon enough, Andy gets bitten by a werewolf, his buddy dies,
and the spirit of the dead friend is cursed to haunt and give advice to
poor Andy - - who now finds that he transforms into a bloodthirsty beast
at night when the moon is full. The third American buddy is captured by
a gang of anti-American French werewolves who want to take over the
world. Meanwhile Seraphine is doing some research on an antidote to cure
lycanthropy (werewolfism). Can Andy and Seraphine cure themselves and
also stop the militant werewolf group from world domination?
Opinion:
I like werewolf movies in general. I also like the first ten minutes of
AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS; it is kind of funny, and it establishes
that - - aside from the wolf story - - some sort of comedic romance is
going to take place. Finally, I like the end of this movie, because it
ties in with the beginning. But the middle of the film really loses me -
- with a dozen side plots about militants taking over the world, causing
and curing lycanthropy, a mysterious patient on a respirator, a needless
breast-feeling scene, an unresolved female American tourist undead
spirit character, confusing new werewolf lore about eating the heart of
the werewolf that bit you, and so on. I ended up with more questions
than I came in with. In my opinion, they should simplify the middle of
this movie by weeding out unnecessary unresolved subplots and
characters, and then find a way to make it humorous and witty - -
instead of suspenseless and confusing.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States/France/UK, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 12/25/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:40
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, gore, profanity, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Tom Everett Scott, Julie Delpy, Vince Vieluf, Phil Buckman, 
      Julie Bowen, Pierre Cosso, Tom Novembre, Thierry Lhermitte
Director: Anthony Waller
Producer: Richard Claus
Screenplay: Tim Burns & Tom Stern and Anthony Waller
Cinematography: Egon Werdin
Music: Wilbert Hirsch
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS is a failed attempt to recapture the 
humor and horror of John Landis' 1981 feature, AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN 
LONDON.  Where the original had comedy, the sequel has the kind of 
revolting silliness that can be found in TV sit-coms.  Where the first 
installment had chills, this one has sequences that are inappropriately, 
unintentionally funny.  In short, while AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON 
has become something of a minor classic in its genre, the woeful AN 
AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS seems destined for late nights on Cinemax (it 
even has the necessary gratuitous nudity).  
     The film opens with a trio of daredevil Americans -- Andy (Tom 
Everett Scott), Brad (Vince Vieluf), and Chris (Phil Buckman) -- 
sneaking up to the top of the Eiffel Tower to drink wine and do a little 
bungee jumping.  Soon they have company in the person of Serafine (Julie 
Delpy), who has decided to end it all.  She jumps, but Andy, with a 
bungee cord attached, goes after her, and manages to save her (at the 
price of a major headache).  Serafine disappears, but a smitten Andy 
seeks her out.  However, once he learns his would-be girlfriend's dark 
secret, he wishes he hadn't.  She's a werewolf, cursed to change into a 
hideous beast when the moon is full, and, to make matters worse, he has 
suffered a nasty bite himself.
     Actress Julie Delpy is far too good for this movie.  She imbues 
Serafine with spirit, spunk, and humanity, which gives us an emotional 
stake in the character's fate.  This isn't necessarily a good thing, 
since it prevents us from relaxing and enjoying AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN 
PARIS as a completely mindless, campy entertainment experience.  Delpy's 
injection of class into an otherwise classless production raises the 
specter of what this film could have been with a better script and a 
better cast surrounding her.
     Delpy's previous credits include such memorable ventures as 
Krzysztof Kieslowski's WHITE and Richard Linklater's BEFORE SUNRISE.  
She was radiant, charismatic, and effective in both.  Given the nature 
and level of the material she has to work with here, she gets as close 
as possible to those adjectives.  It could be argued that Delpy is the 
only reason to see AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS, but even her most 
devoted fans should consider giving this one a miss.  And if your 
primary objective is catching a glimpse of her in the buff, check out 
either KILLING ZOE or THE PASSION OF BEATRICE -- those movies have 
intelligible plots in addition to breasts.
     The rest of the cast acts at a level considerably below that of 
Delpy -- which is to say, they give performances appropriate for the 
screenplay.  Tom Everett Scott (THAT THING YOU DO) plays the lead like 
he's in a made-for-TV movie.  It would be kind to call him bland.  
Actors Vince Vieluf and Phil Buckman, as Andy's friends, are no more 
impressive.  Julie Bowen (HAPPY GILMORE) is suitably fetching as 
werewolf meat.  And respected French actor Thierry Lhermitte has a brief 
turn as another monster meal.
     On the technical side, it's all bad news.  The computer-generated 
werewolves look painfully unreal.  The creatures would probably have 
been more believable had they been men in wolf suits.  Repeated use is 
made of the "werewolf cam", an infrared wolf's point-of-view approach 
that's interesting the first couple of times it's employed, then becomes 
tedious.  And the soundtrack includes some alternative grunge rock tunes 
that clash violently with the on-screen action they're matched to.
     Director Anthony Waller, who displayed a confident, edgy style in 
MUTE WITNESS, stumbles with this material, never being able to make the 
comedy and horror elements gel.  As a result, we get the worst werewolf 
sequel since THE HOWLING II: YOUR SISTER IS A WEREWOLF.  (I will give 
Waller credit for killing off a dog, though -- something that's rarely 
seen in movies these days.)  AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS is marginally 
entertaining in a "bad movie" sort of way, but that's a dubious 
distinction.  Ultimately, it's an unfortunate effort, for, while it 
isn't unbearable to sit through, it isn't a howl, either.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
starring: Tom Everett Scott (Andy), Julie Delpy (Serafine), Pierre Cosso
(Claude), Vince Vieluf (Brad); written by Tim Burns, Tom Stern, Anthony
Waller; produced by Richard Claus; directed by Anthony Waller; based on
characters created by John Landis.
Seen December 18, 1997 at 7:30 p.m. at the Rotterdam Square Mall cinemas
(Rotterdam, NY), theater #1, with Chris Wessell for free (promotional advanced
screening passes). [Theater rating: ***: good seats, sound, and picture]
        Movie producers are often in no-win situations. When they do the same things
over and over again we complain about their lack of originality. However, when
they try to shake things up, the results are often sloppy. Perhaps the reason
"An American Werewolf In Paris" succeeds is because it does both of these at
the same time without even trying. The result is a genuinely interesting,
charming B-movie on a grand scale.
        The film starts out in the spirit of bad horror movies by introducing us to
three typical friends, Andy (Scott), Brad (Vince Vieluf), and Chris (Phil
Buckman) who are college-age Americans traveling through Europe. Within the
first few minutes generic characterization is unveiled, and it's no surprise
two of the guys are jocks while the other is a geek. We they spot a sexy
French babe on a train, the discussion of sex and who has and who will
accumulate the most "points" comes up. It's no surprise Andy, the dorky one,
is way behind on points and falls in love with the girl at first sight.
        Campiness, combined with blatant foreshadowing, is the icing on the horror-
film cake, and we get a good, tasty helping of that here. For example, the
buddies' dialogue and actions are cartoony, and Andy's crush on the French
girl seems significant, yet it works because everything's so lighthearted and
appealing. There's a scene in which the guys sneak up to the top of the Eiffel
Tower to bungee jump off it, but bump into the same girl up there. When she
attempts to leap to her death, Andy ends up saving her through a fantastic
action sequence. Yes, the situation is quite silly in premise, but the
atmosphere it lighthearted enough to make it all work. Even the slapstick gags
that ensue right after the serious scenes don't seem out of place and are
actually very funny.
        Through a series of events which could best be described as "movie events for
the sake of a movie," Andy finds his dream girl, learns her name is Serafine
(Delpy), and manages to get a date with her even though his friends think
she's insane. The first act revolves almost entirely around this plotline, but
does drop hints of something supernatural going on. And it is because of this
factor that the film's transition from the lighthearted to the grim and gritty
works. 
        As the second act develops, the mood continues to get darker and darker,
while the screenplay gives the main characters just the right amount of depth
and puts them in particular situations to keep everything well-paced. When the
guys go to an underground party (literally) hosted by Serafine's caretaker,
Claude (Cosso), the true nature of the film is revealed. It's clear from the
get-go who the  werewolves are (and "good" and "bad" werewolves at that),
who's going to become a werewolf, and who's going to die. 
        We get the dark, Gothic scenes set in the sewers with the werewolves jumping
out of the shadows, and scenes of the werewolves attacking crowds of trapped
people. But surprisingly enough, there is authentic tension to these scenes
and little gore. The true horrorific elements come through the shots of the
people running for their lives as seen through the werewolves' eyes, and the
aftermath scenes of police putting body parts into evidence bags.
        As the film passes its midpoint, it undergoes many changes as the story
actually has a focus and the satirical elements are brought back into play and
perfectly synchronized with the more intense aspects. What's most remarkable
is how the story and its polarized atmospheres are able to further each other.
This is perfectly illustrated through the basic plot and it subplots and how
they work together. Andy and Serafine are trying to stop Claude's werewolf
cult from slaughtering innocent people, but Andy's "undead" victims keep
harassing him and create for a paradox that's both comical and serious at the
same time, but it all comes together in the end.
        It's funny how certain things can be seen as enhancements to some and flaws
to others, and "An American Werewolf In Paris" is based on this principle.
Although it does have problems, it should be appreciated for its ability to be
consistently entertaining and original.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Author
Tim Voon
What started out as promising, spoofy fun took a turn for the worse when
the werewolf started getting nasty. You can't keep laughing when there's
an arm hanging here, a leg hanging there and a bit of blood splattered
everywhere. So what was I expecting? I wanted a tale as tragically
romantic as BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, as touching as BORN FREE and as
carefree as HARRY AND THE HENDERSONS. Too much to ask you might say, but
a subject as overdone as werewolves deserves only the utmost attention.
I was disappointed, not so much because it wasn't original, but because
it didn't carry any heart except within the jaws of the beast.
So I grimaced as I witnessed this blood bath reminiscent of hyenas
ripping apart prey on the Savannah. These mythological men who turn to
beasts at full moon, awaken to feast on the hearts of humans was too
difficult to swallow, even with popcorn and coke on hand. Remember the
Christians being fed to Lions in the Colosseum, well this time round
it's the Americans who get fed to werewolves at numerous night clubs.
Somehow, the French werewolves prefer American blood. This may be pure
coincidence, a subtle hint that Americans aren't welcome in Paris or
more likely that the over-friendly Americans make the easiest prey for
partying wolves. Anyway it was quite amusing to see werewolves
massacring Americans in Paris. It's not a sight you'll find at the zoo.
The cast includes Julie Delpy who talked too much with Ethan Hawke in
BEFORE SUNRISE. In this movie she says less but carries a lot more bite.
She is otherwise charming when she tries to calm the hallucinating Tom
Everett Scott (THAT THING YOU DO) post wolf bite. Her idea of helping
him through the difficult transition from man to wolf is to keep his
hands on her breasts. I've heard that this particular naturipathic
treatment is also effective for insomnia, anxiety and good for
rebuilding finger strength. Unfortunately, this is as enchanting as the
movie gets. Gone are the days when only a silver bullet will kill a
werewolf, now any bullet will do the job. Three cheers for modern
technology, but an overall unhappy movie experience.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
AN AMERICAN WEREWOLf IN PARIS
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Hollywood Pictures/Cornerstone Pictures
 Director:  Anthony Waller
 Writer:  Tim Burns & Tom Stern & Anthony Waller
 Cast: Tom Everett Scott, Julie Delpy, Vince Vieluf, Phil
Buckman, Julie Bowen, Pierre Cosso, Thierry Lhermitte, Tom
Novembre
   There was a time that college kids going to Europe said to
their stay-at-home buddies, "Eat your heart out, pal."  Things
are quite different now, as Anthony Waller would have us
believe in his role at the helm of "An American Werewolf in
Paris."  Now the slogan might be the very reverse: "So you're
going to Paris?  Eat your heart out."  Waller's campy horror
comedy-thriller, which he wrote together with Tim Burns and
Tom Stern and which is based on characters created by John
Landis in Landis's messy 1981 opus, "An American Werewolf
in London," comes off best during its initial half hour.  After
the fun dialogue, shenanigans and fantasies which three
young Yanks share with us as they tour the City of Lights, the
movie simply degenerates.  In doing so Waller falls into
the lapse suffered recently by scripter Quentin Tarantino in
the Robert Rodriguez film "From Dusk Till Dawn."  That
tamale Western gives us a first act brimming with tough talk
and violent action, magnetic in its story and pacing, and
favored with a charismatic villain played by George Clooney. 
"From Dusk Till Dawn" then retrogresses into a by-the-
numbers vampire gross-out, shedding all pretense of
character development, action with at least internal logic, and
people the audience could sympathize with.
   After a blood-and-thunder prelude which takes us promptly
to a central Parisian boulevard on a dark and stormy night,
Waller's film settles into a pleasantly humorous banter of its
three principal, fun-loving males: Andy (Tom Everett Scott),
Brad (Vince Vieluf) and Chris (Phil Buckman).  Traveling
together on a train across the French countryside they
challenge one another in a game of one-upmanship on their
sexual experiences, each offering to grant "points" to the
other two for each success they have in "boinking" the
sophisticated Parisian coeds they might meet.  In the story's
most flat-out hilarious scene, Andy sits in a cafe with a young
French woman he has met, Serafine (Julie Delpy) under the
most unusual circumstances, trying to convince her that he
respects and likes her as a person and not simply as a
potential bed mate.  When a half dozen condoms spill out of
his pocket--courtesy of his pals' donation to him just before
the date--he pretends that they are merely the latest type of
American chewing gum.  We in the audience remain a step or
two ahead of the performers as soon as Serafine warns Andy
that he must give her up immediately for his own safety: "It's
not you, it's me, " she insists, and in this case she can be
taken at her word.
   It is currently fashionable to say that the wolf is one of the
world's most beautiful creations.  Those who remain skeptical
will join the trendies when they watch Ms Delpy--a lovely
actress who charmed us so much in the French-language
movie "White"--transform into a such a creature under the full
moon.  It's not long before Waller--recapping "From Dusk Till
Dawn" but simply replacing vampires with lupine curiosities--
throws before us an epidemic of morphing.  Waller does not
even trust the patience of his audience to become wrapped
up in teasingly slow metamorphoses of human beings to
bizarre animals with incredible strength and a curious love for
human blood. Wouldn't you expect him at least to show the
hair slowly sprouting on hands which simultaneously
exchange manicured nails for well-honed claws?  No way. 
They simply convert one-two-three and they're off and
running.   We meet folks who are dead-dead, like Serafine's
stepfather; others who are undead, like Amy the bimbo; and
the Lupus Vulgaris types who are alive but are human beings
only part-time.  At least in Landis's 1981 London version, the
David Naughton character turns into a  werewolf with real
style: hands elongating and growing claws, face twisting into a
snout and fangs.
   Still, Tom Everett Scott makes a charming Andy with a
modicum of chemistry for the lovely Julie Delpy, two
characters who literally fall for each other not once but twice:
over the Eiffel Tower and the Statue of Liberty in a decently-
executed pair of bungee jumps.  Perhaps to add at least a bit
of class to the film, the writers throw in--but are too
embarrassed to elaborate--a political scenario: the
werewolves who are members of an exclusive club guarded
over by Mr. Clean are really skinheads during the day who
believe they are purifying the planet by getting rid of the sick,
the dependent, the halt and the lame.  "Werewolf" is
ultimately a heartless exercise in more ways than one.
Rated R.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey
Karten
