Title
Review for Speaking Parts (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Atom Egoyan
Starring: Michael McManus, Arsinée Khanjian, Gabrielle Rose, Tony Nardi,
David Hemblen, Frank Tata, Gérard Parkes, Jackie Samuda, Peter Krantz
"Speaking Parts" deals with a group of five people who have something or
other to do with films, and tells a story focusing on their distanced
relationships.  Each of them have to do with film in one way: Lance
(Michael McManus) is a film actor (actually extra), Lisa (Arsinée
Khanjian) is someone who watches films, Clara (Gabrille Rose) is a film
writer, Eddy (Tony Nardi) not only works at a video store but also
shoots videos of weddings and parties; and the Producer (David Hemblen)
is...well, the producer.  
There is a lot of drama, dealing with many instances of the different
relationships these people have.  Lance and Lisa work together as maids
at a classy hotel, and Lisa is in love with him, but he always shuns
her, giving her no less than the silent treatment.  Lisa is pretty
obsessed with him, carrying around a photograph of him in her purse, and
renting all his movies all the time.  However, Lance is only an extra in
films, but Lisa likes this better.  She tells Eddy, who notices she's
renting all these films, that talking is not very important.  
In the meantime, Lance has auditioned for a role (his first speaking
role) in a movie about a man who gives a lung to his dying sister.  At
the audition, he and the woman he auditions for, Clara, hit a spark, and
carry on a sexual affair.  He discovers she's the writer of the film,
and that it's very autobiographical (we later discover that her brother,
who she watches videos of, looks exactly like Lance).  When she goes
away to argue with the producer of her film, they keep in touch via
video confroncing (including some video conferencing sex...).  
The film unfolds beautifully, giving us information on a need-to-know
basis, and possessing a hypnotic feeling, drawing us into the lives of
the five characters, and creating a lot of depth.  The film seems to be
asking who has control of media, and examines this question from
different aspects.  Lance tries to help the writer, who has lost a lot
of control over the way the film is presented (the producer wants to
make it into a talk show format, and change the guy giving his liver to
his sister to giving it to his brother), but gets a cold "Who do you
think you are?!" from the producer.  Eddy is able to ask questions to
people at the weddings and parties, but when Lisa tries it out, she
accidentally insults her interviewee, who has her newly-wedded husband
yell at her horribly.  And Clara is never able to get any real control
over the film, although her choice at playing her brother (Lance) is
duelly noted.  
The film is also structured to show the distances between these people,
be they emotionally or physically.  Lance shuns Lisa, who is always
opening up to him ("Let me love you," she says a couple times to him),
but he completely ignores her.  So she watches his videos constantly,
and freezes the frame on him as he's in the background as an extra. 
Lance is distanced from Clara, as they often talk only over video
conferencing (including the distant sex they have), and they grow
farther and farther apart over the course of the film).  The producer is
the most distanced, it seems, as he's only shown on video conferencing
until the end, when he's playing another person.  At the end, in the
final scene, it seems that the barriers have been broken down somehow,
and two of the characters who have not been in mutual contact come
together, spreading a sense of hope that people can open up emotionally
and physically (though not necessarily sexually).  
There are some confusing parts of the film, especially towards the end
when all things to go very surreal.  There's a part where Lisa is
watching a tape she has watched obsessively, and finds it starts to talk
to her and involve her.  While I haven't totally figured this out, it
seems that it means that walls of communication are being broken down. 
And the ending is a quick-cut masterful editing job, featuring a barrage
of images, and we're not sure if they're real, on video, or fantasies
(like Clara putting a gun to her head).  
But even if it can't be figured out totally, we appreciate the way it is
presented, as a lovely art form.  The film really seems to be about
emotional barriers.  The film is often silent, with very little dialogue
(the first ten to fifteen minutes is a montage of people who all look
alike, causing the brain to work overtime), causing it to become
complicated, yet hypnotic.  
"Speaking Parts" is a giant puzzle piece, a lovely connundrum for the
brain to figure out, but with one unifying theme which holds the film
together: that people are often islands, and we need to become more
unified.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
