Title
Review for Iceman Cometh, The (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
American Film Theater was a production company
with a good idea.  Why not film top-quality plays,
casting them with famous (if past their box office
prime) actors?  Aware that these films would not
have folks standing in line to see them at theaters,
they were distributed for limited engagements only,
with the audience sometimes paying in advance to
see them through a subscription.
About ten films were made, from 1972 through 1975.
Perhaps the most famous of these films was "The
Iceman Cometh", the 1947 Eugene O'Neill play about
alcoholics hiding from life behind 'pipe dreams'.
It starred Lee Marvin as the garrulous Hickey,
a reformed drunk seeking to free his fellow
alcoholics from the bottle by shattering their
'pipe dreams'.  Among the drunks are Harry Hope
(Fredric March, in his final film), an elderly
man who hasn't been outside in twenty years,
Larry (Robert Ryan), a world-weary anarchist who
fears death, and Parritt (young Jeff Bridges),
who sold out his mother and 'the cause' for a
turn with a prostitute.
The full length of "The Iceman Cometh" is four
hours.  The version that I saw had one hour removed,
and another version exists that is under two hours.
Not having seen the four or two hour versions, I
can't compare them with the three hour version.
I have heard that a television production from 1960
with Jason Robards as Hickey is superior, but I
haven't seen that either.  I can say that the 1973
version is a good film, but not a happy one.  The
large collection of eccentric and pathetic drunks
have little to look forward to except the next
drink, which is not always easy to obtain.
The performances are good all around.  Blustery
Marvin may or may not make as good a Hickey as
Robards, but he had to learn and deliver a mountain
of lines, which he does effortlessly.  His
character provides the play's suspense: why
did he become reformed, what happened to his
wife, and will he succeed in reforming the drunks?
Not all the characters are as interesting,
particulary Hugo (played by future Boss Hogg
Sorrell Booke) with his ravings about the
bourgeois and the willow trees.
kollers@home.com
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
