Title
Review for Inferno (1980)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mike Watson
Frustrating yet seductive, incoherent yet intriguing, by turns
beautiful, horrifying and just plain silly.  INFERNO is all this, and
then some.  The second of only two supernaturally-themed thrillers
directed by cult Italian filmmaker Dario Argento in his 30 year
career, INFERNO occupies his most ambitious period spanning from the
classic DEEP RED (1975) through to OPERA (1987).
The film's premise - and what a muddy, obtuse thing it is - concerns
the origins of an old apartment building in New York.  A curious
tenant named Rose (Irene Miracle) buys an old book written by a mad
architect and alchemist who claims that the building is home to one of
the "Three Mothers".  The book offers a number of clues about the
building that will help uncover the resident Mother's secrets.
Argento's script would have us believe that the Three Mothers "rule
the world" from their houses in Germany, Rome and New York with
"tears, sighs and darkness".  And that they are, in fact, one being:
Death.  
This central premise is the film's chief flaw.  Not for a second can
the viewer really believe that these insignificant buildings and the
women who had them built are the actual earthly embodiment of "Death".
The various goings on - Rose's investigations, her violent murder, her
brother Mark's arrival to investigate further - are all so utterly
trivial in comparison.  Argento is talking about the very
personification of Death here, the force which effects every living
being on planet earth.  Yet he offers us events and settings of
absolutely no global significance and peoples his story with nobodies.
But if you accept your own, lesser premise - for example, that these
sisters are evil, bad-ass women who possess a real power from their
dabbling in the black arts - INFERNO becomes much more digestible.
One astonishing, hypnotic scene follows Rose's descent to the basement
in search of one of the clues or "keys".  Now if you discovered a room
in a basement completely submerged in water, would you dive in?  No,
but our heroine does, in a marvellous sequence devised (uncredited,
mind you) by the late great Mario Bava, his last contribution to film
before his death.
After a narrow escape from...well, I won't spoil it for you, Rose
writes a letter to her brother Mark in Rome begging him to come to New
York.  But the resident Mother in Rome - a beautiful, ghostly
apparition - somehow intervenes so that the letter is almost destroyed
before Mark can read it.  After a strange scene with an alchemist in
an old library and two bloody murders, Mark stumbles upon the letter's
remaining fragments and then sets of to New York, only to discover his
sister has disappeared.
Argento's direction - the poetic scene changes, the gliding
camerawork, the brilliant use of Keith Emerson's classical rock score
- is often masterful.  Particularly well executed is a scene later in
the film when a tenant falls victim to a sudden and frenzied attack by
about a dozen cats.  But although Agento's murder scenes throughout
INFERNO are typically stylish and bloody, the generally disjointed
narrative does rob them of some dramatic power.  And we don't get
answers to a perfectly reasonable question: just who or what is that
silhouette doing the killing?
Argento certainly extracts maximum effect from art director Guiseppe
Bassan's beautiful gothic interiors designed for the New York
apartment building.  The intense reds and blues strongly echo the look
of the Agento's previous film SUSPIRIA, which Bassan also designed.
Mark's eventual discovery of the Mother's lair - a gleaming, surreal,
stunningly ornate gothic interior - is genuinely exciting.  And for
all the story's flaws, not to mention some very lame dialogue, the
ending of INFERNO is curiously satisfying.
A much discussed film, this.  Argento's reported excuse for INFERNO'S
incoherence is that when he read a book on alchemy - for which the
film is apparently a metaphor - he simply couldn't understand it.
Perhaps, then, he should have let someone else write the screenplay.
But in Argento's career that hasn't often happened.  His filmmaking
style is a very personal one - with Argento the director, you also get
Argento the writer.  And that, I imagine, is the way it will always
be.
