Title
Review for Grizzly (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Douglas P Mosurak
written by Harvey Flaxman and David Sheldon
a Edward L. Montoro production
released by Film Ventures International
MPAA ratinbg: PG for violence, gore, brief nudity, and mild profanity.
"If man continues to encroach upon this untouched natural environment,
he will soon displace those creatures who were meant to live here." 
Thus begins the opening tirade of "Grizzly", released at the height of
the mid-Seventies "man vs. nature" exploitation film craze.  Make no
mistake - this film is bad, probably as bad as most of the films
following "Jaws" (1975) that bit so firmly on the genre.  However,
"Grizzly" is bad in a very odd, almost endearing way that made me feel
kind of sorry for it.  It's almost as if the film were made on two
entirely different shoots.
The story copies "Jaws" almost verbatim, but with a twist.  Instead of
the ocean, we're in a national park, and instead of a shark, the
tourists and campers are plagued by one fifteen foot, two-thousand-pound
grizzly bear.  How did it escape the tagging and cataloguing efforts of
"National Park"'s rangers?  "I don't know", says Scott (Richard
Jaeckel), an eccentric naturalist hunter who wears a fur pelt.  "It just
did".
That's just one of the many plot deficiencies endemic within the film. 
Despite the warnings of rangers Kelly (Christopher George) and Don
(Andrew Prine), the park superintendent Tom (Tom Arcuragi) refuses to
heed the reports of campers mauled, eaten, and buried by this bear.  And
while the carnage continues, Tom opens the park to inexperienced,
drunken hunters to stalk the bear without a barrage of media attention. 
Yeah, right.  And when the cameras do arrive, Tom turns the situation
into a veritable media circus.  It's all a big part of his plan to
pursue what Kelly refers to as a "big warm, brown plastic office in
Washington".  Tom finds Kelly a "maverick".  That's the internal tension
in the film.  Seriously.  That, and the bear, which has no "bear"-ing on
any of the human drama that finds its way into the script.
By the way, we don't get to see the bear until the halfway point - those
initial victims are merely attacked by a large furry paw, capable of
shearing limbs.  Of course, nobody in management listens to reason about
how the bear behaves.  Of course, the people who get naked get killed
first.  Of course, the false scare of the little boy who goes outside
the front yard to round up his pet bunny is immediately followed with a
scene of him getting his legs torn off.  Of course, characters
disappear, then come back after the action is gone.  This is for the
drive-in, and late-night cable TV, not for Sundance.  Most of the men
with speaking parts have gruff, affected voices that border on
laughable.  Tact is definitely not its strong suit.
What this film does have going for it is some pretty tight editing and
wonderful aerial cinematography of the Georgia mountains.  Director
Girdler, who died in a helicopter crash after leaving us, unaccountable,
with the similar "Day of the Animals" (1978), and the blaxploitation
exorcism knockoff "Abby" (1974), scouted these locations well, and the
look of the film is certainly not unprofessional.  And it's got the
bear, who also manages to knock the head off of a horse.  But roughly
one-quarter of the film is padded out with annoying "bear-cam" shots
(you know, the first person perspective, with the rustling of leaves and
branches underscoring a low, growling sound that even the
hearing-impaired could sense).
I like bears.  I find them to be the clowns of nature, and the star of
"Grizzly" is no exception.  I wish he (and it is a he, since it also
eats a bear cub, something which a female bear would never do) would
kill the entire cast and not stop until they were all chewed on at least
a little bit.
As a whole, "Grizzly" works as mindless, fun, and entertaining, but it's
crap nonetheless.  It's definitely not gripping in any way, shape, or
form, and I would only recommend it to those who want to see people
dumber than they are get torn to shreds by a really big bear.
