Title
Review for My American Cousin (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
The winner of six 1985 Genie Awards (the Canadian equivalent of the Oscars), 
director Sandy Wilson's "My American Cousin" is a nostalgic, delicately-paced 
drama that plays exactly as if it were a memoir of the central character, 
many years down the road. Light on a so-called plot, but heavy on character 
observation, the film works a gentle spell around its viewer, and ends up 
leaving an unexpected lasting impression.
Set in a peaceful Canadian ranch town in the summer of 1959, a time when rock 
'n' roll music was still looked upon as a nasty racket by many, we first meet 
Sandy Wilcox (Margaret Langrick) writing in her journal before bed, in big 
letters, "NOTHING HAPPENS HERE!" Right on the verge of becoming a teenager, 
Sandy yearns to not be treated like a child, and is starting to grow 
interested in the opposite sex. This interest is only further carried along 
by the appearance of her 17-year-old American cousin, Butch (John Wildman), a 
suave, captivating young man who, with his hair slicked perfectly the way he 
likes it, has obviously seen James Dean in "Rebel Without a Cause" one too 
many times. Driving up to the Wilcox's home late at night in his extravagant 
cherry red convertible, Butch tells Sandy's parents (Richard Donat, Jane 
Mortifee) that he is up on vacation for a while, and is welcomed to stay with 
them. Sandy is immediately taken aback by Butch, and gains her first crush, 
but when Butch finds out that she's only 12-years-old ("I can't believe I'm 
talking to a little kid"), he doesn't seem to return the feeling.
This is the basic setup for "My American Cousin," and there isn't too much 
more to say about the story. Although there are a few discoveries about Butch 
towards the conclusion, the film isn't concerned about such petty things, 
instead choosing to wisely follow Sandy through the summer, as she grows up a 
little along the way. To be sure, not exactly groundbreaking material, but 
not too many films have been able to capture the innocence and sweetness of 
being 12, when you're too old for childish play, and too young to do much 
else. The film captures this age so marvelously and accurately, from the 
arguments that Sandy often gets into with her mother, whom she feels doesn't 
understand her, to her precociousness and naivety. In one scene, she 
complains that her life and the scenery is absolutely boring (although with 
the mountains, lakes, and endless countryside, it is obviously very much 
gorgeous), and it is only until the ending that she realizes she should have 
enjoyed the final bit of her childhood while it lasted.
In her motion picture debut, Margaret Langrick is a radiant presence to 
behold (and deservedly won the Genie Award for Best Leading Actress). Both 
unaffected and polished, Langrick gives won of the best performances (of that 
age range) I've seen, and she also has a natural comic ability, gaining 
several laughs just from her on-the-mark mannerisms and facial expressions. 
In the other role at the forefront is John Wildman, who is very appropriate 
for the role. Certainly the more underwritten of the two, Butch is 
nonetheless portrayed as a realistic 17-year-old, concerned with very little 
but girls and embarrassed when he is coaxed into giving Sandy and her three 
giggly friends a ride in his car. In their sequences together, Langrick and 
Wildman form a charismatic rapport that develops with ease and delight.
The inevitable parting of Sandy and Butch is also portrayed truthfully, 
without a sign of manipulation in sight. To be vague and not give anything 
away, Sandy and Butch do not say goodbye as we always see in movies, but go 
their separate ways as it happens in real life. Fans of syrupy, heavy drama 
may be displeased by the film's ending, but those that prefer realism will be 
utterly satisfied.
With entertaining '50s songs filling the soundtrack, writer-director Sandy 
Wilson, previously a documentary filmmaker, has created a definite time and 
place, and knows how to write genuine, unforced dialogue. "My American 
Cousin," I wouldn't doubt, is a personal film for Wilson, perhaps even 
autobiographical, as it never strays from its deft, subtle path in order to 
create big, flashy plot occurrences. It's as it should be, and nothing more.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
