Title
Review for Double Parked (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Castle Hill Productions/Fierce Films
 Director: Stephen Kinsella
 Writer:  Stephen Kinsella
 Cast: Callie Thorne, William Sage, Noah Fleiss, Rufus Read,
P.J. Brown, Michelle Hurd, Eileen Galindo, Anthony DeSando
   "Double Parked" is the sort of movie that is less painful
than a root canal but slightly more entertaining than receiving
a traffic ticket.  A sitcom from the get-go, Stephen Kinsella's
"comedy" which seems made for Monday afternoon viewing
by desperate housewives, will cause smiles on the faces of
audience members who can't get enough of ethnic
stereotypes, alarming coincidences, mismatched couples,
geeky adolescents, and young toughs who look more like
preppies going out for some trick-or-treating than for felonious
break-ins.  Did I mention the abusive father with the three-
day beard and the slurred speech?
   The acting, directing and writing are of the sort so insipid,
predictable, and unmomentous that "Double Parked" would
not even qualify for space on the proverbial shelf that houses
films which may or may not be released within a decade. 
The story is of Rita Ronaldi (Callie Thomas), divorced for the
past decade from her abusive, alcoholic husband Warren
(P.J. Brown), and unable to keep a job through no fault of her
own.  After dumping a plate of pasta on her ass-pinching
boss (almost reminiscent of Zoe Caldwell's doing likewise to
critic John Simon for receiving a nasty review), she finds
herself "overqualified" for most gigs despite being obviously
uneducated and with little experience in anything meaningful. 
To add to her woes, her geeky sixth-grader, Matt (Rufus
Read, who provided a climax for Todd Solondz's smashing
movie "Happiness"), hangs out with his thuggish half-brother,
Bret (Noah Fleiss), unaware of their relationship.  (All
together now: SOAP OPERA!)  In denial when Bret's
handsome junior high teacher Karl Severson (William Sage)
warns her of her son's daydreaming, she can scarcely believe
the real problems her asthmatic son faces for chilling with the
wrong company.  But fortune comes her way as she
commences an improbable romance with the boy's teacher
and lands a job as a traffic enforcement agent.
   As a woman ground down from a disastrous marriage,
unable even to perform a no-talent job dishing out
summonses to double-parked cars, Callie Thorne is anything
but lovely Rita, meter maid.  Instead she comes across
throughout the film as a cheap, brassy ethnic stereotype who,
lacking decent men in her lives, even seems to cross the
border into child sexual abuse by loudly demanding hugs and
kisses from her kid and at one point doing nothing to
discourage the boy's climbing into bed with her.  There is not
a smidgen of indication that the handsome, educated, well-
spoken teacher would think of getting it on with a woman
whose personality is so relentlessly grating that the audience
would have a tough time sitting through this Slamdance Film
Festival release for its jangling 96 minutes.  Production notes
call this drama "thought-provoking," which is true: it makes
one think that the talented Rufus Read had better team up
again with Todd Solondz lest his youthful career gets nipped
in the bud.  This movie has about as much character as its
Jersey City location.
Not Rated.  Running time: 96 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
