Title
Review for Gingerbread Man, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Robert Altman
Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert Downey Jr., Daryl Hannah,
Robert Duvall, Tom Berenger, Famke Janssen
Screenplay: Al Hayes, Robert Altman, John Grisham
Producers: Jeremy Tannenbaum
Runtime: 112 min.
US Distribution: PolyGram
Rated R: violence, language, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
The trailers for The Gingerbread Man boast that it's a film based on a
story by John Grisham, devised specifically for the big screen.  After
seeing the picture, I found that this statement essentially means that
it's a film about a Southern lawyer in a situation that doesn't require
him to use his skills as a lawyer.  Directed by the always-experimental
Robert Altman and starring the great Kenneth Branagh, I expected a lot
from this film.  What I got was a professional execution of a cliched
and only semi-amusing script; even worse, the conclusion provides more
questions than answers.  Unfortunately, The Gingerbread Man comes down
to little more than cheap shocks and Actors Faking Accents.    
Branagh is superb in the main role, featuring another flawless accent
completely dissimilar from his native British inflection.  He plays Rick
Magruder, a successful lawyer in Georgia.  The most prominent background
information we get on him is that his ex-wife, Leeanne (Famke Janssen),
hates him; and, because of a bitter custody battle, he only gets to see
his kids once a week.  The film opens with Rick meeting a strange woman
in a parking lot during a rain storm.  Her name is Mallory Doss (Embeth
Davidtz), and her car has been stolen by her crazy father, Dixon.
Naturally, the only thing Rick can do is take her home and seduce her
(she makes it really easy for him by taking off all her clothes to have
a crying fit).  The plot thickens when it turns out her father, played
by Robert Duvall, is terrorizing her by hanging her cat, among other
things.  Rick takes the case to court, at which point Dixon is sent to a
mental institution.  Not long after this, Dixon's destitute pals break
him out, and we are led to believe that he not only continues his
harassment of Mallory, but that his focus also falls onto Rick's
children.
There's a lot more to the story, but the last half hour or so is
reserved for unlikely plot twists, so I'll let you experience those for
yourself.  The problem with the story, I noticed, is that it's hard to
tell where it's going for at least an hour into it.  The threat of Dixon
never seemed threatening, so I was constantly wondering what all these
people were so incredibly worried about.  Then, just when it seems that
Rick is as useless a main character as I've ever seen, his kids are in
danger, and he must fight against the police and his ex-wife to keep
them safe.
The Gingerbread Man, as I said, relies on a story that is, for the most
part, composed of numerous plot devices and scenes that we've seen in so
many other films of the mystery and thriller genres.  Rick is a lawyer,
but he doesn't need to be:  his only source of motivation is his
children.  (Although the fact that he is a lawyer provides for one
particularly interesting scene in which he can't get help in a police
station because all the police men know he's a lawyer and hate him for
it.)  A lot of the film is suspenseful, but too much of it hinges on
cheap thrills (yes, you will see a cat knock over a glass bottle to
create a sudden loud noise and scare the characters).
Then, of course, we have the supporting characters, which is a vast
assortment of Actors Faking Accents.  Davidtz is a good actress, and
she's good here in her quiet, subtle way.  Robert Downey, Jr., whose
Southern accent is about as thick and exaggerated as any I've ever
heard, is fun to watch as Rick's detached partner.  Duvall has all of
two lines in the film, but still has fun with his role of the token
psycho.  Darryl Hannah plays Rick's secretary, and is almost completely
unrecognizable with the accent, dark hair, and glasses.  In fact, there
are so many Actors Faking Accents that I was distracted in every scene
because I know all these actors are faking these accents.  I wish the
film would have taken place somewhere other than the south, because then
everyone could have just spoken normally.
But that just points out another flaw of this film:  the setting has no
impact on the story.  The characters don't, either.  Rick never solves
anything because of his ingenuity or intelligence (he's even forced into
a pointless climactic battle in a rain storm on a catwalk with Tom
Berenger).  None of the characters are particularly well-drawn, though
they are interesting enough to have kept my attention.  Thrillers are
most effective when they rely on the characters to solve the problems
that the film offers.  The Gingerbread Man features a bunch of
one-dimensional people doing things that the story requires them to do.
But, it's not all bad.  Altman does a great job with the atmosphere,
and the fact that the film takes place almost entirely during a
hurricane is a nice touch for underlying tension and suspense.  The film
is adequately dark, and the music is subtle enough that it adds mood and
color to the scenes.  Not all of Altman's choices are great, though:  he
often makes it difficult to see (even Seven wasn't this ridiculously
dark), and I often found myself straining to pick up the image.  
I don't understand why The Gingerbread Man even needed to be a thriller
with car chases and gunfire.  This seems like it could have been an
almost completely psychological thriller.  For some reason, Altman and
crew have put their hearts into a story that just isn't very interesting
or even plausible.  It might prove to be a worthwhile evening of
entertainment for some, because it is a well-crafted picture.  But I was
hoping for a lot more than just a bunch of Actors Faking Accents.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1998
U.S. Release Date: 1/23/98 (NY, LA), 2/20/98 (limited)
Running Length: 1:55
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, nudity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert Downey Jr., Daryl Hannah, 
      Robert Duvall, Tom Berenger, Famke Janssen, Jesse James, 
      Mae Whitman
Director: Robert Altman
Producer: Jeremy Tannenbaum
Screenplay: "Al Hayes" (Robert Altman) based on an original story by 
      John Grisham
Cinematography: Changwei Gu
Music: Mark Isham
U.S. Distributor: Polygram Films
     Combine the talents of director Robert Altman and actors Kenneth 
Branagh and Robert Duvall, and you have the apparent recipe for a motion 
picture worth waiting for.  But, although THE GINGERBREAD MAN is a 
finely-tuned example of mainstream entertainment, and holds the 
audience's interest for most of its running length, it is a little 
disappointing.  Perhaps the problem is that the story was written by 
John Grisham, and, as one might expect, it doesn't stray far from the 
standard Grisham formula.  Or maybe it's that Altman has gotten lazy 
recently.  Following the less-than-stellar READY TO WEAR and KANSAS 
CITY, THE GINGERBREAD MAN (a blatantly commercial effort) isn't likely 
to appease those questing for the next Altman masterpiece. 
     Kenneth Branagh, stepping into a rare contemporary role (and 
sporting a stable Southern American drawl), is Rick Magruder, a top-
notch Savannah-based defense attorney who hasn't lost a case in eight 
years.  Since his successful record has resulted in part from his 
ability to chew cops apart on the stand, he's not one of the police 
department's favorite citizens.  One night, following a big victory 
celebration, as Rick is making his way through a torrential downpour, he 
encounters Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidtz), a waitress whose car has just 
been stolen.  Rick offers her a lift home and a shoulder to cry on.  
Soon, her whole sad story pours out:  her deranged father, Dixon (Robert 
Duvall), has been stalking her, and she's afraid for her life.  Rick, 
instantly sympathetic because of his infatuation, agrees to help her get 
an order of commitment for Dixon.  But the wily old man proves to be 
more dangerous than the lawyer expected, and soon his two children are 
in peril.  And, on top of everything else, Hurricane Geraldo is bearing 
down on Savannah.
     THE GINGERBREAD MAN starts out strongly by defining the characters, 
establishing the setting (following MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND 
EVIL, this is the second recent atmosphere-soaked thriller to transpire 
in Savannah), and anchoring the somewhat convoluted storyline.  One of 
Altman's strengths, most evident in films like NASHVILLE and SHORT CUTS, 
is character development, so it's no surprise that we are introduced to 
a gallery of interesting individuals.  Past the setup, as the plot 
gathers steam, the movie takes on the characteristics of a traditional 
thriller, with such familiar elements as a mysterious car that tails 
Nick, a drunk private investigator (Robert Downey Jr.), a damsel in 
distress, and children in jeopardy.  Altman ratchets up the tension 
during this section of the film, providing a few genuine edge-of-the-
seat moments.  
     It's in the final half hour that THE GINGERBREAD MAN starts to lose 
its way.  The denouement and ending, while in keeping with what we 
expect from a Grisham-penned tale, are pedestrian, offering only 
contrived surprises.  Nevertheless, in part because I had invested so 
much into the characters over the film's better first two-thirds, I was 
able to accept, if not applaud, the resolution.  The plot has its share 
of logical flaws, but that's standard for all but the very best 
thrillers.
     THE GINGERBREAD MAN's undeniable primary strength is the level of 
acting.  Branagh, whose training in Shakespeare gives him a tendency to 
overact (see MARY SHELLY'S FRANKENSTEIN if you don't believe me), gives 
a perfectly-modulated performance under Altman's direction.  Branagh's 
Nick is strong, decisive, and obviously human.  Embeth Davidtz, who has 
essayed a number of roles since her eye-opening turn in SCHINDLER'S 
LIST, does her best work here since the Holocaust drama, easily 
surpassing her bland turn in the recent FALLEN.  Solid supporting work 
is turned in by Robert Duvall, Robert Downey Jr., and, surprisingly, 
Daryl Hannah as one of Nick's law partner.  (This may be the only time 
Hannah's acting hasn't stuck out like a sore thumb.)  The only flat 
portrayal belongs to Famke Janssen (as Nick's ex-wife), but at least 
she's better here than she was in DEEP RISING.
     At its best, THE GINGERBREAD MAN evokes memories of Alfred 
Hitchcock, the master of suspense who used every tool at his disposal to 
trick, cajole, and manipulate the audience into a state of heightened 
anxiety.  One of the mechanisms employed here by Altman is the weather -
- it always seems to be raining, and the approach of the hurricane 
promises even more wind and water.  Fortunately, the storm sequences are 
impressively filmed and serve to enhance the atmosphere, rather than 
drown it (like in HARD RAIN).  
     Although THE GINGERBREAD MAN has its faults, there are enough fine 
moments and solid performances to more than balance them out.  While 
Altman aficionados may be disappointed by the conventional nature of the 
production, fans of writer John Grisham (who gets story, but not 
screenplay, credit) will probably feel right at home.  The legal 
thriller has become Grisham's home field, and THE GINGERBREAD MAN, with 
an accomplished director at the helm, is as worthwhile as anything he 
has helped bring to the screen.  The result is an entertaining and 
sporadically engrossing two hours.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Nikki Lesley
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert Downey Jr., 
Daryl Hannah, Robert Duvall, Tom Berenger.
Based on a novel by John Grisham. 7 little words that usually 
send me running in the opposite direction. This time, however, 
the waters were muddied with the accompanying phrases: Directed 
by Robert Altman and Starring Kenneth Branagh, Robert Downey Jr. 
and Robert Duvall. On top of that, I'd read an interview with Robert 
Altman where he said something along the lines of "I sent the 
finished film to John Grisham. His response was that it was an 
interesting movie but nothing to do with him." I was sold. And so 
I headed off to the cinema in search of some Robert Altman magic. 
My quest was only partially satisfied. The first hour or so of set 
up is brilliant. The film is set in Savannah, Georgia but instead 
of the usual long, hot, sultry days of the south in the U.S. of A., 
we have the precursor to a hurricane, rain, rain and more rain. The
weather evokes a moodiness that suffocates and confuses, wonderfully 
complimenting the action up to the moment of confrontation between 
Rick Magruder (Kenneth Branagh) and Dixon Doss (Robert Duvall). 
The acting throughout is superb, with Ms. Hannah as Lois Harlan 
giving a great performance. Similarly of high quality are the efforts 
of Mr. Branagh and Mr. Downey Jr., even to the point of fake southern 
accents, with only a word or two to give away that they aren't Savannah, 
born and bred. 
I cannot say enough good about the first section of the film: the 
ambiance, the acting, the plot all weave together beautifully leaving 
me breathless and intrigued, with little idea of what is going on or, 
more to the point, who is behind it. My advice would be that once 
Magruder and Doss confront one another, leave the cinema: any ending you 
can think up will be better and more satisfying than the one presented 
in The Gingerbread Man. 
On that score, much as I am a serious detractor of Mr. John Grisham, 
having once been trapped in a house with one of his novels, I cannot 
believe even he would have come up with such a simplistic and
unconvincing 
ending. At least in his novels, badly written as they may be, there are 
wheels within wheels, plots and conspiracies. In The Gingerbread Man, 
there is none of that. 
Even ignoring the insubstantiality of the plot, it makes no sense. 
Why would the trap that Magruder set about the will cause the reaction 
that it did? In the interest of not giving away too much of the plot, 
I'll stop there but rest assured, I could pick more holes, given the 
opportunity. 
Perhaps the ending wouldn't have seemed quite so bad if the 
beginning hadn't been quite so good: a case of exciting one's 
anticipation. The reverse of The Devil's Advocate where the ending 
was so much fun, I left the cinema feeling much better about the
movie than it deserved, perhaps in this case I am being wrongly harsh, 
having emerged from the movie theatre so let down. My recommendation: 
go see the movie and emerge, feeling smugly superior knowing that you 
could write a better ending. Of course, that feeling is only fleeting 
as you realise that these people are getting paid millions for their 
efforts. 
Nicole Lesley             http://www.cs.usyd.edu.au/~nikki/        
Basser Department of Computer Science, University of Sydney
ph: (02) 9351 6098  rm: G90b    email: nikki@cs.usyd.edu.au        
Movie Reviews: http://www.cs.su.oz.au/~nikki/m_r/Intro.html

Author
Jason Bacon
Five words: Go see The Gingerbread Man. Yes, I DO live in Savannah, and
it was weird to see our city up there on the big screen. This film,
masterfully directed by Robert Altman, was very enjoyable, and made
Savannah look gritty and urban. Rick Magruder (played to perfection by
Kenneth Branaugh, who, of course was last seen frolicking in his own
four-hour Hamlet adaptation) is a prominent Savannah lawyer. After a
party for a recent win, Magruder meets Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidtz).
Her car gets stolen in the parking lot. Magruder gives her a ride home.
Soon enough, they're in bed.
Turns out that her father, Dixon Doss (Robert Duvall, in a small but
critical role) was the one that stole her car. He's the leader of a
cult-type group.Magruder subpoenas Mallory's ex-husband (Tom Berenger)
to testify against Dixon. It works. After he is arrested, and after a
quick hearing, Dixon is sent to Georgia Regional for psychiatric
treatment. Soon after, his cronies break him out of the asylum, and
pretty soon thereafter, not only is Magruder's life in danger, but his
children as well. That's when Magruder hires his woman-loving,
hard-drinking private detective friend, Clyde Pell (Robert Downey, Jr.,
who easily gets the most laughs). All of this culminates in typical and
new Altman scenes. You get everything you'd hoped for and more in this
suspense-laden film. Kudos belong to not only Branagh, but to Downey,
Jr., Embeth Davidtz, and Daryl hannah, as Lois, Magruder's assistant.
Also, the hurricane used in the film, Hurricane Geraldo, is NOT a plot
device, but an effective use of dramatic tension for the finale.All in
all, The Gingerbread Man is worth the price of admission alone. A truly
suspenseful excellently Grisham(recieves story credit for this film)
film that leaves one remembering it for a long time. 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Philandering hotshot Southern lawyer takes on a simple case of a father
stalking/harassing his daughter (whom said lawyer is sleeping with), and
succeeds in getting the man put away. Unfortunately for all involved, the
nutty father escapes and begins to make the lives of his daughter, the
lawyer and his family a living nightmare. His band of religious hillbilly
followers help him along his twisted path.
CRITIQUE:
Picking up steam like a snowball barreling down a mountainside, this film
starts off looking like your basic Southern Grisham "lawyer flick", but
slowly crafts itself into a tension-filled thriller, with interesting
characters, some relevant and unique stylings via the watchful eye of
veteran director Robert Altman, and many stormy scenes succinctly
paralleling the film's own brewing tension. Understand that this film is not
your everyday thriller, and does take some time to get going, but I
personally found the setting, the players, and Bobby Duvall's nutty
character interesting enough to keep me tuned into its two-hour stretch. I
will admit that I saw the film's "twist" coming up 5th Avenue from frame
one, but nonetheless, a couple of curve balls managed to keep me in the
game. Downey Jr. also plays a pretty neat supporting jokester, and Branagh
drops his British accent for a near-perfect Southern drawl. All in all, this
film's got great atmosphere, strong performances, interesting characters,
nice style, despite the predictable but enjoyable plot line. Check it out on
video, and bring an umbrella...you'll need it.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Word on the street is that director Robert Altman rewrote this film's
screenplay so much, that the only recognizable John Grisham story elements
left seem to be the loathsome Southern lawyer at the center of a crisis and
a sleazy detective following his beat. Grisham only ended up with a "Story
by" credit in this film, with the screenplay going to the pseudonym Al Hayes
(really Robert Altman).
Mary Jo Slater was the casting director of this film. She's actor Christian
Slater's mom. Stephen Altman was the production designer of this film. He's
director Robert Altman's son, and was also credited for the same on at least
six other films by dad.
Embeth Davidtz's real name is Gretta Milano (Don't ask me why she changed
it?? Very odd choice).

Author
Christian Pyle
I'm a bit surprised that "The Gingerbread Man" came and went with so little
fanfare.  It boasts a plot penned by best-selling novelist John Grisham,
direction by legendary director Robert Altman, and a cast of familiar faces. 
Or, perhaps, it's not so surprising . . . because, despite having so many
talented people associated with it, "Gingerbread Man" is a run-of-the-mill
thriller.
Kenneth Branagh stars as Rick Magruder, a (you guessed it, Grisham fans)
Southern lawyer.  A divorced father of two, Rick is always on the prowl for
women and giving a ride home to Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidtz) turns into
spending the night in her bed.  Mallory is menaced by her father, Dixon (Robert
Duvall), an lunatic who has a posse of other crazy old men.  When Rick finds
Mallory's murdered cat dangling in her doorway, he volunteers to help commit
her father to a mental institution.  Dixon's pals break him out, and Rick
starts getting death threats.  When he gets a photo of his kids with their
heads cut out, Rick kidnaps his kids and hits the road.  When the kids
disappear, Rick and Mallory are drawn toward a violent confrontation with
Dixon.
There's a twist or two before it's all over, of course.
The cast also includes Robert Downey Jr. as a private eye who works for Rick,
Daryl Hannah (hidden underneath hair dye and spectacles) as a coworker of
Rick's, and Tom Berenger as Mallory's ex-husband.  Overall, the performances
are impressive.  Branagh sports the most convincing Southern accent in recent
memory (Downey's accent is less so).
While "The Gingerbread Man" is a enjoyable excursion, it is easily Altman's
most conventional movie.  Even when he's worked with genre fiction in the past,
Altman has retained his knack for creating quirky and original films (who else
would cast Elliott Gould as Philip Marlowe?).  His long list of grade-A work
includes "M*A*S*H" (1970), "McCabe & Mrs. Miller" (1971), "Nashville" (1975),
"The Player" (1992), and "Short Cuts" (1993).  But "The Gingerbread Man" offers
little that resembles any of Altman's previous movies and even less that blazes
any new trails.  It's a thriller-by-the-numbers, redeemed slightly by a strong
cast and a refusal in the end to forgive the hero for his sins.

Author
Rick Ferguson
Written by John Grisham and Robert Altman (as Al Hayes)
Some time ago, a young director was given the opportunity to direct the 
screen version of a popular novel. The novel was a summer smash, topping 
best-seller lists across the country and already drawing speculation as 
to which popular actors of the day might play the leads. The only 
problem: the novel wasn't very good. It was far more pulp than 
Pulitzer. But the director realized that, no matter how pedestrian the 
prose, this book really grabbed people - that the author, while not a 
great writer, was a fantastic storyteller. So he took on the project, 
convinced he could make something happen on screen.
The director? Francis Ford Coppola. The book, of course, was Mario 
Puzo's THE GODFATHER. The rest, as they say in showbiz, was history.
By bringing up THE GODFATHER, I don't mean to suggest that Robert 
Altman's THE GINGERBREAD MAN is destined for that level of greatness. 
But the parallel does suggest that it is possible to create great cinema 
from questionable source material. Can you get any more questionable 
than John Grisham? Depends on whom you ask. But there's no question 
that Grisham's work grabs people. Like Puzo, Grisham is a better 
storyteller than a writer - unlike fellow hack Michael Crichton, who is 
a good idea man but who can't tell a well-constructed story from a can 
of Spam. So something in Grisham's unpublished story of a cocky 
Savannah lawyer who gets involved in a deadly family squabble drew the 
attention of Robert Altman, who at 73 years old remains one of 
America's greatest living filmmakers. The result is a gripping 
thriller that, while falling short of classic cinema, deserves its place 
in the Altman canon.
>From its opening shot to the closing credits, THE GINGERBREAD MAN is 
permeated with a sense of dread, with a fear of the natural destructive 
forces of the universe. This terrific sense of mood is a classic Altman 
touch. Witness said opening shot: we see an aerial view of coastal 
Georgia with its writhing, undulating landscape while the soundtrack 
grumbles ominously in our ear. We roll over the hills into the town of 
Savannah, then zoom in close on a red sports car speeding over a bridge 
while its driver chatters oblivious on his cell phone. Right away we 
know that the driver of that car is in for a few surprises. Pay 
attention, boys and girls - this shot was not conceived by John 
Grisham, but by Altman. This is what a great director can do for 
questionable source material.
The sports car belongs to Rick Magruder (Kenneth Branagh), the 
aforementioned hotshot attorney who specializes in police brutality 
cases. Magruder has just won a high profile case and celebrates that 
night with a catered party at his office. Outside after the party he 
meets one of the waitresses, Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidzt), just as she 
realizes her car has been stolen. Driven by Southern chivalry, a driving 
rainstorm and his unspoken attraction to the fragile waitress, Magruder 
offers her a ride home. There he learns more about Mallory's life than 
he bargained for. Her car was stolen by her schizophrenic father Dixon 
(Robert Duvall), a Ted Kyzynski-style whacko who has been stalking and 
terrorizing his own daughter. Magruder, perhaps influenced by 
Mallory's decision to strip off her wet clothes in front of him, is 
sympathetic to her plight, and offers to help her get her father 
committed - right after he sleeps with her, of course.
This simple offer of help leads Magruder down a dangerous path with a 
black end. He succeeds in having Dixon incarcerated in a mental 
hospital, and for a moment all appears well. But then Dixon's crack 
team of homeless commandos bust him out of the lockup - and suddenly 
Magruder finds himself, Mallory and his own children in danger. The cops 
won't lift a finger to help a liberal attorney. His only allies are 
his faithful assistant Lois (Daryl Hannah) and his bumbling private-eye 
sidekick Clyde (Robert Downey Jr). If this predicament wasn't bad 
enough, Hurricane Geraldo is bearing down on Savannah and throwing the 
world into chaos.
Altman may provide the atmosphere, but Branagh's performance holds THE 
GINGERBREAD MAN together. An accomplished actor when he isn't 
directing himself in vanity productions, Branagh does a fine job of 
making Rick a sympathetic hero while casting doubt upon his motives. Is 
his offer of help to Mallory an act of kindness, or of egotism? Magruder 
is so sure of his place in the world that he never considers that he has 
bitten off more than he can chew until he has to swallow it - and by 
then it's too late. As the plot unfolds, Magruder learns that none of 
us are as secure as we think we are. And life is never so bad that it 
can't get worse.
If you're familiar with Altman's work, you'll recognize several of 
his signature techniques. Characters are not introduced in establishing 
shots, but rather are allowed to wander in the background of scenes 
until their importance becomes apparent. Crucial scenes are shot from 
the outside through windows, making the audience unwitting voyeurs of 
the action. Dialog overlaps and the actors seem to slip naturally into 
an improvisational style. And of course there's my favorite Altman 
technique - the Obligatory Nude Actress shot. Thanks to Altman, here 
are some of the actresses I've had the pleasure of seeing naked: Sally 
Kellerman, Julianne Moore, Madeline Stowe, even Frances McDormand. And 
now I can add Embeth Davidtz, who looks quite healthy in the altogether. 
The naked actress shot has become as ubiquitous to the Altman film as 
the director cameo was to the Hitchcock film. Is it old-school sexism, 
or a clever in-joke? You be the judge.
But back to the picture at hand. In the hands of a mere mortal, THE 
GINGERBREAD MAN would have been a routine thriller, no better or worse 
than the countless others we've all endured. In the hands of a master 
like Altman, it becomes an exercise in existential doom, in its own way 
far more successful than Scorsese's CAPE FEAR remake, which tried for 
the same result. What may prevent it from enduring with Altman's 
greatest work is a weak third act - in fact, there really is no third 
act in Grisham's story, so it appears that Altman had to throw in the 
hurricane just to jazz things up. But there are true moments of riveting 
suspense, and great performances by Branagh, Davidzt and Downey Jr - 
more than enough to see you through. That Polygram so hated this picture 
that they tried to steal final cut from Altman, and then buried the 
marketing campaign when he won it back, should tell you how utterly 
clueless of quality most studios are. They probably wanted it to look 
more like A TIME TO KILL. And that, my friends, should make you very 
afraid.

Visit the FILM GEEK web site at: http://www.filmgeek.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GINGERBREAD MAN, THE (director: Robert Altman; cast: Kenneth Branagh
(Rick Magruder), Embeth Davidtz (Mallory Doss), Robert Downey Jr. (Clyde
Pell), Daryl Hannah (Lois Harlan), Robert Duvall (Dixon Doss), Tom
Berenger (Pete Randle), Famke Janssen (Leeanne), Jesse James (Jeff), Mae
Whitman (Libby), 1998)
This wasn't a bad film, as much as it was a mediocre one. It is taken
from a paper thin story by the renown pulp writer of the vox populi,
John Grisham (the screenplay is credited to Al Hayes, but rumored to
have been re-written by Robert Altman). It was directed with
misdirection by the legendary director Robert Altman (M*A*S*H (69),
McCabe & Mrs. Miller (71), The Long Goodbye (73), Nashville (75)), who
has never directed a thriller quite like this one before, and shows with
this film that his enormous talent, probably, does not lie with this
genre. The only thing that saves this movie from being a complete bust
is the marvelously energetic cast. They took this inane formula story
seriously and did a fine job in keeping it going.
In particular, I liked Duvall's Dixon Doss portrayal of the supposedly
insane father of Mallory Doss (Davidtz). A minor part for Duvall, but a
good diversion from the constantly intense and impetuous performance of
Branagh's (Magruder) amoral, Southern accented, slick Savannah lawyer.
Branagh might be a capable British Shakespearian actor, but he has a
tendency to chew up his scenes, which he does here, to the further
detriment of the film.
That Altman did such a haphazard job in directing this thriller, is
proven in the first fifteen minutes of the movie, when he gives away the
plot by anxiously holding his attention too long on an obvious set-up
situation. If you didn't know that the lawyer was going to be set-up by
the low-life Mallory, who literally throws her nude body on this
divorced father/lawyer, whose only redeeming quality is that he loves
his children, then you must have been out getting popcorn in the lobby
while that scene was taking place. As a result, with all the tension
taken out of the film, in the very beginning of it, the only reason for
seeing the rest of the film has become dissolved into watching how well
the actors could work without a well-developed story.
The plot revolves around a surprise party being given for Magruder, who
is coming off a victory in court, where he got his client off by
thrashing the police. Here he meets the waitress Mallory who needs a
ride home after her car is missing and there is a big rain storm. Once
at home, the seduction takes place. Magruder and Mallory from now on
become inseparable, or maybe not. So the obvious set-up begins and
Magruder is unwittingly drawn into a whacky families' dirty business.
Magruder becomes the lawyer for Mallory, who is accusing her father of
stalking and harassing her. She succeeds in getting him put away. But
the dangerous father escapes and begins to make not only the life of his
daughter hell but also her lawyer's life, as he kidnaps Magruder's
child.
When the best part of the movie for me, is watching the hurricane take
place, and I know that the weather conditions has little to do with the
story, except as setting a mood, then I'm certain that I haven't been
swept away by this film. There was, as far as I could tell, no
particular character development of the principal players, no intense
drama taking place, no new insights into the judicial system, or
compassion felt for any one remotely connected with this story. I found
myself trying to figure out why there is such a huge market for
Grisham's stories, and it sure beats me...
The film becomes an Actor's Studio venture, with the following
characters acting out their supporting roles with varying degrees of
effectiveness: Clyde Pell (Robert Downey Jr.) appears to be the most
likable one in the film, playing a fun-loving alcoholic private dick and
buddy of Magruder. Pete Randle (Tom) is scary as Mallory's ex-husband.
Daryll Hannah is the busybody aide in Magruder's office. Famke Janssen
is Leeanne, Rick's nondescript ex-wife. They all make an earnest
contribution to a film that would have served Altman better if it wasn't
so thin a story
he was telling.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Er is een leuke vondst in deze film. In het Amerika van "The Gingerbread
Man" woedt er een grote orkaan, genaamd Geraldo. Met deze naam verwijst
ohn Grisham naar de onderwerpen in deze film: scheidingen, ontvoeringen,
mysterieuze sektes, stoere advocaten
en drugsverslaving. Met "The Gingerbread Man" heeft Grisham dus een
andere weg ingeslagen. Samen met regisseur Robert Altman heeft hij
ervoor gezorgd dat deze film een stuk realistischer is dan de anderen.
Rick Magruder (Kenneth Branagh) is een succesvolle advocaat, die
gescheiden is van Leeanne (Famke Janssen) en niet vaak z'n kinderen
ziet. Na een grote zaak gewonnen te hebben, gaat hij terug naar z'n
kantoor om de overwinning met z'n collega's te vieren. Aan het einde van
de avond heeft Magruder genoeg op en besluit terug naar huis te rijden.
Dan ziet hij dat iemand een auto steelt en er meteen mee vandoor gaat.
De eigenaresse van de wagen, serveerster Mallory Doss 
(Embeth Davidtz) , blijft alleen achter. Magruder biedt z'n hulp aan en
samen rijden ze naar haar huis. 
Eenmaal aangekomen ontdekken ze dat haar auto nu voor het huis
geparkeerd is. Doss gaat samen met Magruder voorzichtig naar binnen, in
de veronderstelling dat de dief nu binnen is. De deur is open, de
televisie staat aan en de lichten zijn nu opeens volop aan het schijnen.
Het komt Doss zeer bekend voor en al snel heeft ze 
in de gaten wat er aan de hand is: haar vader Dixon Doss (Robert
Duvall), lid van een mysterieuze groep, is weer begonnen met 'stalken'.
Magruder wilt haar graag helpen en geeft deze zaak aan Clyde (Robert
Downey Jr.), die graag aan de drank zit.
De vader wordt snel gevonden en naar de rechtbank gebracht. Daar wordt
hij schuldig bevonden. Luid protesterend gaat hij naar de gevangenis.
Magruder en Doss denken nu dat de zaak gesloten is. Fout. De rest van de
sekte weet Dixon uit de gevangenis te halen, zodat hij weer kan beginnen
met het stalken van z'n dochter. Met nu iin verschil: de kinderen van
Magruder worden nu ook bedreigd. Magruder krijgt het benauwd en haalt in
een paniekerige bui z'n kinderen van schhool. Maar dat blijkt niet
genoeg te zijn...
Dat Robert Altman de regisseur is van deze film, is te merken. "The
Gingerbread Man" druipt namelijk van de sfeer. Met veel regen, stormen
en orkanen wordt de toon gezet voor duistere, persoonlijke zaken. Het
geeft de film iets bijzonders, net zoals de mooie openingsschne. Ook
zorgt de orkaan 'Geraldo' voor veel spannende 
momenten, want het is in feite een voorbode van wat er gebeuren zal. 
Ondanks de eerder genoemde pluspunten blijft "The Gingerbread Man" een
doorsnee thriller. De rol van Tom Berenger als Pete Randle, ex-man van
Mallory Doss, is zo klein, dat het net zo goed weggeschreven kon worden.
Ook zijn er veel gaten in het verhaal, zodat de kijker vaak in het
duister moet tasten.
Niettemin is deze thriller van Robert Altman een intrigerende,
sfeervolle film. De ouwe kerel heeft z'n stijl niet verloren. 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert Downey Jr., Daryl Hannah,
Robert Duvall, Tom Berenger, Famke Janssen, Jesse James, Mae Whitman
Director: Robert Altman
Producer: Jeremy Tannenbaum
Screenplay: "Al Hayes" (Robert Altman) based on an original story by
John Grisham
The first thing that struck me about this movie, was how amateurish it
felt. Maybe, this was the intent of the usually brilliant Robert Altman,
who I am surprised decided to cash in on this potentially commercial,
John Grisham product. Well, why not, if Ford Coppola saw fit to direct
THE RAINMAKER?
This isn't your standard Grisham courtroom drama. Gone are the usual
features of the incredibly corrupt industrial forces vs. the severely
disadvantaged individual, with a lawyer carrying a conscience thrown
somewhere in between. Also gone, are some strong Grisham's tendencies to
highlight moralistic issues.
Sadly so, because this movie has ended up becoming melodramatic trash,
more in consistency with Sidney Sheldon or Jackie Collins, but lacking
the bitchy edge. What we have is a sleazy lawyer (Kenneth Branagh), who
ends up in bed with a mysterious waitress (Embeth Davidzt), living in
fear of her lunatic father (Robert Duvall). The movie hits an all time
low, when a mostly grumpy, whiney Branagh loses all self control when
his kids get kidnap. I guess there is a moral here, somewhere, if you
sleep around expect to get more than just you're fair share of STD's.
As already mentioned, Branagh is painful to watch when not reciting
Shakespeare. Daryl Hannah acts as an assistant lawyer, but it takes more
than her pair of glasses to make her role intelligent. Robert Downey Jr,
is once again stoned, etc. Duvall is genuinely crazed, whilst Davidzt
mopes, and Tom Berenger has very little screen time.
A most disappointing tale, with little relevance to the children's story
on which it is based, except for the fact that Davidzt got nightmares
when Duval told her the story when she was a kid.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As a category 3 hurricane -- aptly named Geraldo -- conveniently
makes its way to Savannah, the scene of the latest John Grisham movie,
the predictable plot of THE GINGERBREAD MAN is already so full of holes
that the storm is unlikely to do it any damage.
     The legendary, but uneven (remember the disastrous KANSAS CITY),
writer and director Robert Altman places his stamp on the only Grisham
story that was developed exclusively for the big screen.  Reportedly
Altman rewrote it significantly with the result that the only
recognizable Grisham story elements are the loathsome, southern lawyer
at the center of the crisis and the sleazy detective on its periphery.
     Robert Altman, cinematographer Changwei Gu and set designer
Stephen Altman set a consistently somber and moody look for the
picture.  The law offices are full of dark mahogany paneling lit only
by small desk lamps.  In a film dripping with atmosphere, the constant
lightning and thunder are used and abused with a vengeance.  Think
soggy film noir.
     Cast against type and with a rarely believable southern accent
Kenneth Branagh plays Rick Magruder, a lawyer who chases anything in a
skirt and barks out orders to his large office staff like a marine
drill instructor.
     As Rick's sexy, but unobtainable, office manager Lois Harlan,
Daryl Hannah dresses in proper business suits and wears dark,
horn-rimmed glasses.  She treats her boss with a certain disdain for
his sexual promiscuity.  "You keep propositioning girls until someone
says yes," she admonishes him.
     Rick's latest conquest is a fidgety woman named Mallory Doss,
played by Embeth Davidtz from FALLEN, whose nerves appear to cause her
to disrobe in front of strangers.
     In the film's best performance, Robert Duvall in a tiny part plays
Mallory's insane father Dixon.  Dixon, a barefoot and dirty recluse,
lives with a bunch of Neanderthals who act like rejects from a caveman
movie.  The wonderful courtroom scene where the judge declares him
insane shows how good the movie might have been.
     Who should they cast in the role of the constantly soused
detective Clyde Pell?  In a bit of art imitating life, Robert Downey
Jr. plays the role with abandon.  Belting out funny one-liners ("No
offense ma'am, but your Dad's always been a few beers shy of a
six-pack.") and inanities with equal vigor, he tries without success to
juice up the picture.
     Not only does the show drag, it is predictable with a capital P.
A show this easy to guess makes reviewing it hard without giving key
twists away.  Let me instead cover a few of the show's many minor flaws
and plot holes since they are symptomatic of the story's bigger
problems.
     Rich people in party clothes go outside in a torrential downpour
but neglect to use an umbrella.  Rick drives a red Mercedes convertible
that stays so highly polished that it looks like it just left the
showroom floor, and it keeps this sheen even after driving through rain
and muddy roads.  How many people do you know who have two kids who use
a two-seater car to transport them around?  When he is followed for
miles by a mysterious car, Rick never notices even though he is trying
to escape.  And, finally, when Rick confronts the killer in the end, he
turns his back on the killer without ever worrying about being stabbed
or shot.
     If you're a fan of Boston Blackie style endings, where the hero is
chased up a high platform in one final fight to the death, you may be
just the target audience for THE GINGERBREAD MAN.  Others may want to
catch this one on video where it would probably have begun were it not
for the illustrious cast and crew.
     THE GINGERBREAD MAN runs 1:55.  It is rated R for nudity,
profanity and violence and would be fine for most teenagers.

Author
Michael Dequina

The Gingerbread Man (R) *** (out of ****)
        John Grisham.  Robert Altman.  Kenneth Branagh.  This odd assemblage of
talent suggests a most unusual film, but there's just about nothing
unconventional about this thriller, which gets the formulaic job done--with
a considerable amount of style.  In the bestselling author's first story
written directly for the screen (the screenplay itself is written by Al
Hayes--a.k.a. Altman), cocky Savannah lawyer Rick Magruder (Branagh)
becomes romantically and professionally entangled with one Mallory Doss
(Embeth Davidtz), a young woman who is being stalked by her unstable
derelict father Dixon (Robert Duvall).  Rick succeeds in having him
committed, but he is sprung by his cronies just about as soon as he is
locked up, not only placing Mallory in danger but Rick and his family as well.
        Sounds like boilerplate Grisham, and that The Gingerbread Man is for all
of its twisty (yet predictable) way.  But what makes this one of the more
interesting Grisham thrillers is Altman, who leaves his indelible signature
under the familiar trimmings.  The film has a most daunting atmosphere,
created through a rich synthesis of stunning photography (by Chinese
cinematographer Changwei Gu) and haunting music (created electronically by
Mark Isham).  Altman's penchant for long takes and complex sound design are
also in evidence, as is his uncanny ability to attract a lot of solid
acting talent (in addition to Branagh, Duvall, and Davidtz, the cast
includes Robert Downey Jr., Daryl Hannah, Tom Berenger, and Famke Janssen).
 None of these touches are surprising; what is--refreshingly so--is how
well Altman's distinct, idiosyncratic tools service the needs of as
straightforward an entertainment as a this.  In the end, The Gingerbread
Man may not be a slick crowdpleaser like A Time to Kill or The Rainmaker,
but it's the closest a Grisham film has come to approaching art.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"If you chase something, then sometimes you never get it.
 If you put forth the work and all the attitude, next thing you know
 it's bestowed upon you."
--Michael Jordan

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Robert Altman || Screenplay: Robert Altman (based on an
original story by John Grisham) || Stars: Kenneth Branagh (Rick
Magruder), Embeth Davidtz (Mallory Doss), Robert Downey Jr.
(Clyde Pell), Daryl Hannah (Lois Harlan), Robert Duvall (Dixon
Doss), Tom Berenger (Pete Randle), Famke Janssen (Leeanne), Jesse
James (Jeff), Mae Whitman (Libby) || MPAA Rating: R
Whenever writer/director Robert Altman works in a specific genre,
he has the tendency to rewrite it on his own terms. He made the
West dirty in "McCabe and Mrs. Miller" (1971), he parodied
hard-boiled detective stories in "The Long Goodbye" (1973), and
he transformed a cartoon into flesh and blood with "Popeye"
(1980). The same holds true for his most recent film, "The
Gingerbread Man," which reinvents a genre that has developed at
an exponential rate over the last five years: the John Grisham
Movie.
By the time "The Gingerbread Man" was completed, there was very
little evidence that it was ever based on a story by Grisham.
There's no idealist young lawyer ala Tom Cruise, Matthew
McConaughey, Chris O'Donnell or Matt Damon, and it doesn't
feature a great showdown in a courtroom. Instead of being a grand
ode to the powers of the legal profession, "The Gingerbread Man"
is a rain-soaked, Southern Gothic noir thriller with wildly
eccentric characters, a twisting plot line, black humor, a
somewhat bleak ending, and even Altman's trademark full-frontal
female nudity.
The central character of the film is Rick Magruder, who is unlike
any of Grisham's other lawyer heroes. He is older, experienced,
and rich; he drives a cherry-red $80,000 Mercedes that never gets
dirty, even in the incessantly pouring rain of Savannah, Georgia,
where the story unfolds. Rick is in the midst of an ugly divorce
with his wife, Leeanne (Famke Janssen), and he rarely gets to see
his two children, Jeff (Jesse James) and Libby (Mae Whitman). A
reason is never given for the divorce, but it isn't hard to
surmise that Rick's womanizing had a large part in it. Whenever
he's late to pick up the kids on his visitation days, Leeanne
always assumes it's because he's been "screwing around."
After an office party celebrating another of his court victories
(he hasn't lost in eight years), Rick becomes involved with
Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidtz), one of the catering waitresses. He
drives her home because her car has been stolen, and they end up
in bed together. Rick finds out that Mallory is being terrorized
and stalked by her slightly psychotic father, Dixon Doss (Robert
Duvall), a grungy, stringy, bare-footed old man who leads a
commune of other greasy old codgers. It was actually Dixon who
stole her car that night, and when Rick asks why, Mallory replies
that he always does "weird" stuff like that. As another character
puts it, Dixon is "a few beers short of six-pack."
Rick ends up convincing Mallory to have Dixon brought to court
and tried for competency. He succeeds with information dug up by
Clyde Pell, a private investigator friend (Robert Downey Jr.),
and testimony from Mallory's begrudging ex-husband, Pete Randle
(Tom Berenger). Dixon is put in a mental hospital, but his
commune buddies succeed in breaking him out. From there, the
story delves into kidnapping, murder, double-crossing, and even a
hurricane that adds an ominous cloud of constant violence to the
action.
Altman's cinematographer, Changwei Gu, gives the film a dark,
soaked look. If it isn't night-time, at least it's raining. Gu
shoots the interiors, which are almost all dark wood paneling,
with a minimum of light. A great deal of the action takes place
in the leafy Georgia backwoods, which Altman uses to create an
acute sense of dread and vulnerability. In the city there is
danger enough, but when Rick has to venture into the woods, you
can almost feel him leaving all hope of civilization behind as he
literally enters another world.
Altman has worked in just about every conceivable genre, from
westerns to epic dramas to comedies. But, no matter what the
genre, he is always sure to give it the Altman stamp, which
usually consists of all kinds of idiosyncratic quirks and little
details that are often missed without repeat viewings. "The
Gingerbread Man" is no different, although his style is much more
restrained here. However, without those little touches, the film
could have easily slumped into a routine action/thriller.
A great deal of the credit for the film's success can be given to
the actors, especially Branagh, who rarely works outside of
period pieces and his own direction. Here, the British actor
consistently maintains a serviceable Southern drawl, while making
an essentially contemptible character interesting and
sympathetic. Rick is an extremely flawed man, but Branaugh brings
real humanity to his character. Without it, the entire film would
fall flat because so much of it is reliant on the audience
feeling Rick's pain and frustration.
The supporting actors also put in fine performances, including
Embeth Davidtz, who is probably best known for her heart-breaking
role as the Jewish maid in "Schindler's List" (1993). Tom
Berenger provides some gruff comic relief, and Robert Duvall
spends most of his on-screen time just looking weird. It doesn't
seem like he does much because he has very little spoken
dialogue, but watch him closely during the film's one courtroom
scene: his entire performance is in his eyes and his body
language, and few actors could have pulled it off without being
either silly or overbearing.
While "The Gingerbread Man" isn't in league with Altman's
greatest works like "Nashville" (1975) or "The Player" (1992), it
is nonetheless a solid piece of genre filmmaking, which may prove
a successful vehicle to restart his somewhat lagging career. Some
critics love to stamp films like this as "commercial," as if
Altman can only maintain artistic integrity if his films are
aimed at a tiny audience and don't make money. Altman has done
something much better: he took what could have been a generic
movie, and by investing artistry and effort, he made it into
something more.


Author
Michael Rich
Directed by: Robert Altman
Written by: Al Hayes (Robert Altman), based on a story by John Grisham
        I saw The Gingerbread Man in an art-house theater, where it was
showing alongside Ma Vie en Rose, Mrs. Dalloway, and Men With Guns. The
latter two were sold out, which is why I ended up watching a movie I can
only describe as a prettily-dressed, well-directed John Grisham flic.
Not a surprising description, I suppose, all things considered. It's
directed by Robert Altman, stars Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert
Downey, Jr., Daryl Hannah, Robert Duvall, and Tom Berenger, and was
based on an original story by John Grisham. Which all adds up to mean
that the movie should have a pretty sheen (much like the glistening of
sweat in A Time To Kill), but not much underneath.
        True and false. There really is a surface to this movie that,
when poked through, reveals nothing more than illogic. The shell,
though, isn't pretty. The movie focuses on high-powered Savannah lawyer
Rick Magruder (played with a convincing Southern accent by Branagh),
who's just won a suit condemning a police officer who shot a civilian.
At a party celebrating his victory, he manages to argue with his ex-wife
and her boyfriend / divorce lawyer, shoot off some sparks of sexual
tension with his assistant Lois Harlan (Hannah), and initiate a mating
dance with caterer Mallory Doss (Davidtz).
        However, by the time he's gotten to bed with Mallory, all signs
already point to there being something wrong in Savannah. First off,
Mallory's dad stole her car, then returned it to her house. Second,
Mallory inexplicably strips to her birthday suit within two minutes of
being home, and while she and Rick are arguing about whether or not she
should do something about her insane, fanatical father.
        Now, while I say that the surface of the movie isn't pretty, I
don't mean that it isn't good. Altman injects mood into each scene, and
the camera-work, while not radical, maintains interest in more subtle
ways. Altman has a particular fascination with shooting scenes through
windows, particularly with ever present rain trickling down them.
(Courtesy of a tropical storm brewing close by, ready to strike when the
plot requires.) This trick, along with others, builds upon the
servicable script to create enough tension to make me know something
about this neatly-tied story was wrong, even if I couldn't figure out
exactly what.
        Unfortunately, the twist is another one of those that sub-par
writers use in order to feign complex characters and plot: it's the
twist which no one could reasonably figure out. Even after it happens,
you could go back and watch the movie ten more times and not see any way
you could have divined that this ball was going to fly in from left
field.
        And it really is too bad that the plotting is so illogical,
because the acting, like the directing, is pretty damn good. Branagh
makes more out the run-of-the-mill Southern, Grishamesque lawyer than
I've seen before. In fact, Magruder is down-right seedy at times, but
the seediness only makes him more sympathetic by the end. Downey, Jr.'s
also strong, his natural charisma oozing through the one-dimensional
drunk, womanizing private detective. Hannah's fine in her underwritten
role, and Duvall manages to force at least a little depth from a villain
the audience never gets to know.
        All in all, though, the movie feels too much like watching
hand-drawn cardboard cut-outs run around on a two-dimensional board,
chasing and shooting at each other. Too bad the board-game's so
well-conjured and the actors are good enough to even make some of the
stock-paper come to life time to time.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Robert Altman
Writer: Al Hayes (based on a story by John Grisham)
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Roberty Downey Jr, Daryl Hannah,
Robert Duvall, Famke Janssen, Tom Berenger, Jesse James, Mae Whitman
"The Gingerbread Man" is a film that almost cries out to be made into a
piece of Hollywood fluff, and it would have been if it hadn't been directed
by someone like Robert Altman.  It's not surprising that this film is based
on a story by John Grisham, one of the current kings (or at least he's a
duke) of bestsellers, since it has to deal with his favorite topic -
lawyers being forced to go above and beyond their duties - and because it
soon descends into a kafkaesque nightmare where the protagonist's life is
turned inside out.
Yet it's effortlessly not like the other Grisham films, like "The Firm" and
"The Client."  There's more atmosphere, more plausible twists, less
contrivance (in comparison, that is), and one other quality the other
lacked: surprise.  As a hurricane (nicely titled "Geraldo") sweeps through
the film's location of Savannah, Georgia, the film tells a nice piece of
pulp where the twists are geniuine, and so is the atmosphere and the
characters.  And yet the pulp is another of the Grisham lawyer stories,
following a formula that has been perfected yet doesn't feel like it's
being followed all the time.
The story deals with, well, a southern lawyer named Rick Magruder (Kenneth
Branagh, with a flawless and not-at-all annoying Southern accent), who
arrives home from a case one night and finds his staff and friends have
thrown a party for him.  After chatting it up with his assistant (Daryl
Hannah, who's not at all bad in this) and a couple of his other staffers,
he leaves and runs into a waitress who was there, Mallory (Embeth Davidtz),
who's car is stolen and who ends up with a ride home from Rick.  Rick
discovers that Mallory suspects her father (Robert Duvall), a crazy old man
who has been stalking her of late, stole it, and when back at her house,
the two become close as she tells him of her problems and he tries
unsuccessfully to help.  The two end the conversation by sleeping together.
>From here on, Rick begins to feel a certain need to help her, and he
manages to get her father to court, where they win effortlessly, and he is
sent to a mental institution.  But he is broken out by a cult he belongs
to, and soon Rick's life is being turned upside down.  He gets threats in
the mail, finds out cars are following him, and soon begins to take the law
into his own hand.  For once in a real long time, Altman manages to make
everything very suspenseful, with some real geniune nail biters here, even
though the final chapter of the film is basically one big predictable
contrivance, bringing it to a cliched albeit less glossy ending that it
could have avoided.
It's not the plot I really liked about this film.  Most Grisham plots are
in all reality just throwaways.  His novels are entertaining, but let's
face it: they're forgettable.  You read it while on vacation or on breaks
from work, and when you're done, you read his next book and the cycle just
continues.  What Altman has done differently, something which the other
directors didn't do, is give it a personal touch.  Altman's a very original
director.  He goes for a less glossy approach to all his films, using lots
of sloppy and improvised close-ups, following many voice tracks at one
time, and just allowing the film to lay still as he allows characters to
just hang out.  Look at how he designs Rick's office staff and you'll see
how loose and free this film really is, even if its confined by a plot.
As for the element of surprise it introduces - what I mean is that it
allows us to feel a lot like the characters, and it never really lets us
onto thinking of possible conspiracies.  We go along with everything. 
We're there with Rick in his rage towards the second half of the film, when
his kids are kidnapped by someone and we all know who did it.  It doesn't
hurt that Kenneth Branagh is such a likable actor that he manages to make
Rick, who could be just a lawyer who may just be on the receiving end of
instant karma, into a sympathetic and lovable guy.
I can't say I totally liked this film.  It's still a contrived film, with
an ending that Altman fought with the studio over and you wonder why he
didn't just look for a better one.  And Altman's free direction, which
allows mood and characters to be more prominent than plot doesn't exactly
work perfectly well with a film where the plot is so important.  And this
film is disappointing in one major way: just the fact that this was
directed by someone as amazing as Altman.  This certainly can't be a step
forward for the same man who less than a decade ago made a brilliant little
film called "The Player."
But I'm still one of the few people who try to look at every film by a
director as a singular piece of art, and not judge him from his others. 
This man has made "M*A*S*H" and "Nashville."  So what?  Directors sometimes
need to take breaks but still direct, and making films like this, that are
never meant to be masterpieces is sometimes refreshing.  I remember when
Martin Scorsese made "Cape Fear" and some critics criticized it for not
being as great as, say, "Raging Bull."  I suppose the difference between
this film and that one is that "Cape Fear" WAS a great film, and "The
Gingerbread Man" is merely just good.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Matt Williams
Doing a John Grisham film seems to be the trendy way these days for an
artistic director to make a commercial film.  First Francis Ford Coppola
tackled The Rainmaker, which is still the finest adaptation of any of
Grisham's works.  Now Robert Altman gives his own unique stamp to
Grisham's first story written exclusively for the screen, The
Gingerbread Man.
All Grisham films have to have a lawyer, and The Gingerbread Man is no
exception.  This time around, the lawyer is Rick Magruder (Kenneth
Branagh), a somewhat unscrupulous criminal attorney in Savannah.  His
career is skyrocketing, but his life has fallen apart.  He has divorced
from his wife, Leeanne (Famke Janssen), and has a hard time keeping
track of his children when they're in his custody.
Trouble comes Rick's way when he meets Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidtz), a
waitress who is being stalked by a man she believes to be her crazy
father (Robert Duvall).  The old man drove a wedge between her and her
ex-husband (Tom Berenger), and now it seems he may be out to kill her.
Rick sets out to help her, but slowly gets drawn into the deadly game
himself.
Meanwhile as a tempest is brewing in Rick's life, a real storm is
brewing outside. Hurricane Geraldo is building force and heading
straight toward the Savannah coast.  Hmmm...I wonder when it will hit?
The Gingerbread Man starts well, with a nearly trademark Altman party
scene that informs us this won't be the typical Grisham adaptation.  The
overlapping dialogue weaves a rich texture of Savannah life, and is an
excellent backdrop for the film.  Unfortunately, as the storm brews
outside, chunks of the movie get torn away like debris in gale-force
winds.  While the film is thrilling over two-thirds of the way through,
the film's finale is a whimper of incredulity.
The cast is top notch, involving us even though the characters are never
quite endearing. Shining out among the talented cast are Duvall, who
gives the eerie coot a note of authenticity, Robert Downey Jr as a
booze-ridden private eye, and Daryl Hannah as Rick's legal assistant.
The film is neither the typical John Grisham tale, nor the typical
Robert Altman film. Although involving a lawyer, the film is more
personal and compelling than most of Grisham's work.  It's good to see
the protagonist as something either than a fresh idealist just out of
law school.  The film is much more linear than most of Altman's work.
While the opening carries his distinctive touch, as the film progresses
it gains a greater sense of anonymity.
Still, even with its flawed ending, The Gingerbread Man is an enjoyable
tale to watch. Solid directing and an excellent cast make for a
thrilling initial 90 minutes, and even when the good actors start doing
stupid things, at least you can enjoy the good acting.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 PolyGram Filmed Entertainment/Island Pictures
 Director:  Robert Altman
 Writer:  John Grisham and Robert Altman (Al Hayes,
pseudonym)
 Cast: Kenneth Branagh, Embeth Davidtz, Robert Duvall, Tom
Berenger, Daryl Hannah, Famke Janssen, Robert Downey, Jr.
   "The Gingerbread Man" may not imitate the daily headlines
as much as "Wag the Dog," but it does show into what
troubles a man can be dragged if he thinks with a part of his
body other than his head. Current events in American politics
notwithstanding, sexual conduct with the wrong person by
people high in authority has driven narratives ever since
Agamemnon was murdered by Clytemnestra.  In this movie,
in which John Grisham bypassed the book and scripted
directly for the screen, a lawyer who has never lost a case in
eight years becomes careless and forfeits the one litigation
that would hurt him the most.  "The Gingerbread Man" takes
Grisham somewhat afield of his usual tales: this time his film
is directed by Robert Altman, who is known to forego
structure for atmosphere: who does just that in adeptly
capturing the shadowy, sinewy, and stormy surroundings of
Savannah.  But Altman forgoes the laid-back, discontinuous
structure of his most famous film, "Nashville" in favor of a
taut, suspenseful, and occasionally violent work with a
surprisingly effective twist in its concluding quarter hour.
   Backed up by a team of major performers like Kenneth
Branagh, Tom Berenger, Robert Duvall and the upcoming
Embert Davidtz, Altman's film opens with his signature scene,
a large, catered party--a surprise to celebrate lawyer Rick
Magruder's big victory in gaining the release of a man who
shot a cop.  It's the sort of case that does not make lawyers
into the heroes of police precincts and prompts even a private
investigator hired by Magruder to quip (about an attorney who
committed suicide) that at least one guy in the profession has
a conscience.  
   During the party, Magruder's speech slurs over as he
sloshes down some drinks and, when on a stormy night he
witnesses a car theft at the expense of its owner, Mallory
Doss (who served as part of the catering staff), he drives her
home in his chic red Mercedes.  After a tempestuous night of
lovemaking, the divorced Magruder takes a liking to his new
friend and decides to help her out, having learned that the
alleged car thief is her own, insane father--who has been
stalking her for years.  His efforts to get the nutty father,
Dixon Doss (Robert Duvall) locked up include his hiring of a
laid-back private investigator, Clyde (Robert Downey jr.), the
subpoena-forced testimony of Mallory's hostile ex-husband,
peter Randall (Tom Berenger), and the witnessing of several
fires including the blowing up of Mallory's car.
   Altman's direction, however taut, takes its time in exposing
the lives of his characters, particularly the dilemmas faced by
the rich and successful lawyer whose problems do not allow
him to enjoy his position to the fullest.  Chief among these
difficulties is his own marital situation: he is divorced with
custody of two small children whom he loves and his ex-wife
Leeanne (Famke Janssen) is anything but supportive of his
custodial visits.  Unwisely, he rejects the advice of his
associate in the law firm, the statuesque Lois (Daryl Hannah),
who warns him regularly about his activities with bimbos and
obviously cares quite a bit for him.  
   Branagh, it turns out, can enjoy slumming.  The English
actor takes a breaks from his usual Shakespearean roles to
adopt a southern American accent and a goatee, and appears
in virtually every one of photographer Changwei Gu's scenes. 
While Mr.Changwei expertly capitalizes on Savannah's old-
world beauty, too many vistas take place in poorly-lit indoor
locations, including Magruder's pine-panelled law office and
the bar which constitutes Clyde's hangout and pick-up spot for
bimbettes.  Daryl Hannah plays well against type as the
bespectacled lawyer's aide as does the lovely, slim Embeth
Davidtz who may not be quite the angel she was with Denzel
Washington in "Fallen."
   The first part is the more interesting one: the picture turns
increasingly melodramatic and difficult to accept.  Far too
often the heavy rain and routine, melodramatic actions remind
us of the cloudburst-soaked film, "Hard Rain," and we lose the
wit and clever dialogue that make the initial scenes
particularly Altmanesque and thereby compelling.  Mark
Isham's music is most effective, becoming menacing as the
movie progresses into the dark Savannah night. Rated R. 
Running Time: 115 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten
