Title
Review for Bread and Roses (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
BREAD AND ROSES, by director Ken Loach and writer Paul Laverty, who 
collaborated last on MY NAME IS JOE, tells a fictional story with a 
documentary feel about organizing L. A. janitors.  Two of the story's 
three leads are sisters who work as non-union janitors in a typical 
skyscraper.  One sister, Maya (Pilar Padilla), is idealistically and 
bravely pro-union, whereas the other, Rosa (Elpidia Carrillo), is 
pragmatically and just as bravely anti-union.  Both are completely 
believable and deliver strong performances, but Carrillo steals the 
movie in a long dramatic scene towards the end.
We see the workers verbally abused and threatened as they attempt to 
organize.  Although the bosses draw most of the writer's fire for 
underpaying the janitors, the leaders of the union are criticized in one 
scene in which the union organizer complains that the money they raise 
will be thrown away like the $40,000,000 that the unions gave last year 
to the Democrats.
Although it is a powerful film at times, Loach makes two strategic 
mistakes that significantly and needlessly detract from its message.  
The first is the casting of Adrien Brody as Sam, the paid union 
organizer.  Brody, a Tom Green look-alike who darts around like Harpo 
Marx, gives the movie a comedic side that is jarringly out of place with 
the rest of the drama.  
The second mistake concerns the subtitles.  Since the characters would 
naturally speak a mixture of English and Spanish, Loach keeps switching 
the language that is being subtitled.  In theory this may sound 
sensible, but in practice it is a disaster.  If you try to read the 
subtitles and they turn out to be in a language you don't understand, 
then, by the time you stop reading and start listening, you've missed 
the first few words of the sentence and are frequently unable to parse 
what is being said.  The reverse is true if you're listening carefully, 
only to realize that you should have been reading.  Since these switches 
may occur several times per minute, it is hard to keep track of the 
dialog.  If Loach felt that dual language subtitling were necessary, 
there are two ways that would have solved the problem.  Either have both 
languages subtitled all of the time -- Films shown in multilingual 
countries like Switzerland do this -- or use different colors with, say, 
white for English and yellow for Spanish.  
"I believe in nothing but this," says Rosa, holding up her hand to her 
sister.  BREAD AND ROSES makes some powerful points for the union while 
reminding us of everyone's believe in self-reliance.  Were it not for 
the miscasting of the comical Adrien Brody in a serious part and for the 
distracting and constant switching of subtitles, I would have been able 
to recommend BREAD AND ROSES.
BREAD AND ROSES runs 1:50.  It is rated R for strong language and brief 
nudity and would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film opens in nationwide release in the United States on Friday, 
June 1, 2001.  In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera 
Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Ken Loach has made a career of directing films that feature scrappy,
blue-collar protagonists that deal with class conflicts and other inequities
rooted in money, power and politics.  He has always worked outside the
Hollywood system, and one of his early documentaries (Cathy Come Home) was
so powerful, it actually led to a change in England's laws concerning the
homeless.
Having apparently tapped every possible unjust social issue in the U.K.,
Loach loaded up his truck and moved to Beverly.  Or Los Angeles, that is.
Bread and Roses is Loach's first American film, but don't be fooled by its
shooting location.  It's still packed full of rah-rah social commentary, and
even though Roses takes place within spitting distance of Tinseltown, it was
still independently financed.
No matter what anyone tells you, Roses isn't the name of the ballyhooed
return to music by Axl Rose.  The film takes place in the spacious glass
towers of downtown Los Angeles, where multi-million-dollar deals are
routinely made every day.  But when darkness falls, the empty buildings are
taken over by dirt-poor cleaning crews, largely made up of illegal aliens
from south of the border.  They make very little money and have no benefits.
Miss a day of work, for any reason at all, and you're fired.  Hey - not all
of those downtown businessmen are as nice as Leland McKenzie.
Pilar Padilla plays Maya, a recent import from Tijuana who gets a cleaning
job through her older sister Rosa (Elpidia Carrillo).  They work their
fingers to the bone for a few measly dollars and the privilege of having the
people they're cleaning up after look down their noses at them.  But the
grueling, repetitive world of office cleaning is set on its ear when a union
organizer named Sam (Adrien Brody, Liberty Heights) arrives on the scene.
He heads an organization called Janitors for Justice and has just
successfully negotiated benefits for cleaners in Chicago.  He tries to get
the L.A. janitors to unionize, but they're all too scared about silly things
like losing their jobs and being deported.  Eventually they come around and
become Sam's army of picketing, sign-wielding minorities.
Roses comes to a head during an emotional, well-acted battle between Maya
and Rosa, the former finding herself falling in love with Sam, while the
latter is firmly anti-union.  There's also a pretty cool protest scene where
the J for Js crash a party full of big Hollywood stars, like Gary Busey, Ron
Perlman, Tim Roth, that guy from Deuce Bigalow and Benicio Del Toro (Jesus -
can he give it a rest already?).
Yeah!  Go union!  Fight the Man!  Disrupt his business meetings!  Crash his
parties!  Generally raise a lot of - what?  What's that?  Hmmm.  That's a
good point.  What rights are you due when you're not supposed to be here in
the first place?  Maybe that's why I had a problem mustering sympathy for
the protagonists.  We're talking about folks who keep quiet and fly under
the radar to avoid getting booted out of a country they entered illegally.
Michael Moore can do a much better job of making potentially unsympathetic
people more likeable in his pursuit for truth and justice.
Roses reminded me a lot of Haskell Wexler's documentary called Bus Riders
Union.  Like Roses, it was set in Los Angeles, but pitted the poor community
against the city's Metro Transit Authority.  It's probably because Loach's
directorial style gives Roses a bit of a documentary feel.  The film's
dialogue is great and rarely seems scripted, even though longtime Loach
collaborator Paul Laverty's story is kind of weak as a whole.
1:52 - R for strong language and brief nudity
