Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
Number of Reviews
31

Author
Ross Anthony
Great concept, stale on dialogue; "Mystery Men" gives great climax.
Three wannabe superheros (the Shoveler, the Blue Raja and Mr. Furious) are
given a shot at the title, when real (well, spoof of a real) superhero,
Captain Amazing is kidnapped by arch bad guy Casanova Frankenstein.
It's whacky deadpan silliness. And although good performances are given all
a round (special praise to Ben Stiller) "Mystery Men's" humor escaped my
eager clutches for the better part of the first half of the movie. Things
sort of start rolling around the superhero wannabe try-outs, where every
goofy power imaginable pops up.
Great set design, my complements to the art director. I loved the Corvette
limo. I also enjoyed the assimilation of the wannabe superheros back into
their real lives with their real wives or moms or girlfriends, the contrast
of identities and world view is oddly ironic and potentially inspirational
for all of us with a secret superhero wannabe inside.
Besides the concepts; the costumes and that Adam West Batman spoof humor are
noteworthy, unfortunately they don't quite orchestrate well with the dodgey
script. "Mystery Men" is nonetheless charming and as I said, the real power
is in the big finish. Bring your pre-teens.
Starring Ben Stiller, William H. Macy, Hank Azaria, etc.
Directed by Kinka Usher.
Written by Neil Cuthbert.
Produced by Lawrence Gordon, Mike Richardson and Lloyd Levin at Universal.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Nick Lyons
  Usually when a blockbuster comes out, it's loaded with effects, stars, bad
scripts, and plenty of action. Mystery Men may contain an all-star cast, and
efects, but the clever script and characters are what really works, which is
rare to see this year.
  The film is based upon the comic book series "The Flaming Carrot" by Bob
Burden, in which 3 wanna be super heroes try and fight crime, only to be out
done by the real hero of Champion City, Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear). Things
go a little haywire, when the sinister Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) is
released into the city, where he captures Captain Amazing, and plans to wreak
havoc upon Champion City. Well, the trio decide to take matters in their own
hands, by saving the city, but first they need some assitance. This is where
the film takes a turn for the better.
  In the beggining, there were only 3 wanna be heroes. "Blue Raja (Hank
Azaria), "Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller) and "The Shoveller (William H. Macy). Sure
they were enterataining, but their acts grew old fast. that is until they
aquire "Invisible Boy" (Kel Mitchell), and "The Bowler" (Janeane Garafalo) and
"Mr. Splein" (Paul Reubens), 2 of which rescue the film from becoming a
disastorous mess. Thankfully, the original 3 heroes become amusing, with some
support of Reuben and Garfalo on screen.
  The whole premise is rather ridiculous, but packs a few punches to keep
interest. For one, the film is considerably clever. It literally pokes fun at
super hero films, like Batman And Robin, Superman etc. In fact, many scenes are
similar to Batman And robin, including the opening sequence, only altered in a
humorous and superior way. A part of the cleverness comes from the cast.
Sometimes a film with such talent is overblown, but the acting is what keeps it
alive here.
  While Azaria and Macy were enteratining, 2 characters really stood out. One
was Paul Reuben. No matter how disgusting or revolting "Mr. Splein" may be, you
still can't help but laugh. It' so incredibly moronic, it's just a riot
watching Reuben relieve himself of bodily functions. Janeane Garafalo also was
an interesting character. She seemed to be the most outgoing and convincing
character on screem, due to her enthusiasm, that kept the film flowing. Men is
worth seeing alone, for those 2 troubled heroes.
   On the downside, a few of the heroes and especially the villain never really
lift off. Kel Mitchell and Geoffrey Rush, were both utterly useless. Their
parts were so limited, they'd be lucky at all to be on screen for more than 20
minutes. Ben Stiller too was wasted, mostly because of his unlikeable power and
dialogue. None of these characters get a rise out of anybody, but happily they
are lost in the charming flow of the film.
  As far as the budget goes, it was wisely spent on the cast, not the effects.
While the set designs and action all look nice, I'm glad there was a seperate
aspect, that the film focused on, and for that I applaud.
  Slow at times, and rather pointless, Mystery Men still delivers. It forgets
about money making, because it's not likely to make a bundle like it's
proceeders, and that's what works. Stupid? Maybe, but for once I'm not
disappointed. No one expected an intelligent film, but you get a film thats wit
captures your attention and makes you forget this miserable year.

Author
MR JONATHAN RICHARDS
     "Mystery Men" is high-concept satire with low-concept execution,
a spoof of superhero conventions that finds itself unable to leap low
comedy at a single bound.  It's full of smart lines and ideas, and yet
its sophomoric leaden-footedness renders it as bankrupt of comic
superpowers as the inept title characters.
Champion City, home to the superstar superhero Captain Amazing
(Greg Kinnear), has hit a crime drought.  Thanks to his crime-busting
talents, the few remaining crooks are pathetic gangs up only to such
criminal enterprises as crashing a dance at a nursing home and
stealing wigs and dentures.
A trio of superhero wannabes -- Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller), who
gets furious and rides a Harley compatible; The Blue Rajah (Hank
Azaria), who speaks with an affected British accent and throws forks;
and The Shoveler (William H. Macy), a decent family man who hits
people with a shovel -- tries to foil the nursing home caper, but even
at this they have to be bailed out by Amazing, an effective but
preening and commercialized crime-fighter whose face appears on
billboards all over the city, and whose uniform is plastered with
advertising logos. But Amazing, faced with the Alexandrine dilemma of
no new worlds to conquer, arranges to spring his former arch enemy,
the evil genius Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush), from the
nuthouse.  When Frankenstein turns the tables and captures Amazing,
the hapless trio springs into action to save him and Champion City.
To recruit some backup they hold superhero auditions which
produce aspirants even more hopless than the core trio.  Out of this
pool they select Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell), who can only be
invisible when nobody's looking; The Spleen (Paul Reubens), who farts
spectacularly; The Bowler (Janeane Garofalo), who flings a transparent
bowling ball with her mafioso father's skull inside it; and The Sphinx
(Wes Studi), who utters deeply inane nuggets of wisdom.
There are moments of wit, and Macy does his best to lend comic
dignity to the production.  Garofalo utters her one-liners with
spirit, and Kinnear makes a nicely pompous hero when the inanity of
his dialogue doesn't hog-tie him tighter than his nemesis ever could.
It sounds so much better than it plays.  When a movie gets some
of its biggest laughs from flatulence, it is probably fair to conclude
that it stinks.

Author
Jamey Hughton
More MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton at:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
Mystery Men is a movie about super-heroes who use garden tools, cutlery
and flatulence to fight evil. They dress up in threatening, homemade
costumes and try to rid the city of crime. This sounds like it would
make a terrific Saturday Night Live skit, but a 2-hour summer movie
is... perhaps pushing it. Despite it's sporadic enjoyment and visual
flare, Mystery Men simply can't hold together as a whole.
The premise is certainly creative. In futuristic Champion City, the
local super-hero Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear) controls crime and rules
the streets. Sporting more product-placement ads than Tiger Woods,
Amazing is a sponsor for companies like Pepsi, Penzoil and Mighty Whitey
Toothpaste. But lately, it seems, the crime rate in Champion City has
been experiencing a serious decline. Losing the spotlight and hoping to
regain his stature, Amazing springs super-villain Casanova Frankenstein
(Geoffrey Rush) from a mental institution so he can make headlines
again. But alas, the plan backfires, as Amazing is kidnapped by Casanova
to leave the city in destruction and peril.
Enter a squad of second-rate heroes who want to also clean up the city,
and rescue Captain Amazing in the process. Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller) is
a leather-clad `ticking time-bomb of fury', The Shoveler (William H.
Macy) has incredible skill with gardening tools, The Blue Raja (Hank
Azaria) tosses kitchen utensils with precise accuracy, The Spleen (Paul
Reubens) uses the deadly art of passing gas to ward off villains, The
Bowler (Janeane Garofalo) wields a bowling ball containing her late
father's skull, and Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell) has the ability to
disappear when no one is looking. The fate of the city is in their
hands. I know, it doesn't look good.
While Mystery Men certainly has it's moments, the foundation is lost
with all the frantic special effects and missed opportunities. Too many
gags fall flat as a result of botched humor and imperfect comic timing.
Everything becomes caught in a whirlwind of expensive sets and visuals,
and the movie begins to see the jokes as a second priority.
Still, there are bits and pieces of sheer delight. Wes Studi plays The
Sphinx, a (supposedly) wise and mysterious super-hero who offers the
group some philosophical views on fighting crime. His pointless lessons
include `If you doubt your powers, you add power to your doubts' and
`When you care what is outside, what is inside cares for you.' Studi,
best known for his role in The Last of the Mohicans, has never been
better.
Most of the cast fares exceptionally well. Stiller is believably angry,
but he adds an unexpected sensitive side to his character that was nice
to see. Macy is wonderful (as always), but given limitations. Azaria
does a remarkable job with a cheesy British accent, Garofalo is fun to
watch, and Reubens is appropriately disgusting. Geoffrey Rush is
somewhat irritating as the long-nailed, disco lovin' super-villain, but
his performance seems perfectly on target. All of the actors, despite
some unfunny material, never display a hint of desperation.
There are amusing one-liners everywhere. Debating whether businessman
Lance Ardon and Captain Amazing are the same person, Macy argues: `Lance
wears glasses. Captain Amazing doesn't.' Hmmm... perhaps a little (wink,
wink) reference to Superman and his alter-ego. But even with clever
zingers such as this, the film can't settle on a stable conglomeration
of comedy and action, as the scale never fixates on a confident center.
Laughs are absent from certain scenes where they could have been
plentiful, and minor when they should have been huge. I certainly won't
argue if Mystery Men is funny; it is. But with more skillful material,
the proceedings could have multiplied in comedic value.
For most, this will be entertaining. But take a look at the cast list
and the enormous potential that it carried, and perhaps you'll agree: it
could have been more.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
.......................

Author
Frankie Paiva
Mystery Men was supposed to be one of the biggest box office draws of the
summer. It had a hip cast, (get this cast list: Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo,
William H. Macy, Kel Mitchell, Paul Reubens, Ben Stiller, Wes Studi, Greg
Kinnear, Lena Olin, Geoffrey Rush, Tom Waits, Eddie Izzard, and Pras just to
name a few) an interesting premise, and great special effects, but somewhere in
the midst, someone had forgotten about the script.
Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear) is losing his superhero pop deal with Pepsi,
he's almost wiped out all of the crime in the city and is losing publicity
fast. What he needs is one of his old evil villains to battle with, the only
one still alive is Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) and he releases him
immediately. But Cassanova is smart, and soon captures Amazing and holds him in
his mansion of evil.
Enter Mr. Furious, (Stiller) the Shoveler, (H. Macy) and the Blue Raja, (Hank
Azaria) they are your b-movie type superheros. They go around each night and
try to protect the citizens of Champion City from extreme evil. When their idol
Captain Amazing is captured, they soon make it their quest to rescue him before
the entire city is blown to a pulp. They hold superhero auditions for more
people to join their gang and go to an old carnival where a man sells lots of
weird weapons.
That's exactly what Mystery Men is, the film has some extremely inventive
situations but smothers them in stupid, unfunny dialog. The performances are
surprisingly mediocre with only Rush and Garofolo standing out from the crowd.
It's also full of characters that we are supposed to find amusing that come off
more annoying than funny. Universal put $68 million into the picture, and so
far it's only made about $25 million, and it's probably not going to make $35
million either. While well cast, Mystery Men can't make the cut, so it gets
**1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains a scene of someone's eyeballs and face being
disoriented and burning (it's not that bad) it also contains some gross humor
and language. Good Age: 9 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: *** (out of ****)
Universal / 1:58 / 1999 / PG-13 (language, comic violence, crude humor)
Cast: Ben Stiller; William H. Macy; Hank Azaria; Janeane Garofalo;
Geoffrey Rush; Wes Studi; Paul Ruebens; Kel Mitchell; Greg Kinnear;
Claire Forlani; Eddie Izzard; Tom Waits; Lena Olin
Director: Kinka Usher
Screenplay: Neil Cuthbert
If you've been pining to see William H. Macy removed from his element,
then "Mystery Men" is going to be your kind of movie. The "Fargo"
Oscar-nominee and critically-acclaimed character actor here plays a
blue-collar (and blue-jeans) crime-fighter known as The Shoveler, and
seeing him dispatch disco-vamping enemies with a swift whack of his
namesake weapon provides many a pinch-me-so-I-know-I'm-not-dreaming
moment. Be thankful you're wide awake: Chief among the perverse
pleasures of "Mystery" is witnessing him and more unexpected talents
deadpan their way through a story that's all punchlines and sensory
explosion.
A single member of a trio of hero-wannabes in the Gotham-like metropolis
Champion City, Shoveler's team also includes Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller,
radiating manic cool in stubble, spiky hair and black leather), prone to
attention-getting tantrums, and The Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), a
fork-flinger sporting an effete British accent and a wardrobe that looks
stitched together from an elderly lady's housecoat. (It probably was.)
They genuinely want to help rid their hometown of bad guys, yet always
seem to fall into the shadow of the amazing Captain Amazing (Greg
Kinnear, perfectly utilized), Champion City's bonafide defender against
evil.
With this set-up, "Mystery Men" sounds like any number of comics brought
to large, lush life on the big screen - and, as every colorfully askew
frame makes evident, it's source is just that (specifically, a Dark
Horse publication called "Flaming Carrot"). But that the protagonists
are second-rate saviors hints at vast opportunities for a wicked sense
of humor, an edge that the performers, screenwriter Neil Cuthbert and
debut director Kinka Usher take to the hilt. And what a hilt: A
particularly amusing running gag involves Kinnear's promotional
sponsorship, his NASCAR-esque jumpsuit displaying logos for Reebok,
Rayovac and Pepsi.
Actually, Captain Amazing loses the latter endorsement after one too
many ho-hum rescues. This puts him in a glum mood, so he demands that
his publicist work to free old arch-nemesis Casanova Frankenstein (hammy
Geoffrey Rush) from the local asylum to spark some deadly new conflict -
only the plan backfires when he gets kidnaped by Casanova, allowing
Shoveler, Mr. Furious and Blue Raja to prove their worth. First order of
business: A backyard barbeque to hold auditions for new partners, where
such funny rejects as Waffle Man (special power: "truth syrup") and PMS
Avenger expire their moment in the spotlight.
Enter the real deals ... well, sort of: Paul "Pee-Wee Herman" Rueben's
flatulent Spleen, Wes Studi's uber-enigmatic Sphinx, Kel Mitchell's
affable Invisible Boy and "Mystery" MVP Janeane Garofalo as The Bowler,
whose ball - containing both her dead father's skull and spirit - throws
like a destructive boomerang. Once these cads come together following a
shaky beginning, "Mystery Men" stands tall and proud on terra firma.
Usher piles his freak show high in trappings so garish and silly that
they occasionally topple under the weight, especially the messy action
sequence that inaugurates the movie. But when they fly, they soar.
"Mystery Men" similarly finishes on a sloppy note, as each individual
good guy gets his or her chance to shine in the run-of-the-mill
climactic battle; the film dangerously courts becoming what it so far
has poked a generous amount of fun at. But even with Usher's
inexperience creating cluttered bookends, the long, strong midsection's
mirthful mayhem and summer-flick satirizing are as irresistible as the
priceless cast. Given the delightfully demented accomplishment here, a
sequel that reunites these super friends and their behind-the-scenes
counterparts - in some cases older, in others wiser - isn't out of the
question.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"Upon hearing word of this outrage, Star Wars' creator George Lucas (in
the throes of developing scripts for the two remaining "Star Wars"
films) quickly removed all references to an upcoming character allegedly
named Stingy MacHaggis, a kilt-wearing alien who was to spend a good
portion of Episode II' drinking, picking fights and playing an alien
musical instrument that strongly resembled a set of bagpipes.  He is to
be replaced by another alien character - a formless, colorless and mute
creature who in no way resembles any culture or individual that ever
existed or ever will exist. -AAlgar on "The Phantom Menace"'s
race-stereotyping controversy

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
What you get when take about a dozen name-actors and slap them into a
budgeted $85 Million comic-book movie with Oscar-winner Geoffrey Rush as the
bad guy, and first-time movie director of Taco Bell's infamous TV Chihuahua
ads, "Yo Quiero Taco Bell", at the helm? Mystery Men: The Movie, based on
the Dark Horse comic book is what you get. Is it any good? Well, let's find
out.
PLOT:
Captain Amazing, the popular superhero known to have abolished crime in
Champion City, decides to allow one of his biggest nemeses, Cassanova
Frankenstein, out of the penitentiary, because he is losing his sponsors due
to the lack of altercations left for him in the big city. Unfortunately for
him, Cassanova has plans of his own, leaving it up to several up-and-coming,
bumbling superheroes to attempt to save the day.
CRITIQUE:
Mostly enjoyable and colorful comic-book hero spoof, this movie was not as
funny as I anticipated, but did offer enough original material and pretty
eye-candy for yours truly to be amused during its entire showing. I am also
a comic book collector myself, and appreciated many at the potshots taken at
the comic-book genre (Most of the funniest stuff came from this premise). I
also liked the whole concept of "disco" being integrated into the bad guys'
theme, as well as the quirky special effects and the few surprises tossed in
and around. The actors were all passable, with William H. Macy sticking out
as the cream of their crop, but I did think Ben Stiller could have been a
little funnier. Also, what's with Lena Olin taking that complete throwaway
role as Cassanova's bimbo-du-jour (I still have dreams about here in ROMEO
IS BLEEDING... :) Garofalo was darkly humorous as per usual.
All in all, I suppose they could have done much better with such a parody
film, especially in the humor and action department, but then again, some of
the stories that I had heard before this screening, had me expecting the
worst as well. Geoffrey Rush for one, was a definite poor casting call,
simply boring me as the bad guy. They could have gotten someone with a
little more charisma. And surely the "identities" of each of the Mystery Men
was not as inspirational as they could have been...I mean, I know it's a
parody, but the "fork-guy"? C'mon! Having said that, I think that anyone who
has ever had an interest in comic books, superheroes, or even movies based
on either, will enjoy this movie for what it is: a goofy, wink-wink,
over-the-top, special effects-laden comic-book spoof starring a whole bunch
of name-actors having a blast! Not the best movie I've seen this summer, but
definitely far from the worst. Warm your nachos, and grind right into them,
cause these are the kind of movies for which nachos were indirectly
invented.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Kinka Usher is best known for having directed those cute doggie
commercials for Taco Bell ("Yo Quiero Taco Bell?").
Actor Ben Stiller and Janeane Garofalo once dated for about three weeks, but
stopped after they thought that it was getting "weird". They are now really
good friends, and seem to be in every other movie together. They even wrote
a book together called "Feel This Book: An Essential Guide to
Self-Empowerment, Spiritual Supremacy, and Sexual Satisfaction".
Janeane was offered the role of Gale Weathers in the movie SCREAM (8/10),
but turned it down to do a movie called SWEETHEARTS. Courtney Cox then got
her role and SCREAM went on to gross more than $100 million, where as
SWEETHEARTS went straight to video. Her production company is called "I Hate
Myself Productions". She stands 5'1".
One funny in-joke is contained in the line "I'm just a publicist, not a
magician!", delivered by Captain Amazing's publicist near the beginning of
the film. The actor delivering the line, Rickie Jay, is in actually, a
magician.
Greg Kinnear lived in Greece for sometime, and can actually speak Greek.
Paul Reubens (AKA Pee-Wee Herman) was born Paul Rubenfield. He was once
honorably discharged from the Marine Corps, and was arrested for
masturbating in an adult movie theatre in 1991.
Actress Lena Olin is born in Sweden, and had already made a successful
career as an actress before she came to Hollywood. Director Sydney Pollack
rewrote the scenario for his movie HAVANNA especially for her.
The "H" in William H. Macy's name stands for Hall.
Actress Louis Lasser, who plays Hank Azaria's mom in this film, was once
married to director Woody Allen for about three years in the sixties.
Fugee music star Pras plays one of the Disco Boys in this film.
Actor Wes Studi (The Sphynx) is an American Indian of the Cherokee Nation.

Author
Christian Pyle
It's tough to be an aspiring superhero in Champion City.  Just ask Mr. Furious
(Ben Stiller), the Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), and The Shoveler (William H. Macy).
 They're trying to break into the biz, but Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear), the
city's hero numero uno, hogs all the action.  The good captain has his own
problems.  Because he's all but eliminated crime, Amazing's endorsement deals
are falling through.  The public craves a major slugfest, so Amazing engineers
the parole of his one-time arch enemy Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush). 
Frankenstein succeeds beyond expectations; he captures Capt. Amazing before
setting out on his scheme to destroy the city.  
So, no one is left to save the day but our would-be superheroes, but their
abilities are more "little league" than "Justice League."  The Raja hurls forks
at foes, the Shoveler hits them with a shovel, and Mr. Furious just yells at
people (Stiller is doing essentially the same character he played in a guest
appearance on "Friends").  After a painful first strike, the guys hold
auditions for teammates and add The Bowler (Janeane Garofalo), who carries her
dead father's skull in her bowling ball; Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell), who can
only use his powers when no one is looking at him; The Spleen (Paul Reubens),
who blows devastating winds from his rear; and The Sphinx (Wes Studi), a
mysterious figure who will teach them to fight.
"Mystery Men" boasts one of the most talented and eclectic casts ever
assembled.  In addition to those already mentioned, the credits include Lena
Olin as Frankenstein's evil shrink, comedian Eddie Izzard and the Fugees'
Prakazrel Michel as disco-themed thugs, singer Tom Waits as an inventor of
superhero weapons, Artie Lange (from "MAD TV") as another thug, Claire Forlani
(from "Meet Joe Black") as a waitress Mr. Furious is pursuing, Louise Lasser
(from "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman") as the Blue Raja's mother, and
actor/magician Ricky Jay as Capt. Amazing's manager.  The cast includes four
Oscar-nominated actors!  When I saw the list of players early last year, I
figured the result would be a can't-miss comedy.  
Yet, I must report disappointment.  The script is probably the worst of 1999. 
Nearly every joke misfires.  The stabs at comic books are too obvious to be
funny.  (For example, no one can recognize Capt. Amazing in his secret identity
because he's wearing glasses.)  The fart jokes surrounding the Spleen are
surprisingly the only gags that work.  The cast tries hard, especially Hank
Azaria, whose character adopts an effete British accent while in costume, but
the script is just too lame to run.  
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
John Carroll
Mystery Men
Starring Ben Stiller, William H. Macy, Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo,
Greg Kinnear, Geoffrey Rush
120 Minutes Long, Rated PG-13 for some violence and crude humor.
Mystery Men is a very innovative and clever comedy that benefits from
a wonderful cast.
   Every summer we always get hit by the big blockbuster films that have
special effects and a big name cast.  And every summer we always see these
films get toasted by critics and never live up to their full potential.  At the
beginning of the summer, Mystery Men was shaping up to be another
blockbuster film with a great cast, and we were waiting to see if it would fail
or not.  Unfortunately, this clever comedy got lost in the mix of The Blair
Witch Project and The Sixth Sense.  What got lost was a very clever
and innovative comedy, which spoofs superhero films.
   The graphics in this film are great and add to the spoof.  They are very
colorful and outrageous, which adds to the comic book feel of the film.  It is
in a futuristic setting with Captain Amazing, played by Greg Kinnear, as the
protector of Champion City.  Then, there is the trio of Mr. Furious, The
Shoveler and The Blue Raja, played by Ben Stiller, William H. Macy and Hank
Azaria, respectively.  They are the superhero wannabes.  Things go afoul when
Captain Amazing starts to lose popularity.  He has done such a good job that
there are no superheroes left to take out.  Therefore, Captain Amazing sets up
a plan to set his arch-nemesis, Casanova Frankenstein, played by Geoffrey Rush,
free.  Chaos ensues as Casanova traps Captain Amazing and it is up to the
wannabes to help Captain Amazing.  They do some recruiting and eventually add
Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell), The Spleen (Paul Reubens), The Bowler (Janeane
Garofalo) and The Sphinx (Wes Studi) to their team.  
   As stated before, the cast is nothing short of excellent.  Movies can
always enlist A-List celebrities, but they need to mesh in order to be
successful.  In Mystery Men, the cast blends perfectly.  Ben Stiller and
Janeane Garofalo are the perfect combination and they interact terrifically.  
Hank Azaria stands out as well as The Blue Raja, whether it be practicing his
cutlery or arguing with his mother.  William H. Macy gives another strong
performance as The Shoveler, and his demeanor and wit will have you chuckling
throughout the film.  But perhaps the funniest performances come from Paul
Reubens, a.k.a. PeeWee Herman, and Wes Studi.  Reubens plays the flatulent
Spleen and Studi plays the "prophetic" Sphinx.  These performances
are great and contrast the clever humor of the rest of the cast perfectly.
   Unlike Ben Stiller's last comedy, There's Something About Mary,
Mystery Men is a clever and innovative comedy.  It will not have you
rolling in the aisles, but you will still be impressed and laughing.  
   Are there any problems with this film?  Of course.  This could have been
a great film, but despite the two-hour length, it could have benefited by being
longer.  The script is underwritten due to the great cast.  They are so funny
they need more time.  Kinka Usher, the director of this film, tries to get each
cast member his or her own amount of screen time, which takes away from the
film.  In particular, Stiller and Macy could have used more screen time, along
with Janeane Garofalo.  Despite all of this, the rest of the cast usually
delivers with comedy when they are featured on screen.
   And the other detraction from Mystery Men is the ending.  The
spoof ends in the last ten minutes.  Instead of having a spoof ending, which
would have been funnier, they have a typical superhero ending.  In this case,
each member of the cast gets to shine in their own particular way.  This
detracts from the rest of the film considering the rest was a spoof.
   Overall, Mystery Men is a very enjoyable experience.  It is a
spoof of not only superhero films, but also blockbusters as a whole.  This may
be one of the few A-list casts that meshes together so well, so you do want to
check this film out.  Unfortunately, stiff competition from films like The
Blair Witch Project, The Sixth Sense and Runaway Bride will
keep Mystery Men from achieving the box office results that it truly
deserves.
Rating: 3 Stars Out of 4 Stars.
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated PG-13
Universal Pictures
starring Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo, William H. Macy, Kel Mitchell,
Paul Reubens, Ben Stiller, Wes Studi, Greg Kinnear, Lena Olin,
Geoffrey Rush, Tom Waits, Eddie Izzard, Claire Forlani
based on the comic book by Bob Burden
written by Neil Cuthbert
directed by Kinka Usher
It could have been a summer hit; perhaps the beginning of a
much-needed franchise for Universal Pictures. The
superheroes-without-superpowers storyline seemed to appeal to all of
us underachieving Americans. So where did "Mystery Men" go wrong? In
my opinion, at almost every turn. "Mystery Men" is the story of 7
self-made-heroes out to fight supervillain Cassanova
Frankenstein(Geoffrey Rush) in order to get back their real superhero,
Captain Amazing(Greg Kinnear). The film is supposed to be a mockery of
comic-book action franchises, but the jokes just aren't funny at
all. The only real high-notes in an "all-star" cast(which includes
Paul Reubens a.k.a Pee Wee Herman) are Ben Stiller and Janeane
Garofalo, who each have the talent to make any line into a sardonic,
cynical catchphrase. While the film's basic idea sounds like fun,
"Mystery Men" is actually somewhat of a bore thanks to Neil Cuthbert's
one-note script and Kinka Usher's wannabe-hip-and-stylish
direction. Even as a comedy sketch, there wouldn't be much to "Mystery
Men", so why torture us with a feature film? "Mystery Men" also
disappointed at the box office, so thankfully, no sequel is being
planned.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Sociey at http://www.ofcs.org
I'd say the studios needlessly delayed the release of many movies, out of 
fear of losing money to George Lucas' institution back in May.  There's a 
spate of above-average and solid ones out now, too many for me to justifying 
paying to see!  The one we shelled out for last night is "Mystery Men."
You know the premise if you go to movies regularly.  Or perhaps you know it 
because of hype that permeates other media.  Skip the next paragraph if you 
don't need it.
Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear) is such an efficient superhero that he has 
virtually cleared the gothic streets of Champion City.  Because he is 
commercial-minded, he wears sponsorship patches, a la race car drivers, 
plastered across his rubber armored suit.  The problem is he's lost the big 
account, the Pepsi endorsement, so he decides to finagle the early parole of 
his nemesis, Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush).  This way he'll have an 
arch-villain to quash again, and his name will stay in the news.  Well, 
Frankenstein captures Amazing rather easily.  So it's up to a group of 
clumsy vigilantes to protect the city from Frankenstein and the group of 
disco-themed henchmen that surround him.  The original trio is comprised of  
Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller), The Shoveler (William H. Macy) and the Blue Raja 
(Hank Azaria).  Because their numbers and skills are not a match for the 
insanely bad Frankenstein, the eccentric crimefighters begin to interview.  
With whom do they end up?  A revolting, zit-covered schmendrick called the 
Spleen (Paul Reubens), Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell) and The Bowler (Janeane 
Garofalo).  Faced with the task of rescuing Captain Amazing and stopping 
Frankenstein from destroying Champion City with his souped-up death ray, the 
team of wannbe superheroes goes under the tutelage of the "terribly 
mysterious" Sphinx (Wes Studi).  They also enlist the help of Dr. Heller 
(Tom Waits), a brilliant but grizzled scientist who specializes in creating 
non-lethal weapons.  Will they prevail?
What's funniest is the self-reflexive jokes.  The film works best as a 
send-up of all the cliches and conventions of superhero stories you've read 
and heard and watched.  The premise turns post-modern in the sense that so 
many elements are parodied -there's so much subtlety.  When Mr. Furious, 
tired of the Sphinx's trite Yogi-isms, beats him to the punch line, we see 
also the off-center skepticism that marks so many works that recognize 
viewers-have-seen-this-before- so-let's-do-it-a-different-way.  Ben 
Stiller's humor functions so well here because of his style, at once deadpan 
and dumb, seems funnier when it fails the first time; like a Letterman 
monologue, Stiller's jokes plod on until they become self-conscious and 
hilarious.  Any character who holds his breath and pushes and talks in 
stilted phrases like "rage building, blood pressure climbing" gets laughs 
out of the sheer stupidity of his shtick.  Mr. Furious is also the most 
well-rounded of the team, Stiller causing us to like his character because 
he is the neglected underdog.
William H. Macy is even more droll as the Shoveler, the self-effacing 
crimefighter whose wife threatens to leave him.  This guy wears leather work 
clothes and a catcher's chest protector and a lighted hard-hat, and carries 
a chrome shovel that he uses deftly as a weapon. "I shovel," he says.  
Macy's sincerity comes across perfectly;  he's perhaps the most humorous one 
of the bunch because we don't think of him as a comedian.
The Blue Raja is "an effete British superhero" who dresses in cape and 
turban (with no hint of blue) and throws forks and an occasional spoon.  
Never knives, though.  As with the personal life of The Shoveler, we get to 
see behind-the-scenes with Raja, and watch his officious mother ask what is 
going on in her grown son's room.  In a turn-about that's good for several 
chuckles, she ends up proud of him, giving him heirloom flatware to throw 
and asking him to do his British accent again.  Hank Azaria' voice and eyes, 
full of exaggeration, are also perfect in the role.
A casting coup was done with Geoffrey Rush.  This Academy Award winner goes 
just enough over-the-top with the fiendish Frankenstein, who dresses like a 
gothic transvestite and makes his ridiculous pronouncements in a German 
accent.  Too bad not many comic roles are nominated for Best Supporting 
Actor!
Worthy of mention is the vehicle used by the team - which is not called by 
the title epithet until very late - in their assault on the gates of 
Cassanova Frankenstein.  It's a Herkimer Battle Jitney, a half-sized bus 
that Mr. Furious pinches from the scrap yard where he works.  What a great 
name for a vehicle that looks both silly and awesome.
It's only in a couple of places that the film falls into the same potholes 
of cliché we've been fed by other stories.  There's a half-hearted romance 
between Mr. Furious and a waitress at a diner where the heroes eat and 
schmooze.  Claire Forlani is woefully underused as Monica the waitress, 
giving Mr. Furious first scowls and then looks of longing.  Further, for 
ordinary people who dress up in outlandish outfits, a couple of them 
actually seem to have super powers!  The Bowler, for instance, pulls out a 
Lucite ball in which the skull of her father is entombed.  She throws the 
ball with near-deadly effect, but many times the lurid-looking thing floats 
around by itself.  And you tell me:  doesn't Invisible Boy actually 
disappear, even though no one is watching?
Director Kinka Usher paces the film well, and the comic timing is what seals 
the success of the film.  Based on the Dark Horse comic, "Mystery Men" 
blends action and satire so smartly that it reaches a very wide audience.  
It's the kind of movie that piles up one-liners and visual jokes one on top 
of the next, so that a belly laugh is followed by a series of chuckles 
before the next belly laugh.  And it's surely a tribute to say there's not 
much laugh down-time.  If you want to see a knock-down funny film, you must 
be willing to knock down a film with funniness!


Author
JABII
Imagine a city where superheroes are a dime a dozen. They're all over the
place, crowding the costume shops and karate stores; tripping over each other
in an attempt to make a name for themselves. Unfotunately, all these
superheroes are also godawful at their jobs. This is the basic premise behind
the very amusing comic book superhero spoof "Mystrey Men". With an all star
cast, an often hilarious script, and great visuals, this is one of the few
truly good satires in recent memory.
Captain Amazing, Champion City's protector, has a problem. His funding is
slowly being cut by all the major companies which sponsor his crime fighting.
This is because he has captured or killed all the real super villains, and is
now reduced to fighting street punks. In an effort to revive his dwindling
career, he arranges for the release of his old nemesis, Cassanova Frankenstein.
His intention is to fight the villain in a climactic battle and win back
support. However, there's one small flaw in his plan. Frankenstein is
brilliant, and Amazing is a moron. Captured by Cassanova, Amazing's only hope
lies with a group of superhero wannabes. Mr. Furious, who seems to have the
power to get really mad; The Shoveler, who hits people with his shovel (imagine
that) Blue Raja, who throws forks with deadly accuracy; Invisible Boy, who is
only invisible if no one looks at him; The Bowler, who throws a bowling ball
filled with her father's skull; The Sphinx, who speaks like a rather dumbed
down version of Yoda; and The Spleen, who is an expert with, umm, gas. The
motley band attempts to free the real superhero, while making some sort of name
for themselves. 
For a long time, I was quite a comic book fan. I collected just about every
comic imaginable. However, there were certain things in them which always
rather bothered me. For example, why couldn't anyone tell that Clark Kent and
Superman were one and the same? Mystery Men covers that in a very amusing
discussion the heroes have while in a diner. The movie does, in fact, take so
much glee in poking fun at comic book styple heroes, that some of the gags run
on a bit too long. The Spleen, for instance, gets a little annoying by the
film's end. However, most of the humor is right on target, such as when the
heroes are creating their new costumes.
As for the acting, from a cast like this one expects the best, and in this
case, receives the best. All the actors appear to be having an absolute blast
with their roles. Hank Azaria was my absolute favorite as the Blue Raja,
speaking in a hilarious English accent, and constantly attempting to explain
why he has one when his name and costume are obviously Indian. The rest of the
cast are uniformly great, each character having odd litle quirks which never
failed to make the audience laugh uproariously. The only character who never
really seemed to find his niche was Invisible Boy, who basically sat in the
background through most of the film.
If you don't care for spoofs, don't see this movie. If you don't like comic
books, you might not enjoy this. Otherwise, try and catch "Mystery Men". It's
one of the best entries into the genre in recent memory, and earns four stars.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Pictures
 Director:  Kinka Usher
 Writer:  Neil Cuthbert and Brent Forrester, from Dark Horse
comic of Bob Burden
 Cast: Hank Azaria, Claire Forlani, Janeane Garofalo, Eddie
Izzard, Greg Kinnear, Jennifer Lewis, William H. Macy, Kel
Mitchell, Lena Olin, Paul Reubens, Geoffrey Rush, Ben
Stiller, Wes Studi, Tom Waits
   Do you know or did you ever like comic books?  That's like
saying did you ever like bubble gum, lollipops or cotton
candy.  Of course we all did, so the theory that your affinity
for a movie like "Mystery Men" depends on your attitude
toward the comics is irrelevant.  Unless you read The New
York Times and The Wall Street Journal at the age of eight,
you doubtless encountered Dick Tracy and, going back far
enough, The Captain and the Kids.  When I was a little one
back in the Jurassic Age, the comics of choice were
Superman, Superboy, Mary Marvel, Captain Marvel, Wonder
Woman, Plastic Man and Mad.  More recently the likes of X-
Men appeal to the hip kids in high school.  Now that we grant
the universal appeal of the genre, we can imagine that Kinka
Usher, who directed "Mystery Men" and Neil Cuthbert who
wrote the script (based on the Dark Horse Comic Book Series
of Bob Burden) are aficionados of these picture magazines. 
"Mystery Men" is both a parody and a veneration of these
little novels.  Unlike some of the humorless books
themselves, this house of Usher is loaded with some witty
lines, 
puns and visual gags, and since the violence is of the
Daffy-Duck
cartoonish kinds, parents should not fear to take their little
ones to the PG-13 show.  
   Despite the presence of strong actors known to just about
every moviegoer, the picture is way overlong for what is
essentially a one-joke property.  The story is of the typical
hero-villain sort with mostly inept champions chasing after a
particularly professional and off-the-wall criminal who seeks
to destroy the city he lives in for the pure fun of doing so.
   As Captain Amazing, Greg Kinnear plays a dashing Rudy
Giuliani type who has rid his town, Champion City, of crime, a
man who in his daily life is a bespectacled multimillionaire
named Lance (after Clark Kent or Bruce Wayne).  Sickened
after losing the sponsorship of Pepsi Cola (he wears a
uniform filled with buttons of various products whose
corporate officers pay him), he is determined to allow at least
one bad guy to terrorize the metropolis once again.  After all,
where would the police--or superheroes--be if they wiped out
crime and thereby put themselves out of jobs?  He makes
sure that his old nemesis, Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey
Rush) is paroled knowing that the madman will assemble a
gang of terrorists and create havoc anew, thereby giving
himself and a few wannabees something to do.  
   The alleged fun comes from the second-tier superheroes,
all good people but each almost thoroughly inept.  They
include the effete Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), who lives with his
mother and is expert at flinging forks and spoons at the
sources of evil; Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller, who depends on his
perpetual rage to drum up the strength to fight); The Shoveler
(William H. Macy, who looks like a coal miner and wears his
shovel proudly across his back as an icon of weaponry); The
Spleen (Paul Reubens, who depends on his lactose
intolerance to knock out his opponents); and The Bowler
(Janeane Garofalo--whose weapon is a bowling with the skull
of her father inside, giving the sphere a life of its own).  
   Despite the attendance of sharp lines like The Bowler's "I
would like to dedicate my victory to supporters of local music
and those who seek out independent films," the movie--which
goes on endlessly reinventing the wheel in a progression of
silly, unfunny episodes of gauche good guys battling a
menacing mental case--is an unholy muddle of the usual
special effects.  These performers have been seen in far
better roles. Bill Macy was superb on stage in "Oleanna," Ben
Stiller was super in indies like "Reality Bites," and Geoffrey
Rush totally outta sight as a genuinely villainous conspirator
in his "Elizabeth" role and a genuinely insane pianist in
"Shine."  One can hope only that the young people in the
audience will become involved in the work of these sharp
performers and take in some of the real pictures for which
they will inevitably be called upon.

Author
Michael Elliott
DIRECTED BY:     Kinka Usher
STARRING:        Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo, Greg Kinnear, William H.
Macy, Paul Reubens, Geoffrey Rush, Ben Stiller
WRITTEN BY:      Neil Cuthbert
RATED:           PG-13 for comic action violence and crude humor
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:      2 Corinthians 2:11, Ecclesiastes 4:9-12, 1 Corinthians
12:18-27
For every super hero there are a hundred wannabees. In the super hero
business, wannabees are those good hearted men and women with something
less than superpowers who nonetheless have a burning desire to fight
crime and avenge the righteous. MYSTERY MEN is a film about them.  
Champion City already has its resident protector. But Captain Amazing
(Greg Kinnear, AS GOOD AS IT GETS), his uniform tattooed with product
endorsements, has done his job so well, there simply aren't any super
villains left to vanquish. Enter Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush,
ELIZABETH) who easily tricks the captain and holds him captive while he
makes plans to destroy the city. 
With Captain Amazing incapacitated, the only ones standing in
Frankenstein's way are our would-be heroes: Six kooks in funny looking
costumes. They are: The Shoveler (William H. Macy, A CIVIL ACTION),
expert with a spade, not so good explaining his pastime activities to
his wife; Mr. Furious (Jerry Stiller, THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY)
whose only talent seems to be in getting mad; The Blue Raja (Hank
Azaria, GODZILLA) who flings his mother's flatware (forks and spoons
only) with pinpoint accuracy; The Bowler (Janeane Garofalo, PERMANENT
MIDNIGHT) who converses with her father's skull encased in her bowling
ball; The Spleen (Paul Reubens, PEEWEE'S BIG ADVENTURE) whose flatulence
is so noxious it literally knocks out his opponents; and The Invisible
Boy (Kel Mitchell, GOOD BURGER) who can only turn invisible if no one
looks at him. 
Together, these dimwitted defenders of truth and justice, under the
guidance of The Sphinx (Wes Studi, DEEP RISING) who talks in a fortune
cookie language, ("He who questions training only trains himself to ask
questions"), must rise to the challenge of saving their city and their
city's hero from certain doom. 
MYSTERY MEN is based on the DARK HORSE comic books by Bob Burden. With
such an unquestionably talented cast as has been assembled, it is
disappointing to say that this is not a better film. The problem lies
primarily with director Kinka Usher who is making his feature film
debut. Mr.  Usher is perhaps best known for his award winning talking
Chihuahua Taco Bell commercials. No doubt he has learned that capturing
an audience's attention for 30 seconds is a lot easier than doing the
same over a 90 minute span. 
The script is weak, the humor rather puerile, and the actors, excepting
the work of Mr. Kinnear and Mr. Macy, seem lost in a sea of good ideas
gone bad. Mr. Kinnear is amusingly smug as the corporate sponsored
Captain Amazing. Mr. Macy, as the crewcut wearing, shovel-wielding
epitome of a working man, wears his idealistic values on his sleeve. His
consistency, as a character, is part of the glue that keeps this movie
from falling completely apart. 
A film of this scope needed a much firmer hand and clearer vision than
Mr. Usher provided. The concept is one that is actually quite
appealing... Working class men and women who have unusual yet obviously
developed skills, acting out the role of "super-hero" to benefit a
society that barely is aware of their existence. Their success comes
only from their working in unison. They must combine their various
talents in order to have any possibility to defeat their common foe. 
Followers of Christ must work in the same manner. By combining our
individual talents, knowledge and abilities, we lend support and
strength to each other's weaknesses. Together, with God, we have the
prevailing strength necessary to stand against our spiritual enemy. The
scriptures say: 
It is folly to enter into the spiritual competition alone. As the Sphinx
might say: "He who fails to stand with team, will stand to fail alone." 

Author
James Brundage
Starring Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo, Ben Stiller, William H. Macy, Kel
Mitchell, Paul Reubens, Wes Stuidi, Greg Kinnear, Lena Olin, Geoffrey Rush,
Tom Waits, Eddie Izzard and Claire Forlani
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 In the words of Lisa Simpson, "the few, the proud, the geeky."  Indeed,
these three adjectives are as good descriptions for the completely likeable
band of misfits put forth in Mystery Men.
 In Champion City, the superhero market is pretty much cornered by Captain
Amazing (Greg Kinnear).  The villains are all defeated... crime is down...
the corporate sponsors are backing out.  Yes, you heard right, Captain
Amazing is a walking, talking, crime fighting ad for toothpaste and soda.
Striding around in an expensive suit, he saves the day every chance he can
for the celebrity endorsements he gets to do.
Meanwhile, Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), master of silverware, The Shoveler
(William H. Macy), master of dirt moving, and Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller),
master of getting really pissed, roam the streets at night looking to win a
battle.  Of course, they fail every single time, but who really cares?
 They spend each night roaming around, getting stabbed with their own forks
or hit with their own shovels and heading to the local cafe for coffee
served by the attractive waitress Monica (Claire Forlani), whom Mr. Furious
has a crush on.
 Back to the wonderful antics of Captain Amazing, who has all of the
endorsements and all of the intelligence as the average MAW (Model Actor
Whatever).  Using his power as his real identity, he sets free Casanova
Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) so that the ensuing battles will help get him
back the precious Pepsi endorsement that he has just lost.  Only one
problem, he has the general IQ of a tack and soon finds himself held
prisoner.
 And the Mystery Men (although they can never decide on a name to give
themselves) have to save the day.
 The begin recruiting super heroes with bizarre powers such as Invisible Boy
(Kel Mitchell), who can only become invisible whenever no one is looking at
him and he's not looking at himself.  Invisible Boy helps them recruit an
entire bunch including The Spleen (Paul Reubens), master of flatulence, The
Bowler, who keeps her father's skull encased in a pink bowling ball, and The
Sphinx, whose power remains a mystery.
They get non-lethal weapons from a the mad scientist Doc Heller (Tom Waits)
and then have to face Casanova Frankestien, Tony P. (Eddie Izzard) and the
Disco Gang before a hideous weapon destroys Champion City.
 In case your wondering why the hell I would spend about 400 words on  plot,
the answer is simple: plot alone makes Mystery Men worth seeing.  It's so
ungodly wacky, so hilarious in its premise that one cannot help but laugh.
Were that not enough to carry a movie (and past films have proved that
movies can be carried on much less), the film is blessed with a perfect
comic timing that makes all of the wordplays and jokes pass off
effortlessly.  A good deal of slapstick helps keep oh ye of little brains
occupied while the juicer cerebellum focuses on the more intelligent attacks
on the nature of comic books in general (the reason that no one recognizes
super heroes who merely change from having glasses to not having glasses)
and the type of bizarre powers that are featured in Marvel or DC comic
books.
 Of all of the scenes in the film, I would have to say that the most
memorable remains when they are searching for qualified heroes.  On the list
are PMS Avenger ("I work four days a month, you have a problem with that?"),
Pencil Man and Pencil Boy, and Ballerina Man.  I don't think I have to tell
you any more how wacky and enjoyable Mystery Men is.  Besides, the rest you
should see for yourself.

Author
Walter Frith
'Mystery Men' has all of the ingredients of a typical 1990's film that looks
like an adult comic book layered with special effects.  Naturally it's all
computerized and has paid advertising seen throughout the film by the
corporate states of America.  The hero, Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear) wears
his outfit plastered with ads from sponsors and the film's bizarre visuals
look in many cases like 'Batman' and 'Blade Runner' on LSD.
Now that you have an idea of how it looks, it's important to tell you how it
feels.  There are moments of sporadic laughter but the film has clumsy
execution and an even clumsier tone.  The way the heroes carry out their
mission is unconvincing in the face of unspeakable evil and no one would
believe for a second that they could overcome their adversaries and save the
day for the forces of good.
Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller), the Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), the Bowler (Janeane
Garofalo), the Shoveler (William H. Macy), Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell), the
Spleen (Paul Reubens) are a team of wannabe heroes.  Some of them have fake
accents, some use the tools of mere mortals and in general look like a gang
of club members who got together in one afternoon and decided to be crime
fighters and went to the nearest garage sale to get their arsenal of
weapons.  Forks, shovels and other oddities are used and in the opening
scene we find they need a lot of work when they try and save a seniors home
from a group of invading meanies.  The original members of the group are Mr
Furious, the Blue Raja and the Shoveler.  They are joined later by the
Bowler, Invisible Boy and the Spleen.  The most intriguing member of the
group is the Bowler (Garofolo) who has the skull of her dead father inside
her ball and brags effortlessly that "The guy at the pro shop did it for
me."
When Captain Amazing is held captive in the evil clutches of Casanova
Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush), the heroes try and save him but have to deal
with the goons aiding the chief bad guy.  Casanova Frankenstein's plot is to
destroy the city that kept him in an insane asylum for many torturous years.
With his ego the size a dozen pro athletes, some would argue that Captain
Amazing's eventual fate is justice in the making while the amateurs get all
the deserving glory.
Director Kinka Usher catapults the film like a guided missile gone awry.  I
enjoyed some of the antics and the way it made me laugh from time to time
but overall I just couldn't find enough to sustain a film with a running
length of 121 minutes.  Neil Cuthbert is the author of the film's screenplay
based on the comic book series Dark Horse created by Bob Burden.
In my review of 1998's 'There's Something About Mary', I criticized the film
for going too far in its display of overly crude material and I said that
Ben Stiller was rather flat and unfunny.  In 'Mystery Men' I found that his
performance as the most screwed up hero probably looked good on paper but
his execution of it is comparable to the least funny member of the original
Three Stooges.  The rest of the cast members are very flat and the fact that
there are definitely too many of them makes it hard to root for any single
one of them.
Throughout the history of film, many have argued that some material just
isn't capable of being filmed.  Some literature worked better in plain text
on paper.  Some of it looks better as images in squares known as comic books
and while special effects have worked marvelously for many films in the
nineties, just as many of them have suffered from overkill and have passed
themselves off as flash over substance.  'Mystery Men' may be 1999's
ultimate definition of that.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
As superheroes, it's hard enough fighting vicious villains without
having the local cops ridicule you as being merely a group of wannabes.
And with Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear) garnering all of the television
coverage and concomitant product endorsements, it's almost enough to
make you want to hang up your kitschy costume and return to a normal
lifestyle.
Kinka Usher's hyperactive spoof of comic book action heroes, MYSTERY
MEN, is never less than cute.  Its shortcoming is that Neil Cuthbert's
superficial script never goes beyond cute.  You can count the big laughs
on a single hand, but the movie never fails to provide good
entertainment.  And even if it never wows you, at least the risk taking
and imaginative story with its good-spirited hijinks will never
disappoint you either.  Think of it as BATMAN with a heart.  The
production design and art direction by BLADE's Kirk M. Petruccelli and
Barry Chusid are reminiscent of the look of the Tim Burton BATMANs.
Captain Amazing, who has just lost his Pepsi endorsement but not his
power, has a predicament.  Thanks to his effectiveness, there just
aren't enough evil challengers left in Champion City.  Forced to lower
himself to fighting minor bad guys at a nursing home, he needs a better
class of opponents.  Otherwise, more of his sponsors, whose logos he
wears on his black jumpsuit, will drop him like they would a soap opera
with falling market share.
Captain Amazing turns to his old nemesis, Casanova Frankenstein
(Geoffrey Rush), to save the day.  Although Frankenstein is currently
imprisoned in a mental institution for his dastardly deeds, this proves
little impediment to Captain Amazing's plan for battle.
While the titans are contesting the high ground, the story's ragtag band
of wannabes are winning the hearts of the audience, if not the citizens
of Champion City, as their track record does not inspire confidence.
The founders of this unnamed band, later to be referred to as the
Mystery Men, are some very unlikely heroes.  The original members of the
group include: the Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), the master of cutlery --
throwing forks and spoons but eschewing knives; the Shoveler (William H.
Macy), who wears a yellow miner's hat and swings a mean shovel; and Mr.
Furious (Ben Stiller), an angry, biker guy who drives a
"Harley-compatible motorcycle."  (For the record, I drive a
Rolls-Royce-compatible automobile.)
"We're the other guys," the sincerely serious and sweetly shy Shoveler
explains, "We're the guys nobody bets on."  When the need arises, he's
willing to rise to any challenge, even though his wife keeps threatening
to divorce him because of all of his silly superhero stuff.  "We've got
a blind date with destiny, and it looks like she's ordered the lobster,"
he says to arouse his fellow wannabes to battle.  The movie has the good
sense to never take itself seriously, making the most ridiculous lines
the best.
Some even weirder recruits join them.  Kel Mitchell plays a
comic-worshiping kid known as Invisible Boy.  His claim to fame is that
he can make himself invisible.  There is only this one small catch.
While he's invisible, he can see himself, but if anyone else looks, he
becomes visible again.  The creative story manages to find a use for
this highly limited talent.
The Spleen (Paul Reubens) produces noxious gas as his weapon, which
attracts an amorous skunk.  It's a good sign when a movie is able to
find something a little different to do with the overworked flatulence
jokes.
Wes Studi plays their new leader, The Sphinx, who trains them in
everything from group hugs to sewing.  Most of all, he provides them
with words of wisdom to speak to their inner superhero child.  ("You
must be like the wolf pack and not the six-pack."  "He who quits
training, only trains himself to quit.")  All of this cliched wisdom
drives the word-challenged Mr. Furious into his signature fits of anger.
"I don't need a compass to tell me which way the sun shines," he tells
the Sphinx.
As perhaps the funniest of the lot, Janeane Garofalo plays the Bowler.
She is interviewed last on a day when the guys talk to a host of
superhero pretenders (the Waffleman, the Pencilhead, the Squeegeeman,
the Ballerinaman and the PMS Avenger among others).  Stiller doesn't do
much with his part, except in his scenes with Garofalo.  Together, their
snappy, sarcastic chemistry steals the scenes.
There's a plot, but it doesn't really matter.  The movie just jumps from
one nice visual to another.  Every once and awhile, the scenes are funny
enough to produce outright laughter.  The now moribund BATMAN series
could use some doses of MYSTERY MEN's self-mocking humor.  There isn't
much to MYSTERY MEN, but what there is will keep a smile on your face.
MYSTERY MEN runs 1:52.  It is rated PG-13 for comic action violence and
crude humor and would be fine for kids 8 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, liked it and gave it ** 1/2.  He thought it was
an imaginative film with a lot of action.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
In the neon-heavy metropolis of Champion City, crime has been all but
quashed by the strong arm of justice possessed by the local superhero,
Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear). Due to his ability to fight crime,
there hasn't been much need for him anymore.  His latest act of heroism
involves rounding up a group of goggle-wearing punks that disrupt a
party at a nursing home.  This is hardly the stuff of superhero legend
and the Captain knows it.  His solution is to recommend the release of
one of his archenemies, Dr. Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush), from
his prison sentence.  Perhaps a renewed battle of good versus evil will
elevate his status among the people.  This would not only keep his ego
healthy, but would keep his publicist happy as well.  Yes, a publicist.
 After all, you won't be popular just because you're super-strong and
can fly like a bird.
`Mystery Men' takes a comedic look at the life of a superhero.  These
guys aren't millionaire playboys.  Rather, as in Captain Amazing's
case, they need advertising sponsors to defray the cost of
crimefighting.  It's probably pretty expensive dry cleaning those
outfits.  Captain Amazing wears a suit covered with so many sponsor
patches that you're not sure whether he's a crimefighter or a stock car
racer.  Alas, Amazing's plan backfires and now the evil Dr.
Frankenstein holds him captive.  Luckily, within Champion City are a
slew of Amazing wannabes that also wants to fight crime.  They include
Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller) whose power seems to be making empty threats
while seething with anger; Blue Raja (Hank Azaria) who can throw forks
with amazing accuracy and strength; and The Shoveler (William H. Macy)
who whacks people with a huge spade.  Why don't these guys deserve more
credit for their crimefighting efforts?  Probably it's because they are
terrible at it.  They wind up hurting each other more than the bad
guys. But soon, these three half-baked heroes will discover that the
fate of Champion City will be in their hands.
But they need help, and eventually enlist Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell)
who can only turn invisible when you don't look at him, The Bowler
(Janeane Garofalo) who has a bowling ball with a mind  skull actually
 of its own, and The Spleen (Paul Reubens) whose weapon is noxious
gusts of flatulence.  It's a pretty strange assortment of heroes who
will be saving us all, but at least they didn't recruit other
questionable heroes like Waffleman (who hits people with a griddle
pan), the Pencilhead (who erases crime), or PMS Avenger (who only works
4 days a week).  To channel their energy and to develop their skills in
preparation for the big battle with Frankenstein, they accept tutelage
from The Sphinx (Wes Studi) who is a fountain of stupid aphorisms.  He
says things like `learn to control your rage our your rage will control
you' and `be a part of the wolf pack and not part of a six pack.'  
At its heart, Mystery Men has some clever ideas about what the average
blue-collar' crimefighter is like.  My favorite scene was when these
three contemplate the true identity of Captain Amazing.  Though Amazing
and his alter ego look obviously identical, when one wears glasses, the
resemblance disappears!  Much of the script is written to take
advantage of the comedic gifts of Stiller's dysfunctionality and
Garofalo's charm.  But ideas and words are not enough.  It becomes very
apparent that this film has neither direction nor structure to speak
of.  The abundance of characters makes this film chaotic at times. 
Couple this with a lot of swirling special effects, the result is a
film that's too cluttered to enjoy.  It almost made me want to leap off
a tall building in a single bound.  How the likes of Mr. Furious and
his crimefighting sophomores manage to actually save the world is a
complete mystery to me.

Author
John Sylva
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
The horror genre was spoofed in 1996's Scream.  The "mob" genre was spoofed in
1998's Mafia!  Virtually every genre has been spoofed at one time or another,
but what about the comic book/super hero genre?  Don't worry, the Mystery Men
are here!  Mystery Men, the directorial debut of Kinka Usher, who has directed
the talking Taco Bell Chihuahua ads, among other television commercials,
features one of the best ensemble casts every assembled featuring a handful of
today's most talented and popular stars.  The premise is great, original- too
bad screenplay writer Neil Cuthbert had to screw up what could have been the
year's best comedy.
Welcome to Champion City, ala Batman's "Gotham City", a high tech, futuristic
town, which has been under the guard of the heroic Captain Amazing (Greg
Kinnear), who bares exact resemblance to the city's wealthiest man, Lance
Harbor, but no one can figure out who Captain Amazing is.  Lance Harbor wears
glasses, Captain Amazing doesn't.  I wonder who Captain Amazing could be?  This
clever gag comes from Batman as well, as Bruce Wayne, who is a billionaire, and
also Batman, had the identical looks of the caped crusader, and the same voice,
but Gotham City could never figure out who Batman was.
Meanwhile, at the city's cuckoo hospital, Dr. Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey
Rush) is released, after he is declared "cured." (He tried to destroy Champion
City.)  Frankenstein takes Captain Amazing hostage, taking away the city's
protection, as a part of his plan to destroy Champion City.  Hearing of Captain
Amazing's disappearance, three wannabe super heroes, Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller),
Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), and The Shoveler (William H. Macy), decide they must
retain Captain Amazing, but not without help from the city's other talented
super heroes.  The Bowler (Janeane Garofalo), The Spleen (Paul "Pee Wee Herman"
Reubens), and Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell) jump on board the talented group
that plans to save the Champion City.
With the "ticking time bomb of fury" Mr. Furious, the shoveling talents of The
Shoveler, the bowling ball with The Bowler's father's head encased that has a
mind of its own, the flaming flatulence from The Spleen, the capability to
disappear when no ones looking by Invisible Boy, and the spoon and fork
wielding Blue Raja, The Mystery Men are prepared to do what is needed to carry
out their difficult task.  Doing so will require paying a visit to Dr. Heller
(Tom Waits), who will supply the misfit super heroes with weapons, and also The
Sphinx (Wes Studi), who will guide them in the use of their powers, and working
as a team, ala Professor X, who teaches a team of mutants how to use their
powers in the comic X-Men.
The film starts off on a good note, with the wise cracking Greg Kinnear doing
what he does best, comedy, and when the new super heroes, who The Shoveler
calls "the other guys", first meet.  From here, Mystery Men turns more into the
genre of film it is spoofing, with only a few gags pulled here and there,
creating a lighter super hero/action movie than the regulars, such as 1997's
Batman and Robin, but Mystery Men's clever sequences are washed out by the time
this 122 minute film's credits roll.
Mystery Men, one of three particularly clever, comedic films released this
summer (Dick is the other one), doesn't live up to hype, or the wonderful cast,
but I recommend  it, as when gags are pulled, they are hilarious, and every
cast member and character, excluding Invisible Boy, adds their share to this
fun movie.  Most laughs come from The Spleen, whose voice does become an
annoyance at times, but his flaming flatulence is funny enough to cancel out
any negative thoughts that might have come to mind during the film.  
Janeane Garofalo, one of today's funniest actresses, is great in her
underwritten role, and takes the two dimensional character that the screenplay
gives her, and turns it into three.  I can always count on Garafalo to bring me
laughs, whether it be her performance as the outrageously rude Heather Mooney
in 1997's Romy and Michele's High School Reunion, are watching her talk to her
dad's skull here in Mystery Men, Garofalo always delivers.  Garofalo, who also
up showed Uma Thurman in 1996's The Truth About Cats And Dogs, has around ten
movies coming out in the next year, so make note of each and everyone of them,
and seek them out immediately.
William H. Macy, who steals the show in virtually every movie he is a part of
(1998's Pleasantville and Psycho), is given some acting competition here in
Mystery Men, with Garafalo, Stiller, and Rush making it impossible for him to
steal Mystery Men, but he still gives a solid, hilarious performance, as he
delivers one liners such as "God gave me a gift. I shovel well," every few
moments.
Geoffrey Rush, one of my personal favorite actors, brightens up with Mystery
Men, after performing in two of 1998s darker films that were in the running for
Best Picture at the Oscars, Shakespeare in Love and Elizabeth.  Rush isn't
given enough to do with the screenplay, creating a villain which isn't so
villainous, but Rush does what he can.
The talented Ben Stiller is great here, especially in the sequence in which the
Mystery Men attack Frankenstein's limo, and shows Hollywood the great talent
that he has, which he is only marginally able to show in 1998's There's
Something About Mary, which has a weak screenplay that doesn't give Stiller
enough to do.  Stiller's character isn't even threatening here in Mystery Men,
which makes the film funnier when Stiller unleashes his power- extreme anger. 
Mr. Furious takes himself extremely seriously, but comes off as a joke.  I mean
what is he going to do? Yell at you?
Mr. Furious isn't the least threatening character though, that title would go
to Invisible Boy, who is always tagging along, but hardly says anything or does
anything.  Kel Mitchell, a Nickolodeon star that is popular among young
children, is given nothing do do with the screenplay, therefore making it
impossible to judge his performance.  Seeing him perform on Nickelodeon's "All
That", I know he is a talented actor, and deserves better roles than Invisible
Boy.
Last but not least is Blue Raja, who delivers an abundance of laughs, while he
throws his forks and spoons rapidly, not for one second coming off
intimidating.  The relationship between Blue Raja and the other characters,
including his confused mother, is downright hilarious.  At one point, Blue
Raja's mother tells him, "I wanted to save these for your wedding day," as she
hands him silverware for his journey against Frankenstein.
Mystery Men doesn't take itself seriously, but the characters do, and that's
what makes Mystery Men worth admission price.  Luckily, the film isn't just
another "summer movie," it's a funny, fun, and satisfying motion picture.  The
outstanding visuals had me in awe for the entire running time, as the vibrant
Champion City bursts with color and brightness, creating an environment that
makes the viewer want to reside there.  Mystery Men had potential to be a cult
classic, but like many potentially wonderful movies, this one has a major flaw,
the screenplay.  Kinka Usher's direction is fun, fast, and smart, with in your
face camera angles, and quick transition from scene to scene.  The cast is what
powers Mystery Men the most, as the performers out perform the screenplay,
making the best of their roles.  Hopefully, Mystery Men will be a path to an
entire saga of Mystery Men films.  Heck- It would be a lot better than 100
Batmans, eh?
The Bottom Line- It will remain a "mystery" why the screenplay went so wrong,
but the brilliant visuals and a hip cast make Mystery Men a fun experience.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Ben Stiller, William H. Macy, Hank Azaria, Paul Reubens, Jeneane
Garafolo Greg Kinnear, Geoffrey Rush, Claire Forlani, Kel Mitchell, Wes Studi,
Pras, Eddie Izzard, Tom Waits, Artie Lange, Lena Olin
It should have been a classic. A great cast of respected supporting actors. An
interesting premise of loser comic book characters. However, "Mystery Men"
proved to be one of the great disappointments of 1999. The jokes were bland and
hackneyed from talents who have previously made audiences laugh with their
unique rituals. The number of cliches and shallow characters made the film
difficult to sit through seriously hurting its attempt of having a fast paced
premise. The script tried to deliver a series of small jokes throughout the
film but without a big laugh-out-loud joke and mediocre small jokes, it failed
miserably at being entertaining at all. The jokes were not funny for a number
of reasons. They had been used a number of times before in previous films, the
best ones, which were mediocre to begin with, were ruined in the trailer, and
the expectation of laughing at clever, unique gags from clever unique comedians
when there were none to laugh at greatly damaged the film. "Mystery Men" might
have worked if it was an ensemble cast of newcomers trying to break into the
business. But with veterans doing this kind of junk, it really questioned
whether their other work was as funny as originally thought. Thankfully most
actors in this movie will appear in five other movies before the new year
arrives to help viewers forget this little movie. 
The film follows a band of wannabe superheroes living in a wannabe Gotham City
who are ridiculed by their fellow citizens and villains because of their
clumsiness and failure to save they day and capture the bad guy. The fact is
these pathetic losers are not needed because their city already has a
successful superhero, Captain Amazing, who has recently captured every
evil-doer in the city. Captain Amazing (played terribly by an uninspired Greg
Kinnear), because of his success in the past, is worried that he will lose
popularity. After freeing one of the most notorious bad guys in the city
(Geoffrey Rush, overacting just a bit too much) to keep himself busy, things
get out of hand when Captain Amazing is captured. It is up to the wannabe
superheroes to save the day. By the time this section of the plot is finished,
the interest for what happens (if you haven't already figured it out) is very
low. There are very few scenes which catch the viewers complete attention. The
first scene in the film, which shows the wannabes trying to save the day, feels
like it was seriously edited down. Right when it was beginning to become
slightly funny seeing these actors get humiliated at an old folk's home by some
masked goons, Captain Amazing comes in and saves the dayor ruins the movie.
Instead of editing this scene, more editing should have been done in areas such
as the unnecessary romance between Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller) and Monica, a
waitress(Claire Forlani) or the vast majority of the film, which is the heroes
talking at a coffee table about how their day was. A simple rule: More silly
action is needed in order to make a silly action movie work. 
Another major problem with "Mystery Men" is that every actor in it seemed very
uncomfortable and consequently gave terrible performances. The film depended on
its cast to work fluently together, like a bunch of old friends working
together in an amiable reunion. However, most characters seemed like they did
not even want to be in this film or at least the script made it seem this way.
To pull one of the actors in this film randomly out of a hat, Paul Reubens, who
disappeared from acting to everyone's joy, returns here leaving very little to
be impressed about. As a wannabe who uses flatulence for a weapon, all of his
jokes must therefore be fart jokes. Fart jokes that have all been heard before
and will inevitably be heard again in future films thanks to the success of
"American Pie" and "There's Something About Mary." 
"Mystery Men" drags on towards the end to a point where anything else in the
world is more entertaining. Anyone with a brain knows each one of the heroes is
going to be successful at their talent in the end and each one is going to
contribute in a helpful way. So why continue to watch? This film is far from a
worthy guilty pleasure. "Mystery Men" indeed does this and every time a
character succeeds another one congratulates him and says "I knew you could do
it!" "Mystery Men" fails in every category it attempts to pass. What makes this
film so bad is that it had the potential to be wonderful and unforgettable.
Terrible acting, terrible script, and a terrible waste of time changes opinions
about all of these actors. "I'm unpredictable!" an overexcited Ben Stiller
shouts out. No Ben, you're the complete opposite.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Mystery Men
Rated [PG-13], 100 minutes
Starring Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo, Greg Kinnear, William H. Macy,
Kel Mitchell, Paul Reubens, Geoffrey Rush, Ben Stiller, Wes Studi
Screenplay by Neil Cuthbert
Based on the comic by Bob Burden
Directed by Kinka Usher
website: http://www.mysterymen.com
IN SHORT: Inferior Five via Not Brand Ecch!
If it isn't obvious from the X-Men Movie updates on the homepage, Cranky
is deeply into comic books. The creative team behind Mystery Men, from
Bob Burden (who created the team as part of his Flaming Carrot book) to
the folks at Dark Horse (who have a better track record with bringing
comics to the bigscreen, and vice versa, than any of the Big Three) have
peppered this flick with lots of in-jokes that will be readily apparent
to any fanboy. That being said, no knowledge of comic history is
necessary to enjoy the world of Champion City and its defender, Captain
Amazing (Greg Kinnear).
The Captain has done such a good job protecting his city that the only
bad guys left are bands of two-bit villains who steal dentures out of
the mouths of retirees. Crime is down, as are revenues from products
like Pepsi and Mighty White Toothpaste, whose logos make the Captain's
uniform look like that of a stock car race driver. Only the return of an
evil villain, like the scurrilous Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush)
can improve the bottom line so, with the aid of bespectacled billionaire
Lance Hunt (who looks remarkably like Greg Kinnear ), the Captain
engineers the parole of his arch enemy and prepares for the epic battle
that will mark the Millennium. The Captain, it must be said, is quite
full of himself. That means Champion City will soon be without a
champion.
If the villains of Champion City are two bit, the remaining superheroes
are even less. There's Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller) possessed of an anger
and rage that makes him, um, angry. There's The Blue Raja (Hank Azaria),
an effeminate British accented good guy whose deadly aim with forks and
spoons (no knives -- knives are dangerous and could hurt someone) is
less than deadly. He's not really effeminate, by the way, its just part
of his superhero act. Last up is The Shoveler (William H. Macy) who
wears a catcher's chest protector and has a shovel.
Turning the superhero genre on its ear yields a flick that is,
thematically, visually and aurally delightful. Virtually all of the
heroes are emotional misfits, Mr. Furious and the Blue Raja both have
problems with their moms. The Shoveler has a wife and two kids to
support (and Mrs. Shoveler has had just about enough). The production
design of Champion City is breathtaking. The high tech talk coming out
of the mouths of the heroes (neuro-laser-hossenpfeffer-chopper indeed)
is dead on loving parody of comic book excess. As in the comics, to save
the day, a super-team of heroes must be built. That means open
auditions, held in the backyard of The Shoveler's house. What a motley
group ...
The remaining superheroes, all third string, include The Bowler (Janeane
Garafalo) whose bowling ball contains her dad's skull; The Spleen (Paul
Reubens), whose silent but deadly power yields the funniest fart joke of
the summer; Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell) whose invisibility power works
only if no one is looking at him; and the mysterious The Sphinx (Wes
Studi), whose telekinetic power split guns in two with and who trains
our team of misfits with instructional dialog that would have been at
home amidst the gobbledygook heard in The Matrix. In this case, it's
supposed to be funny. Rounding off the cast is Tom Waits as the good guy
weapons designer whose guns won't kill; Eddie Izzard (currently star of
an HBO comedy special) and Fugee music star Pras as the murderous bad
guys, the Disco Boys. You know they're bad -- they use guns.
Tomake comic heroes work, you've got to play 'em straight. William H.
Macy is the center of the team, a DC-style man in a Marvel-style group
wracked by self-doubt. Janeane Garofalo, above all the rest, nails the
schizophrenic identity shtick that accompanies the super-life.
Basically, she still discusses her actions with her dad. See it and
believe it.
Mystery Men gently pokes fun at Superman, Batman, the X-Men and at least
one teevee SF superhero (telling would spoil the surprise) and is
definitely one for us boys. On the downside, this is a popcorn flick
that may be too clever for its own good. There's not enough in it to
keep you glued to your seats -- Cranky's gut feeling is that
Frankenstein just isn't bad enough -- ducking out in the middle won't
mean you'll anything vital but, c'mon folks, this kind of cast in this
kind of flick is just too tempting to avoid.
Parents to whose kids Kel Mitchell is a superstar (from Nickelodeon's
Kenan and Kel series) will find no reason to keep their kids away from
the flick, though some of the superhero dialog shtick may confuse 'em.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Mystery Men, he would have paid...
Dateflick level. Mystery Men is terrific eye candy and a fine popcorn
movie if you've got a little boy child locked away inside. There's
nothing here that wouldn't work fine on the little screen, which should
mean a lower rating on the Cranky scale, but it's summertime and lite is
good.
Cast members William H. Macy, Ben Stiller, Janeane Garofalo, Geoffrey
Rush and Paul Reubens (formerly known as Pee Wee Herman) all reveal that
they know diddle about comic books in their Cranky CriticŽ StarTalk. A
good time was had by all.
Best non-comics in-joke: Real life magician Ricky Jay saying to Captain
Amazing: "I'm a publicist, not a magician!"
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š by, Chuck
Schwartz. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Kinka Usher. 
Cast: Ben Stiller, William H. Macy, Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo, Kel 
Mitchell, Paul Reubens, Greg Kinnear, Geoffrey Rush, Wes Studi, Tom Waits, 
Claire Forlani, Eddie Izzard, Jenifer Lewis, Lena Olin.
1999 - 121 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for comic violence and profanity).
Reviewed August 7, 1999.
I'm not sure who director Kinka Usher is, but thanks to him and screenwriter 
Neil Cuthbert, the superhero comedy, "Mystery Men," is the most depressing 
cinematic experience of the year. Not the worst ("Inspector Gadget" and "Wing 
Commander" narrowly edge it out on that disreputable title), but easily the 
most dreary and saddening, as we are forced to watch a cast of fabulous 
actors, usually appearing in smart independent films, flounder within a movie 
that gives none of them an actual distinctive character to work with or, for 
that matter, anything at all to do, aside from be continuously humiliated by 
the absolute inanity of the screenplay.
An obvious take-off of "Batman" and "Superman," "Mystery Men" sets us smack 
dab in the middle of Champion City, as if it was a rejected set from Joel 
Schumacher's version of Gotham City. When the city's reigning superhero, 
Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear), is kidnapped by arch-nemesis Casanova 
Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush), it is up to a squadron of loser superheroes to 
save him, all of which have their own separate power or talent (if you can 
even call it that). There's Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller), the Shoveler (William 
H. Macy), and the Blue Raja (Hank Azaria, wielding lethal forks and spoons 
upon the enemy). Saving the likes of Captain Amazing, however, is going to 
take more than three rejects, so coming to their aide are three more wannabe 
superheroes--Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell),a teen who claims he can become 
invisible "only when nobody is looking"; the Spleen (Paul Reubens), who 
knocks people out with his rancid flatulence; and the Bowler (Janeane 
Garofalo), equipped with a see-through bowling ball that holds her beloved 
father's skull inside. Are these six characters enough to overcome Casanova 
Frankenstein? Do dogs bark? Do cats meow? Do pigs snort? I rest my case.
The almost laughably unfunny jokes in "Mystery Men" is cause enough to 
question the intelligence of its thought-to-be superb cast. Let's take a look 
at the actors, while we're at it: Ben Stiller ("There's Something About 
Mary," "Your Friends and Neighbors"), Janeane Garofalo ("Romy and Michele's 
High School Reunion," "The Truth About Cats and Dogs"), William H. Macy 
("Fargo," "Boogie Nights"), Greg Kinnear ("As Good As It Gets"), Geoffrey 
Rush ("Shine"), and Paul Reubens ("Pee Wee's Big Adventure"). If that weren't 
enough, Claire Forlani, a standout in "Meet Joe Black," is painfully wasted 
(as is everyone else, of course) as the only 'normal' character in the whole 
film, a diner waitress and potential love interest to Stiller. Heavy usage of 
highly euphoric, mind-alterting substances had to have been used in order for 
these actors to sign on to this $85-million movie that looks like a 
$5-million direct-to-video effort. Either that, or they turn out to not have 
any taste in films after all...nah! Drugs definately played a large part in 
the casting process.
So-called comedy flies at a rapid rate throughout the film, but the problem 
is none of it is the least bit funny, only groan-inducing and lame. 
Supposedly, 60-70% of the dialogue was improvised on the spot by the actors, 
which leads me to believe that not only was the script bad, but the cast 
realized this and tried to fix it with their stand-up comedy abilities. 
Improvisation on the spot must be one of their weak spots, unfortunately, 
since very rarely does anyone say anything clever, and even then it is a 
throwaway line that is all but forgotten about a second afterwards. "Mystery 
Men" proves that no matter how good the actors may be, they cannot salvage a 
film if they aren't even given the chance to develop their own individual 
personalities.
'Excruciating' would be the perfect word to describe physically watching this 
movie. Every element on every level is inept in every respect, and the 
non-stop, stylized comic-book action sequences and idiotic dialogue is akin 
to watching an Akiva Goldsman-written fourth "Batman" sequel. If anything, an 
empty water bottle came in quite handy while I was watching the film, for if 
I couldn't have handled it in my hand, played with it, tore off the paper 
wrapping, etc., I would have been in dire danger of dozing off.
If there is a bright spot to be found at all in "Mystery Men," beyond the 
unbearable filmmaking stench of desperation, it is Janeane Garofalo, who is 
fun to watch in every movie she's in. She ultimately is not very fun to watch 
here, simply because the rest of the movie is so nauseatingly awful, but she 
does have a few good lines and shines just by appearing on the screen. Like 
everyone else, though, there was no character to work with, and Garofalo's 
only distinctive quality was that she was actually hip and snappy. In other 
words, far to kewl to be hanging out with the rest of those nitwits.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
MYSTERY MEN
(Universal)
Starring:  Ben Stiller, William H. Macy, Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo,
Paul Reubens, Kel Mitchell, Wes Studi, Geoffrey Rush, Greg Kinnear.
Screenplay:  Neil Cuthbert, based on characters created by Bob Burden.
Producers:  Lawrence Gordon, Lloyd Levin and Mike Richardson.
Director:  Kinka Usher.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, mild profanity, adult humor)
Running Time:  117 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Of all the reasons to be frustrated by a film, I'll take the one
MYSTERY MEN provides:  it's just too clever and original for its own
damned good.  The super-hero action film has become such a predictable
package of action sequences, limp quips and bland characterizations that
it was screaming for a satirical treament.  To fill this need, along comes
MYSTERY MEN, spinning out a dozen different ways to turn the genre on its
ear...which turns out to be at least a half-dozen too many.  As busily
directed by television commercial auteur Kinka Usher, MYSTERY MEN rarely
sits still long enough for any one of its sharp ideas to turn into
inspired comedy.
     The concept, based on characters appearing in Dark Horse comics,
offers plenty of potential.  In Champion City, a teeming BLADE
RUNNER-esque metropolis, we meet three would-be warriors for justice: Mr.
Furious (Ben Stiller), The Shoveler (William H. Macy) and the 
fork-wielding Blue Raja (Hank Azaria).  Unfortunately, the trio is way
down in the super-hero pecking order from the dashing Captain Amazing
(Greg Kinnear), and even Captain Amazing can't find a good fight because
he's dispatched evil-doers so efficiently.  When Captain Amazing engineers
the release of arch-villain Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) from a
mental institution, he finds himself unexpectedly captured by his nemesis.
With Captain Amazing out of commission, it's left to Mr. Furious and his
crew to bring together a team of heroes with more ambition than
super-fire-power, including The Bowler (Janeane Garofolo), master of
flatulence The Spleen (Paul Reubens), Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell) and the
"terribly mysterious" Sphinx (Wes Studi).
     MYSTERY MEN works best from the outset by turning its super-heroes
into analogs for contemporary athletes.  Career minor-leaguers like The
Shoveler, a married suburban father of three, wonder whether they'll get a
shot at the big time; Captain Amazing and his publicist (Ricky Jay) find
themselves generally more preoccupied with maintaining corporate
sponsorship deals than with crime-fighting.  The simple moments in which
the heroes-in-waiting cope with workaday life are sparked by the
wonderfully off-beat cast -- Azaria's Blue Raja as a mama's boy who 
practices his witty one-liners in his room; Stiller's Mr. Furious trying
to strike the right super-hero image to impress a diner waitress (Claire
Forlani).  Every so often, MYSTERY MEN nails the absurdity of its premise
so well that the comedy is blissfully perfect.
     It's just not often enough.  As the film winds its way through two
hours, its comic highlights are nearly matched by the unexplored
sub-plots.  Lost in the shuffle of too many characters are the team's two
over-eager tag-alongs, the geeky Spleen and earnest Invisible Boy (whose
"powers" may be nothing more than a major case of teenage existential
angst).  Neil Cuthbert's script spends too much time on The Sphinx's
initially amusing Yoda-like training, and too little on Kinnear's
splendidly smug Captain Amazing.  Rush's Cassanova Frankenstein hardly
gets a moment to develop a distinct personality, treating his Teutonic
accent as sufficient evidence of his villainy.  And director Usher takes
the swooping full-screen close-ups from his Taco Bell chihuahua and "Got
Milk?" ads, and uses them to distracting excess.  MYSTERY MEN wants to
make every possible gag about super-heroes in one film, but it's off on
the next set-up before you get a chance to appreciate the last punch line.
     Thankfully, there are just enough quirky pleasures in MYSTERY MEN to
counteract its hyperactivity.  Some bits of dialogue are priceless,
including The Shoveler's stubborn insistence that millionaire Lance Hunt
couldn't be Captain Amazing's alter-ego ("Lance Hunt wears glasses,
Captain Amazing doesn't").  The team's first joint assault on Cassanova's
limo is a goofy low-tech triumph over the bad guys, followed by a round of
drinks at a bar like a city league softball team.  A cast like Stiller,
Garofalo, Macy and Azaria guarantees more oddball enjoyment than most
films could deliver, but they could have been part of a cult classic.
It's ironic that a parody of summer movie overkill is guilty of some of
the same sins.  You can't swing for the fences every time, especially if
you're a minor leaguer trying to make it to "The Show."  Sometimes, you've
gotta take one for the team.

Author
Greg King
MYSTERY MEN (PG).  
(Universal/UIP)
Director: Kinka Usher
Stars: Ben Stiller, William H Macy, Hank Azaria, Geoffrey Rush, Greg 
Kinnear, Janeane Garofalo, Claire Forlani, Kel Mitchell, Lena Olin,
Paul Reubens, Wes Studi, Tom Waits, Eddie Izzard, Ricky Jay, Louise
Lasser, Jenifer Lewis, Ernie Lee Banks
Running time: 121 minutes.
This high camp, low brow spoof of comic book super heroes is
ultimately something of a disappointment.  Based on the Dark Horse
comic, Mystery Men affectionately sends up the conventions of more
familiar super heroes, but it also taps the genre for some rich
satire.  The film follows the misadventures of a group of amateur
super heroes who finally get their chance to prove themselves.
Despite a stellar cast, high production values and some nifty one
liners, Mystery Men sadly fails to reach any great heights.
The fictitious Champion City has always been protected by its
resident super hero Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear, from As Good As It
Gets, etc).  But he has done such a good job of putting away super
villains that he is doing himself out of a job and losing lucrative
sponsorship deals as well.  Captain Amazing hatches a plot whereby he
arranges for his arch nemesis Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) to
be released on parole, in order to maintain his status.  But
Frankenstein has diabolical plans of his own.  He quickly turns the
tables on the super hero, taking him prisoner and setting up his
scheme to dominate Champion City.
The only ones capable of thwarting Frankenstein's evil scheme
are a tragic group of wannabe super heroes with dubious special
powers.  Blue collar workers disillusioned with their dead end day
jobs and lack of respect from their peers and family, the three men
prowl the city at night trying to fight crime.  These aspiring super
heroes are the Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), an effete master of cutlery
who hurls forks - never knives - at the villains; Mr Furious (Ben
Stiller) who works himself into a terrifying rage; and the Shoveler
(William H Macy) who wields garden implements with dexterity and
skill.  But their incompetence and lack of ability sees them regarded
as little more than a joke by both the police and the supercilious
Captain Amazing.
The hapless heroes are no match for Frankenstein's army, and
reluctantly realise that they need to recruit some more super heroes.
A hasty search turns up the Spleen (Paul Reubens, aka Pee Wee Herman),
whose explosive farts can vanquish villains from ten paces; the
Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell, from Good Burger, etc), whose ability to
turn invisible works best when no-one is watching; and the Bowler
(Janeane Garofalo), who carries her murdered father's skull around in
a glass bowling ball.
The task of whipping this motley crew into shape falls to the
legendary super hero the Sphinx (Wes Studi, from Geronimo, etc).
However, his habit of uttering clichéd aphorisms like "If you doubt
your powers then you give power to your doubts" both confuse and
frustrate our heroes.  Armed with some high tech non-lethal weaponry
provided by an eccentric armourer (Tom Waits), these amateur super
heroes are ready to take the fight to Frankenstein, for one final
time.
From its distinctive visual style it's obvious that first time
director Kinka Usher hails from a background in commercials.  The
gothic production design and the striking look is reminiscent of the
gloomy look and dark tone that Tim Burton gave to his version of
Batman.  But ultimately the film is all style, with very little
substance.
Usher may be good with visuals and the overall look of the
film, but he's less assured with handling actors.  Most of the
performances here lack subtlety.  However, the always reliable Macy
gives his character a touch of vulnerability and grounds him in a
reality that is sadly missing from the rest of the characters.
Garofalo is at her tart and acerbic best, while Rush's camp and over
the top villain perfectly captures the comic sensibility of the film.
There are some great moments in this film, but there are also a number
of moments that fall horribly flat.
Despite some well meaning ideas about the nature of friendship
and the inevitability of good triumphing over evil, Mystery Men is a
bit of a mixed bag that may struggle to please audiences.  The biggest
mystery of all is how a film with so much potential fell so horribly
short of the mark.

Author
Michael Redman
League Of Stupid Heroes comes so close
Frustrations. I don't know about you, but they're some of my least favorite
things. And there's so many of them. Lives that might have been. Opportunities
lost. Delayed gratification.
In the context of this column, the most common frustration, and the most
dreaded one, is a movie that almost makes it. Every element seems right, but
they don't fit together. The whole is less than the sum of the parts.
Filmmaking is an art, not a science, and sometimes the best laid plans just
don't quite work.
Based on a little known cult-favorite comic book by Bob Burden (also
responsible for the equally cultish "Flaming Carrot"), the film is a spoof of
super-hero antics. The mystery men are an unnamed group of farm league
characters who don't quite get the idea.
Some of them have super powers -- The Spleen (Paul Reubens aka PeeWee Herman)
can disable a foe from a distance with his deadly, err...gases -- and others
merely think they do. The Invisible Boy's (Kel Mitchell) power is inspired. He
is invisible only as long as no one is looking at him.
The team operates in Champion City, a cross between Gotham City  and
"Bladerunner", but no one takes them seriously. After all, the city already
has a resident hero, Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear).
The good Captain has done such a good job of cleaning up crime that he has no
foes left to fight. Since this has resulted in a decline in commercial
endorsements, he arranges the release of his arch-enemy Casanova Frankenstein
(Geoffrey Rush). When Frankenstein captures Amazing in a nefarious scheme, the
second-raters must come to the rescue.
The casting is wonderful. Hank Azaria is The Blue Raja who, clad in green, is
an expert at throwing forks and scratching cars. Janeane Garofalo as The
Bowler throws a mean strike with her transparent ball encasing her father's
skull. Ben Stiller's power as The Furious is that he is uncontrollable when he
gets angry. At least that's what he keeps saying. The list goes on.
The real stand-out is William H. Macy as The Shoveler. Using only a shovel as
a weapon, he is the perfect gimmick super-hero. He's committed to his work and
takes it seriously: Batman with a digging tool. Macy is perfect in the role.
He completely captures the dedication of a crime fighter and is hilarious only
because the concept is ludicrous.
This isn't so true with some of the others. Vastly talented Reubens is stuck
in a goofy role and is unable to transcend it. Rush is more tedious than
menacing. Tom Waits as a weapons designer could have been outrageous.
So many of the scenes are hilarious, it's difficult to understand why the film
doesn't deliver more than it does. When the guys realize they need more
firepower, they hold a barbecue tryout for more members. It's a wonderfully
wacky bit.
The heroes refuse to believe that Captain Amazing's secret identity is
millionaire Lance Hunt because Hunt wears glasses. How could he see without
them? When confronted with a super-villain, they dent and scrape his limo.
Their rescue of Amazing doesn't go exactly as planned with an appropriately
ridiculous result.
But overall, the movie feels flat. There's too much of the same scene over and
over. The Bowler's animated ball is entertaining the first time, but after
that, it's repetition. The Spleen's farting is less amusing the more he does it.
In his first feature film, director Kinka Usher exhibits his commercial-making
("Got Milk?", Taco Bell) background as he introduces sub-plots and leaves
them unexplored.
Some of the timing is off. The Furious' attempt at romancing a coffee shop
waitress is so much wasted time. For such an over-the-top movie, some it is
oddly subdued and could do with a bit more flamboyance. As the film draws to
an end, it becomes too much like the movies it makes fun of.
"Mystery Men" is not a bad film. Some portions are marvelous and it's worth
seeing just for those.
Like some frustrations in real life, this movie comes close. So close.
(Michael Redman has written this column for just about 24 years and is
somewhat of a mystery to himself. Email your tales of frustration to
Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 8/12/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
I.D. Letterman
The salt of the earth, the true guardians of our values are not the
superheroes nor the high profile super-achievers  but the rank and file
working stiffs, the ordinary citizens. Out of their weakness and their
failures they muster enough strength to rise to the challenge when the chips
are down, somehow making a virtue of their  weakness and extracting strength
from their commonplace attributes. Mystery Men is about ordinary people who
challenge themselves to heroic action: the blue collar worker with his
shovel, every man who ever used a fork, every citizen who was ever enraged,
everyone who farts, and every woman that was ever advised and tyranized by
her father at a bowling alley. The parable of the Invisible Boy works at
several  levels. There are the neglected children that no one sees because
no one bothers to look. At a different level there is the anonymity that
strips man of his identity in the mechanized society and at a more
superficial level there is the man that longs to be special but in reality
is like everybody else. And then there is the set of simple maxims, the
cliched standards of idealism that inspire the common man to give his best,
represented by a hilarious character called `The Sphinx.'
In the opening sequence of Mystery Men we see a band of thugs raiding a
group of helpless citizens, and a trio of ridiculous would be superheroes
who come to the rescue attempting to foil the attack, only to be humiliated
not just by superior force but by their own ineptness. While one attacks
with a shovel, sometimes banging his own teammates, another throws forks at
the crooks. Out of context as they have to be at the beginning of the movie,
these gags are not particularly funny and you brace yourself for another of
those presentations in which hectic tries to be funny and fails. But as the
movie unfolds and you get to understand the characters, you begin to
identify with their ineptness and their indomitable idealism. When the
situation repeats itself in a different variation; an attack on the villain'
s limousine, the effect is very funny indeed. Knowing that his rage is
Captain Furious' only weapon you understand his frenzied but alas
ineffective attack with fists, elbows, knees and feet on the roof of the car
and you roll with laughter as he maniacally wrestles the hood ornament. The
shovel attack and the fork missiles are now thoroughly enjoyable. If one had
known then what one knows now one would have laughed heartily at the opening
sequence, which is not to fault the script because there was no other way in
which the characters could have been introduced.
This movie has a strong cast and many funny sequences. I have not attempted
to present a technical analysis. Simply to communicate that it is a
thoroughly enjoyable fable about the common man laughing at his own
limitations and delusions, while celebrating his own worth. In a strange way
it is a little like The Sixth Sense, in that knowing the premise is
essential to the integration and enjoyment of the whole., but unlike the
Sixth Sense, knowing the premise in advance can only enhance the enjoyment
of Mystery Men.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
The trailer didn't lie: Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) has captured
Captain Amazing (wholesome Greg Kinnear), leaving a superhero-sized void in
the skies of Champion City. Enter Mr Furious, the Bowler, the Shoveler, Blue
Raja & Co. (Ben Stiller, Janeane Garafalo, William H. Macy, and Hank Azaria)
to fill that void and save the city. All slapstick aside, this is Kinka
Usher's Mystery Men, a send-up of all the Supermans and Batmans and Spawns
and Phantoms which have been taking themselves too seriously for too long
now. Granted, The Mask dealt with the whole superhero shtick in a similarly
tongue-in-cheek manner, but it didn't go nearly as far as Mystery Men. Or,
it was comic, but its comedy was confined to the scenic level; the backbone
of the superhero movie was left intact (i.e., the target
audience--children--was conservatively not overshot).
Not so with Mystery Men.
Mystery Men does to the superhero movie what Rustler's Rhapsody did to the
western: reduces it to the level of ridiculousness while still retaining
that same mass appeal. Yes, it does still have all the flash and gadgetry of
the Batman series, but--and this is important--the standby notions of good
and evil have been called into question. And in a particularly clever
manner: the hero no longer fights evil just because s/he's good, but because
it's good publicity to fight evil. And good publicity translates immediately
into corporate sponsorship, endorsement opportunities, star treatment. But
it's not easy being a superhero, either. You have to worry about staying in
character, sticking to a theme, matching your gloves with your boots,
getting the right publicist, and--as in Captain Amazing's case which sets
things in motion--you have to worry especially about having an arch-nemesis
left to fight. Batman had The Joker, Superman had Lex Luthor, etc. As
Mystery Men opens, though, Champion City is pretty much free of
arch-villains; Captain Amazing has been a little too amazing for his own
good, evidently.
This is remedied soon enough, by him, even, which, once it all turns around
on him, leaves room for the wannabees to fumble around and save the day. And
this wannabee contingent is the one brilliant aspect of the movie, simply
because it's so logical: in a world where superheroes wear Pepsi armbands,
there will of course be hero-types a few rungs down, longing to wear that
armband as well, longing to save the city so as to get a little airtime. But
not every wannabee is a hero, either. Some are just grown men wearing tutus.
And some, like Mr Invisible, can only be invisible when no one's looking at
them.
And the villains are nearly as fantastic (disco gangs etc.), if a tad more
traditional: they seem to still want to take over the city just because
that's what villains do. Which is something of a weakness, in that their
motivations are no longer the inverse of the heroes' (commercially-oriented)
motivations, which is to say that the good guys and the bad guys no longer
counterbalance each other. Even in Rustler's Rhapsody there is at least that
balance. It lends a wholeness to the proceedings, a wholeness missing from
Mystery Men. It goes deeper, though. While the sub-arch-nemeses are equally
as theme-loyal etc as the heroes here, the arch-arch nemesis--Casanova
Frankenstein--is, aside from his wonderful name, wholly typical.
To return to Rustler's Rhapsody again, in it the villain achieves balance
with the hero by being equally eccentric-by hiring a good-guy gunman to be
his bad guy. Which is a fitting turnaround. Mystery Men has no such built-in
turnaround, but instead relies on the individual comic ability of its cast,
which, while significant, doesn't quite make up for careless writing. Too,
and not dealt with, at the end of the movie these Mystery Men are in the
same predicament Captain Amazing opened with: though they have airtime now,
they don't have anything to do with that airtime, as they've defeated the
one bad guy around. Not for long is the idea, though, right? Which, in spite
of itself, brings Mystery Men full circle, transforms it into yet another
comic-book superhero movie, albeit with more laughs than usual.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones

Author
Tim Chandler
Directed by: Kinka Usher
Written by: Neil Cuthbert (comic by Bob Burden)
Starring: Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo, William H. Macy, Kel Mitchell,
Paul Reubens, Ben Stiller, Wes Studi, Greg Kinnear, Geoffrey Rush,
Tom Waits
Produced by: Lawrence Gordon, Lloyd Levin, Mike Richardson
A group of wannabe superheroes have to save Champion City's one true
hero, Captain Amazing, from the clutches of the evil Casanova
Frankenstein.
    Superheroes have had an easy ride in motion pictures. While other
popular film topics such as the Mafia (Analyze This) and the military
(Hot Shots) have been spoofed to death, relatively few parodies have
been made about superheroes; Meteor Man immediately comes to mind.
The Superman series, while light, always kept Supe himself
serious. Within this year of parodies and dark, biting comedies, you
would think that the time for Mystery Men had come. Unfortunately it
has such a large cast that there isn't enough screen time available
for any of them to shine, making this an uneven film with lots of
unused potential.
    Mr. Furious (Stiller) leads his comrades The Shoveller (Macy) and
The Blue Raja (Azaria) in a constant fight against crime. The problem
is that they have no real superpowers. Mr. Furious just gets mad, The
Shoveller swings a shovel and The Blue Raja, most pathetically of all,
throws forks. They are unnoticed and unneeded in Champion City, where
Captain Amazing (Kinnear) routinely keeps the streets clean of
crime. It's only when the Capt. gets kidnapped by the evil Casanova
Frankenstein (Rush) that they become the city's saviours. To save him,
they enlist the help of The Bowler (Garofalo), who throws a magical
bowling ball which has her father's skull embedded in it, The Spleen
(Reubens), a disgusting man whose projectile flatulence is his weapon,
The Sphinx (Studi), who can occasionally break guns with his mind but
mostly stands around saying lame affirmations ("You must control your
rage, before your rage controls you."), and finally Invisible Boy
(Mitchell) who is only invisible when no one is looking.  With the
added bonus of some strange non lethal weapons by inventor Dr.  Heller
(Waits), they battle Casanova Frankenstein and his henchmen, and in
the end become a team.
    Mystery Men tries to do to Superman what Austin Powers does to
James Bond. The film looks at the silliness that traditionally
accompanies superhero stories and lampoons it. A discussion about
whether Captain Amazing is really a billionaire named Lance hinges on
the fact that Lance wears glasses while Captain Amazing doesn't. When
Mr. Furious mentions that Lance simply takes them off, The Shoveller
counters "but then he wouldn't be able to see!" Dr. Heller's gadgets
could easily be lamer replicas of the plethora of things on Batman's
utility belt. With a combination of Stiller, Garofalo and Reubens, you
can expect a lot of laughs. Each provides many chuckles, but the more
straight-laced cast members tend to hinder them a bit. A lot of the
humour is too intellectual, not really making you laugh, but making
you nod thinking "that's quite clever". A good example would be when
The Blue Raja explains the meaning of his name to someone; he goes on
about how the British government ran India way back when, with a
government called the Raj, and since he has a British accent, and was
born in India, voila, he is The Blue Raja. The film contains too much
of this style of humour; when Mr.  Furious says "I'm gonna go Pompeii
on your butt" a large portion of the audience really doesn't get it.
It's a bit like a Dennis Miller comedy monologue, you've got to think
to appreciate it.
    The large cast hinders things a bit, with some of the wannabe
superheroes (Invisible Boy) getting no good material at all. Tom Waits
is given nothing funny to do as Dr.  Heller. He just sits around
saying things like "my god, that's a positronic modulating
psychoblaster!"  Claire Forlani is thrown in as a pathetically
unneeded love interest for Mr. Furious. I would have liked to see more
screen time go to Casanova Frankenstein. Geoffrey Rush is hilarious as
the film's disco dancing/ German accented baddie.  He naturally plans
to destroy the entire city with a dastardly deed, in this case some
kind of giant laser weapon. He truly captures the film's irreverent
tone and provides some of the best laughs, its only too bad that his
accent is at times indecipherable. To writer Neil Cuthbert's credit,
there is one hilarious and unexpected plot twist in the film, and a
couple scenes that are magical.  When the superheroes encounter
Casanova in his limo and proceed to enjoy a brief, minor victory, the
laughs were so constant that my stomach hurt.
    This is a good way to kill a couple bucks on cheap night, but many
people who pay full price will consider their money wasted. I have a
feeling that Mystery Men will become a hit on video, becoming funnier
with each repeated viewing. Hopefully there will be a sequel, as the
potential of this cast and concept is huge.
check out more reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html

Author
David Sunga
Starring: William H. Macy, Ben Stiller, Janeane Garofalo, Hank Azaria, Paul
Reubens, Kel Mitchell, Greg Kinnear, Geoffrey Rush, Wes Studi, Claire Forlani
Synopsis: 
In this superhero spoof a team of seven inept wannabe heroes get their
chance to save "Champion City" when too-perfect resident superhero Captain
Amazing (Greg Kinnear) is captured by a mad scientist (Geoffrey Rush). The
bumbling "heroes" are: Mr. Furious, The Shoveler, The Bowler, The Blue
Raja, The Spleen, Invisible Boy, and The Sphinx, played by Ben Stiller,
William H. Macy, Janeane Garofalo, Hank Azaria, Paul Reubens, Kel Mitchell,
and Wes Studi, respectively. 
Mr. Furious is powered by "boundless rage." The Shoveler is a master at
shoveling. The Bowler argues with her father's skull, which is embedded in
a magical bowling ball. The Blue Raja wears entirely green clothing and is
a master at throwing forks. The Spleen was cursed by an old Gypsy woman to
become a creature of pure flatulence. Invisible Boy thinks he's invisible
when no one is looking. And the Sphinx spouts awful puns. 
Opinion:
The heroes know where the bad guy lives. The bad guy knows where the heroes
hang out. From then it's just a matter of try, try, again, assaulting the
bad guy's lair throughout a number of bungled battles. Guess who wins the
last battle after the obligatory girlfriend capture? Sometimes going
overboard, MYSTERY MEN has fun with itself, satirizing the superhero genre
enough to keep the audience either snickering or groaning throughout the film.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        As far as "Mystery Men" is concerned, the burning question is less
"is it really as bad as it looks from the trailer?" (the answer there is an
unequivocal "yes") and more "how in the name of sweet Jesus did first-time
director Kinka Usher get such a first-rate cast to act in this muck?"
        "Mystery Men" features Greg Kinnear as the heavily-sponsored
Captain Amazing and Geoffrey Rush as his arch nemesis (singular) Casanova
Frankenstein.  A veritable police lineup of hot Hollywood talent plays the
superhero wannabes of the title, who join forces to get C. Amazing out of a
tight spot when C. Frankenstein puts the screws on Champion City.
        There's William H. Macy as the mild-mannered Shoveler, Hank Azaria
as the cutlery-flinging Blue Raja (no knives, but a phony English accent
that's just as sharp), Ben Stiller as Mr. Furious (whose only power seems
to be his ability to get hot under the collar), Janeane Garofalo as a
crazed bowler with her father's skull interestingly preserved, Wes Studi as
a rhetoric-spouting cowled avenger, and Kel Mitchell as the token (and,
adding insult to injury, invisible!) black guy.  Bringing up the rear, so
to speak, is Paul Reubens (yes, that's Pee Wee Herman Paul Reubens) as...
well, let's just call him the gas man.
        The production design is overblown, the special effects are
overdone, and the script (based on Bob Burden's "Dark Horse" comic book
series) is overbaked.  The appealing actors are uniformly good and Stiller
is even stellar, but they can't begin to save "Mystery Men"--it's just one
big mess.  You're better off renting the video and pressing fast-forward to
get to the funny bits.  I believe I counted three.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
This feeble spoof tells the saga of seven aspiring
superheroes, each possessing a unique - and bizarre - superpower, who
band together to save Champion City. The ragtag group consists of Ben
Stiller as Mr. Furious, a leather-clad neurotic with a foul temper
("I'm a ticking time bomb of fury!"); Janeane Garofalo as the bitchy
Bowler, whose weapon is a clear bowling ball with her father's visible
skull inside; Paul Reubens (a.k.a. Pee-wee Herman) as the Spleen, who
farts noxious gas; Hank Azaria as the effete Blue Raja whose specialty
is throwing silverware ("May the forks be with you!"); Kel Mitchell as
Invisible Boy, who can't disappear when people are watching; Wes Studi
as the Sphinx, who spews sage-like homilies; and William H. Macy as
the Shoveler, whose superweapon is, you guessed it, a spade. The
villain is the psychotic Cassanova Frankenstein, played by Geoffrey
Rush, who has invented the deadly "Frakulator" beam which fragments
and warps everything - from people to buildings - into a weird state
that reflects what's going on within Cassanova's maniacal head - like
Picasso's cubist renderings. His conspirator is Greg Kinnear,
a.k.a. Captain Amazing, Champion City's bona fide arrogant superhero,
who is afraid he'll lose his product endorsements if there isn't a
villain on the loose. The preposterous derring-do in Neil Cuthbert's
deliberately formulaic screenplay, based on the Dark Horse comic book
series created by Bob Burden, must have looked better on
paper. Utilizing every camera trick, director Kinka Usher exaggerates
the obvious, which is not surprising since his background is in
television commercials.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Mystery Men" is a muddled 3. It's a superhero sendup that snickers
and deflates quickly.
