Title
Review for Men Cry Bullets (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tamara Hernandez.
Cast: Steven Nelson, Honey Lauren, Jeri Ryan, Harry Ralston, Michael 
Mangiamele, Bob Sherer, Sabrina Bertaccini, Trish Elliot, Hugh Bogan, Fred 
Kenyon, Edith Shatz.
1999 - 106 minutes (Opens in 8/99).
Not Rated (equivalent of an R for violence, profanity, gore, nudity, and 
sexual situations).
Reviewed July 12, 1999.
Independent director Tamara Hernandez's feature film debut, "Men Cry 
Bullets," is a quite provocative piece of work for one reason: in telling the 
story of a physically and emotionally abusive, love-hate relationship, it 
turns the cliche on its head by making a gender-swith and having the female 
as the dominant, forceful one, and the male as the passive, sensitive one. 
"By reversing the genders in the film and showing the victim as a weak man 
and the abuser as a violent woman," speaks Hernandez, "I tried to express to 
men what it feels like to be a vulnerable girl, and to shed fresh light on 
the seductively insidious nature of abusive recognizable brutes." This 
potential gimmick ultimately works well in the finished product of 
Hernandez's film, and is ably equipped to encompass such a thing in order to 
create a believable story that, as in many abusive relationships, is headed 
for tragedy. 
The film begins on the night of the innocuous, young Billy's (Steven Nelson) 
first performance in a club, posing as a drag queen. Dressed as his late 
mother (in flashbacks to his childhood, we see the abuse she took from his 
unstable father), Billy goes onstage and starts to hit it off until he is 
humiliated by the precarious, loudmouthed 33-year-old writer, Gloria Hunter 
(Honey Lauren), who assaults him when her boyfriend gets up on the stage to 
dance with him. Somehow drawn to Gloria, even after experiencing her juvenile 
ways, Billy goes to see her at her home, where she still lives with her 
parents and has a pig that she calls her child. Gloria half apologizes to 
him, she gets him to fix her breakfast, and then while out in the shed, she 
rapes him. Horrified and upset, Billy nonetheless begins an infatuation with 
her, and for brief, isolated moments, they appear to be a happy couple. 
Things grow more complicated with the appearance of Gloria's debutante 
cousin, Lydia (Jeri Ryan), a beautiful blonde who gradually forms the final 
part of a love triangle destined for failure and affliction.
"Men Cry Bullets" is an involving dark comedy-drama that, occasionally, is at 
least a little too offbeat and odd by a half, particularly in the final 
half-hour, which includes a drunken, fantasy-like three-way sex scene, a 
potential poisioning, and murder. The ending is especially unsatisfying, 
bringing the conflict to a close but, at the exact same time, creating new, 
more complicated problems that are never explored before the end credits 
roll. 
For the first 70 minutes, however, the film works wonderfully, particularly 
due to Honey Lauren's dazzling performance. As the venemous, wicked Gloria, 
she adds unexpected dimension to the "villain" role by making her an 
alternately spiteful and likable woman. At times, when Gloria is not 
exploding into fits of rage, we are able to half understand her position. 
After all, she is edging into her mid-30s, still lives at home, does not have 
anyone to love except her pig, and is seeing a psychiatrist. It is also 
apparent that she respects her parents but, simply put, she is nothing but a 
child inside, albeit a dangeous one.
Steven Nelson has the right looks to be believable as Billy, an innocent man 
who also is often childish and haunted by his past, but unlike Gloria, keeps 
his feelings bottled up inside rather than taking them out on others. The 
problem with Nelson is that, in comparison to Lauren, he does not captivate 
the viewer as he should, nor did he really make me care for him. Oddly 
enough, I did care about the fate of Gloria, most likely because she was a 
more easily identifiable and multi-layered character.
Rounding out the three principles is Jeri Ryan (of TV's "Star Trek: Voyager") 
as the southern belle, Lydia. Ryan is often very funny, and runs with her 
flightly, unconciously egotistic lines of dialogue. The key to Lydia not 
turning into a stuck-up, dispicable character is that she really does care 
for her cousin, Gloria, and even admires her for her forthrightness. When 
Billy and Lydia become friends, and he starts to understand that he needs to 
say goodbye to his relationship with Gloria, Lydia makes a kind-hearted offer 
for him to come back with her when she returns to her southern home. Ryan is 
the most well-centered character of the three, and therefore, somewhat helps 
to keep the film from flying completely off the deep end in the over-the-top 
penultimate sequences.
"Men Cry Bullets" is a flawed motion picture, and yet it works despite its 
many problems. Digging underneath the surface, the film is basically about 
two unhappy people (Billy and Gloria) who have their own sets of serious 
problems and are both lonely individuals, but whose wildly diverse 
personalities do not mix, no matter how hard they try. Writer-director 
Hernandez is a promising talent who sometimes needlessly gets a little arty 
(such as pointlessly intermixing color and black-and-white photography), and 
who loses track of her realistic focus in the latter half, but never 
condescends to the characters or the audience. "Men With Bullets" is a tough, 
if uneven film, perfectly admirable for a first film from a new director, but 
something tells me Hernandez has stronger, more balanced stories to tell in 
the future, and those will be greatly anticipated by myself.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Eugene Novikov
"When it comes to loss of love, men cry bullets."
Starring Starring Steven Nelson, Honey Lauren, Jeri Ryan. Not Rated
(would be a strong R due to profanity, gore and full-frontal nudity).
I'm not the kind of person you'd find automatically giving high-marks
to the avant-garde or patently bizarre. In fact, when I see a movie
that is obviously calculated to have a strikingly weird look and feel,
I make it my goal to look beyond atmosphere and see what I can find. It
is typical of modern-day independent filmmakers to use an "original"
facade to compensate for a pointless or hollow script (or no script at
all, as in the case of I Woke Up Early the Day I Died). So when I find
a film with its point as prevalent as its peculiarity, it is a find
indeed.
Which brings me to Men Cry Bullets, a remarkable little movie that's as
weird as it is complex. It marks the feature debut of short-film
veteran Tamara Hernandez, and it's impressive. Brazenly original and
visually striking, this obscure production probably won't get even a
marginally wide release, but if it does happen to open near you, take
my word for it and sprint to the theater wise enough to exhibit it.
The story seemed intriguing even before I actually saw the movie: Billy
(steven Nelson), a female impersonator with little life experience is
jostled during one of his performances by Gloria, a fiercely tough
novelist (Honey Lauren) who still lives with her parents. He goes to
her place of residence expecting an apology but what he gets instead is
his very first sexual experience. This begins a rocky, one-sided
relationship which takes our protagonist on a roller-coaster ride
because he has no control over what he has gotten himself into; the
relationship is run either by fate or by his girlfriend.
Meanwhile, Gloria's cousin Lydia(Jeri Ryan) comes to visit. She is a
gorgeous woman and Gloria is horrifically jealous; she even makes up
stories about her being in a mental institution. Well, Lydia
unwittingly kills Gloria's beloved pig and serves it in a beautifully
prepared dinner, inflaming Gloria's anger to the point where she wants
Billy to help her kill her cousin. But Billy takes a liking to the
vicious woman and begins to question who is better for him, the
abusive, relentlessly angry Gloria or the affectionate, beautiful,
arrogant Lydia.
Men Cry Bullets turns the tables on your typical abusive relationship.
This time, the male is docile and the woman is dominant. Scenes in
which Billy is being smacked around are punctuated by flashbacks of his
childhood in which he sees his mother being abused in uncannily similar
ways. These sequences are as touching as they come; compassionate,
heartfelt and very powerful. They are also cryptic, coming together to
form a complicated big picture, making the movie a terrific character
study.
Never underestimate the importance of style in an independent picture.
Thankfully, Men Cry Bullets is far from lacking in visual flair. From
the glitzy nightclub scenes to the downright gritty parts set in a
house or out in the middle of a field, it never ceases to impress
aesthetically. Adding atmosphere is an ominous, exciting soundtrack
that stays in the background much of the time but always makes an
impact.
I must caution that this isn't a movie for everyone. Some will be put
off by the subject matter, others by the graphic content. I've learned
that if I allow myself to be overly influenced by such things I'm
likely to miss the thematic undertones of a picture and will wind up
oblivious to its potential significance. If personal feelings overtly
distract from your appreciation for a motion picture, lock them out.
This film must be seen.
