Title
Review for Hombre mirando al sudeste (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Upstill
     One of the most universally-praised films of the last year was MAN FACING
SOUTHEAST.  With only two exceptions, everyone I know who saw it lavished it
with praise.  I finally caught up with it last Friday, and I'm spoiling for a
fight with anyone who would care to defend it.
     One of my two dissenters described it, not kindly, as a misbegotten hybrid
of THE MAN WHO FELL TO EARTH and ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST.  I concur;
MAN FACING SOUTHEAST *is* indeed like an ill-starred half-breed, but without
the latter's mystical power or the former's sense of humor.
     But seriously, folks, I have three serious gripes with it.  First, it
didn't have the dramatic fortitude to be consistent.  If Rantes was supposed to
be this unfeeling creature, why are we never informed, or even hinted at, about
the transformation which enabled him to express such joy in the "conducting"
scene.  He seems impassive when an Impassive Objective Analysis of Human
Affairs is required, and passionate/human when that is convenient.
     Second, the film tries very hard (and apparently successfully) to give 
the impression of addressing important issues without ever really coming to
grips with any of them.  Ambiguity and irresolution have their place in a
well-constructed plot, but not in the kind of hit-and-run philosophical
flirtation you find in this film.  Sure the doctor was intrigued, engaged and
depressed by encountering Rantes, but was he any different at the end than at
the beginning?  Did he learn anything?  If so, then his treatment of the woman
does a good job of obscuring it.  And how are we supposed to make of the
prisoners rioting while Rantes conducts?  Is this supposed to matter to us,
except to jerk hope out of us like romantic novels jerk tears out of
adolescents?
     But I guess the thing that bothers me most involves the film's single
clear philosophical statement, that it is "rational" to help another, which
proves that people are irrational.  In fact, compassion is one of the most
noble of human emotions, partly because it is irrational.  The most chillingly
uncompassionate people I have ever met are also the most rational.  Tune in to
libertarian discussions on Poli-Sci sometime if you don't believe me.  The
view that morality is a strictly rational phenomenon goes back to Kant, and is
profoundly dehumanizing, making people into dry bearers of Absolute Good,
devoid of either passion or joy, with no use whatsoever of the idea that 
humanity shares some common bond.
     But of course the filmmakers didn't think it through that far.  They tell
us that compassion is rational because it's an easy, glib way of telling us how
fucked up we are.  The annoying thing about MAN FACING SOUTHEAST is that it is
perfectly content with glibness, allowing and encouraging its audience in the
smugness of frustrated hope, without ever considering the effort involved in
making real change in the world.  As H. L. Mencken said (more or less) "If you
make people think they're thinking, they'll love you.  If you *really* make
them think, they'll hate you."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A serious science fiction film from
     Argentina has a psychiatrist faced with a Christ-like patient
     who claims to be an alien.  This is a film with a lot to say
     about psychiatry, hunger, charity, and religion.  With that
     much to say it is, perhaps, over-ambitious.  It does not do
     everything right but what is right is worth seeing.
     Argentina is not one of the countries one generally expects to be
making science fiction films.  It has had a film industry for quite a long
time--as anyone who has heard EVITA knows--but their films seem rarely seem
to get international play and do not seem to have much fantasy, in any case.
Yet Argentina has a heritage of literary fantasy led until his recent death
by Jorge Luis Borges.  Borges's influence can be felt in a new fantasy
science fiction film from Argentina, MAN FACING SOUTHEAST.  The film
combines elements of THE MAN WHO FELL TO EARTH and ONE FLEW OVER THE
CUCKOO'S NEST.
     The main character of MAN FACING SOUTHEAST is a psychiatrist in an
insane asylum.  Dr. Denis is disturbed by his inability to really help his
patients and by the asylum's callous and factory-like treatment of patients.
One patient's fantasy, incidentally, is an uncredited enactment of the
painting "The Lovers" by Magritte.  But a new patient appears at the asylum
one day, committing himself.  It is Rantes's apparent delusion that he is an
extra-terrestrial sent to Earth on a mission.  He commits himself
voluntarily because he knows society would only commit him more forcibly if
he did not.
     Rantes sees the suffering and pain around him and the selfishness of
the comfortable.  In a number of scenes he turns the tables.  But Dr. Denis
is the real center of the story.  Facing pressure to drug Rantes out of what
may or may not be an illusion (actually the audience knows which but the
doctor does not), Denis sees himself as Pontius Pilate, being forced to
crucify another Jesus.  As more patients at the asylum become disciples of
Rantes, the pressures increase on the bewildered psychiatrist to fulfill his
role as the later-day Pilate.
     MAN FACING SOUTHEAST is an intelligent science fiction film that needs
no special effects.  It is at once a cry of social despair, a philosophical
essay, and a science fiction story.  If anything it tries to be too much and
spreads itself too thin; often it gives way to cliche.  Yet in many ways it
is comparable to THE MAN IN THE WHITE SUIT and if the Argentine industry
follows the same path the British did, we can hope to see a lot more good
films from it in the future.  Rate MAN FACING SOUTHEAST a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.
