Title
Review for Steel (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Sanford
Watching "Steel" is like sitting through one of those sunny "let's save
Mother Earth" grade-school pageants: The intentions are certainly the best,
even though the performances and most of the productions values are
second-rate and often downright laughable. Your sentimental side begs you to
be kind to this sort of entertainment, even as the analytic part of the
brain tears the show to shreds.
 Adapted from an unsuccessful comic book, "Steel" radiates messages of
positivity and racial harmony when it's not struggling to be "Batman in Da
Hood." Shaquille O'Neal plays John Henry Irons (get it?) who helped develop
high-tech weapons during his Army days, alongside kindly Lt. Susan Sparks
(Annabeth Gish) and nefarious Nathaniel Burke (Judd Nelson). When Burke's
tomfoolery with one of the "sonic cannons" the trio wound up crippling
Sparks, Irons left the Army and returned home to inner-city L.A., which
writer-director Kenneth Johnson sees as a kind of "Sesame Street" with a few
nasty gang members hanging 'round.
 After the superguns turn up in the hands of criminals (guess who put them
there), Irons, Sparks and feisty Uncle Joe (Richard Roundtree) team up to
create an urban superhero who strolls the streets in a suit of steel and
brandishes a giant hammer that doubles as a ray gun. "He's like the Tin Man
on steroids!" squawks one gangsta, not inaccurately.
 "Steel" is every bit as silly as it sounds, and yet it's not entirely
without merit. At a time when African-American kids have their choice of the
sex-starved heroes of "Booty Call" or Bill Bellamy's super-stud in "How To
Be A Player" as role models, it's heartening to see someone like O'Neal
giving them another option. The movie also deserves points for showing how
Sparks, though paraplegic, becomes an invaluable asset to the team because
of her brilliant mind and friendly supportiveness. There's also a bit of
cute comic relief from Irma P. Hall (the scene stealer of "A Family Thing")
as Irons' grandmother, who dreams of opening a restaurant called Black and
Bleu that would combine soul food with classic French cooking.
 On a technical level, however, "Steel" is more like "Tin Foil." Its visual
effects can't hold a candle to those in "Spawn" and the tacky music that
underscores the action sounds like it was stolen from a "Starsky and Hutch"
episode. Like Michael Jordan in "Space Jam," O'Neal is most comfortable when
he's smiling or running around. Delivering lines and dredging up emotions
overtax his talents, and some of his reaction shots are unintentional hoots.
 But even with a multitude of sins, "Steel" might provide a perfectly
enjoyable afternoon for the under-12 crowd. Perhaps they'll overlook
O'Neal's wooden acting and find the movie's well-meaning heart.
James Sanford

Author
"jasanfor" <jasanfor@MCI2000.com>
Watching "Steel" is like sitting through one of those sunny "let's save
Mother Earth" grade-school pageants: The intentions are certainly the best,
even though the performances and most of the productions values are
second-rate and often downright laughable. Your sentimental side begs you to
be kind to this sort of entertainment, even as the analytic part of the
brain tears the show to shreds.
 Adapted from an unsuccessful comic book, "Steel" radiates messages of
positivity and racial harmony when it's not struggling to be "Batman in Da
Hood." Shaquille O'Neal plays John Henry Irons (get it?) who helped develop
high-tech weapons during his Army days, alongside kindly Lt. Susan Sparks
(Annabeth Gish) and nefarious Nathaniel Burke (Judd Nelson). When Burke's
tomfoolery with one of the "sonic cannons" the trio wound up crippling
Sparks, Irons left the Army and returned home to inner-city L.A., which
writer-director Kenneth Johnson sees as a kind of "Sesame Street" with a few
nasty gang members hanging 'round.
 After the superguns turn up in the hands of criminals (guess who put them
there), Irons, Sparks and feisty Uncle Joe (Richard Roundtree) team up to
create an urban superhero who strolls the streets in a suit of steel and
brandishes a giant hammer that doubles as a ray gun. "He's like the Tin Man
on steroids!" squawks one gangsta, not inaccurately.
 "Steel" is every bit as silly as it sounds, and yet it's not entirely
without merit. At a time when African-American kids have their choice of the
sex-starved heroes of "Booty Call" or Bill Bellamy's super-stud in "How To
Be A Player" as role models, it's heartening to see someone like O'Neal
giving them another option. The movie also deserves points for showing how
Sparks, though paraplegic, becomes an invaluable asset to the team because
of her brilliant mind and friendly supportiveness. There's also a bit of
cute comic relief from Irma P. Hall (the scene stealer of "A Family Thing")
as Irons' grandmother, who dreams of opening a restaurant called Black and
Bleu that would combine soul food with classic French cooking.
 On a technical level, however, "Steel" is more like "Tin Foil." Its visual
effects can't hold a candle to those in "Spawn" and the tacky music that
underscores the action sounds like it was stolen from a "Starsky and Hutch"
episode. Like Michael Jordan in "Space Jam," O'Neal is most comfortable when
he's smiling or running around. Delivering lines and dredging up emotions
overtax his talents, and some of his reaction shots are unintentional hoots.
 But even with a multitude of sins, "Steel" might provide a perfectly
enjoyable afternoon for the under-12 crowd. Perhaps they'll overlook
O'Neal's wooden acting and find the movie's well-meaning heart.
James Sanford

Author
Hosun Smashing Lee
There is no synopsis per se in this. This is the "lite" version.
Shaq, Judd Nelson, Some Chick, Richard Rountree and Paco Irons
present....
        STEEL is the best comedy of the year. It's bloody hilarious. I
haven't been to a movie this year that I laughed so hard while
watching. I didn't think I'd be amused at seeing this, but I was
pleasantly surprised.
        The movie adapts most of the comic book's storyline, with John
leaving the army because his weapons are being used to kill (no duh)
and finding out that they have invaded his home town. The reason for
him leaving is rather silly, due to an accident, his partner gets her
legs crushed and a senator is dead. (Basically, the weapon overloads)
It's a rather weak note, and it says little for his integrity. 
        He goes back home, but unfortunately, his arch-enemy in the
army, Lt. Biff (or whatever his name is), also goes to LA to get
revenge, but also to sell the weapons. See, Biff was operating the
weapon at the time, and it was his fault the weapon overloaded, so he
got drummed out.
        John's stay at home is short, though. The weapons are now
being sold in LA, and his Grandma Odessa wants to open a Soul/French
restaurant called "Black and Bleu." Her attempting to make souffle is
a running gag throughout the movie, much like Shaq trying to act.
During this, the only other two females in the movie get maimed and
killed.
        So John ends up getting Sparks from the hospital where she's
been moping around since she can't bake flan (or souffles, for that
matter). He forcibly removes her and she, John and John's mentor
Sanford....I mean Uncle Joe (Richard Rountree) create a way to buy
real estate for no money down and sell it for lots of money.
        The rest of the movie consists of the conflict between John
and Lt. Biff. The suit looks rather silly, and I think the producers
realized it at some points, making fun of it. But they erred in
turning John Irons into your standard, "hip" super-hero. He's not
SUPPOSED to be hip, and some of the jokes and comments are just not in
character for John Irons of the comic book.
        A degree of realism is lacking. I'm guessing they got rid of
the rocket boots partly due to budget, and partly due to wanting Steel
more "real." Yet more important things such as Sparks' disability are
glossd over. Her legs look FINE after being crushed, with no scars at
all. John manages to climb up a side of a wall without ever touch the
wall. And his hammer becomes a gun. It's never used as a hammer. 
        Instead, John shoots the bad guys. He *SHOOTS* them with the
same weapons they use. He's got a laser beam and a sonic cannon in the
handle of the hammer.  And an electromagnet built into the suit.
        I also had a great deal of problems with the cast. The
producers apparently wanted the largest group of stereotypes and
cliches on earth. There is no one with a personality. All of the black
characters talk like they're having their brains sucked out of them.
All of the females are spunky and dead or maimed. All of the white
folks are businessmen or military officials. And Grandma Odessa, oh
please. Can you possibly be any more irritating? In other words, it's
EXACTLY LIKE the first three years on STEEL, the comic.
        There's even a scene that's obviously intended as a direct
homage to it, involving the infamous "Beat Up the Bad Guys with the
Frying Pan" sequence. I kid you not, Jim Smith is probably happy
beyond belief now. There are also numerous references to Superman (but
as a cultural icon, not a real one), and the phrase "Man of Steel" is
used a lot. There were TONS of analogies to steel and metal. Matt and
I were waiting for them to use "tempered steel," since that was the
only analogy they HADN'T used.
        This is fun, but only if you don't take the movie the way the
producers intended. As a comedy, as a criticism of Louise Simonson's
issues of STEEL. As a way to FINALLY see what Paco Irons might be
like. The audience laughed throughout the movie, but oddly enough,
only during the dramatic and/or depressing scenes. That says a lot.
And I LOVED the escalator. I'm waiting to see how Mr. Priest
incorporates the Steel-Cave and the Steel-Escalator in the book.
        On a scale of Louise Simonson characters with personalities,
with Paco Irons being the low end and Jack Power being the high end,
this is definitely a Paco Irons on acid.
-Hosun Smith Lee/Vorpal Bunny(TM), who reminds you that you should eat
the hot dog, not be the hot dog.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Shaquille O'Neal, Annabeth Gish, Judd Nelson, Richard Roundtree, 
      Irma B. Hall
Director: Kenneth Johnson
Producers: Quincy Jones, Savid Salzman, & Joel Simon
Screenplay: Kenneth Johnson
Cinematography: Mark Irwin
Music: Mervyn Warren
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     STEEL may be the title, but the real metal of this lame superhero 
flick is more like tin.  After striking gold big time at the box office 
with SUPERMAN and BATMAN, Warner Brothers has decided to bring to the 
screen another, less familiar DC Comics protagonist.  Like the Caped 
Crusader, Steel is just an impressive physical specimen in an 
extraordinary suit that's equipped with a lot of neat gadgets.  And, as 
was true of the most recent BATMAN flick, STEEL is far too silly to be 
taken at all seriously.  The concept may not be bad, but there are times 
when the execution borders on embarassing.
     STEEL is the second comic book-to-screen adaptation to arrive in 
theaters this month.  But, aside from the inspiration's format, there 
are few similarities between this movie and SPAWN.  Whereas the latter 
was all style and little substance, this isn't the case with STEEL.  
This movie has decidely unimpressive set designs and takes place in a 
mundane, modern Los Angeles.  The film is story-driven, even if that 
story is distinctly juvenile. The PG-13 rating is based exclusively on 
violence.  The target audience appears to be young teenage boys; anyone 
not in that category may find themselves less-than-enthralled by this 
experience.
     STEEL begins with an interminable "origins" sequence that explains 
(albeit not very convincingly) how Steel came into existence.  John 
Henry Irons (Shaquille O'Neal), Lt. Sparks (Annabeth Gish), and 
Nathaniel Burke (Judd Nelson) are all members of an elite military 
weapons development team.  In keeping with the film's pure black-and-
white morality, John and Sparks are good guys; Burke is driven purely by 
self-interest.  To curry favor with a visiting senator, Burke cranks up 
the power too high on a weapon, and the result is a disaster.  The 
senator is killed and Sparks loses the use of her legs.  As a result, 
Burke is thrown out of the military and goes to work for himself.  John 
also leaves, although of his own volition, and returns to L.A., where he 
helps his uncle (the venerable Richard Roundtree) out at a local junk 
yard.
     Then Burke's weapons start appearing on the streets of L.A., and 
John realizes he has to do something to stop them.  So, like any law-
abiding citizen, he creates a superhero alter-ego.  With the help of 
Sparks and Uncle Joe, Steel combs the benighted streets of the City of 
Angels, seeking to stop crime wherever it can be uncovered.  He 
confounds a mugger, stops a gang fight, and, eventually, comes face to 
face with the group of theives using Burke's sonic weapon to gain 
illegal entry to the Federal Reserve.
     Annabeth Gish (BEAUTIFUL GIRLS) has a winning smile and is suitably 
sweet as Sparks, and Judd Nelson has the villain's sneer down pat.  But 
STEEL's lead actor, Shaquille O'Neal, shows that he's got a long way to 
go before being considered a competent actor.  O'Neal is fine when he's 
in the Steel suit, but, out of it, he's prone to bouts of uncontrollable 
stiffness.  It's not a pretty sight.  Back when I reviewed the awful 
KAZAAM, I indicated that O'Neal has a palpable screen presence.  My 
opinion hasn't changed -- it's just that, at this point, his acting has 
a distance to go before it catches up with his charisma.  In supporting 
roles, Richard Roundtree (the immortal SHAFT himself) and Irma B. Hall 
are both delightful.  In fact, Roundtree gives the film's most memorable 
peformance, continually stealing scenes from all of his co-stars.  
     Comic book collectors will insist that there's more depth to the 
characters than one might expect from the medium.  That may be true, but 
it's not evident in STEEL, where everyone has a clearly-defined role and 
personality.  None of these characters undergoes any significant growth, 
and the few stabs made at character development are trite and 
ineffective.  Writer/director Kenneth Johnson is the same man who once 
wrote for THE SIX MILLION DOLLAR MAN television show, and was credited 
for some of that program's most innovative storylines (including "The 
Bionic Woman" and "The Secret of Bigfoot").  But, while I enjoyed THE 
SIX MILLION DOLLAR MAN when I was about ten, I no longer find it 
particularly satisfying or enjoyable (except, perhaps, in a campy 
sense).  Much the same is true of STEEL -- its appeal is limited, and 
not adult in nature.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     How's this for diminishing returns?  In BATMAN AND ROBIN, George
Clooney battled Arnold Schwarzenegger.  In SPAWN, it was Michael Jai
White versus John Leguizamo.  In STEEL, the third and presumably *final*
superhero stretch of the summer, Shaquille O'Neal dons a high-tech,
hand-crafted suit of armor to combat the earth-shaking, world-shatter-
ing, super-duper-ultra evil menace of... Judd Nelson?  Holy economical
casting!  The latest synergistic teaming of Warner Brothers and D.C.
Comics is a strictly third-rate affair, with a forgettable hero (Shaq,
all size and smiles in his ridiculous costume) performing forgettable
feats (stopping a mugger, shooting back at bad guys) while in pursuit of
a forgettable villain (Nelson's revenge-seeking arms dealer, whose sole
super-power appears to be the ability to stifle laughter among those
actors sharing scenes with him).
     Pure cheese, but it's well-intended.  There's lots of family love
and a majority of minority characters and one disabled person (Annabeth
Gish) that the story makes a bit of an embarrassing big deal about, but
later redeems itself by giving her a kick-ass laser-firing wheelchair.
(Let's see *her* action figure go up against Share-a-Smile Barbie.) The
amount of gratuitous violence is quite reasonable and there's enough
scattered laughs to hold a bored parent's attention.  (I enjoyed Richard
Roundtree's SHAFT reference, a couple of hilarious comments about the
Internet, and one whopper of an Ahnuld gag at the end.) If only the lack
of realism wasn't *quite* as distracting.  I know, I know, not exactly a
valid complaint in a movie based on a comic book, but, good God, a Man
of Steel with an exposed mouth and lower jaw?  And who spends half of
his time engaged in gunfights?  Sigh.  Written and directed by Kenneth
Johnson, an old TV hack whose credits include "Alien Nation" and "The
Incredible Hulk."  Eat the hot dog, don't be one.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Shaquille O'Neal, Annabeth Gish, Judd Nelson and Richard
Roundtree
Synopsis: 
Shaq plays an army tech who works on high tech non-lethal weapons. He
quits when an accident injures a buddy played by Annabeth Gish, but then
goes home and notices his high tech weaponry appearing in local street
gangs. He invents an anti-terrorist suit of armor and dubs himself,
"Steel". 
Opinion: Shaq's acting has gotten a whole lot better. In this movie, he
even does a better acting job than George Klooney did on Batman. The
movie is better than Batman, and the  plot is also better than Batman,
with less distractions. But keep in mind this is not a big budget movie
with big name actors and effects. It has the feel of a made for TV,
tongue-in-cheek, made for kids, film. For example, everyone in the film
is pretty wholesome, with family type situations and no swearing. There
are some inside jokes such as Shaq being unable to hit a free throw, and
Richard Roundtree (he played a supercop named "Shaft" a few decades ago)
commenting on the "Shaft" of a weapon. Not bad as a made for kids film.

Author
Doug Skiles
STEEL
Starring: Shaquille O'Neal (John Henry Irons/Steel), Annabeth Gish (Lt.
Sparks), Richard Roundtree (Uncle Joe), Judd Nelson (Lt. Nathaniel
Burke)
Directed by: Kenneth Johnson
Written by: Kenneth Johnson
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence and strong language
Los Angeles street thugs are being supplied with a whole new kind of
weaprony.  These are weapons that can injure and incapacitate a target,
but do not kill.  Lt. Nathaniel Burke is supplying these weapons to the
gangs so that the world can see the power he has available to them, for
the right price.  But these weapons were created by John Henry Irons,
and Johnny's not happy when he comes home to LA to find his weapons
being used for evil.  Feeling responsible for this, he calls on his old
friends Lt. Sparks and Uncle Joe to help become someone who is able to
stand up to the gangs.  Man.  Metal.  Hero.  STEEL.
Let's face it, STEEL is one goofy flick.  Any movie starring Shaq is
already asking for trouble.  Add to that the retro-'70s SHAFT-esque
soundtrack, and the fact that Shaft himself (Richard Roundtree) is
actually in the movie, and you've got one seriously wacked-out
production.  But that's part of what makes STEEL kind of amusing.  I
smiled every time I heard them play that funky music, white boy.  I
grinned when Judd Nelson strutted right up to our hero actually tried to
be intimidating towards O'Neal (who, of course, is at least two feet
taller than him).  I even laughed when a street gang member, decked out
in leather, gold chains, and weaponry, uttered "word?" to the prospect
of a turkey hot dog.  I doubt that this was actual intentional humor...
but it was so downright silly that I liked it.  What can I say?
That's not to say that this is good cinema in any sense.  STEEL is
pretty basically average, or slightly below that.  Some aspects are
irritating, like Johnny's Grandma, and the running gag about how Shaq
can't make free throws (basically true).  Shaq's no thespian (I'd love
to see this guy try Shakespeare... "Othello," anyone?), but he does a
better job here than George Clooney did in this summer's BATMAN & ROBIN
at least (then again, *I* could do a better acting job than Clooney did
in that movie).  And the action sequences, though likable, are also
unspectacular.
Still, there's something pleasant about the feel of all this.  The disco
music playing while our nice-guy superhero takes down the bad guys is
something to see.  When Steel first stops a mugging and returns the
stolen wallet to its rightful owners, the lucky couple is on the news
that night, saying, in amazing "He was so... polite!" Kinda makes you
wish we were a little more like Steel, doesn't it?  After all, who among
us *wouldn't* like being seven feet tall?

Author
Scott Renshaw
STEEL
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Shaquille O'Neal, Annabeth Gish, Richard Roundtree, Judd
Nelson.
Screenplay:  Kenneth Johnson, based on the comic book characters created
by Louise Simonson and John Bogdanove.
Producers:  Quincy Jones, David Salzman and Joel Simon.
Director:  Kenneth Johnson.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, comic book violence)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It doesn't take long to figure out that there's something decidedly
unfashionable about STEEL.  The opening theme song, with its
wakka-cha-wakka guitar track, sounds like it was salvaged from a 1970s TV
series; ditto the no-nonsense exposition, arch-villains and even archer
performances.  All of which is quite appropriate, since writer/director
Kenneth Johnson wrote and directed for 70s adventure series like "The
Bionic Woman" and "The Incredible Hulk."  You might swear that Johnson had
made STEEL 20 years ago, dusted it off and gussied it up with a few modern
special effects, if not for the fact that Shaquille O'Neal would have been
in pre-school at the time.
     The funny thing about STEEL is that it's so unfashionable it's
actually refreshing.  The plot casts O'Neal as an army weapons expert
named John Henry Irons, who leaves the service when one of his creations
accidentally leaves his good friend Sparky (Annabeth Gish) a paraplegic.
"Johnny" is resolved to lead a quiet civilian life until he notices that
some powerful military hardware has ended up in the hands of a street
gang.  With the help of Sparky's electronics wizardry and the raw
materials provided by his junkman Uncle Joe (Richard Roundtree), Johnny
creates a high-tech suit of armor to help him bring down the turncoat
soldier (Judd Nelson) providing military technology to criminals.
     Thus is born Steel, a hero with a decidedly unfashionable modus
operandi:  he just wants to make the world a better place.  He isn't a
tormented soul seething with a need for vengeance, or a shady anti-hero
with a dark side and a hundred vices to "humanize" him.  He doesn't even
kill anybody.  He simply acts out of a sense of responsibility...and he's
very polite.
     Perhaps it helps to have a certain nostalgia for the admittedly
B-grade TV STEEL is modeled after, because it's certainly nobody's idea of
stellar film-making.  Shaquille O'Neal, who still can't act a lick, coasts
through the film on his affability and a running gag about his inability
to make free throws.  Johnson asks little of his actors -- he's used to
working with Lou Ferrigno, for heaven's sake -- offering them direction
which seems to consist of "stand there and read your lines."  He seems
perfectly aware that STEEL is a formulaic action film with stock
characters and fight scenes placed at carefully spaced intervals, yet he
also seems perfectly sincere about his subject.
     That sincerity is part of what makes STEEL so improbably satisfying.
Johnson refuses to wink at Steel's selflessness, or to mock him for being
such a square; he refuses to take his straightforward narrative and turn
it into a collection of incoherently edited battles peppered with
one-liners.  He has made a film about role models, role models who happen
to be an African-American man and a disabled woman, and you get the
impression that the people involved feel good about that without
preaching about it.  STEEL isn't going to dazzle anybody, particularly the
kids who will make up most of the audience.  They'll be used to cutting
edge effects, chaotic battles and even more chaotic storylines, not the
perfectly comprehensible (if extremely simplistic) narrative of STEEL.
Those kids may find it all pretty old-fashioned, but I hope there's still
a place for old-fashioned heroes, the kind who say "Yes, ma'am" and mean
it.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Ah, the family classic Kazaam, starring that ever popular Shaquille O'Neal,
once a big basketball star. Space Jam was a hit with Michael Jordan, why not
have other players act? That ever popular movie about Shaq being a genie in a
bottle made $18 million, and it's time to do a sequel.
(NOTE ON ABOVE PARAGRAPH: Anyone reading the above paragraph and thought that I
was actually serious should seek medical help immediately by going to
www.shrink.com) 
How many times does it take those dumb studio executives to figure out that
something doesn't work? If O'Neal's movie premiere, Kazaam, which made the
Internet Movie Database's Top 10 Worst Films of the 90s than why make another
movie starring this tall basketball hero? What is an extremely poor rehash (it
almost gets the same treatment that this summer's other comic book to screen
dissapointment Spawn got) of a great old comic book, turns into a violent,
cheesy, and inane chase through a city of bad guys.
The evil Nathaniel Burke (Judd Nelson) purposefully shoots fellow officer Susan
Sparks (Gish) with an overpowered weapon right in front of John Henry Irons
(O'Neal, his name is Henry Irons and Steel, get it?) on the testing field. He's
some type of psychotic maniac and plans to reek hell on the world by letting
everyone feel his pain. When Susan becomes confined to a wheelchair, John helps
her on her road to recovery. 
But all is not well, Burke has decided to sell the powerful weapons on the
black market and hires unknowingly naive young African-Americans to sell them
for him. But, (and I hope your sitting down) my god, he's captured John's baby
brother! This prompts him to turn into a superhuman metal man with a cool suit
and plenty of interesting gadgets.
An action film easily more forgettable than Batman & Robin. At least Batman had
some flashly effects and cool scenes. This film is filled with countless scenes
that are so bad, it almost appears as if some of the actors are holding back
their laughter. Another thing that makes it bad is the fact that we a supposed
to actually care for all of these characters when they are placed into danger,
even though we know that they cannot possibly die because this is a run-of-the
mill action flick. This is another film to see if you enjoy inflicting pain on
yourself, and I give it * star.
The Young-Uns: This film contains lots of violence and showcases it as a way of
solving problems, it glorifies this is many ways. However, it's not as nearly
as violent as many other action films your child's already seen. Good Age:
11-12
ADDITIONAL NOTE: This film also made the Internet Movie Database's Top 10 Worst
Films of the 90s.
