Title
Review for Few Good Men, A (1992)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A FEW GOOD MEN is an entertaining
     courtroom drama with some good dialogue.  The script raises
     issues and then unfortunately handles them in a very
     superficial manner.  Nicholson's Colonel Jessep is so
     despicable and vile that the film bypasses a discussion of
     issues and is more the story of the slaying of a monster.
     Rating: low +1 (-4 to +4).  Very minor spoilers.
     Rob Reiner has proved himself to be a fine director, though his scripts
have occasionally been better directed than written.  His latest film has
just such problems.  A FEW GOOD MEN is his film version of Aaron Sorkin's
Broadway play with Sorkin himself writing the screenplay.  Any court martial
play invites comparison to Herman Wouk's "Caine Mutiny Court-Martial," and
in several major aspects, Sorkin's play falls short.
     Marine Pfc. William T. Santiago, stationed at Guantanamo, Cuba, just
did not measure up to the high standards set by the U.S. Marine Corps.  He
is killed in a hazing incident perpetrated by Pfc. Lawson Downey and Lance
Cpl. Harold W. Dawson.  A mis-matched set of Navy lawyers is given the task
of providing the defense in the court martial.  And over the whole idea is
the shadow of Col. Nathan Jessep (played by Jack Nicholson), who commands
the Marines at Guantanamo.  We know almost immediately that Jessep is the
source of all the evil that has taken place.  Little effort is spared in the
script to make Jessep as vile and politically incorrect as possible  The
goals of our three defense lawyers--Lt. Cmdr. JoAnne Galloway (played by
Demi Moore), Lt.(j.g.) Daniel Kaffee (played by Tom Cruise), and Lt. Sam
Weinberg (played by Kevin Pollak)--are first, to stop conflicting with each
other; second, to put together a case to help Downey and Dawson; and third,
if possible, to at the same time bring down the incredibly nasty
Col. Jessep.  The result is a fun, entertaining, Kleenex-like sort of movie
that is a long way from the classic that some critics are claiming it to be.
     While I enjoyed the film, it did not work for me as a drama for three
very strong reasons.  The first is that the three lawyers are trying to
defend two men who to better their position in the Marines were willing to
stuff a rag in a man's mouth, seal his mouth and bind him with duct tape,
and (in so doing) cause the man's death.  It is a little hard to root for
the lawyers defending them.  It is even harder to root for this team of
lawyers.  In their own way they are every bit as unprofessional as Jessep.
Kaffee and Galloway start out at each other's throats for the good reason
that neither is particularly good as a lawyer.  Cruise's Kaffee, slick and
just a bit slimy as a lawyer, is lackadaisically doing his job and prides
himself on his long list of low-effort court cases.  Moore's Galloway is
hopeless in her efforts to control Kaffee, and it is only Pollak as the
sweet, healing, wise, Jewish lawyer who is able to hold the team together.
These are flat, unengaging characters, and they are not written very well.
But the film could have survived that if Nicholson's Jessep had been better
written.
     The third complaint is in the portrayal of Jessep.  If the other
characters are flat, the disgusting Jessep is linear.  It is difficult to
believe that this tactless, rather disgusting man could be given a position
of prominence as he has been in this film.  And it is a serious mistake to
oversimplify the negative characters of the film, making them easier to
detest.  At no point do we see anything in the film from Jessep's point of
view.  How much would it compromise his character to show a little merit in
his arguments?  Bringing him down has much more dramatic impact if it is
regrettable but necessary than if it is dragon-slaying.  That brings me back
to how much better a similar story was handled in the play "The Caine Mutiny
Court-Martial" or nearly as well in the film THE CAINE MUTINY.  A FEW GOOD
MEN is a film whose conflict was asking to be fleshed out, but which
preferred not to risk having the audience agree with the wrong side.
     In the final analysis, we have a film that is entertaining without
being provocative, but is enjoyable for mindless entertainment.  From me it
gets a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  I am a little surprised at the
positive critical comment it has gotten elsewhere.

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
As of 1997, Jack Nicholson has won three Academy Awards.  In 1975 as
Best Actor in 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest' even though Nicholson
should have won for 'Chinatown' in 1974 and Al Pacino should have won
for 'Dog Day Afternoon' the year that Nicholson won for 'One Flew Over
the Cuckoo's Nest', but that's the way things go.  Nicholson has also
won in 1983 for Best Supporting Actor in 'Terms of Endearment' and in
1997, again for Best Actor in 'As Good As it Gets'.  Nicholson's only
other Oscar nomination in the 90's so far has been for Best Supporting
Actor in 1992's 'A Few Good Men'.  Nicholson's portrayal of a deranged
and fanatical Marine named Col. Nathan Jessep is largely the strength
that holds 'A Few Good Men' together for its entire run of 138 minutes.
As a courtroom drama for much of its running time, it has the potential
to fizz out quickly but Nicholson's appearance in the movie's climax is
the film's defining moment.  Whenever a movie runs over two hours in
length, I always get nervous, fearing over length but that doesn't occur
in this film in which Nicholson appears only in four key scenes but they
are the most powerful in the film.
The film opens on a U.S. military base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba where two
Marines are seen bursting into the room of another where they gag him
with electrical tape, tie his hands and feet with it and stuff a rag
into his mouth.  As we cut to the opening credits list, we are treated
to a sequence of drills performed by a squadron of Marines in full
formal dress who perform some fancy movements with their rifles.  As the
film begins its basic run, we discover that the opening sequence has led
to the death of the Marine ambushed and legal counsel is assigned to
represent the two other Marines charged with the crime of murdering
him.  Lt. Commander JoAnne Galloway (Demi Moore) asks for the job but
the assignment goes to Lt. Daniel Kaffee (Tom Cruise) who has only been
out of law school and in the Navy a short while.  Kaffee's specialty is
plea bargains.  He is reluctant to go to court.  His investigation of
the case leads him to go to court eventually to defend the Marines
charged with murder.
Kaffee's colleague and the lead prosecutor is Capt. Jack Ross (Kevin
Bacon) who is extremely convincing in this film and the matching of
court skills between Bacon and Cruise is one of the film's greatest
strengths.  There are no dirty tricks involved between the two in order
for one to win his case.  They are friends through and through the
trial, and this, while not that noticeable at first, is one of the
film's greatest assets.  One scene in a bar during the trial even has
Ross admitting to being Kaffee's friend and he advises Kaffee that his
conduct in court could land him a court-martial.
After reading a plot outline from any description of the film, it would
lead you to believe that 'A Few Good Men' has its share of good guys and
bad guys.  Partly true, and partly false because the characters
perceived to be the villains believe in what they're doing from an
extreme position taken in their military duties and also believe they
aren't guilty of any crime because of their "code" in protecting their
country.
Jack Nicholson's counter parts on the base in Cuba are Lt. Col. Matthew
Markinson (the late J.T. Walsh) and Lt. Jonathan Kendrick (Kiefer
Sutherland), a nasty redneck of a Marine who would probably shoot you if
their was an improper mark on your uniform.  J.T. Walsh is probably the
film's weakest character, not because of his skill as an actor, but
because he is over shadowed by many other popular superstars.
Tom Cruise and Demi Moore are joined by co-counsel Sam Weinberg (Kevin
Pollak) who is the pillar of strength for both of them and a voice of
intelligent reason at the times that are the most tense.  Director Rob
Reiner keeps the film moving at a brisk pace and the film doesn't have a
single boring spot and the screenplay by Aaron Sorkin, based on his
play, isn't full of surprises but is full of snappy dialogue and in the
film's final resolution, Sorkin sets out to resolve what was originally
discussed by the characters earlier in the film.  It's not a
conventional court room drama but one with an off beat texture.  The
most interesting thing about Sorkin's script is that even though the
plot lacks depth, it still requires your full attention as it looks and
feels like putting pieces of a jigsaw puzzle together.
Nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, 'A Few Good
Men' is a film with universal appeal as its main focus isn't only about
finding the truth, it's about the main character, Tom Cruise's lethal
performance as a Navy officer and lawyer, and his willingness to earn
the respect of his peers.  Something we all want.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Michael S. Huang
Directed by Rob Reiner
Starring Tom Cruise, Demi Moore, Jack Nicholson, Kiefer Sutherland, and
         Kevin Bacon
     The past few years have been lacking genuinely well-told stories
that are there for the essence of the yarn -- tales that make people
think and feel.  Movies of late have relied on special effects, sex,
violence, controversy, and big names to bring in audiences, and this is
the first movie in a while which I've seen that doesn't use any of these
except the big names and doesn't rely on *any* of them to keep your
attention.
     The story starts out with the brutal beating and murder of a
Private First Class at the United States Naval Base, Marine Barracks in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
     Moore, as the officer in Internal Affairs finds out about this case
and wants to pursue this as a case of "Code Red," illegal hazing and
beating of marines who are not up to par for some reason.
     Her superiors deny her request to press this case, and forward it
to Tom Cruise who plays a Harvard Law School graduate who has been out
of school for nine months and in the Navy for only seven.  He's had a
history of brilliant plea-bargains, and has never actually defended a
client in court.
     Enter Nicholson, who is the Colonel in command of the Marines in
Guantanamo Bay, and Sutherland, his right-hand man (well, once removed.
:-)  Nicholson's character ordered the "Code Red" which eventually led
to the killing of the Private.
     This is the premise for the story of getting to the truth, and
Cruise and Moore's battle through Marine Code of Platoon, Corps, God,
Country.  They must dig out the truth through a group of highly
disciplined soldiers who are trained to obey orders, and to put nothing
above the word of their superiors.
     Reiner did an outstanding job with the movie's direction, and
Cruise was brilliant in a few courtroom scenes.  Moore gave much of
herself in her role as a very self-determined, stubborn, headstrong
Naval Officer, and Nicholson played an unbelievable courtroom scene
near the end of the movie.
     Cinematography was well-done, and music was moderately-well-done.
     This movie is a definite gem among today's common movies being
released.  Unlike others like BASIC INSTINCT, and TERMINATOR 2 it
doesn't rely on gratuitous sex or violence to convey an extremely
well-told story.  There isn't any gore or "skin," although there is a
bit of language spread through the film, although done well with the
type of story being told.  An extremely well-done story.  A definite
must-see.

Author
Jon Webb
     I was reluctant to see this film because I'm not wild about Tom
Cruise, but THE CRYING GAME hasn't hit Pittsburgh yet, and it came down
to a choice between HOFFA, which my wife didn't want to see, and this,
which I'd actually heard was good.  So we went.
     It turned out to be a pretty good film, after all.  It is
entertaining, funny, and has plenty of good acting, especially from Jack
Nicholson (no surprise there) and Tom Cruise (big surprise to me).
     Tom Cruise is a nonchalant but successful Navy lawyer who is handed
a politically sensitive case: two Marines at Guantanamo Bay have
accidentally killed another in a hazing incident ordered by the base
commander, Jack Nicholson.  Of course, Tom Cruise mus come to terms with
his inability to take anything seriously, grow up, etc.
     What makes this film good is that it is obvious that Tom Cruise is
having a great time.  His performance is full of energy and fun.  I'm
really beginning to think that I've underestimated Tom Cruise; I think
that he can still be a great actor, even though he keeps playing the
same character over and over.  After all, many of the great male actors
have managed to become great with only one good character -- look at,
for example, Jimmy Cagney.
     Jack Nicholson's performance is rich and interesting, too, although
he's not on that much.  At the end, in the courtroom, he seems like an
out of control bull; I would have been terrified to be there with him.
     By the way, there's a marvelous moment when Cruise imitates
Nicholson's character.  Watch for it.
     Demi Moore's performance is a real downer, not interesting at all,
at least to me.
     I respected the screenplay because it showed restraint; some of the
more obvious cliches are avoided, e.g., in the relationship between
Moore and Cruise.  Some of the little tricks are clever, like the
cliched conversation between Cruise and the newspaper seller.
     The direction felt a little odd.  I couldn't tell what was going on
in Cruise's mind during the courtroom confrontation with Nicholson.
Similarly with the earlier meeting in Guantanamo Bay.

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
(NOTE-This is the 2nd of 5 retro reviews of Jack Nicholson films
I plan to do in the next few weeks. Starting with "Chinatown"
last week, I will analyze five of Jack's very best performances.)
Great dialogue stays with you. Heck, if it's good enough, you can
sit around with your friends and recite half a movie. There was a
time in college that I could shout out almost every line in "A
Few Good Men". The famous courtroom climax ("YOU CAN'T HANDLE THE
TRUTH...") was only the best part of a script where if you sat
beside me, you might think the stereo surround effect of this
movie was really terrific. Of course, some people get annoyed by
such grandstanding, so I had to watch the powerful film alone.
Soon after, I stopped watching it altogether and hadn't seen it
for well over a year. That is, until a few nights ago when the
worn-out tape found its way into the VCR. And you know what--I
can STILL follow right along almost flawlessly!
A critical and financial success, this film hits the right
buttons. A blockbuster when it came out in '92, "A Few Good Men"
is full of people who are movie stars, not actors. Although Jack
Nicholson has won 3 Oscars and Tom Cruise should win one or two
eventually, they are movie stars first and thespians second. This
label has kept Cruise from getting the critical praise he
deserves, but it doesn't hinder him at all in finding great
projects and great castmates. By co-starring with Paul Newman,
Dustin Hoffman, and Robert Duvall before this role opposite
Nicholson (and later with Gene Hackman and Jon Voight), Cruise
showed he was worthy of working with the best. And, save for
Steven Spielberg, Cruise has been guided by most of the great
directors of the last 30 years. Holding it against him because
he's handsome is silly. He graces the scenes he's in with charm
and talent instead of barging in and dominating them.
Director Rob Reiner was looking for "a few good men" when he shot
this picture. He found more than a few--first selecting the right
man to play Lt. Daniel Kaffee (Cruise) in this charged-up
courtroom drama. All the aforementioned barging and dominating is
done by one of the great villains of the '90s, Colonel Nathan R.
Jessep (Nicholson in his 10th Oscar-nominated performance).
Nicholson could easily have won the Best Supporting Actor award
for turning this movie upside down and for so effectively tearing
everything apart. Let's not forget about Lt./Commander JoAnne
Galloway (played by another movie star, Demi Moore), Captain Jack
Ross (Kevin Bacon), Lt. Sam Weinberg (Kevin Pollack), or Lt.
Kendrick (Kiefer Sutherland). 
The powerhouse cast compliments Aaron Sorkin's screenplay (based
on his own play) about two young marines based in Cuba who are
charged with the murder of one of their fellow marines. The movie
opens with the death of PFC William T. Santiago, a notorious
screw-up who accidentally dies during a hazing ritual
administered by Lnc./Cpl. Dawson and PFC Downie. We later learn
that their superior officers (Jessep and Kendrick) ordered this
"Code Red" to bring Santiago back in line after breaking the
chain of command and ratting to higher authorities on Dawson for
an illegal fenceline shooting. Santiago had been pleading for a
transfer off the base for 9 months and hoped the information he
had about the fenceline shooting could be exchanged for that
transfer. The fanatical Colonel Jessep gets hold of the letter
and lectures to his Executive Officer Lt./Colonel Markinson (J.T.
Walsh) and Kendrick that rather than pawning off their
sub-standard marine, they should "train the lad". Ironically,
they order Dawson--the very marine who could face disciplinary
action because of Santiago's tattling--to beat some sense into
him. After the boy dies, Jessep covers it up and Markinson goes
along with it despite his strenuous objections.
While that is essentially the plot, this film is not just about
marines or cover-ups or revenge. It's about daring to defy higher
powers (and often logic) and doing what's right by following your
conscience. That applies to Dawson and Downie (Wolfgang Bodison
and James Marshall, respectively) as well as Kaffee, their
attorney. He's the hot-shot young Navy lawyer and the best young
litigator in the JAG corps--particularly at plea-bargaining. He's
never seen the inside of a courtroom and tries to get his two
clients to accept a deal rather than risk getting put in jail for
life by facing a losing battle in a formal court martial. The
young marines refuse to plead guilty and take the deal because
they maintain they were only following orders. Galloway nags
Kaffee to stand up and defend them. He reluctantly takes the case
to court despite a complete lack of evidence in their favour
(after all, they DID kill Santiago). They step on numerous
landmines until the infamous climax between young pony Cruise and
old warhorse Nicholson where the truth is exposed in a huge
explosion of tension and drama.
The script takes a few liberties. Any lawyer worth his salt would
drop the case when the reluctance of his two defendants to accept
a sweet deal puts them all in such peril. By going into the
courtroom with no evidence (and with their clients having a
motive), they can only assign the blame for the death to Jessep
and Kendrick. If Kaffee falsely accuses the decorated officers
without proper evidence, he would face a career-destroying court
martial of his own. It's the superfluous sub-plot about his late
father (who was a legendary lawyer) that probably explains why he
throws caution to the wind and tries to win such an unwinnable
case by street-smarts and spin-doctoring alone. He wants to live
up to his father's legacy (and probably to stop Galloway from
pestering him!).
Criticisms--It's doubtful that Nicholson's remarkable thundering
during a court martial would be accepted by any judge. He doesn't
so much answer questions on the witness stand as he tells the
world how lucky it is to have such a strong man defending the
nation. Other small problems occurred with the usually top-notch
editing. During an early scene where baseball-loving Kaffee takes
batting practice, the conversation between he and Galloway is cut
in such a way that the continuity is a little off. In one shot
he's in the process of swinging the bat. Quickly cut to the other
and the bat is already on his shoulder. And to nitpick, we see
Kaffee watching a ballgame between Minnesota and Baltimore after
the case has begun. How?! The case starts on October 3rd and that
would be World Series time. Well, at least American League
Championship Series time, but those two teams didn't even meet in
the playoffs! Sorry, I'm scrutinizing, but it's a noticeable
gaffe. Also, I HATE when modern movies say "The End" when it's
over. Arggh!
However, everything in those last two paragraphs is a careful
criticism. This movie scores in a big way and only a long-time
fan would even care about the mistakes. Two of the finest
dialogue-driven films of the '90s (non-Tarantino works, of
course) came out in 1992 (this and "Glengarry Glen Ross") and "A
Few Good Men" stands above all. Sorkin wrote this in a way that
the court scenes were dynamic and the Kaffee/Galloway
relationship was heated yet platonic. Many of the characters
learn to respect each other, but the film doesn't manipulate a
perfect ending. It wraps up right when it should. Because of the
sharp editing--save for those small continuity errors--this is
fast-paced and completely riveting. During scenes of
conversation, it's like you're right there with the actors and
you forget that everyone's dialogue was filmed separately.
The screenplay has racist, sexist characters, but the movie rises
above those shady slimeballs. Both Jessep and Kendrick have
racial and sexist issues (if you listen to what they say and how
they say it, you'll understand). Still, the underdogs (the female
Galloway, the black Dawson, the Jewish Weinberg, and the kid
Kaffee) match the tough guys because the actors exude appropriate
strength and charisma. You'll get some laughs when the subject
matter eases up a little, too. The cinematography is fantastic at
times--especially during the rifle drill during the opening
credits--and the sound mix is fine. This film scored for North
Americans for many reasons--it's patriotic, dynamic, cultural,
interesting, and so well acted by its superstars.
In two of Nicholson's few scenes, he and Cruise are at opposite
ends of the spectrum. Cruise looks like a baby next to Jack, but
that's the point. Will we buy into Kaffee beating the proverbial
truth out of Jessep? Oh yeah, we do. This is "Star Wars" without
the lightsabers. We know exactly who the good guy is and who the
bad guy is. Cruise is confident, but he's human. We relate to the
young man and we like him. Without a doubt, Colonel Jessep is one
of the great screen villains of the '90s. Nicholson's eyes burn
with hatred and his body manner is incredibly powerful.
"A Few Good Men" skillfully hits the mark with a bullseye. It's
intense when it should be and funny when it should be. Finely
crafted and well-cast, it remains one of the more memorable
courtroom dramas in film history. If you ever forget why, give me
a buzz and I'd be happy to shout "YOU CAN'T HANDLE THE TRUTH..."
and the rest of the script in near-perfect synchronization.
USELESS TRIVIA--Along with the superstars in "A Few Good Men",
youngsters Noah Wyle (Dr. Carter on TV's "E.R.") and Cuba Gooding
Jr. (Oscar-winner in "Jerry Maguire") also appeared.


Author
Brian L. Johnson
142 min., R, Drama, 1992
Director: Rob Reiner
Cast: Jack Nicholson, Tom Cruise, Demi Moore, Kevin Bacon,
      Kevin Pollak, James Marshall, J. T. Walsh, Kiefer Sutherland,      
      Christopher Guest, Xander Berkeley
     Two Marines are accused of killing another Marine in their platoon.
They are represented by Navy lawyer Tom Cruise and by Demi Moore.
Cruise and Moore want to prove that the Marines didn't kill the man on
purpose, but were just following orders given by their commanding
officer, Jack Nicholson.
     A FEW GOOD MEN is an excellent film, and I suggest that you don't
miss it.  I enjoyed every minute of it.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give A FEW GOOD MEN a five.  A FEW GOOD MEN is rated R for explicit
language and violence.
     The cast for this film is exceptional.  I expect to see some
Academy Award nominations for the cast (among other categories) for this
film.  Jack Nicholson (HOFFA, THE SHINING) stands out above the rest of
the cast.  His performance is the best that I have ever seen him give.
I think that Jack Nicholson gives a much better performance in this film
than in HOFFA, so if you can only see one of his current films I suggest
this one.  Tom Cruise (RAIN MAN, RISKY BUSINESS) gives an excellent
performance.  His character is completely believable.  Demi Moore (GHOST
[1990], ABOUT LAST NIGHT..., BLAME IT ON RIO) is perfect.  I don't think
that she could have done any better with her character.  Kevin Bacon
(FLATLINERS, PLANES TRAINS & AUTOMOBILES) is great.  Kiefer Sutherland
(1969, TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME) also is outstanding.
     The director, Rob Reiner (THE PRINCESS BRIDE, STAND BY ME), does an
excellent job.  He has created a near perfect, if not perfect, film.
The writing for this film is great.  I was entranced for every minute of
this film.  This film is far better than the other court film out, BODY
OF EVIDENCE.
     The locations used for this film are great.  They set the film
perfectly.  The characters are well built so that they are all three
dimensional.  They are characters that I found myself liking or hating.
They also can bring emotion from the audience watching the film.  I
could probably go on forever talking about all the great aspects of this
film so I will stop here before I end up boring you.  Definitely go out
and see this film as soon as possible.
