Title
Review for Breakfast at Tiffany's (1961)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frankie Paiva
Ah, Audrey Hepburn, one of the cinema's greatest stars, she's never been
shining brighter than here. Holly Golighty (Hepburn) is an eccentric woman who
lives in an apartment building where she annoys Mr. Yunioshi (Mickey Rooney) by
pushing his buzzer when she loses her key. 
Moving in upstairs is Paul Varjak (Peppard) whom Holly instantly begins to call
Fred (as he looks somewhat like her beloved brother.) Paul is not sweet and
innocent, he's having an affair with 2-E (Patricia Neal) and wants to end it
because he's falling in love.
Every great romantic moment after 1961 in the movies had to take at least one
or two things from Breakfast at Tiffany's. Whether it be modern classics like
Notting Hill and My Best Friend's Wedding or older hits. But the movie oozes so
much cuteness (almost as if you were walking into a Sanrio store) that there's
no way you can resist it. Now I always like to make my reviews for the classics
short enough so that no one gets mad at me and says, "Why did you diss my
favorite movie of all time? What is wrong with you?" I simply can't go on
enough on how much I loved this movie, it's a fun romantic classic. Go to an
older video store, go and rent it now.
ADDITIONAL NOTE: Go, go to Suncoast and buy it now.

Author
Noel Wood
The following review is property of MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED and cannot
be quoted or referenced without proper credit. For more information, go to the
homepage at http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
May we hope that somewhere in heaven, George Peppard is resting peaceably.
After all, this is the guy who played Hannibal. No, not the cannibal and not
the guy who crossed the Swiss Alps. The leader of the force that compromised
the most wonderful television program to ever appear on a major network.
By the way, who played Murdock? Peppard was 
Hannibal, as we've already established. And the true Hollywood Icon Mr. T
played B.A. Baracus. And if I recall correctly, Dirk Benedict of BATTLESTAR
GALACTICA fame played the Face. And later there was some useless chick in the
group but nobody really gives a damn who played her. But everyone I ask draws a
blank when I ask if they remember who played Murdock.
How could anyone NOT love the A-Team? Only in
the Reagan era could a show this violent do so 
well on a major network. Sure, there are action
shows on today like Xena: Warrior Princess and Renegade, but they're relegated
to syndication and basic cable and piss-ant studios like UPN. NBC would never
have the balls to run a show as macho as the A-Team in the Clinton-dominated
liberal 90's. 
After all, this was a show about Vietnam vets who apparently were like
vigilantes and shit who got sick of the way the government was treating them so
they took matters in to their own hands. Or something like that. I mean, I was
pretty young when the show was running so I didn't really understand the
dynamics of it. I just loved it because of all the unneccessary violence that
was well above and beyond what I could see on the Dukes of Hazzard.
Even the intro montage to the A-Team was cool. There were all these big action
scenes with explosions and stuff and then they'd freeze-frame on one of the
actors in an action pose and put the little caption that said "Starring George
Peppard as Hannibal". Then at the end of the title sequence they shot bullets
at the A-Team logo and the faces of the team members appeares in the bullet
holes. Man, that was cool.
And of course they had that van. I used to have the A-Team van and all the
figures from Galoob but I think they got sold at a garage sale or something. It
was kinda cool because they were the same size as my G.I.Joes so I could
pretend Mr.T had joined Cobra or something. I did go to Universal Studios as a
kid and got to lift the A-Team van with my bare hands. Actually it was hollowed
out so that the average little kid could lift it. But apparently it was from an
episode where Murdock got trapped under the van so B.A. had to lift it up in a
fit of adrenaline. So they used this hollowed-out prop van so Mr.T could lift
it because apparently Mr. T was a pussy in real life, much like Richard Donner.
Actually, Mr. T's character was pretty much a pussy on the show too. Remember,
they always had to slip him a mickey or knock him out to get him in to a
helicopter because big bad B.A. was afraid to fly?
And what was the deal with Murdock anyway? I know that I can't remember for the
life of me who played him but it was also weird because his character was crazy
but not really crazy.I mean, he acted like he was crazy and it scared the shit
out of the bad guys but when it came down to it he was kind of smart. Like when
he was handling bombs or something and he acted perfectly normal. And didn't he
have a cat that he ran around with all the time? I can't remember exactly but
I'm pretty sure he had this cat that he talked to all the time and B.A. hated
it. And the cat had a name but I can't remember for the life of me what the
cat's name was. But at least it had a name unlike that damn cat that Holly
Golightly parades around with in BREAKFAST AT TIFFANY'S.
Speaking of which, I guess I should be talking about that movie. 
Okay, for a second we almost see Audrey Hepburn naked at the beginning of the
movie. That's pretty cool because back then she was really hot. But then she
got really old so now if I
think about her I think about the old wrinkly 
Audrey that's in ALWAYS or worse yet I think of old and wrinkly Katherine
Hepburn, which is far worse. Either way, the mood is ruined. So Audrey Hepburn
playes Holly. Oh, and Mickey Rooney plays a Chinaman. And Buddy Ebsen plays a
horse doctor who used to be married to Holly, and I'm thinking "Jed Clampett
and Audrey Hepburn? No way!". And a young Hannib...er, Peppard looks a lot like
Cary Elwes in THE PRINCESS BRIDE so I keep waiting for him to put on a silly
accent and say "as you wish." So Peppard, as Paul Varjak, moves in and meets
Audrey and they have this fling but decide to just be friends because she has a
thing for rich men but it's all unfulfilling to her and Peppard tries to win
her back and they have this long argument and she loses that damn nameless cat
and he helps her find it in an alley in the rain and they kiss and it's a happy
ending.
As Hannibal would say, "I love it when a plan comes together."
"If Al Gore invented the internet, then I invented the spell-check."
-Danforth Quayle
HEY! Check out MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED:
http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
