Title
Review for Poketto monsutaa: Maboroshi no Pokemon X: Lugia bakudan (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
The fate of the world is in his hands -- Ash Ketchum, Pokemon trainer.
With the help of Pokemon all over the earth ("Pokemon are acutely
attuned to the balance of nature," we are told), Ash fights an evil
Pokemon collector.  Underwater rivers are snaking their way around the
planet, thus disturbing the global environment.
In POKEMON: THE MOVIE 2000: THE POWER OF ONE, this is about all of the
almost impenetrable plot that it is possible to ascertain.  Perhaps
those who watch the show faithfully will be able to crack more of the
code.  Of course, if the studios had spent a small fraction of the
fortune they will reap from the movie's profits, they could have come up
with a decent script, one with real character development and more than
a paper-thin plot.  Our kids deserve better.
The only saving grace for this sleep-inducing tale is its lush
animation.  It is drawn as flat as a pancake but colorfully happy and
inviting.  With the intense palette of a Salvador Dali painting, the
richly painted frames come to life as much by the panning of the camera
as by the tiny movements of the characters.  Japanese anime can be so
much better with none surpassing PRINCESS MONONOKE, which was close to
the top of my best films list last year.
As last time, the film is preceded by a 21-minute short.  Last time, it
was called PIKACHU'S VACATION, which made the top of my worst of the
year list.  This time Pikachu (whose entire vocabulary consists of the
two words "Pika" and "Pikachu") is back with a short called PIKACHU'S
RESCUE ADVENTURE.  Thankfully, this short is almost exactly the same
quality as the main feature, which is to say colorfully watchable.
With the possible exception of those well-versed in the television
series and the trading cards, viewers will find both the movie and the
introductory short visually pretty but narratively inert.
POKEMON: THE MOVIE 2000: THE POWER OF ONE runs 1:20 (1:41 including
PIKACHU'S RESCUE ADVENTURE).  It is rated G and has nothing to offend
anyone of any age.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, gave the film ***, saying that he liked this one
better than the first one.  He said that his favorite parts were the
music and the new bird.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Michael Dequina
_Pokémon_(The_Movie_2000):_The_Power_of_One_ (G) * 1/2
with _Pikachu:_The_Movie--Pikachu's_Rescue_Adventure_ (G) * 1/2
        As was the case with many kiddie fads before it, the TV anime phenomenon
_Pokémon_ is gradually flaming out after a period of frenzied excitement.
 But before Pikachu and his pals say make their final sayonara into the
sunset, they make one more big screen excursion with another two-film
compilation, this time released under the umbrella title
_Pokémon:_The_Movie_2000_.  If anything, both the main feature and the
opening short are better than their counterparts in last fall's
_Pokémon:_The_First_Movie_.  But that's not saying much at all.
        Unlike _Pikachu's_Vacation_, the curtain-raiser for _The_First_Movie_,
the opening "mini-movie" _Pikachu's_Rescue_Adventure_ has at least an
attempt at a plot.  As their masters take a nap in a park-like area,
Pikachu (the adorable yellow, rosy-cheeked, electrical-powered critter)
and his fellow Pokémon (pocket monsters, for the uninitiated) are free to
frolic in the water and surrounding wilds.  But a strong wind blows
Togepi, an egg Pokémon, down a hole into a magical forest, and Pikachu
and the others have to rescue him (her?  it?).  While the tots will
undoubtedly be entranced by the bright colors and the new characters that
are introduced, those over the age of 10 will have their patience tried
by the nonsensical mutterings of the Pokémon (all they are able to say
are their names--though in the case of Pikachu, it's still kind of cute).
 A trippy musical interlude will briefly shake adults out of their ennui,
however.
        As the feature presentation, _The_Power_of_One_, opens, it appears to
fall into the same trap that befell that last film,
_Mewtwo_Strikes_Back_--pretentiousness.  A solemn narrator goes on about
the elements of fire, lightning, and ice needing to be in harmony or else
the world would be destroyed, and I'm thinking that the _Pokémon_
creators have once again bitten off more than they can chew.
        But things quickly settle down into a more palatable Saturday
morning-level mood.  In a somewhat cheeky reference to rabid _Pokémon_
product collectors, the villain here is one Lawrence III, who is
determined to capture the bird Pokémon that control those aforementioned
elements--and the all-powerful guardian of the sea, Lugia--for his
personal collection.  As the title suggests, it is up to one person to
stop Lawrence III and restore balance to the planet--Ash (voiced by
Veronica Taylor), master of Pikachu and other Pokémon.
        There is a message behind _The_Power_of_One_, but it's not as
questionable as  that of _Mewtwo_Strikes_Back_.  This film's message is
your basic banal business about trying your best and whatnot.  It's
nothing kids haven't heard before, but it's something easier for them to
grasp--and easier for the film to support--than the jawdroppingly
hypocritical anti-violence stance in the last film (_Pokémon_ is about
little animals fighting each other, after all).
        That said, only those really in tune with the _Pokémon_ world (read:
children) will be able to make heads or tails of the specifics of the
story.  Then again, they will be the only ones who will be able to stay
completely alert during the film.  There's only so much shoddily-animated
explosions and plotless mayhem an adult can take before the eyelids start
to feel heavy.  Not helping matters is the absence of the television
series' infectiously bouncy theme song; in its place is "We All Live in a
Pokémon World," an even-worse-than-it-sounds R&B-ish ditty complete with
a rap bridge.
        It remains to be seen if the _Pokémon_ craze will survive long enough to
earn a stateside theatrical release release for the third _Pokémon_
feature, which was produced in Japan last year.  It's hard to tell if
_Pokémon_The_Movie_2000_ will be a late-inning shot in the arm for the
waning franchise or speed up its demise.  Both scenarios are plausible,
for the film is simply more of the same--which is all you need to know
when deciding whether or not to see it.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Jon Popick
The amount of hate mail I received from people that took offense to my
review of the first Pokémon film was enough to choke a horse.  Here are
two of my favorites:
"Maybe you lack confidence in your point of view and have to secure it
by making jokes at the expense of the innocent, asshole."
"I hope that sometime during your worthless life that you experience a
trauma so severe that it causes you to become an epileptic."
Can you believe it?  What kind of monster would write such horrible
things to a guy who is just trying to make a living writing film
reviews?  All I did was suggest that Pokémon might be a good thing for
society because it has been known to give its viewers seizures and that
our ^Óherds^Ô needed some ^Óthinning.^Ô  No big deal, right?  It^Ňs not like
I^Ňm the one giving kids seizures.  So wipe the drool from the chins of
your zombified children and send your hate mail to the people that make
the stupid television show.
You^Ňd think I^Ňd launched a full-scale attack on an American classic from
the volumes of responses I received.  It wasn^Ňt Ben Hur, or Schindler^Ňs
List, or even Spaceballs.  We^Ňre talking about Pokémon.  You could put
100 monkeys in a room with 100 typewriters and not get a concept as bad
as Pokémon.  It shouldn^Ňt be possible to make something this immediately
unwatchable.  If your kids like Pokémon, there^Ňs probably something
really wrong with them.  Maybe you were too busy firing off e-mail to
film critics while Junior was guzzling the Drano under the kitchen sink.
I^Ňve learned a few more things about Pokémon since the first film, like
that each Pokémon can say nothing but its name.  This enabled me to
figure out that the name of the thing I called Turtle-Pokémon is
actually Squirtle.  I only mention this because we used the same name
for the kid on our high school track team who had a perpetual wet spot
that seeped through to the front of his sweat pants.
Like Pokémon: Mewtwo Strikes Back, the new film begins with an awful
unaired episode of the television show called Pikachu^Ňs Rescue
Adventure.  Pikachu, if you remember, is the little yellow squeak-toy
owned by Pokémon master Ash.  In short, Pikachu rescues the
baby/star/egg Pokemon (just like in Mewtwo), as well as a cat hanging
Wily E. Coyote-style on a branch on the side of a cliff.  There was
supposed to be some kind of moral about accomplishing things through
teamwork, but it gets kind of lost through the bad animation and stupid
little noises that each creature makes.
Pokémon 2000 concerns an evil Pokémon master that is trying to collect
three rare Pokemon in an attempt to unlock great treasures.  Ash and his
friends also set off in search of the same uncommon Pokémon after
crashing their boat into a remote island and having the natives mistake
him for ^Óthe chosen one.^Ô  I had my fingers crossed that Ash would end
up on an island populated by flesh-eating head-hunters, or perhaps an
overweight homosexual exhibitionist and a grumpy homophobic ex-Navy
Seal, but things just didn^Ňt pan out for me.
Pokémon 2000 is probably a little more visually pleasing than Mewtwo,
just from a few scenes that offer computer-generated animation (all of
which seemed way too similar to the video game ^ÓMyst^Ô).    But you
should not take that statement as a ringing endorsement, or even as a
suggestion that you take your sticky little brats to see it.  Scary
Movie is a better family film.
On a humorous note, the translation of the Japanese title of Pokémon
2000 (Poketto monsutaa: Maboroshi no Pokemon X: Lugia bakudan) is The
Phantom Pokemon: Lugia's Explosive Birth.  Now that^Ňs entertainment.

Author
Susan Granger
There's a sequel to last fall's "Pokemon" phenomenon revolving
around the Pokemon universe.  While the first, "Mewtwo Strikes Back,"
introduced all the participants, this has more adventure as a terrible
force threatens all life on Earth and the only one who can stop it is
a young trainer named Ash Ketchum, who proves that one person can
really make a difference. There are six new Pokemons, including Lugia,
a great hero who plays a key role in helping Ash restore balance to
the world. The plot revolves around a villainous, unscrupulous pokemon
collector who is after Lugia, who is rare and, therefore, quite
valuable to collectors. Legend has it that when three Pokemon -
Zapdos, Articuno and Moltres - are assembled, Lugia will appear. But,
as each globe is captured, the balance of nature is disrupted and
bizarre weather patterns emerge. Ash, Misty and their cohorts are
alerted to this danger when a sudden storm forces them to crash into
an island and soon setting the ecology of the planet to right becomes
everyone's quest. In Japan, where it was released last year, this film
was called "Poketto monsutaa: Maboroshi no Pokemon X: Lugia bakudan."
The rudimentary animation resembles the TV show and many familiar
characters from that series make an appearance, plus there's a music
score by Ralph Schuckett and John Loeffler. As an added bonus, there's
"Pikachu's Exploration Party," a cartoon short that precedes the
feature, much like "Pikachu's Summer Vacation." On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pokemon the Movie 2000" is a formulaic 4 -
appealing to those children who are crazy for Pokemons and quite
boring to those who aren't. Warner Bros. Pictures is once again
collaborating with Nintendo of America, so be aware that there are
lots of new toys to accompany this film.

Author
Laura Clifford
Ash Ketchum and his gang of humans and pocket monsters, including the prized 
Pikachu, are back and this time he's saving the world in "Pokemon: the 
Movie 2000."
"Pokemon:  the First Movie" was perplexing in its anti-violence message when
its titular subjects are pitted in battle against one another by humans.
Nintendo (who own Pokemon rights) have apparently lightened up this time
around as the new film's message is that it's bad to collect Pokemon simply
for the joy of possession.
Firstly, though, the film is once again preceded by a short, "Pikachu's
Rescue Adventure."  While these 22 minutes were nowhere near as excrutiating
as "Pikachu's Vacation," once again we must endure the Pokemen at summer
camp where the little starry-egg guy gets into trouble so Pikachu can get
a group to cooperate and save him.  At one point, five eggs transform into a
three-headed walking pineapple.  (I'm surprised this series doesn't have the 
same reputation as the Teletubbies for drug trippers.)  At least the animators 
have relaxed the editting style which once caused Japanese children to suffer 
seizures.
The film itself is both better and worse than its predecessor.  It opens
as a lone man in a spaceship converses with his computer about the three
Pokemon he intends to capture for his collection - Moltres, bird of fire; 
Zapdos, bird of lightning and Articuno, bird of ice.  According to the lore, 
having these three in one place will draw out his real prize, Lugia, the beast 
of the sea, which will result in the disruption of the world's weather
patterns.  Ash and friends are on a pleasure sail when a sudden squall forces 
them to land at Shimuti Island, just as an island ritual is about to be 
performed.  The weather is being caused by the collection of 
the three birds and legendary ritual decrees that 'the world will turn to Ash,' 
who must collect three treasures, to prevent the destruction of the planet.
(That Ash is constantly referred to as 'the Chosen One,' is a bit of religious
symbolism in the weirdest place.)
The animation is a mixed bag of impressive looking high-tech effects and 
Saturday morning cartoon sweat shop, but at least it's taking steps in the 
right direction.  The spaceship is beautifully done, as well as some of the 
weather effects.  The human characters are fleshed out and their ranks added 
to, although the returning Team Rocket duo are annoyingly superfluous.  Oddly, 
the Pokemon almost take a back seat in this story, which frankly,
has far less to it than the first, yet takes the same amount of time in the
telling.  Environmentalism is once again a strong message.  A pretty tune's
played on a conch shell.
The kids at the screening I attended were mostly captivated, laughed at some
of the inane jokes and applauded at the end, so I'd guess the target audience
will be happy with the product.  For adults, however, a few jokes and
improved technical aspects can't quite counter overall boredom.
Ash Ketchum is a Pokemon master par excellent. He and his favorite pocket
monster, Pikachu, are about to embark on a new adventure, but, this time, it's
not just to do battle with other Pokemon. An unscrupulous collector,
named Lawrence III, is hatching a plan to capture three powerful Pokemon birds
- fire, ice and lightning. These magical creatures, while free, maintain 
harmony in the world's weather. Their capture will disrupt that harmony and 
allow Lawrence to seize the most powerful Pokemon of all - the water borne 
Lugia. The havoc the collector creates draws Ash into the fray as the Chosen 
One, the only person who can save the world in the feature portion of "Pokemon 
the Movie 2000," "The Power of One."
Following the same formula presented in "Pokemon the First Movie," the sequel
is in two parts, too. Part One is a 22-minute short called "Pikachu's Rescue
Adventure," where the title character, with his Pokemon buddies, must brave the
elements, including other creatures, to save one of their number. It's light on
dialogue, which consists mostly of the inane babble that the little creatures
constantly voice - it's amazing the volumes that can be said by repeating
"pikachu" over and over and over again. The visuals are geared to the
pre-school crowd with lots of movement and color to please the tiny eyes of the 
target audience. For anyone over age 8, I think it may cause brain lesions.
Part Two of "Pokemon 2000," "The Power of One," has a little more meat to its
story than the short and reps the main draw for the more hardcore pocket
monster fans. The story owes more than a nod to Toho Pictures and the Godzilla
franchise, with the action of the battling birds straight out of such films as
"Godzilla on Monster Island." As such, the setup from the first feature -
Pokemon fighting Pokemon - is laid to rest as the more "conventional" monster
against monster and save the world yarn kicks in.
Ash is, again, the hero, but this time, instead of pitting his prized Pokemon
against those of Team Rocket, he is a boy on a quest to save the world from
destruction. It's a daunting task as he throws himself into his mission and
gets the help of friend and Pokemon alike. Of course, he accomplishes his 
assignment and returns the Earth to its former harmony, before Lawrence reared 
his conniving head. Of course, as the hero, Ash is expected to accomplish the
impossible - no job is too big that it can't be tackled - and he does. The
young Pokemon master is a good role model for kids.
There is a distinct split in the demographics targeted for this two-part anime.
"Pikachu's Rescue Adventure" is for the very young fans of the franchise.
Dialogue is simple and visuals are geared toward the short attention span of
smaller kids. "The Power of One" is a more mature story with its complexity and
variety of action. It, too, has the visual eye candy that will entertain the
little ones, but the action and fights will definitely appeal to the older of
the Pokemon fans. There is even some humor that will appeal to the parents
accompanying their kids to the theater, but, be warned - there isn't anywhere
near enough adult-level humor in "Pokemon 2000" to warrant calling it "family
entertainment." For me, if Pikachu said "pikachu" one more time, my head would
have exploded.
But, the kids like "Pokemon the Movie 2000" and that's what counts, so I rate
it solely from their viewpoint and give "The Power of One" a B- and "Pikachu's
Rescue Adventure" a C.
