Title
Review for 12 Angry Men (1957)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are many ways in which Continental and Anglo-Saxon
schools of law manifest their differences in the area of
Criminal Procedure, but usually the most notable, at least
for outside observers, is the use of lay jury in the latter.
The advantages and disadvantages of both schools could be
the subject of lengthy debates, but there is no doubt that
the criminal trials in Anglo-Saxon countries provide better
drama and, consequently, better material for movies.
Hollywood filmmakers came to such conclusion long time ago
and, as a result, created whole new sub-genre of courtroom
dramas. However, the most important and possibly the most
interesting element of such trials - jury and its
deliberations - was mostly absent from Hollywood films. One
of the rare films to break such taboo and deal with juries
was 12 ANGRY MEN, 1957 directorial debut by Sidney Lumet.
Plot of this film is based on the play by Reginald Rose, who
had been allegedly inspired by his own experiences as juror.
The movie begins one hot summer day in New York courthouse.
A teenager has just been tried for the murder of his father,
and the judge sends the jury to deliberate about his guilt
or innocence, warning them that the guilty verdict brings
mandatory death penalty. When jurors enter the room, things
aren't looking very well for the defendant - jury members
are eager to pronounce him guilty as soon as possible. The
only exception is Juror #8 (played by Henry Fonda), who
votes "not guilty" only because he thinks that the decision
on someone's life and death should be made after careful
examination of the evidence. The rest of the jury is upset
with such dissent, but Juror #8 gradually convinces them to
review the case. As a result, reasonable doubt about boy's
guilt emerges and more jurors are ready to vote "not
guilty", while, on the other hand, some jurors are becoming
quite passionate about sending defendant to the electric
chair.
Today, 12 ANGRY MEN is a considered to be classic, one of
the greatest films made by 1950s Hollywood. Unfortunately,
it also belongs to those films, which are not made in
Hollywood today, since it is hard to imagine big studios
spending money on films based on stage plays, shot in black
and white and with plots set in a single room during one
afternoon (1997 remake was shot in cable production). On the
other hand, some filmmakers in today's Hollywood would find
the theme of this film quite to their tastes. Reginald
Rose's play doesn't just reveal dramatic tensions, usually
hidden behind locked jury room doors; it also reveals the
role prejudice plays in judicial, as well as any other
important collective decisions in American society. If made
today, and without some constraints Lumet had in 1950s, this
film would be considered very "politically correct". Of
course, subplot about prejudices could be hidden for those
accustomed for more direct and more preachy ways of socially
conscious American cinema of 1990s. All person in the jury
room are white men; but even they are object of social
stratification and prejudices. Through the escalating drama
anonymous jurors slowly reveal their different social
backgrounds and the ways in which they perceive the world
and each other. The biggest prejudice is, of course, racial
one - directed against "people from the slums", who are,
same as jurors themselves, anonymous for the viewers, but
their ethnic background is presumed to be Puerto Rican.
Because of such prejudices, many jurors were ready to make
their fatal decision before they were really examining the
evidence. The microcosm of the jury room could be perceived
as metaphor for the American society in 1950s and the
struggle of the lone Juror #8, whose background is
intellectual, could be seen as a metaphor for the struggle
for civil rights of American ethnic minorities.
With or without politics, 12 ANGRY MEN is a powerful film,
and its director Lumet should be really praised for making
it such with small budget and in so unappealing setting.
Lumet's achievement is even greater when we take into
account the fact that it was his first major film. On the
other hand, we could say that he had easy time, since few
directors enjoyed privilege of working with such stellar
cast. Always reliable Henry Fonda is only a nominal lead,
being partnered with eleven great character actors. Thanks
to Lumet's meticulous pacing and editing, each of them used
opportunity to give splendid performance. Only one of them,
Lee J. Cobb (Juror #3 and most ardent member of "guilty"
camp), got "Oscar" for the role in this film, but each other
member of the cast deserved it too. Perhaps 12 ANGRY MEN
should have been the opportunity to introduce new category
of "Oscars" - given for collective performances. The
excellent acting was supported with good photography by
Boris Kaufman and also by ascetic but suggestive musical
score by Kenyon Hopkins. The only thing that doesn't look
perfect in this film is the ending, which seems somewhat
abrupt and the epilogue is unnecessary. However, this flaw
is a minor one, and 12 ANGRY MEN completely deserved its
high status of undisputed classic.
Another thing that makes 12 ANGRY MEN important is its
educational value. This film is a great combination of an
adult theme and the treatment suitable for younger audience.
Therefore, 12 ANGRY MEN is a film that should be viewed not
only by those who want to educate themselves about inner
workings of American judicial system.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In a time of bloated productions where special effects have become
the movies' real stars, going back to a classic like director Sidney
Lumet's 12 ANGRY MEN can remind viewers what movie making is supposed
to be about -- acting.
     12 ANGRY MEN from 1957 focuses the viewers' attention on the drama
at hand with few props to distract them.  The script by Reginald Rose
is firmly rooted in the 1950s, but, like a Shakespearean play, most of
the lines reveal deeper meanings and hidden truths.  Arguably one of
the best early television dramas was the original 1954 "Studio One"
version of 12 ANGRY MEN.  The only link between the two is Reginald
Rose's script which was kept almost totally intact.  The cast and the
director changed, but the story stayed the same.  And what a story.
(The Showtime cable network recently remade the story, and, being smart
enough to use basically the same script, managed to make an interesting
film, albeit not in the same league as the original two.)
     Many movies start with promising premises which end up only
partially fulfilled, but 12 ANGRY MEN never disappoints.  The rich
drama with minimalist sets occurs almost completely within the confines
of a jury room.  The incredibly strong ensemble cast for the jury
includes: Henry Fonda, Lee J. Cobb, Ed Begley, E.G. Marshall, Jack
Warden, Jack Klugman, Edward Binns, Joseph Sweeney, Martin Balsam,
George Voskovec,  John Fiedler and Robert Webber.  To further minimize
distractions, we never learn most of the jurors' names.  We know them
by their opinions, backgrounds and weaknesses.  They have their juror
numbers, and that is considered sufficient labeling.
     As the story opens, a bored judge in a capital murder case is
reading his charge to the jury.  When he comes to the part about a
reasonable doubt, he repeats it with such an emphasis that he seems to
be suggesting that any doubt they may have in their minds about the
defendant's guilt is probably not reasonable.  Indeed everyone,
including the defendant, seems to think the case is hopeless.  The
accused, played with big, soulful eyes by John Savoca, never speaks,
but his sunken, despondent demeanor says it all.  The evidence in the
case is clear, and as we find out later, his attorney apparently was
pretty inept.
     Before the jurors start their deliberation, they idle away their
time arguing over whether the case was dull or not and over how well
the attorneys performed.  If you didn't know better, you could assume
they were reviewing some movie they had seen.  None of them seems to be
concerned in the least that the defendant's life is at stake.
     Into this sure and certain world comes a voice of caution, someone
who is willing to demand that the jurors put a halt to their headlong
rush to judgment.  This voice of reason comes from a juror played by
Henry Fonda, giving a resolute and perfect performance that should have
at least gotten him an Academy Award nomination for best actor, but
didn't.  (Alex Guinness won the best actor award that year for THE
BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI.  Sidney Lumet was nominated for best director
but lost to David Lean for THE BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI.  And the best
picture award was lost the same way.  Easily the biggest shame was that
Reginald Rose's script -- an absolute classic -- lost to the excellent
but lesser one for THE BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI.  Then again, Academy
voters do like sweeps.)
     Fonda's character votes not guilty on the first ballot, not
because he's sure the defendant is innocent, but because he wants to
get his fellow jurors to stop and reconsider the merits of the case.
The other jurors are aghast that he seems to have forgotten the sure
and certain "facts" of the case that prove the defendant's guilt.  "Now
these are facts," barks an angry juror played by Lee J. Cobb.  "You
can't refute facts."
     Everyone brings their differing lifestyles into the jury room.
E.G. Marshall plays a prim and proper Wall Street stockbroker.  He
ticks off the facts in the case as if he were reading closing stock
prices from the newspaper.  His studious and ever stern glare cuts down
those who disagree with him.  And he is the only one who keeps his coat
on the entire time -- he claims he never sweats, even in the stiflingly
hot jury room.  His banker's glasses, one of the film's few props, turn
out to be key to the case's solution.  With superciliousness, he
bemoans slum dwellers such as the defendant, only to find out that
another juror, played by Jack Klugman, grew up in the slums and resents
the broker's remarks.
     Although most jurors are known by the intensity of their
convictions, Robert Webber plays someone who works in advertising and
views serving on a jury no more seriously that he would concocting a
laundry soap jingle.  He tries using advertising lingo such as "run
this idea up the flagpole and see if anybody salutes it."
     After ridicule and scorn by his fellow jurors, Henry Fonda's
character suggests a startling compromise.  He will abstain from the
second ballot, and if they all vote guilty, so will he.  But if he has
garnered any support for the defendant, then the rest of the jurors
have to agree to stay awhile and discuss the case with him.  After he
wins that round, one by one, the other jurors begin to fall in line
behind him, but even if the conclusion is obvious, the way they get
there constantly surprises and fascinates.
     The beauty of Rose's script is that we come to know each of the
jurors by the end of the deliberations.  Most writers would gloss over
some of them to concentrate on a few, but Rose gives each a unique
personality and background.  Jack Warden, for example, plays an
extroverted marmalade salesman, who made $27,000 last year and has
tickets to tonight's ball game burning in his pocket.  He wants to vote
guilty as quickly as possible so he can get to the ballpark.
     Boris Kaufman's intimate, black-and-white cinematography makes
each member of the audience feel like a 13th juror.  And the wailing,
solo flute music by Kenyon Hopkins provides a somber atmosphere without
ever overpowering.
     My only complaint with Lumet's direction is that the last holdout
for guilty is allowed to convert all too abruptly.  Nevertheless, 12
ANGRY MEN is a nearly perfect drama to be savored by generation after
generation.
     12 ANGRY MEN runs 1:36.  It is not rated but would be PG for
mature themes.  The show would be fine for any child old enough to be
interested in such a serious story.  I give the film my top
recommendation and rating of ****.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 13, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Twelve Angry Men (1957)
Directed by Sydney Lumey
Written by Reginal Rose
Starring  Martin Balsam, Ed Begley, Ed Binns, Lee J. Cobb, John Fielder, Henry
Fonda, Jack Klugman,  E.G. Marshall,  Joseph Sweeney, George Voscovec, Jack
Warden, Robert Webber
    A flawless masterpiece. "Twelve Angry Men" tells the story of one juror
(Fonda) and his attempt to convince 11 others, that a young man should not be
executed for a crime he might not have committed. The 11 jurors are positive
that the boy is guilty of killing his father from the evidence given during the
trial, but Fonda, in a truly believable and inspirational performance, explains
to the men that there are two sides to every story. This ambiguity creates a
creepy and thought provoking plot. If the jurors decide he's not guilty, they
could have let a cold blooded killer out on the streets of New York again. If
they decide he is guilty, the jurors could ruin an innocent boy's life. Fonda
never says that the boy is not guilty, he just states that there is a
possibility he is not guilty and he reminds the men that there decision can
determine a man's entire future. No matter what the outcome of the verdict is,
the truth is never given to the audience or to the desperate, tired jurors.
       Filmed in one room on a hot day in New York City, "12 Angry Men" begins
with very little information but as the film progresses the superb script
addresses every detail of the trial, each jurors background, and the tensions
and differences
between them. The focus is not on a few characters but rather on all the
characters in the movie. All twelve jurors are examined from every angle
including whether they wear glasses or not or their employment status. The
convicted boy is shown in a silent, poignant shot in which he begs the jurors
not to stereo type him. This innocent face must have provoked Fonda to attempt
to dig deeper into the murder. Even the security guard who guards the room
which holds the jurors is given a purpose. When he gives the twelve angry men
the murder weapon which they requested to inspect, he briefly looks back at the
room and, with his facial expressions, asks what is taking so long and why
haven't you figured out the obvious conclusion that he is guilty. The guard
represents the world outside the court room. He is similar to the 11 other
jurors besides Fonda in that he immediately made his decision based on the
background of the young boy.
"Twelve Angry Men" challenges the way court systems function by raising an
issue of prejudice in which some of the men believe the boy is guilty only
because someone like him had caused grief in their lives or because the
neighborhood he was brought up in must have influenced him into becoming a cold
blooded killer. What is frightening about 12 Angry Men is that the men,
nameless and only
referred to as juror # _, could easily represent any person in our
society including ourselves, even if they are all white males. 
