Title
Review for Strictly Ballroom (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jason Overbeck
Strictly Ballroom is a wonderfully original film disguised as a
traditional, cliched one.  It talks about breaking out of traditions and
creating something new and heartfelt.  The story is basically about a
guy that takes an ugly duckling under his arms and teaches her (in an
incredible short time) how to be as good as him so they can compete, and
show-up the usual opponent.  If you think you've seen that before,
you're right, and you can still see Strictly Ballroom because it doesn't
follow that formula in anyway you've seen before.  
The film starts in a quasi-documentary form showing a spirited ballroom
dancer (Mercurio) trying to dance in the standard ballroom fashion, but
as he is trapped he improvises with crowd-pleasing but judge-annoying
moves.  His partner is hardly able to keep up to his moves and they lose
to a white-haired man who sticks to the traditions.   His partner and
annoying, old-timer dancing mom are frustrated by the loss and the
partner quits to join the white-haired victor.  This is when the
frustrated and flashy dancer meets the ugly duckling (Morce) whom also
has an offbeat style.
Hey have to keep their merging secret because his mother has to see her
son win, and the ugly ducking is a newcomer who has only been dancing
for 2 years.  They practice at night at his parents dance studio and she
is under constant pressure by her domineering father.  More conflicts
arise and they're dancing together is questioned.
Strictly Ballroom is a crowd-pleasing film that will keep you're toes
tapping constantly as you watch and listen to the film.  Even though you
probably know the way the film will end you will have fun getting there
and will be surprised by plot twists in between.  Strictly Ballroom is a
fun film that can be seen by people of all ages.

Author
Evan Hunt
     If you're the kind of person who sighs wistfully at the end of
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN because they don't make movies like that anymore,
rejoice--because they have!  STRICTLY BALLROOM is a marvel of a movie,
a parody of every musical cliche that amazingly also rejuvenates the
genre and makes it fresh and alive again.  It is at once sweetly
romantic and hilariously funny and somehow makes a film about ballroom
dancing which uses old pop songs the most original film musical since
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
     The story of STRICTLY BALLROOM uses elements from every musical
ever made, and uses them perfectly.  Scott, a young dancer, loses his
partner when he breaks the regulations and starts dancing unauthorized
steps. Fran, a frumpy beginner at his mothers dance school (marvelously
played by Tara Morice), persuades him to follow his dream, with her as
his partner.  As they learn to dance together, they fall in love--but
will Scott be able to stand against the pressure to go back to his old
partner and dance to win?
     What makes STRICTLY BALLROOM work so well is the utter conviction
of the players.  Although the extravagant parody is hilarious, the
characters are utterly sincere, making you feel for them even as you
laugh.  The classic falling-in-love-through-dance scenes are
blissful--the dancers simply glow with romance.
     STRICTLY BALLROOM is the kind of movie that sends you out of the
theatre dancing and singing, with an insane smile on your face.  If
there was an Oscar for "movie that makes you feel real good", this
would win.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Scott Hastings (Paul Mercurio), one of Australia's best ballroom
dancers, is on-target for a number of championships until he starts to
dance from the heart, abandoning the Dance Federation's rigid steps in
favor of his own moves.  His partner Liz (Gia Carides) leaves him and
Scott is forced to take up with an amateur.  Fran (Tara Morice) matches
Scott's zest for life, but one question hangs over them as they teach
each other about life, love, and dancing: can they win by rejecting
tradition?
     STRICTLY BALLROOM, based on an Australian play of the same name, 
was one of that country's biggest 1992 screen hits.  It's easy to see
why.  The movie is funny, energetic, and enjoyable--the perfect film
for a night or an afternoon out, no matter what your mood is.  While
the plot and characters don't boast any special depth, there's enough
freshness and originality to hold just about anyone's interest.
     The movie has an inventive sense of humor that becomes apparent in 
the riotously funny opening scenes.  Although STRICTLY BALLROOM never 
recaptures the brilliant irreverence of its beginning, there are still a
lot of laughs peppered throughout.  
     The first half of STRICTLY BALLROOM is better than the second.  
The final forty-five minutes don't have the same sense of exuberance, 
perfect timing, and quirkiness.  The character of Shirley Hastings (Pat 
Thompson) becomes less amusing and more annoying with the passage of 
time, and the wonderful chemistry between Scott and Fran sputters a
little.
     Nevertheless, even the less-enjoyable parts of this movie outshine
the best scenes in many American comedies.  From start to finish,
STRICTLY BALLROOM is filled with energy and color.  The dance numbers
are splendidly choreographed and the soundtrack is vibrant and varied.
The romantic elements, while skillfully downplayed, are never lost or
ignored.
     For a film of this sort, it might easily be expected for the most
memorable scene to be the "final dance", in which the contest is
resolved and the victor decided upon.  In STRICTLY BALLROOM, this isn't
the case.  More magical than the ultimate dance at the Pan-Pacific
competition is the sequence where Scott teaches Fran to dance to the
tune of "Time after Time".  Despite the presence of a
too-obvious-to-be-missed Coca Cola product placement, that portion of
the film is enchanting.
     Both of the lead performers are good as actors and dancers.
There's no "stunt dancing" here.  Mercurio and Morice (reprising her
role in the stage show) are clearly at home on the dance floor.  In the
acting department, Morice has the edge, but Mercurio doesn't embarrass
himself.  The two work well together.  Also, at least in Morice's case,
it's nice to have someone in a starring role who doesn't look like she
belongs on a magazine cover.  She's physically plain, but her talent
gives her a wealth of charisma.
     The parallels with DIRTY DANCING are so obvious that I won't bother
discussing them.  Instead, I'd like to point out some similarities to
the 1992 ice skating flick THE CUTTING EDGE, of which I was strongly 
reminded while watching STRICTLY BALLROOM.  Both films focus on love
and competition in a similar, lighthearted manner.  Neither boasts a 
cast of well-established names, but the principle performers are all
effective.  Finally, THE CUTTING EDGE, like STRICTLY BALLROOM, deals
with the crushing burden of others' expectations, and the exhilaration
that comes from being freed of them.  
     STRICTLY BALLROOM is immensely enjoyable, and, apart from the
slight fall-off during the second half, there aren't many flaws to be
found.  The movie has color, energy, wit, and style; doesn't demand an
inordinate amount of attention; and is intelligent enough to avoid
being condescending.  All-in-all, it's a fine movie-going experience.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Society has its rules.  Because of these rules everybody knows where
they stand and what is expected of them.  Who c Scott Hastings started to go
wrong.  He came from a good family.  His parents ran a ballroom dancing
studio.  Scott himself had the makings of one of Australia's great ballroom
dancers.  Then one day Scott broke society's rules.  In the middle of a
minor ballroom competition Scott just snapped.  Suddenly he was dancing his
own steps--steps not accepted by the Australian Ballroom Dance Federation.
Here in Technicolor and stereophonic sound is the story of Australia's
Spartacus of ballroom dancing.
     Here also is a delightful satire of really bad over-ripe dramatic
story-telling.  It is all here: the boy with the dream, the girl from the
wrong side of the tracks, the pushy mother, the conspiracy to fix the big
dance competition, the dark secret from the past, and, of course, the
climatic dance competition.  And not one un-telegraphed plot twist.  In
fact, everything is here to make the plot feel like an old friend.  The
target is contrived film plotting and STRICTLY BALLROOM hits the mark with
deadly accuracy.
     The film stars Paul Mercurio as Scott Hastings, who instinctively knows
that a man has got to dance the way a man has got to dance.  Actually, this
particular man DOES dance very well, not that that is really the point of
the film.  Scott's love is Fran (played by Tara Morice).  She has glasses
and a bad complexion, and is ugly and surprisingly clumsy, but inside she
knows she has what it takes to be beautiful and a great formal dancer.  Bill
Hunter plays Barry Fife, who wrote the videocassette on ballroom dancing.
But does he hide a sinister secret?
     This is a film that has echoes of what is wrong in even the most
popular films from 42ND STREET to ROCKY and HOOSIERS.  I give this one a low
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.  It's a hoot!

Author
Max Hoffmann
RATING = 10 (scale of 0 -> 10, 10 = must see)
Australian, (general distribution in Australia August 1992.)
No nudity, little profanity, no violence.
     Why would anyone want to go to a film about the cut-throat,
competitive world of ballroom dancing, that some critics might be
tempted to label as a cross between DIRTY DANCING and FLASHDANCE?
     If PRETTY WOMAN is your favorite film, go for the costumes, the
dancing and the terrific hairstyles.  If you lean towards THE PLAYER, go
see this film for the touching parable of growing up, and overcoming
repressive unquestioned "traditional values."  But most of all, go
because the film is a gift: a thoroughly Aussie maverick that kicks up
its heels at film-making conventions, and has some great comedy and
dancing to boot.
     The film's slight plot grew from a fifty-minute Australian stage
play, that started out as a student project at NIDA (National Institute
for the Dramatic Arts).  It toured Oz to great acclaim and won awards at
an international competition in Czechoslovakia.  The Aussie producers
were unable to convince overseas distributors of financiers to help fund
the film, so they turned to their own devices for fund-raising, and made
it "their way."
     Though lacking stars of any renown in North America, STRICTLY
BALLROOM is a thoroughly engaging film chock full of Oscar-worthy
supporting performances, terrific dancing, comedy drawn in brush strokes
broad enough to make Monty Python envious.  This film may be the
international launching pad for Paul Mercurio, a highly gifted
choreographer and lead dancer with a stream of hits in Oz.  (I had the
privilege to watch him dance live from front row seats in August, where
he sucked up the audience's attention like a black hole ... what 5 other
dancers in the company?)  With a young Tyrone Power's face on Marky
Mark's body, Mercurio is a candidate for the decade's next "poster boy"
role.
     The film's only disappointment (which won't affect Americans) is
that the camera isn't "kind" enough to Mercurio, and film stock flattens
much of his dynamic energy.  It's a shame that more of his brilliant
dance career wasn't shared by a world audience.  A chance to see
Mercurior perform live on stage is well worth whatever means it takes to
get "down under" to his next venue.
     The film is an uneven mix of visual and acting styles, but taken as
a whole, the film is reminiscent of the works of Swiss artist Paul Klee,
who according to the Encyclopedia Britannica "attempted through his own
highly inventive pictorial language to convey the essential spiritual
significance of things."  That wouldn't be a bad description of director
Baz Luhrmann's style.  From the deadpan seriousness of the love story to
the giddy Peter Max colored dance sequences and flashbacks, each scene
carries much more than meets the eye.
     Synopsis: Scott Hastings (Mercurio) appears to have it all: looks,
charm, and a shoe-in for the next Pan Pacific Grand Prix Champion.  He
shocks the Ballroom Federation's dictatorial director, and his lifetime
ballroom dancing parents (who missed their chance and are counting on
Scott...) by introducing some wild new steps in the rhumba competition.
Losing his partner of 15 years, Scott's only hope is to bring ugly
duckling Fran (Tara Morice) up to speed.  Along the rocky path to the
finals Scott learns a thing or too about love and loyalty from Fran, and
about "real" dancing from Fran's flamenco dancing immigrant father.
     Tara Morice brings sensitivity and charm to what could have been a
throw-away role.  Pat Thomson gives a world-class performance as the
bleached blond comet of a stage mother who'll stop at nothing to hitch
her son Scott to his rightful partner "Tina Sparkle" (instead of the
little "nothing" with the bad complexion.)  The rest of the cast lend
some flesh and substance to cartoon-like characters.
     Though on the surface, *very* Australian in it's fixation with
Ballroom Dancing and class structure, the film has a heart-felt message
for anyone who grew up to be something other than their parents
best-laid plans.  The "rebellion" carried out in dance steps will speak
to anyone who's had to put a lid on it at work, or in any other highly
compromising environment.  In spite of this, I fear for the film's
acceptance, in that much of it's satire may be misinterpreted, and the
broader comic icons will make easy targets for myopic critics who
collapse into comparisons on any film with vaguely familiar themes.
     Though it remains to be seen how American audiences will warm to
this quirky film, it's been picked up for distribution in 86 countries,
and was voted audience favorite at both the Toronto and Cannes film
festivals.  If the film accomplishes nothing more than exposing Paul
Mercurio to a wider audience (though so far he's a better dancer than
actor) the film will proved its worth on at least one level.
     While in Sydney recently, I was also able to visit the Powerhouse
museum and see an exhibit about the creation of the film.  Though
Americans might think some of the ballroom scenes are overblown
caricatures, Polaroids of actual events reveal the film to be visually
very true to its topic.  Some of the competition scenes were filmed on
the floor of the *real* Pan Pacific Ballroom Competition, which
ironically created an eerie sense of unreality.  (Also got a close up
look at the costumes, which are dynamite.)
     Local Australian critics interpreted STRICTLY BALLROOM as a coming
of age film for Australia, in which a more diverse population is
revealed to have more to offer than the stodgy Anglo values of countless
decades.  Even if you have trouble taking the love story between Mecurio
and Morice seriously, you'll still enjoy broad references to shameless
plugs for Coca Cola, and some smug camera angles that wink satirically
at DIRTY DANCING.  Though not the Hope Diamond, the film has enough
facets and catches enough light to make the nearly two-hour length seem
to fly by all too fast.
     To be distributed by MiraMax, look for openings in major cities
sometime in February/March.
