Title
Review for Blues Brothers, The (1980)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Regis M. Donovan
Review of "The Blues Brothers" (1980) by Regis M. Donovan
"The Blues Brothers" has it all: music, romance, drama, stunts,
thrills, adventure, nuns, beer, whips, smashing bottles, bar fights, a
car chase through a shopping mall, hordes of police and military,
Aretha Franklin, a mission from God, and about a zillion cars crashing
into everything.  It's a no-holds-barred funhouse ride.
The plot is just enough to hold together the outstanding musical
numbers.  Jake (just relased from Joliet prison) and Elwood Blues are
informed by "the penguin" (Sister Mary Stigmata) that the orphanage
where they were raised is going to be closed for nonpayment of taxes.
Inspired by James Brown and many leaping flipping celebrants at a
gospel service, the brothers decide to put together their old band,
make enough money to pay the tax bill, and keep the world safe for
nuns wielding rulers.  While collecting the sometimes reluctant band
members, Jake and Elwood manage to incur the wrath of the police, the
American Nazi Party, a country & western band, and one very
destructive mystery woman.  Hijinks ensue.
The plot is not the thing that makes this movie great, however.  It's
the music, and the sheer fun the film has.  The Blues Brothers' Band -
with some help from Aretha Franklin, Ray Charles, and Cab Calloway -
fill the film with classic performances.
"The Blues Brothers" clocks in at 133 minutes of silliness.

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Dan Aykroyd's best film as a talented writer is definitely 'The Blues
Brothers'.  His follow-up to it in 1998 entitled 'Blues Brothers 2000'
is simply horrible.  Testifying further to the fact that the worse the
sequel, the better the original really looks and is.  Only, however,
when you consider that the original people who put the first one
together also made this one.  'The Blues Brothers', written by Aykroyd
and the movie's director, John Landis, has so much going for it that it
works for one simple reason.  It achieved exactly what it was going
for..... irreverence.  It's the most irreverent film I've ever seen as
tons of cars are destroyed, every character is so unattractive and the
comedy avoids being mean spirited and comes off in a most delightfully
jabbing manner.  The movie is comparable to being poked in the ribs for
a good laugh and it's a shame that so many of its stars are now
deceased.
John Belushi (1949-1982), John Candy (1950-1994), and Cab Calloway
(1907-1994) are all deceased and the second film was no fun simply
because Belushi could not be in it and a film with such recognizable
cult status as 'The Blues Brothers' simply cannot duplicate itself
unless all of the original and important elements are intact.
Jake Blues (John Belushi) is released from prison at the beginning of
the film and is picked up by his brother Elwood (Dan Aykroyd) and the
two of them embark on a journey to pay a visit to a nun who was there
former guardian in an orphanage where they grew up.  She informs them
that $5,000 is needed to save the orphanage by paying its taxes and the
entire film is basically spent in the pursuit of raising the money as
the Blues Brothers get into more mischief and make more enemies in
comedic fashion than any other screen duo I can think of.
Things occur in their life that would scare the pants off of the average
man but the Blues Brothers seem so cool with their black suits, black
hats and black sunglasses (they even wear them at night) that nothing
gets them rattled.  Jumping over a raising bridge, nearly getting hit by
ammo from a rocket launcher and having their walls come literally
crashing down around them have them driving or walking away from it all
in style.  They really are more alike and truly act like siblings who
have a lot in common.
The real payoff in the film is the last half hour as a wild car chase
that lasts for 106 miles and peaks in downtown Chicago is truly a
classic and one of film history's most memorable action sequences.  Not
entirely noticeable when you consider that thrown into the mix are
persistent cops, gay nazis, country bar rednecks, jilted girlfriends and
the military.  The film's climax is way over the top but perfectly
executed as that is exactly what was intended and credit has to be given
to director John Landis as the king of irreverent comedy direction comes
across masterfully in making his best film.
There are more cars destroyed in this film than any other in recent
memory and even Steven Spielberg has a speaking cameo at the end of the
film as a tax clerk who is the Blues Brothers last contact with civilian
life before they get hauled away to.....well, see for yourself.  : - )
Avoid all television broadcasts of this film if you can and the only way
to truly appreciate it is on home video and DVD, and on DVD, extra lost
footage has been added that gives the film a running time of nearly 2
1/2 hours.  'The Blues Brothers' is either a film you'll love or despise
depending on your taste in comedy.  For low brow and non-critical fans,
you'll have a laugh since you don't care about much and for the more
serious and high brow movie fan, the wit and self indulgent tricks in
this film should be enough to give you one of the most memorable comedic
rides of your life.  Don't yield during this movie or you'll be
frustrated.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
