Title
Review for Spiral Staircase, The (1946)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the most interesting (or disturbing) elements of today's
popular culture is media obsession with the serial killer phenomena.
This obsession is particularly visible in the area of motion picture
industry, with multitude of serial killer films being produced by
Hollywood in the last decade. However, serial killers weren't that
unfamiliar to the filmmakers in previous decades. One of the films
that gives insight in the way Hollywood handled such material in its
Golden Age is THE SPIRAL STAIRCASE, 1946 Hitchcockian thriller
directed by Robert Siodmak.
The plot, based on the novel by Ethel Lina White, is set in small New
England town in the first decades of 20th Century. Local residents
have been recently affected by the series of murders, in which all the
victims are women affected with some kind of mental or physical
disabilities. Helen Capel (played by Dorothy McGuire) is beautiful
girl who works as a servant in the mansion of old and bed-ridden Mrs.
Warren (played by Ethel Barrymore). Since she happens to be mute since
childhood, everyone in the mansion, including Professor Albert Warren
(played by Ed Brent), Mrs. Warren's stepson, is concerned for her
safety and advise her to stay within the locked doors of the house
until the killer is caught. Mrs. Warren, on the other hand, warns
Ethel that the real danger lurks within the house, but Helen doesn't
believe her. Instead she would leave the mansion because of the young
and handsome Doctor Parry (played by Kent Smith) who wants to marry
her. But, before that happens, she must stay in the house for the
night, but soon she would find that Mrs. Warren's warning is quite
justified.
Although remade twice for the television, THE SPIRAL STAIRCASE hardly
comes to mind when people think about most important genre films in
1940s Hollywood. It may be argued that the great Alfred Hitchcock and
his work shadowed the film's reputation, but the real reason probably
lies in the fact that the film was at least a few decades ahead of its
time. Those who pay attention could see that many horror and thriller
directors in later decades have borrowed heavily from THE SPIRAL
STAIRCASE. The most obvious examples are the use of killer's POV,
strange noises in the dark being mistaken for the killer by its
potential victim and sexual activity being equal to death sentence -
two cliches almost inseparable from slasher movies. However, what
separates this film from its 1980s imitators is the lack of gore and
shock tactics. Siodmak relies on suspense, and manages to make film
truly exciting, by creating generally creepy atmosphere. His
directorial skills help this movie in overcoming even such cliched
setting of isolated country mansion in the stormy night. Even the
viewers who are accustomed to such sort of films would be genuinely
scared by Siodmak's masterful manipulation.
The most valuable of this film are characters, though. Scriptwriter
Mel Dinelli managed to create some really interesting personalities,
memorable despite their relatively short appearance in 81 minutes of
this film. Heroine is superbly played by Dorothy McGuire, although her
character doesn't say a word. But the supporting characters are also
excellent, being played by always reliable character actors. Elsa
Lanchester is truly memorable and quite believable as alcoholic cook,
and Ethel Barrymore truly shines as bed-bound yet intelligent
matriarch. Unfortunately, obligatory Hollywood romance brought
character that isn't that interesting - good doctor, played by Kent
Smith, which isn't that necessary for the course of film. But,
thankfully, and against the Hollywood conventions, his character
leaves the movie before the end and the damsel in distress has to rely
only on herself. Characters in this film are even more interesting
when we try to understand them in psychoanalytical context - THE
SPIRAL STAIRCASE actually tries to explain serial killer motives as
the consequence of masculine impotence. Use of Freudian psychology in
thrillers would become much more fashionable in later decades, thanks
to Hitchcock who made it one of his trademarks. Siodmak is in such
matters, of course, less explicit but equally effective as the great
Master of Suspense, which makes THE SPIRAL STAIRCASE one of the true
gems of classic Hollywood.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
