Title
Review for Bored Silly (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Sanford
        The makers of "Bored Silly" would probably describe their
creation as good, clean fun.
 In truth, they only got the "clean" part right. Wholesome as a
glass of milk and almost as exciting to watch, this extremely low-budget
comedy at least has the courtesy to carry a title that warns potential
viewers exactly what to expect.
 "Bored Silly" strings together a collection of fuzzily
photographed and seemingly improvised sequences, slaps kooky songs such
as "I Really, Really, Really Like Girls" on the soundtrack, and calls
itself a movie. Perhaps writer-director Robert Shallcross had an idea to
make a modern-day version of the "Our Gang" comedies (popularly known
today as "The Little Rascals"), but he seems to have overlooked the fact
that those films were short subjects. In fact, when producer Hal Roach
attempted to move "Our Gang" into features with the 1936 film "General
Spanky," the public resisted the concept and Roach never tried it again.
         "General Spanky," however, was much better than "Bored Silly,"
which follows three 8-year-olds (Evan Gabriel, Seth Fjersted and Shaun
Poremba) as they try to build a fort, go fishing, make enough money to
buy some ice cream, get revenge on a neighborhood bully and spy on the
mysterious junk man, who reputedly chopped up six kids. The schedule may
sound hectic, but the movie meanders pointlessly from one anecdote to
the next, pausing often to let us watch our heroes stroll down the
street or plod through a field.
 The boys also engage in a lot of Macaulay Culkin-style
screaming and frequently are called upon to laugh uproariously at their
own zany antics. Oh yeah, there's also no shortage of whining, in case
listening to whiny children is your idea of a solid afternoon of
entertainment.
 After about 90 minutes and before the plot's loose ends can be
tied up, "Bored Silly" comes to a screeching halt, almost as if
Shallcross ran out of money before he could shoot a suitable finale. So
few viewers are likely to make it to the end of the movie, however, it's
unlikely there will be many complaints. James Sanford
