Title
Review for Best of the Best II (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Eric Roberts, Phillip Rhee, Christopher Penn, Ralf Moeller,
           Wayne Newton
Director:  Robert Radler
Producers:  Peter E. Strauss and Phillip Rhee
Screenplay:  Max Strom and John Allen Nelson
Music:  David Michael Frank
Released by The Movie Group (through Twentieth Century Fox)
     Alex (Eric Roberts) and Tommy (Phillip Rhee) are martial arts
experts (last seen in the uninspired BEST OF THE BEST).  When one of
their friends is killed in an underground pit-fight against the
sadistic, bloodthirsty brute Brakus (Ralf Moeller), the situation
becomes personal.  Alex and Tommy are determined to get Brakus--if he
doesn't get them first, that is.
     BEST OF THE BEST 2 is a shameless celebration of blood and
violence--a human cockfight with little style and no subtlety.  In many
films of this nature, the difference between the good guys and the bad
guys is that the good guys let the defeated villains live (and
presumably face a court hearing), while the bad guys kill everyone in
sight.  That isn't the case in this movie.  There's no real
discrimination between who does the killing.  Good guys and bad guys
end up with blood on their hands.
     There's no doubt who's good and who's bad, either.  The film goes
through a rather unnecessarily blunt depiction of Brakus as a devil
incarnate.  By the same token, Alex and Tommy are presented as caring
people who only kill when pushed to it.  None of this
"characterization" is particularly effective, except in showing how
truly one-dimensional the script--and the people who populate it--is.
     I suppose most people that go to see this film will be expecting a
lot of fight sequences and little else.  That's exactly what they get.
There's a slight visceral appeal to some of these moments, but it's not
enough to do more than momentarily stir the blood.  The humor in this
movie, when it's intentional, is off-key and the dialogue is hopelessly
mired in banalities.
     Watching BEST OF THE BEST 2, with a villain who can barely speak
English and the death of a friend to motivate the events of the film, I
was strongly reminded of ROCKY IV, one of the weakest and
least-watchable movies of Stallone's saga.  One would think that if one
of the Rocky films was going to be imitated, the movie makers would
choose one of the better entries in that series.
     I cannot, in good conscience, recommend this to a casual
movie-goer.  The film is aimed at a specific group of people--male
teenagers--and those who go into BEST OF THE BEST 2 with open eyes (not
expecting plot, characters, dialogue, or anything better than
mediocre acting) will probably be reasonably satisfied.  Death and
violence have become so commonplace in the cinema that it's difficult
to be shocked by the gratuitous quantities in this movie, especially
considering the motives of the people behind the picture.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
