Title
Review for Possessed by the Night (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Justin Felix
POSSESSED BY THE NIGHT (1994)
A "Turkey of the Week" film review by Justin Felix  
Copyright 1998 Justin Felix  
Screenplay by Mark Thomas McGee.  
Original Story by Fred Olen Ray.  
Starring Shannon Tweed, Ted Prior, Sandahl Bergman.  
Rated R (contains nudity, profanity, and violence)  84 mins.  
Synopsis:  A novelist struggling with his latest work buys a weird brain
with a protruding eyeball encased in a jar.  The brain exerts its evil
influence upon the novelist and his secretary, while his wife disapproves.
Meanwhile, a loan shark in need of a shave tries to leave his profession.  
Comments:  Why is this movie called POSSESSED BY THE NIGHT?  It's hard to
speculate.  Most of this film takes place during the day, and the only
thing possessing anyone is an icky, pulsating, bubbling brain thingie in a
jar.  In case you haven't picked up on this yet, POSSESSED BY THE NIGHT is
a bottom-of-the-barrel "thriller" (I use the term "thriller" loosely here)
which is really cheap and bad.  The plot, which sounds like a cheesy pulp
science fiction story from the 1950s, actually serves one purpose: to
exploit nude women as often as possible.  
Writing a movie review for a film like this proves oddly challenging.
There's really not much to say.  The acting is lousy; although,
occasionally, the attempts at acting are so absurd that they garner a
chuckle or two from the audience.  Most humorous is Frank Sivero, who plays
Murray, the novelist's agent.  He is so horrible in this role that one
can't help but be amused.  The plot sucks.  Nearly half the film is devoted
to a loser loan shark who wants out of the profession, even though he has
only limited relevance to the movie as a whole.  The dialogue stinks.  A
loan shark, for instance, tells another how much he loves bimbos, which is
something the audience really doesn't need to know.  Everything about
POSSESSED BY THE NIGHT is second rate, even the film credits.  As the names
of the not-so-talented film crew scrolled by at the end, Joseph Scales came
up, credited as being "Assistsant to Foley Artist."  Someone could have
used an editor!  
To be honest, the film is basically an excuse to flash frontal nudity and
show some sex scenes.  Playboy Playmate Shannon Tweed, after all, is the
star here.  I suppose that if one wanted this sort of thing, he would like
this movie.  Why did I give this turkey two stars and not one?  As a bad
movie, it is unintentionally funny enough to keep someone passingly
interested in the film.  If you feel possessed to see POSSESSED BY THE
NIGHT, however, I'd recommend you exorcise this impulse and watch something
else.  

Author
Dragan Antulov
"De gustibus non disputandum est" ("People's tastes should
not be discussed") is an old Latin proverb that is going to
be seriously challenged whenever someone chooses interior
decoration similar to the one chosen by the protagonist of
POSSESSED BY THE NIGHT, 1994 erotic thriller directed by
Fred Olen Ray. For writer Howard Hansen (played by Ted
Prior) a simple jar containing brain looks like an exotic
artefact so he brings it home. Needless to say, the said jar
is alive and able to lead Hansen and people around him to
evil. But this is just a part of Hansen's problems, since
his literary agent Murray (played by Frank Sivero) is a
gambling addict in serious debt to mean gangland boss Scott
Lindsay (played by Henry Silva). In order to pay his debts,
he wants to steal the manuscript of Hansen's yet unfinished
novel and his sexy secretary Carol McKay (played by Shannon
Tweed) is sent to Hansen's household.
When queen of cheap 1990s "erotic thrillers" Shannon Tweeds
stars in a film directed by trash cinema king Fred Olen Ray
the viewers might be certain that the result of this
combination won't have any redeeming values. Whole
Cormanesque horror plot is nothing more than an excuse to
have Shannon Tweed naked in front of cameras. The trouble
with POSSESSED BY THE NIGHT is in the plot being way bellow
even such minimal standards necessary for this kind of
movies. To make things even worse, this "plot" is combined
with even more ridiculous subplot about loanshark wanting to
go straight, introduced probably only in order to fill 90
minutes of running time. Result of all this is, as you might
expect, a complete mess. It is sad to see how once great
actors like Henry Silva or notable performers like Sandahl
Bergman sink their reputations by appearing in this film.
However, at certain points this film becomes so bad in an
entertaining way, and Shannon Tweed does deliver her goods
on the screen, so it could be said that POSSESSED BY THE
NIGHT fulfilled its purpose.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
