Title
Review for Four Rooms (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Christopher Null
     I wish I could say I was let down by FOUR ROOMS, but given the sheer
volume of just awful buzz about the film, I think I got what I was
expecting:  an over-anticipated, overworked movie that was full of talent
but devoid of taste.
     It starts off bad enough.  As the credits announce the four
writer/directors (Allison Anders, Alexandre Rockwell, Robert Rodriguez,
and Quentin Tarantino), a cartoon sequence plays over them, in the
tradition of cinematic masterpieces like MANNEQUIN.  This sets the stage: 
New Year's Eve at Hollywood's Mon Signor Hotel and only one bellhop (Tim
Roth), and believe me, it's a rillyrilly wacky place.  The film then
launches into the first of four 30ish-minute shorts, one by each director.
     The first segment is Anders's "The Missing Ingredient," about a coven
of witches (including Madonna, Valeria Golino, and a mostly topless Ione
Skye) who don't quite have everything they need to return their petrified
goddess to flesh.  Cut together like an episode of "Love, American Style,"
this vignette is just plain goofy and without point.  Anders had *never*
made a good movie before this, and she still hasn't, thanks mainly to lots
of rillyrilly bad dialogue and acting.  I heard a rumor that the actual
ending to this episode is after the closing credits, but I'm not sure it's
worth sticking around for.
     The worst of the bunch is Rockwell's "The Wrong Man," wherein a
sadomasochistic guy with a gun terrorizes his wife (Jennifer Beals) and
bellhop Ted.  I never did determine what this episode was all about, and
judging from the silent audience, no one else did either.  (Hint:  Beals
and Rockwell are married.)  Rillyrilly bad music and dialogue also abound.
     Robert Rodriguez's "The Misbehavers" is poor, but at least provides a
few chuckles.  Here, Rodriguez gets to take his comic strip, about some
naughty kids, from his old college newspaper (where yours truly also
worked) into the exciting world of live action.  Dad Antonio Banderas is
funny, but otherwise there's not much that's good here, although nothing
is rillyrilly bad.  Don't forget to smile during the humorous finale and
appreciate the prodigious amounts of vomiting in this episode.
     Wrapping up the film is the patriarch of the bunch, Tarantino
himself, with a ripoff of an old "Alfred Hitchcock Presents" titled "The
Man From Hollywood."  Actually, for 25 minutes the characters (Tarantino,
Beals, Paul Calderon, and Bruce Willis) moan and scream a lot.  Then, for
15 minutes they rip off Hitch's "The Man From Rio," where Peter Lorre bets
that Steve McQueen can't light his lucky lighter 10 times running.  If he
wins, Lorre gives him his car.  If he loses, McQueen loses his pinky. 
Same deal in Tarantinoland, and the very very end pays off this otherwise
drab episode.  Notably poor here are the rillyrilly bad acting and editing
and a rillyrillyrilly bad performance by Willis.
     Watching the finale is almost worth sitting through the last hour of
the film, but Anders and Rockwell should have been cut loose years ago
when this project was dreamed up.  Very disappointing is Tim Roth's
ubiquitous overacting and just plain constantly annoying presence.  Two
stars pretty much cover all the four rooms...generously.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Zach Douglas
     Four rooms, four stories, four directors.  The film is split four
ways between directors:  Aliison Anders (Mi Vida Loca), Alexandre Rockwell,
Robert Rodriguez (El Mariachi), and Quentin Tarantino (Re-writes for
"It's Pat", Just Kidding).  Tarantino (hereforth, "QT") has a bit more
influence over the picture as a whole, as he was also an executive
producer, and even directed the animated title sequence.  It's difficult
to review this much hyped movie without reviewing all four pieces
separately. For the sake of time and space though, I'll try not to go too
in depth on each since this may end up lengthy anyways.
By now you probably know it's "Ted (Tim Roth) the bell hops first
night on the job" at the classic but run-down Mon Signor Motel.  It's
New Years eve and Ted is in for a wild night.  Allison Ander's room is
Ted's first stop in the segment "Strange Brew".  A coven of witches is
convening there to perform a ritual to bring their Goddess back to life.
The witches are a lively bunch including Valeria Golino (For some reason
her most memorable performances to me have been Hot Shots and Pee Wee's
Big Top), Madonna (Her acting hasn't really improved, but has gotten no
worse),  Ione Sky. Alicia Witt, and Lili Taylor. Together they begin to
throw the ingredients in the cauldron, but it seems one didn't bring what
she was supposed to.  I won't go into it, but they need Ted's help.
I was disapointed with the story here, as it was pretty straight forward
when I expected something more clever like a short film might deliver.
Also, isn't this a comedy?  THere was also a lack of humor if so.  Anders
uses some cute special effects and screen wipes, but I didn't really find
them attractive.  Roth's Ted is most annoying here as it takes a while to
get used to him playing the part that would have been more suitable for
Cosmo Kramer than Mr. Orange.  Enough said about room one, I found it
rather uninteresting, but at least we get it out of the way first for...
The second room, Alexander Rockwell's "Two Sides to a Plate".  Ted
is trying to deliver some ice to the drunken party in 409 (Was that long
haired yuppy scum Lawrence Bender? Again! I think so!)  but he ends
up in a different sort of party.  Sigfried (David Proval) has his wife
Angela (Jennifer Bales) in the ol' Marvin Nash position - bound and
gagged and at gunpoint.  From there, Sigfried has some good old fashioned
fun with Ted as he refuses to let him leave.  He pops some pills and
continues to booze while he gives his wife and Ted the third degree.
The story takes a minor turn, but it's an interesting situation left just
sitting there.  I was confused as again, there wasn't a lot of humor yet
there was also nothing in the story to make up for this shortfall, like
some interesting conclusion we are driving toward.  Jennifer Beals
is very good even while bound and gagged, but Ted is again flinchy and
awkward throughout the segment.  I'd like to be a better critic and say
more about what was wrong with the segment, but it seems to me that the
story being told just wasn't good enough to be interesting regardless
of the acting or the director's style.  Oh well, got those two out of
the way, two of Hollwood's most talked about new comers up next.
Third Segment, Robert Rodriguez (The 7000 dollar man) directs, "The
Misbehavers".  Word on the street was that Rodriguez's segment blew the
other three out of the water.  Yet I didn't find this entirely true.
Rodriguez's story DOES have some structure to it though.  The segment
revolves around Antonio Banderas and his Wife (Tamlyn Tomita) attempting
to go out for a night on the town while leaving the kids 'home alone'.
Yes, that's right Home Alone.  So Father politely demands that Ted watch
over the kids (or else) and slips him a quick $500.  Of course, all does
not go well with the kids, and wacky wild mayhem ensues.  This segment
was a lot better than the other two.  The characters get some good, quick
definition early on, and the it's off to the races.  The main problem
here seems that Rodriguez's style is quite restricted by the setting and
characters.  He wants to do his trade mark super-stylistic camera work
- but on what?  We see a nice take of Ted sweeping shoes of the bed and
also of Ted turning the key in the lock.  Ooh, Exciting.   Also, it's
supposed to be wacky fun with the two misbehaving' kids, yet Rodriguez
seems to forget they are kids.  There are many things that go harshly
against the grain here including the language and some violence.  I
found these things mildly funny, but mostly awkward and bewildering in
this setting.  Overall though, nice work with a memorable conclusion.
Definitely not bad at all.  Which leads us to wonderboy himself,
Tarantino.
QT takes the reigns a bit early as he has a short transition piece
where Ted calls up a manager to try and get some help (Why, if the
manager isn't Shocked Lady/Shot Lady herself from Reservoir Dogs/Pulp
Fiction!).  But, his call to the manager is taken by one Marisa Tomei
doing a HUGE stretch to play a stoned chick playing some nintendo after
the big party. This was probably my favorite part of the entire movie!
Tomei is excellent, and you can tell that the dialogue has made that
sudden change, a change over to...the Tarantino Zone.  Even Ted is
slightly calmed now, speaking fluent English.  Ted finally get to
speak with the manager. She tells him to take care of the hotel's only
Hollywood client if it's the only thing he does right the rest of the
night.  Flamboyant Movie Star, Chester Rush (Played by QT himself, imagine
that) is that big star. So Ted makes the trip to the penthouse to deliver
some bizarre items that the party requested, and from there on out it's
full-fledged Tarantinoverse.  In the penthouse are Chester, and his
apparent parasite/friends Norman and Leo (Paul Caldron and Bruce Willis
respectively, both in Pulp Fiction - Caldron is Paul, and that's up to
ya'll' if his name doesn't ring a bell) and also Angela from down the
stairs (Jennifer Beals character!  Perhaps Sigfried was RIGHT to have
tied her up!)  Like QT's previous works, the characters yak about
bullshit that has nothing to do with anything, yet somehow, it does.
Also, you seem to remember hearing bits of dialogue in another movie
some how - was it in..another QT movie? I think it was.  Chester curses
a lot and cozies up to Ted while Norman sits quietly and Leo is on the
phone arguing with his wife.  Once the gang feels ready though, they
let Ted in on the secret of why they want him to hang out with them -
to help them reenact an old episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents!  You
could feel the anticipation (curiosity?) of the audience rise instantly
at that point.  Chester then must sell Ted on staying to help them out.
I'm going to stop right there and let you watch the rest because it was
truly a great 20-25 minutes for me and I don't want to spoil anything as
it took all I could do to avoid hearing what happened myself before
watching it (Many have seen the original Hitchcock episode, although I'm
sure it's quite a bit different!).
I found this segment to be imperfect, but pretty damn entertaining.
I'll admit I'm a big QT fan, and he really puts more of a stylistic stroke
onto the canvas in his segment where the others couldn't seem to find
enough room to do so (perhaps that is why QT made sure HE got to film
in the roomy penthouse!).  Some of the camera work is amazing as the
camera slowly moves and turns while the actors just keep spitting out
lines, and eventually when the camera comes to rest, the actors are all
lined up on screen in perfect form, right where QT wants them to be.
He also shoots an incredibly long take (5-6-7 minutes or more?) and even
shoots a scene with the character's shadows talking. The dialogue is
funny, but nothing near as memorable as in his other works thus far.
There is a LOT of cursing which could be distraction.  I guess QT figured
he would get his quota in this new time frame somehow.  QT's acting is
slightly flawed as usual, but not terrible.  Caldron also didn't win my
respect as I thought they could have found someone else either inside or
out of the Tarantinoverse for this role (and QT's also).  Willis is
so-so but and Beals is even better than before, but it doesn't really
matter, as all the characters get better collectively throughout the
segment to pull off the punch line.
The segment is much like a condensed Tarantino movie.  There's the
B.S. which is like a shot to numb you and make you forget whatever it was
you were thinking about, then the anticipation that something is going to
happen, and then it builds (slowly, slowly), and then something happens
and in a big way, and then you have a nice stylish ending, role the theme
music.   It's got everything, just squeezed down a little smaller for the
limited time frame.  OK, so I'm an obviously biased Tarantino fan, but if
you don't agree that the end of this movie makes you think "Whew, it
wasn't a total waste of time" - then I'll stick a red hot poker up my..
ahem (sorry another QT dialogue reference).
Well, I covered what I could and the major points of what I thought
worked or didn't.  Overall, it's just not a very good film.  But, taken
in parts, it does have some interesting moments.  I failed to mention
earlier, another big minus for me was some grotesqueness/toilet humor in
the first three segments.  All three contained something that wasn't
very pretty (bodily fluids, references to bodily fluids, other icky
things).  None of them were very funny either, and somewhat low-brow
which also seemed to go against the grain at times.  Again, the setting
seemed to handcuff the first three directors the most and it's obvious
from their other works that they are no where close to talentless, just
perhaps not as adept at these shorter pieces.
On the good side, it's a very different movie.  Even different
than other experimental movies where different stories/directors are
combined. Tomei and Beals displayed the most talent and the acting all
in all wasn't bad. Bad and good aside, if you are a true Tarantino fan,
I think you'll eat up his latest offering and perhaps find some merit
in the other three where you can.  If you aren't, I can only hope you find
at least ONE room in the building that you can enjoy!

Author
James Brundage
Get Ready for the Wildest New Years Eve of your life.
Witches, cauldrons, lesbians, and bitches, that's what lies in Allison
Anders segment of this bizarre anthology about the money-crazed dealing with
crazier people Bellhop Ted, who's sole motivation becomes tips in an ever
growing amount. And he'll do whatever to get them. He'll screw a
witch/midwife in a cauldron, helping resurrect a god. He'll watch two
psychotic children of a Mexican gangster and his alcoholic wife. He might,
just might (gasp) CUT OFF NORMAN'S LILLE' ....
This isn't a movie you should see if you hate profanity or violence, it has
plenty of both, but has to be on your list if you like the Black Comedies
that Lawrence Bender, the producer of Pulp Fiction, turns out.
The basic plot of the movie is you have Ted, the greedy bellhop doing his
first night on the job on New Year's Eve. A coven of witches resurrects
their goddess Diana and, because of such, the entire hotel goes mad in one
night, and each successive room reflects the madness.
The segments, directed by Allison Anders, Alexander Rockwell, Robert
Rodreguiz  and Quentin Tarantino (in that order) are miraculously
interwoven, perfectly locked in (I.E. The third segment becomes part of the
second segment when someone calls room 409, where a psychosexual drama is
being played out with a big gun, a tied up woman, and the bellhop. The
little girl asks if they have a syringe in their room. The other end says
"No, kid, we don't have any of those in our room. Just a big fucking gun.
How does that strike you?". The girl jovially responds "Thanks."), darkly
comic (the best I've ever seen) and well-produced.
Unlike PF, it doesn't have any deeper meaning, no social commentary or
redeeming value, but, should you have a taste for the bittersweet black
comedy, then you will NEVER regret checking out Four Rooms.

Author
John Paul Powell
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Jan. 18, 1996)
Starring: Tim Roth, Antonio Banderas, Jennifer Beals, Ione Skye, David Proval,
          Madonna, Valeria Golino, Paul Calderon, Bruce Willis and 
          Quentin Tarantino.  
The origin of this atrocity began four years ago. Directors Allison Anders
(Gas, Food, Lodging) Alexandre Rockwell (In The Soup) and renaissance man 
Quentin Tarantino (Reservoir Dogs, Pulp Fiction) smoked the 1992 film 
festival circuit. Fresh and hip, the trio bonded like two socks and a 
sweater on tumble dry.  
Shazam! Inspiration zapped Alexandre Rockwell. Why couldn't they merge 
their talents and shoot a picture? (Mistake Numero Uno) They rang up 
philosopher king Richard Linklater (Slacker, Dazed And Confused, Before 
Sunrise). "Thanks but no thanks," was his reply. Smart move, O' Wise One.  
Quentin conned bud Robert Rodriguez (El Mariachi, Desperado) and Rockwell 
drew up the guidelines: four stories Crazy Glued by a rookie bellhop, a 
run-down Hollywood hotel and New Year's Eve. Everyone wrote their script 
in isolation, submitting it upon completion. (Mistake Numero Two-o) 
The opening segment (The Missing Ingredient) showcases a coven of witches 
renting the Honeymoon Suite. Broom carrying-Broomhilda-Wicked Witch Of The 
West crones they ain't. We're talking Valeria Golino, Alicia Witt, Lili Taylor
, Ione Skye, Sammi Davis and Madonna. Prior to filming, Madonna had an  
apparent advantage over the other actresses. She didn't have to research 
the part.  
At their beck and call is Ted (Don't Call Me Theodore!) the bellboy. It's 
Ted's first night on the job and he's as tightly strung as Alex Lifeson's 
guitar. Unbeknownst to Ted (Tim Roth-Mistake Numero Four-o), he stocks the
"missing ingredient" for the coven's resurrection spell. All in all, it's a
sticky situation. (Mistake Numero Five-o) 
Ted cannonballs out of the frying pan and into the fire delivering a bucket of
ice. (Boy. These guests are lazy sloths.) By mistake, he walks in on a married
couple. The wife (Jennifer Beals) is tied to a chair and gagged. Oops. Wrong
room. Red-faced, Ted apologizes and retreats. The business end of a .357
Magnum stops him cold. The Wrong Man in the wrong place at the right time, Ted
humors the sickos until he can split the scene. (Mistake Numero Six-o) 
Two child actors (Lana McKissick and Danny Verduzco) outshine Antonio 
Banderas in The Misbehavers. Gangster dad (Banderas) pays Ted to babysit his
Damien-Omen children so he and his wife (Tamlyn Tomita) can paint the town 
red. The parents book. Ted's left in charge. Scratch one Towering Inferno 
hotel room.  
Witches. Sexual deviants. Snot-nosed brats. Minimum wage or no minimum wage.
Tips or no tips. Ted calls in his resignation. The hotel manager (Marisa 
Tomei) begs Ted to complete one last task.  
Staying in the penthouse is comedy star Chester Rush (Quentin Tarantino) 
and friends. As instructed, Ted fetches them a chopping block, a bucket 
of ice, a roll of twine, three nails and a hatchet. The occupants intend 
on recreating an episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents.  
In The Man From Rio, Peter Lorre bets Steve McQueen his new car if McQueen can
ignite a cigarette lighter three times in succession. If McQueen fails, his
finger is lopped off. In their drunken stupor, Rush and pal Norman (Paul 
Calderon) make an identical wager: Rush's sports car for Norman's digit. Ted 
is paid handsomely to, if need be, drop the hatchet. 
Four Rooms is a heartbreaker. Braced by Tarantino's leverage, the four
directors had the chance to really do something special. They blew it. To
feast on the Tarantino/Rodriguez double-bill (The Man From Hollywood, The
Misbehavers), we have to sit through a pair of real snoozers. The Missing
Ingredient and The Wrong Man are contributions Allison Anders and Alexandre
Rockwell would have been better off locking in a musty chest and stashing it
in the attic.  
As a Tarantino junkie myself, I know what you are presuming. Two outta four 
ain't bad, right? Hold yer horses, pardners. Tim Roth's inept execution tips
the scales.  
I'm not even sure what the hell he was attempting. Roth walks as if he had a
phone booth shoved up his ass and behaves as if a car battery was attached to
his testicles. Every line and movement is exaggerated. A magic mushroom 
induced imitation of Jerry Lewis? A bungled try at physical comedy? Whatever
that was, it's bleeding annoying and excruciating to behold fine actor 
self-destruct.  
(Audible sigh) Quentin. Quentin. Quentin. You wanna support your friends. I 
respect that. A good friend will and should go to the wall for a chum. Chums
though can't properly judge their friend's work. They'll politely stifle their
genuine feelings so yours won't be bruised.  
Plainly put, no director was hurt during the filming of this motion picture.  
Four Rooms is rated E for Erratic. Beals rifling off synonyms for "penis" - 
Madonna wearing a designer Glad Bag - Tim Roth + one pickled corpse + a 
sister drop-kicking her brother Bret Hart style + guest star Marisa Tomei 
sucking on a bong - Allison Anders + Tim Roth smacking a cig out of a 
punk's mouth (twice) + waaay underage drinking - Alexandre Rockwell - 
semi-nude witches doin' the Twist = Big-o Mistake-o. 

Author
Ken Cooper
     I saw this film on Christmas Day expecting an upbeat comedy.  Boy
was I in for a Christmas dissapointment!  After an hour of the movie, I
was ready to change rooms-into another theater! Read on to see what I
have to say....  
Starring:Tim Roth, Jennifer Beals, Antonio Banderas, Quentin Tarantino, 
Valeria Golino, Madonna, Bruce Willis, Marisa Tomei, Alicia Witt, Lili 
Taylor, and Ione Skye.  
Rating:* (out of **** possible stars)
     "Four Rooms" was supposed to be one of the biggest hits of the
year.  Key word here: "supposed."  Four of the biggest directors in
Hollywood: Quentin Tarantino, Robert Rodriguez, Alexander Rockwell,
and Alison Anders were all directing one big film with a big and
popular cast.  I guess it was all just too much because this turned out
to be the biggest flop of the year and it could of been great.  The
plot: It's New Years Eve and it's a bellboy's first day on the job.  He
encounters many mysterious and kinky hotel guests as he tries to handle
all his own problems.  Tarantino told his directors this plot, and each
of them wrote a script.  It turned out each of them had written a dark
comedy.  Anders wrote and directed the tale about a coven of witches
(Madonna, Valeria Golino, Alicia Witt, and Ione Skye), which was the
worst one out of all of them.  The second room (Jennifer Beals) was
better, but lacking in plot.  This room was about a man who accuses
every man of sleeping with his wife.  The third room (Antonio Banderas)
was the best roomm, about two rambunctous kids that trash a hotel
suite.  The final one (Tarantino, Willis) was about a movie star wanting
the bellboy to chop off someone's finger.  The movie was just plain
trash.  There was nothing here that even makes up a quality film.  It
was not funny, and I didn't hear one laugh in the theater throughout
the whole film.  Tim Roth is horrible as the bumbling and mumbling
bellboy, and he ruins every joke in the film.  The supporting cast
loses meaning to the word support and the only mentionable
actors/actresses are Antonio Banderas and Jennifer Beals.  Marisa Tomei
appears in a stupid cameo role.  This movie is the worst film of the
year and the film could have been great, perhaps like a more upbeat
"Plaza Suite," but it wasn't.  As trashy as it was, some people will
call it classic.  Do you call a man chopping off a finger with
Madonna's chest showing a classic film?
Look for more of Ken's Kritic Korner Coming Soon! Please check the 
Newsgroups under the Movie Reviews Section for updated reviews.  
P.S. "Four Rooms" made Number 1 on my top ten worst list of 1995.  

Author
Michael Dequina
Four Rooms (R) **
        Quite needless to say, I did not enter the first showing of Four 
Rooms on opening day (Christmas Day) the most unbiased viewer.  Despite 
the critical drubbing it had received following its lackluster premiere 
at the Toronto Film Festival, I was eager to see this omnibus anthology 
comedy written and directed by four different independent directors, two of 
whom being a couple of my absolute favorites, the incredibly talented (and 
all-around swell guy) Robert Rodriguez and my namesake, Mr. Brown himself, 
Quentin Tarantino (Allison Anders and Alexandre Rockwell are the other 
two).  Instead of fearing the worst, I took my seat in the fairly crowded 
auditorium willing to give everyone involved the benefit of the doubt.  I'd 
probably have been better off expecting the worst, for I probably would have 
enjoyed this slapdash stew of mostly unfunny gags a little more and not have 
been so utterly disappointed.
        The film takes place on New Year's Eve at the Mon Signor Hotel, 
and bellhop Ted (Tim Roth), the only staffer on duty, provides the only 
link between the four tales, getting involved in bizarre goings-on in 
four different rooms.
        The first tale is Anders's "The Missing Ingredient," about a coven of 
witches (Valeria Golino, Sammi Davis, Ione Skye, Lili Taylor, and a 
surprisingly adequate Madonna) who attempt to resurrect their goddess Diana 
(Amanda deCadenet) with a strange brew (which, coincidentally, was the 
segment's original title).  The final ingredient in their brew is fresh sperm,
and they enlist Ted to provide the goods.  Word is that over twenty minutes 
were cut from the finished film following the Toronto premiere, and a good 
chunk of that missing footage appears to have been from this story, for, as it
stands in its current version, is neither funny nor makes any complete sense. 
There's no comic payoff at all, and it doesn't really "end"--it just stops.  
None of the actors are given much to do although Roth's bizarre mannerisms and 
delivery are good for a chuckle here or there.
        Ted is "The Wrong Man" of Rockwell's segment of the same 
name, in which our trusty bellhop is mistaken for the lover of a woman 
(Jennifer Beals) who is bound and gagged and held hostage at gunpoint by her 
husband (David Proval of Mean Streets fame).  Unlike Anders's piece, this 
vignette does build up to a big joke, but that joke isn't all that funny 
(unless, perhaps, you find the rattling off of numerous euphemisms for 
"penis" hilarious), and the road to that joke is quite bumpy and slow, 
with no real laughs.  Sharp-eyed viewers will recognize Lawrence Bender, 
producer of the film and Tarantino's partner at A Band Apart Productions, 
in a cameo.  Again, the best thing about the piece is Roth, who has a 
manic energy that is unmatched by the other players or the writer-director.
        Manic energy is in abundance in the third room, Rodriguez's "The 
Misbehavers," the only truly hilarious segment.  Ted is left in charge of two 
boisterous young children (Lana McKissick and Danny Verduzco) when their 
parents (Tamlyn Tomita and Antonio Banderas, in fine form) go out for a 
night on the town.  Hilarity ensues when a syringe, alcohol, and a dead 
body are thrown into the mix, leading to a raucous finish.  It all plays 
better than it sounds, thanks to the expert direction by Rodriguez and the 
comic timing and prowess of Roth, Banderas, McKissick, and Verduzco.  This
segment is the film's true saving grace.
        The most disappointing, but not the worst, piece of the puzzle is 
Tarantino's closing bit, "The Man From Hollywood."  Quentino himself 
stars as Chester Rush, an egomaniacal movie star who gets Ted to play the 
impartial moderator of a twisted bet between himself and a member of his 
entourage (Paul Calderon, who played the bartender in Pulp Fiction).  The 
vignette ends with a nifty joke, but it's slow going getting there, for 
Tarantino's dialogue lacks his trademark snap, and his rather lengthy 
takes only contribute to the sluggish pace.  Jennifer Beals's character from 
the Rockwell segment and an unbilled Bruce Willis also appear, but add little,
if anything to the mix.  Maybe it's my bias talking, but ol' Q's acting isn't 
half bad here (then again, I can't say that I ever really had a problem with 
his acting), and Roth once again maintains his dignity.  But this vignette 
feels rather forced, with none of the soul or passion in previous 
Tarantino efforts.
        If anything, Four Rooms _is_ outrageous and far from a tough sit, 
but as a comedy, it fails to deliver the goods.  It is a noble but failed 
filmic experiment that maybe isn't quite as bad as its detractors have been 
saying, but is by no means that good, either.  Expect this one to check 
out of theatres soon.
12 Monkeys (R) **
        This ambitious thriller is a messy melange of action, adventure, 
sci-fi, romance, horror, and unintentional comedy.  A bald Bruce Willis 
plays an inmate from an unspecified future year sent back in time to 1996 
to try to trace the origins of a virus responsible for wiping out 99% of 
the earth's population; Madeleine Stowe is a psychiatrist who ultimately 
comes to his aid; and an inexplicably Golden-Globe-nominated Brad Pitt is 
a mental patient who could hold the key to the mysterious riddle of the 
12 monkeys.  Fine efforts by Willis and Stowe, stunning production 
design in the future sequences, and director Terry Gilliam's keen visual
sense can't make up for a laughable, scenery-devouring Pitt; Gilliam's
plodding pacing; and a script (by David and Janet Peoples, inspired by the
film La Jetee) that's all over the map and spread much too thin.  Only the
final moments achieve the haunting, lingering sense of dread for which
Gilliam appears to strive (and falls short) for the entire 130-minute
running time.
Heat (R) *** 1/2
        Michael Mann's ambitious crime saga is far from the action 
spectacle it's being sold as, but it is an insightful dramatic look about 
the relationship between cops, criminals, and the women in their lives.  
Al Pacino is in over-the-top Frank Slade/Scent of a Woman mode as a Los 
Angeles police detective determined to take down master criminal Robert 
DeNiro, who is even more reserved here than he was in Casino.  
Writer-director Mann sometimes overreaches, such as including an 
unnecessary subplot involving a serial killer, but the overall package is 
still worth a look; an intense coffee shop talk between the 
two leads is worth the admission price alone, as is a spectacular 
shootout and the transcendent finale.  Val Kilmer, Ashley Judd, Amy 
Brenneman, and Tom Sizemore, among others, round out the fine ensemble.
Leaving Las Vegas (R) *** 1/2
        This grim Vegas romance between a man (Nicolas Cage) determined to 
drink himself to death and a hard-luck prostitute (Elisabeth Shue) is the 
definitive downer--which isn't to say that it is a complete drag to sit 
through (although it _is_ a difficult sit).  The powerful work of Cage 
and Shue and writer-director Mike Figgis make for a haunting, 
heartbreaking film that does deserve most of the many critical plaudits 
it has been receiving.  Thankfully, Boxing Helena's Julian Sands only 
turns up very briefly as Shue's Latvian pimp.
Nixon (R) ****
        You can take the man away from Natural Born Killers, but you 
apparently can't take the natural born killer out of the man, for Oliver 
Stone's fascinating bio of the late, lamented president is not lacking in 
stylistic pyrotechnics--a number of Stone's NBK tactics are here, 
such as constant shifts between color and black and white, the use of 
many types of film stocks, and the superimposing of words over scenes 
(this time in foreign characters--some type of subliminal suggestion, 
Oliver?).  In any case, this is a riveting tragedy, the moving tale of a 
man who had it all--or so he thought--and saw it all fall to pieces.  
Anthony Hopkins is fabulous as Tricky Dick, leading a very strong ensemble 
including James Woods, Bob Hoskins, David Hyde Pierce, and Joan Allen, 
particularly impressive as Pat Nixon.  One small complaint: the first 
name of actress Bridgette Wilson, last seen in Mortal Kombat and seen in 
a small role here, is misspelled as "Bridgitte" in both the opening and closing 
credits.  Regardless, one of the best of the year.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Four stars for FOUR ROOMS? Not quite. This one was 
lucky to scrape up the paltry one-and-a-half star rating it got. An 
interesting concept was drug into the ground by an aimless script 
and annoying lead actor. Tim "Pumpkin" Roth plays an idiotic 
English bellboy trying to run a hotel by himself on New Year's 
Eve. Four hot young directors (Quentin Tarantino, Robert 
Rodriguez, Allison Anders and Alexandre Rockwell) each wrote 
and directed a segment of the movie, none of which ever rise 
above the level of mediocre and two of which are completely 
beyond redemption.
        The first, Anders' "The Missing Ingredient," is one of 
those. Madonna is a witch who wants sperm... I know you're all 
thinking, "Yeah, I know that, but what part does she play in the 
movie?" and to that I have to say shame on you. She and the rest 
of her coven meet in one of the hotel rooms to mix a witch's brew, 
with one pivotal ingredient missing -- the aforementioned life juice 
of a man. So one of the witches has sex with Roth. End of segment. 
The whole thing is pointless and unentertaining, with Madonna 
and the sexy Valeria Golino standing around, their talents 
unused.
        Then comes the equally-bad "The Wrong Man," directed 
by Rockwell. This time Roth is the wrong man entering the wrong 
room at the wrong time in the wrong movie. Some guy has his wife 
tied to a chair, and goes from thinking Roth slept with his wife to 
kissing Roth full on the mouth, which has to be the absolute low 
point of the movie. It doesn't elevate itself too much more when 
Roth tries to escape and ends up stuck in the bathroom window, 
pleading the drunk man on the next floor up for help. The man 
vomits on his face, physical comedy at its finest.
        The third segment, Rodriguez's "The Misbehavors," is 
the best of the movie, which definitely isn't a distinction to brag 
about. Roth is paid to look after the mischevious children of a 
Mexican gangster and his Asian-American wife. The second Roth 
leaves the room, they break open the champagne, watch adult 
movies, throw hypodermic needles at the painting on the wall and 
unearth a dead body hidden in the mattress springs. By the time 
the parents return, all hell has broken loose, although Rodriguez 
never shows how Roth escapes the gangster's wrath.
        He instead cuts to a phone conversation Roth has with 
a stoned Marisa Tomei, in which he threatens to walk off the job 
but finally agrees to take some food up to the visiting Hollywood 
star in the penthouse. Begin the final segment of FOUR ROOMS, 
"The Man From Hollywood." This is Tarantino's segment and he 
of course plays the man from Hollywood, who shows Roth around 
the room before offering him money to officiate a bet that he and 
his drunken friends (one of which is an uncredited Bruce Willis) 
have made. It's interesting but incredibly slow-moving except for 
the ending, which is resolved in the five seconds before the credits 
roll. Even Tarantino can't do much justice to a fallen movie that has 
goes nowhere in ninety minutes and is only slightly entertaining 
during its final half.

Author
Ted Prigge
When respecting a director, you must also respect the fact that they are 
not perfect.  Woody Allen has made a couple less-than good films, and 
he's my favorite.  Even Martin Scorsese hasn't had a perfect track 
record.  Kevin Smith, after a smashing debut with the classic "Clerks" 
stooped as low to sell-out and make the dreadful "Mallrats."  I mean, so 
far the only director who's made several films, none of which have been 
bad is Richard Linklater ("Slacker," "Dazed and Confused," "Before 
Sunrise," and "SubUrbia"...all which were great).  
Now, I ADORE Quentin Tarantino.  His first two films were classic films, 
the second one being one of the greatest films of all time.  But 1995 
just wasn't that good of a year for him.  He made way too many TV 
appearances.  He mispronounced Jackie Chan's name on the MTV Movie 
Awards.  And he made this film.  (He was also awarded an Oscar, so I 
guess that would be a grand exception).  Robert Rodriguez is also a 
great director; not a brilliant one, but a cool one.  I've never seen an 
Alexandre Rockwell or Allison Anders film, so I can't comment on them.  
But in this crap ensemble director's film, all four give pitiful 
efforts.  Pitiful for any director, too.
Now in all fairness, ensemble director pieces never really work out.  
I've never seen all of "New York Stories," but have heard the first two 
films, by Scorsese and Francis Ford Coppola are crap (I saw Woody's one, 
which was hilarious but not totally up to par).  But I will rate each 
film individually and then report back to you on the overal average 
score of the film.
EXPOSITION: A simple one - a bellhop, Ted (the totally overdone Tim 
Roth, who's a god and all, but not in this one, though he has a couple 
good moments) is working on New Year's Eve for his first shift (!!!) in 
an old fancy hotel.  He's the only one there (again: !!!) and he only 
has a couple rooms (yet again: !!!).  The old bellhop (the seemingly 
immortal Marc Lawrence - who hated Pulp Fiction actually) hands over his 
cap to Ted and he goes to his job happily.  As the night goes on, he 
becomes increasingly annoyed and hostile.  Yea.
(The short films are presented in order, btw):
THE MISSING INGREDIENT
Writer/Director: Allison Anders
Starring: Sammi Davis, Amanda DeCadenet, Valeria Golino, Madonna, Ione 
Skye, Lili Taylor, Alicia Witt
This one starts it off horribly with no plot, no intrigue, and crap 
dialogue.  The situation is so terrible that it's physically painful to 
watch.  The plot has something to do with a coven of witches needing 
sperm to bring back a godess who is (GASP!) stuck inside some object in 
their hotel room.  The witch that was supposed to bring it (Ione Skye) 
calls up Ted and asks him if she can perform Fellatio on him to get it. 
 Yeah, that's what I said.  Stupid plot, inane characters who aren't 
interesting at all, etc, etc, etc.  The only good thing about this is it 
has a good cast which, in turn, it wastes pitifully.  Not even actually 
funny for a second.
THE WRONG MAN 
Writer/Director: Alexandre Rockwell
Starring: David Proval, Jennifer Beals and Laurence Bender 
Another bad little film with another stupid sex thing going on.  Ted 
stumbles into the wrong room or something and gets in the middle of a 
couple (David Proval and Jennifer Beals in her attempt at "coming back") 
who are playing sex games.  Ted tries to escape and we cheer him on so 
it will end soon.  But at least this has a bit of comedy in it, just not 
that much.  And David Proval has never overacted as much.  And it's 
"Pulp Fiction" producer Laurence Bender who gets to puke from a window. 
 A masterpiece compared to the first one, but still...
THE MISBEHAVERS
Writer/Director: Robert Rodriguez
Starring: Antonio Banderes, Tamlyn Tomita, Lana McKissack, Danny 
Verduzco, Salma Hayek
Would a Robert Rodriguez film be the same without Salma Hayek's navel?  
Nope.  Luckily she's on the TV dancing so we get to see her.  
Surprisingly enough, when I read the screenplay (about a year before 
actually seeing it), this one seemed to have the most potential.  It was 
fast-paced, funny, and well, funny.  But when I watched it, it seemed 
anti-climactic and only seemed to gain any momentum towards the end when 
everything happened at once.  Antonio overacts nicely and the two kids 
(Lana and Danny) are funny.  But, as I said, it moves slowly and in that 
way, it's more painful than funny.  But the ending was stupid and funny 
at the same time.  Oh!  The plot: Antonio is a supposed gangster 
(assumed, really) who leaves his two troubling kids home while he and 
his wife (Tomita) go out to get drunk at a New Year's Party.  Antonio 
hires Ted for a couple bucks to watch his kids all night long, but 
things go wrong...it was okay.
THE MAN FROM HOLLYWOOD
Writer/Director: Quentin Tarantino
Starring: Quentin Tarantino, Bruce Willis, Paul Calderon and Jennifer 
Beals (again)
Ironically, this one could be considered the best for a bad reason: it 
best represents what Quentin has done with this film.  He plays Chester, 
a spoiled brat actor or something who has just had a huge box-office hit 
on his hands and is living it up by playing an anti-climactic game from 
a Hitchcock TV episode starring Steve McQueen and Peter Lorre where they 
gamble to see if one of them can get light from his lighter ten times in 
a row.  They're drunk and need sober but nervous Ted to hold the cleaver 
and bring it down if the lighter doesn't light.  They also pay him a lot 
of cash.  This is so much exactly what this little film is about that 
it's campy.  Tim Roth was probably payed a lot of money to do this 
stupid part in this stupid film made by a bunch of people who are high 
on themselves 'cause they've had hits, major or minor.  It took Quentin 
to realize that.  But the thing is, it doesn't seem like he realizes 
that.  If he did, I'd give this a good 3 stars.  But this sucked.  It 
was anti-climactic and the dialogue wasn't very good.  He starts off 
with a very long steadicam shot then goes to flashes.  That makes no 
sense.  It's cool for a while, then he makes it uneven.  It's long and 
it's just not very good.  Hopefully Quentin never repeats what he did 
with this one.
CONCLUSION: What's the moral here?  If you've made celebrated films, 
don't do an ensemble piece.  They should have re-watched "New York 
Stories" and then stopped in their tracks.  None of these have any point 
to them and they're embarrassing to not only the writer/directors, but 
to the actors 'cause they're working with crap.  But I will forgive 
everyone involved and I especially look forward to Quentin's next 
directing job (even though he and Rodriguez jumped back to the top 
immeadiately with the cool "From Dusk Till Dawn," which I found 
exhilerating).  I love Quentin and I suppose it's good he made "The Man 
from Hollywood" because it makes him seem more realistic and not some 
"God of Cinema."  I seem to respect directors if they aren't "Gods" and 
are actually human beings who make mistakes.  "The Man from Hollywood" 
is his big mistake and let's hope he doesn't return her continuously.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FOUR ROOMS  no * . Written & directed by Allison Anders, 
Alexandre Rockwell, Robert Rodriguez, Quentin Tarantino. 
Produced by Lawrence Bender. Photography, Rodrigo Garcia, Phil 
Parmet, Guillermo Navarro, Andrzej Sekula. Production 
design,Gary Frutkoff. Costumes, Susan Betram, Mary Claire 
Hannan. Editing, Margie Goodspeed, Robert Rodriguez, Sally 
Menke. Cast: see text. A Miramax Film. 96 minutes. Rated R 
(language, sex, violence)
The mainstream is where most movies thrive financially but 
drown artistically, unless the particular mainstream adds 
imagination and quality. Offbeat films can hold promise, point 
to progress and in some cases be most rewarding. But while a 
bad mainstream film is plain bad, a bad offbeat movie can be 
awful. Such is the case with "Four Rooms."
"Four Rooms" is an omnibus of four films averaging 25 minutes 
apiece, each written and directed by a different person. 
Already, that concept is iffy. Few multi-episode pictures are 
successful. I can think of many failures--but to be fair, of 
some exceptions too, like the classic British "Dead of Night," 
the also British "Quartet" from Somerset Maugham stories, or 
the multinational five-parter "Love At Twenty" with its 
striking episode by Andrzej Wajda and the superb "Antoine and 
Colette" by Francois Truffaut. 
"Four Rooms" starts out with cutesy, dumb and unfunny 
animation, often an indication of troubles to come. Then we 
have the overture.  On New Year's eve, in a Hollywood hotel 
that had known better days, bellboy Ted (Tim Roth) is taking 
over from a retiring employee. If you are a movie buff you 
might get a pleasurable little shock of recognition by 
identifying the old man as Marc Lawrence, the supporting actor 
who played villains in so many gangster movies and westerns. 
At age 85 he reappears on the screen after more than a 16-year 
absence, then vanishes.
Tim Roth is the connecting link among all episodes. The 
segments' other two points in common are that they take place 
in different rooms of the Monsignor Hotel and that they are 
all bad. Tim Roth, seen generally in menacing roles, has done 
very well in such movies as "The Hit," "A World Apart," 
"Vincent and Theo" (as Vincent Van Gogh), "Reservoir Dogs" " 
Little Odessa" or "Pulp Fiction." In 1965 he just about stole 
the show in "Rob Roy." 
Roth's Ted is probably the lowest point of his career. He 
mugs, flutters, minces, sways, twitches his facial muscles, 
gestures idiotically, tries miserable imitations of silent 
comics, and of the Jerry Lewis of "The Bellboy." Roth's nose 
(which ought to get him the nickname "Il Nasone" in Italy) 
seems to get more prominent with each successive episode. His 
accent undergoes changes from Cockney British to Fake 
American. A washout.
Filmlet #1 by Allison Anders ("Gas Food Lodging" and "Mi Vida 
Loca") is about the meeting of a coven of seven witches, 
including Sammi Davis, Valeria Golino  and Madonna. There is a 
fixation on breasts and much pulchritudinous toplessness. The 
latter might be enjoyed in a Politically Correct way since the 
director is a woman. There is also much ado about body fluids 
and especially semen that Ted will have to provide to Ione 
Skye. The less said about all this, the better. 
Episode #2 by Alexandre Rockwell ("In the Soup") has Ted, on 
room   service duty, becoming involved with pantless David 
Proval who holds a gun, has gagged his wife (Jennifer Beals) 
and tied her to a chair. The subject is unworthy of 
description and critique. When Beals, who shows no trace of 
acting ability, gets un-gagged, she proceeds with porno-flick 
language.
In Number 3, by Robert Rodriguez ("El Mariachi," "Desperado"), 
tough, tuxedoed Antonio Banderas, wants to take his Oriental 
wife to a New Year's celebration. He hires Ted to check on 
their kids every half-hour. The 6-year-old boy, also wears a 
tux. He smokes, smells his feet. His 9-year-old sister, in 
evening clothes, smells them too, as well as hers. The odors 
have ramifications. There's also a champagne bottle, a 
stripper on TV, a huge hypodermic syringe, a mysterious 
corpse, and so on. Though a tad less dull than the other 
vignettes, coming from the promising Rodriguez it is 
appalling.
Number 4, by Quentin Tarantino, unites two of the most 
unpretty male faces in Hollywood, Tarantino's and Roth's.  Set 
in the penthouse, it gathers a group of pals: Tarantino, Bruce 
Willis, Paul Calderon and Jennifer Beals. Like the other 
episodes it has echoes of surrealism and of the Theatre of the 
Absurd, both undigested and not understood. 
Media freak Tarantino feebly attempts in-jokes on film-making 
plus  other references to film and TV, all without any trace 
of intelligence, finesse and appropriateness. There is more 
talk of Jerry Lewis. The core of the episode is to recreate 
"The Man from Rio"--not to be confused with "That Man From 
Rio," a French, heavy-footed James Bond parody with Jean-Paul 
Belmondo. The model here is the "Alfred Hitchcock Presents" 
item in which Peter Lorre bets his new car with Steve McQueen. 
If McQueen can light his lighter ten times running he gets the 
car. Otherwise, he loses his pinky.  
All this episode shows is that Tarantino may be an an "ersatz 
wunderkind."  All the movie as a whole proves is that the 
Brothers Miramax, while now belonging to Disney -- but with 
their own unit-- are asserting how independent they can be.
Apparently they try proving this by making an 180-degree turn 
away from Disney's sugariness. However, over and above the 
"risque" nature of "Four Rooms" is the choice of language: the 
f-word pervades the movie not just from A to F but also from G 
to Z. This monotonous repetition points to a lamentable lack 
of imagination --linguistic or other--and to a low-life 
conception of humor. 
In life and in films, crass terms are often inevitable, 
perhaps even made necessary by the situation. But this movie 
goes over the top. So prevalent is the f-word in the speech of 
all characters (females and males, children and adults) that 
if you were to eliminate it you might be left with just half 
of the total dialogue. 

Author
Ben Hoffman
     FOUR ROOMS, a four-segment anthology directed by independent film 
darlings Allison Anders, Alexandre Rockwell, Robert Rodriguez, and 
Quentin Tarantino, has to be one of 1995's major disappointments.  
Perhaps it's the format itself -- twenty minutes isn't enough time to 
develop much in the way of characters or story.  When Martin Scorsese, 
Francis Ford Coppola, and Woody Allen tried a similar structure for 
their ill-fated 1989 offering of NEW YORK STORIES, "flop" was the most 
commonly heard description.  More problematic than the format, however, 
is FOUR ROOMS' execution.  Shoddy acting and direction typify three of 
the segments (Robert Rodriguez's being the exception).  Even Tim Roth, 
one of the best actors of the '90s, has his weak moments.
     FOUR ROOMS takes place on New Year's Eve at the Mon Signor Hotel, 
one of Los Angeles' most notorious dives.  Ted the bellhop (Roth) has 
just joined the staff and is in for "a really bad night."  Ted is the 
glue that holds the four stories together as he moves from room-to-room 
and problem-to-problem.  Roth, with an accent that unaccountably fades 
from American to British, plays Ted like a cross between Jim Carrey and 
John Cleese. 
Cast: Tim Roth, Valeria Golino, Madonna, Ione Skye, Sammi Davis, 
      Lili Taylor, Alicia Witt, Amanda De Cadenet
Written and Directed by: Allison Anders
Cinematography: Rodrigo Garcia
     By far the most lame of FOUR ROOMS' stories, "The Missing 
Ingredient" lacks anything resembling intelligent dialogue, coherent 
plotting, or competent acting.  This trite mess is easily the low point 
in the short career of writer/director Allison Anders, whose 1992 
release, GAS FOOD LODGING, was a positive triumph.  "The Missing 
Ingredient" plays like an R-rated episode of a bad TV sitcom, with 
profanity, bare breasts, and sex failing to liven things up.
     The story -- what little there is -- revolves around a witches' 
coven trying to resurrect the spirit of a stripper.  All the ingredients 
(mother's milk, virgin's blood, sweat of five men's thighs, and a year's 
tears) are ready except for a sperm sample.  Since witch Eva (Ione Skye) 
failed in her assignment to bring this vital component of the mixture, 
she is charged with seducing Ted and getting what she needs from him.  
Cast: Tim Roth, Jennifer Beals, David Proval
Written and Directed by: Alexandre Rockwell
Cinematography: Phil Parmet
     Unlike many reviewers, I wasn't a big fan of writer/director 
Alexandre Rockwell's debut feature, IN THE SOUP.  While the film 
contained several instances of insightful comedy, the entire production 
seemed self-indulgent.  It's doubtful, however, that even those who 
heaped effusive praise on IN THE SOUP will have many kind words for "The 
Wrong Man".  This totally unfunny segment places Ted in between a man 
(David Proval) and his wife (Jennifer Beals) while they play S&M games.  
The episode isn't effectively comical, provocative, or titillating.  
Rockwell's confused script degenerates into dirty language with a cheap, 
predictable conclusion.  
     "The Wrong Man" is one of those stories that, because of a certain 
artistic pretentiousness, thinks it's a lot more humorous and clever 
than it actually is.  Really, it's basically a pointless short that, 
following right after Anders' disastrous opening, dooms FOUR ROOMS to a 
forty-five minute start that's almost unendurable.
Cast: Tim Roth, Antonio Banderas, Tamlyn Tomita, Marisa Tomei, 
      Lana McKissack, Danny Veruzco
Written and Directed by: Robert Rodriguez
Cinematography: Guillermo Navarro
     After struggling through an unwatchable first two episodes, FOUR 
ROOMS finally stumbles upon something worthwhile in its third.  By now, 
a large portion of the audience probably won't care.  However, for those 
with patience, "The Misbehavers" offers an oasis in an otherwise 
creatively barren land.  Robert Rodriguez's contribution starts with Ted 
being induced by a $500 tip to baby-sit for the two small children of a 
gangster (Antonio Banderas) and his wife (Tamlyn Tomita).  Of course, 
Murphy's Law rears its head, and just about everything that can go 
wrong, does.
     Although a fair portion of the humor in "The Misbehavers" is of the 
crude variety, it's skillfully handled by film maker Rodriguez (EL 
MARIACHI), and, as a result, is occasionally sidesplittingly funny.  The 
two child actors (newcomers Lana McKissack and Danny Veruzco) are apt 
performers, and Tim Roth does his best manic John Cleese imitation.  
There's also a riotous phone conversation between Roth and Marisa Tomei 
that, despite its brevity, may represent FOUR ROOMS' comic highlight.
Cast: Tim Roth, Quentin Tarantino, Jennifer Beals, Paul Calderon, 
      Bruce Willis
Written and Directed by: Quentin Tarantino
Cinematography: Andrzej Sekula
     There's no doubt that a fair number of those in the audience will 
be present because Quentin Tarantino is involved in this film.  
Unfortunately, Tarantino's episode can't save FOUR ROOMS.  Not only is 
it pointless, but it lacks the energy that characterized the director's 
feature films (RESERVOIR DOGS and PULP FICTION).  Also, while "The Man 
>From Hollywood" features Tarantino's rapid-fire dialogue, the actor 
speaking many of the lines is one of the most inept and uncharismatic 
performers in movies these days:  Tarantino himself.
     "The Man from Hollywood" is based on an old Alfred Hitchcock TV 
episode, where a man bets his finger that he can start his lighter ten 
straight times.  Ted is brought in to wield the hatchet to remove the 
digit (should the need arise), earning a fee of $1000 for his troubles.  
The two bettors are big-time Hollywood director Chester Rush 
(Tarantino), who's putting up his 1964 Chevy Chevelle, and actor Norman 
(Paul Calderon), whose pinkie is on the line.  Also in the penthouse 
suite is profanity-spewing Leo (Bruce Willis) and, reprising her role 
from "The Wrong Man", Jennifer Beals.
     Even though "The Man from Hollywood" is merely twenty minutes long, 
it drags, and only the conclusion has any zing.  Whether Tarantino is 
played out has yet to be determined, but his efforts in FOUR ROOMS are 
feeble at best.  It's only the ugliness of Anders' and Rockwell's 
segments that make Tarantino's somewhat palatable -- but "The Man from 
Hollywood" is still no better than mediocre by his, or anyone else's, 
standards.
     At its best, FOUR ROOMS is reminiscent of John Cleese's '70s TV 
series FAWLTY TOWERS.  Far more frequently, however, this movie recalls 
one of the worst hotel movies of all time, BLAME IT ON THE BELLBOY. 
While spending ninety minutes watching FOUR ROOMS doesn't rank alongside 
the distasteful experience of a full night's stay at the Mon Signor, 
it's still a poor way to waste an evening -- New Year's Eve or 
otherwise. 
