Title
Review for Excess Baggage (1997)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Jamie Peck
Columbia / 1:38 / 1997 / PG-13 (language, sex-related dialogue, 
violence)
Cast: Alicia Silverstone; Benicio Del Toro; Christopher Walken; Jack 
Thompson; Nicholas Turturro; Michael Bowen; Sally Kirkland; Leland 
Orser; Harry Connick, Jr. 
Director: Marco Brambilla 
Screenplay: Max D. Adams; Dick Clement; Ian La Frenais 
By starring in Amy Heckerling's "Clueless" two summers ago, Alicia 
Silverstone proved she wasn't just another pretty, pouty ingenue, 
showing a buoyant comedic craftiness that blew all previous jobs -- 
namely a stint as the Aerosmith girl and a silly turn as the lethal 
Lolita of "The Crush" -- out of the water. Her only work since that 1995 
gem has been in June's "Batman & Robin," where she overcame the 
underwritten role of Batgirl. Now, she's the star and producer of 
"Excess Baggage," a hopelessly phony film that demonstrates how an 
ill-composed story can drag an otherwise solid performer down to its 
level. 
Silverstone's Emily T. Hope is stuck with a billionaire father (Jack 
Thompson) who neglects her emotionally. In an outlandish plan to gain 
his affection, she fakes her own kidnapping -- Emily uses an 
electronically disguised voice to call her dad and set a pricey ransom, 
ties her legs together and mouth shut with duct tape and locks herself 
in the trunk of her BMW. But before the police can "rescue" her, 
professional auto thief Vincent Roche (Benicio Del Toro) jimmies the 
locks, hot-wires the engine and makes off with both the car and Emily, 
who's still trapped in the back. 
When Vincent discovers Emily, the two don't exactly hit it off -- she 
annoys him, he annoys her, and at the advice of his slimy car salesman 
partner (Harry Connick, Jr.), he decides to drive her out to the middle 
of nowhere and leave her there. Along the way, of course, they get into 
a whole heap of trouble, and come to realize that being together is the 
only way to get out of their sticky, felony-studded situation. It 
doesn't help matters that Emily and Vincent are being trailed by cops, 
crooks and even her shady Uncle Ray (Christopher Walken), who's wise to 
his niece's ploys for attention and has mafia connections. 
For at least a half-hour, "Excess Baggage" bounces along fast and 
efficiently. During this time, Emily and Vincent sport engaging 
personalities as well as a nice role-reversal twist -- she's an awfully 
aggressive, combative victim and he's quite the aloof, seemingly 
vulnerable captor. But once it's past its set-up, the situation suddenly 
becomes uninvolving as the story tries to be too many things at once. A 
road movie, a teen comedy, a mob thriller, a drama about family 
relationships -- you name the cliche and "Excess Baggage" likely covers 
its territory. Of course a romance develops between the two leads, but 
it all seems forced, and thus characterization is manipulated to cause 
the finally happy outcome. "Do you like my tummy?" Emily coos to Vincent 
at one point in the film. Huh? Did I miss something? The hard-edged, 
foul-mouthed grrrl is suddenly gone and replaced with a pair of batting 
goo-goo eyes. 
Then again, "Excess Baggage" becomes so weak in so many areas that the 
personality transplant is not a complete surprise. A supporting cast 
attempts to do what they can with colorful but empty secondary roles, 
but the movie isn't game enough to use them all and therefore seems 
overcrowded. Motivations keep shifting, resulting in an often confusing 
narrative. Scant existing story background confuses matters even worse 
and adds to the growing list of unanswered questions. "Excess Baggage" 
has too many characters, too much plot and juggles with one arm behind 
its back and a remaining shaky hand. 
I loved Silverstone's turn in "Clueless" as an aloof, pampered Beverly 
Hills matchmaker inspired by Jane Austen's "Emma." Looking back at the 
skill she displayed for comedy there, it's simple to justify any high 
expectation or enthusiasm that I had mustered for "Excess Baggage." 
Sadly, however, "Excess Baggage" is no "Clueless." But, on the other 
hand, it is clueless. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 10 September 1997 for $0 at the SONY 19th Street
Every now and then there is a movie that absolutely astounds you, that
makes you think and wonder... how and why it every got made. Clearly,
there must be a special place in hell for the writers and producers of the
aptly named Excess Baggage.
This is possibly one of the worst movies I have ever witnessed. At one
point I was so bored I actually started counting loose singles and coins
in my back pocket. But I remained hopeful that perhaps Alicia Silverstone
(who plays the whiney Emily Hope) wou ld shine like she did in Clueless.
Well, it was a cloudy day for Alicia. 
The film features the "unlikely romance" (code words for unbelievably
stupid) of rich, spoiled Emily, who fakes her own kidnapping and locks
herself in her BMW's trunk, and Vincent (Benicio Del Toro), the car thief
who steals her car with her in it. In t he course of the following two
days, he tries to dump her, she persists in staying with him, and they are
pursued by Vincent's yuppie partner (Harry Connick Jr.), some criminals
(one played by the otherwise wonderful Nicholas Turturro), and Emily's
"uncle " Ray (the typecast, unhealthy looking Christopher Walken). 
Overall, for a nonstop rollicking chase movie, there are many torturously
slow moments, which get interrupted by "cool videolike sequences" and some
really dreadful dialogue like this: 
Emily:  My shirt is stained. My pen exploded. 
Vincent: They have postcards in the room. You can write on them. 
It is just so hard to believe someone actually wrote this crap. The other
major liability is the love interest: Benicio Del Toro, which roughly
translated means "good bull." He is barely comprehensible, which might
turn on some pre-teens out there, but he has gigantic carry-on bags under
his eyes. He looks like a heroin addict.  I am not sure who in casting
owed someone a favor, but that's one possible explanation for making him
the romantic lead. He is so bad, he makes Adrian Zmed look like Lawrence
Olivier.
Luckily, I paid zero dollars to see this movie, but I still feel like
someone owes me something. Don't see it, don't rent it; just watch it when
you're truly bored and have nothing better to do than watch USA's *Up All
Night*. 
Trashy Bonus: Excess Baggage features not one but two special homophobic
comments: Emily refers to Greg as Vincent's "faggot boyfriend" and Ray
later tells Emily that he doesn't want her surrounded in jail by
"sociopathic lesbians."
----------------
Copyright (c) 1997, Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com.
Other movie reviews with graphics can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Ask the typical moviegoer about a film, and what you will be told
about are the stars and the plot.  With few exceptions, the director is
never mentioned.  And the writers are totally ignored.
     EXCESS BAGGAGE can serve as an object lesson in the importance of
an intelligent script and a director with a sense of vision.  Certainly
Columbia Pictures must have been impressed with the deal they were
offered by the producers.  For stars the picture was to have the
talented Alicia Silverstone and Christopher Walken, and the setup for
the story showed great promise.
     The resulting film, however, leaves much to be desired.
Screenwriters Max D. Adams, Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais fashion the
outline of their characters but never bother to fill them in.  The
dialog is as sparse as it is meaningless, making the movie seem like a
partially finished body of work that was rushed into production before
it was completed.
     Director Marco Brambilla, whose only other film was DEMOLITION
MAN, crafts a story without context or compass.  The film appears to be
a dark comedy, but dark comedies have impressive atmospherics and are,
shall we say, funny.  This remarkably humorless movie has a laugh count
of one -- an unprintable line of Silverstone's that occurs 45 minutes
into the film.  Jean-Yves Escoffier's pedestrian cinematography has no
discernible look to it, rendering it as uninviting as the soliloquies
of the actors.
     The story has a propitious beginning.  "All I ever wanted was a
father who loved me," bemoans a melancholy young woman.  "Someone to
protect me.  Someone to guide me through life.  But it was never about
the money."  The cynical young woman, ironically named Emily Hope, is
played without energy or passion by Alicia Silverstone.  Silverstone
brings nothing to the role and rarely rises above her poorly written
part.  Her character, like all of the characters in the story, is
unsympathetically drawn.  The movie is populated by people who are more
walking enigmas than flesh-and-blood human beings.  If an unexpected
tornado had killed all of the characters, none of them would have been
worth mourning.
     Emily has kidnapped herself and gotten her father to pay a million
dollars in ransom.  At the start of the story she puts herself into the
trunk of her car, but before the police can rescue her, a car thief
named Vincent Roche steals it.
     This sounds better than it is due to the director's inability to
stage compelling scenes.  The actors drift slowly through the props
looking disinterested and confused.  Sometimes they speak.  Rarely is
what they say worth hearing, so perhaps the paucity of lines is a
blessing in disguise.
     Benicio Del Toro, as the thief, sleepwalks through most of the
picture, waking periodically to mumble some incomprehensible lines.
Only the acting by Jack Thompson, as Emily's father, is worse.
Thompson seems to be on strike and staging a work-to-rules protest.  He
will speak the lines written, but he will not show one scintilla of
emotion.
     When Christopher Walken shows up as Emily's Uncle Ray, the film
briefly looks promising again, since Walken is the master of the
creepy.  The director manages to confuse Walken too.  He wanders the
set in the same zombie-like state as the rest of the cast.  The only
differences is that he looks incredibly sad.  You would be too if you
were stuck in this movie.
     When the inevitable conclusion finally comes, it is not clear what
the director of this sleep-inducing picture had intended to accomplish.
His slightly mean-spirited film wasn't funny, gave no message and
touched no emotional nerves.  I left as confused as the actors.
     EXCESS BAGGAGE runs 1:41.  It is rated PG-13 for violence,
drinking, and sexual dialog.  The film would be fine for teenagers and
those a bit younger.  I do not recommend the picture, and I give it a
generous * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
EXCESS BAGGAGE
(Columbia)
Starring:  Alicia Silverstone, Benicio Del Toro, Christopher Walken, Harry
Connick Jr., Jack Thompson, Nicholas Turturro.
Screenplay:  Max D. Adams and Dick Clement & Ian La Frenais.
Producers:  Bill Borden and Carolyn Kessler.
Director:  Marco Brambilla.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     EXCESS BAGGAGE marks the first starring role for Alicia Silverstone
in the two years since CLUELESS became a surprise hit and made her 1995's
"it" girl.  It is also the first film under Silverstone's lucrative
production deal, as well as the first film marketed solely on the basis of
her drawing power.  It casts her in a role which seems perfectly suited to
continuing that drawing power -- she's a motherless rich girl looking for
a little affection, a la CLUELESS -- and gives her plenty of opportunities
to flash that crooked baby doll smile.  Make no mistake, EXCESS BAGGAGE is
The Alicia Silverstone Show.  So why does it feel like she is the one
thing most dreadfully wrong with EXCESS BAGGAGE?
     Perhaps because EXCESS BAGGAGE, which appears on the surface to be an
ideal comic caper vehicle for Silverstone's daffy charms, is really an
oddball black comedy struggling to break free.  The plot concerns a
neglected heiress named Emily T. Hope (Silverstone) who stages her own
kidnapping to get some attention from her papa (Jack Thompson), a
cold-hearted corporate shark.  She stashes herself in the trunk of her BMW
for Daddy and the police to find her, but a car thief named Vincent
(Benicio Del Toro) gets to the BMW first.  Vincent certainly doesn't
expect the additional cargo he finds in his latest acquisition, nor does
he know what to do with her.  The only sure thing is that the trouble gets
deeper every moment, as everyone from the police to Emily's spooky Uncle
Raymond (Christopher Walken) to Vincent's car thief cronies want to get
their hands on Vincent and Emily.
     The mainstream version of this story would find the mismatched pair
going through a streak of mutual antagonism, closing ranks through a
series of misadventures, then eventually falling in love.  That is exactly
what director Marco Brambilla tries to deliver, with miserable results.
The first half of EXCESS BAGGAGE moves with all the frisky energy of a
constipated brontosaurus, offerring little more than monotonous bickering
between the two leads.  There's never a moment of chemistry between
Silverstone and Del Toro, no magnetism -- in fact, all known natural
processes come to a dead stop when they are on screen together.  They
might as well be performing in two different films.
     At least one of those films might have been worth watching.  Benicio
Del Toro is, to put it mildly, an unconventional screen presence, but he's
never a boring one.  His every reaction in EXCESS BAGGAGE is worth a
giggle of disbelief; the more ridiculous and over-heated the plot gets,
the more interesting Del Toro becomes.  Even while the story in EXCESS
BAGGAGE wanders from the mundane to the predictable, actors like Del Toro,
Christopher Walken and Nicholas Turturro provide line readings with a
bracing dose of surreality.  When Del Toro and Walken share a scene
together, the needle on the Surreal-O-Meter whips into the red zone.
     "Surreal" might as well be something you have at breakfast with milk
as far as Silverstone's performance is concerned.  When it comes to
playing material with an edge, she seems...well, clueless; her idea of
edginess consists of muttering her lines petulantly while wearing clothes
and makeup left over from Meg Ryan's performance in ADDICTED TO LOVE.  
It's much too late for her to recover her adorableness by the time the
romance turns more conventional, complete with dialogue ("Do you like my
tummy?") which should come with a warning label if you're going to listen
to it with a mouthful of popcorn.  I can't imagine what Silverstone's
young fans will make of this strange film in which their idol is annoying
and unlikeable, then hooks up with such a weirdo. If Silverstone the
newly-crowned mogul wanted to make a romantic comedy, she shouldn't have
cast Benicio Del Toro.  If she wanted to make a bizarre crime caper, she
shouldn't have cast herself.

Author
James Sanford
         Two years ago Sony Pictures signed Alicia Silverstone to a
two-picture deal reportedly worth $10 million. If you haven't heard
much about that coup lately, it's because ``Excess Baggage'' - their
seemingly jinxed first collaboration - has gone through numerous
re-shoots and been shuttled in and out of editing rooms for well over
a year now.
  All in vain, unfortunately: ``Excess Baggage'' still amounts
to a series of flaccid, go-nowhere scenes featuring a sullen
Silverstone and the inarticulate Benicio Del Toro (the least memorable
of ``The Usual Suspects''), an actor almost as alluring as a bowl of
rotting fruit.  Though Christopher Walken and Harry Connick Jr. turn
up occasionally along the way, they fail to relieve the general
dreariness.
  The threadbare story offers up Silverstone as Emily, a poor
little heiress who stages her own kidnapping to get the attention of
her business-minded daddy. Del Toro's Vincent is a master car thief
who inadvertently takes Emily for a ride, then can't shake her.
  Executive producer Silverstone may have seen this film as a
chance to segue from ``Clueless'' to ``Breathless,'' but what could
have been a rowdy romantic caper turns out to be a lethargic slog
across Washington State with two abrasive bores. As Emily and Vincent
vacantly snipe at each other, ``Excess'' has the feel of a
misconceived improvisation-comedy sketch that goes on interminably
without ever coming close to being funny.
  Del Toro's slurred speech and blurry eyes make him seem more
like Cheech and Chong's lost cousin than a hunky bad boy. And
``Excess'' is irrefutable evidence Silverstone needs a strong director
to bring out her effervescence, since it's nowhere to be found here.
  The movie's patchwork production is betrayed by the obvious
fluctuations in Silverstone's figure from scene to scene. ``Do you
like my tummy?''  Emily asks Vincent at one point, and you half-expect
him to answer, ``Which one?''.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Alicia Silverstone, Benicio Del Toro, Christopher Walken, Jack
Thompson, Harry Connick Jr., Nicholas Turturro, Michael Bowen Director:
Marco Brambilla Screenplay: Max D. Adams and Dick Clement & Ian La
Frenais
Ever gone on a holiday and suddenly realised that you took only enough
underwear for three days, but you really needed a weeks worth.
Fortunately most holiday retreats have a customer laundry and shops for
the accidental tourist with missing underwear in action. However, in a
movie like EXCESS BAGGAGE where do you turn when the most important
contents, like underwear, suddenly go missing? Missing elements like
passionate romance, witty dialogue, suspenseful action or light hearted
comedy? Surely there must be something worth wearing in this Alicia
Silverstone package. I remain sadly silent. It's like I suddenly woke up
one morning and discovered the world was naked, and I was the only one
wearing clothes and when I took my clothes off, there was nothing to see
underneath.
Like most young men who first saw Ms Silverstone in her starring role as
"Cher" in CLUELESS, I soon fell in love with her lips and the rest of
her body. I know sadly admit that the grand delusion of puppy love is
finally shattered by a ton of excess baggage. The basis of the story is
not too uncommon as wealthy rich girl tries to get attention from Papa
by staging her own kidnapping. She has nothing to complain about except
for the fact that her father has not given her the attention she needed
as a child, but then neither has half the human race. So I do not
sympathise entirely with her situation. However, this is not the
problem. The problem like most bad movies, is what you actually decide
to do with the material.
With romantic comedies, I'm not sure whether it is more difficult to
generate romance or comedy. Having both is like striking gold.
Unfortunately the romance factor in this movie doesn't take off at all.
It becomes hard to believe that this poor little rich girl falls in love
with a scruffy car thief who accident steals the car with her in the
boot. I haven't seen Mr Benicio Del Toro (car thief) act before, but I
think "subzero personality" best describes his character. He carries
that dark fazed look of a drug junky, and mumbles his lines with the
slurred, droll manner of a stoned alcoholic. My question is - is it all
an act or is it really him? If so, is this the sort of character that
attracts girls nowadays? The only reason I'm asking is because this
movie wants us to get all warm and fuzzy when he breathes down Ms
Silverstones neck after downing a bottle of Jack Daniels; and Ms
Silverstone's character isn't much better.
As for the comedy, I don't remember laughing once or hearing anybody
else laugh for that matter. The saddest factor is that Ms Silverstone is
out of her prime material. Gone is that innocent sweet girl that stole
the hearts of a generation of men. So perhaps it will take another
movie, or several more, before I fall in love again.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        BATMAN AND ROBIN was probably supposed to be the 
turning point in the career of Alicia Silverstone, the role that would 
make her a box office superstar rather than just the Moon Pie-faced 
cutie that carried such worthless "the" movies as THE CRUSH and 
THE BABYSITTER. The fourth BATMAN film, of course, turned out 
far worse than expected, in quality and quantity (at the box office), 
then Silverstone made the not-so-brilliant choice to follow that 
mistake up with EXCESS BAGGAGE , which will probably have her 
doing Aerosmith videos again by the year 1999.
        Read my old reviews of Silverstone efforts and you'll see 
I had a killer crush on her through my late high school years -- 1993 
through 1995. Back then, I was convinced that she had enough beauty 
and charm that, if she could ever pick a decent script, she would be a 
force to be reckoned with at the office. Now I realize that can't happen. 
Two or three bad movies could be a coincidence, but when you get to 
turkey number five, six and seven, it's time to get out of Hollywood 
and let some other teenage bulemic take her turn.
        It sounds mean, but I've got no more patience for Alicia. 
Where a media-created infatuation used to lie, now I wonder what it 
was I liked about her in the first place. She's never acted convincingly 
in any movie other than CLUELESS, and then because the ditz 
character was tailored to her personality. Even though I didn't like it 
the first time out, I admit CLUELESS was her defining movie. I've 
taken the advice of countless e-mailers and watched the film again -- 
and, no, it's not as bad as I thought. I'd up it to a two-and-a-half star 
rating in the wake of other Silverstone disasters. At least she was 
likeable there.
        I went to see EXCESS BAGGAGE at the insistence of my 
younger brother, who's just now going through his Silverstone phase, 
maybe a little late. I've talked to a lot of guys my age and we were all 
infatuated with her at one time. This is the first time I've realized just 
how annoying she is when you're not attracted to her. Freed from my 
past crush, I could finally watch objectively as Silverstone embarrassed 
herself in her worst movie since THE BABYSITTER, even though this 
one had a budget and a theatrical release.
        Silverstone plays a none-too-intelligent spoiled brat (a 
serious method acting role for her) who stages her own kidnapping 
as a last-ditch effort to gain her father's attention and affection. The 
movie, thankfully foregoing any buildup to the fake kidnapping, joins 
her just as she is arranging to have the ransom exchange. Then she 
handcuffs herself (a private preference of hers) and locks herself in the 
trunk. So far, so good. Then comes a fatal mistake -- car thief Benicio 
Del Toro decides to steal her BMW. That's not the mistake; the 
mistake is letting her out of the trunk when we all would have been 
much happier leaving her in.
        This starts a series of predictable scenes -- brat Silverstone 
kicks him in the crotch, he locks her in the bathroom, she burns down 
the warehouse with a discarded cigarette butt, they end up in a car 
together, he dumps her, he finds out who she is and goes back to get 
her, she claims he molested her (in the movie's only funny line, 
"Daddy, he made me touch his penis," made even more amusing when 
you realize she wasn't talking about Benicio but the executive who was 
casting this movie), they fall in love -- that each become more tedious 
and grating than the last.
        Then there are two supporting characters that lend nothing 
to the film. There's Harry Connick, Jr. (it had to be him) as Benicio's 
associate, who shows up a couple times to demand his money and 
ask what the hell's going on, why Alicia's still there, etc. And there's 
Christopher Walken, the uncle who is really sort of a surrogate father 
to Alicia. Walken tries to act fatherly but comes off creepier than 
normal in scenes where he tries to track down Alicio and Benicia.
        None of this is the least bit amusing, intelligent or fun in 
execution. Alicia is unconvincing as the bad girl who has to smoke 
and cuss, Benicio is confusing in a performance that is a bizarre 
combination of Nicholson, French Stewart and Brad Pitt hell, 
everyone is miscast except for Connick and he might as well not even 
be in the movie. Bad acting and bad writing combine to give this 
movie a plodding pace that makes it seem like it will never end. Better 
give Steven Tyler a call, Alicia.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Almost 1/25th of a Century!

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Alicia Silverstone, Benicio Del Toro, Christopher Walken, 
      Jack Thompson, Harry Connick Jr., Nicholas Turturro, Michael Bowen
Director: Marco Brambilla
Producers: Bill Borden, Carolyn Kessler, Alicia Silverstone
Screenplay: Max D. Adams and Dick Clement & Ian La Frenais
Cinematography: Jean Yves Escoffier
Music: John Lurie
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     If you like Alicia Silverstone, you'll probably enjoy EXCESS 
BAGGAGE.  This dubious road movie/romance/caper flick is clearly a 
vehicle for the spritely starlet, and her winsome charm is one of its 
strengths.  Unfortunately, the other actors (including the underrated 
Benicio Del Toro and the always-solid Christopher Walken) don't keep 
pace with her, and she's saddled with a frustratingly ordinary and 
unambitious script.  In the end, EXCESS BAGGAGE ends up playing like any 
other late summer movie destined to pass as quickly from memory as from 
the box office.
     The film opens with a genuinely interesting premise:  18-year old 
Emily Hope (Alicia Silverstone), the attractive heiress to the 
multimillion dollar Hope fortune, decides to kidnap herself and demand a 
$1 million ransom.  The reason:  to get a little attention, and 
hopefully a sign of affection, from her cold and aloof father (John 
Thompson).  In her words, "it was never about the money."  After the 
ransom has been paid, Emily tapes her legs and mouth, handcuffs her 
hands, and dumps herself in her own car trunk.  However, while she's 
waiting for the police and her father to "rescue" her, the unexpected 
happens:  Vincent (Benicio Del Toro), a professional car thief, steals 
her car -- with her in the trunk.  Suddenly, Emily finds herself really 
kidnapped, only the kidnapper doesn't know what to do with her.
     The early portions of the film, which introduce a few interesting 
characters, relationships, and situations, are the best.  Unfortunately, 
as things progress, the plot devolves into a series of fairly standard 
contrivances:  the captor and willing captive bond, the police close in, 
gangster involvement threatens to turn violent over some missing money, 
etc.  Director Marco Brambilla (DEMOLITION MAN) can't prevent EXCESS 
BAGGAGE's seemingly-inevitable journey along the path from reasonable 
freshness to over-familiarity.  Relationships that are effectively set 
up are not pursued with the same diligence.  The central romance between 
Emily and Vincent is developed in fits and starts, with a great deal of 
filler interrupting the scenes that really work.
     Alicia Silverstone is a natural in front of the lens.  She's not 
the most talented actress of her generation, but the camera loves her.  
To date, her best role was probably that of the vapid Cher in CLUELESS.  
She has also played a psychotic, obsessed Lolita (THE CRUSH) and a 
superhero (BATMAN AND ROBIN).  Here, as a lonely, love-starved teenager, 
Silverstone's natural charisma filters through all the booze, smoke, and 
profanity that define Emily's dark side.  Her characteristic mannerisms 
(the pout, the engaging smile) do as much as her acting ability to 
establish Emily as a sympathetic person.  None of the supporting 
performers eclipses Silverstone's shine.  Benicio Del Toro is low-key as 
the unwitting car thief who becomes a cog in Emily's plan, and, except 
in a few winning scenes (like a quiet moment on a lake shore), there 
isn't any strong chemistry or connection between the two.  Christopher 
Walken does a walk-through of the kind of shady, semi-sinister 
individual that has become his bread-and-butter.  Jack Thompson is 
suitably distant as Emily's father, and Harry Connick Jr. does a 
passable imitation of a weasel (or a snake) as Greg, Vincent's car-
stealing partner.
     EXCESS BAGGAGE's biggest problem is probably a lack of focus.  
There's so much going on that there's not enough to time to hone in on 
the film's two critical relationships:  those between Emily and Vincent, 
and Emily and her father.  Instead, unnecessary things like car chases, 
gunplay, and fist fights keep interfering.  For that reason, the title 
is apt:  this movie is indeed burdened by too much excess baggage.  And, 
unless you're a fan of Silverstone, you can lighten your late summer 
load by skipping this offering.
The website is moving!!
ReelViews web site through 8/31: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
ReelViews web site beginning 9/1: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Edwin Jahiel
EXCESS BAGGAGE  *  Directed by Marco Brambilla. Written by Max D. Adams,
Dick Clement & Ian La Frenais.Story by Adams. Produced by Bill
Borden.Photography, Jean Yves Escoffier.Editing, Stephen Rivkin. Production
design,Missy Stewart and Carolyn Kessler. Music, John Lurie. Cast: Alicia
Silverstone (Emily), Benicio Del Toro (Vincent), Christopher Walken
(Emily's uncle Ray), Jack Thompson (Emily's father), Harry Connick, Jr.
(Greg), Nicholas Turturro (Stick), Michael Bowen (Gus), Sally Kirkland
(Louise), et al.  A Columbia release. 105 minutes. PG-13.
Back from a trip I looked for a movie worth reviewing. The end-of-summer
openings looked dismal by and large, with the main exception of "Excess
Baggage." That's the occasional translation of "El Bulto," a Mexican
production dating from 1991. It had received much praise abroad; its recent
US release had very positive reviews.
What, however, was on the screen was another "Excess Baggage," a Hollywood
flick starring Alicia Silverstone and produced by her own company, First
Kiss. Even discounting my great expectations for the Mexican movie, the
Silverstone vehicle was a bummer.
20-year-old Alicia plays 18-year-old Emily  She is the (presumably) only
child of a widower, a shady tycoon (or is this tautological?) played by
Australian Jack Thompson who came to prominence with "Breaker Morant" but
has had few really important roles since. This one is no exception.
The movie opens with a bang. Emily, pretending she's been abducted, phones
Dad and asks for a ransom of one million dollars. (She uses some device
that changes her voice to a man's. How she got it is beyond me, but then I
walked in one minute late, as credits and action were rolling. Still...)
The magnate agrees. Emily ties up, gags and handcuffs herself, gets inside
the trunk of her BMW. Professional car thief Vincent (Del Toro) steals the
automobile, unaware of the "excess baggage." There's the obligatory chase.
The car is hidden in a warehouse full of stolen vehicles. The film begins
to slow down. Slowness grows into a drag. The drag is handicapped by the
performers, the script, the awful editing, the bad continuity, several
confusing sections, unclarity as to people and relationships.
Del Toro plays Vincent in a mumbly-jumbly, hoarsy-monotonous, often
inaudible voice. He looks sullen and vague, not so much by character but
rather like someone who has overdosed on tranquilizers. His very first
smile comes at minute 71. The voice and the acting are vaguely Actors'
Studio derivatives and not vaguely throwbacks to James Dean and Marlon
Brando.
Vincent looks grungy. He has a partner, Greg (Harry Connick) who looks like
a classy car-dealer, which indeed he is. Greg produces some of the rare
mirthful touches when, much later, told of a catastrophe, he keeps reacting
with "Gosh!"
Vincent discovers Emily. He becomes her unwilling abductor (don't ask). The
two get into a road-movie situation. They have the kind of
would-be-funny-and-antagonistic relationship which has all the bells,
whistles and flashing lights that spell "future romance."
Emily is a spoiled brat who smokes like a steam locomotive, guzzles liquor,
flaunts her sexuality (more imagined than real) and is an overall pain. I
have not followed religiously Miss Silverstone's career, yet it seems to me
that she has gained weight. Her baby fat is visible. She's on the chubby
side, like chorus girls of the 1940s. Her acting is also about the level of
that of chorus girls of the 1940s. Or the 1950s. Or college students of
many decades who are performing in an amateur play.
The plot can't make up its mind. It hesitates  and seesaws between comedy
(even slapstick), action and pathos. The comedy is of the cutesy-couple
persuasion. The action is muddled. It includes dealings among four
partners-in-crime: Vince, Greg and two others that make up the ring of
thieves. (But with the garagefuls of stolen, pricey cars, many more
acolytes would have been needed).
The action is enhanced by Emily's dad's enlisting the help of his brother
(or brother-in-law? unclear), ex-CIAer Ray. He is played by Christopher
Walken, who, at his best, with his piercing eyes and his peculiar,
hairless, sometimes androgynous face can exude menace like nobody's
business --and can do it in a minimalist way.
Among his best recentish roles is that in the excellent "True Romance"
directed by Tony Scott.  I'm thinking of this movie as it has a distant
"air de famille" with "Baggage," which, following "Demolition Man," is his
second feature. Brambilla had been "discovered" earlier by, and worked
with, Tony Scott's older brother, filmmaker Ridley Scott ("Alien," "Blade
Runner," the road-movie "Thelma and Louise").
36-year-old Brambilla has worked primarily in TV commercials whose tiny
time-span techniques are reflected in the choppiness of this feature-length
movie. Sprinters are not Marathon-runners.
The pickings are slim. If you do see this product please note the waitress
who has her CDs for sale and who unwittingly helps Walken to locate Del
Toro. She's good, but I cannot identify her with certainty from the slim
pressbook and other research.
Now to the pathos, such as it is. This unfocused film makes you wonder what
brat Emily's scheme is all about. Near the end she tells Vincent  that she
did it "to make my father feel." "Feel what?" "Anything." So here's the Big
Secret. Daddy lavishes bucks and BMWs on his girl, but does not show
affection--or is it attention? Now we also understand why Emily had
previously tried to set fire to her prep school. Deep stuff.
The audience I saw "Baggage" with was passive, very seldom giggled or
laughed. Instead, there were frequent return trips to the concession stand.
The film, set in the State of Washington, was shot in neighboring and less
expensive British Columbia. Grungy sets and rainsoaked landscapes added
another depressing touch to this listless production.

Author
Steve Kong
Some movies start with such potential and then rise even more, blowing away
our expectations. Excess Baggage has so much potential. The plot has a
catchy proposition, which gives it so much potential. But, never does it
rise more below the catchy opening, it even sinks below that.
Alicia Silverstone is a neglected daughter of a rich man. He seems to care
more about his dirty business dealings than about his daughter. She is a
mischievous girl that has a bad history. To give you an idea of her
mischief, she has a news article about herself framed on her dresser. The
news article is about her burning down the school library.
In an attempt to both get her father's attention and test to see if he
really does love her, she sets up an elaborate scheme. She makes as if she
is kidnapped (herself being the kidnapper), demands money, ties herself up
and locks herself into her car trunk. What she didn't expect was a
professional car thief, played by Benicio Del Toro, who, unknowingly,
steals her car before the police can get to it. After meeting the two
develop a relationship.
The first production out of Alicia Silverstone's company, First Kiss, this
is not a great start. The genre is hard to pin point. It's not a romantic
film because there is hardly any romance or chemistry between Silverstone's
Emily Hope and Del Toro's Vincent Roche. It's not a comedy because, well,
it's not funny. It's not a drama because it can't be taken seriously. It's
not an action film because of the action in the film, most of it falls
flat. You get the idea.
Christopher Walken, who I really don't admire or prefer to watch, shows
again why I don't. He seems to play the same role over and over again. (I
did though love his short role in Pulp Fiction, but next to that, I find it
hard to find another film that I enjoyed his work in.)
Del Toro gives a low key performance, and it works. Silverstone gives a
strange uneven performance, and for her part it works to an extent. But,
all their time on screen together generates nothing; there just is no
chemistry between the two.
Excess Baggage is a weak film that I almost walked out on many times during
the film. I do respect the film makers enough to ride out the rest of the
film to see if there any divine intervention occur during the film that
could change it. In the end though, I was disappointed. Excess Baggage is a
film to skip on screen and on video.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Excess Baggage (1997)
Rated PG-13 for violence, drinking and sex-related dialogue
Starring Alicia Silverstone, Benicio Del Toro, Christopher Walken
Going into Excess Baggage, I didn't quite know what to expect.  I knew
Alicia Silverstone was in it, and I knew that it was about a
kidnapping gone awry.  But the trailers are so misleading that one
might think Excess Baggage was a comedy in the same realm as Ruthless
People.  Well, if you do go in expecting this, you might be
disappointed, or you may be like me and find yourself quite
entertained by the humorous mishaps of Silverstone and Del Toro.
Baggage is a very different type of film which somehow barely manages
to maintain the threads holding it together.  If it wasn't for Del
Toro and the rest of the cast, Excess Baggage could have just been
another lost cause amongst the August releases.
Excess Baggage is the first film from Alicia Silverstone's new
production company, First Kiss Productions.  Surprisingly enough, the
movie is fun to watch and originally done.  Unfortunately, there are a
few problems which pop up along the run of the film, especially the
script, which could have used some major work.  The beginning of
Excess Baggage reminded me so much of Clueless, Silverstone's best
film, that I wondered if Silverstone was trying to capitalize on the
success of that much more entertaining film.  So much is similar
between her two characters in these films that you begin to think that
this is the only role she could ever play.  After seeing films like
Batman & Robin, this seems like a major possibility.  Not that there
is anything wrong with that, as I could watch numerous Clueless
sequels if as well written as that first one.  But I fear that if our
poor Alicia doesn't get an original role soon, she will be lost
amongst the quickly forgotten stars who could never get past their
childhood persona.
Excess Baggage does have a lot going for it, though, namely the cast.
The film begins very quickly as a spoiled daughter, Emily Hope
(Silverstone), kidnaps herself.  The reason is established through a
monologue given by Hope, and we learn that she is doing this because
her father doesn't pay enough attention to her.  Alexander Hope (Jack
Thompson) is the ignorant father, but he shows glimpses of compassion
when his daughter is kidnapped.  She orders her father to throw one
million dollars onto a barge floating down the river, and then ties
herself up and locks herself in the trunk of her green BMW.  This is
all rather interesting, and it gets even more intriguing when Vincent
Roche (Benicio Del Toro), an advanced, but slow-witted car thief,
steals the car Hope is locked in.  To his (and her) surprise, he
discovers her after he reaches his final destination: a warehouse
filled with stolen cars.
This pretty much sets up the entire film for a rush of
misunderstandings and coincidental occurances.  Still, for some reason
I expected these events to be funnier than what they were.  Some were
quite funny, such as some of the scenes between Del Toro and
Silverstone, and some are very dull (scenes of the father all fit in
this category).  The first half hour of Excess Baggage are
entertaining and original, which usually can foreshadow the final half
hour as being drop-dead boring.  This film doesn't reach that point,
thankfully, but cautiously and unintentionally remains on the border.
One way could have made the film succeed even moreso, and the other
could have caused the film to drop in the ratings.  It's a shame that
the three or four writers weren't able to come up with some original
ideas towards the end of the film.  They even tried to create suspense
by attempting to make us guess as to what Silverstone's character was
going to do.  It was actually more insulting than anything else.
To the writers' credit, however, is the wonderfully funny and cute
scenes between Silverstone and Del Toro.  I would have loved for
Excess Baggage to try something new, and not have the two leads fall
in love.  This wasn't going to happen, and in fact created some
unrealistic chemistry between these two (they fell in love in two
days--a Hollywood subplot regular).  Whenever they didn't get along,
the screen lit up with sharp dialogue and humorous situations.  It was
a lot more fun (and definitely much more believeable) when they
couldn't get along, but this is a Hollywood film.  In fact, when I
think about it, the first hour of Excess Baggage is so wonderfully fun
that the last part seems drained and forced.  The scenes between
Raymond Perkins (Christopher Walken) and Hope's father are
excruciatingly painful to watch, but thanks to Walken's power as an
actor, he brings some joy into the scenes.  Which brings up another
point: for the life of me, I couldn't tell whether Perkins was a good
or a bad guy until about twenty minutes before the end.  Walken is
almost always an evil man in films, and to see him in a good role
confused me.
Excess Baggage has one main thing going for it: a talented cast.
Silverstone is pretty good as the rich brat, but her character is just
a cross between Cher from Clueless and Batgirl.  Del Toro (from The
Usual Suspects) shines in his role as the caring but slow-minded car
thief.  He is very entertaining and lights up the screen whenever he
appears.  Christopher Walken is extremely effective as Silverstone's
uncle.  It's nice to know he can play a good guy once in a while (even
if he looks mean).  Jack Thompson gives a believeable and rather
mean-spirited performance as the hard-hearted business father.  I was
just waiting for someone to punch him in the face.  Harry Connick, Jr.
is good in his underwritten role, but he isn't given very much to do.
This is purely Del Toro's film, with Silverstone doing nothing more
than she did in Clueless.
Excess Baggage is rated PG-13 for violence, drinking and sex-related
dialogue.  Director Marco Brambilla uses some nice storytelling
techniques, but I only wish he could have held that camera still
during some scenes.  Composer John Lurie creates a very nice musical
score to go along with this film.  In fact, I was even distracted
during some scenes by the wonderful music.  Excess Baggage is far from
the comedy and entertainment of Clueless, but with four different
writers, you think one of them might be able to come up with something
funny.  Excess Baggage is cute and light-weight, but don't expect to
laugh very often.
Reviewed by Respect of Respect's Movie Reviews
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html
respect@aros.net

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Alicia Silverstone - you either love her or hate her. That could make all the
difference in your interpretation of EXCESS BAGGAGE. If you love her, you'll
have no problem sitting thru 100+ minutes of fluff just to look at her, but if
you hate her, those same 100+ minutes are going to be excruciating.
EXCESS BAGGAGE stars Alicia Silverstone as Emily T. Hope, a whiny, bratty, but
ignored daughter of multi-millionaire Alexander Hope (Jack Thompson). In an
effort to obtain any form of attention from her father, Emily engages in a
wide array of stunts and pranks that usually get her in trouble. Emily knows
no discipline. In fact, she seems rather proud of her wild antics, even going
to the extent of framing newspaper articles about the disasters she personally
choreographs. As the film begins, Emily is up to yet another prank. This time,
she has faked her own kidnapping and is leading her father on a wild goose
chase. After he drops off the one-million dollar ransom, she informs him over
the phone, with an altered voice, that she can be found in the trunk of her
car in a parking terrace.
Emily proceeds to bond herself with tape and handcuffs and stuff herself in
the trunk of her BMW, which means that if you're into bondage as well as
Silverstone, you're in for a real treat. One problem occurs: a car-thief named
Vincent (Benicio Del Toro) comes along and does what he does best, stealing
the car and unknowingly abducting Emily. Vincent takes his "catch" back to a
warehouse full of other costly sports cars, but his curiosity is soon peaked
when noise is heard coming from the trunk. Slowly he approaches the car and
pops open the trunk, quickly slamming it back shut when he sees the blonde
bound bimbo.
Vincent panics and calls his conniving accomplice, Greg (Harry Connick, Jr.)
from a nearby coffee shop.  Vincent returns to the warehouse to wait for Greg,
only to find that Emily has escaped the trunk. He continuously promises not to
hurt her as she beats the crap out of him, but he finally gets her under
control and locks her in the bathroom. When Greg arrives, they come to the
conclusion that the best answer is to simply take Emily off somewhere and
leave her. This proves to be a more difficult task than Vincent thought as he
attempts to get the ever-so-non-compliant Emily in the car. Finally he does,
and the two set out on a long, tension filled ride.
When Vincent drops Emily off on the side of the road in the middle of nowhere,
he breathes a sigh of relief. Up the road, however, he stops at a gas station
and sees the report on the news, learning that Emily is the daughter of a
multi-millionaire and that the cops are on his trail. Unsure of what to do, he
finds Emily and picks her up again, taking her along as he tries to come to a
conclusion for this unbelievable mishap. Emily, whose life hasn't seemed to
mean much to anyone, doesn't object to accompanying Vincent, but she also
doesn't make it easy on him, consantly bickering and complaining about his
every more.
Vincent and Emily are the odd couple who will inevitably fall for each other
and become a team as opposed to the original kidnapper/kidnappee relationship.
The two travel around, trying to avoid the police, Emily's uncle Ray
(Christopher Walkin) who has been the closest thing to a father-figure in
Emily's life, and a pair of angry thugs (including Nicolas Turturro) who are
out to collect on the Emily's well-to-do background.
The idea behind EXCESS BAGGAGE is quite charming, but the actors and script
don't allow it to bloom into the delightful film it could've been. Alicia
Silverstone is so bland and whiny that you won't be able to like her, and
Benicio Del Toro seems to have taken a heavy dose of sleeping pills before
every take. Most of the time, Del Toro mumbles unintelligible phrases as
though he's awaking from a ten year coma. The rest of the cast, with the
possible exception of Harry Connick, Jr., are used like parsley - they're
simply there to add to the appearance, not to the overall item. Connick can be
commended for trying, but that's about all he has the chance to do.
EXCESS BAGGAGE can probably easily find a market among teenagers, particulary
younger hormone raging teenagers. It's not the worst, but it does turn out
overly conventional. It's not worth wasting your time - unless you're
seriously into Alicia Silverstone in handcuffs.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     EXCESS BAGGAGE, about a spoiled rich kid (Alicia Silverstone) who
fakes her own kidnapping and ends up in the hands (and later arms) of a
quirky, hunky auto thief (Benicio Del Toro), is so uninteresting, so
underwhelming, and so *utterly* uninvolving, that the question becomes
not "do I walk out?" but "how quickly can I find the fire exit?" I
lasted for about thirty minutes, at which point I became concerned about
my personal safety.  Noticing an unusual energy drain upon my person, I
fastened a rope around my waist and proceeded to move forward to the
front of the auditorium.  Upon closer inspection, I discovered what I
had suspected-- the filmmakers had, indeed, made into reality the
central plot device of EVENT HORIZON.  Right there in Raleigh, North
Carolina, at the corner of Atlantic Springs and Spring Forest Road, a
black hole had been opened within the confined space of a movie theater.
I sure hope they learn to harness that power...
