Title
Review for Chaplin (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Pedro Sena
I was born during a time when Charles Chaplin was the most important part of
film, when you were a kid growing up.  And the intelectual world around me,
also liked him for other reasons, most of them with political overtones.
This film, joins both, and makes a truly inspirational film, about a legend,
who made mistakes, but also gave us so much more, that we can never measure
in the scale of enjoyment.  Much of his comedy was precious.  And he did not
repeat himself, as did most of those around him.  This bit does not go by
un-noticed by the director.
Charles Chaplin started in the early days, in the Mack Sennett stuff, as a
bit part actor.  He soon graduated to his own films, and even though he had
some terrible times, the competition for the dollar was very tough, and the
depression was just arriving, he managed to give Hollywood a dignity which
it lacked.  The Busby Berkley
stuffs looked stupid when people couldn't afford a bowl of soup.  The Mack
Sennett stuff needed money.  But Charles just did his own little films, even
with little budget, and busted out through the depression like the no one in
Hollywood could.  And he became the ultimate symbol of what the depression
is really like, with his short THE TRAMP.
But Charles' life wasn't simple.  From the early days when he felt compelled
to live a slight fantasy, until he learned of a lie, he kept himself a
constant list of ladies in waiting, and some of them were famous for trying
to hook rich people in those days ( several scandals ).  He barely escaped
one himself.  But his art form was better than ever.
In enter, the portion of his life he would rather forget.  The FBI in those
days, had no intrigue, except to try and snoop out anyone that was
un-American, or whomever, J. Edgar Hoover felt should be bothered.
But the real art survives, and little can touch it, and a small time hero
like Hoover can never touch it.  They manage to pull off an anti American
fiasco, but the whole thing looms stupid and the film makers are having a
heyday with the government's stupidity and waste of funds.
The film ends, with the famous special OSCAR that Charles Chaplin was given
for his tremendous efforts, specially during a time when it appears that all
was lost.  Charles may have been, but the tramp was not.
Superb performances in this film include Robert Downey Jr as Chaplin, and
Dan Aykroyd as Mack Sennett, and even Kevin Kline as Douglas Fairbanks.  The
surprise bit is the grand-daughter ( Geraldine Chaplin )
playing grandma, who tried so hard, to help their sons withstand so much
during such hard times.
Lovingly directed, with a respect that is not always found in much film
making these days, this longish film is a treat.  Visually, story wise, and
just about at any turn.  It is told in retrospect, as a bit of a memory, by
an aging Charles who is telling one of his biographers ( Anthony Hopkins )
about some of the events in his life. The biographer is disappointed that
there are many holes in the tale, of moments that are obviously buried, and
Charles does not wish to discuss them. like his father, and some of his more
notorious affairs.
But the film is a great tribute to one of the greatest artists the 20th
century has ever seen on film.  He may not have been perfect for himself, or
many, but he made it perfect for the audience, who just howled, and bowled
over, such tremendously funny material.
This film is worthy of all the accolades it ever got, and then some.

Author
James Berardinelli
Running Length:  2:24
Rated:  PG-13 (Language, brief nudity, mature themes)
Starring:  Robert Downey Jr., Paul Rhys, Moira Kelly, Geraldine Chaplin,
  Dan Aykroyd, Kevin Kline, Kevin Dunn, Diane Lane, Anthony Hopkins,
  Marisa Tomei, James Woods, Nancy Travis, Milla Jovovich,
  Penelope Ann Miller, John Thaw
Director:  Richard Attenborough
Producers:  Mario Kassar and Richard Attenborough
Screenplay:  William Goldman, William Boyd, and Bryan Forbes
Music:  John Barry
Released by TriStar Pictures
     CHAPLIN is Sir Richard Attenborough's recounting of the life and
times of film great Charlie Chaplin.  The story picks up in 1894, when
Charlie is five, and lasts until 1972, five years before his death in
1977.  Along the way,  Attenborough gives us glimpses of Hollywood in
its infancy, the filmmaking process, and McCarthyism.  Above all,
however, CHAPLIN shows the life, both on and off-screen, of one of the
pioneers of motion pictures.
     It's easy to pick out the single major flaw of CHAPLIN.  It's too
ambitious.  Attempting to condense seventy-eight years into one-hundred
adn forty-four minutes is a Herculean task that not even a director of
Richard Attenborough's accomplishments is up to.  There's too much
material, and because the story is so rich, characters and events go
whizzing by at dizzying speeds.  CHAPLIN becomes a series of scenes and
images rather than a cohesive whole.
     Robert Downey Jr. does a highly credible Chaplin.  Not only does
he look like the comic, but he had mastered the physical mannerisms so
necessary to the role.  Downey said that copying "The Tramp" was his
biggest challenge.  It is also his most impressive accomplishment.  In
fact, the actor so perfectly captures his character that clips of the
actual Chaplin can be used in the movie without ruining the illusion.
     Aside from Chaplin, there is little attempt at character depth.
Douglas  Fairbanks (Kevin Kline, most recently of CONSENTING ADULTS),
Sydney Chaplin (Paul Rhys), and Oona Chaplin (Moira Kelly, of THE
CUTTING EDGE) are fleshed out a little, but none of them could be
considered three-dimensional.  It certainly isn't the actors' faults.
Their characters have such limited screen time that it's difficult to do
more than introduce them.
     Choosing Geraldine Chaplin to play Charlie's mother Hannah is a
case of inspired casting.  Aside from Downey, she gives the most
convincing portrayal, and even though her screen time is limited, she
has presence in the scenes she's in.
     Attenborough, with a flair for the subtle, cast Moira Kelly in a
double role--that of Hetty Kelly, Charlie's lost love, and of Oona, with
whom he had his only successful marriage.  Kelly has trouble with the
early role--or, more specifically, with Hetty's accent--but she does a
fine job as Oona.  The obvious resemblance between the two characters is
never commented upon, so it's up to the viewer to make the connection.
Unfortunately, this is another instance where the script fails.  Since
Hetty is only briefly introduced, it's hard to envision her as one of
the forces that drives Chaplin's life, and even harder to understand how
he is able to set aside her memory through Oona.
     Indeed, emotional moments are few and far between in CHAPLIN.  The 
only scene of any genuine power comes in the closing moments of the 
movie.  Aside from that, watching the film is much like perusing a 
history textbook--informative and interesting, but not memorable or 
powerful.  Fortunately, CHAPLIN is well-paced and snappily-plotted, so
it never becomes dull or tedious.  Early in the film, Mack Sennett (Dan
Aykroyd) notes that Chaplin's first film appearance is on the cutting 
room floor--not a good place to be.  One wonders how much of this 
picture ended up getting snipped.  My sense is that there was a lot--
too much, perhaps--but it's difficult to imagine that any reasonable
length could have been enough to do justice to the man's life.  Seeing
CHAPLIN has given me a strong desire to read the autobiography upon
which the movie is based.
     As expected from an Attenborough film, CHAPLIN boasts strong
production values.  The editing and camera work are smooth.  There's a
wonderful "life imitates art" scene where Chaplin is being chased by the
police, and this couldn't have been better put together.  The aging
effects are some of the best I've seen.  When Chaplin is old, he looks
like he's being played by an elderly actor, not Robert Downey Jr. under
a mountain of makeup.  Veteran composer John Barry's score, while
perhaps too reminiscent of his DANCES WITH WOLVES music, is evocative.
     All-in-all, although CHAPLIN is solid entertainment, it's far from
a magnificent film.  As intellectually intriguing and satisfying as it
is, the movie fails to touch enough emotional chords to make it of more
than passing interest.  

Author
Brian L. Johnson
149 min., PG-13, Drama, 1993
Director: Richard Attenborough
Cast: Robert Downey, Jr., Moira Kelly, Anthony Hopkins, Milla Jovovich,
      Dan Aykroyd, Geraldine Chaplin, Kevin Dunn, Kevin Kline,
      Diane Lane, Penelope Ann Miller, Paul Rhys, John Thaw,
      Marisa Tomei, Nancy Travis, James Woods
     Robert Downey, Jr., plays the legendary Charlie Chaplin.  This
film traces the life of Charlie Chaplin, starting with his entrance into
show business.  Most of the film is spent covering Chaplin's movie
career and sex life.
     CHAPLIN is an excellent film, which I highly recommend that you
see.  Although the film is almost two and a half hours long, it doesn't
slow down or get boring.  CHAPLIN is very well done and mixed with
comedy (which is appropriate because Charlie Chaplin was a comedian) so
that it doesn't get over dramatic.  This film is very well written.  On
a scale of zero to five, I give CHAPLIN a five.  CHAPLIN is rated PG-13
for female nudity, explicit language, and adult situations.  How this
film managed to get a PG-13 rating, I don't know.
     I expect that, at least, one cast member will be nominated for an
Academy Award (an Oscar).  The entire cast is superb.  Robert Downey,
Jr., (1969, TUFF TURF) was an excellent choice to play Charlie Chaplin.
He does an excellent job and brings life to Chaplin.  Moira Kelly (THE
CUTTING EDGE, LOVE LIES AND MURDER) has a double role in this film.  She
plays Charlie Chaplin first love and his last love.  She does an
excellent job with both roles.  Anthony Hopkins (THE BOUNTY, SILENCE OF
THE LAMBS) does an okay job as a fictional character.  He was put in the
film so Charlie Chaplin would have somebody to tell his life story to.
I don't think that Anthony Hopkins added anything to this film.  Milla
Jovovich (RETURN TO THE BLUE LAGOON, KUFFS) plays Charlie Chaplin's
underage lover.  Milla Jovovich gives a very good performance.
     Dan Aykroyd (DRIVING MISS DAISY, NEIGHBORS) is great as the film
maker who starts Charlie Chaplin in films.  Aykroyd has a comical
character and is a great asset to the film.  Geraldine Chaplin (BOLERO
[1982 version], DR. ZHIVAGO), who is Charlie Chaplin's daughter, plays
Charlie Chaplin's mother in the film.  She does an outstanding job, and
I hope to see her get nominated for an Academy Award.  Kevin Dunn (ONLY
THE LONELY) gives a good performance as J.  Edgar Hoover.  He doesn't
add much to the film though.  Kevin Kline (A FISH CALLED WANDA, GRAND
CANYON) gives an excellent performance, per his usual, as an action film
actor.  Kevin Kline adds a lot to the film.  Diane Lane (LONESOME DOVE,
THE OUTSIDERS) plays another one of Charlie Chaplin's lovers.  She does
a great job.  Penelope Ann Miller (DOWNTOWN, KINDERGARTEN COP) is great.
Paul Rhys (VINCENT AND THEO) is very good as Charlie Chaplin's brother.
James Woods (ONCE UPON A TIME IN AMERICA, THE HARD WAY) is on briefly as
a lawyer.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In 1931 Charlie Chaplin invited Albert Einstein to see a private
screening of Chaplin's new CITY LIGHTS.  When passersby cheered the two men,
Chaplin turned to Einstein and said, "The people are applauding you because
none of them understands you and applauding me because everybody understands
me."  Getting an understanding of a good, simple man was Richard
Attenborough's goal in CHAPLIN much as it was in his GANDHI.  CHAPLIN is, of
course, a long overdue cinematic tribute to the man most easily pointed to
as the greatest screen comic of all time.  In 144 minutes Attenborough
attempts to cover the entire career of Chaplin from about age four to age
eighty-three.  Eighty is a lot to cover. This leads to some problems with
pacing in which some periods are covered much too quickly and others, less
interesting, are shown in too much detail.
     The biography is told mostly in flashback that opens with the Chaplin
family's grinding poverty in London at the end of the 19th Century.
Charlie's mother supports the two of them and Charlie's older brother by a
failing career singing in music halls.  When she is no longer young enough
to please an audience, Charlie finds he has some talent in front of an
audience, but not enough talent to earn what it would take to keep his
family together, nor enough to keep himself out of the workhouse.  In his
suffering and despair the film makes only too clear the roots of Chaplin's
bittersweet comedy.  The film tracks his music hall career, his first love,
and his trip to America to try to prosper.  It is, perhaps, a weakness of
the screenplay by William Boyd, Bryan Forbes, and William Goldman that
Chaplin is so incredibly understandable and so obviously a product of this
early existence.  His efforts to ease suffering and his womanizing all seem
to come from attempts to recapture what little was good in his youth and to
help others avoid the suffering he had experienced.
     The scene shifts to America with Dan Aykroyd playing an extremely
vulgar Mack Sennett.  There Chaplin invents his tramp character.  (The film
takes some liberties here.  The tramp actually first showed up in a humorous
documentary about a children's auto race.  Supposedly a funny-looking
observer keeps walking in front of the camera.  Within two years that funny
little pest would be one of the most famous people in the world.) After all
that Charlie has been through it would be nice to see how he reacts as
success starts coming to him.  What should have been the most exciting part
of the film was covered in two or three scenes in which Chaplin goes from
being a clever new comic to "the most famous man in the world."
     Now scandalously rich, as perhaps the screen's first real star and
certainly the first superstar, Charlie tries to make everything that went
wrong in his youth now go right, only to find that dream impossible.  The
film traces the rest of his career, his many marriages, and his friendship
with Douglas Fairbanks (whose natural flamboyance actor Kevin Kline can only
barely reflect).  Particularly interesting is the discussion over how to
make the transition to sound and why Chaplin insisted on making what were
essentially silent films well into the sound era.  Also we see why he made
THE GREAT DICTATOR and why he insisted it would be the final film for his
tramp.  Chaplin's conflict with J. Edgar Hoover also gets attention.
     Attenborough's Chaplin is every bit as tragic as the character he
played.  Robert Downey, Jr., plays him as a man of terrible self-doubts, a
man who can have a room full of admiring fans and if one drunk does not like
him, he will fall into depression.  He is a man who had many dreams and of
them the only one that came true was his wish for success.
     CHAPLIN is one of those films where major stars are satisfied with
small roles just to part of the tribute.  Among them are Anthony Hopkins,
Penelope Ann Miller, James Woods, and Robert Stephens.  Geraldine Chaplin
plays her own grandmother, Hannah Chaplin.  Downey is surprisingly
satisfying as Chaplin.  One does not really expect Downey to make Chaplin's
slapstick funny for a 1990s audience.  Downey appears to be fully up to the
physical demands of Chaplin's humor and somehow manages to make silent film
gags still very funny.  In make-up he really looks like Chaplin's tramp.
(Of course, people have different ideas of exactly what the tramp looks
like.  Once when Chaplin was in Monte Carlo they were having a Charlie
Chaplin look-a-like contest.  He entered the contest incognito but was only
able to cop third place.)  Playing an older Chaplin, however, Downey's
make-up lets him down.  Also, a segment of the film shot in the style of a
Keystone Cops film does not work well.
     It is very difficult in judging a tribute film to separate the quality
of the film itself from the appropriateness of the tribute.  If one likes
what Malcolm X or Gandhi stood for, it is difficult not to like their
biographical films more for that reason.  However, even if it is just Robert
Downey, Jr., playing Chaplin, he can kick a bully with a panache and a class
that Jean-Claude Van Damme or Steven Segal can barely even dream of.  With
that warning about my subjectivity, I will rate this one a +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Afroditi Michailidi
     CHAPLIN is the long awaited film about the life of Charlie Chaplin.
Directed by Richard Attenborough and with a host of stars including
Robert Downey, Jr., Kevin Kline, Anthony Hopkins and Geraldine Chaplin
(Chaplin's real life daughter who, in a twist, plays his mother), this
film sets out to be the very definition of epic biography, pure and
simple.  It almost succeeds.
     The problem is, it tries too hard.  I found some of the scenes too
loaded for my tastes.  At times I was almost glad the director was
constricted by real life events and could not use all of the plot
devices he otherwise might have.  And, my feeling is, some of the
material was not epic to begin with -- that might well be my serious
gripe with this film.
     The movie is of epic length too, being over two hours and twenty
minutes long.  I found it slow in developing.  On the other hand, I do
not think that cutting any of the introduction would improve it; the
film carries you along little by little until you are engulfed and
immersed in its tale; only by detailing as many events as possible can
it achieve that effect.
     Don't get me wrong.  It is a good film and one of the best I have
seen lately.  Based loosely on Chaplin's autobiography, the film works
on two levels: one is following Chaplin from his early years throughout
his career, while the second one shows Chaplin as an old man conferring
with his biographer (the only fictional character in the movie, existing
purely as a narrative device).  This dichotomy was at first jarring,
since you get pulled in and out of the timeline -- but in the end, it
works too; Attenborough is no novice.
     Robert Downey, Jr., does a wonderful job as Chaplin.  I even began
to think of him as Chaplin midway through the film.  The supporting cast
is excellent too, particularly Kevin Kline as Douglas Fairbanks.
     Bonus points for the ending -- it is really the stuff that cinema
is made of.
     In conclusion, I found this to be a very good and entertaining
film, although dragging in some places.  A masterpiece it is not, which
is rather disappointing considering the cast, director and script
material.  However, the film makes up for it, if only for its ending.
I'd rate it a 9- on my personal scale, i.e., recommended with some
reservations.
[quick reference chart
[recent movies: THE BODYGUARD 5-, ALADDIN 8.5, ZENTROPA 10-
[all time faves: ZOO & THE ELEMENT OF CRIME 10-
[rock bottom: LIQUID SKY 0
