Title
Review for Pink Panther, The (1963)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"The Pink Panther" is a light comedy, with strong romantic,
fashion, and slapstick elements.  While some scenes are
funny, as a whole the film doesn't quite come off.
There are problems with casting and characters and dialogue,
and overall shallowness.
David Niven stars as a man leading a double life: suave
playboy Sir Charles and a jewel thief known as 'The Phantom'.
His conquests include two women half his age, Simone (Capucine)
and Princess Dala (Claudia Cardinale).  Both these women
have apparently been cast for their looks and their accents.
Simone is also the wife of police detective Inspector Clouseau
(Peter Sellers) a bumbling fool who is hot on the trail of
The Phantom.
Much of the film takes place in a hotel bedroom, with Sellers
attempting to seduce his wife, who must gently parry his
unwanted advances while keeping him in the dark about Niven's
double identity.  To make her job even more difficult,
Robert Wagner shows up as Niven's nephew, with his uncle's
personality traits of smugness, seduction and thievery.
Capucine must tease and mislead him as well, but as he is
more sharp than Sellers, matters begin to unravel.
Sellers, of course, plays Inspecter Clouseau well, but
not all of his gags are funny, such as when he burns
his hand.
"The Pink Panther" is notable for introducing the Clouseau
character, which Sellers played in a series of sequels
until his untimely death.  The later films are centered
around Clouseau and not the criminals that he is ineptly
chasing.
The film was nominated for one Academy Award, for Henry
Mancini's inspired jazz score.  While the title refers
to a 'priceless' jewel, it has become associated with
the score and the cartoon panther character, who shows
up in the opening and closing credits.  The Pink Panther
later became the star of a cartoon show, and for a while
even had his own breakfast cereal (it was really gross:
it made the milk turn pink).  Sadly, the Pink Panther has
since been relegated to commercials for Owens Fiberglass.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Frankie Paiva
The moment the famous Pink Panther theme comes on, the mood is perfectly set. 
This screwball comedy featuring the memorable Inspector Clouseau (played by 
Peter Sellers) whose bumbling detective work is less than extraordinary, is 
what most remember best about the film. However, some key scenes and other 
characters sometimes get forgotten. The real main character of the movie is 
Sir Charles Litton (David Niven). Litton is a playboy who also happens to be 
an elusive thief that steals precious diamonds, leaving a white glove behind 
at each crime scene. He's come to a ski resort to steal the Pink Panther; a 
jewel belonging to Princess Dala (Claudia Cardinale), named for the panther 
shaped imperfection in the middle of the stone. Clouseau is oblivious to the 
fact that his wife Simone (Capucine) is having an affair with Litton, and 
that the thief is right under his nose. Also present is a young Robert Wagner 
who portrays George Litton, Charles's nephew. These characters get thrown 
into a complex set of comedic situations that are laugh out loud hilarious. 
The scenes are funny not only for their slapstick physical comedy elements, 
but for the sheer idiocy of the characters and their actions. During some 
points of the movie, one might wonder how stupid Clouseau could possibly be, 
but his dumbness is always appealing, and never annoying. This whole movie's 
basis is fun. 
The reason The Pink Panther is probably so memorable is because of the great 
cast. Sellers is masterful as the Inspector and his performance evokes the 
classic comic genius of Charlie Chaplin. David Niven has fun with his role as 
a jewel thief, and I love how things heat up when his nephew (also an 
aspiring jewel thief) joins in on the fun. Princess Dala is innocent and 
funny, Cardinale makes her a character that is always interesting to watch. 
There have been recent rumors of a remake of this movie with Kevin Spacey 
taking the role of Clouseau. It would be interesting to see Spacey tackle 
this type of comedy. Catherine Zeta-Jones might fit well into the role of 
Dala. However, I don't see any real reason to remake this film. I was 
fortunate enough to see The Pink Panther at the Seattle International Film 
Festival on a big screen (where all comedies belong) with a new 35 MM print. 
The audience (including some very young children) laughed their heads off the 
entire time. The humor has stayed strong for thirty-seven years and is better 
suited to a rerelease. You could also go to a video store and rent one of the 
film's eight sequels.
>From the beautiful fireworks heavy conclusion, to the wacky gorilla costume 
sequences, this film is pure enjoyment. Not only is this a great film for 
those who have seen it and don't remember it well; it's a good movie to share 
with your children. The rich colors, classic humor, and good clean fun are 
what make this movie wonderful.
