Title
Review for Dirty Work (1998)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Michael Dequina
_Dirty_Work_ has a premise of deliciously mean-spirited
potential. Mitch Weaver (Norm Macdonald) and his lifelong best friend
Sam McKenna (Artie Lange) are losers in life: they were constantly
picked on in school, and now they cannot hold regular jobs.  But as
the trailer goes, "There is one thing Mitch Weaver is good
at--revenge."  So he and Sam parlay their unmatched skill in
getting-even schemes into a marketable revenge-for-hire business
called Dirty Work Inc.
This should be the groundwork for a wonderfully wicked black comedy,
but for a film called _Dirty_Work_, what ensues is rather clean of
spirit.  In fact, what makes Mitch and Sam start up their business is
not a giddy desire to give bullies a taste of their own medicine, but
rather a more sappy reason: Sam's father (Jack Warden) needs a heart
transplant, and in order for him to move at the top of the recipient
list, his compulsively betting doctor (Chevy Chase) asks the guys for
$50,000 to pay off his bookie.  So for all the scheming that goes on,
beneath every underhanded plot is--gasp!--a heart, which undercuts the
inherent nastiness of the premise.
Not that there isn't a lot of nastiness on display--there is, but of a
different sort.  There are frequent sexual references, most
prominently in the form of prostitutes and Sam's impotent father's
ongoing lust for them.  And for a film rated PG-13, director Bob Saget
(yes, that Bob Saget, of _Full_House_ and
_America's_Funniest_Home_Videos_ fame) and writers Frank Sebastiano,
Fred Wolf, and Macdonald himself, stretch the boundaries of good taste
rather far--arguably a bit too much so (was not one, but two separate
instances of sodomy between animals really necessary?).  But the
issue, of course, is not so much of taste as it is humor--as in, is it
funny or not? The answer is a resounding no.
It's not that Macdonald isn't a funny guy.  He was one of the more
consistently funny performers on _Saturday_Night_Live_ before his
much-talked-about firing, and his dry brand of smartass wit translates
well to the big screen; it also doesn't hurt that he's a natural,
likable screen presence.  He is able to give some of his lines a nice
acid touch, but, for the most part, the oneliners, as written, are
flat, and the broad slapstick gags just don't work (one running gag
has him being literally tossed out of buildings--a real riot). Still,
Macdonald's few shining moments are just about the only moments the
film has. The late Chris Farley, as hysterical as he ever was, is
amusing in a cameo role, but, as a whole, the supporting players are
amateurish and seemingly free from any directorial guidance.
Saget tries to juice up the proceedings with kitschy cameos by Gary
Coleman, Adam Sandler, and John Goodman, but their minimal novelty
value cannot prevent _Dirty_Work_ from sputtering to the end of its
brief 81-minute running time.  The film closes on a sad note of
desperation, an indulgent reel of outtakes from which only those
involved in the production would derive any amusement.  Come to think
of it, I cannot imagine anyone but those involved in the production to
find much amusement in the entirety of _Dirty_Work_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
So far, I have personally seen more genuinely terrible and unwatchable movies
in 1998 than in any other year in recent memory. DIRTY WORK bellyflops
squarely onto the end of that astonishing string of stinkers. Not only was it
not screened for critics, but when trailers for the movie rolled two months
ago (ours was appended to GODZILLA), people walked out of the theater to wait
for it to end.
DIRTY WORK is offensive in the worst possible way: it's stupid AND
incompetent. The film's basic premise has potential: Norm MacDonald (late of
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE) plays a schlub who, in an attempt to raise money for his
father's heart transplant, starts a revenge-for-hire service. There! With
that concept in mind, sit down and write as many things you can think of that
might appear in a comedy about this subject. I'll bet my 401K fund that not
only do none of them appear in this movie, but that everything you wrote down
is guaranteed to be funnier than anything that happens on screen. The film is
a wretched parade of cheap shots at fat people, gays ("Keep your distance,
Liberace," one of the characters says after a too-intimate embrace), and
anyone else who wasn't in the room when they scrawled the script on the back
of a gum wrapper.
It's absolutely amazing. I racked my brains trying to remember a single funny
moment in this movie. There isn't one. Usually a movie will have SOMETHING
that at least makes you snicker, even if it's not deliberate. This movie is a
desert, seconded only by SOUR GRAPES so far as the worst movie of the year.
Matters aren't helped by the static direction (Bob Saget, of AMERICA'S
FUNNIEST HOME VIDEOS) or MacDonald's dead delivery. He seems to think that
just because he could get laughs reading "Weekend Update" in a smiling
monotone, he can do the same with everything else he gets handed.
There is a little crew of amateur filmmakers who call themselves Random Foo
Productions. They've even got their own web site (www.randomfoo.com). I've
seen several of their homebrew movies already, and for a bunch of kids with
an operating budget that's probably less than what it costs to chauffeur a
big-name director to the airport, they are enormous fun.
Why do I mention them here? Draw your own conclusions.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
The core audience for movies is people between 18 and 24 years of age.
I remember when I was that age, I still hated movies like 'Dirty Work'.
Even when I was 12 to 18, I still hated movies that insulted my
intelligence while offending my sense of decency and good taste.
Decency and good taste are, of course, a matter of individual opinion on
everyone's part, but let's be honest; movies like 'Dirty Work' are
indefensible trash intended to end another wannabe's career.  Cue cards
may work on the Weekend Update portion of 'Saturday Night Live' but Norm
Macdonald's jump to the big screen has him in character doing what looks
like a reading of cue cards to execute his lines and every gag in the
film falls flat on its face with Macdonald being the biggest of turkeys.
Upon research, I discovered that there have been four other movies in
Hollywood history that have the same title as this film and I thought I
might be in trouble from the opening credits when I saw that it took
three people to write a film like this.
Macdonald stars as a man well into his thirties who hasn't found his way
in life and the void we all go through in life seems to be stretching
its boundaries in his case.  He has trouble holding every job he has, he
can't keep a steady girlfriend and is an easy target for insults.  His
best buddy Sam (Artie Lange), turns out later in the film to be closer
to Macdonald than he realizes and Sam's dad (Jack Warden) holds the
secret to Macdonald's past that is completely wasted as the humourous
way they try and present the scenario will make your jaw drop with its
offensive and no talent execution style courtesy of director Bob Saget
(television's 'America's Funniest Home Videos' and 'Full House').  How
did Saget get to direct a motion picture?  He must have more friends
than talent.  He looks good on t.v. but he also looks like one of the
ultimate "bad corn" contributors to modern day pop culture through his
efforts here as a director.  Next, we'll probably have one of the Olsen
twins directing movies.
Failing at every turn, Macdonald and his buddy Sam decide to open a
business doing the one thing they're really good at: REVENGE!  They find
that even though they're relatively successful at it, there are still
problems with their new found endeavours as Macdonald is asked to do a
job that will strike a blow against the friendly grandmother of a girl
(Traylor Howard), that he's sweet on.
Unoriginal, unfunny, rude, offensive (especially to fat people and the
homeless), 'Dirty Work' doesn't even look like it has someone else
watching besides director Saget, interested enough to try and make the
film work.  While directors are ultimately responsible for the way a
film turns out, sometimes there are other people such as the first
assistant director, the writer or even the actors who can create input
in making a series of scenes work to become at least a mild success.  No
one here has any idea of how to do that.  It's one of the biggest no
talent hack jobs I've ever seen and ranks in my all time worst films
list along with other films from the last couple of years such as Tom
Arnold's 'The Stupids' and John Leguizamo's 'The Pest'.  After feeling
ripped off for your money, just remember an old joke that applies to
this film, not to be taken seriously but I hope it makes you feel
better.  If you can't beat them, arrange to have them beaten!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Homer Yen
Perhaps best remembered as the recently departed news anchor on Saturday
Night Live who always started the segment with "...this is the fake
news," Norm MacDonald, at times, could elicit some laughter by blurting
out semi-offensive phrases in his raspy voice, coated with a
condescending attitude.  His shtick was marked by crassness.  In this
movie, for example, when his girlfriend says that she's kicking him out
because he's been fired from 14 different jobs over the last 3 months,
he tries to calm the situation by saying, "maybe you'll feel better
after we have some dirty sex."   This kind of humor can only go so far,
but certainly can't go the distance in a full-length feature.  
"Dirty Work", is nothing more than a sophomoric comedy about two best
friends who grow up only physically.  Emotionally, they've never
outgrown their pubescent years, which is somewhat amusingly explored in
a beginning flashback.  Although having no apparent real world skills,
the one thing that these two have always been adept at is getting back
at people.  If the meter maid was unjust in giving you a ticket, then
dump a bunch of unpopped kernels of corn onto the engine block and watch
the car burst apart.  
Mitch (Norm MacDonald) and Sam (Artie Lange) need to come up with
$50,000 in a period of two weeks so that Sam's dad (Jack Warden) can
have a heart operation.   Their idea is to start a revenge-for-hire
business where they'll do your dirty work.  In the funniest scene (and
possibly the only funny scene) of the movie, they take advantage of a
live television shoot at a nearby used car lot.  Their presence is
established, but when a less-than-honorable real estate developer hires
them and then reneges on the payment, the two go to work to exact their
sordid brand of revenge.
By default, Dirty Work should treat us to some outrageous revenge plots,
but it delivers Jerky Boys level material.  Except for the bit at the
used car lot (and possibly another episode that involves frat brothers),
the dirty work is uninspired and becomes about as funny as a prank phone
call.   Already weak on material, it further spirals itself towards the
video store by having Jack Warden constantly blurt out that he has an
unsatisfied libido and needs 'broads' and also includes a very unfunny
Chevy Chase as a bumbling doctor with a gambling addiction.  But what's
really painfully evident is that Norm MacDonald has no versatility as an
actor.  Relying on his trademark of speaking into his personal recorder
and saying "note to self" ("note to self: learn to fight," he says after
getting beat up; "note to self: there's always beer," he says after
hitting rock bottom; etc.), we feel like we're just watching an
elongated rehash of his not-so-glorious days on Saturday Night Live.
Much like the television show, for 90 minutes we get one or two funny
bits.  The rest of the story is just dead space.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Two life-long losers, who need $50,000 in a jiffy to save the life of their
whore-loving Pops, start a business in the only service in which they
consider themselves to be experts: Revenge-for-hire!
CRITIQUE:
This film stars a man whose humor I've always found to be funny, Norm
McDonald. It's also peppered with plenty of other comedian cameos, an
interesting premise, but unfortunately, doesn't deliver as many laughs as
you might expect. Is it because "America's Funniest Videos" host Bob Saget
is at the helm? I doubt it. He's actually much funnier in real life than any
of his corny lines from the show might indicate.
And in that respect, this film is actually mined with a lot of dry,
sarcastic humor and plenty of Normisms (He likes to mention crack, anal sex
and whores a lot!). But overall, it just seemed to lack any real interest in
their phony plight, and didn't provide enough good jokes to sustain anything
more than a half hour TV program. Of all the cameos, I thought the Don
Rickles one was the best, while Chris Farley deserved much more than his
two-bit stint. So if you don't go into this film expecting a laugh-out riot,
you might just be slightly entertained by a self-conscious Norm McDonald
basically playing himself. On the other hand, it goes without saying that if
you never enjoyed the man's humor in the first place, you will not
appreciate this movie either. Real fans only. Overall, an inferior
hit-and-miss SNL sketch gone long.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Norm McDonald is born in my hometown of Montreal, Canada. Most of this film
was shot in Toronto, Canada.
Chris Farley's bother Kevin plays one of the theatre workers in this film.
Co-screenwriter Fred Wolf also plays one of the homeless guys. He wrote
Chris Farley's 1996 film BLACK SHEEP and was an uncredited writer on his
1995 film TOMMY BOY.
Cameos in this film include Adam Sandler, Gary Coleman, John Goodman,
Rebecca Romjin-Stamos, Dini Petty and Chevy Chase.
This film is only 81 minutes long, and contains outtakes during the final
credits.

Author
John Latchem
        At one point in this movie there is a staging of an Opera that goes
completely wrong.  But one member of the crowd stands up and cheers, thinking
the performance was planned, and applauding it for their efforts.  That's
"Dirty Work" in a nutshell.  A very different kind of movie.
        This is not a movie that I can easily review.  The critic in me analyzes the
structure, plot, acting, characters. . .and tells me this movie is terrible.
        But the Norm MacDonald fan in me had me rolling on the floor laughing.
        This movie plays more like an HBO sketch comedy than a movie.  It's a one
note concept.  Mitch and Sam need $50000 in order to bribe a doctor to give
their father a heart transplant before other more needy patients.  Realizing
they are very good at revenge plots, they open a revenge for hire business,
eventually running afoul of a rich businessman played by Christopher MacDonald
(who after roles in "Happy Gilmore" and "Veronica's Closet" seems typcast in
this role), who sends them to destroy a building that Mitch learns is the home
of his girlfriend's grandmother, thus leading them to plot against the rich
businessman on the night of the grand opening of a new Opera house.
        First the critic in me.  The plot is the standard poor guy vs evil rich guy
device, where the main character meets the girl of his dreams along the way.
Here's the catch.  None of the characters are sympathetic.  They're all
selfish jerks who don't care who they hurt in their attempts to do whatever
they want.  The jokes are juvenile, crude, appealing to the worst elements in
people.  There's jokes about prostitutes, the homeless, beastiality, anal sex.
There's even a subplot that's developed, it seems, only to make jokes about
infidelity and incest.
        And I loved watching it.
        I was a huge fan of Norm MacDonald's sarcastic, to-the-point comedy on
Saturday Night Live, and this movie is an hour and a half of it.  Norm
MacDonald takes a joke, strips it to the core, and tells it like it is with a
dry wit.  Like the scene were he and his friend are learning the ropes at a
new construction job.  The foreman goes over the basics, which Mitch and Sam
don't understand.  How do they get out of it?  By admiting they lied on their
resumes, and don't know a thing about construction!  And surprise, they get
fired.
        The characters are incredibly mean-spirited.  There's a father who's loud and
obnoxious, a gambling addicted Doctor played by Chevy Chase who tells Sam of
his father's condition by saying "If I were a gambling man I'd put a lot of
money on death."  The businessman Cole who always has his dog Spunky, and does
who knows what with it.  And then there's Mitch and Sam, who, thinking they
can get $50000 by destroying a building, ponder how their actions would ruin
the lives of the residents.  "Too bad we have to do it," Mitch says.
        Here's a movie where every joke that is executed as it is set up, where you
see every punchline coming, where every spot profanity could be used and then
is used.  At least the film is honest, and makes no mistake that it is
anything more than idiotic.  But at least it isn't dull, and it isn't
predictable.
        And that's the way it should be.  It's sketch comedy, and if you're a fan of
Norm MacDonald, you'll love it.  The jokes are crude, the characters are mean
to the core, the attitude of the movie is that it just doesn't care.
        If you don't like Norm MacDonald, or stupid movies, then you probably won't
like this one.  The jokes are crude, the characters are mean to the core, the
attitude of the movie is that it just doesn't care.
        So before seeing this one, tune your mindset, and prepare for a slew of Norm
MacDonald humor, gay animal sex, prison rape jokes, uncaring characters, and
one last performance from Chris Farley.
The critic in me says 3 out of 10 (*)
But I give it an 8 (***).  I just couldn't stop laughing.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Bob Saget
Cast:  Norm Macdonald, Chevy Chase, Artie Lange, Christopher McDonald,
Traylor Howard, Don Rickles, Jack Warden
Screenplay:  Norm Macdonald, Frank Sebastiano, Fred Wolf
Producers:  Robert Simonds
Runtime:  80 min.
US Distribution:  MGM
Rated PG-13:  crude sexual humor, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
When one goes into a "Saturday Night Live" spin-off movie starring Norm
Macdonald, one should not have high expectations.  I didn't have high
expectations, although the trailers for Dirty Work made me laugh hard
enough to want to see the movie.  Dirty Work is profoundly dumb,
centering around a ludicrous premise and going way over the line with
it.  It's also amazingly funny, filled to the brim with jokes that
actually work and scenes that are unusually hilarious.  Although it's
clear that absolutely no thought was put into the script, it's nice to
sit through a comedy that actually induces laughter.
Macdonald stars as Mitch Weaver, a loser.  He fills his life with odd
jobs, such as delivering pizza.  The film opens as he gets fired from
his job for delivering a pizza two minutes late.  We then see that his
girlfriend kicks him out (even though he offers "dirty sex" to make up
for losing his job).  Soon we meet his best friend, Sam (Artie Lange). 
They've been best friends for their entire lives (the film opens with a
funny introduction showing their childhood).
Jack Warden plays Sam's father; in a really silly subplot, it turns out
that he's also Mitch's father.  I have no idea what the point of this
is, but it's present in the film and highly stressed throughout.  The
title of the film comes in when Mitch realizes that he can make a lot of
money by charging people to take revenge on their nemesis.  In the
required Villain role, Christopher McDonald (who is now one of my
favorite silly-movie bad guys) has fun hamming it up.  
Macdonald co-wrote the film, along with Frank Sebastiano and Fred Wolf,
and though he doesn't know the first thing about intelligent
storytelling, there's something in the dialogue and his execution of the
lines that makes this film hysterically fun.  He always seems to be on
the verge of laughter (I don't really think he can act), but this only
adds to the odd dynamics of the film.  In fact, every time he opens his
mouth, it's funny -- you should laugh excessively at the scene in which
he shouts, "Who's that dude?" 
He also has a strange fixation with prostitutes.  The film doesn't go
for ten minutes at a time without mentioning prostitutes or brining them
on screen.  By the end of the film, he's enlisted so many prostitutes
that he can refer to his "loyal army of prostitutes."  Just hearing
Macdonald refer to such things is funny, but I'm not sure why.  I think
it's just the way he says it, because, if I referred to my loyal army of
prostitutes, I don't imagine that it would make people laugh.  One of
the funniest scenes in the film has Mitch using a live commercial to
advertise his business; this segment involves a lot of dead prostitutes
in the trunks of new cars.
Like all stupid-but-funny films, it has scenes and subplots that just
don't work.  Warden is disappointing; most of the scenes with him fall
flat (although the picture in the locket is pretty good).  He tries
really hard to be funny, but his lines just aren't that good, and he's a
little too over-the-top to be light and fluffy the way Macdonald is. 
Lange is also pretty funny, though overall I doubt he's much of an
actor.  And the story is totally ridiculous -- how did they even come up
with it?  I certainly have no idea, but I'd be the first to agree that
they took the premise as far as it could possibly go, and then further
than that.
Dirty Work is stupid and funny.  If you want to laugh and not think,
then go see it.  I don't see how you couldn't enjoy it if you like Norm
Macdonald, and especially if you think prostitutes are inherently
funny.  I liked it while noting its enormous flaws, and it passes
swiftly enough that you might not even notice that it's a full-length
film.  No matter how you look at it, though, I'm just glad that I was
able to laugh at all.  An unfunny comedy is unacceptable, and Dirty Work
is, at least, a good time.

Author
Brian Takeshita
Bob Saget's DIRTY WORK is no masterpiece of filmmaking, but it kept me
laughing at a rate more constant than anything I've seen lately.  Some
of the jokes had me nearly doubled over while others merely provoked
chuckles, but they kept coming one after the other.
The film is about Mitch (Norm Macdonald) and Sam (Artie Lange), two
childhood friends who have always had a particular knack for getting
even with those who've crossed them.  "Don't take any crap from
anybody" is their motto.  In grade school they framed the school bully
by hiding guns in his desk.  In high school they got back at the
ticket-happy meter maid by stuffing her car engine with popcorn.  Now
all grown up, but still not mature, reality hits them in the face when
Sam's father, Pops (Jack Warden), suffers a heart attack and is put in
the hospital.  The hospital's Dr. Farthing (Chevy Chase) tells the
boys that Pops will die unless he gets a heart transplant, but due to
Pops's old age, he's not a priority on the donor list.  However, Dr.
Farthing is deeply in debt to some bookies due to a history of failed
wagers including a bet on Mr. T to win in ROCKY III.  If Mitch and Sam
can come up with $50,000 in two weeks, the good doctor can pay off his
debts and will make sure Pops gets his heart.
Jobless, Mitch and Sam try to think of ways to earn the money quickly.
"We have to think of something no one has done before," says Mitch.
"Like the guy who first thought of delivering pizza to people's
houses.  Or the guy who invented crack."  After the employees of the
local movie theater pay the boys to pull a prank on their sadistic
boss (Don Rickles),  Mitch and Sam decide to take their hobby to the
next level and open a revenge-for-hire business.
Whether or not you will like this film is almost totally dependent
upon whether or not you like Norm Macdonald.  The former Saturday
Night Live newscaster delivers his lines with a sarcastic tone that
makes most of his humor of the one-joke variety, but for me it almost
never fails.  Then again, I also think Bob Saget is a funny guy.
Please forgive me.
Although Macdonald's demeanor and delivery doesn't really make him a
convincing actor, and he more or less stumbles his way from one scene
to the next (like a comedian trying to star in a movie), the stuff he
says is just hilarious.  I mean, you've got to love a guy who tries to
get away with saying this to his irate girlfriend:  "Maybe you'll feel
better after we have some dirty sex."
In going through the motions to make a movie rather than a series of
sketches, the filmmakers added a plot involving a love interest
(Traylor Howard) and an unscrupulous real estate mogul (Christopher
McDonald).  None of the storyline is standout, and you don't really
ever get involved in the emotional aspects of the forced romance.
There's no significant feel-good payoff in the end, and there's no
real message conveyed, but DIRTY WORK seems to be more a showcase for
Macdonald's comedic talent than anything else.  In this respect, the
movie clicks.  DIRTY WORK doesn't aim very high to begin with, and
ends up being right about where it wants to be.  There's got to be
something said about achieving your goals.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Dirty Work is America's best comedy.  There.  Now maybe MGM can use that
quote in their newspaper ads.  Apparently, the buzz on the film was so
bad that they didn't screen it to the press until after the release
date.  I don't get it, because I thought the movie was very funny.  In
fact, I haven't laughed this hard since Ron Brown's helicopter crashed.
Funnyman Norm Macdonald stars as Mitch Weaver, a lifelong loser who
finds himself fired and kicked out of his house in the opening reel.
Mitch crashes at buddy Sam's (Lang, Mad TV) house, but not before his
sex-crazed father (Jack Warden) has a massive coronary from watching
aerobics on the telly.
Turns out Pops needs a heart transplant, which will run $50,000
according to the gambling-addict Doctor Farthing (Chase, Fletch).  So,
Mitch and Sam decide to start a revenge-for-hire business to earn the
money within the two-week deadline.  Simple enough, right?
The two dunderheads have quite a history in the vengeance business,
framing a childhood bully, a perverted crossing guard and the
neighborhood Doberman as kids.  And, my friend, they don't miss a step
in the transition to duping adults.  In fact, they ruin businesses and
condemn apartment buildings virtually at will.  There are also two
bizarre hallucination sequences featuring Gary Coleman (?).
Yeah, the story is boringly predictable, but it's loaded with tons of
filthy dick and shit jokes – most from so far out in left field that you
can't see them coming at all.  Most people forget that Macdonald wrote
for Roseanne back when it was somewhat cutting edge, and co-writer Fred
Wolf worked on the Chris Farley laugh-fests Tommy Boy and Black Sheep.
Bob Saget's direction is unassuming while the film is punctuated with
tons of hot, overplayed modern rock tracks.  But ruin a movie, they do
not.  Dick and shit jokes trump frat-boy music any day.

Author
Matt Williams
Like so many other former Saturday Night Live-ers before him, Norm
Macdonald attempts to make the jump to feature films...and falls flat on
his face. Dirty Work is an embarrassingly bland comic failure.
Macdonald stars as Mitch Weaver, a pathetic loser who can't hold a
steady job or even a girlfriend.  He has only one good friend, Sam
(Artie Lange), whose father (Jack Warden) is in desperate need of a
$50,000 heart transplant... money that neither Sam nor Mitch have.
All looks bleak until Mitch discovers a way to make money from his one
true talent:  creating elaborate revenge schemes.  He and Sam start up
Dirty Work, a revenge-for-hire business.  They help people to get
even...from little old ladies to billionaire Travis Cole (Christopher
McDonald). But will they be able to make enough money in time?  And will
anyone stay in the theater long enough to find out?
The film boasts a wide variety of cameos.  Chevy Chase, Don Rickles,
Chris Farley, Adam Sandler, John Goodman, and even Gary Coleman all
appear at one time or another. But aside from simple shock value, they
have very little to add.
Norm Macdonald doesn't have much of a repertoire here.  His one smug
tone might make him a good straight man...but it doesn't work well when
he's supposed to be the comic center of the film.  The film simply hops
from one oddly bland revenge gag to another with little humor in
between.
There are slight glimmers here and there of moments of humor trying to
break free in the film's darker moments.  When Dirty Work unknowingly
pulls a revenge prank on a bunch of murderous drug lords, for example,
the movie skates eerily close to humor.  Alas, what could have been a
quirky dark comedy quickly collapses back into the dull, stale routine.
There may be a good film lurking in the heart of Norm Macdonald...but
Dirty Work shows that it's buried deep.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Sanford
There are many questions we should ponder during our daily meditations. What
does God look like? Why do good people suffer while bad people sometimes
prosper? Why is there air?
And why, after all these years, does Hollywood think that everyone who ever
appeared on "Saturday Night Live" deserves a film career as a reward?
Sure, there's Dan Aykroyd, Eddie Murphy and Bill Murray, who've made some
truly funny movies over the years, but they're genuinely talented. What's
the excuse for showcasing Norm Macdonald, a third-rate Dennis Miller
knockoff whose delivery is slower than Priority Mail? Macdonald is currently
best-known for his public feud with NBC and for a recent college gig in
which he allegedly went onstage plastered and offended most of the audience.
Too bad "Dirty Work," his starring debut, won't even generate that much of a
reaction. It's certainly not the worst film by an "SNL" alumni, and every so
often - maybe twice in the course of its 81 minutes and 27 seconds - "Dirty"
works in a clever idea.
But for the most part, it plods along, throwing in a surprise cameo here, a
horny senior-citizen gag there, until it's time to call it a night.
Underscoring the action with last year's hits (Third Eye Blind's
"Semi-Charmed Life," Chumbawamba's "Tubthumping," etc.) only plunges the
movie deeper into the doldrums. The sole zinger in the script goes to Don
Rickles, playing the surly cinema manager who accurately tells usher
Macdonald, "You have the personality of a dead moth."
Despite featuring the most colorful costumes of any movie so far this year,
"Dirty" is mostly dull. Mitch Weaver (Macdonald) is a ne'er-do-well who's
had 14 jobs in the past three months before he seizes on the idea of opening
a revenge-for-hire business (yes, the filmmakers put AC/DC's "Dirty Deeds
Done Dirt Cheap" on the soundtrack). With partner Sam (Artie Lange), Weaver
struggles to come up with the $50,000 needed to buy a new heart for Sam's
dying dad (Jack Warden).
But the guys work much too hard, putting whole dead fish throughout a house
to render it uninhabitable. All you really need to do is get a couple of
pints of fish oil and pour it in the air ducts, the sofa cushions and the
mattress. Not that I'd know personally, or anything.
Some mild curiosity may be generated by one final appearance by the late
Chris Farley, as the hard-drinking victim of a partial nose amputation.
Sadly, Farley looks much worse than the role requires and watching his few
scenes feels like ghoulish voyeurism.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Some nights during the latest dark period of "Saturday Night 
Live," I turned on the show and was surprised to find myself actually 
laughing. Nine times out of ten, that surprise laughter came from 
something Norm Macdonald said. Like no one else, Macdonald can 
make me laugh by saying a single word, no matter how many times he 
says it. If any other comedian repeatedly milked words like "crack," 
"anal rape" and "whore" for laughs, I'd find it absolutely unfunny.
        There's something about his delivery that can give value to 
the most mediocre writing. I don't know exactly what that is, but 
DIRTY WORK would suck without it. Lines that would make me 
cringe in other summer comedies made me laugh this time, and almost 
make me recommend the movie. Had the movie occasionally included 
a half-intelligent joke in its parade of scatalogical and sexual innuendo 
humor, and had the movie not allowed Macdonald's character to be 
gang raped in jail, I would have given it a full thumbs-up.
        As it is, DIRTY WORK is the most politically incorrect movie 
of the year to date, the kind of movie that has multiple punchlines 
involving prostitutes, incest and dirty old men. It's one dirty old man 
(Jack Warden, still recovering from those PROBLEM CHILD movies) 
in particular that provides most of the plot for the movie. Warden 
plays the father of Macdonald's best friend and, in a span of a few 
minutes, Warden has a heart attack and tells Macdonald he's also his 
father.
        If that weren't enough plot contrivance, the doctor (Chevy 
Chase) tells Macdonald that Warden's only hope for survival is a heart 
transplant. Since Chase owes $50,000 to a bookie, he sets the price for 
a transplant at exactly that amount... and we all know Chase is in dire 
need of $50,000 right about now. Meanwhile, Macdonald and his best 
friend ponder what they could possibly do to earn that kind of money 
in two weeks' time.
        They get jobs at a theater run by Don Rickles, whose cameo 
isn't nearly as funny or politically incorrect as the rest of the movie. 
Rickles' drill sergeant approach to movie theater management prompts 
Macdonald and his friend to get back at him, which the other 
employees offer them money to do. A little bell goes off in their 
heads -- they can make money getting paid to perform revenge on 
other people. There are plenty of revenge scenes in the movie, some of 
them funny, a lot of them not, but with Macdonald at the helm, he 
managed to pull a laugh out of me every time I thought I was going to 
regret coming to see this.
        Not that DIRTY WORK is a classy or original movie by any 
stretch of the imagination. The plot is ridiculous and predictable, 
involving a local land baron (Christopher McDonald, still recovering 
from that LEAVE IT TO BEAVER movie) who hires them to destroy 
the same building that happens to be inhabited by the grandmother of 
a woman Norm has a crush on. Things begin looking bleak for our 
protagonists around the two-thirds mark, as they tend to do in generic 
comedies, but there's never any doubt things will end happily.
        A word for those of you who will no doubt complain that I 
gave DIRTY WORK the same rating as a classier **1/2 movie of your 
choice -- this is a tasteless movie without any socially redeeming 
qualities. It is, however, funny. Macdonald brings all his "Weekend 
Update" charm to the big screen, although I found myself constantly 
wishing he'd drop that "Note to self" gag. It never worked on "SNL" 
and, even worse, it turned out to be part of the plot here.
        Those of you who have seen other movies starring "SNL" cast 
members know that none of them can have just one "Saturday Night 
Live" person. The parade starts with Chevy Chase and continues with 
an Adam Sandler cameo and a running appearance from Chris Farley, 
in one of his final appearances. DIRTY WORK is more entertainment 
than you'll get most Saturday nights around 11:30/10:30 central.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...
