Title
Review for Third World Cop (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Paul Campbell, Mark Danvers, Carl Bradshaw, Audrey Reid.
Directed by Chris Browne Not Rated (R-equivalent for sex, drug use and
gun violence).
The island of Jamaica hasn't exactly embraced the film industry. The
Internet Movie Database lists only ten films that have come from
Jamaica; just 3 in the past ten years. The latest is called Third World
Cop, a drama with a simple, appealing story but dreadful execution. The
film's defenders may chalk it up to the film's low budget but far
better movies have been made for much less money. In an age where you
can make an acclaimed movie for less than the price of a Ford Taurus,
filmmakers need a better excuse.
"Capone," a renegade cop whose gun "doesn't respect anyone" is
transferred to the violent city of Kingston, Jamaica (but not before
his supervisor gets to tell him "Your methods may be effective, but
they're not always right!") There, he reunites with his childhood
buddy "Ratty" (Mark Danvers) and makes himself useful by fighting a
local gun-smuggling operation led by thug Wonie (Carl Bradshaw). He
does this by shooting pretty much everyone he catches.
He soon discovers that his friend Ratty is Wonie's right-hand man. He
must now decide whether to stand by his convictions and bust his friend
or to turn the other cheek and preserve a lifelong friendship. There's
also Capone's childhood sweetheart who is friends with both men. She
can do nothing but stand by and watch her friends destroy each other.
The plot is simple, fast and to the point. There's little filler, few
significant supporting characters and minimal exposition. But despite
the alluring straightforwardness of the story, virtually all other
aspects of Third World Cop leave a lot to be desired. The script is
almost unbearable, piling cliché on top of cliché until we're left with
dialogue straight out of "The Screenwriter's Guide to Cop Dramas." My
personal favorite: after getting into about 15 shootouts, Capone comes
up to his friend and says "Guns only lead to self-destruction."
Paul Campbell, apparently a huge star in Jamaica, is passable as the
title character, even though the same "menacing" expression never
leaves his face. He's flawlessly suited to the role, which requires him
to talk minimally but be able to wield two firearms at a time. I also
liked Mark Danvers, who evokes sympathy despite dialogue that made me
want to slap him. As for Carl Bradshaw, the film's most seasoned actor,
well, he's just irritating as the villain, comical rather than
dangerous.
The movie was directed by Chris Browne and shot on video rather than
film. Browne has worked as camera assistant on many high-profile
American films, though this is his first venture to the director's
chair. He did not write the movie, so the blame does not lie with him;
as a matter of fact he did a relatively excellent job considering that
he didn't use film. The camerawork is unaffected by the medium.
Third World Cop's press kit proclaims the movie to be "Jamaica's
biggest blockbuster," saying that "more than 10% of the adult
population in Jamaica saw the film." This is probably good -- I welcome
anything that encourages a country to make itself a presence in the
film industry. I wish Jamaica could have chosen a better movie to be
their breakthrough but, as Third World Cop's characters say, "Respect."
For people who have not seen a lot of movies and are unfamiliar with
their conventions, it might even prove to be a serviceable experience.
For American audiences, however, there are better alternatives.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A forlorn Harry Belafonte once sang, "My heart is down/ My
head is turning aroun'/ I had to leave a little girl in Kingston-
town."  The aki, rice and the fish are still nice in Jamaica's
capital but the island paradise of Belafonte's memories has
greater problems than broken hearts in Chris Browne's "Third
World Cup."  Browne takes us inland to Kingston, to
neighborhoods of the island that few tourists see or care to,
given the penchant of Americans and Europeans for the
beaches of Montego Bay and Ocho Rios.  "Third World Cop"
conveys memories of Perry Henzell's 1973 cult favorite "The
Harder They Come"--about a country boy who goes to
Kingston to make it as a singer but whose record climbs the
charts only after he turns to a life of crime.  That film, starring
Jimmy Cliff, is credited almost single-handedly with launching
the reggae craze in America.  Browne's new film also bears a
generous and bouncy reggae soundtrack, particularly the
lilting "We Run Tings" performed by Red Dragon, and a few
numbers from Grammy Award winners Sly Dunbar and
Robbie Shakespeare who also produced the soundtrack.  But
despite its incredible popularity back home in Jamaica where
ten percent of the adult population has purportedly seen the
box-office blockbuster, as a police drama the movie's most
recommendable feature is its unintentional comedy.
   North Americans will probably want to compare "Third
World Cop" to Gordon Parks's "Shaft," which came out two
years before Perry Henzell's classic.  Browne gets some
calculated grins whenever he contrasts crackerjack, Shaft-like
law enforcer Capone (popular Jamaican actor Paul Campbell)
with his plump and bumbling Keystone-Cop partner Floyd
(Winston Bell), but the real fun of the movie comes from the
simplistic, amateurish shootouts. The story is for the most
part so unambiguous that unlike even the great James Bond,
Capone is never injured nor is there ever a hint that he may
be up against forces he cannot control.  As the reggae song
goes and as Capone himself intones, "We control
things...things don't control we."  The central thrust of the tale
is the struggle between a good man, Capone, and his
long-term boyhood friend who has turned to a life of crime,
Ratty (Mark Danvers).
   The story opens as Capone, stationed with the Port
Antonio police force, is interrupted by thugs in the midst of a
sexual liaison.  After Capone demonstrates that he is not
much into due process but is perfectly willing to set a
previous jury ruling of "not guilty" right, Capone is transferred
to the capital city of his youth, Kingston, where a man of his
vigor is needed to break up a gun-running scheme.  Learning
that the man he had once treated like a brother, Ratty, is
involved with local crime lord Wonie (Carl Bradshaw), he
seeks to make Ratty an honest man again, a guy whose
talent with kids could make him a fine social worker.  For his
part, Ratty tries to bring Capone into a partnership with him,
promising Capone great deal more money than he could ever
make with the Jamaica police department.  =
   The struggle for men's minds takes a back seat to feverish
gun play in which Capone, outnumbered and outgunned (he
carries two pistols while the forces of evil brandish Uzis),
easily overcomes the hoodlums who have set up shop in one
of Jamaica's many shantytowns.  The obligatory romance
theme involves Capone's childhood sweetheart, Rita (Audrey
Reid--who comes across more as a transsexual than a
femme fatale)--and is underdeveloped.  =
   We can safely presume that the box office popularity of
"Third World Cop" in its home country has more to do with
the popularity of its star performer and with the accent on
action than with any sort of dramatic complexity.  For those
not familiar with Jamaican patois, the movie is subtitled but
only for those parts of the screenplay that would be as
incomprehensible as "Trainspotting"-style Scottish.  The
picture is suffused with washed-out colors that make it
appear as though it were transferred from video, which
doesn't detract too much considering that the locales used as
background for the gunplay are more generic than Jamaican.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Brian Matherly
Cast: Paul Campbell, Mark Danvers, Carl Bradshaw, Audrey Reid, Winston
Bell, Lenford Salmon, Desmond Ballentine (a.k.a. Ninjaman)
Written by: Suzanne Fenn, Chris Browne, and Chris Salewicz
Directed by: Chris Browne
Running Time: 98 minutes
`We run tings. Tings don't run we.'
    -Sound advice from Capone (Paul Campbell) to his squaddie (or
partner), Floyd (Winston Bell).
Jamaican film, shot entirely on video, featuring a standard cop movie
plot mixed with a dash of John Woo-styled brotherhood morals (and a
little gunplay).  Capone, a tough as nails super cop, gets a transfer
back to his hometown of Kingston after successfully taking down some
gangsters that have broken into his home (while he was with his lady)
and killed his partner in front of him.  When he arrives, he discovers
that the ghetto where he grew up has gotten worse, thanks mainly to the
crime boss Wonie (Jamaican film veteran Carl Bradshaw), so named because
his left hand has been amputated and replaced by a grasping hook). 
Capone discovers that Wonie has been smuggling guns inside shipments of
charity supplies for the area churches and, much to his disappointment,
also finds out his childhood friend Ratty (Mark Danvers) has been
helping him.  Torn between doing his job and protecting his best friend,
Capone must make some hard decisions in order to make things right
again.
Directed deftly by first time Jamaican filmmaker Chris Browne (assistant
director for such American films as How Stella Got Her Groove Back and
Instinct), one hardly notices the film was shot on video after a while. 
Shots are handled so efficiently that they quickly take on the nuances
of the aforementioned John Woo films, although the action isn't as
hyperkinetic as most of Woo's films are.  The action scenes are handled
with a kind of flair though, and eventually begin to take on a life of
their own (beyond the Hong Kong films that they are obviously patterned
after).  The make-up effects are particularly good in these scenes as
well, with flawless squib work on display from the effects team.
The cast is superb and listening to their dialogue, spoken with thick
Jamaican accents (half of which have to be subtitled because of their
extensive use of slang), just adds to the interest.  Paul Campbell, as
the `loose cannon' Capone, essays his role perfectly, displaying the
right amount of menace and compassion at the right times.  Mark Danvers
evokes sympathy as Ratty, the part-time gun smuggler who is also trying
to help the community by building football fields and organizing block
parties to bring people together.  Unfortunately, Carl Bradshaw is given
the least to do and his character as the crime boss seems ineffective
(largely because his underlings seem to run all over him), but then
again, that could be the way his character was intended to be portrayed.
The music in the film is composed of all reggae songs, and the
soundtrack was produced by Grammy Award winning artists, Sly and Robbie
(who have worked with the likes of The Rolling Stones, Maxi Priest, Bob
Dylan, James Brown, Grace Jones, Herbie Hancock, Bootsy Collins, and
Carly Simon among others).  The end credit song, `We Run Tings', by the
group Red Dragon, is pretty decent and carries on the theme of the movie
established early on by the quote that opens this review.  Oddly enough,
Desmond Ballentine (who plays the character Deportee) is well known as a
pioneer in the realm of `gangsta' reggae as the performer Ninjaman, and
he doesn't contribute a single song to the film (that I could see),
which is virtually unheard of here in the US.
At the time of this writing, Third World Cop has been put into limited
theatrical release in the US, coming off of a six-month box-office
breaking run in Jamaica, where it holds the position as highest grossing
film of all time (bringing in $21 million in Jamaica, which is roughly
$500,000 US).  Palm Pictures (the company that released the offbeat, but
entertaining Six-String Samurai) is the company releasing the film and
considering that their main focus is the DVD market, I can imagine that
a disc will be available once the film has left theaters.  Chris
Blackwell, founder of Palm Pictures, was also involved in the production
of another Jamaican box-office smash in 1981 entitled Countryman, so I'd
say he has a pretty good track record.
Overall, Third World Cop is a pretty entertaining homage to the films of
John Woo, Ringo Lam, Tsui Hark, and many other action films by directors
from Hong Kong.  If action films are your thing and you don't mind
intermittent subtitles, then you can't go wrong with this film.  The
performances and the story are solid (if only a little cliched) and the
action is tight.  I'm not sure what the other Jamaican films released in
that country are like, but apparently Third World Cop's honors are well
deserved.
Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
