Title
Review for Just Another Girl on the I.R.T. (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Chantel (Ariyan Johnson) is a 17-year old high school student
living in a housing project in Brooklyn.  With excellent grades, high
spirits, and even higher aspirations, she intends to graduate a year
early, get into college, then go to medical school.  As she sees them,
her future plans are set in stone.  Then she meets Tyrone (Kevin
Thigpen).  Pretty soon, one thing leads to another, and Chantel ends up
pregnant.  Undecided about an abortion, she must face critical
questions upon which her entire future rests.
     JUST ANOTHER GIRL ON THE I.R.T. (the I.R.T. is a New York subway
system) tells a story that has been told a million times before.  It's
also something familiar on a more intimate, personal level to countless
Americans.  Nevertheless, as familiar and unspectacular as the plot
might be, the manner in which the film looks at the subject is
decidedly different.  Leslie Harris brings a gritty perspective to this
tale, making it seem more fresh and interesting than it actually is,
and illustrating that it isn't just boys who live and suffer in the
hood.
     One of the film's strong points is that it gives us a rather stark
view of some of the root causes of teenage pregnancy.  In a discussion
with some of her friends, Chantel claims that if a man and a woman have
sex standing up, she can't get pregnant.  Another girl says that
pregnancy can't happen during a woman's period, and still another
advocates withdrawal as a 100% foolproof method of birth control.
These ideas are not just some filmmaker's plot device; they're a
legitimate reflection of what a large portion of the teenage population
(male and female) believes, and a good indication of why there are so
many young mothers.
     The questions that Chantel has to answer following her pregnancy
are those that every girl in her position is faced with.  Should she
have an abortion?  Can she tell her parents?  How will her boyfriend
react?  She faces the situation by doing her best to hide it and
thereby deny its existence, even going so far as to raid the
refrigerator by night and throw out food so that her bulging midsection
can be explained by midnight binges.
     The greatest weakness of JUST ANOTHER GIRL ON THE I.R.T. is not
its story, but an unfortunate tendency to preach to the audience.
While I applaud Leslie Harris' desire to get certain issues out into
the open (such as the need to give a truer perspective on history than
is commonly found in many of America's classrooms), her methods leave a
little to be desired.  Having one of the characters launch into a
didactic monologue not only lacks subtlety, but ruins the atmosphere of
the scene.  Other movies have found better ways to integrate messages;
Leslie Harris should have taken lessons from them.
     The production values are low, but this serves to further heighten
the sense of starkness.  Acting, all done by complete unknowns, varies
from excellent (Ariyan Johnson) to mediocre.  There are times when some
of the performers appear to be reciting something from a script rather
than speaking from the heart.  Chantel, however, is consistently played
with high energy and an appealing sassiness.
     Overall, while JUST ANOTHER GIRL ON THE I.R.T. doesn't have the
power or emotional depth of a BOYZ 'N THE HOOD, it is not without its
strengths.  There are a number of memorable moments.  A childbirth
scene is one of those.  It is perhaps the most realistic that I've ever
seen portrayed in a non-documentary--not just a couple of grunts and
groans and out pops a baby.  So, while the message of the film is as
old as human society, the method of its presentation is new enough to
make the movie worthwhile.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Max Hoffmann
World Premiere Jan 22 at Sundance Film Festival, UT
Q&A with Director/Producers
     I don't remember the last time I saw a film so emotionally
involving and brilliant that at times it was difficult to hear the
soundtrack over the uncontrolled sobbing in the audience!  Or the last
time I left a theatre with my stomach muscles aching from emotional
constrictions.   Or the last time I felt "older and wiser" as a result
of 94 minutes of light and shadows thrown against a screen.
     Director/Writer Leslie Harris breaks rich new ground: a compelling,
involving and totally believable portrayal of high school students, from
a Black Woman's viewpoint.  Ariyan Johnson as the appealing lead,
"Chantel" seemingly has it all: looks, brains, popularity, and attitude
with a capital "A".  Nothing seems to phase her, from snotty yuppy
shoppers in the store where she works, to anal retentive high school
teachers who are out of touch with the realities of the student body.
Chantel feels insulated by her good grades, and gutsy determination to
get out of the Brooklyn project housing that trapped her parents.
     When the unthinkable comes along to break Chantel's bubble, she 
desperately clings to denial, and any device imaginable to preserve her
familiar world.  I'll avoid a spoiler, but be prepared for a 
gut-wrenching emotionally charged scene, in which you feel almost
dragged into her body to experience her pain and isolation with her.  It
is Directing, Acting and Movie Making at it's Finest!
     Chantel's "attitude" is transformed by her experiences, as she
painfully turns a tragedy into something of an opportunity.  By the end
of the film you will feel that you intimately know this extraordinary
young woman, and you will grieve your separation from her, and her
friends, when the house lights come up.
     Director Leslie Harris turned her own roadblocks into a gold mine
as well.  In the nearly two years it took to raise the money for this
film, she interviewed and got to know hundreds of young teens in
Brooklyn's mostly black high schools.  Her sensitive ear has brought us
some of the freshest and most authentic scenes with teens of *any* color
ever to be photographed.  Months of rehearsals enabled the bullet train
schedule the project was shot under.  As a result, this film is the
ride of your life.
     Laughter and tears are often in competition.  Chantel and two of
her girl friends compare notes on sex.  You are confronted with the
frightening denial many teens labor under today.  "Everybody knows you
can only get AIDS from some dude who's been doing drugs, and girlfriend,
I don't go to bed with no one like that!"  "I can't make him wear that
thing!" and worse.  The scene is shot with a unexpected realism that is
at once endearing and frightening.
     Ariyan Johnson delivers a knock out performance ... she *is*
Chantel.  And you will feel the richer for knowing her.  Ebony Jerido as
Chantel's best girlfriend is one of the most indispensable supporting
actresses I've ever seen.  You will envy the richness of their
friendship, and the depth of their communication.  Harris's deft
direction also makes the male actors very compelling in spite of some
"unforgivable" behavior on the part of one of them.
     During the Q and A session, one Afro-American in the audience said,
"thank you for finally giving me a film with black people who *look*
like black people."  Though Ariayn as Chantel is almost magazine-spread
beautiful, most of the cast have lips or hips too thick to match the
finally chiseled, mocha-skinned actors that casting agents seek in
Hollywood.  Viewing this film, you realize what a tragic loss it has
been that such believable actors have been kept away from a larger
audience.  Thankfully, Leslie Harris and Erwin Wilson are changing that.
PLUSES: The film has a knockout soundtrack, with mostly original rap
songs composed for the film (forgot the musicians name, but his nickname
is "VietNam" something.)  Lyrics slyly underscore and foreshadow much of
what takes place.  Brilliant (how many times have I used that word) and
economic use of the camera hides the fact that the film's budget ranged
around $140K.  If it weren't for a few grainy night scenes, you'd peg it
for about $2mil.
*New Ground* in that Chantel's parents emerge as real human beings, with
fully drawn hearts, minds and their own emotional baggage, vs. the
cardboard cutouts that usually pass for parents in Hollywood "coming of
age" films.
GOOD NEWS: MiraMax has picked up the distribution to this film which
hits screens on February 21st!  Video or TV viewing would border on the
criminally insane.  Only a full screen and your presence in a darkened
auditorium will allow you to fully experience this brilliant (!)
offering.  Be prepared to leave the theatre a different person than you
were when you walked in.
Though it has been 23 years since I was Chantel's age, or had a trace of
her "attitude," this film is so involving that at times I forgot what
sex or color I was!  Mainstream critics will be tempted to peg this as
another SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT.  Don't be deceived.  Though Harris is a
long overdue new voice on the cinema scene, her brilliant first film
speaks directly to *anyone* watching who can listen with an open heart.
