Title
Review for Dog Park (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Dog Park
Rated [R], 90 minutes
Starring Luke Wilson, Natasha Henstridge, Janeane Garofalo, Kathleen
Robertson, Gordon Currie, Amie Carey and Mark McKinney
Written and Directed by Bruce McCulloch
IN SHORT: A sweet little nothing of a movie.
Dog Park comes from the pen of Kids in the Hall founding member Bruce
McCulloch. It is a fairly pleasant piece of writing, with not much to
recommend or diss it, and the hardest kind of review to write. The low
rating is not an indicator of a bad movie (and if you haven't learned
how this system works, click">http://www.crankycritic.com/history.html">click here), just of
a very small movie that will probably vanish fairly quickly. The story
is OK. The performances are OK. Production values are definitely low
budget but suitable to the story.
Simply, Dog Park is just OK. Nothing awful. Nothing special. Just OK.
Welcome to the world of Toronto dog parks, where we meet a population of
predominantly single thirtysomethings who know each other by the names
of the dogs they take there for exercise. New to the single crowd is
Andy (Luke Wilson), who hasn't been without a partner of some kind since
eighth grade but has been freshly dumped by Cheryl (Kathleen Robertson)
for a pink haired (sometimes blue haired) punk named Trevor (Gordon
Currie). Stuck in between is their dog Mogley, who has "not been the
same" since he's got a front row seat watching his "mom" getting
shtupped by a different "dad". The solution is to bring Mogley to a
doggie shrink Dr. Cavan (Mark McKinney) for therapy.
Dining alone in a singles bar, Andy inadvertantly catches the eye of
Lorna (Natasha Henstridge), herself riding solo for the first time in a
long whiles. One sex-less rendezvous later, Andy is smitten and Lorna is
looking for a way out. Lorna is advised in her dating life by co-worker
Rachel (Amie Carey). Andy is similarly advised by the only couple in our
story, Jeri (Janeane Garofalo) and her virtual husband Jeff (McCulloch).
Lest you think all these folk have in common is their love of dogs, no,
they are all links in the same dating chain -- a concept explained one
way by Rachel but demonstrated in a different way as you see how this
plays out.
The positive is that McCulloch presents us with a full set of relatively
normal people. It would have been easy to make 'em all dog geeks,
obsessed with their puppies to the exclusion of all else, but his focus
seems to be what happens to those of us who aren't bound by ball and
chain at the age when we should be making babies. The true geek,
McKinney's doctor character, shows an obsession that has ravaged his own
family, wife and two kidlets. McKinney's performance, he's also a member
of the Kids in the Hall, is one of the few sparks in this otherwise
emotionally steady and mildly amusing story.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Dog Park, he would have paid...
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Allan Jenoff
A young couple have split and are fighting over custody of their dog,
Mowgli.  Another, seemingly perfect, couple have two dogs.  A lonely
woman who hosts a children's tv show has a dog called Peanut.  They 
all take their pets to the dog park.  They all take them to the same
obedience instructor.  And pretty soon they have all met.
This is a film about relationships and how they do and don't work.
Andy misses Mowgli.  And his exgirlfriend Cheryl gives up custody
whent their pet's therapist says Mowgli's sudden unhappiness is due to
witnessing Cheryl and her boyfriend have boisterous sex.  Since Andy
isn't
having any sex, his house is a better home.  But Andy meets Lorna
(Peanuts
owner).  They meet in a bar where she picks him up and they go to his
place where she promptly throws up.  Despite this less than best 
first date, Andy likes her and sends her flowers - against the advice of
his friend Jeri (the female half of the perfect couple).  But Lorna
throws out the flowers and vows never to see him again.  
Jeri then convinces Andy to participate in a bachelor auction for
charity.
He's purchased, for $100, by a vegan physical therapist who starts 
causing real problems for Mowgli when she and Andy start having some
very energetic sex.  But Andy doesn't really love her, he's just
terrified
of not being in a relationship.  Something shared by almost everyone in
the film.
The dogs may be in obedience school (and some of the comedic highlights
come from their instructor who firmly believes dogs are better than 
children) but it's the owners who need training.  They lack any self
control and are driven by their passions and fears.
Of course, we all know how a romantic comedy like this ends, but it is 
fun getting there.  The dogs are cute, the relationships close to real,
and the dialogue reasonable.  If you liked movies like Ed's Next Move,
you'll love this.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Independent Pictures
 Director: Bruce McCulloch
 Writer:   Bruce McCulloch
 Cast: Natasha Henstridge, Luke Wilson, Kathleen Robertson,
Janeane Garofalo, Bruce McCulloch, Kristin Lehman
   A couple of blocks from where I live is a vest-pocket park--
nothing like the spacious Toronto meadow of Bruce
McCulloch's new, light comedy--which is dominated from 7 to
9 each morning by a mostly young crew of neighborhood
residents and their mostly large dogs.  Few of the people on
the high ends of the leashes know one another's names, but
they all know the names of the canines that romp, play, and
fetch on the grassy knolls.  A few months ago, in fact, one of
the older walkers died.  A modest service was held for him in
the park, though not a single person attending the function
knew the name of the deceased.  Such is perhaps the politics
of dog parks everywhere, where pet lovers meet daily, sip
their Starbucks breakfasts, and get to know everything about
each other except for names.  Are dog parks the answer to
those who eschew gyms and single bars for meeting the
opposite sex?  Probably.  I've seen no evidence of this in my
own neighborhood but in the Bruce McCulloch's airy, 20-
something world, serial monogamy is the name of the game
as dog people assemble in the park, form bonds, break up,
and meet once again.
   McCulloch, who penned and directs the comedy, is known
mostly to young movie goers as a member of the Kids in the
Hall troupe whose "Brain Candy" deals with the effects of a
prescription drug's running amok.  The Edmonton-born writer
focuses on a serial monogamist, Andy (Luke Wilson), whose
many relationships belie his loneliness.  Compelled by his
lack of fulfillment to remain "single" for no more than four
days at a time, he flits from one unsuccessful relationship to
another, never giving himself time to be alone and reflective. 
After his woman du jour, Cheryl (Kathleen Robertson--a
lookalike for the Ally Sheedy of a decade ago), leaves him for
another (Gordon Currie), requiring him to share with her the
custody of his beloved dog Mogley (Casey), Andy runs into
the clean-cut Lorna (Nathasha Henstridge), whose perfect
skin and facial symmetry make her an ideal candidate for her
page-boy style hair.  While the two awkwardly pursue their
new relationship, each is mentored by a friend.  Andy takes
the advice of her newspaper editor Jeri (Janeane Garofalo),
who is virtually married to Jeff (Bruce McCulloch), while
Lorna, a TV host on a children's show, follows the counsel of
the Joan Cusack-like Rachel (Arnie Carey).
   The film's most interesting scenes are not of the unrequited
people but of the dogs whom they love--the beasts who take
the place of two-legged significant others.  The pooches are
being readied by obedience trainer-therapist Dr. Cavan (Mark
McKinney--taking on the same last name as the producer of
the movie)--easily the most amusing guy in the movie.  He
takes his job with deadly seriousness. Able to get the canines
to come and go from his therapy room with a single
command, he is the person you want to hire to have your
own pet sit, stay, and heel, though like all the others in the
film he has his share of neuroses.
   Aside from him, there are few we can care about.  You've
got to wonder how Andy is able to travel so easily from one
babe to another.  He has the mannerisms of David Arquette
with all the neuroses of a Woody Allen oddball--so passive
that he probably attracts only women who want boys to
mother.  In fact one female literally buys him at an auction
and proves to be so cheap and whorish that you wonder how
Andy is able to stand being with her long enough to celebrate
their 50th anniversary together--that's 50 instances of
lovemaking.
   The sexual revolution has not ended.  These characters
are as addicted to the pleasures of the flesh as are some
people in high places today.  McCulloch successfully merges
the dog panoramas with the more intimate scenes of these
eccentrics. But bizarre characters and whimsical episodes do
not necessarily make for a satisfying whole.  "Dog Park" is so
feather-light that it's as forgettable as yesterday's main
squeeze.

Author
Steve Rhodes
DOG PARK, a movie by first-time writer and director Bruce McCulloch,
concerns a group of singles who meet in dog parks, where single dogs and
humans get to mingle with other singles.  The only rule is that the
owners reveal their dogs' names but never their own.  Too bad the
actors, in this imitation of a bad sitcom pilot, couldn't get their
names removed from the credits.  The dogs, who only drool and smile,
deliver more lively and interesting performances.
In Heaven the characters in this movie must have missed the table where
they passed out personalities.  They are all vapid.  In the few, the
very few, times the movie approaches even mildly cute, the director
kills the moment, almost as if he were trying to keep the movie from
being funny.  Although marketed as a romantic comedy, in truth the movie
belongs to a genre that might be called laughless non-romances.  The
studio did not screen the film in advance to critics in the hope, one
suspects, that some people would see it before the word got out as to
how bad it was.
As in a daytime soap opera, the characters are captured in periodic
shifts of their musical beds.  A used to sleep with B but has now
switched to C, who used to live with D, etc.  You get the idea.  In
fact, you could probably write a better script from this premise than
McCulloch did.
Andy (Luke Wilson), who is depressed because he's just broken up with
his girlfriend, is given a cassette by his friend Jeff (McCulloch, the
director).  It contains "the saddest songs in the Western World," Jeff
tells him.  "What you need is country and western music."  Once Andy can
listen to it without crying, Jeff claims that he will be over the
break-up.
Typical of the stilted dialog is a scene in a bar in which Andy meets
his new girlfriend, Lorna (Natasha Henstridge), who plays Miss Bookworm
in a kids' TV series.  When the lonely Lorna changes her drink order to
a double, the bartender grimaces and says "ouch!"
"What do you do?" Lorna asks Andy when he comes over to strike up a
conversation with her.  "I work writing classifieds," he replies with
his signature earnestness, as if his every answer had some hidden sad
portent.  "I've read your work -- some of it's pretty good," she says.
The scene, which is one of those with a modicum of promise, is killed by
the dull tone that the director sets.  Another scene with unrealized
potential has a dog psychiatrist advising the dog's owners, who are no
longer a couple, not to have wild sex in their respective houses since
it traumatizes the pooch.
When the two lovebirds, Andy and Lorna, go home to kiss, they look like
a couple of adults trying to make fish mouths to entertain small
children.  Surely these actors have kissed someone before.  If not, they
should have practiced in advance.
As lifestyle editor Jeri, Jeff's current squeeze, Janeane Garofalo isn't
able to do anything with her part.  Maybe the movie's material was
hopeless from the outset.
I have spared the rest of the large cast from embarrassment by not
mentioning their names.  A sleep-inducing film, DOG PARK simply has
nothing to recommend it.  It should have gone direct to video so that
the lower price would make viewers feel slightly less cheated.
DOG PARK runs 1:31.  It is rated R for sexuality and language and would
be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Yet another comedy about the singles scene, dating, who
is going to have sex with whom, and what relationships are going to
last.  This one is also about dog owners and a dog psychologist and
obedience trainer.  Nothing in this film is heavier than a cocker
spaniel.  Rating:  6 (0 to 10), 1 (-4 to +4)
   - Bruce McCulloch wrote and directed as well as having a role.
   - Luke Wilson plays Andy, a man who has just broken up with his
     girlfriend and is again looking for someone to share his life.  In
     a singles bar he meets Lorna (Natasha Henstridge) whose job is
     being Miss Bookworm on children's television.  He is interested in
     her, but in part because of a friend's philosophizing she is not
     interested in him.  "People should provide you with romantic
     resumes."   From the start we know they are perfect for each
     other.  Ta-da, ta-da, ta-da.
   - There is also some titillation in liberal doses of sex scenes.
     This too is part of the formula.
   - Being about singles and dogs, of course, it has Janeane Garofalo.
   - Janeane Garofalo plays a friend of Andy, part of a "perfect
     couple."
   - These people don't know what they want and end up being stupid and
     hurting each other.
   - Some of the best humor is from the absurdity of the dog
     psychologist played by "Kids in the Hall" alumni Mark McKinney.
   - When the story gets slow they bring a dog on-stage.  Dogs are
     natural entertainers.  That's why they were domesticated in the
     first place.

Author
Christopher Null
     It is rare that a great actress (Garofalo) will make two *really*
bad movies, back to back.  It is even rarer that those two movies will
premiere on the same day.  And what are the odds that those two films
will star brothers (eg. Luke Wilson in this movie and Owen Wilson in THE
MINUS MAN)?
     According to my astrologer/numerologist, it's an 18 billion to one
shot.
     And yet it happened here, when two of the worst films to grace the
silver screen have been star-crossed in this conflagration of irony.
     There's very little worth writing about in DOG PARK.  Ex-Kid in the
Hall Bruce McCulloch wrote, directed, and starred in this paean to
canines, where a bunch of singles in what looks like Boston meet around
the local dog park and embark on a romantic affair here and there.
Central to this epic saga are Lorna (Henstridge, looking really bizarre
with a short hairdo) and Andy (Wilson, playing dumb, as he did in HOME
FRIES).  Garofalo and McCulloch make another couple, and various other
people intersect the four romantically, all with very little in the way
of a point or anything funny -- and with *zero* chemistry in the entire
lot.
     As a fan of `Kids in the Hall,' this is quite a disappointment.  Of
course, BRAIN CANDY, McCulloch's other writing credit, wasn't a whole
lot better.  And watch for SUPERSTAR, McCulloch's *next* directorial
outing, next week.
     A couple of one-liners here and there, and a notable supporting
role by McKinney as a dog trainer/psychologist earn DOG PARK its half a
star, but believe me, these 93 minutes feel like an eternity with nary a
laugh to be heard.
     Not convinced yet?  Here's the teaser copy from DOG PARK's Web
site:  `I think Andy starts to fall in love with Lorna when she pukes on
him.'
Director: Bruce McCulloch
Producer: Leonard Goldberg
Writer: Bruce McCulloch
Starring: Natasha Henstridge, Luke Wilson, Jeneane Garofalo, Bruce
McCulloch, Kathleen Robertson, Mark McKinney
http://www.lionsgate-ent.com/lionsgatefilms/dog_park.htm
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom
