Title
Review for Johnny Handsome (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     John Sedley is going to get a second chance at life.  Mickey Rourke
plays John Sedley, who was born with massive cranial deformities known as
"lionheadedness."  In spite of Sedley having a good mind, his life has been
a sequence of rejections, scrapes with the law, and foul-ups.  Most recently
he was involved in a heist in which two of his partners, Sunny Boyd and Rafe
Garrett (played by Ellen Barkin and Lance Henriksen), murdered John's best
friend, made off with the takings, and left John to take the rap.  Then as
an added stroke of viciousness they try to have him killed in prison.  But
the prison doctors want to give John a new name and a new.  much improved
face.  He can take his new life or he can go back to his old life.  His
surgeon thinks he will go for the new life; Drones, the cynical police
detective (played by Morgan Freeman) is convinced that John's unfinished
business will just be too strong an attraction.
     Want to know which he does?  Well, director Walter Hill is known for
violent action pictures such as 48 HOURS and RED HEAT.  Hill seems to
specialize in stories about particularly sadistic criminals and likes to
create killers for whom simple killing seems too light a punishment.  And
Boyd and Garrett are no exceptions.  Hill brings Rourke back to New Orleans,
the site of Rourke's popular ANGEL HEART, although the New Orleans
atmosphere is almost ignored in JOHNNY HANDSOME, indicating that Hill is
nowhere the stylist that Alan Parker, director of ANGEL HEART, is.  To
Hill's credit, however, he does get some atmosphere by subduing the color of
the film.  (In spite of what Ebert and Siskel say, a good stylist really can
create a bleaker feel in a scene with color than with monochrome.  It is
just easier to create a mood in monochrome.)
     JOHNNY HANDSOME does not have a particularly original plot.  Basically
the same story was told 53 years earlier in THE MAN WHO LIVED TWICE.  For
that matter, both are really at heart THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO.  But JOHNNY
HANDSOME is a better made film than most of Hill's other chase films.  The
mere fact that one particularly obnoxious woman in my audience irately
complained because it did not have the ending she expected indicates that
Hill is doing something right.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Randy Parker
        If you plan to check out JOHNNY HANDSOME, I'd suggest that you
leave after an hour.  You'll enjoy the movie more that way.  The first half
of JOHNNY HANDSOME carefully sets up an intriguing situation; then, the
second half squanders it away on a cliched finale.
        The movie offers a character study of John Sedley, a two-bit
criminal who was born with a horribly deformed face.  His gruesome
appearance has ruined his life.  Then, he has state-of-the-art
reconstructive surgery, and lo and behold, he emerges from the bandages
looking just like Mickey Rourke.  Sedley's new and improved appearance (if
you consider looking like Rourke an improvement) gives him the opportunity
to start his life anew.  For the first time ever, he has a chance to be
normal.  The catch is that Sedley's one friend in the world, Mikey, has
been murdered, and Sedley is torn between becoming a law-abiding citizen
and seeking bloody revenge on the murderers.  Will he go straight or will
he blow it and return to his criminal ways?
        Well, Sedley blows it, but he's not the only one--so do director
Walter Hill and screenwriter Ken Friedman.  They establish Sedley's inner
psychology so well in the first half that you expect them to follow through
with it in the second half.  But no: they turn their effective little
character study into a simple-minded revenge thriller.  Sedley becomes
almost impossible to root for because it's established so quickly that
he'll never reform.  To make matters worse, his vendetta against Mikey's
killers is repulsively violent and gory.
        The movie is so frustrating because of what's not on the screen,
because of the missed dramatic opportunities.  What IS on the screen isn't
half-bad.  Hill's specialty is action, and as a thriller, the movie has
more than enough energy and style.  Rourke's specialty is disturbing movies
(like ANGEL HEART) that leave you with a headache.  Actually, Rourke does
an admirable job of conveying Sedley's emotional turmoil and confusion.
Ellen Barkin stands out as one of Mikey's killers, but only because her
role is so different from the uptight D.A. she played in THE BIG EASY.
