Title
Review for Stepmom (1998)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Steve Rhodes
Director Chris Columbus's STEPMOM, which would have more appropriately
been titled MOMMY'S DYING, wants to be two movies.
As seen in the film's light-hearted trailers, STEPMOM wants to be a
comedic look at the perils of being a stepmother, and, indeed, the
movie's first act sticks to that plan.
After this breezy start, the movie quickly slips into bathos with scenes
of CAT scans, chemotherapy, and a mother's dying.  Rather than examining
the relatively unexplored territory of stepmothering, the movie wants,
most of all, to be another terminal illness picture, of which we have
one a month.  The maudlin script, by a committee of no less than 5
writers, expects you to bring extra tissues and use every one of them.
In a stellar performance, Susan Sarandon plays Jackie, the obsessively
prepared and sanctimonious mother.  Jackie has her two kids' lives as
perfectly organized as the rigidly positioned post-its on her
refrigerator that specify their monthly schedules.  Whenever they go
out, she packs them a first-aid kit so complete that doctors would envy
it.
Jackie's kids are a cloyingly sweet 7-year-old, Ben (Liam Aiken), and a
smart-mouthed with a heart-of-gold 12-year-old, Anna (Jena Malone).  As
Luke, their busy father, Ed Harris is the show's wallpaper in front of
which the two female leads enact their drama.
Julia Roberts plays Luke's live-in girlfriend and soon-to-be wife,
Isabel.  Isabel is an efficient and talented fashion photographer whose
beauty outshines all of her models.  The treacly script has a throwaway
and not credible subplot about her being fired for trying to mix a
career with parenting.  Anna hates her and fires cheap insults at her at
every opportunity.  Ben is more flexible about his treatment of his
stepmother.  "Mommy, if you want me to hate her I will," he tells Jackie
with a sincere innocence.  Think the kids will eventually fall in love
with the stepmom they hate?  Well, duh!
The film is at its best when it tries to grapple with the issues and
conflicts surrounding divorce and remarriage.  Luke tries to explain to
Ben that one of his parents had to move out since they were constantly
fighting.  "I fight with Anna all the time," Ben retorts.  "Can I move
out?"
The sudsy movie got some of the best response from our audience when
Isabel finally stopped stifling her emotions and told the pompous mother
to shove it by laying into her with some carefully chosen expletives.
The by-the-numbers plot has Isabel taking the kids to Central Park while
she conducts a photo shoot.  One of the kids - surprise! - gets lost,
which makes Isabel feel very bad about not being a dutiful parent like
Jackie.  And Jackie gets to rant and rave and generally feel superior.
The body of the movie has Jackie getting sicker and sicker, while trying
to hide her terminal cancer.  Jackie and Isabel eventually, of course,
bury the hatchet and become bosom buddies.  (We know that they are soul
mates at heart since they each independently lead the kids in a
sing-a-long and lip-synch to their favorite song, Marvin Gaye's "Ain't
No Mountain High Enough.")
Try as hard as they can, the superlative acting by Sarandon and Roberts
can not overcome the schmaltzy material.  Manipulative to the end, the
movie prolongs Jackie's dying as long as possible.  It wants to wring
every last tear possible out of the audience.
STEPMOM runs too long at 2:04.  It is rated PG-13 for profanity,
thematic elements and dope smoking and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
Bring along lots of handkerchiefs because this adult drama
with that terrible title is a real weeper. It's about two women who
hate each other, two kids caught in the middle, and one man just
trying to survive.  Ed Harris's divorced wife, Susan Sarandon, and
their kids - who live in suburbia - are anything but happy when his
perky photographer girl-friend, Julia Roberts, moves into his
Manhattan apartment. Everyone hates her until a life-threatening
illness (cancer) forces Sarandon to accept her ex-husband's
fiancee. Both women are selfish - in their own way. There's the
perfect "soccer mom," who values her children's well-being over
everything else, versus the surrogate, unwanted step-parent who never
wanted children and is far more interested in her career than raising
a family. Grasping her dynamic, gritty part and running with it
magnificently, Susan Sarandon's mean, bitchy portrayal could earn her
the Best Actress Academy Award this year with fresh, hip Julia Roberts
claiming the Best Supporting Actress prize. Their scenes are so true
and so vital and cut so deep. The moving script by Gigi Levangie ("I
am a stepmom. I wrote this from personal experience.") and Ron Bass
("Rain Man," "My Best Friend's Wedding") is juicy, relevant, and
contemporary, and director Chris Columbus ("Home Alone,"
"Mrs. Doubtfire") expertly adds bite and heart to the rich texture,
making it about the humanity of people - with all the laughter and
tears of real families. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Stepmom" is a spellbinding 10. It's a "must see" to watch two
extraordinary actresses ignite the screen with bravura, Oscar-caliber
performances in a poignant celebration of family and of life.

Author
Geoff Berkshire
Columbia Pictures; PG-13; 125 minutes
Cast: Susan Sarandon, Julia Roberts, Ed Harris, Jena Malone, Liam Aiken, Lynn
Whitfield, Mary Louise Wilson.
Susan Sarandon, one of Hollywood's most respected actresses, and Julia Roberts,
one of Hollywood's most successful actresses, team up for the Christmas 1998
release Stepmom.  They play, as the trailers put it, "two women who share one
family."  Unfortunately, the interesting combination is wasted by dropping all
opportunities for originality in favor of run-of-the-mill melodrama.
Sarandon is Jackie, a former editor for Random House, who has been divorced
from Luke (Ed Harris) for several years now.  They share custody of their
children: the very mature, 12 year old, Anna (Jena Malone) and magic fanatic
Ben (Liam Aiken).  Complicating matters is Luke's live-in girlfriend, Isabel
(Roberts).
At the outset, Stepmom appears to be about the conflict that will develop
between these two women and how it effects Luke and the children as they are
pulled into it.  This would give the film a very good possibility to explore an
issue that is widespread in life today but frequently ignored by Hollywood
films.  It would also seem to offer a nice alternative to a film like The
Parent Trap (1998) by showing how divorce can happen and everyone in the family
can still be happy.
Unfortunately, Stepmom has a whole other agenda.  By the end, the film turns
into a routine and melodramatic tearjerker.  It is revealed that Jackie has
cancer and this comes off as an easy out for the problems presented (and a
blatant attempt to make the audience cry).  In its last third the film invites
comparisons to One True Thing (1998) but pales next to that more mature
picture.
While the story falters, the acting helps to save Stepmom from becoming a
complete disaster.  Sarandon doesn't exactly deliver one of her finest
performances but she is more than adequate.  While her character is hard to
warm up to at first (she has a great house, the potential for a great job, she
sees her kids all the time and her only "problem" is that her ex-husband has
fallen in love again...), the disease is revealed after the first half hour. 
While this weakens the story it gives Sarandon more to play with and she dives
right into it.  Her performance overall is a bit of a disappointment
considering who she is and how much she did with so little in Twilight (1998),
earlier in the year.
Roberts, on the other hand, is quite a revelation.  This is certainly her
finest performance since her starmaking turn in Pretty Woman (1990).  Her
dialogue delivery in certain scenes is priceless (a key example being an
exchange between Isabel and Anna after school one day).  This is helped, no
doubt, by some of that dialogue having been written specifically for her by her
favorite screenwriter, Ron Bass.  (Bass is one of five credited screenwriters,
the others being Gigi Levangie, who also gets story credit, and the team of
Jessie Nelson, Steven Rogers and Karen Leigh Hopkins.)  She also holds her own
up against the formidable Sarandon, does a great job with the kids and builds a
believable romantic chemistry with Harris.  I found myself wishing her
character was transported into a better story.
Harris has limited screen time but is a welcome presence.  As the children,
Malone and Aiken are each used in a different way.  Malone (who made her mark
in the shattering child abuse drama Bastard Out of Carolina) is a powerful
little actress and she has a tendency to sometimes overdo some of the emotional
scenes.  This isn't entirely inappropriate though considering the age of the
character she is playing.  On the other hand, Aiken is an adorable child actor
with an infectious giggle and irresistible face.  It's nice to note that he
isn't simply used for "cuteness value" and is actually given quite a bit to do
in the course of the film.  The always reliable Lynn Whitfield also turns up in
a small role as Jackie's doctor.
Chris Columbus (whose previous directing credits include Adventures In
Babysitting, Home Alone and Mrs. Doubtfire) remains a minor director who relies
a bit too heavily on false manipulation.
There's a John Williams score that is characteristically intrusive but
surprisingly unmemorable.  However, the music supervision is quite good with a
nice mix of classic and modern tunes.  Most prominently featured is the classic
Motown song "Ain't No Mountain High Enough" performed by Marvin Gaye & Tammi
Terrell.  The song is featured in not one, but two, sing-a-long sessions with
the kids and one of the women.  The second comes shortly after Jackie announces
she has cancer.
Stepmom is designed to reduce audiences to tears but takes the easy way out by
relying on cliches and manufactured situations.  Both the characters and the
audience become victims of a bad script.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
As I saw in the trailers that Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon, and Ed Harris were
starring in this drama I thought...how could it not be good?  Well, my question
stayed true, considering Stepmom is the best movie of the year.  It is shown as
more of a comedy, but it is mostly a tear jerking drama.  Everyone was in tears
in the theater I was in.  When I sat back in my seat and waited for the movie
to start, little did I know I was about to see the most amazing film since
Titanic.
Susan Sarandon plays Jackie, mother of Ben and Anna.  She was married to Luke
(Ed Harris), but they were divorced three years back when Luke walked out. 
Luke is now seeing Isabel, a young, funny, nice young girl played by Julia
Roberts.  Jackie and the kids despise Isabel though.  Mostly because she is
tearing the family apart by seeing Luke.  Isabel is extremely nice to the kids,
but they don't care.  For instance when Isabel buys them a puppy Anna says
"Well I'm allergic to dogs and I'm allergic to you, too."  
Jackie and Luke have something tremendous to tell one another.  One is more
serious then the other, but Luke goes first.  He lets Jackie know that he and
Isabel are getting married.  At this point, Jackie doesn't say what she wanted
to say and simply states it wasn't important.  But, this thing is extremely
important.  Something that is tremendous.  (I won't tell you what it is
though.)  Jackie continues to lie about her secret to the family.  At this
point, Jackie is sick of all the fuss and wants the family to be happy.  She
gives the kids tips to getting along with Isabel, and they work, a little too
well.  Now the kids think of Isabel as their mother, and Jackie thinks she is
out of the picture.  She becomes very jealous at this point.
Stepmom depicts the average 90s family, with tenseness, sadness, happiness, and
angryness.  This movie is a story about life and the roads that it can take you
on.  It lets you know that you should enjoy what you have because you never
know when it will all come to an end.  Susan Sarandon gives the best
performance of the year and she definitely deserves and Oscar Nomination. 
Roberts and Harris also give outstanding performances.  I don't know about you,
but Stepmom was so special to me, I can't explain it.  Hands down to one of the
greatest movies of the year.

Author
Seth Bookey
Andrea and I went to see Stepmom last night and boy, did it suck. Here is
my review, which gives a lot away. I have not felt so compelled to talk
through a movie in a long time. As people who love Susan Sarandon, this is
a huge disappointment.
Seen on 16 December 1998 with Andrea at the SONY Lincoln Square as a 
Preview
Stepmom is a tedious bore, but it still has hit written all over it, if
the American audience is as stupid as Hollywood surely assumes it must be.
When I held my nose during the preview of Stepmom, it wasn't just because
the movie stank, but to keep myself from laughing with inappropriate vigor
during the schmaltziest parts, with respect to the less jaded members of
the half-empty house.
Movies like Stepmom make you wonder what exactly people in Hollywood think
of the viewing public, and why it took no less than six people to write
such a treacly screenplay. It's not only insulting to just about every
viewer, but it also makes you wonder if Susan Sarandon is that hard up for
money that she has to make a movie like this, much less be one of the
producers.
Stepmom is the story of a family that's undergone a divorce, and recently
added a new element--the father's live-in lover Isabel (Julia Roberts). 
Isabel tries very hard to step into the parent role, but to no avail. Anna
and Ben (Jena Malone and Liam Aiken, respectively) don't like her and
neither does their mother Jackie (Susan Sarandon). All three hurl verbal
barbs at her while Isabel huffs and puffs and wonders "Why don't they
like me?" Luke (Ed Harris) doesn't seem to really like any of them--he's
never around much. Why Isabel takes on parental responsibilities for
these overpriveledged spoiled brats, when she has a fabulous job as a
fashion shutterbug is beyond me. 
The family home is gingerbreadesque, with a grand porch, gables
everywhere, no neighbors in sight and a magnificent Hudson River valley
view. Even Luke's New York loft, which looks like 100 percent IKEA, would 
make Martha Steward kvell. Even the *emergency room* has designer
curtains.
I hate to give anything away in a review, but it's necessary, and it's
what the ad campaign doesn't tell you: Jackie gets a diagnosis of
lymphatic cancer from her very very very concerned oncologist (Lynn
Whitfield). Jackie doesn't tell anyone though, and tries to soldier on
bravely. Brave in that even though there are references to babysitters,
they are never seen, as she seems to be UberMama. She cooks, sews,
chats, and quilts. She's always available for those horrible children of
hers. Horrible in that Anna has a face reads like an admission form for
Our Lady of Perpetual Hurt Feelings. Her brother's squealing laugh is cute
for about two seconds.
Stepmom is insulting on two levels. The two female leads alternate
erratically from histrionic hissy fits to bonding moments. It gets
tiresome. Even when undergoing chemotherapy, Jackie still finds time to be
a bitch. When she's not quilting.
On the second level, it is very anti-urban and pro-family to a degree that
ignores the realities of family issues in America. At one point, it is
clearly implied that being a career girl in New York, working with
effeminized ad executives and "having a life" is not preferable to
sequestering yourself in an upper-class throwback life of the stay-at-home
mother. You "lose your edge." Winning the hearts of cranky children, and
getting them to their riding lessons on time, *that's* important. There
are no real American family issues here--two working parents,
money problems, "quality time" problems, etc., are all ignored. Stepmom is
a landscape where the biggest problem facing you is finding out you're
making the wrong Halloween costume for your daughter with only a week to
go. 
Finally, Jackie's cancer is treated like it's not a horrible devastating
tragedy. In Stepmom, having cancer means you have to recline as often as
possible and keep a chenille blankie over your knees. You still have
plenty of energy to sew, take midnight horseback rides, even go to a Pearl
Jam concert. There's also plenty of time for idiotic "loving" discussions
that don't really have much depth. 
"I like talking to you about stuff, too."
It's no accident that cloying and annoying rhyme.
What's so problematic about Stepmom is the perverse morbidity of it all.
Mom's dying--let's take a photo! Everyone say, "Last Christmas!"  
Clearly, there cannot be two women that are important in the kids'
lives--only one. So, Jackie has to *die* and usher an orderly transfer of
her children to Isabel. The idea that they share responsibilities and
emotions is inadequate to this hyperbolic family values dramedy. Why
Isabel is determined to love these horrible children, or even have a
relationship with the perpetually absent Luke (who seems to have more
chemistry with Jackie, even when they battle) defies logic. The two-parent
nuclear family is the only thing that counts. So few characters outside of
these five characters are ever seen. It's Family Values claustrophobia all
the way. Even the divorce is sanitized. Luke was tossed out not for
adultery or wife beating, but for simply being a workaholic lawyer who
wasn't around enough for trips in the SUV around the exclusive
neighborhood that features no sidewalks or minorities.
Directed by Chris Columbus, this is another in a line of his "family
sitcom dramas"--he brought us the first two *Home Alone* movies, and
*Mrs. Doubtfire*.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Stepmom (1998)
Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon, Ed Harris, Jena Malone, Liam Aiken, 
Jason Maves, Lynn Whitfield, Darrell Larson, Mary Louise Wilson. 
Screenplay by Gigi Levangie and Jessie Nelson & Steven Rogers & Karen 
Leigh Hopkins and Ronald Bass, based on a story by Gigi Levangie. 
Directed by Chris Columbus. 125 minutes
Rated PG-13, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at 
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests 
to pbbp24a@prodigy.com
SPOILER WARNING: This article contains references to key plot points. 
Proceed at your own risk.
In several interviews, Julia Roberts and Susan Sarandon stated their 
belief that "Stepmom" was a poor name for their current film. I agree.
 A much more appropriate title would be "When Bad Movies Happen To 
Good Actors." Watching talents like Roberts, Sarandon and Ed Harris 
mouth virtually every cliché that has ever popped up on the Lifetime 
Channel is beyond embarrassing. Sure, juicy starring roles for women 
are hard to come by, but Julia and Susan, did you actually read this 
script before signing your contracts? As for Ed Harris, I can only 
assume that director Chris Columbus once saved his life and demanded 
that Harris do this movie to repay the debt.  
The story, about the fireworks that come when Dad tries to introduce 
his new love into the lives of his children and ex-wife, exists only 
to allow Sarandon and Roberts a wide berth to strut their stuff. 
"Stepmom" begins as a bitchy relationship drama, then mutates into an 
extremely cheesy tearjerker, with incurable cancer serving as a handy 
device to tie together loose plot threads. The filmmakers are utterly 
shameless in their quest to send you out of the theater drying your 
eyes while saying, "Oh, it was all so sad and so true!" 
In fact, almost everything about "Stepmom" is false. The script isn't 
based on anything actual human beings would ever say. Instead, the 
characters spout lines recycled from other hack movies. For example, 
when daughter Anna (Jena Malone) stomps out of the room during a 
family quarrel and her father shouts, "You do NOT run out on your 
mother," she pivots at just the right moment and snaps back, "No, 
that's YOUR job!" It gets worse. One conversation about Anna between 
doomed earth mother Jackie (Sarandon) and inheritor-to-the-throne 
Isabel (Roberts) ends with Jackie intoning "I have her past, and you 
can have her future." Believe it or not, it took five writers to 
create this drivel.
The plotting is as phony as the dialogue, with every situation 
wrapped up oh-so-tidily by the end of each scene, no matter how much 
contrivance it takes to get there. After all, this is a feel-good 
melodrama and director Columbus is determined not to let reality get 
in the way of his cavalcade of golden moments. How far does he go? 
Well, the film features two touching death-bed scenes without the 
central character actually getting around to dying. Neat trick, eh? 
Speaking of dying, Susan Sarandon's character is really good at it. 
Once Jackie realizes that her cancer is irreversible, she 
choreographs her upcoming demise in grand fashion, sewing 
commemorative capes and quilts like the Martha Stewart of terminal 
illness. Julia's character also orchestrates a number of Kodak 
moments, including one magical scene where she enchants Jackie by 
filling a room with life-sized stand-up photos of the kids. Forget 
the ludicrously extreme preparation time and expense of creating such 
a display. It looks great and that's the only thing that matters.  
In-between the bickering and bonding, Columbus pads the film with 
sing-a-longs, repeated visits to the same restaurant for heart-to-
heart chats, and that most dreaded of all contemporary clichés, the 
"let's celebrate life and love by lip-synching to a golden oldie" 
scene. Oh, the joy, the heartbreak and the schmaltz of it all!
To be fair, the adult actors give it their best. Julia Roberts, 
radiant as always, does what she can with an unevenly-written 
character who fluctuates maddeningly from sharp-as-a-tack 
professional photographer to flummoxed caregiver to infinitely 
resourceful counselor. Susan Sarandon is excellent as the fiercely 
protective mother, while less successful as the martyr du jour. Even 
during the mawkish last hour, though, she manages to provide the only 
genuine moment in the film, when she pauses and surveys a family room 
while her remarkably expressive eyes flash panic over all she is 
about to lose. 
Ed Harris, one of the finest actors in the business, is wasted here, 
disappearing for extremely long stretches of time while the women 
duke it out. And then there's the kids. Jena Malone is suitably 
annoying as Anna and young Liam Aiken, playing her brother Ben, comes 
off more like a very cute toy than an real child. 
Earlier this year, "One True Thing" explored family conflicts, 
reconciliation and the great aching tragedy of terminal illness with 
intelligence, insight and dignity. "Stepmom" takes the same issues 
and cheapens them. Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon and Ed Harris earned 
big paychecks appearing in this cloying exercise in manipulation. 
Don't waste part of your check on their error in judgment.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: December 25, 1998
Starring: Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon, Ed Harris, Jena Malone, Liam
Aiken, Darrell Larson, Lynn Whitfield
Directed by: Chris Columbus
Distributed by: Sony Pictures Entertainment / TriStar Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (language, thematic elements) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/stepmom.htm
It's been said that the toughest thing for a director to do is to get
the audience to emote the way he wants it to. But that statement is a
contradiction in terms: it should never be the director's intention to
get the audience to emote in a specific way. Such a style is the
trademark of a lightweight drama -- a pretender -- like Chris Columbus'
latest film, STEPMOM. Rather than being a heartfelt product, it is an
emotionally-manipulative one that specializes in pushing the right
buttons. 
The Gigi Levangie story can be spotted for the tearjerker it is from a
good distance off. Luke (Ed Harris) and Jackie (Susan Sarandon),
recently divorced, are still very much a part of each other's lives due
to their two children, Anna (Jena Malone) and Ben (Liam Aiken).
Unfortunately, the situation is complicated by the presence of Luke's
fiancée, Isabel (Julia Roberts). Naturally, Isabel and Jackie are at
odds with each other: Jackie, a good many years older than Isabel,
envies her freshness but despises her disorganized lifestyle. The two
children aren't sure what to make of Isabel either, both of them
unwilling to accept the separation between their mother and father. As
the story proceeds, then, we learn that Jackie has a malignant form of
cancer, and that soon all will be forced to accept Isabel into their
lives. 
For her credit, Julia Roberts essays the role of Isabel with talent.
It's easily the most dynamic role in the movie, and although none of the
roles are really sympathetic to the audience, hers is the one to watch.
She contributes to much of the life found in STEPMOM that might
otherwise be lacking. The rest of the cast is unfortunately stale. Both
Sarandon and Malone, as mother and daughter, never really get on the
audience's good side. Liam Aiken plays the naďve little boy, a la JERRY
MAGUIRE, and he specializes in stealing scenes. Ed Harris, for all of
his effort, can't create any gravity in his role due to his minimal
screentime; it's unfortunate that he plays so minor a role in the
finished product. 
Watching the movie is an unfulfilling experience from start to finish.
Although the story should be emotionally moving -- the prototypical
American family deals with life-and-death issues in an abnormal manner
-- it comes off weak. All of the gusto about the quality of life found
in PATCH ADAMS is lacking here, and the character motivations are
similarly unclear. There's no reason for the audience to reach out and
accept STEPMOM, and hence its only appeal is for those who don't want
serious drama. As a lighter outing it works marginally: all of the
appropriate elements are present and used in the correct fashion. But
there's little to say that this will be remembered after it has dropped
off the box office charts, and in the mean time, audience dollars are
better spent elsewhere.

Author
Matt Williams
With a bland and unrevealing title like Stepmom, you might half expect a
horror film about the mad matriarch of a dysfunctional family. That's
not the case here.  Rather, Stepmom is another a long tradition of
three-hankie weepies, and a rather archetypical one at that. Luckily,
this tearjerking comedy-drama compensates for its familiar structure
with several superior performances.
Luke and Jackie Harrison (Ed Harris and Susan Sarandon) have been
divorced now for two years.  They have joint custody of their two
children: aspiring magician Ben (Liam Aiken), and the uncontrollably
angry Anna (Jena Malone).  Luke and Jackie are still on fairly good
terms... until Luke's girlfriend Isabel (Julia Roberts) moves in with
him.
Isabel is a career photographer, who has had no experience with kids.
She tries, but nothing she does can live up to the perfect example of
motherhood, Jackie.  Ben and Anna love tormenting her, and Jackie's
shrewish attitude doesn't make Isabel feel welcome either.
But there's another piece to this puzzle.  Something which will cause
everyone involved to reevaluate their feelings and attitudes.  But can
this non-traditional family bond together in a time of true crisis?
Stepmom shamelessly goes overboard in its attempts to manipulate your
emotions.  It pulls out every stop, and utilizes every trick in the book
to wring that one last tear from your body.  It performs these tasks
strictly according to the tearjerker textbook.  If you've seen even one
tearjerker before this one, you'll know exactly where the plot is going.
Still, there is considerable talent involved here.  And despite, the
blatant manipulation, the excellent performances that permeate the film
somehow manage to redeem Stepmom.  Both Susan Sarandon and Julia Roberts
excel in the lead roles.  Ed Harris, when he's not busy being
under-utilized, is a joy to watch as well.  Even the children are above
par for this sort of film., though Liam Aiken was seemingly cast on the
basis of his infectious laugh alone.
The film itself is a bit rushed, confining all the action to a few short
months.  This dramatic shortcut does serve to heighten the emotional
shocks of the film (the impacts are all felt sooner than they should
be), but at the cost of realism.
After the end of Stepmom, you feel like a finely wrung sponge. The film
may be completely by-the-book, but thanks to the performances at its
center, its emotional manipulation succeeds. This may be a formulaic
tearjerker, but it's one done well.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
James Sanford

 Perhaps there really are jobless, single women in this world who can
somehow afford to maintain magnificent Victorian mansions in upstate New
York, complete with a stable full of horses in case they decide to take a
moonlit ride through the countryside. Maybe somewhere you could find a
couple of kids who'd bristle at the thought of having a hip, vivacious and
eager-to-please young woman like Julia Roberts in their lives. Possibly, if
you searched far and wide enough, you might track down a fashion
photographer with the power to call all the shots on her shoots, even
changing entire ad campaigns on a whim.
 In lovelier-than-life movies like "Stepmom," such things happen everyday,
along with junior-high Thanksgiving pageants that look like mini-Broadway
musicals and lunches packed in Bloomingdales bags. But underneath the
picture's glossy surface lies a hornets' nest of painful emotions -- fear,
jealousy, shame, self-loathing -- the likes of which are not hard to find in
the real world, especially in divided families.
 "Stepmom" is the story of how fate dictates that fortysomething Jackie
(Susan Sarandon), the divorced mother of two, and Isabel (Julia Roberts), a
twentysomething career woman, learn to respect each other for the good of
the other people in their lives, and the film makes the valid point that
when children are listening, parental figures have an obligation to behave
maturely, rather than resorting to catty games and backstabbing to settle
old scores.
 Isabel is now living with Luke (Ed Harris), Jackie's ex, with kids Anna
(Jena Malone) and Ben (Liam Aiken) shuttling back and forth between Luke's
sprawling Manhattan loft and Jackie's enormous country home, a showplace of
quilts, flowers and antiques which makes Martha Stewart's digs look
hard-scrabble by comparison. Though Jackie prides herself on being the kind
of mother who'd rather set herself on fire than be late in picking up the
young ones from school, her barely disguised disgust with Luke's new love
cues Anna and Ben to do their best to make Isabel feel lousy. Jackie may be
a terrific mom, but as a role model she's no better than the hapless Isabel.
 "Stepmom" doesn't come close to delivering the punch of director Alan
Parker's "Shoot The Moon," a much sturdier movie on a similar subject, but
nevertheless Roberts and particularly Sarandon work overtime to make this
hit-and-miss script click. Theirs is an intriguing match-up of acting
styles, too: Sarandon relies on her expressive eyes to show us Jackie's
emotions, while Roberts conveys Isabel's uneasiness mostly through her
unsteady voice and slightly awkward body language. A scene near the end in
which the two meet in a tavern to discuss their situation becomes a
wrenching tour de force for both actresses.
 In the end, the well-rounded characterizations are what sell the film;
everyone involved has their own strengths and weaknesses, unlike "Patch
Adams," which is dominated by one-dimensional caricatures that seem to have
come straight off the assembly line at the stereotype factory. Though it has
just as many corny moments as "Patch," as a drama "Stepmom" is considerably
more successful, mostly because Sarandon and Roberts play the material
gently, rather than aiming straight for the tearducts at every opportunity.
The movie's setting may be superficial and dreamy, but its stars make
"Stepmom" hit home.
James Sanford

Author
Steve Kong
Stepmom is a movie that takes all of our emotion-strings and yanks on them
for two hours. It makes us laugh, cry, sympathize, and dislike. And it's
because of this that the movie fails.
Isabel (Julia Roberts) is a big-time fashion photographer. She's engaged
and living with an older divorced man, Luke (Ed Harris). Isabel gets to
take care of Luke's kids from time to time, much to the dismay of Luke's
ex-wife, Jackie (Susan Sarandon).
After Isabel temporarily loses Luke's younger son at the park the fighting
between Isabel and Jackie escalate. Both of them have their reasons for not
liking the other. Jackie finds Isabel irresponsible, self-centered, an
unworthy stepmom for her kids, and is afraid of Isabel stealing her
children. Isabel dislikes the kids, loves Luke, and thinks that Jackie is
overbearing and a control freak. It is this strife between the two women
that carries the film. A small subplot about Isabel, Jackie, and the young
daughter Anna (Jena Malone) also exists.
Chris Columbus directs Stepmom well, though his pacing is a bit off. The
film runs long at a few minutes over two hours. Columbus is able to pull
every emotion out of the bag. The film drips of melodrama. Columbus is
known more for his lighter work: Home Alone, Home Alone 2, and Mrs.
Doubtfire. Stepmom is the opposite of those - this is a drama - and
Columbus does well.
What kills the film is the script. The script is filled with cliches and
bad lines. The writer, Gigi Levangi, wrote some pretty melodramatic lines
for this film, take for instance what Isabel tells Anna to say to the boy
that just turned her down.
The only thing that shines from Stepmom are the performances by the three
leads. Harris, Sarandon, and Roberts all give good performances, but not
good enough to save this film from disaster. Skip Stepmom on the big screen
and catch it on video.
[Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 123 Minutes]
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Mac VerStandig
Every holiday season a film will come out that is attempting to be the 
next Miracle on 34th Street or It's A Wonderful Life. The content will 
be values and morals. And the plot's predictability will be none less 
than that of this annual event. Recently, director Chris Columbus has 
been behind several of these films such as Home Alone and Mrs. 
Doubtfire. So, as tradition may have neither gaps nor breaks, this 
year's wannabe movie is Stepmom, directed by, appropriately enough, 
Chris Columbus.
The unadvertised plot of Stepmom is coping with the harshest of things 
that life has to offer; in this case it is cancer. The advertised plot 
is dealing with divorced life and the children involved; which does fall 
under the larger theme as well. And of course, just to insure that this 
movie doesn't break the trend, there are scenes that will cause you to 
laugh, and others to cry.
Jackie (Susan Sarandon) and Luke (Ed Harris) have made the decision to 
divorce long before the film starts. They have 2 children, one is a 12 
year old girl, Anna (Jena Malone), and the other a significantly younger 
boy, Ben (Liam Aiken). Their lives seem to have adjusted to this 
divorce, and just when a degree of stability is beginning to exist, Luke 
has his younger girlfriend, Isabel (Julia Roberts), move in. Devoted to 
her work as a photographer, Isabel never dreamed of playing Mom, but now 
living with 2 children part of the time, she will be forced to adjust. 
That is where the movie picks up.
Stereotypically, the kids don't want to except Isabel, and in their 
minds she will never stack up to the job of their full time mother, 
Jackie. The movie becomes an artificial study of acceptance in life, and 
plays out several very two dimensional Hollywood type scenarios. But 
then, just when you have calculated the ending, and can predict every 
scene ahead of time, the movie inserts it's one bold surprise. (WARNING: 
Partial Plot Giveaway) As viewers of Terms of Endearment once saw, those 
who see this will as well. Jackie is terminally ill with cancer. 
Although this is the one non-predictable move of the film, everything 
related to it is. And so it that the lives of these 5 people are 
changed, and they must cope with just another situation on top of all 
those that they currently do.
When you put 3 talented people like Susan Sarandon, Ed Harris and Julia 
Roberts together on screen, there will almost always be chemistry and 
extraordinary acting. This is no exception. Sarandon gives her best 
performance since her Academy Award winning role in Dead Man Walking. 
Roberts is solid as well, and seems to enjoy playing her young, rock n' 
roll obsessed character. The kids' roles don't have much room to shine, 
but the relatively new Jena Malone (Contact) is wonderfully charming. 
However, the real treat is Ed Harris in his second great job of the year 
(The Truman Show). He is believable, enjoyable, and all around great in 
his role.
When all is said and done, Stepmom offers very little that is new or 
unique, beyond some great acting. However, as worn out as it may be, the 
overly predictable plot is still enjoyable and entertaining. Adding a 
serious twist with Jackie is a bold, fairly new step for this genre that 
deserves applause. Is it worth the time and money? I suppose so, but 
waiting for video wouldn't hurt either.

Author
Nicole Lesley
Starring: Susan Sarandon, Julia Roberts, Ed Harris, two annoying
children.
Yes, I'll admit it.  I did go to see Stepmom: partly because of its
two leading actors and partly because someone asked me.  No, mostly
because someone asked me.  And, in spite of it all, I'll still talk to
that person.
Stepmom is exactly what you would expect: an over-wrought, weepy film.
The basic premise is that Jackie (Susan Sarandon) and Luke (Ed
Harris), who have two children, are divorced.  Luke has taken up with
Isabel (Julia Roberts), who is having trouble coping with being a
parent, even if only part-time.  Jackie is having trouble coping with
the fact that her ex-husband has fallen in love again, and that she
may be being replaced in the lives of her children.  Oh yeah, and
Jackie is having trouble coping with dying of cancer.
Clearly we have enough going on here to give the tear ducts a good
work-out.  I saw the movie in a packed movie theatre and people were
crying their eyes out; the woman next to me was crying and sniffing
and blowing her nose all throughout the picture.  As it sets out to be
a weepy, Stepmom achieves one of its goals.  Since telephone
commercials can make people cry, we need some other criteria by which
to judge this movie.
First, the performances.  All the adults in Stepmom give very good
performances.  All are experienced actors with a track record of
playing good to great roles.  All enunciate clearly, cry at the right
moments, look frazzled when expected.  No, there is nothing wrong with
the adult performances.  The daughter, Anna (Jena Malone), also does a
fine job with a strange role.  I'm not sure if she was meant to be a
spoilt brat or just someone coming to terms with it all.  Currently,
I'm voting for the spoilt brat but the script didn't really make it
clear.  The son, Ben (Liam Aiken), however, was not at all fine.
Given his young age and the material with which he was working, I'm
confident that none of it was his fault.  I think we can lay the blame
squarely at the feet of the director, Chris Columbus.  This child was
vomit-inducingly cute, unfailingly, consistently, throughout the
movie: not one bad mood, not one sour expression, not one iota of a
resemblance to a normal child.
While we're dealing with things that aren't at all fine, let's
consider the script.  Stepmom covers what I consider to be potentially
interesting film-making topics.  Split families with changing dynamics
are common in our society: a movie examining these roles could be very
illuminating.  Also, here's a movie with two strong female roles, and
two quite good female actors cast in those roles.  Unfortunately,
Stepmom feels the need to manipulate rather than investigate,
underline rather than understate, overplay rather than imply.
Even given this, Stepmom is confusing.  Clearly, we are meant to
believe that Jackie is a great mother but until the very end, we never
see that.  Instead we see a manipulative, nasty woman without a
generous bone in her body.  Throughout the film, we see Isabel trying
so hard in her new role of stepmom, often being the voice of reason,
yet during the meeting of the two women in the bar, (and there appears
to be only one bar), they do a body switch and Jackie is the
reasonable one and Isabel the selfish one.  Very strange.
On top of this, although the movie itself is quite long, and every
scene overplayed, Stepmom takes place in a relatively short space of
time: the beginning of Autumn (in the US) to Christmas.  The
metamorphosis of these characters would have been much more believable
over a longer space of time: the only reason I can see for not doing
this was that making Ben age a year or two would have been tricky.  On
the time-compression topic, no-one can make a quilt that quickly,
especially not if they're doing other things at the same time, like,
say, chemotherapy.  Just little things like that, had they been
correctly handled, would have made the movie more enjoyable.
Now it sounds like I hated this movie.  That's not quite the case.  I
just felt so much of it could have been done much better.  Had that
happened, this movie would have moved up a rating notch.  Instead of
really dealing with the issues involved, the heart-strings were
tugged, the violins were strained and the emotions exaggerated.  Of
course, you'll cry and you might even laugh at Ben's antics, but it
feels empty, so that when you leave the theatre you start thinking of
all the worthwhile things you could have done with the price of
admission.  If you feel the need for a good cry, what till it comes
out on video.
Nikki Lesley 1998

Author
Walter Frith
'Stepmom' has the worst screenplay I've ever seen for subject matter
contained within its genre.  Contrived, pretentious, corn ball, and
shallow are just a few adjectives that would be accurate in describing
it.  Releasing it during the holidays and using two cute kids in
marketing it is shameful as this is NOT a family film.  Don't
misunderstand.  It is about family but the bad taste it leaves in the
mouth is unacceptable for children.  It starts out by telling you that
two women who interact with the same man---one the ex wife, and one his
current lover, will naturally hate each other at first but will come to
accept and even like each other later on.  I've known families and have
seen it within my own family and circle of friends that once somebody
hates another person, it's permanent.
Julia Roberts is a photographer in love with lawyer Ed Harris (in a
completely wasted role).  Harris' ex-wife (Susan Sarandon) lives alone
and the couple have an older daughter and a younger son.  The kids hate
dad's new main squeeze and despite her attempt to like and please them,
they stick it to her every chance they get.  Every time Sarandon and
Roberts see each other, they are like oil and water.  One thinks the
other is a b**** while the other sees her rival as inexperienced and
unable to cope with family.  Caught in the middle of all of this,
naturally, are the children.  One of the kids has a laugh that is so
irritating that it will make you shriek to the point of wanting to throw
stuff at the movie screen.
This film is like a rock that has been thrown into a pond.  It sinks
straight to the bottom.  It goes nowhere in a credible fashion in a
running time of more than two hours.  The performances in 'Stepmom' are
somewhat admirable but it's too bad the actors didn't have the wisdom to
realize that by making the most of a bad script can't make for a good
movie.  'Stepmom' has the worst poker face I've ever seen.  It's obvious
and doesn't know how to cover-up its sugar coated shortcomings and
therefore it fails.
Chris Columbus ('Home Alone', 'Mrs. Doubtfire') directs this film
without a clue as to how you go  about the usual input of a director's
own idea of how a film is shaped to decide its final outcome.  Upon
reading a script, a director can make a fairly good film from a
superficial screenplay and therefore a film can be redeemed at least
part of the way.  The screenplay by Gigi Levangie, Jessie Nelson, Steven
Rogers, Karen Leigh Hopkins and Ron Bass (five people?) has enough
laughably bad dialogue to insult the intelligence of even the most
casual movie fan who only sees about five or six movies per year.
As studios continue to take away more and more of a director's artistic
licence, movie audiences will find less and less to appreciate,
especially film buffs.  With standards being lowered, box office figures
continue to rise, not because audiences are pleased with the results of
a final cut and keep coming back but because movie theatres are being
built with bigger and better technology to distract us away from the
movie and into the theatre's coffee shop, restaurant or arcade which
sometimes are more entertaining.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://www.joblo.com/
Chris Columbus takes another poke at a film that includes happy upper-middle
class families coping with their troubles by singing a few catchy 50's
tunes, visiting beautiful settings with wonderful memories, and tossing a
cute kid in for effect. Sound familiar? It might. He previously directed the
huge hits of HOME ALONE (8/10) and MRS. DOUBTFIRE. This film is actually
more of a drama, but the director's trademark devices are all present and
accounted for.
PLOT:
Two kids must deal with the fact that their parents are divorced and that
daddy is ready to bring another younger woman into their lives permanently.
The mother of said kids seems to have a bigger chip on her shoulder in
regards to the new "stepmom" moving in with her kids, as the whole lot of
them deal with their emotions, reservations and fears in respect to this new
family dynamic.
CRITIQUE:
A cardboard cutout of a perfectly sad drama done in happy smiley faces, this
film gives us a few laughs, most of which I had already seen in the TV
commercial, many moments of emotional confrontations, a couple of which
managed to give me the "ol' wet-eye", and an uninspired script acted out to
perfection by some very talented actors. I have to say that nothing in this
movie surprised me one bit, and that most of what I did see was played out
by the numbers. Stepmom bad, kids and mom good. Daddy confused. Stepmom mess
up, kids and mom still good. Daddy confused. Stepmom try harder, kids start
liking her, mom catch deadly disease. Daddy still confused. Can you fill out
the rest? Well I did, and I'm guessing that most others will as well.
Having said that, this film still managed to make me chuckle every now and
again, mostly because of the cute kid (Damn you, Columbus!!), and did
feature some terrific performances by all involved, with a special hand
going out to Susan Sarandon's eyes, which absolutely took a beating during
this film. Her eyes were filled with tears for what seemed like the whole
movie, but she still managed to deliver her lines perfectly. To the redness
in her eyeballs, and to the onions in her diet, I tip my baseball cap, and
wish her the best of luck at the Oscars. Julia also managed to cramp up a
couple of tears here and there, and even Harris got in on the act. All in
all, a by-the-numbers sappy dramatic comedy, that offers a lot of
inspiration to all those in this same situation (I am not, so I admit that I
could not truly relate to any one of these characters), but very little to
all others, who may be looking for a night of entertainment. My usual female
companion for the evening, Mrs. JoBlo also didn't care much for the film,
despite washing a wave or two from her puffy eyes during the Sarandon
red-eye scenes. See it if the premise interests you, or if you want your
loved one to cry, so that you could cuddle up with them, otherwise, skip it,
and see TITANIC (7/10) again. At least that schmaltz-fest had some slick
special effects!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Julia Roberts' full name is actually Julie Fiona Roberts. She was once
engaged to actor Kiefer Sutherland, and dated TV's "Friends" favourite
sarcastic friend, Chandler Bing, Matthew Perry. Her wedding with Kiefer
Sutherland fell through just days before the couple was scheduled to take
their June 14, 1991 vows. The groom-to-be's indiscretions with a stripper
reportedly were the last straw in what had been a turbulent relationship
from the outset, and Roberts fled to Ireland with Sutherland's buddy, actor
Jason Patric.
She is to receive US$17 million salary for her upcoming role opposite her
PRETTY WOMAN (7.5/10) co-star, Richard Gere, in the film called THE RUNAWAY
BRIDE. Her bra size is 34B. Her real parents divorced when she was only
four, and her father passed away from cancer when she was only nine.
Susan Sarandon's full name is Susan Abigail Tomaling. She has three children
with actor Tim Robbins, to whom she is not married. She also had a large
family growing up, and was the oldest of eight younger brothers and sisters.
She once dated director Louis Malle and actor Sean Penn. If you're into this
kind of thing, you might enjoy her lesbian love scene with Catherine Deneuve
in 1983's THE HUNGER, starring David Bowie.
Ed Harris has been married to actress Amy Madigan since 1982. She is best
known as Kevin Costner's wife in FIELD OF DREAMS (7.5/10).
Two previous titles for this picture were CLASS DIVIDED and GOOD NIGHT MOON
(and you thought STEPMOM was bad).
The proposal scene in this movie was apparently thought up by Julia Roberts
and Ed Harris (And yet they needed five writers to accomplish this squeeshy
script?).
Director Chris Columbus' production company is called 1492 productions. Get
it? Christopher Columbus...1492? :)
Screenwriter Gigi Levangie, who just happens to be the wife of big-time
producer Brian Grazer of Imagine Entertainment, had originally presented her
original screenplay to all involved, who found her version to be
"unrealistic". Four other writers later, it apparently turned "realistic".
Go figure.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     About forty minutes into STEPMOM, I came to a numbing realization...
well, two actually.  The first was that I knew exactly where this domestic
drama was headed and could predict scenes and confrontations far down the
road.  The second was that I knew we were still 90 minutes away from the
closing credits.  As the film ever-so-slowly unfolded, I began to realize
what five credited screenwriters can buy you:  perhaps the most
inefficient screenplay of the year.
     There's some promising human drama in the premise, which begins with
conflict in an extended family.  Photographer Isabel Kelly (Julia
Roberts), living with divorced attorney Luke Harrison (Ed Harris), is
struggling to gain the acceptance of Luke's daughter Anna (Jena Malone)
and son Ben (Liam Aiken).  Making the task even harder is Luke's ex-wife
Jackie (Susan Sarandon), who undercuts Isabel at every turn and rails at
her every parenting miscue.  What Isabel doesn't know is that Jackie is
battling an even tougher adversary than a potential stepmother for her
children:  cancer.  As she confronts her mortality, Jackie also confronts
her fears of being replaced in her children's hearts.
     That's an interesting enough twist on the complicated emotions and
allegiances of extended family interactions, one that could have made a
tidy feature weeper.  Unfortunately, absolutely nothing about STEPMOM 
could be called tidy.  If a situation or relationship calls for a scene to
establish it, STEPMOM provides two or three.  Isabel bonds with Anna over
an art project (one of the film's few truly affecting moments), then bonds
with her over a musical number; everyone panics over Ben when he
disappears in a park, then panics over Ben when he falls off a jungle gym.
STEPMOM appears to have no faith that we'll understand the significance of
a character's actions unless those actions are underlined, making it both
insulting and redundant.  Every turn of character is so deliberately
structured, you might suspect that every subsequent screenwriter came in
just to add another half dozen scenes, and no one threw anything out.
     STEPMOM's narrative unwieldiness also makes it extremely hard to
connect with any of the many plot lines.  Isabel struggles with balancing
career and her new family, Jackie struggles with balancing her health and
her family, Anna struggles with how she should respond to the new woman in
her father's life, and Ben (played by Liam Aiken with the kind of fulsome
adorableness that gives child actors a bad name) struggles to find new
things to giggle at.  Ed Harris, meanwhile, struggles just to find a few
minutes of screen time.  With all the complexities involved in these 
family dynamics, dear old dad remains a complete enigma.  "You're a great
dad," Jackie tells Luke in once scene; "I just never gave you the chance
to realize it."  That sentiment will probably apply to the entire
audience, which may forget there's a father anywhere to be found.  For a
film about getting your priorities straight, STEPMOM sure doesn't.
     Of course, it's understood that this is to be a showcase for the two
lead actresses, and we shouldn't begrudge them a showcase when lead
actresses generally get the treatment Harris gets here.  Roberts and
Sarandon are both quite good in their roles, Sarandon in particular
bringing a wonderful steely maternalism.  They're just stuck in the kind
of film which has become director Chris Columbus' specialty:  cheap comic
relief which gives way to Big Messages of understanding.  STEPMOM is a big
emotional mess of a movie, one which grows increasingly irritating as
karaoke production numbers and one tearful goodbye after another chew up
minutes of screen time.  Good actors deserve better than a script that --
strangely enough -- looks like pieces of the work of five different
writers stitched together to form a movie.

Author
Joy Wyse
When a noted photographer becomes involved with a recently divorced man,
she also becomes involved with his two children and his ex-wife.   All of
the Actors are perfectly cast in their roles.  They all play likeable
people with problems.  Although this combination is sure to be a
crowd-pleaser the movie lacks a lot in the art of filmmaking.  The editing
and continuity leave a lot to be desired. The film literally jumps from
scene to scene as we progress deeper into their lives.  In an opening
scene, Isabel, [Julia Roberts] trips over a rabbit, the pet of the son,
Ben [Liam Aiken], who imagines himself a magician.  We never see the
rabbit again.
Later Isabel presents the children with a dog.  When Ben is found at
the police station following his disappearance, the dog is with him
but they must have left the dog with the cops because he's never
seen again either.  One minute we're in the midst of Halloween.
The next you know, it's suddenly Thanksgiving.  When the story
begins, Isabel is not a Stepmom.  She is simply a woman in love who
questions whether or not she is capable and willing to take on a ready
made family.
Susan Sarandon as the mother, Jackie, makes a nice transition from being
a bitter resentful divorcee to a more likeable person.  It gives her a
chance for an Oscar nomination.  She's done much better than this, however.
Ed Harris as Luke, the father, is neither too good nor too unfeeling.  He
makes you understand how it is to be divorced, engaged, and a very good
Dad.
The children are typical kids.  If anyone deserves a nomination it should
be for Best Supporting Actress for Jena Malone as Anna, the daughter.  Her
performance is so natural that you don't realize she's acting.  It's a
very intense role for someone so young.  She shouldn't be dismissed
because of her age.
Basically the plot is about the power struggle that develops between the
two women.  Julia simply wants to be accepted while Susan wants to be
remembered.  It becomes more serious as the movie unfolds.     All in all,
the second half of the film drags on and on.  It should have been
re-titled `The Long Goodbye'.
The audience cried a lot, but that doesn't make it good.  I give it a B. 

Author
Michael Dequina
The breezy trailers for _Stepmom_ would lead one to believe that it is one
of those light films one would expect from director Chris Columbus.  The
reality of the film, so cleverly hidden in the rushes, is much more sober
and serious.  Some would go so far as to call it sad.  But it doesn't go
quite _that_ far, in my opinion.  _Stepmom_ is a well-made and undeniably
involving film, but its artistic compromises are not completely effective.
The character being referred to by the title actually is not a stepmother,
at least not yet.  She's Isabel Kelly (Julia Roberts) the much younger
live-in girlfriend of Luke Harrison (Ed Harris).  Luke's two children,
7-year-old Ben (Liam Aiken) and especially 12-year-old Anna (Jena Malone)
are resentful of Isabel, and somewhat rightfully so--they have been blessed
(spoiled?) with a perfect mother, Luke's ex-wife Jackie (Susan Sarandon).
Although busy professional photographer Isabel scarcely has the time or
interest for parenting, the kids are occasionally left in her questionable
care, creating even more points of conflict between the two women.
About the first hour of _Stepmom_ has a nice hard edge, albeit somewhat
overwritten by the five credited scripters, Gigi Levangie, Jessie Nelson,
Steven Rogers, Karen Leigh Hopkins, and Ron Bass.  (I'm not so sure a girl
Anna's can come up with such pithy zingers so quickly; it's one thing to be
a smartass, and quite another to be a smart ass.)  Even during the
seemingly happier moments, there's a palpable undercurrent of tension,
especially between Isabel and Jackie.  Their conflicts over parenting
philosophies and authority is something not often seen in film, and it's
solidly played by Roberts and Sarandon.
Columbus is not known for displaying a hard edge, if even one at all, and
so the air of anger cannot last--or, at the very least, must tone down
somewhat.  And that it does, in a less than convincing fashion.  The most
contrived development has Anna, who has heretofore been Isabel's most vocal
detractor, make a complete 180 after Isabel shows her a nifty painting
technique; before long, the two are best friends singing along to "Ain't No
Mountain High Enough" in the car.  But the big complication--and the film's
big secret--is also a big misstep.  Jackie, it is revealed, has secretly
been receiving treatment for cancer, and her condition is steadily
worsening toward the inevitable.
Now, I have no problem with films featuring people suffering from a
terminal disease.  But throughout _Stepmom_ I wondered if the illness
wrinkle was really necessary.  The Jackie/Isabel conflict was already
involving, with each side showing its share of right and wrong; making
Jackie sick unfairly stacks the sympathy deck in her favor.  But I suppose
the illness was a necessary compromising device for Columbus, enabling him
to try something more edgy at first and then settle into familiar, safe,
and blatantly calculated schmaltz, which hits full-throttle with the de
rigueur mawkish mother-child "goodbye" scenes.  And though this is an
adult-aimed film, Columbus also couldn't completely shake his _Home_Alone_
kiddie tendencies by casting Aiken, a Macaulay-esque moppet who is as short
on talent as he is long on cuteness.
Before her comeback with _My_Best_Friend's_Wedding_, Roberts was in a bit
of a career bind.  She wanted to prove her serious acting chops, but
audiences wanted to see her megawatt smile and hear her whooping laugh, and
drab, smile-less efforts such as _Mary_Reilly_ flopped.  Here, Roberts
attempts to have the best of both worlds, flashing those pearly whites ever
so often within a meaty dramatic context.  Unlike Columbus's compromise,
hers works, and she delivers one of her most impassioned performances,
holding her own against the formidable Sarandon, who is true to strong
form.  Stealing some of their thunder is the impressive Malone, who plays
such a convincing brat in the earlygoing you may find yourself wanting to
slap her.
While I was not among the people who cried at various points during
_Stepmom_, it did strike some emotional chords.  But the film's
effectiveness had less to do with the story than it did the strong work of
the actors--an all too appropriate compromise in a film characterized by
them.  (opens December 25)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
James Brundage
Starring Julia Roberts, Susan Surrandon, Ed Harris
 Well, I just saw Shakespeare in Love.  That was filed under "S" for superb.
Three guesses what the "S" in Stepmom stood for.
 If you guessed correctly, you have a very good adjective to describe the
utterly boring and idiotic movie by Chris Columbus.  If you haven't guessed
it, you will by the end of the review.
 Stepmom follows Isabel (Roberts), fashion-photographer, stepmom TO BE, and
bitch extrodinaire.  It also follows Tammy (Surrandon): divorced mother,
terminally ill, and, again, bitch extrodinaire.  Both of these characters
are equally worthy of your hate, and both of these characters are supposed
to evoke some sort of sympathy from the viewers.
 Needless to say, they don't.  The rest of the plot is that Tammy, Luke's
(Harris) ex-wife, is dying from cancer and still has the energy to bite the
head off of Isabel, Luke's unlikable girlfriend and later fiancée BUT NEVER
WIFE.  The entire movie takes all the substance of a very badly written poem
or short story and spreads it out like gum onto your shoe into a two hour
long modern version of the rack.
 You don't laugh, you don't cry, you don't feel a thing.  The movie was
written by five writers, all of whom I am sure are nom de plums for monkeys
learning to type, and has nothing to show for the collaborative effort.
That, friends, is Hollywood at its best.  These people are being paid $1000
per screen minute or so and still are unable to turn out a product that
anyone in their right mind would think is anything other than crap.
 Chris Columbus decided to make this film either as a victim of binge
drinking or a bet, either one of them ending in obvious disaster.  Susan
Surrandon, Julia Roberts, Ed Harris, and the two poor children who will be
forced to place Stepmom on their earlier filmographies, all get experience
with fake tears.
 This was a film where my diatribe of picking on the film is more fun that
the film itself, and it is also a film to practice your aim of popcorn
kernels with.  Watching the film, I now understand the mind behind The Mad
Bomber, who placed pipe bombs in movie theatres in New York City during the
1950s.  Believe me, after seeing Stepmom, you will too.
 Of the other unforgivable aspects of the film, besides exploiting cancer as
a sympathy-getter for a badly written role without any hope of sympathy, you
have the simple fact of the title: Stepmom.  Think about this.  Julia
Roberts is the girlfriend, and the fiancée, but never is she the stepmom.
 Also you have the unforgivable mistake, and here comes a spoiler, that you
never actually see Susan Surrandon die.  As with Brandy in I Still Know What
You Did Last Summer, you keep waiting and waiting for the bitch to bite the
dust, but it never happens.  Instead, she tortures you with ten minute long
speeches and a film that feels like the ending of the story at the
beginning.
 I thought I wouldn't find a film with more pseudo-drama than Varsity Blues,
but, on a melodramatic scale of one to ten, Stepmom is a ten.  Yes, if it
happened to me, I would care if it were happening, but as it happens to
them, I just try to stay awake.
 For those who think they know what "S" stands for, it isn't sleepy and it
isn't stupid, but both of these apply.  Neither is it silly or sad or smart
or sassy or savvy.  None of those adjectives apply at all.  It would be
stuck in the middle of bad movies if it didn't try so damn much to be great.
But, aim hi, fall far...

Author
Luke Buckmaster
STEPMOM
Cast: Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon, Ed Harris, Jena Malone, Liam Aiken,
Jason Maves
Director: Chris Columbus
Screenplay: Gigi Levangie, Jessie Nelson, Steven Rogers, Karen Leigh
Hopkins and Ronald Bass, based on a story by Gigi Levangie
Running time: 125 minutes
Australian theatrical release: January 21, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 stars
It appears as though everybody and their dog wanted to contribute
something to Stepmom.  What other reason could explain the seven
scriptwriters (one not credited) and eleven producers involved in the
production?  It is ironical, then, that the greatest fault in this film
lies in its screenplay.  Despite solid efforts from an ensemble cast,
there is only so much that actors can do.  Julia Roberts and Susan
Sarandon tried desperately to make Stepmom work, only to find themselves
with too much screen time, and too little to say.  Blunder blockbuster
Armageddon suffered from a similar problem, with nine writers and no
hint of a coherent storyboard.  At least this time, director Chris
Colombus occasionally builds some worthwhile dramatic moments.
With Stepmom Colombus departures from his trend of lightheaded movies;
the best known being Home Alone, Mrs. Doubtfire and Nine Months (that's
why this "serious" film didn't have "by the director of Home Alone" on
its posters).  When Stepmom drifts into drama and confrontations, you
get the sense that Colombus is unsure as to how to handle his material.
Many moments go way too long and are emphasized over sufficiently, and
much of the dialogue could have been said in far fewer words.
Consequently, Stepmom loses interest in scenes that could have been
edited into something tighter and more structured.  With so much speech,
a good half-hour could have been slashed from its 124 minute running
time.
Isabel (Julia Roberts), a professional photographer, is the girlfriend
of workaholic lawyer Luke (Ed Harris), a divorced father of two
children.  She regularly takes care of Anna (Jena Malone), who has just
started dating, and Ben (Liam Aiken), a little kid with an aspiration to
be a magician.  Luke's ex-wife Jackie (Susan Sarandon) dislikes Isobelle
and sees her as a threat to the family, so naturally she is quick to
find fault in every mistake Isabel makes.  But Jackie is soon forced to
reevaluate her views on life and love upon the news that she has cancer,
and not long to live.  The two women form an unlikely friendship and
respect for each other whilst Luke fades into the background, presumably
working on an important case.
Allow me to stress that Luke - the most important male character (with
the possible exception of Ben) - performs an annoying disappearing act.
Lead female roles in film are not easy to find nowadays (though we've
had some good ones lately with My Best Friend's Wedding and There's
Something About Mary), but the novelty of having Julia Roberts and Susan
Sarandon dominate the screen is quickly worn off.  The always-reliable
Ed Harris is given enough ground to make a solid performance, but not
enough screen time to make a memorable one.  As Harris performs his
disappearing act, something even greater than a gifted actor vanishes -
the film's father figure is also missed.  Whilst it's great to see a
couple of talented women star in movie that is primarily theirs, it is
foolish to ignore a male actor when one is desperately needed
(especially one of the caliber of Ed Harris).
For everything that it is not, Stepmom at least provides realism and
maturity.  The seven scriptwriters take a good shot at looking into
sensitive family themes, which consist primarily of divorce and
re-marriage.  The film is most painful when it looks through the eyes of
the children, although some of their pain is a little exaggerated -
yelling and crying is one thing, subtly examining their desire for love
and acceptance is another.  I guess this is something that one writer
could do better than seven, twenty or a hundred. Chalk that down as a
message to the makers of Stepmom: hire fewer people and do a better job.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or for any inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies:
http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Dustin Putman
"Stepmom," directed by Chris Columbus (1990's "Home Alone" and 1993's 
"Mrs. Doubtfire"), is an earnest and well-made film with, perhaps, one 
unfair flaw: It is very similar to the recent, and far superior, "One 
True Thing," starring Meryl Streep and Renee Zellweger. "One True Thing" 
was a more serious and seemingly accurate portrayal of a family coping 
with cancer, while "Stepmom" is a more sleek and "mainstream" motion 
picture. That is not to say it still isn't a marginally good film, 
however.
The film begins as Isabel (Julia Roberts), a young woman looking to be 
in her late 20's, is rushing around her house trying to get two 
children, 12-year-old Anna (Jena Malone) and 7-year-old Ben (Liam 
Aiken), off to school without much success. Before long, an older woman, 
Jackie (Susan Sarandon), shows up, and we learn that she is the 
children's actual mother, while Isabel lives with the children's father, 
Luke (Ed Harris), much to the spitefulness of Ben, and especially Anna. 
It is clear that Isabel is trying very hard to help take care of the 
children, but still has a lot to learn about parenting, and isn't helped 
very much by the uncooperation of the kids and Jackie, who obviously 
isn't too fond of Isabel, a woman whom she informs Luke, "is half his 
age." Meanwhile, as Isabel is trying to become friends with the 
children, Jackie learns that she has lymphatic cancer, and when all of 
her treatments fail to work, she decides that she has a lot of things to 
settle before she dies.
"Stepmom" follows a fairly predictable line throughout its 124-minute 
running time, but is helped immeasurably by the beautifully-done and 
touching performances from, particularly, Sarandon, Roberts, and Malone, 
a talented young actress who could very well be the next Jodie Foster 
(and, sure enough, she did play Foster as a child in 1997's "Contact"). 
The performers are so good, in fact, that they easily rise above the 
admittedly thin material and help make scene after scene their own. 
Sarandon, like always, is realistic and heartbreaking as a woman who 
realizes she has a lot of things she needs to do before the illness 
takes over her life; and Roberts gives one of her best performances to 
date, and smoothly is able to convey her character's frustration of 
becoming a second-rate parent who will never be able to equal up to the 
children's real mother. 
Through the performances and screenplay, we often do get some extremely 
well-written and intelligent scenes. Particular sequences that stand out 
include a subtle, but observant scene where Isabel helps Anna with an 
art project; Isabel gives Anna advice about some boy troubles that she 
is having; a moving scene between Jackie and Luke at a restaurant; and a 
concluding scene set during Christmas between Jackie and her children. 
In the individual moments of accuracy and truthfulness, "Stepmom" is a 
suberb and nicely-drawn drama, but, unfortunately, there are a couple 
noticable problems.
For one, Isabel might be too ideal of a girlfriend and substitute 
parent. Scene after scene, we are shown how hard and diligently Isabel 
is working to care for Anna and Ben, but we are not really given a 
reason why this is. We are supposed to believe it is because Isabel 
truly loves Luke, but he is often out of the picture for long stretches 
of time, so much so that I found it hard to accept, later in the film, 
when one character observes how great of a parent he is. Meanwhile, 
sitting back watching the picture, I was thinking to myself that if he 
was such a "great" parent, why was he never watching his kids? The flaws 
of the Luke character come from that particular weak area in the script, 
and should not be blamed on Ed Harris, who is nonetheless good in the 
film, even if he is stuck with a largely underwritten role. Another 
problem, but to a lesser extent, are some subplots that are brought up 
but not resolved in any way, such as when Isabel is fired from her job 
as a photographer.
Even after taking into consideration the film's many missteps, "Stepmom" 
still remains a worthwhile and honest drama that is able to portray the 
many dilemmas a family often must go through. While a few moments seemed 
to strain for melodrama, they were able to look like prime examples of 
unstrained subtlety compared to a film opening on the same exact day, 
"Patch Adams," which was shameless in its quest for "heartwarming" 
(read: superficial) emotions. As said before, "Stepmom" is nowhere near 
as strong as "One True Thing," but the several top-notch performances and 
scenes were able to raise it above the level of mediocrity.
           - Copyright 1998 by Dustin Putman
             Dustin
Putman's Film Reviews >

Author
Michael Redman
Once upon a time, back probably sometime before the invention of the wheel,
the way it worked was that a man and woman married, had children, stayed
together until one died and then maybe the survivor remarried. For those
too young to remember this prehistoric era, these were called nuclear families.
Then the nuclear family melted down. For a number of reasons -- lifespans
increased, life became easier and a "work partner" was less important,
expectations of remaining in love heightened, family members went their
separate ways during each day and grew apart -- divorce rates soared. The old
style family complete with the original mother and father is a rarity.
Now we have relationship units that would have been seen as oddities a few
decades ago. The most common of these are situations where children have "new"
mommies and daddies and "old" mommies and daddies. Just because this is
widespread doesn't mean it's easy. Although it's been going on for years,
people are still trying to figure out how it works.
Luke (Ed Harris), father of two children, has a new girlfriend, Isabel (Julia
Roberts). This doesn't sit well with his ex-wife Jackie (Susan Sarandon). Not
only is Isabel much younger, gorgeous and a fashion photographer, but she's
attempting to form a parental relationship with Jackie's kids.
The kids, Anna (Jena Malone) and Ben (Liam Aiken), don't take very well to the
new situation either. Anna tells her teacher that her parents are getting back
together. Ben promises his mom "I'll hate her if you want me to," and creates
a magic potion to cause Isabel to sleep for 1,000 years. Jackie actively
sabotages Isabel's efforts to bond even to the point of refusing to allow her
to take Anna to a rock concert and then taking her, herself.
The parents have important news for each other. Luke is going to ask Isabel to
marry him. Jackie has cancer and may be dying. The combination of these two
announcements changes the dynamics of the various relationships. Isabel
officially becomes a part of the family and Jackie wants to put everything in order.
Even with these motivations the two women bump heads over just about
everything. When Anna has problems with her junior high school boyfriend, the
mothers give opposite advice. Every time the women are together, sparks fly.
The movie begins at a snail's pace and takes a long time to reach speed.
Although it's important to take time to establish situations and characters,
the first half creeps by. By the latter half the story reaches its pace and
pulls you in. There are some truly well-done bits towards the end but it takes
a while to get there.
Director Chris Columbus attempts to create a film that touches the audience
and it works on some levels. Unfortunately many scenes come across as
manipulative rather than real. The old Motown songs sound great but they've
become a cliched cinematic shortcut. Movies where one of the main characters
has a fatal illness are often cop-outs for the more difficult task of
demonstrating real emotions. What if Jackie and Isabel had to co-parent
without the easy plot solution of cancer?
Although the film's focus is on the women, more screen time for Luke would
have made for a fuller look at the family. We don't know much about him other
than he seems to be a nice guy and cares about his children and the women. Oh
yeah, he is obviously very successful at whatever it is he does. He pays for a
spacious city apartment for him and Isabel and a luxurious country house for
Jackie and supports both women when neither works. He's also gone a lot, both
from the family and the movie.
Both women turn in top notch jobs. Sarandon is has a history of fine
performances and is one of the several actresses who have been casted as
sensual older women in recent years. As the baby boomers age, so do their film
stars. Fortunately now they continue to get juicy roles. Roberts has shown
that she is capable of doing good work and she does so here.
Harris has a warm presence and comes across as a real person with what little
time he has.
The kids are a mixed bag. Malone seems like a real person but rarely exhibits
more than sadness or anger. Aiken is the proverbial cute as a button, stealing
every scene that he's in. He looks like a living Japanese anime cartoon
character and is difficult to resist. It's too bad that he is about as
three-dimensional as those cartoons. Ben's extreme cuteness provides comic
relief but detracts from the authenticity of the film.
Some aspects of the movie are very effective. Isabel and Jackie's evolving
relationship feels authentic. It doesn't progress in the stereotypical linear
fashion that we see in less accomplished films. They dislike each other, grow
a little closer, backslide and then get closer again. Something like real life.
There is some unexpected dialog. When Luke finds out that Jackie has cancer,
he gives her the all-too-common line, "It should have been me instead of you."
But then she nods in agreement.
This film gets inside you. Some of it is real and you'll cry. But after you
think about it, you'll feel guilty about responding to some of the cheaper
manipulation. It didn't have to be that way.
(Michael Redman has written this column for, oh, about 23 years or so and
wonders why the older man and younger woman combination is so popular in
Hollywood films today. Email theories to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 12/30/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures
 Director:  Chris Columbus
 Writer:  Gigi Levangie and Jessie Nelson & Steven Rogers &
Karen Leigh Hopkins and Ron Bass, story by Gigi Levangie
 Cast: Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon, Ed Harris, Jena
Malone, Liam Aiken, Lynn Whitfield, Darrel Larson, Mary
Louise Wilson
   The oldest theme in the books is: boy meets girl, boy loses
girl, boy gets girl.  "Stepmom" capitalizes on this but with a
notable variation.  Boy loses girl, boy meets girl, girl hates
girl, girl likes girl.  Everything else about "Stepmom" runs its
course without a single mutation.  In a movie that's directed
and edited in a compulsively conventional manner suitable for
afternoon TV, Chris Columbus helms a dramatization of a
screenplay credited to five (count 'em) writers, a movie that
looks every bit like one penned by a committee.  Disjointed,
loaded with tired expressions and disconcerting exchanges,
"Stepmom" seems unable even to jerk tears from its targeted
audience of women who must be as tired of disease-of-the-
week pieces as the United States is of impeachment
hearings.
   Director Columbus has already proved his ability to deal
with stories about kids ("Home Alone") and about women's
issues ("Mrs. Doubtfire") but is not likely this time to approach
the well-deserved box office that those features received. 
Exploiting a theme as ancient as those explored by
Greek tragedies like "Electra," Columbus portrays the strife
that overcomes a family when daddy Luke (Ed Harris)
divorces mother Jackie (Susan Sarandon) and moves in with
the much younger Isabel (Julia Roberts).  Though Isabel
knows every rock song ever played and even bribes Luke's
two children with a Golden Retriever puppy, Luke's kids Anna
(Jena Malone) and Ben (Liam Aiken) treat her with contempt.
She is the meddler who has allegedly broken up the family,
exiling the very capable and loving Jackie and putting the
youngsters in the hands of a career woman who can't cook
and has no experience whatever with the care and nurturing
of children.  If you guess that by the picture's conclusion
Isabel will become a fully condoned member of the
household, you're telepathic.  And if you prophesy that the
beloved Jackie, considered by all to be the Earth Mother
herself, will suffer a recurrence of a deadly cancer, you're
positively clairvoyant.  
   The dialogue is fatuous throughout, featuring sentences
that you'd never hear in real life but have listened to all too
often in movies of this sort.  The women seem almost to
enjoy their catfights, lashing at each other with declarations
only a little more novel than 12-year-old Anna's, "I don't
have to listen to you...you're not my mother."  It gets even
better.  When the women ultimately reconcile as you vaguely
suspected they would, Jackie lovingly tells her former enemy,
"I have her past, and you can have her future."
   There are all too many cute scenes of the whining kids,
although Liam Aiken's Ben is less insufferable in his rejection
of his stepmom than his adolescent sister.  But performances
are fine all around, with Julia Roberts looking good as a
photographer of fashion models who absurdly gives up her
fast-track job to be more of a mom to her future stepchildren,
but it's disconcerting to watch her in a discreetly
romantic bedroom scene with Ed Harris--who is in real-life
seventeen years her senior and look five years beyond that. 
For an edgier, more mature and imaginative film about the
hostility between child and dad, take in Paul Schrader's
movie "Affliction," which features an Oscar-caliber
performance by Nick Nolte.

Author
Greg King
Those who believe that Hollywood doesn't create strong roles
for female actors anymore should look closely at the new film Stepmom.
This emotionally charged drama gives two popular actresses an
opportunity to sink their teeth into a pair of strongly drawn, juicy,
challenging and interesting female roles that move beyond the normal
stereotypes.
Jackie Harrison (Susan Sarandon) is a divorced mother who is
still protective and possessive of her two children.  When her former
husband Luke (the always solid Ed Harris), a workaholic lawyer,
settles into a relationship with fashion photographer Isabel (Julia
Roberts), she feels resentment and hurt.  Isabel is unprepared for the
instant demands of temporary motherhood thrust upon her.  The
unforgiving Jackie is quick to point out her shortcomings, and
constantly belittles her efforts in front of the two children.  When
Jackie is diagnosed with terminal cancer, though, the two women are
forced to bury their enmity towards each other and establish a united
front for the sake of the children.  Out of bitterness slowly grows an
unexpected friendship.
It would be too easy to dismiss this manipulative tear jerker
as a melodramatic "women's film", but that is both patronising and
condescending.  Stepmom is a well acted, deftly written, entertaining,
and broadly appealing drama that explores some important themes, with
a mixture of compassion, insight and humour.
Five writers laboured over this poignant drama about families,
divorce, the love and pain of relationships, but it is Oscar winner
Ron Bass (Rain Man, Waiting To Exhale, etc) who gives the multi-
layered material its warmth and honesty.
Sarandon and Roberts also co-produced the film, and their
empathy for the characters and its themes is evident in their sterling
performances.  Sarandon has the meatier role, one that allows her to
run the gamut of emotions, which she does with style.  She also says
more with inflections and her facial expressions than most actresses
say with pages of dialogue.  She is excellent, bringing an innate
intelligence and compassion to this wonderful role, and her
beautifully nuanced performance should ensure she starts front-runner
to win a well-deserved second Oscar.  Roberts' solid and emotionally
rich performance is something of a stretch, and should also come as a
revelation to those who have previously dismissed her as a light
weight actress of little depth.
As the self-absorbed and resentful Anna, Jena Malone (who
played the young Jodie Foster in Contact) captures all the pain,
confusion and anger of children caught in the bitter cross fire of a
divorce, and delivers a quite mature performance.  Liam Aiken (from
The Object Of My Affection, etc) is heartbreakingly cute and
unaffectedly natural as younger son Ben.  In one eloquent scene in
which Jackie is sharing some time with her two children, he turns to
her and says: "If you really want me to, mum, I'll hate her."  Harris
is fine and restrained, and brings dignity to his smaller role.
Director Christopher Columbus is better known for his slapstick
comedies of the juvenile Home Alone variety.  But he also brought a
sympathetic touch and compassion to films like Nine Months and the
hugely successful Mrs Doubtfire.  Those qualities are very much in
evidence in Stepmom, which is also touchingly dedicated to the memory
of his late mother.  
**** 
greg king 
http://www.netau.com.au/gregking
