Title
Review for Switchback (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Berardinelli
     A blizzard of exceptional proportions is bearing down on Colorado, 
threatening to close all routes in and out of the Rockies while burying 
the Centennial State beneath feet of snow.  Sound familiar?  Of course, 
it's a coincidence that SWITCHBACK, which uses this critical plot 
device, is opening in the wake of a mammoth late-October snow storm that 
crippled the American midwest, but it's great timing.  Paramount 
Pictures couldn't have come up with a better release date if they'd 
planned it.
     A baby-sitter caring for a young child is murdered, then the boy is 
kidnapped from his affluent parents' home.  A doctor-turned-drifter 
wanders through Texas, trying to hitch a ride to Salt Lake City.  An ex-
railroad worker driving around in a cadillac (with an interior decorated 
by nude pin-ups) offers him a ride.  A serial killer strikes in 
Amarillo, where the current sheriff is embroiled in a pitched battle for 
re-election against a powerful opponent.  A mysterious FBI agent arrives 
claiming to be on the killer's trail while he's really pursuing his own 
agenda.  These are the diverse strands that screenwriter Jeb Stuart 
weaves together into the tapestry of SWITCHBACK, his taut, intelligent 
directorial debut.
     Unlike most thrillers, SWITCHBACK doesn't move at a breakneck pace 
that camouflages flaws by ceaseless action and non-stop edge-of-the-seat 
moments.  Instead, this film progresses at a more leisurely pace, 
allowing us time to get to know each of the four main characters:  Danny 
Glover's Bob Goodall, the cadillac driver; Jared Leto's Lane Dixon, the 
wandering ex-doctor; Dennis Quaid's Frank La Cross, the FBI agent; and 
R. Lee Ermey's Sheriff Buck Olmstead.  By the time the final reel 
unspools, we've spent time with each of these men and have come to 
understand a measure of what makes them tick. 
     That's not to say that there's no tension in SWITCHBACK.  Stuart, 
who wrote THE FUGITIVE and is helming a motion picture for the first 
time, crafts the movie in a fashion that builds tautness gradually.  As 
the snow storm intensifies and the roads become more treacherous, we 
have a sense of impending doom and death.  Ice, snow, mountainous 
heights, and racing trains all contribute to SWITCHBACK's growing sense 
of unease, which culminates in an ending that, sadly, is all-too-
routine.  But, while the finale is anticlimactic (and even a little 
silly), it's easily the weakest aspect of an otherwise well-realized 
narrative.
     While SWITCHBACK doesn't boast any "A-line" stars, all of the roles 
are well-cast and each of the performers does a laudable job.  Danny 
Glover (last seen floundering in GONE FISHIN'), one of Hollywood's most 
likable actors, plays the kind of helpful, cheerful character that he is 
often associated with.  Dennis Quaid (most recently looking scruffy in 
GANG RELATED) portrays Frank with a quiet intensity that betrays the 
anguish and desperation lurking just beneath his icy demeanor.  Jared 
Leto (PREFONTAINE) adds the right note of ambiguity to Lane to make us 
uncertain about his sincerity and intentions.  But, as good as these 
three are, the scene-stealer is R. Lee Ermey (PREFONTAINE), whose 
Sheriff Buck Olmstead takes over the screen as one of the year's most 
memorable supporting characters.  Ermey's performance as the moral, 
practical, cynical law man is nothing short of superb.
     SWITCHBACK avoids many of the staple aspects of serial killer 
movies.  First and foremost, this is not a whodunit.  While I have gone 
to great pains not to reveal the killer's identity in this review, it's 
not much of a secret.  There are enough clues littered around that it's 
possible to finger him twenty minutes into the film, and the truth is 
explicitly revealed before the halfway point.  Secondly, Stuart 
successfully avoids turning the picture into a routine chase.  In fact, 
for much of the movie, it's not clear exactly how everything is going to 
fit together in the end.  Only as the climax slowly, inexorably 
approaches does everything become clear.  Aside from the obligatory 
nature of the ending, if there's one complaint I have about SWITCHBACK, 
it's that there are times when the characters seem too smart -- but 
that's infinitely better than the alternative.
     Like THE GAME and KISS THE GIRLS, SWITCHBACK features an 
elaborately-structured contest between the hero and the villain.  Of 
these three movies, this one is the best, because it takes the time to 
develop its characters and doesn't force-feed us increasingly difficult-
to-swallow plot twists.  As the title implies, the storyline for 
SWITCHBACK does feature a few unexpected curves, but it doesn't try to 
dazzle us with narrative contortions.  In the end, the film is almost 
more disturbing than it is exhausting, but you'll leave the theater with 
a sense of grim satisfaction.  For SWITCHBACK, Jeb Stuart can be 
credited with a job well done.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Inauspicious beginnings have doomed many a film.  So it is with
first time director Jeb Stuart's SWITCHBACK.  Stuart seems to believe
that films must telegraph their punches or else they will lose the
audience.
     SWITCHBACK opens with the classic a-stranger-is-in-the-house scene
so popular in slasher movies and cheap thrillers.  And to make sure
that he hooks the audience, Stuart, who wrote the script for SWITCHBACK
as well as much better films such as THE FUGITIVE, carefully includes a
child endangerment aspect to the opening.  Finally, to make sure that
he has everyone's complete attention, he switches next to a gruesome
scene in a far away motel of a pair of bright red, sliced bodies in a
bathtub.
     The movie stars Dennis Quaid as rogue FBI agent Frank LaCrosse.
Frank spends the movie on the lam from his own bureau while he tracks
down a serial killer.  Although the FBI thinks it already has the
killer, Frank remains convinced that the motel killings were the old
serial killer's handiwork.  Like many movie killers, this one has a
personal vendetta against Frank, the agent who was in charge.  Of
course, the killer has genius tendencies as well as tremendous good
luck.
     Quaid, who frequently has trouble demonstrating much dynamic range
as actor, approaches his role in this film with a singleness of
purpose.  His vision of an angry agent affords only one expression, a
hangdog frown that looks like someone suffering from constant gas.  And
his terse elocution borders on parody.  Absent his performance and with
a director more adept at staging scenes, the movie would have been much
better.  (When in doubt, Stuart calls out the stuntmen to hang off of
some cliff in a snowy wilderness so as to distract our attention from
the problems in the storyline.)
     The supporting cast almost carries the show.  The best is R. Lee
Ermey (the police captain in SEVEN) who plays Buck Olmstead, a cagey
Amarillo, Texas sheriff, who becomes Frank's lone supporter.  "He told
the truth, and once you tell the truth, everything else is just cheap
whiskey," Buck says with homespun wisdom about his belief in Frank's
veracity.  Easily the most likable character in the story, Buck is
willing to put his career on the line to assist his friends.
     While the FBI chases their own agent, who in turns searches for
the elusive killer, a parallel story has the film's only two visible
suspects driving around in the snow.  Jared Leto, playing ex-doctor
Lane Dixon, has a scene in which he cuts open a man's throat to save
his life almost exactly like the beginning scene in PLAYING GOD.  Lane
actually dropped out while he was an intern, but his skills with a
knife makes him an instant suspect.
     One night Lane makes what appears to be a bad decision and hitches
a ride in a '77 Caddy.  Bob Goodall, the car's owner, has decorated
every inch of his automobile with pictures of naked women -- even the
seat belts are covered.  Bob explains how he designed nuddie upholstery
so that he could slip a picture out when he got tired of one of his
"honies" and put in a new picture.  Danny Glover, who has a penchant
for bad film choices, GONE FISHIN' being his most recent disaster,
plays Bob with wild eyes and great glee.  Bob is a suspect because he
loves to threaten people with his knife, and because he acts too
friendly.  Then again, one learns in films of this caliber never to
discount the minor character or even the one not yet seen as the
killer.
     SWITCHBACK runs too long at 2:01.  It is rated R for violence,
profanity, and pinup pictures.  The film would be fine for most
teenagers.

Author
Ben Hoffman
The script for SwitchBack was written when Jeb Stuart was in
college, long before he wrote DIEHARD and THE FUGITIVE.   There is
no question about his talent.  Still, the story for SwitchBack
reads like a million others, convoluted and unnecessarily
complicated.
Essentially, it is the story of a serial killer, Bob Goodall,
(Danny Glover) who is being tracked by an FBI man, Frank LaCrosse.
We are never told why Goodall is engaged in his killings, only that
he has killed some 16 people.   Not only has he thrown the police
off his track, he has managed to make them look for someone else.
However, he has not fooled LaCrosse.   When Goodall becomes aware
of that, he kidnaps Lacrosse's  seven-year-old son in the hope that
the father will lay off.  On the contrary, this incites the father
to double his efforts.
Early in the film, Goodall meets up and saves the life of Jared
Leto (Lane Dixon) a medical student dropout who has become a
drifter.  For the rest of the film they hang out together.   The
other interesting character is that of Sheriff Olmstead (R Lee
Ermey) who originally is antagonistic to the FBI stepping in on his
case but eventually becomes an ally.
What value the film has is almost entirely in the spectacularly
beautiful photography of the snow-covered Rocky Mountains with the
train snaking through. That is the magnificent work of Oliver Wood.
In addition, there are some hair-raising fights with both Goodall
and LaCrosse battling it out on some kind of snowplow that swings
perpendicularly away from the train.  Still, the film does not lend
itself to any great acting and so everyone is quite adequate
without particularly having to shine..

Author
Scott Renshaw
     By the time Dennis Quaid, the ostensible star of SWITCHBACK, makes
his first appearance at about the 22-minute mark, you may find yourself
wondering why he bothered.  After all, writer/director Jeb Stuart has
already set up a fairly promising pair of parallel story lines.  The first
finds Amarillo, Texas sheriff Buck Olmstead (R. Lee Ermey) facing a
hotly-contested election battle just as a brutal double homicide is
discovered at a motel in his jurisdiction.  As Olmstead begins his
investigation, we also meet the two men who come to be our prime suspects.
Lane Dixon (Jared Leto) is an enigmatic young hitchhiker; Bob Goodall
(Danny Glover) is the jovial motorist who offers Lane a ride from Texas to
his Utah destination.  All the necessary conflicts seem to be in place --
the internal struggle of Olmstead over the clash between good politics and
good police work, and the external struggle as one of the two travelers
eventually becomes villain to the other's protagonist.
     But then Quaid shows up as grimly determined FBI agent Frank
LaCrosse.  LaCrosse is certain that the Amarillo murders are the work of a
serial killer he has been tracking for nearly two years.  He's not
supposed to be tracking him any more -- according to the Bureau, they've
got their man -- but LaCrosse has a very important reason for believing
otherwise.  Two months earlier, LaCrosse's own son was kidnapped by the
killer, and the boy has yet to turn up anywhere.  LaCrosse knows his
killer's work, and he knows that the man is still out there somewhere
trying to continue their game.
     It wouldn't be fair to reduce everything that's wrong with SWITCHBACK
to Quaid's presence, but it's a pretty good place to start.  There's a
reason LaCrosse feels like an intruder in the narrative instead of its
vital center:  as a dramatic actor, Dennis Quaid possesses exactly one
facial expression and one vocal intonation.  We can tell LaCrosse is
determined because his face is a perpetual tight-jawed, sourpuss pucker;
we can tell he's grim because every word comes out in an Eastwood-esque
rasp.  A more flexible performer might have given weight to the character,
pulling the audience into his haunted intensity, making SWITCHBACK _his_
film.  Quaid merely looks annoyed and slightly constipated.  It's tough to
become emotionally invested in a character's turmoil when it looks like
all he really needs is a big bowl of bran flakes.
     Even without Quaid, it doesn't appear that SWITCHBACK would have
stayed on course.  The early scenes between Leto and Glover have a lively
energy, building our curiosity over which man -- the taciturn kid or his
gregarious benefactor -- is the real threat.  Unfortunately, Stuart tips
his hand far too early in the game, both through the pitch of the
individual performances and the facts he chooses to reveal.  Once the
mystery of the killer's identity is dispatched, the interaction between
Leto and Glover becomes stale and predictable.
     In fact, "stale and predictable" describes the direction that
SWITCHBACK takes in general, falling back on far-too-common Hollywood
devices like cats jumping out of nowhere, a climactic fistfight on board a
freight train, and edgy law enforcement agents.  It's too bad Stuart
wasn't willing to spend more time with Sheriff Olmstead, far and away the
most interesting and appealing character in the film.  Played with
atypical restraint by R. Lee Ermey, he's a wonderful, unconventional hero
who seems genuinely comfortable accepting the consequences of acting on
his convictions.  A film focusing on the Olmstead would have signaled a
film-maker willing to take a few risks with his casting and story-telling.
Instead, Stuart places his trust in a "name" star who can't carry the
material.  Maybe next time he'll throw away that one crucial page in
the script, the one where the grimly determined FBI agent wanders onto the
scene to muck up a perfectly good story.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The second serial-killer thriller of the month is just awful.  Oh,
it starts deceptively okay, with a handful of intriguing characters and
some solid location work.  After a baby-sitter gets gutted in the suit-
ably spooky someone's-in-the-house prologue, parallel stories unfold,
the first involving a Texas sheriff (R. Lee Emery), a gruesome double
murder, and the arrival of a morose FBI agent (Dennis Quaid) on the eve
of voting for the local lawman's reelection.  The second pairs a hitch-
hiker (Jared Leto) with a friendly former railroad worker (Danny
Glover).  They're headed west, toward the Rockies and away from the
murder scene.  Which one is the killer?  Well, it doesn't really matter,
'cause when writer/first-time director Jeb Stuart (DIE HARD) finally
spills the beans, you won't take his choice seriously anyway.  The whole
thing goes south about an hour in, with the tale taking hairpin turns
that I certainly couldn't follow.  And through the whole thing there's
Quaid, playing with the most intense monotony this side of Steven Sea-
gal.  I guess I'm glad that I didn't walk out-- there's some nice train
stuff at the end and a fun nod to DR. STRANGELOVE.

Author
James Sanford
SWITCHBACK
Directed by Jeb Stuart
 If you're one of those people who just can't get their fill of watching
cars skidding around on icy roads or people sliding down snow-covered hills,
you'll want to hurry up and see "Switchback," a tepid would-be chiller that
offers no shortage of perilous wintry situations. But don't be surprised if
the rest of the film leaves you cold as well: "Switchback" is messily
written and surprisingly poorly acted, considering the leads are Dennis
Quaid and Danny Glover. Quaid, stuck in a one-note role as a renegade FBI
agent, has no opportunities to exercise his rogueish charm, while Glover is
woefully out-of-place pretending to be a man of mystery. Only Jared Leto (of
TV's "My So-Called Life") seems to strike the right note, playing a
hitchhiker with a secret.
 Like every fifth movie these days, "Switchback" deals with a serial killer,
and yes, he's brazen enough to send self-congratulatory letters to the Feds.
That gets Quaid's goat, and he takes it upon himself to personally track
down and nail the murderer (why he's so determined to find the maniac will
remain a secret, just in case you end up having to watch this some night at
3a.m. on HBO). Meanwhile, seemingly kind-hearted Glover travels through the
West in a white Cadillac decorated with pictures of nude women. The car
freaks out picked-up passenger Leto and probably won't win any applause from
Gloria Steinem either. For some odd reason, a trail of blood seems to follow
the duo around, and director-screenwriter Jeb Stuart obviously hopes you're
on pins and needles wondering which man is responsible for the string of
stabbings. But, just in case you're not, Stuart casually reveals the guilty
party halfway through the movie, leaving the audience to wait for Quaid to
finally catch up to the killer. For the most part, the pursuit is a yawn a
minute, leading to a climax that would be laughable if it weren't so dull.
 Much of "Switchback" turns on outrageous coincidences and pure luck, as
when someone just happens to enter a room just in time to overhear a crucial
conversation, or someone just happens to look in the right direction at the
right time and spot a major clue. Aside from a few well-executed stunts, the
movie's only notable for being the second film within a month to feature an
emergency tracheotomy in a public place. "Playing God" had the operation
being performed in a nightclub; here, Leto saves a choking victim by doing
the procedure on the counter of a roadside diner.

Author
Berge Garabedian
This film is Jeb Stuart's big-screen directorial debut. Before this, he
wrote 48 HOURS (7.5/10), DIE HARD (8/10), LOCK UP (7.5/10), and THE
FUGITIVE (7.5/10), among several other solid scripts.
PLOT:
This movie is cut into two stories, which alternatively switch back and
forth from one another (hence-Switchback). The first has an extremely
serious FBI agent (Quaid) tracking down a serial killer, while the
second deals with a hitchhiker (Leto) and his transportation savior
(Glover) trekking across the snowy mountains on their way to Utah. The
identity of the killer is what engulfs the rest of the movie.
CRITIQUE:
Overly long, barely interesting retread of a dozen other serial killer
movies, this picture offers us as much excitement as Dennis Quaid's
stiff demeanor (Dennis might think that his cold look made him look
serious, but really it just made him boring.) This film was interesting
at first, as you try to figure out who the killer and/or his
motivations might be, but eventually (after the first hour or so), you
start to realize that this explanation will not come until the very
end, and by then, you just don't care anymore. I think I see what the
writer was trying to do here, in that he wanted to keep the audience
guessing throughout the entire movie, but unfortunately, there aren't
enough effective scenes, action sequences, or possible suspects to
really keep it interesting for that duration. In the end, you're just
begging for the damn thing to finish!
And even after its conclusion, I still found myself wondering about the
actual motivations of the serial killer, which were never really
explained, and/or why so much of the story focused on the local sheriff
and not on a more interesting character like Quaid's wife or something.
On top of all that, the typical Hollywood sugar-pie ending further
impressed this script's unoriginal nature into my negative point of
view. 
In regards to the acting, I would have to give Danny Glover some points
for taking on this kooky role, but take plenty others away from Quaid
who just hasn't been able to punch in a decent acting gig since he gave
that piss-awful over-performance as Jerry Lee Lewis in GREAT BALLS OF
FIRE! back in 1989. Maybe he should give up the day job, and allow his
wife Meg "the cutest human being on the face of this Earth" Ryan to
support their family. The man's facial expression didn't change once
during this entire picture. 
The atmosphere of the film was actually well manufactured, and the
sights were pretty to behold, but that would be it in regards to praise
for this film. Other than that, I suppose one could get a little into
the movie, if one were really a mystery buff, but even then, the movie
just drags, and drags, and drags. No extreme graphic violence either.
Now if you're looking for an excellent serial killer mystery with some
great action, suspense and atmosphere, pick up David Fincher's
wonderfully rainy SEVEN (8.5/10) starring the ever-loveable Brad Pitt
and Morgan Freeman.
Little Known Facts: 
Originally titled GOING WEST IN AMERICA and GOING WEST.
Dennis Quaid is the younger brother of fellow actor Randy Quaid.
Danny Glover stands 6"4, graduated from San Francisco State College,
and received an honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts Degree from San
Francisco State University on May 31, 1997. His film debut was in 1979,
in the film ESCAPE FROM ALCATRAZ.
---------------------------------------
Visit JoBlo's Movie Emporium
http://surf.to/joblo
---------------------------------------
(c) 1998 Berge Garabedian

Author
Jamie Peck
Paramount / 2:02 / 1997 / R (violence, language, nudie pics)
Cast: Dennis Quaid; Danny Glover; Jared Leto; R. Lee Ermey; Ted Levine; 
William Fichtner 
Director: Jeb Stuart 
Screenplay: Jeb Stuart 
This season needs another serial killer movie like Kathie Lee Gifford 
needs more public devastation. But lo and behold, here comes 
"SwitchBack," and fast on the heels of such stalker fare as "Kiss the 
Girls" and "I Know What You Did Last Summer." But "SwitchBack" is an 
undoubtedly weak genre entry, as the material it covers is old and 
tired, and the filmmakers rarely sustain enough energy to make any of 
the proceedings interesting. 
"SwitchBack" opens with the murder of a babysitter and the abduction of 
the young child she's watching. We learn late in the game that the kid 
belongs to FBI agent Frank LaCrosse (Dennis Quaid), and that the 
kidnapper/killer is a nameless fiend that LaCrosse has been tracking 
across the country for quite a while. He is promptly removed from the 
case, but this conflict of interest doesn't keep him from offering 
pursuit. LaCrosse's most recent trek takes him to a blood-soaked hotel 
room in Amarillo, Texas, where the local sheriff (R. Lee Ermey) is torn 
between his re-election campaign and helping his new ally catch his man. 
In a related aside, former railway worker Bob Goodall (Danny Glover) is 
cruising through the snowbound west in his pinup-plastered (even on the 
seatbelts) El Dorado. Along the way, he picks up -- and subsequently 
saves the life of -- hitchhiking loner Lane Dixon (Jared Leto). This 
tangent isn't a random one, as Bob or Lane will end up either holding a 
piece of the puzzle or turn out to be the killer himself. Or is the 
villain in fact LaCrosse, only pretending to be after the cold-hearted
murderer he knows so much about. 
In a sense, that's half of the basic problem with "SwitchBack." For its 
first hour, the movie presents evidence that any of these three men 
could be the perpetrator, so we're given little insight into who they 
are, likely for fear that we'll learn too much too fast and therefore be 
able to make the proper deduction. But "SwitchBack" then decides to 
explicitly reveal the killer's identity at its midpoint, and the 
following contradictory character motivations muddle both the pacing and 
the generation of suspense. 
Some of the acting is a burdensome area as well, probably because the 
performers were instructed to build personas that are the exact opposite 
of their true selves. What is Danny Glover doing here, grinning and 
yeehawing his way through the messy plot? And Dennis Quaid? (That 
monotone -- stop it!) Ermey is solid in a supporting role that's more 
interesting than the two leads thrown together, but the charismatic Leto 
(Claire Danes' object of affection in "My So-Called Life") is a 
scene-stealer tried and true. 
>From a material standpoint, "SwitchBack" is pretty empty. But even when 
first-time director Jeb Stuart (who wrote "The Fugitive" and "Die Hard") 
doesn't know what to do, he knows what he wants it to look like -- the 
movie provides some great visuals. The set-on-a-train climax looks good 
(even though the action is illogical), and the beautiful, crisp 
cinematography captures the Rockies in all of their icy splendor. Still, 
that's not enough to turn a lump of coal into a diamond, and more than 
the movie's look will end up leaving you cold. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1

Author
Steve Kong
A hitchhiker, a guy in a Cadillac, a sheriff running for election, and a
FBI agent. A strange mix of people and for the first half of Switchback a
great character study the film spins of these people. The writer and
director, Jeb Stuart, creates a story about these four men and for the
first hour and even past that, we get to look at these characters, see what
they are doing, and get to know how they would react in different situations.
The hitchhiker, Lane (Jared Leto) is a former doctor who left his
profession to travel west. He meets up with a guy, Bob (Danny Glover), who
drives a white Cadillac that has seats upholstered with nude pinups. Bob
was a former railroad worker who is now travelling west to return his
Cadillac to a friend. These two befriend each other on this trip.
In a Texas city where elections are being held a murder just occurred. The
current sheriff Buck Olmstead (R. Lee Ermey) is tasked with solving the
case while looking good to the public. Soon arrives a lone FBI agent, Frank
La Cross (Dennis Quaid), who helps Buck with the case.
What we find out is that La Cross is working on a serial killer case that
follows closely to the murder in Olmstead's town. But, does La Cross have
an ulterior motive for his work in this case? As the movie unfolds we see
that either Lane, the hitchhiker, or Bob, the guy in the Cadillac is the
serial killer. And the serial killer has a game that he wants to play with
La Cross.
Though this sounds like another whodunit mystery film in the vein of SE7EN
or Kiss The Girls, it's not. The killer's identity is revealed a little
after halfway through the film. And from this point the movie becomes a
taut thriller.
The performances throughout the film are great. R. Lee Ermey gives the best
performance of the film, stealing all the scenes he's in. (I sat watching
Ermey wondering where I've seen him before, and if you're going to wonder
the same, I've seen him in his memorable role in SE7EN.) Quaid gives a good
performance as the tough Frank La Cross who is desperate on the trail of
the serial killer. Jared Leto is good as the doctor-hitchhiker. And Glover
is the all around happiness-guy of the film. He is the guy that smiles
throughout the film and we find trust in him.
The only part of this film that bothered me was the lead up to the end that
comes off as somewhat thrown together and feels a bit unbelievable. But,
this is not a big deal because the rest of the film is so strong. The film
runs a bit over two hours, but at no time did I find myself looking at my
watch. This film moves pretty quickly and is very enjoyable.
This is the directorial debut for Jeb Stuart who wrote Die Hard and The
Fugitive. And it is a great debut for him. This is a must see film. It is a
taut tense thriller that entertains for its running time. The performance
of R. Lee Ermey is definitely one to look for.
