Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 2 (1989)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Okay, Cinema Philosophy Time:  Can a film with an abysmal script,
unremarkable photography, reams of shoot-outs and chase scenes, wind-up
villains, outrageous plot blunders, gratuitous advertising (how many Subway
Shops can *you* spot in this picture?) and a totally predictable climax be
saved by a good rapport between the two main characters, and a basis for said
relationship that overshadows the pedestrian film?
     I mean, I like watching Gibson and Glover when they get together.  I
particularly like the concept for their relationship: Gibson plays a cop who is
right on -- I mean *right* on -- the edge; he's a finely-honed, somewhat
demented (at least in risk-taking) fighter.  However, he would have burned
himself out (or killed himself) long ago, if it weren't for his friends, i.e.
his partner (Danny Glover) and his partner's family, who've adopted him and
given him that lifeline that anchors him to reality.  Their affection for him,
and his for them, works.  Unfortunately, that constitutes about 15% of the
movie.  The rest of it has to be one of the lamest excuses for an action film
since FATAL BEAUTY.
     Oh, Lord, where to start?  The villains are drug-dealers, sadists *and*
racist South African officials.  (I'll bet the head honcho was originally
Joseph Goebbels, Jr., but they decided to cut that bit out to save running time
for the action sequences.)  What these people are able to get away with under
the aegis of Diplomatic Immunity is unbelievable.  (Even under the Bush
administration.  Hell, even under the Quayle administration.)  Characters are
introduced and then killed left and right to get G & G (and the audience) into
the "Waste Their Ass" mood -- it's pretty transparent.  And if that wasn't
enough, the main henchman comes out of the blue to say that he killed Gibson's
character's wife before LETHAL WEAPON!  Gee, why not have him responsible for
shooting down Korean Airlines Flight 007, or spitting on Jesus -- *really* give
Mel that excuse to Waste His Ass!
     Good points, besides the chemistry between The Guys?  Neat nail gun.
(Craftsman?)  The girl looks like Susan Dey with her own Wolfe tanning system.
And there are a few good lines.  Not enough to sustain the movie, though.
     My suggestion: see THE ABYSS.  It isn't a masterpiece, but I can still
remember what happened in it.  LETHAL WEAPON II has sort of faded from my
memory -- no doubt some sort of natural protection mechanism.

Author
Randy Parker
        With LETHAL WEAPON 2, Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, and director
Richard Donner have created a Hollywood rarity: a worthwhile sequel.
Although the movie doesn't quite live up to part one, it does succeed in
recreating the slick mix of humor, action, and character that made the
original a superior crime thriller and a $70 million hit at the box office.
Gibson and Glover are still teamed together as partners, bickering and
teasing one another like a long married husband and wife.  Gibson has
remained wild, daring, and cool under pressure, and Glover, as always,
finds himself reluctantly agreeing to his partner's crazy plans.  However,
since the first film, Gibson has become more stable; we no longer question
his will to live or fear that he's on the verge of exploding.  The
charismatic performances by Gibson and Glover help distinguish LETHAL
WEAPON 2 from other cop films.
        The movie finds the two detectives chasing down vicious drug
dealers while at the same time protecting the man whose testimony is
crucial to the investigation.  The plot is pedestrian and full of holes,
but who cares when we're having so much fun?  As the key witness in the
investigation, Joe Pesci delivers an inspired comic performance with his
grating personality and nasal-voice.  Between Pesci's constant whining and
Gibson and Glover's playful rapport, the movie has plenty of laughs.
        The two leads play off each other especially well when Gibson
discovers that Glover has spent the night sitting on the toilet ... and for
good reason.  The villains have boobytrapped it with explosives.  Glover
dare not stand up, let alone flush.  In another clever scene, Glover
creates a diversion for Gibson at the South African Consulate by pretending
he wants to emigrate to South Africa.  "But you're BLACK!" responds the
horrified immigration official.  "I want to join my brothers in their
struggle against oppression!" Glover snaps back as he starts a big
commotion to distract the security guards.  Equally amusing is Gibson
returning home to his messy trailer and discovering (much to his dismay)
Pesci vacuuming and neatening up.
        LETHAL WEAPON 2 has one car chase too many, but otherwise it's an
exhilarating roller coaster ride of action and suspense.  The movie
maintains a high level of intensity from beginning to end.  The brutal
violence doesn't always mesh with the humor, but for the most part they
exist harmoniously side by side.  LETHAL WEAPON 2 has a large body count,
but it pushes all the right buttons to make us accept, and even root for,
the violence.
        Screenwriters Shane Black and Jeffrey Boam have blessed the movie
with despicable villains who are worthy of a James Bond film.  Joss Ackland
plays the Minister of the South African Consulate--a cold, murderous
criminal who hides behind his diplomatic immunity.  As his right-hand man,
Derrick O'Connor is equally deplorable, a heartless killer in his own
right.  These villains need not have been South Africans (in fact, the
movie could have done without its underdeveloped political undertones), but
their politics makes them all the more creepy.
        The only area where Donner and his cast come up short is in their
attempts to give the movie some substance and the characters some depth.
The film tries to develop Gibson's character, but its efforts are
superficial.  For example, to show that he has regained his ability to
love, the film throws in a superfluous affair between Gibson and Patsy
Kensit.  Their encounter is just window dressing, a feeble attempt at
character development.  Glover fares no better; his character development
is limited to one small plot strand about his daughter appearing in a
condom commercial.  The filmmakers should have known better than to worry
about making the characters complex; the movie is already overflowing with
big laughs and rousing action.

Author
William December Starr
     In answer to someone's query ("Is LETHAL WEAPON II really as bad as that
Starr guy says it is?"), a few people  have more or less recommended it, the
gist of their postings being that it was a lot like the first LETHAL WEAPON
only more so, so if you liked the first one you'd like the second one.
     Well, I sort of liked LETHAL WEAPON back when I rented and watched it
about a year ago.  It was kind of wahoo, but what the hell, the plot mostly
held together and I liked the haunted, desperate, crazed and seriously
depressed Riggs (Mel Gibson) and the contrast between him and the family man
Murtaugh (Danny Glover).
     So why didn't I like -- nay, why did I *detest* the sequel?  Lots of
reasons, most of which I won't go into here because (a) I want to keep this
short and (b) in order to accurately categorize them I'd have to see the damn
movie over again, and I'm not getting paid enough for this to do that.  So, the
bottom line ... by the numbers, I detested LETHAL WEAPON II because:
1. Of all the major events in the movie, virtually *none* of them
   could possibly have taken place in or near the City of Los Angeles,
   the State of California, the United States of America, or the planet
   Earth in or near the year AD 1989.
2. The creators, writers, producers etc. of this movie could not possibly
   *not* have known that the alleged story they were filming was
   completely incoherent, illogical, ridiculous, preposterous and a whole
   lot of other words too, yet they went ahead and shot it (not
   literally, alas), edited it, made thousands of copies of it, promoted
   it, distributed it and then -- and this is the part that's gotten me
   angry -- they foisted it off on me and conned me into paying them six
   dollars and investing two hours of my life under the mistaken
   impression that I was going to be cinematically told a *story*
3. The bottom line, and the reason I'm so ripped about this, is that the
   bastards *ripped me off*.  The promised me a *movie*, a story told
   in moving pictures and sounds. . . but all they gave me was a
   collection of about a hundred and fifty thousand pieces of 35mm
   celluloid spliced together and wound up on a reel.
[And, Special Bonus Point #4, Free With This Flame. . .]
4. The scum are *getting away with it*  If this was some dumb
   who-cares "The Deathstalking Blademaster Vs. The Lost Barbarian City
   of Glort-Splert, Part VII" flick that shows up in the city's
   lowest-grade theaters, plays for about a week and then goes
   straight into the video market, I wouldn't be so upset.  But this
   cinematic abortion is raking in money hand over fist, professional
   critics who should know better are giving it thumbs up instead of
   reserving it a place on their Ten Worst Films of 1989 lists, and
   the bastards who made this film, and everyone else who's in the
   movie business for no reason other than the love of money, are
   learning the Golden Lesson of LETHAL WEAPON II: 
--> Throw enough flash and glitter and slo-motion stuntwork and
--> cardboard villains -- the scummier the better -- at the audience
--> and they won't *care* whether it's garbage or not; they'll just
--> *beg* you to take their money away.
   And the film industry will move another step away from quality and
   innovation and another step towards recycled garbage and Lowest
   Common Denominator movies and. . . oh hell, you've already heard
   all this from people who really *care* about cinema, from Siskel 
   and Ebert (on their good days) and from Harlan Ellison, who on his
   worst day can outwrite and outreview anyone in the business, and
   from lots of others, and none of it makes any difference when the
   Fakers and the Takers (as opposed to the Makers) crank up their
   magic publicity machines and start harvesting the money.
   Look, if you want to see LETHAL WEAPON II, go see it.  Just don't
   say I didn't warn you.
-- 
William December Starr, Northeastern U. Class of '90 (Poly Sci/pre-law)
wdstarr%charon.local@charon.mit.edu  (If that doesn't work, try either
wdstarr%lynx@northeastern.edu or wdstarr@lynx.northeastern.edu)
