Title
Review for Anastasia (1997)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Tim Voon
Featuring the voices of: Meg Ryan, John Cusack, Kelsey Grammer, Angela
Lansbury, Christopher Lloyd, Hank Azaria, Bernadette Peters, Kirsten
Dunst
Directors:  Don Bluth, Gary Goldman
Producers: Don Bluth and Gary Goldman
Screenplay: Susan Gauthier & Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker & Noni White
Music: David Newman, Stephen Flaherty
Lyrics: Lynn Ahrens
Who would have thought that Fox would have chosen a subject as
controversial as the dead Romanovs, to be the topic of their first
animated musical. But I guess if Disney got away with cashing in on a
little Indian Princess who dies of small pox in reality, then the issues
surrounding Anastasia Romanov, the surviving heiress of the great Czars
of Russia, is as much up for grabs as any other little princess.
I wasn't expecting much, but look it's got Meg Ryans voice and
mannerisms tied into the character of Anya  and anything with Meg Ryan
can't be bad. Importantly, the music is lively - if not as memorable as
the Disney greats, certainly much better than the recent Herculean Epic
of recent past year. Engaging us with the mysteries of whether this girl
is truly the last surviving Russian princess, we are swept off our feet
with Anastasia in her discovery of not only her heritage but also of
herself. Making a viable romantic interest and bantering partner is John
Cusack, as Dimitri, the kitchen-boy-turned-con-man. Other notable notes
are Rasputin (John Lloyd), a Russian mystical figure who places a curse
on the Romanov's. In reality very little is known about him, as much so
as the missing grand duchess.
So don't expect a historical lesson from this version of Anastasia, but
expect instead to be moderately entertained by flighty tunes that linger
in your mind as you stroll through the park on a winter's morn. The kids
will enjoy much of the commotion, the girls because the heroine is a
girl, and the boys may even take a liking to the evil Rasputin  but to
tell you frankly, the scenes in Hell, scarred the hell out of me.
Overall, good family entertainment.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Featuring the voices of: Meg Ryan, John Cusack, Kelsey Grammer, Angela
Lansbury, Christopher Lloyd, Hank Azaria, Bernadette Peters, Kirsten
Dunst
Directors: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman
Screenplay: Susan Gauthier & Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker & Noni White
Australian theatrical release date: June 25, 1998
Due to what we have been witness to in the past, it's hard to label any
animated movie as anything except a "family film." Such is the story
with Anastasia - which has a mature, adult-like plot but some weaker
moments for the kids which in the end distracts the viewer from the
power of the film. It's almost as if an animated film must have people
walking away smiling, ready to buy new Happy Meal toys.  But, even when
observing it in an adult frame of mind, it's still damn good as a
distraction from ordinary, less stimulating films.  It also serves as a
reminder than animated features can indeed have a good amount of
substance, and can genuinely stir your emotions.
In its most shallow moments, Anastasia is just a simple tale told well.
In 1916, the Romanov family are celebrating their 300th anniversary as
the ruling dynasty in Russia.  The evil, party-crashing Rasputin (who
sold his soul to the Devil) puts a curse on the Romanov's, and goes on a
killing spree across the nation, slaughtering all members of the family
except two.  Anastasia (Meg Ryan) and her grandmother the Dowager
Empress  (Angela Landsbury) manage to escape the evil hands of Rasputin,
but are separated along the way.
Flash forward ten years and Anastasia is 18 years old, with only
glimpses of her tragic past.  The Empress, now residing in Paris, is
offering ten thousand dollars to anyone that can deliver her
granddaughter to her.  Anastasia joins con men Dmitri (John Cusak) and
Vlad (Kelsey Grammer) on their trip to Paris.  Meanwhile in the
underworld, Rasputin learns that she is still alive, and hatches various
plots to murder her.
The inevitable romance between Anastasia and Dmitri is the vehicle for
many of the film's gags; but is also its emotional core.  The
relationship between these two characters is truly enticing, and a lot
more interesting and mature than many of the recent animated romances.
Perhaps this is why Anastasia can effectively appeal to adults - it
works as a drama as much as it does a comedy.  It's a film that you can
imagine in a non-animated form, unlike Disney classics like Aladdin, The
Lion King and Beauty and the Beast.  Whilst many have dubbed Anastasia
as simply an attempt for a different company to cash in on animated
successes, directors Don Bluth and Gary Goldman have been careful not to
mimic Disney films.  Much to their credit, it looks, feels and sounds
genuinely original, bar the occasional exception.
Most of Anastasia's duration is filled with healthy, skillful moments,
but like most animated films it does have its flaws.  Strangely, most of
the scenes involving Rasputin fail to impress or innovate - making the
viewer wish that he had never been included in the first place.
Rasputin could have been a wonderfully complex, religious character but
instead appears cliché and predictable; appearing every so often just so
the heroes of the story could have someone to fight against.
If previous animated features have taught us anything, it's that there
has to be a bad guy, a hero and a final confrontation.  In fact, the
only film of this type that I can think of that was not afraid to show
complex scenes and characters was The Hunchback of Notre Damn, which I
still regard as the best exhibit of film animation ever.
But in all fairness, Anastasia shouldn't be compared to all the other
cartoon classics because, as I mentioned before, it does stand out as an
original piece of work.  And more than that - it's a beautiful,
unexpectedly touching experience that will make you wonder how on Earth
an animated film can be so moving.
If only Bluth and Goldman could have dared to forget the "family film"
tradition and make a genuinely adult, mature film - perhaps then we
would have a clear-cut masterpiece.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Dan Kim
Released by 20th Century Fox. Directors Don Bluth & Gary Goldman.
Producers Bluth & Goldman.
Fox takes the plunge into mainstream animation feature films with the
utterly conventional "Anastasia." Few things really stand out about
this movie but at the same time, there is nothing noticeably bad about
it either. It's a pleasing, and successful, one and a half hour sortie
at Disney's megalomaniacal animation division that spells stiff
competition in the future.
The base of the story is taken from the historic Romanov family from
Czarist Russia. A rather unlikely source for an animated feature, Don
Bluth and Gary Goldman (both who have extensive Disney experience)
and their team of writers manage to put together an enjoyable, albeit
routine story that should do well to appeal to young and old.
The year was 1916 and Anastasia's (voice by the always likable Meg
Ryan) family, the Romanovs, was celebrating its 300th anniversary as
the ruling dynasty in Russia. Her grandmother, the Dowager Empress
Marie, returning to her home in Paris, gives Anastasia a beautiful
music box that played their special lullaby. The Empress, resembling
Angela Lansbury after taking classes in royalty (incidentally, played
by Angela Lansbury) had a special inscription placed on the key to the
music box - "Together in Paris." Someone should have warned them that
the evil Rasputin had returned from exile to St. Petersburg seeking
revenge. Sporting a beard that would make ZZ Top jealous, escorted by
spunky sidekick Bartok the albino bat, ultimately consumed by hatred,
he sold his soul for a dangerous power to curse the family. From that
moment on, revolution begins to rage across the country, ultimately
destroying most of the Romanov family. 
With the aid of a courageous kitchen boy named Dmitri, the Empress and
her granddaughter make their perilous escape from the horde which is
attacking the Romanov palace. Pursued by the fervent Rasputin, Marie
and Anastasia's only hope is to catch the last train from the crumbling
capital. 
Rasputin tries to catch and kill the two, but he falls into an icy
death, pardoning the lives of Marie and Anastasia. But as they struggle
to escape the mob that has become St. Petersburg, Marie and Anastasia
are separated when the princess falls from her grandmother's grasp and
hits her head. As the distraught Marie heads toward Paris and safety,
Anastasia lies unconscious, alone and an amnesiac.
Along the way, she comes across a grown-up Dmitri and his friend/
business partner Vladimir. These genial rogues have a get-rich-quick
scheme, that scheme being to get an actress to play the lost princess
Anastasia and then collecting the reward of ten million rubles from the
Empress. Lucky for them, Anya just happens to be the lost princess.
Unlucky for them, she does not even know it despite the telltale
pictures of the royal family in the now abandoned palace.
History purists and devout Russian nationalists will be obviously
perturbed by the watered-down storyline   but the Bluth/Goldman script
works for what is supposed to be, an animation feature geared towards
the young and the young-at-heart.
Fox shamelessly plagiarized the successful formula that earned Disney
so many millions, from the rags-to-riches heroine, the handsome suitor
that crosses her path, to the all too cute sidekicks that no animated
feature can do without. They're almost as successful. "Anastasia,"
though having a plot that is relentlessly conventional, yet serviceable
is saved by the shrewd casting for the voices of the main characters.
Ryan is perfect as the perky yet strong-willed princess, and John
Cusak's voice suits the charm of Dmitri quite well. Christopher Lloyd
is gleefully evil in his ranting and raving. However, Hank Azaria
steels some spotlight as Bartok the ambiguous-conscienced bat. Cliched
lines like "stressed is a killer sir" would not work had it not been
for his lively, if indecipherable, accent.
Ryan and Cusack work well off each other, with a lively banter that
hints at the inevitable romantic tension between the two. Ryan devotees
will recognize the style of that dialogue that made her so likable (and
famous) and "When Harry Met Sally" so enjoyable.
The Disney influence shows plainly in some of the shots of the interior
of the palace ballroom, as does the relationship between Empress Marie
and the grown-up Anastasia. When Anya dresses up for the final ballroom
event, one cannot help but have "Beauty and the Beast" running through
their heads at the moment. Right down to Lansbury's voice to that
elegant yellow dress.
The computer generated animation is near flawless, just slightly less
polished than Disney's best works. The sweeping "cinematography"
covering the ballrooms is especially impressive however; the illusion
of camera movement, or panning, being smooth and realistic.
"Anastasia" will no doubt be the first of many features Fox will throw
into the already saturated movie market, and if the following films get
better as Fox gains experience they will have a bright future indeed.
As it is, this is a pleasing, enjoyable and sometimes too cute movie
that hits its target almost on the mark.

Author
Kristian Lin
ANASTASIA begins when the Bolshevik revolution overthrows the Russian
tsars, and the reigning Romanov family is killed except for their
youngest daughter, Anastasia (voiced by Meg Ryan).  Ten years later,
18-year-old Anastasia is released from the orphanage and goes to St.
Petersburg, where she meets a con artist named Dimitri (voiced by John
Cusack).  She doesn't remember her parentage, so Dimitri decides to try
to pass her off as the missing Anastasia to collect the reward.
You don't have to be a dyed-in-the-wool monarchist to prefer the Romanov
regime to what came afterwards.  The tsars may have been just as
oppressive as the Soviets, but at least they had an antique sort of
charm (who could cuddle up to an apparatchik?).  Those Easter eggs they
had Faberge design were ruinously expensive toys at a time when millions
were starving, but they were pretty, weren't they?  And you feel a
certain pity for the innocent Romanov children and their mother whose
hysterical concern for her sick son made her prey to Rasputin's charms. 
You even feel for Tsar Nicholas, who died believing that the Russian
people loved him and would save him (attested to by his bewildered last
words upon being informed that he was about to be executed:  "What? 
What?").
Still, this myth that little Anastasia Romanov somehow escaped her
family's execution and lived on in Paris or Houston or wherever has
always seemed like a royalist pipe dream.  Why would presumably sane 
and intelligent people find comfort in the possible survival of the
Romanov line?  After all, the Soviet system was a repressive
dictatorship, but nobody ever showed so much nostalgia for the Weimar
Republic or the Emperor of China.  Are people really so desperate to
restore the mystique that royalty once brought to heads of state?  The
20th century has seen some pretty nasty stuff brought into the world,
but wanting to revert to the 19th century seems a rather extreme
response.
It's probably churlish to expect historical accuracy from a kid's movie
like ANASTASIA, but presenting imperial Russia as an enchanted paradise
is stretching it a bit.  To stretch even further, the Tsar is overthrown
because Rasputin, who has sold his soul in exchange for magic powers,
lays a curse on the Romanovs, thus causing the workers' uprising.  What
we have here is a Russian Revolution without Communism, Marx, Lenin,
Trotsky, or any mention of the grievances the people had against the
royals.  By 1927, the proletariat are singing happily of Anastasia's
rumored survival, while seeming to regard Party officials as party
poopers.  This is really perverse.
What redeems ANASTASIA from its dramatic slackness and drab songs are
the performances from the actors.  The romantic plot between Anastasia
and Dimitri is unusually sharp, funny, and well-written.  Meg Ryan has
better chemistry with Cusack than with any leading man since (dare we
say it?) Billy Crystal in WHEN HARRY MET SALLY...  Ryan seems to respond
best to a leading man who's slightly disreputable.  She overcomes her
initial distaste to let herself be dazzled by a guy who knows how to
break the rules in the right way.  In turn, she dazzles the outlaw
because she tempers her wholesomeness with a touch of eccentricity. 
That dynamic is present here where it wasn't with Matthew Broderick
(ADDICTED TO LOVE), Tom Hanks (SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE), or even Dennis
Quaid (FLESH AND BONE).  Unfortunately, Ryan doesn't have the voice to
carry off Anastasia's climactic confrontation with Rasputin, but she's
more alert to her onscreen lover, and thus funnier and more charming,
than she's been in years.
For his part, Cusack's always good at portraying a man living on his
wits - I'd like to see him as Shakespeare's Hamlet.  Like Michael
Keaton, he's an actor whose characters seem to be constantly improvising
their way through life's situations.  Maybe that's why I've never been
entirely convinced when the drama requires him to radically change his
way of thinking, be it in BULLETS OVER BROADWAY or GROSSE POINTE BLANK;
he's never given over to deep philosophical musings because he's too 
quick for that.  Luckily, though, he's dead on as a romantic lead, and
that's what makes his performances in those movies such rousing
successes.  He widens his eyes just a bit, and suddenly he's a guy who
has fallen in love and will follow his woman down the right path as long
as she'll lead him.  He does something like that here.  The fact that he
can only be heard and not seen hampers him somewhat, but he and Ryan
still make a perfect fit.     
Kelsey Grammer, though, is wasted as Vladimir.  The vaguely-defined part
calls for someone with as much warmth as worldly wisdom, and Grammer,
despite his plush baritone voice, isn't and has never been about
warmth.  He's meant to be an urbane wit with a neurotic streak, which he
is on "Frasier."  Vladimir is too content in his fallen gentility to
suit Grammer.  Hank Azaria's South Side of Chicago-accented bat is a
hoot, and Bernadette Peters squeals delightfully as Grand Duchess
Marie's silly cousin.  A rhetorical question rather than a complaint: 
I'm a big fan of Kirsten Dunst, who voices young Anastasia, but Fox
brings in Lacey Chabert (from "Party of Five") to sing for her.  My
question is, why go to such trouble?  Why not cast Chabert in the
speaking role as well, since she has proven that she can act?
As for Don Bluth's animation, it lacks the last ounce of Disney's
polish, and the characters' faces could use a little more definition in
close up, but the drawing still has its own splendor, especially when
depicting Russia's imperial court.  In the end, I was disappointed in
ANASTASIA, not because it wasn't good, but because it's the first direct
challenge to Disney's hegemony over the animated feature film market. 
In taking up the challenge, Fox created high expectations for its
movie.  ANASTASIA isn't the blockbuster success that you'd like to see
open up the genre for competitors, but it's good enough to give us some
hope 
for the next animated feature from a major studio.  Let's hope this will
inspire Disney to put as much care into their movies as they currently
invest in their marketing campaigns.

Author
Chris Eades
ANASTASIA contains something that has been lacking from all of the
recent Disney releases... (especially Hercules)... emotion.
All the wacky characters voiced by celebrities and fantastically
animated adventure sequences aren't going to hold anyone's interest
unless there is an emotional core to hold it all together.  Not since
Disney's Beauty & the Beast has there been such a compelling animated
film with interesting characters and drama that works.
The story of the Romanov family, the rulers of Russia, and their
downfall begins the film.  Anastasia, one of the daughters, narrowly
escapes the mad monk Rasputin (Voiced by Christopher Lloyd) with her
Grandmother (voiced by Angela Landsbury).  But Anastasia gets lost, and
grows up with no memory of her royal origins.  The Grandmother lives in
Paris, hoping to someday find her beloved Anastasia, the only member of
the family to survive the Russian Revolution.
A young woman named Anya (Voiced by Meg Ryan) runs across Dimitri (John
Cusack) and Vlad (Kelsey Grammar), who are trying to put together a
scheme to create an Anastasia to fool the Grandmother and get the reward
money.  They pick Anya to pose as their princes, and of course, it is
soon revealed that Anya is in fact the lost Anastasia.  Dimitri realizes
that he can never win her love as he is a commoner, and meanwhile,
Rasputin is NOT dead, and plots his revenge against the last Romanov.
The plot is actually quite well structured.  There are a lot of
complexities that may have to be explained to the kids later, but it
moves along fast enough that they'll never have time to be bored.  What
this really means is that the adults won't be bored by it either.  There
is a great deal of banter between Anya and Dimitri that is very funny,
and their relationship develops quite naturally as the film progresses.
There is, of course, lots of comedy for the kids, including Rasputin's
pet bat, Bartok (Hank Azaria), who is easily the funniest thing in the
film.  However, the comical scenes never distract from the drama, but
are worked into the plot almost seamlessly.
The animation is gorgeous - the characters seem to come to life through
the talented animators.  Not since Beauty & The Beast have animated
characters had so much life to them.  Even without the voices, they act.
The musical number in Paris is a show-stopper, with some of the
backgrounds rendered in an impressionist painting style.
As with all recent animated features, there are songs, however, these
songs do more than just provide fodder for top-40 singers to get on the
radio (although there are three of them during the end credits).  The
songs are all very catchy, and advance the plot, instead of just being
showpieces (except for the Paris number, but that's so much fun, it's
okay...).
I can't reccomend ANASTASIA highly enough.  It's a wonderful film that
ranks right up there with other animated classics.  Kids and adults
alike will enjoy it, and it's also nice to have a quality animated
feature film from another studio besides Disney.

Author
David Sunga
Directed by: Don Bluth and Gary Goldman
Songs by Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty
Written by: Susan Gauthier, Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker and Noni White
Starring the voices of: 
Meg Ryan, John Cusack, Kelsey Grammer, Christopher Lloyd, Hank Azaria,
and Angela Lansbury
Ingredients: girl with amnesia, young love, singing
Synopsis: 
In real life the twenty-year reign of the monarch Tzar Nicholas of
Russia ended with the Bolsheviks seizing power. The members of the
Russian royal family including Nicholas and his daughter Anastasia were
shot dead in a basement in 1918.  But luckily this animation story is a
lot happier; in this story Anastasia is alive and well! Young hustler
Dimitri (voice of John Cusack) and his old fat partner Vladimir (voice
of Kelsey Grammer) cook up a scheme to collect the reward money for
returning a lost Russian princess to her grandmother in Paris. All they
have to do is get an orphan girl named Anya (voice of Meg Ryan) to
travel to Paris with them, and have her impersonate Anastasia in order
to dupe the grandmother (voice of Angela Lansbury) for the reward money.
Unknown to them, orphan Anya, an amnesiac, really is Anastasia.  A long
time ago, when the evil monk Rasputin (voice of Christopher Lloyd)
assassinated her parents, the escaping Anastasia fell off a train and
lost her memory. The journey to Paris is long, and Anya and commoner
Dimitri fall in love. When she gets to Paris, will she choose her royal
title or will she choose the love of a commoner?
Opinion: 
This film is just like a Disney film, only it's not made by Disney (it's
20th Century Fox). My guess is that the unevenly paced storyline will
prove to be a little too complex for young kids, and a little sappy for
adults to sit through, but it is just right for girls hovering above and
below ten years old. On the good side this animated musical offers a
superb cast, great acting and singing, and fantastic and realistic
artwork. I like how the viewing angles zoom in, spin, and move around
like simulated camera-work, despite it being a cartoon. And who would
have thought Meg Ryan and John Cusack were so stellar at singing? This
film proves that directors Don Bluth and Gary Goldman are (with minor
adjustments in movie pace and target audience) certainly capable of
making inroads into the formerly unassailable Disney cartoon market.

Author
Ted Prigge
Directors: Don Bluth and Gary Goldman
Writers: Susan Gauthier, Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker, Noni White, and Eric
Tuchman (based on the screenplay Arthur Laurents which is in turn based on
the play by Marcel Maurette)
Starring: Meg Ryan, John Cusack, Kelsey Grammar, Christopher Lloyd, Hank
Azaria, Angela Lansbury, Bernadette Peters, Kirsten Dunst, Liz Callaway,
Lacey Chabert, Jim Cummings, Jonathan Dokuchitz
I can't even remember the last animated feature that had big promotion that
wasn't a Disney film.  Maybe it was "An American Tail" (or it's ill-fated
sequel).  Nevertheless, Disney has been the king of animated features, for
better or worse.  And while it's not a great film, it is a breath of fresh
air from the Disney trend, which has been getting kinda lackluster as of
late, and proof that Disney isn't the only company who can make a really
good enjoyable film.
Of course, Twentith Centry Fox, who advertised the film over a year before
its release, have pretty much given themselves a harder job than Disney
does.  Instead of adapting something that's relatively fantasy-like anyway
(stories about mermaids, genies, and gods and godesses), the filmmakers
have chosen to adapt a story based on real life, that of the disappearance
of the daughter to Russian Czar Nicolas and his wife Alexandra, who was
overthrown by the people, led by Lenin.  It's even been made into a 50s
film, which served as Ingrid Bergman's comeback film after a long drought
of nothingness.
Of course, they needed to make it universal to kids and adults, so decided
to make the creepy Russian personage of Rasputin into the film's chief
villain (the film exploits the old curse put on the family by Rasputin, who
is out for vengeance after Nicolas screwed him over).  When the palace
falls due to the revolution, the family flees, but accidentally leave
behind little Anastasia (voiced by Kirstun Dunst; sung by "Party of Five"'s
Lacy Chabert), who conks her head, and receives some nasty amnesia.
After a brief introduction to all of this, the story follows a woman named
Anya who is about 18 years old (voiced by Meg Ryan; sung by Liz Callaway),
and we see her trying to figure out what to do with her life now that she's
kicked out of the orphanage she's lived in what seems to her all her life. 
We're also introduced to two con artists in St. Petersburg, Dimitri (voiced
by John Cuasack; sung by Jonathan Dokuchitz) and Vladmir (voiced and sung
by Kelsey Grammar), who have heard that there is a possibility that
Anastasia still lives, and her grandmother, an Empress (Angela Lansbury)
who fleed to Paris before the revolution, is looking for her.  They begin
holding auditions to find a girl who looks like Anastasia, and who is
willing to be trained to act like her so they can receive an award.  Anya
wanders in, and after a bit of conversation, agrees to go overseas with
them to maybe discover her past.  Of course, Anya is really Anastasia, and
it'll just take some time for her employers to figure it out.
All the while, Rasputin (voiced by Christopher Lloyd; sung by Jim Cummings)
is a living corpse, having sold his soul to the devil for the ability to
exact revenge on the Russian family, and is constantly falling apart (it
was funny the first two times...).  When he discovers that Anastasia is
still alive, and begins to attack the trio on their way to Paris.
Although a cartoon, this film is actually a really entertaining film for
everyone.  Sure, I was a little appalled at some of the historical
inaccuracies, but, like I did with Disney's "Hercules," I soon got over
that and just tried to enjoy the film.  The film has the same kind of magic
of a Disney film, filled with lots of very good music (I can probably hum
two or three songs from this; from "Hercules," none), and some definite
magical moments, like a sequence where Anya enters the run-down palace of
her youth and all the ghosts from her past burst out of the windows and
re-enact a dance from earlier on.  And there's even some very suspenseful
moments, most notably an excellently crafted runaway train sequence.
The animation is more mature than Disney's, with very human facial
expressions from many of the characters.  And the writing and voices are
both excellent, with Meg Ryan and John Cusack seen as having great
chemistry in several of the scenes.  Throughout the first half, they're
constantly bickering, and it actually sounds realistic.  I was very shocked
and impressed by all of this, and also how they could also work well with
more cartoony characters, like a bat named Bartok (voiced by the great
cartoon voice actor, and all-around great actor in general, Hank Azaria),
who serves as the main comic relief.
If there's anything wrong with it, it's that it's too brief.  I know it's
an animated feature, and most of them have to adhere to around 90 minutes
or less, but maybe more time and less editing would have fleshed out some
more of the supporting characters.  Rasputin is only shown a couple times,
and although we fully understand his intentions, sometimes his appearances
are so far apart from eachother that you almost forget he's there.  And
sadly, Vladmir is in much of the first act, but seems to have disappeared
during the second, who falls in love with the Empress's friend, Sophie
(voiced by Broadway great Bernadette Peters).
Nevertheless, "Anastasia" has a lot of energy, and is evenly paced, which
is very impressive as a lot of animated films are choppy and way too
episodic for their own good.  You also have to like how it doesn't insult
our intelligence, and gives us a romance between Anya and Dimitri that is
based on that of a Howard Hawks/Frank Capra film, which is more than
helpful in giving it a lighthearted feel.  This is not high drama, and
thank goodness for that.  Save the high drama for the live action, and
reserve the lightheartedness for the cartoons.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **1/2 (out of 4 = OK/average)
1997, G, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[animated - lighthearted drama/fantasy/musical]
starring the voices of: Meg Ryan (Anya), John Cusack (Dimitri), Angela
Lansbury (Dowager Empress Marie), Christopher Lloyd (Rasputin); written by
Susan Gauthier, Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker, Noni White; produced and directed
by Don Bluth, Gary Goldman.
Seen December 8, 1997 at 8:40 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas (Oneida,
NY), theater #2, by myself for free (free pass). [Theater rating: ***: good
sound, picture, and seats]
        One would think the animated film industry would be free of the same
criticism live-action, Hollywood movies often receive, such as too many
special effects and not enough story. Watching "Anastasia," it's apparent that
trend has been picked up on in the last place it should be, as the film is
flooded with spectacular imagery, but strung together by a weak story.
        In the spirit of most animated movies intended for children, this film opens
in traditional fashion by establishing all of its important aspects quickly.
And like many other films of the nature, the atmosphere is a lighthearted mix
of basic reality and some fantasy. The animation is beautiful, as its
computer-generated enhancements give a good sense of three-dimensional
realism, movement, and minute detail.
        The setting takes place in 1916 Russia where we get a glamorous royal family
and a nasty villain, each such obvious representatives of good and evil it's a
bit surprising these labels aren't stamped on their forehead. When the
villain, Rasputin (Lloyd), tries to put a curse on the Romanov royal family, a
chase scene immediately ensues. But the princess Anastasia doesn't make it,
and, after hitting her head while trying to catch a speeding train, suffers
amnesia. Thus the heir to the throne is thought to be missing for the next 10
years.
        Although the film does a fine job in establishing its basic plot, it does so
through typical song-and-dance routines that could be found in almost any
animated musical. We learn Anastasia wound up in an orphanage and is now named
Anya (Ryan). We also learn the Dowager Empress Marie (Lansbury), has moved to
Paris and is offering a reward to anyone who can find her. Of course, where's
there's a reward, there's got to be con artists, and those characters are
present here with Dimitri (Cusack), the likable kitchen boy, and Vladimir
(Kelsey Grammar), his chubby cherubic guardian of sorts. They plan to find a
girl to impersonate Anastasia and split the reward money - guess who becomes
their proxy?
        From this point the story plays itself out as expected: with a rivalry and
unspoken attraction between Anya and Dimitri; a long road trip to make for
adventures; and the villain trying to kill Anastasia even though he's dead.
The problem is the screenplay is confused and inconsistent. The scenes and
sub-plots between Anya and Dimitri are clever and funny, as they look, talk,
and act like real people. Yet the other characters look like comic-strip
caricatures and the result is a conflicting atmosphere.
        Then there's Rasputin and all the silliness that comes with him. We get lots
of gratuitous special effects, magic tricks, and the generic, wisecracking
sidekick. But it just doesn't synthesize with the story since everything else
seems so realistic in comparison. Rasputin has such little screen time we
never get a sense of his motivation, he's just the token villain.
        To say the film suffers an identity crisis is an understatement. The first
act is told almost exclusively through song, but once the story has focus, the
songs disappear and what had been a good musical becomes anything but. It's
all over the map using the interaction between the main characters to create
for comedy, the threat of Rasputin for wild adventure, and when they finally
arrive in Paris the melodrama comes pouring in. 
        There seems to be a charming fairytale within "Anastasia," but it never
really surfaces through the bland story. It is a bit charming, but it doesn't
have the magic touch it needs.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe plan#_" in the header (plan 1 - new releases, plan 2 - all
movies reviewed).

Author
Jeremiah Rickert
     I caught the late showing of Anastasia at one of my favorite
theaters, the Westgate in Beaverton, Oregon.  It is the theater where as a
lad of three, I stood on the seat and shot Darth Vader with my green spark
gun, but I digress.  
     Anastasia is the first animated production of Fox Family Films, and
for the most part it is a pretty good offering.  The man behind it is Don
Bluth, who has put out a fairly steady stream of animated entertainment,
including The Secret of Nimh, An American Tail, and All Dogs Go To Heaven,
just to name a few.  None of the above have really competed with
concurrent Disney offerings, but this latest one, in my opinion, outshines
two of the last three Disney Animated films.  (Hercules and Pocahontas).
At first glance, it seemed that Fox and Bluth were trying to emulate their
competitors style.  They began to market Anastasia with teasers and
posters and such practically a year ago.  A few months later, I recall
seeing a trailer with partially completed animation (sound familiar?), and
then the blitz started.  It's the old jam it down our throats campaign, a
bit softer than the Disney bombardment, but there nonetheless.
     The story concerns a rabidly revenge-minded Rasputin (Snickered and
Growled wonderfully by Chistopher Lloyd), who in an effort for repaying
the Tsar of Russia for disowning and trying to have him killed (assuming
they've stuck to history of course, this is never fully explained), curses
the royal family to be killed.  He then sells his soul to the forces of
Darkness in order that this curse be carried out.  The curse then seems to
cause the once prosperous and placid peoples of the empire to become
agitated and angry towards the imperial family, finally culminating in the
bloody Russian Revolution.  I thought that history should have been a bit
more elaborated upon, simply because at least kids would "learn"
something, but it was not to be.  The family then attempts to escape, but
they are all killed save the mother of the Tsar (voiced by Angela
Lansbury), and his Daughter Anastasia, however, she fails to catch the
last train out of St. Petersburg, and is coldcocked to the ground,
becoming an orphan.  10 years later, now grown, she yearns to find out who
she is, and whether she actually has family, thus begins the adventure.
She meets up with a swindler named Dmitri and his sidekick Vlad (played by
John Cusack and Kellsey Grammer respectively) who attempt to pass her off
as the Grand Duchess Anastasia in order to receive the 10million Ruble
reward.  And of course, Rasputin returns to finish the job.  The pieces
are all in place, and how they play out is rather entertaining.
     The story kept me interested and definitely entertained, the songs
were passable, but not very memorable.  If it wasn't for the fact that the
strongest song was in the credits, I would have probably forgotten it.  
     The Animation was good, but incosistent, at times I found it
breathtaking, particularly during the "paris" song, when the city is laid
out like an Impressionist painting.  The human movements were as good as,
in some cases more realistic than, those of Disney characters, except for
their faces.  Their faces lacked detail and their lips rarely moved in
synch with their lines and songs.  This is the biggest flaw in the film,
it bothered me throughout the whole thing.  The computer animation also
didn't blend in as well as it could have, sometimes it stuck out like a
sore thumb, particularly the cars driving around paris.  The computerized
"camera" movement in the Dowager's townhouse looked too rigid and
unnatural.  
     Overall, however, I was entertained, the story was interesting, and
actually more "Grown-up" than I expected.  I think it would be scary in
some respects for young kids.  I was reminded of The Black Cauldron a bit,
where armies of the dead poured from the Cauldron, summoned by the Horn
King, and how a lot of families were put off by that.  I would be
surprised if Anastaisa grosses in the Disney territory for this very
reason.  The comic foil, Bartok, unfortunately has all of his best lines
stuck in the trailers, as it often is with these things, and really didn't
seem much more as an attempt to garner a few laughs.  This sounds strange,
but The parrot in Alladin as played by Gilbert Gottfried was a more
well-rounded character than Bartok.  
--

Author
James Sanford
 As subjects for family entertainment spectaculars go, the legend of
Anastasia is neither as odd a choice as Victor Hugo's "Hunchback of Notre
Dame" nor as conventional as "Cinderella," although the animated musical
"Anastasia" somehow manages to incorporate elements of both into the curious
tapestry it weaves.
It also ties in such old reliables as an adorable animal companion, a regal
and loving grandmother and three different balls for our heroine to waltz
through.
Opulence abounds in "Anastasia," thanks to the efforts of animators Don
Bluth and Gary Goldman ("An American Tail," "The Land Before Time"), but the
visual elegance can't fully camouflage a clumsy story built around the
conceit that the Russian Revolution was motivated not by the uprising of the
proletariat, but by the conjuring of the sorcerer Rasputin.
In "Anastasia," Rasputin "The Mad Monk" is transformed into a decomposing
resident of Hades, with a batch of winged green demons to do his dirty work.
At the top of his list is placing a curse on Russia's ruling Romanov family,
all of whom "disappear" - the movie's genteel explanation - except the
Empress Dowager and her granddaughter Anastasia, who are separated in their
flight fromthe palace.
Ten years later, rumors circulate that Anastasia has somehow survived and
that the Empress Dowager will pay 10 million rubles to whoever can bring the
missing heiress to Paris.
Enter Anya, a teen-age amnesiac who's en route from an orphanage to a job in
a fish factory when she takes a detour to St. Petersburg instead and meets
up with con artists Dimitri and Vlad, who see in the spunky young woman a
potential fortune.But when word of Anastasia resurfacing hits the
underworld, Rasputin vows to pull himself together - literally - and to do
away with the last of the Romanovs.
If "Anastasia" offers little in the way of valid historical background or
genuine charm, it does include some breathtakingly sophisticated animation,
particularly a terrific train crash and a gorgeous moment in which Anya
envisions the now-shuttered ballroom of the palace in its glory days, with
phantom dancers encircling her.
"Anastasia" also stands, along with "Sleeping Beauty," as one of the few
cartoons to be shot in cinemascope, which gives the animators a spacious
canvas on which to work their magic - sometimes too spacious, as many of the
backgrounds have a rushed, sketchy look.
The songs by Stephen Flaherty and Lynn Ahrens ("Once On This Island") are
generally pleasant, althoughdeleting the overlong tribute to the splendors
of Paris (featuring Gertrude Stein, Josephine Baker and Maurice Chevalier
caricatures that should baffle the matinee crowd) would have helped the
film's pace.
As the speaking voices of Anastasia and Dimitri, Meg Ryan and John Cusack
make no attempt to sound anything but American, leaving Angela Lansbury to
steal the show with her splendid reading of the Empress Dowager.
There's much to admire in "Anastasia," although it's hard to embrace a film
that seems more interested in beating Disney in the animated musical
sweepstakes. Unfortunately, in the company of such cinematic royalty as "The
Little Mermaid," "Pocahontas" and "The Lion King," "Anastasia," like the
real-life woman who inspired it, seems like a pretender rather than a
contender.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Cartoons were originally just the opening act to whet the
audience's appetite for the cinematic main course.  Walt Disney changed
all of that in 1937 with the first feature-length animated movie, SNOW
WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS.
     Since then what brings people into the theaters, rather than the
now ubiquitous video rental emporiums, has changed dramatically.  The
movies that make money these days rely heavily on star power or special
effects, frequently both.  Young kids are seen less and less at the
multiplex because studios are ignoring them.  Is it that fewer kids are
coming and therefore the studio's wise marketeers are cutting back on
kids' movies to match the decrease in demand?  Teenagers, on the other
hand, remain the mother lode for theater owners.
     Yet some animated movies have been successful and a few, such as
THE LION KING, have been incredibly lucrative.  So what does it take to
make a winning movie with cartoon characters?  Although there is no
sure and certain recipe, aside from having a Disney logo, some of the
ingredients include color, images, music, humor, and a compelling
story.
     The non-Disney animated movie ANASTASIA by the directing and
producing team of Don Bluth and Gary Goldman has already become a
holiday hit.  Its popularity comes from a combination of all of the
above ingredients, but one part stands head and shoulders above the
rest -- the images, which are worthy of a master painter.  This film is
so beautiful that, if the sound system were to go out, you would have
absolutely no reason to demand your money back.  Just watching the
picture provides the vast majority of the enjoyment, which is not to
say that the other parts have problems since they do not.  Although the
songs are the film's weakest element, even some of them, especially
"Dancing Bear", are quite lovely.
     ANASTASIA is a retelling of the legend of the missing Romanov
princess.  Historians would be well advised to skip the picture for it
plays fast and loose with the facts, but others will not care.  This is
a cartoon to entertain audiences, not an instructional video.
     Meg Ryan is the voice of a sassy, tough and attractive Anastasia.
Ryan becomes the character rather than the other way around, unlike the
Genie in ALADDIN, for example, who became Robin Williams.  If your
girls are looking for a good role model, look no further.  Anastasia is
a resourceful and self-assured young woman who is capable of saving her
boyfriend rather being saved herself.
     A con artist named Dimitri (John Cusack) takes a beautiful orphan
named Anya (Ryan), and transforms her into a mock-Anastasia, falling in
love with his creation in the process.  The twist is that Anya may
actually be Anastasia.  Kelsey Grammer is the voice of Dimitri's
companion in crime, Vladimir.  If they can convince the Dowager Empress
Marie (Angela Lansbury) that Anya is Anastasia, they will get a ten
million ruble reward.  (Anastasia has a cute little dog named Pooka,
who, unlike most cartoon characters, does not get to talk.)
     Along the way Dimitri and Anastasia have to fight the dastardly
villain Rasputin (Christopher Lloyd), who keeps falling to pieces,
literally.  His hands fly off, his mouth falls down and he generally
cannot keep himself together -- we've all had days like that.
Rasputin's frequently not-so-willing companion is a wise-talking bat
named Bartok (Hank Azaria).
     The memorable parts of ANASTASIA are the visuals.  Although words
cannot do them justice, let me mention a few of the best.  There is one
sequence in a train where they show the boiler of the engine.  Oranges
and reds dance across the screen as the heat of the flames makes the
air undulate in front of the viewers.  When the train crashes down into
the canyon, it explodes in a fireball both realistic and gorgeous.  The
characters are all drawn with life-like delicacy.  And there is a scene
set inside a French house with photo-accurate Impressionist and other
paintings on the walls.  Finally, there is a simple scene of Anya
looking into the waters of a stream, which reflect with a magical
luminescence.  It is easy to go on, but the film is more to be seen
than discussed.
     ANASTASIA runs 1:34.  It is rated G and would be fine for the
whole family.  There is some potential that the littlest munchkins
might be scared by Rasputin, but I saw no evidence of it in our packed
theater.


Author
Jamie Peck
20th Century Fox / 1:33 / 1997 / G (off-screen killings)
Vocal Cast: Meg Ryan; John Cusack; Kelsey Grammar; Christopher Lloyd; Hank 
Azaria; Bernadette Peters; Angela Lansbury; Kirsten Dunst 
Directors: Don Bluth; Gary Goldman 
Screenplay: Susan Gauthier; Bruce Graham; Bob Tzudiker; Noni White 
"Anastasia" marks 20th Century Fox's first feature-length foray into 
animated filmmaking, and while Disney still owns the field, they now have 
a reason to watch their backs. Quite an accomplished opus, "Anastasia" 
gets Fox off to a solid start despite its occasional flaws. The credit is 
probably due to the creative mind of Don Bluth, who with "The Land Before 
Time" and "An American Tail" has shown himself to be the most innovative 
non-Disney cartoon film-creator working today ... tankers like 
"Rock-a-Doodle" and "The Pebble and the Penguin" aside, of course. 
"Anastasia" opens in 1916 St. Petersburg, where the Romanov dynasty is 
celebrating the 300th anniversary of its Russian rule. The party is 
crashed by evil sorcerer Rasputin (voiced by Christopher Lloyd), who has 
doomed his own soul for the power to destroy the family and returned from 
exile in order to use it. With the help of courageous servant boy Dimitri, 
young Princess Anastasia ("Interview With the Vampire"'s Kirsten Dunst) 
and her grandmother, the Dowager Empress Marie (Angela Lansbury), escape; 
Rasputin offers chase but ends up drowning in the icy waters of the Volga 
River. Anastasia and Marie make it to a train station, but the confusing 
mob scene tears them apart and leaves Anastasia lying on the boarding 
platform, unconscious and alone. 
Jump forward into the 1920s, and Anastasia is now headstrong 18-year-old 
Anya (Meg Ryan) and has no idea of her true legacy. As fate would have it, 
she runs into an older version of Dimitri (John Cusack), now a con artist 
scanning the countryside for an Anastasia-lookalike that he can bring to 
Paris to appease Marie, who is still alive and consumed with a passion to 
find her long-lost granddaughter. Anya fits the bill perfectly -- although 
neither party realizes how perfectly. All of this Romanov commotion causes 
Rasputin's resurfacing; sure, he's literally in hell, but his spiritual 
state doesn't keep him from a connection with the outside world thanks to 
his batty bat sidekick Bartok (Hank Azaria). 
As a history lesson, "Anastasia" is spotty and scant. An intriguing back 
story is paired with somewhat head-scratching development, mostly the 
fault of the film's villain -- Rasputin might be an entertaining guy to 
watch, but when it comes to supplying motivation, the movie is clueless. 
Why does he hate the Romanovs so much? The question is never adequately 
answered, and therefore we're spared a truly hissable bad guy. But let the 
record show that it's a risky venture for any studio to embrace fact-based 
occurrences in an animated film ("Pocahontus" certainly *is* Disney's 
dullest toon flick yet); when doing so, you run the risk of altering 
chronology so much that it becomes distracting. 
But whatever "Anastasia" lacks in historical departments is made up for in 
sheer, splendid showmanship. This is one gorgeous movie, even when the 
animation is just a tad under the level established by Disney. The 
occasionally stiff look could be attributed to the animators' dedication 
to realism -- these characters are drawn to look somewhat more "human" 
than the Mouse's many curvy Prince Erics and Princess Jasmines. There are 
dazzling set pieces aplenty, including a dangerous dalliance on a runaway 
train and a ghostly ballroom dance sequence that's a true breath-taker. 
The songs are very adequate; while the number of true showstoppers is 
limited, the tunes that really work here are the more subtle ones. Marie 
and Anastasia's gentle ballad "Once Upon a December" is beautiful while 
Rasputin's anti-good rant "In the Dark of the Night" (with slimy 
cockroaches singing backup!) strains a little. Impressive vocal 
performances by the likes of Ryan and Cusack are an added treat; so's the 
Bartok-provided comic relief, which is funnier than it first seems. 
Even if "Anastasia" is missing the emotional draw that Disney's 
semi-serious features ("Beauty and the Beast" and "The Hunchback of Notre 
Dame") have pulled off without a hitch, it's still got some powerful 
moments. And even if it's never as roaringly comic or colorful as Disney's 
lighter films ("Aladdin" and "Hercules"), it does have its bright spots. 
There's a little room for improvement, but not so much that really matters 
(although some children will likely be bored with its heavy dramatics) -- 
"Anastasia" is a beautiful, potent, graceful film. Unlike the 
leprosy-stricken Rasputin, it hardly ever loses its footing. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Michael Dequina
Months before its release, Fox's epic animated musical Anastasia had been
touted as the first legitimate challenge to Disney's animation empire,
which looked more vulnerable than ever after the disappointing box office
(and, as it turns out, merchandising) performance of the fun-but-phoned-in
Hercules.  Now that the film has arrived in theatres, does the Mouse indeed
have reason to worry?  During its exquisite first twenty or so minutes, I
found myself agreeing with the buzz, but the film soon collapses under the
weight of convention, becoming a  merely pleasant entertainment.
A harrowing prologue set in 1916 swiftly gives us the necessary backstory:
during a revolution the entire Russian royal family is killed save for the
czar's youngest daughter, Anastasia (spoken by Kirsten Dunst, sung by Lacey
Chabert), who is lost after escaping from the palace; and her grandmother,
Dowager Empress Marie (Angela Lansbury), who left Russia for Paris just
before the unrest.  Then the film flashes forward in time, jumping into its
buoyant opening number, "A Rumor in St. Petersburg," which introduces the
main action: the presumed-dead princess is rumored to be alive, and with
their eye on a possible financial reward from the Empress, con men Dimitri
(spoken by John Cusack, sung by Jonathan Dokuchitz) and Vladimir (Kelsey
Grammer) seek out a young woman who can be a believable Anastasia stand-in.
 While a big opening production number is part of the Disney formula,
directors Don Bluth and Gary Goldman approach it in a fresh way.  In Disney
films, the characters do little more than sing and slightly sway to the
music; here, the style is more live-action Broadway and MGM, with
background characters forming a full-on dance chorus, spontaneously
breaking into heavily choreographed moves.
Dimitri and Vlad ultimately find their perfect impostor in orphan Anya
(spoken by Meg Ryan, sung by Liz Callaway), and that's no accident--she
truly _is_ Anastasia, but with barely any recollection of her royal past.
Freshly released from an unpleasant orphanage, Anya articulates her dream
of having a family in the stirring "Journey to the Past."  This number is
equivalent to the Disney "I Want" song in function, but once again the
stage-influenced execution sets it apart, with Anya literally prancing her
way through the snow-covered forest and even capping her song by
dramatically raising her arms into the air (you almost expect the movie to
pause for audience applause).
Right before Anya meets up with the scheming duo comes a truly stunning,
magical moment--as it turns out, the film's way-too-premature peak.  She
steps foot in the ballroom of the abandoned palace, crooning the hauntingly
beautiful "Once Upon a December," a lullaby her grandmother used to sing
with her when she was young.  After a single verse, the ghosts of the past
waltz in through the windows, enveloping her, creating a lavish ball out of
thin air.
By this song's end, the glitter and glamour disappears, and so does much
of the luster of the film.  The songs by Stephen Flaherty and Lynn Ahrens
(the latter of whom holds a special place in my and many others' hearts for
her enduring work on ABC's Schoolhouse Rock!) become increasingly
forgettable, and even worse, the story loses some steam.  The strict
adherence to the established Disney formula becomes a hindrance.  There is
really no dramatic need to include an out-and-out villain in the piece,
but, true to convention, there is one: evil monk Rasputin (spoken by
Christopher Lloyd, sung by Jim Cummings), whose supernatural curse on the
royal family caused its near-destruction.  While the dying Rasputin's plot
does lead to some standout sequences (in particular a suspenseful and
spectacular sea storm scene), and the running gag of his body parts
constantly fall off is amusing, I never felt as if he and his sidekick,
wisecracking albino bat Bartok (Hank Azaria), played a necessary role in
this story; they seemed to be shoehorned in for formula's sake.  More
interesting and involving than the good-versus-evil plot is the romantic
sparring between Anya and Dimitri; this may sound odd, but Ryan and Cusack
generate a lot of chemistry with their voices.  But the resolution to their
romance is far from satisfying.  Instead of being moved by the ending, I
was merely pleased.
One thing, however, does remain consistently impressive throughout
Anastasia, and that is the visuals.  The animation is a little ragged and
not nearly as fluid as Disney work, but the artwork is outstanding.  From
its beautiful handdrawn images to the three-dimensional computer-generated
work, all shot in  the 2.35:1 CinemaScope aspect ratio (the first animated
feature to be shot so since 1959's Sleeping Beauty), Anastasia truly looks
and feels like an epic even when the goings-on are less so.
In the end, the heavily hyped Anastasia does not announce Fox's animation
division as a challenger to Disney's throne.  What it does announce,
however, is Fox as a _potential_ challenger.  Anastasia may not be great,
but it is good, and if the film is a jumping-off point for the fledgling
animation house, the Mouse should be prepared for a war.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"If you chase something, then sometimes you never get it.
 If you put forth the work and all the attitude, next thing you know
 it's bestowed upon you."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Mark D. McKean
The Disney juggernaut has long held dominion over the feature film
animation market in Hollywood. It's reached the point of most Americans
equating animation itself with Disney. And try as they might, no other 
film
studio in Hollywood has been able to produce an animated film that could
legitimately challenge Disney's monopoly.
ANASTASIA is such a contender, the end result of years of effort by former
Disney animators Don Bluth and Gary Goldman, and a Disney-sized budget
provided by Twentieth-Century Fox. While neither innovative nor
groundbreaking, this film demonstrates, beyond any doubt, that Disney's
days as sole producer of feature animation in Hollywood are over.
Loosely based in history, ANASTASIA is the tale of the purported surviving
daughter of Czar Nicholas II of Russia, but historical accuracy is not an
element of this story, nor is it necessary. And while comparisons to the
classic film of this story starring Ingrid Bergman are inevitable, they
really aren't appropriate, as the theme and focus of this adaptation are
quite different from that of the earlier effort. The Bergman film was a
mystery, a high drama: was the girl really the heir to the Russian empire,
or was she a fraud? This animated version, on the other hand, is presented
as a grand romantic adventure, a fairy tale, and a comedy of errors.
Two key twists in the history are all that was needed to create the
fairy-tale atmosphere of this story. First, the mystery element was
removed; we, the audience, know from the very start that Anya (Meg Ryan) 
is
indeed the real Anastasia. Second, a villain was created, since you simply
can't have a fairy tale these days without a villain (Disney used the same
alteration in BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, another tale which originally did not
have a villain). The convenient historical character to become the villain
was Rasputin (Christopher Lloyd), the monk and mystic who was once an
adviser to Czar Nicholas. In history, Rasputin did fall out of favor with
the court, and reportedly did curse the Romanoff family, but he was
otherwise not involved in the demise of the royal family. In the film's
version, Rasputin sells his soul for the magic needed to make his curse
felt.
And that curse is felt quickly. The rabble rioting through the palace
manage to capture nearly all of the royal family. Only the Dowager Empress
Marie (Angela Landsbury) and Anastasia, Nicholas's youngest daughter,
escape, thanks to the help of Dimitri, a servant boy in the palace.
Unfortunately, Marie and Anastasia are separated in the escape, and Marie
goes on to Paris, wondering what happened to her granddaughter.
Ten years later, Anastasia (now known only as Anya) is living in an
orphanage in Russia with no memories of her royal childhood. An impulse to
find her past (and the urgings of a stray dog) leads her to St. 
Petersburg,
where she meets Dimitri (John Cusack), who is now auditioning girls to
present to the Dowager Empress. It seems that Marie, desperate to find her
granddaughter, has offered a reward of ten million rubles to whomever can
reunite her with Anastasia. Struck by Anya's resemblance to palace
portraits of the young princess, Dimitri convinces Anya to go with him to
Paris to meet the Empress. Meanwhile, Rasputin's long-dormant curse has
been awakened by Anya's return to St. Petersburg, and the evil monk,
languishing in limbo, revives to finish off the Romanoff family once and
for all.
There is nothing new about this kind of story; long-lost heirs and
forgotten pasts are staples of epic romantic adventure. And there is never
any real suspense in this film, as it is obvious from the first that Anya
will be revealed at the end to be the real Anastasia, and Rasputin's curse
will be defeated. But, just as when traveling to places one has visited
before, the enjoyment is not so much in discovering the destination as it
is in finding out how one will get there this time.
Technically, the film has much the same flaws as Disney's recent animated
features, but more so. Effects, backgrounds, and props animation is
excellent, aided by modern computer techniques, but their photo-realism is
distracting when the animated characters are placed in the middle. In some
scenes, the mismatch between characters and props is so great it's
laughable, with props not moving in sync with the characters manipulating
them. And the character designs are very inconsistent, with faces changing
shape right before our eyes as the camera moves around. The only plus of
this inconsistency is that the variations make it clear that all the cels
were actually drawn individually, not photocopied or reused as seems to be
the fashion at other animation houses in Hollywood.
Just as with most of Disney's animated features, the performances of the
supporting actors in ANASTASIA are much more interesting than those of the
leads. Ryan and Cusack are passable, though bland, in their roles, but
Landsbury and Kelsey Grammer (as Dimitri's partner Vladimir) are more
entertaining and authentic. And the songs, while mostly sticking to a
fairly authentic vintage Broadway style, do occasionally fall into the
modern pop stylings that have plagued recent Disney musicals.
In fact, the real strength of ANASTASIA as a challenger to Disney's
dominance is not so much in what it does better than Disney as it is in 
how
well Disney's own strengths and weaknesses have been copied. Had Disney
continued its animated features in the same direction where THE LITTLE
MERMAID and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST led, ANASTASIA is the sort of film which
might have come next.
Despite all its flaws, ANASTASIA is a film which is very difficult to not
be enchanted by. Its formulaic characters and plot are the same archetypes
which brought Disney into its Second Golden Age, and so it should appeal 
to
the same audience. In the hearts of many American filmgoers, predictable
epic romance will never go out of style.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Long before its release, Fox's ANASTASIA was greeted with some
strangely familiar skeptical remarks.  "The execution of the Romanovs?"
scoffed the wags. "Not exactly the stuff for an animated film, is it?"
Similar words greeted Disney's POCAHONTAS a couple of years ago, and that
film went on to take a criticaly pasting for not being enough "fun."
Journalists and studios have formed an odd tag-team perpetuating the
notion that an animated film with adult subject matter is just a waste of
time between the Happy Meal characters.  While television has produced
smart animation for grown-ups like "The Simpsons," "King of the Hill,"
"Dr. Katz" and "South Park," adult-themed animated features have been
treated as though they were violating the social order.  It's like folks
don't like their cartoons gettin' uppity.
     ANASTASIA is not, I repeat, _not_ a great film for kids.  It is,
however, a visually rich and extremely well-constructed story which shows
a little nerve.  It begins in 1916 Russia, where the mad monk Rasputin
(voice of Christopher Lloyd) places a curse on the ruling Romanov family.
All are killed in the ensuing domestic upheaval except the Dowager Empress
(Angela Lansbury), who escapes to Paris, and young Anastasia (Kirsten
Dunst), who is lost in the chaos.  Flash forward ten years, to 18-year-old
Anya (Meg Ryan) leaving the orphanage where she grew up with no memories
of her life before she arrived.  Her only clue to a family is an inscribed
necklace leading her to Paris, so she joins up with a pair of other
travelers, the con men Dmitri (John Cusack) and Vlad (Kelsey Grammer).
The two plan to deliver a phony Anastasia to the exiled Empress in Paris,
but little do they know that they have the real thing on their hands.
Little also do they know that Rasputin intends to return from the dead to
finish off the last of the Romanovs.
     At its least inventive, ANASTASIA attempts merely to follow the
successful Disney plan for animated features.  There is a cute puppy named
Pooka, a wise-cracking bat cohort for Rasputin named Bartok (hilariously
voiced by "Simpsons" cast member Hank Azaria), the Disney-patented
affection for monarchy (accompanying a few swipes at Communism along the
way), and songs by Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty including the 
now-standard heroine's theme, a villain song, and a splashy production
number.  Least effective of all is Rasputin, who spends most of the film
grumbling in the underworld while his decomposing body falls apart around
him.  Most of the comic relief shows up during Rasputin's scenes, yet they
also hinder the narrative.  The villain doesn't contribute to ANASTASIA's
most interesting elements; he's around because, darn it, you've _got_ to
have a villain around in an animated film.
     That assumption is based on the "kids first" paradigm, one which
ANASTASIA doesn't follow most of the time.  The characterizations of Anya
and Dmitri are effective without being over-wrought; their developing
relationship is sketched out in smart, subtle scenes.  The character
animation seems somehow richer than most of Disney's recent efforts,
giving the characters more life (Anya's unconventional features are worth
extra attention).  Yet ANASTASIA may be most intriguing because, unlike
Disney's features, it feels like a genuine _musical_, not simply a film
with songs attached.  Don Bluth and Gary Goldman put on a real show, with
eye-catching choreography, characters who sell their songs with gusto,
and a Prokofiev-influenced David Newman score full of grandeur.  When
ANASTASIA breaks into song, it's like you're watching an ambitious stage
production.
     It also comes with an unusual but dynamic animation style which
combines conventional hand-drawn characters with computer-generated
backgrounds.  Though the juxtapositions don't always work, the effect is
stunning when they do.  ANASTASIA also serves up a few genuinely creepy
images, the kinds you'd associate with Ralph Bakshi more than with Uncle
Walt.  Though Disney has managed to make a couple of films as satisfying
for parents as they were for their children (BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, for
certain), no recent Disney film has felt quite as mature as ANASTASIA.
Fox, quite predictably, is still marketing ANASTASIA as a family film, and
there's not exactly anything which would be considered objectionable.  It
just seems a shame that ANASTASIA _had_ to become a children's film when
this material could have been turned into a spectacular drama unencumbered
by cute puppies or talking bats.  It's time for someone to take a look at
the ratings for television's animation for grown-ups and take a chance.
Come on, we can handle it.  After all, we're not kids any more.

Author
Ben Hoffman
There are a few small criticisms that come to mind as I watched
ANASTASIA.    Despite some wonderful animation, when Dimitri walks up
stairs, he seems to hop.   And when he goes down the steps, he seems
to stumble.    I could not understand that because the rest of the
animation, and in particular the ballroom scenes, were spectacularly
perfect.
The other thing one must wonder about is why this story of a Russian
Princess and the Russian Revolution is suitable for children, even
if it is in animation.   And is it something adults will want to
watch in as much as it is animated?   Why does the story imply that
the real Anastasia is returned to her grandmother when, in fact, no
one knows that, nor do we know if there is a real Anastasia who escaped
the execution of the royal family?  "And the greatest mystery of the
20th Century begins. . . "   To which I say, "THE greatest mystery?
Hardly."
Be that as it may, the animation is a delight to watch.   Rasputin
is suitably monstrous bringing to mind the devil in Fantasia's Night
on Bald mountain.   And, getting back to the animation, why is every
woman in animated films shown as wide-eyed beyond belief?  Such as
Jasmine in ALADDIN?  And Anastasia?
An all-star cast is used for the voices behind the characters:

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
It's obvious that any motion picture studio would have a field day kicking
Disney butt with a full-length animated masterpiece, but it's also very
understandable. In my own little way, seeing Disney fall flat would be a bit
of a treat for me. But it's becoming more and more so everyday that people
complain Disney has gone too commercial, and this has been very apparent with
each summer "classic" they release. Still, even as Disney's grosses (and
quality) begin to dwindle, they have remained ruler of the animated celluloid
realm. Then ANASTASIA comes along. Absolutely beautifully animated,
wonderfully scored (by David Newman), and brilliantly brought to life,
ANASTASIA is better than any of the last four Disney animations combined.
Michael Eisner, eat your heart out.
Based very loosely on the actual Romanov family legend, ANASTASIA begins in
1916 Russia where young heiress Anastasia (voiced by Kirsten Dunst) lives
happily with her royal family. An evil spirited monk named Rasputin
(Christopher Lloyd) plans to put an end to all that, however, and even sells
his soul for the ability to do so. Narrowly escaping a feast of mayhem,
grandmother Dowager Empress Marie (Angela Lansbury) flees with young Anastasia
at the aid of an unknown kitchen servant and initiates a departing train as
the means of escape. It is during an attempt to board the already moving train
that Anastasia and her grandmother are split up, the young child falling back
into the crowded streets, leaving the Empress on a lone refuge to Paris,
France.
Ten years later, the same unknown kitchen boy, Dimitri (John Cusack), is now
an adult setting his goals on making a small fortune for himself. How? It
seems the Dowager Empress is offering a reward to anyone who can find her long
lost granddaughter. With insider knowledge gained thru his years as a dutiful
servant boy, Dimitri plans to cast a young woman to play Anastasia, train her
in all the royal ways, and pass her off as the authentic heiress. At about the
same time, not too far away, a strong-minded, independent young woman is being
ousted from her orphanage for acting a bit too queenly. It isn't long before
Dimitri and Anya (Meg Ryan) soon find each other and, both wanting to get to
Paris, team up to pull off the ultimate hoax the world has ever known. After
all, as Dimitri defends the morality issue behind the plan, it's possible Anya
is the real Anastasia. With no memories of her childhood intact to prove
otherwise, the two set off for Paris along with Dimitri's assistant Vladimir
(Kelsey Grammer), none of them realizing Anya is in fact Russia's forgotten
princess.
During the long trek from Russia to Paris, Dimitri trains Anya to behave like
a true heiress, but is she learning, or merely remembering? The interaction
between the two is superb. Never have animated characters seemed to talk,
move, react, and respond so realistically, particular notice going to Cusack,
who gives Dimitri a heavy sense of believability. Ryan, who comes off more Meg
Ryan-ish than ever before, has never been so likeable, turning her typical
flightiness into a strong, sophisticated young woman. This is perhaps the best
animated ensemble Hollywood has ever offered, full of likeable, unique, and
refreshing characters who genuinely come to life on the screen. Even Rasputin,
who plays a surprisingly small role in the film, is a return to a more classic
kind of cartoon villain. The problem is he was also the most uneven aspect of
the film, disappearing after some initial scenes, then returning for the out-
of-nowhere, way-too-supernatural climax. It would have been much better had
Rasputin never even been used, or at least been portrayed as a mortal
character.
But small quips aside, ANASTASIA returns us to classic fairytale territory,
brimming with hope, dreams, a sincere love story, and a surprising level of
action. The train derailment scene was more intense than many live-action
action flicks! Even the songs far eclipse Disney's past several projects. It
seems as though Fox may have had double meanings behind one of the film's
final quotes. When the Dowager Empress Marie's lady in waiting calls it "the
perfect ending", Empress Marie replies, "No, it's the perfect beginning". In
terms of ANASTASIA kicking off Fox's attack on animation heavyweight Disney,
no other words could be more accurate.

Author
Dave Thompsen
Walt Disney studios may have finally met its match with the lush animation
in Twentieth Century Fox's ANASTASIA. But judging by the latest efforts from
the Don Bluth studios, the visuals are the only thing Fox has to brag about.
Disney's recent classics have occasionally stretched credibility in such
films as POCAHONTAS, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, and to a lesser extent,
HERCULES.  With ANASTASIA, Fox has gone so far as to throw all facts
completely out the window. Some may say - So what? It's just a kid's movie.
Well... if you have young kids, beware, as they may be noticeably frightened
by the visuals of a corpse-rotting Rasputin zombie, whose body parts
continually fall off in a disconcertingly real way. Consider yourselves
warned.
Nevertheless, the animation is quite stunning at times. Don Bluth has used
computer animation extensively throughout, occasionally rivalling
photographic quality.  And yet in other scenes, the hand-drawn material
seems of the Saturday-morning TV crowd, which leads me to wonder... was this
rushed to market to combat Disney?
The plot, as anyone who had read history before knows, concerns the attempt
to return Anastasia to her royal family after she was lost in the overthrow
of the Romanovs in 1916.  Not that ANASTASIA is much concerned with what
really happened.  As for the plot --- Go rent Disney's CANDLESHOE.  You'll
see 60% of ANASTASIA there.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1997. Directors/Producers - Don Bluth & Gary Goldman, Screenplay - 
Susan Gauthier, Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker & Noni White, Animation 
Adaption - Eric Tuchman, Based on the 1956 Screenplay by Arthur Laurents 
(Adapted by Guy Bolton from the Play by Marcelle Maurette), Music - 
Stephen Flaherty, Songs - David Newman. Production Company - Fox Family 
Films.
Voices: Meg Ryan (Anastasia), John Cusack (Dimitri), Christopher Lloyd 
(Rasputin), Kelsey Grammer (Vladimir), Hank Azaria (Bartok), Angela 
Lansbury (Dowager Empress Marie), Bernadette Peters (Sophie)
Plot: 1916, St Petersburg. When he is banished from the Tsar's court, 
the evil monk Rasputin sells his soul to enact sorcerous revenge on the 
royal family and raises the masses to overthrow them. The young princess 
Anastasia flees to safety but grows up with no memory of her past. She 
is found by an ambitious former servant boy who cons her into posing as 
Anastasia in order to obtain the exiled dowager empress's fortunes. 
Gradually he comes to fall in love with her only for to discover that 
she really is Anastasia. Meanhile the evil Rasputin, banished to limbo, 
plots to kill her.
The career of animator Don Bluth is one that has been punctuated by a 
series of ironic reversals. Bluth and several associates left Disney 
Studios in 1975, unhappy at the studio's betrayal of the great animated 
tradition. (The period for Disney that had peaked between 1937 and 1945 
with the likes of `Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs', `Bambi', 
`Pinocchio', `Dumbo', `Fantasia' et al, and which had fallen into 
decline in the 1960s and 1970s with the banal likes of `The Sword and 
the Stone', `The Jungle Book', `Robin Hood' and `The Rescuers'). Vowing 
to make their own return to the Disney tradition, Bluth made the superb 
`The Secret of N.I.M.H.' in 1982, a beautifully constructed homage to 
the classic Disney films which can easily stand up alongside some of 
Disney's best. Unfortunately `N.I.M.H.' was not a success and Bluth was 
reduced to making far less ambitious, although passably enjoyable 
middle-of-the-road animated fare like `An American Tail' (1986), `The 
Land Before Time' (1988) and `All Dogs Go to Heaven' (1989). But even 
more sadly Bluth's work in the 1990s - `Rock-a-Doodle' (1991), 
`Thumbelina' (1994), `A Troll in Central Park' (1995) - sank to an 
insipid banality far below Disney ever at their worst. The great irony 
then was that Disney from about 1991 onwards started to recapture their 
own classic tradition with a series of epic animated features - the 
likes of `Beauty and the Beast' (1991), `Aladdin' (1992), `The Lion 
King' (1994), `Pocahontas' (1995), `Toy Story' (1995), `The Hunchback of 
Notre Dame' (1996) and `Hercules' (1997). The triple irony for Bluth is 
that Disney have been so successful at returning to what they do best 
that he has now found himself re-employed by a rival studio - 20th 
Century Fox - wanting to market their own brand of high-quality artistic 
animated features in the same Disney tradition. Indeed it seems 
everybody is now trying to make epic animated films - 1998 is going to 
be a big year for animation buffs with `Anastasia' from Fox; Disney's 
`Mulan' later in the year; Spielberg's Dreamworks SKG putting out `The 
Prince of Egypt' - an animated version of `The Ten Commandments'; 
Warner's `The Magic Sword: Quest for Camelot'; and `A Bug's Life' from 
the `Toy Story' people.
The good news is that `Anastasia' is easily the best film Bluth has made 
since `N.I.M.H.'. It allows him again the budget to make a film that 
uses a really large-screen artistic canvas. And it is even, at least in 
my view, a better animated film than the last few Disney films - 
`Hunchback' and `Hercules' - have been. It gets the whole balance just 
right - some marvellously exciting action sequences aboard in particular 
a runaway train; a light but not excessive lineup of songs; just a touch 
of romance; a likeable supporting cast of small cuddly talking animals - 
and winds it all into an enjoyably well-rounded story. It is perhaps in 
the end sight a film that falls short of standing up there among the 
great animated Disney classics like `Snow White', `Bambi' or `Fantasia', 
but one that can quite ably hold its own at least on the second rung of 
Disney films among the likes of `Sleeping Beauty', `Cinderella' or `101 
Dalmatians'.
My only quibble with it might be its rather dubious historical 
authenticity. As the unearthing of the remains at Ekaterinberg in recent 
years has conclusively proved (except to all bar the Russian Orthodox 
Church), Anastasia did not manage to escape the same fate as the rest of 
the Romanovs, which leaves the film in the rather embarrassing position 
of basing itself on a proven fraudulent story. The unearthing of the 
Romanov remains was well publicised and the film could hardly not have 
known about this when it went into production. Even more amusing is the 
story's managing to sweep aside almost all details of the Russian 
Revolution. Seemingly as though Hollywood is still haunted by the spirit 
of McCarthy blacklisting, not a single mention will you find anywhere of 
Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Indeed the film rather amazingly comes out to 
state that the entire Revolution was not a people's uprising against a 
cruel and incompetent aristocracy but rather was all down to the 
black-hearted Rasputin selling his soul in revenge for being banned from 
the Tsar's court. (The Communist Revolution all down to Satanism - one 
wonders if they might not be able to make a case for an ultra-right 
fundamentalist subtext somewhere there !).


Author
Nick Amado
Anastasia        
Directors: Don Bluth and Gary Goldman
With the Voice talents of: Meg Ryan, John Cusak, Christopher Lloyd, Kelsey
Grammar, Angela Lansbury, Bernadette Peters, and Hank Azaria
Approx Running time: 90 min.
The battle between ex-Disney animator Don Bluth and his former employers
began back in 1982 when Bluth's company created the marvelous "The Secret of
NIMH". At the time, Bluth hit Disney when it was most vulnerable; the
animation market was down, and cartoons were merely for children. As Disney
regained its prominence in the industry, Bluth was unable to compete, and
subsequent films failed both critically and at the box office. (With very few
exceptions.) Thanks to 20th century Fox (and a hefty budget) Bluth has
managed to combine state-of-the-art computer animation technology with a sort
of live-action feel that sends a loud and clear message to Disney; there's a
new kid in town.
Anastasia tells the story of a young princess separated from her family at
the age of 10. The evil Rasputin sells his soul in order to wipe the Romanov
family out of Russia. What he doesn't count on is the young girl being left
behind. She soon forgets her past and is raised by peasants, only to be given
hope by a couple of con-men who think they can pass her off to the queen as
the real princess.
Anastasia is replete with standard ingredients of an animated film. There is
romance, characters spontaneously bursting into song, and an evil bearded
character with gruff voice and a goofy sidekick. But Anastasia also offers
inventive storytelling, and some breathtaking sequences (one in which the
characters step into a Monet-like painting and continue to dance in front of
impressionist backgrounds)
Somehow, the "Magic of Bluth" created for me a feeling that I was watching
something real, something very human. There were few, if any, moments that
made me think that this absolutely had to be a cartoon. Of course there is
the fantastic element, and a talking albino bat, but the 3 years Bluth and
Co. put into this picture really shows that they wanted to capture something
important, emotion.
Anastasia is brimming with color and excitement. Plenty of computer razzle
dazzle, and some fun vocal performances. There couldn't have been a better
choice for the lead character than Meg Ryan. She brings her feisty attitude
(much like her character in French Kiss) and plenty of feeling to her
character. Christopher Lloyd follows the villain school of voice overs, rule
number one, "you must either be British or throaty." Since Rasputin was
Russian, he chose "throaty" but was menacing nonetheless as a living corpse
who's gimmick was that body parts fell off at random. (Eyeballs popping out,
hands falling off, lips sliding down his beard.) His sidekick, Bartok the
albino bat, was voiced by the marvelous Hank Azaria who really brings his
style of humor to the character. His adorable character is reminiscent of
Nathan Lane's fantastic "Timon" from the Lion King, though sadly, Azaria has
half the screen time.
Anastasia didn't have for me the power that Beauty and the Beast or The Lion
King did, but it is more than a "valiant effort" at dethroning the Disney
champs. If Bluth in his collaboration with 20th Century Fox can manage to
string together a few successes like Anastasia, the history of animation in
film will change forever.
3 1/2 stars out of 4
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of: Meg Ryan, John Cusack, Kelsey Grammer, 
      Angela Lansbury, Christopher Lloyd, Hank Azaria, 
      Bernadette Peters, Kirsten Dunst
Directors: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman
Producers: Don Bluth and Gary Goldman
Screenplay: Susan Gauthier & Bruce Graham, Bob Tzudiker & Noni White
Music: David Newman, Stephen Flaherty
Lyrics: Lynn Ahrens
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     Finally, there's a legitimate challenge to Disney.  And, while it's 
unlikely that Twentieth Century Fox's ANASTASIA will break the Mouse's 
stranglehold on animated films, it's a good place to start.  ANASTASIA 
is easily the best non-Disney animated movie in recent memory, and it is 
good enough to rival such titles as THE LION KING and ALADDIN.  The key 
is enjoyability and appeal to both adults and children.  This degree of 
magic and energy has been noticeably absent in movies like POCAHONTAS, 
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, and HERCULES.  Maybe with another studio to 
push them, Disney will get back on track.
     The first thing to note about this delightful animated adventure is 
that it should not be confused with an historical account of the Russian 
revolution.  Aside from borrowing a few names, facts, and dates, this is 
pure, unadulterated fantasy.  Someone expecting even a loose reliance 
upon history is going to be horrified, but then anyone who falls into 
that category probably doesn't belong at this movie in the first place.  
Even moreso than POCAHONTAS, ANASTASIA uses reality as nothing more than 
a convenient backdrop.
     The story opens in 1916 Russia, just before the revolution, and 
depicts the fall of Czar Nicholas II as the result of a curse placed 
upon him by the evil monk Rasputin (voice of Christopher Lloyd).  Every 
member of the Romanov family is killed, except Nicholas' mother, Marie 
(Angela Lansbury), who escapes to Paris, and the Czar's youngest 
daughter, Anastasia (Kirsten Dunst), who is missing.  Rasputin is also 
slain, but, because his curse was not fulfilled, he ends up languishing 
in limbo.
     Fast-forward ten years.  Marie has offered a 10 million ruble 
reward for anyone who finds her granddaughter.  Back in St. Petersburg, 
a pair of con artists, Dimitri (John Cusack) and Vladimir (Kelsey 
Grammer), are holding auditions for an "Anastasia" to take to Paris.  
When they discover Anya (Meg Ryan), little do they realize that the 18 
year old young woman is actually the real princess.  Together, Dimitri 
and Vladimir teach Anya how to act like royalty, preparing her for an 
audience with Marie.  Meanwhile, Rasputin finds a way out of his nether-
domain and plots Anastasia's demise.
     While the animation in ANASTASIA still doesn't quite match up to 
that of Disney's recent features, it's light years ahead of the likes of 
THE LAND BEFORE TIME, BALTO, and even AN AMERICAN TAIL (also by 
ANASTASIA's director, former Disney animator Don Bluth).  There are 
times when the characters' lips don't perfectly synch up with the 
vocals, and other occasions when the background detail is lacking, but, 
on the whole, ANASTASIA's visual pallet is quite rich.  Many of the most 
complex sequences are majestic, and effective use is made of computer 
generated effects and background paintings.  Consider, for example, an 
impressive view of a shining St. Petersburg as Anastasia approaches it 
from over a hill.
     Story-wise, ANASTASIA is every bit as strong as any new wave Disney 
film except BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  There's a little adventure, a little 
romance, a little mysticism, and a little drama.  The lead character is 
easily the strongest, most independent animated female to grace the 
screen, surpassing even Belle for spunk.  Meg Ryan is perfect for this 
role.  Anastasia's love interest, Dimitri, isn't very interesting, 
although John Cusack gives him a spark of personality.  The villain, 
Rasputin, looks hideous, but his nastiness is relatively generic.  In 
fact, most of the time, he's just a diversion from the real story, which 
is about Anastasia's quest to find her family.  There are two "cute" 
animals:  a voiceless dog named Pooka and a bat called Bartok (Hank 
Azaria), who is very talkative.
     Musically, ANASTASIA is better than anything from Disney since 
death deprived them of their key lyricist, Howard Ashman.  All of the 
big production numbers in ANASTASIA have their roots in Broadway 
musicals, with a lot of well-choreographed dancing and singing.  The 
songs themselves (there are six from Stephen Flaherty and Lynn Ahrens) 
are lively, and several, including "A Rumor in St. Petersburg", "Once 
Upon a December", and "Paris Holds the Key", stick in the memory.  It's 
interesting to note that, of those who have speaking parts, only Kelsey 
Grammer, Bernadette Peters, and Angela Lansbury are allowed to do their 
own singing.  Liz Callaway doubles for Meg Ryan, Jonathan Dokuchitz 
fills in for John Cusack, and Jim Cummings replaces Christopher Lloyd.
     The whole process of watching ANASTASIA is a thoroughly enjoyable 
one, and it proves that any studio willing to put forth the time, money, 
and effort can match Disney.  In fact, understandably, a lot of kids 
will mistake ANASTASIA for the Mouse's latest offering.  Twentieth 
Century Fox should consider this a compliment, not a slight.  If every 
non-Disney animated film in production or on the drawing board is as 
good as ANASTASIA, the executives at the Magic Kingdom have good reason 
to worry.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."
