Title
Review for Wild America (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jamie Peck
Warner Bros. / 1:46 / 1997 / PG (animal violence and intensity, language)
Cast: Jonathan Taylor Thomas; Devon Sawa; Scott Bairstow; Jamey Sheridan; 
Frances Fisher 
Director: William Dear 
Screenplay: David Michael Wieger 
A kiddie nature adventure where the special effects aren't too special, 
"Wild America" is more "When Fake Animals Attack" than a "National 
Geographic" special. But it's no painful sit -- this entertaining, if 
uninvolving, yarn does more than a few things right, starting with a 
nice, hokey setup and some rather interesting main characters. Whenever 
the sights cause unintentional hilarity, there are usually assets to fall 
back on. And when there's not ... well, everyone can use a good chuckle 
now and then.
"Wild America" takes place in 1967 and charts a summer in the early lives 
of the Stouffer siblings, a trio of Arkansas brothers who would 
eventually become wildlife photographers for the nature program that 
shares its name with the film. At 18, Marty (appealing Scott Bairstow) is 
the eldest, locking horns with their trucker dad (Jamey Sheridan) over 
future career paths. Vain, 16-year-old Mark (Devon Sawa, frequently 
shirtless for some reason) can't get enough of the ladies. And baby bro 
Marshall (Home Improvement's Jonathan Taylor Thomas), who's 12, is very 
much a dreamer. Manned with a brand new camera, all three take off on a 
cross-country tour to capture exclusive footage of endangered species, 
but don't stop to consider the danger they're placing themselves in. 
A meatier budget could have helped things considerably -- it's hard to 
get excited over some of the creature contact when the animals are 
obviously phony. A runaway moose hoists Marshall up on its antlers for a 
wild ride, but it looks too artificial. The same can be said for a run-in 
with supposedly-venomous rattlesnakes. And the movie's nature-set climax, 
where the boys stumble into a bear den (hibernating in the heat?) and 
wake its occupants up, falls flat on its face thanks to -- yep, you 
guessed it -- actors in furry suits. A "Mystery Science Theater 3000" 
interlude would have been much appreciated amidst all of this weirdness. 
And speaking of weird, wait'll you see Danny Glover's peculiar turn as a 
crazy mountain man! 
While large chunks of "Wild America" are dopey -- and some even too 
heavy-handed (there's needless "spiritual" filler involving a pet owl and 
a destined plane ride) -- the movie still clicks as a honest showcase for 
three fine young actors and nice wildlife footage; clips from the 
Stouffers' real movies are even shown during the end credits, and are 
worth sticking around for. The situations that Bairstow, Sawa and Thomas 
are put into don't always ring true, but their camaraderie feels right, 
and elevates the film past such recent family-oriented fare as "Far From 
Home: The Adventures of Yellow Dog" and "Alaska." "Wild America" 
certainly means well, and the story holds enough promise to keep you 
diverted, if never fully satisfied.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In the summer of 1967, three brothers -- real-life wildlife
film-makers-to-be Marty, Mark and Marshall Stouffer -- left their Fort
Smith, Arkansas home for a cross-country trip with their 16mm camera,
hoping to capture endangered and dangerous animals on film.  The story of
their adventures might have included beautiful wildlife photography,
tense moments of realistic clashes with nature and the wonder of the
natural world which made Marty Stouffer's "Wild America" series a success.
     That's not the kind of film you can expect Hollywood to make about
this kind of story, however.  WILD AMERICA is a hodge-podge of different
films nominally connected by the presence of the three Stouffer boys,
played by Scott Bairstow, Devon Sawa and Jonathan Taylor Thomas.  The bulk
of the film is in fact set in the wilds of America, but it's not likely to
inspire much reverence for nature.  For every moment of grandeur like a
stampede of wild horses, there are encounters played almost entirely for
laughs:  a tussle with an alligator, a ride on a moose's horns, a cave
full of bears dozing off to a lullaby which concludes with a chorus of
flatulence.  These scenes will likely entertain young audience members,
but they hardly inspire much respect for majestic beasts.  At least
director William Dear respected them enough to use animatronic doubles
when the animals have to play the stooge; no self-respecting bear would be
caught dead hibernating in the middle of the summer.
     The low-brow comedy in WILD AMERICA is frustrating enough, but Dear
and screenwriter David Michael Wieger aren't even willing to commit to
being low-brow.  Bracketing the goofy antics of the wilderness segments is
a terribly maudlin sub-plot involving the boys' taciturn father (Jamey
Sheridan) and his stubborn refusal to allow his sons to pursue their
dreams.  It's a trite bit of film-making which incorporates the exchange
of moderately harsh words, a moderately serious auto accident, and a few
moderately annoying bits of wisdom ladled out by young Marshall, who
(apparently because he is played by lead-billed Jonathan Taylor Thomas)
gets to lecture darned near everyone.  The wilderness-based second act of
WILD AMERICA ain't art, but at least it tries to entertain.  The twenty
minutes between the boys' return to Fort Smith and the closing credits
crawl by with an agonizing sincerity.
     Then again, WILD AMERICA isn't really about parents letting go,
either, any more than it's about learning to respect nature.  Judging by
an audience comprised largely of teen and pre-teen girls, WILD AMERICA is
really about its cute trio of teen stars.  All three get the opportunity
to look alternately grimy and dreamy, all three get the opportunity to be
alternately sensitive and scrappy, and a couple of them take off their
shirts.  Parents and young children may find a few giggles or a few gasps
in the wilderness adventures, but WILD AMERICA isn't for them.  In
retrospect, this conglomeration of themes does have one guiding principle.
It's a cross between "National Geographic" and "Tiger Beat."

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Devon Sawa, Scott Bairstow, 
      Jamey Sheridan, Frances Fisher
Director: William Dear
Producers: James G. Robinson, Irby Smith, Mark Stouffer
Screenplay: David Michael Wieger
Cinematography: David Burr
Music: Joel McNeely
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Supposedly, WILD AMERICA is a family film, but I can't figure out 
which members of the family it's intended for.  Children will likely be 
bored by this adventure that doesn't really go anywhere, and adults will 
have their patience tried by the bad dialogue and juvenile plot twists.  
I could equate this with the kind of program that used to be shown on 
the old WONDERFUL WORLD OF DISNEY TV series, except I think those one 
hour shows, as plodding as they often were, offered more enjoyment.
     WILD AMERICA wants us to believe that it's based on a true story, 
but that's probably the biggest fiction of all.  Very little of this 
preposterous plot has the ring of truth to it.  A kernel of the real 
story likely remains, but not much more.  Even the character 
relationships seem simplified and streamlined so as not to confuse the 
audience.  And, of course, in the end, everything works out for the 
best.  The movie, directed by William Dear, who was responsible for the 
offensive remake of ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD, shows no ambition in 
bringing this tale to the screen.  Anyone under the age of about twelve 
will get the feeling that they're being condescended to.
     WILD AMERICA chronicles the supposed adventures of the three 
Stouffer brothers during the summer of 1967.  All of them grew up to 
become animal photographers, and this movie purports to show how it all 
started.  Armed with only a 16 mm camera, several cans of film, and the 
necessary provisions, the three boys -- Marty (Scott Bairstow), age 18; 
Mark (Devon Sawa), age 16; and Marshall (Jonathan Taylor Thomas), age 12 
-- leave their native Arkansas to make a cross-country trip to film 
endangered predators in their natural habitats.  Their goal:  "to get 
the shots everyone else is afraid to get."  In the process, they place 
themselves in great danger, yet miraculously escape alive and relatively 
uninjured.  
     No member of the main trio is either complex or interesting.  Marty 
(who, in real life, created the TV series WILD AMERICA) is portrayed as 
a driven artist whose hero is Ernest Hemingway.  Mark, the middle child, 
is "a man of action" who often seems more interested in girls than 
animals.  Then there's our narrator (the voiceover never seems to stop), 
Marshall, a "dreamer" whose amazing wisdom would do someone three times 
his age credit.  None of the actors creates a memorable personae.  
Bairstow and Sawa are adequate, but Taylor Thomas (from the sitcom HOME 
IMPROVEMENT) irritates with his false earnestness.  
     Parts of the film -- primarily those dealing with photographing 
wildlife -- are moderately engrossing, which leads me to wonder if there 
might have been an interesting story to tell here, had the film not 
ventured into the realm of half-baked melodrama.  WILD AMERICA comes 
across mostly as episodic silliness:  the boys escape from fake-looking 
alligators, go skinny-dipping with girls, stumble upon a practice range 
and dodge the firepower of Air Force planes, meet up with a spooky Danny 
Glover, then avoid a group of angry bears whose cave is guarded by 
snakes.  It's a telling statement that, hands down, the best scenes in 
the movie occur during the end credits, when we are given a chance to 
view snippets of the Stouffers' films.
     One wonders if there should have been some sort of "don't try this 
at home" warning attached to WILD AMERICA.  After all, the kids in the 
film seem to be having fun (certainly more fun than those of us sitting 
in the audience are having), and they're never really in danger.  Then 
again, where in real life is anyone going to find an alligator who likes 
chewing on flashlights, a belligerent rubber rattlesnake, or a bear that 
is stupid enough to hibernate in the middle of the summer?  I guess the 
only real warning that should accompany WILD AMERICA is the one about 
avoiding dogs like this movie.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"As far as the filmmaking process is concerned, stars are essentially
worthless - and absolutely essential."
-- William Goldman
