Title
Review for Kid from Brooklyn, The (1946)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Kid from Brooklyn" is a comedy, and a vehicle for
talented comedian Danny Kaye.  However, Kaye's charm 
cannot overcome the many severe problems that the movie 
has.
Kaye is a humble milkman who meets Virginia Mayo
when his cart-horse gives birth.  Mayo never seems
to get upset when Kaye drops by unexpectedly at early
morning hours, before she has dressed.  While defending
a ladies' honor from two drunken clods, one of the
clods is knocked unconscious.  This man turns out to
be the middleweight champion.
Publicity from this leads to Kaye becoming a boxer,
winning a series of fixed fights.  Meanwhile, Mayo and 
Kaye's sister both become successful nightclub singers.
Will Kaye survive a real boxing match against the champ,
and will he win the love of Virginia Mayo?  (What do
you think?)
"The Kid from Brooklyn" has a major weakness: the script.
It just isn't funny.  The jokes fall flat.  Reliance on
Kaye's physical humor (he often shows off his pathetic boxing 
skills) doesn't work either.  Another problem is the many
musical numbers: they are just above the quality of a
Lawrence Welk production, and better only because of 
the costumes.
In this film, boxing is presented as a fixed sport much as
professional wrestling.  I can't accept this premise,
and Kaye, who shows no boxing talent except an ability to
duck, could never convince anyone as a boxer.  Also not
credible is both Mayo and Kaye's sister as stars of
musical productions, a plot device to fill the movie with
the tiresome songs.  Finally, Kaye's character is not
consistent.  First, he is a humble milkman, and later he
is Danny Kaye, doing his complicated standup shtick.
I have not seen a Danny Kaye vehicle that was very good.
Perhaps there are some out there, most likely when he
plays a straight character.  Tailoring a movie to Kaye's
talents doesn't appear to work.  Perhaps he needed zany
character actors to support him, as for example is
provided for in successful Marx Brothers comedies.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
