Title
Review for Chôjin densetsu Urotsukidôji (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:45, Animated/Action/Science Fiction, 1989, available in English
& Japanese versions
MPAA rating: NC-17 (adult situations, female nudity (drawn),      
                    explicit language, rape, graphic violence)
Rating: four (on a scale of zero to five)
Director: Hideki Takayama
Voices of: Christopher Courage, Rebel Joy, Danny Bush, Lucy Morales,
           Rose Palmer, Randy Woodcock, Bick Balse, Jurgen Offen
     A god is born to the human world every 3,000 years that will bring
peace to three worlds; the world of the humans, the world of the
demons, and the world of the half-beasts.  This god is called the
Overfiend, and his time has come.  Beings from the half-beast world
have been waiting for the arrival of the Overfiend, so they can protect
him.  Beings from the demon world have also been waiting for the
Overfiend's coming so they can destroy him.  Now the two start a battle
to see if the Overfiend survives or not.  The humans, though, have no
knowledge of what is about to happen.
     UROTSUKIDOJI: LEGEND OF THE OVERFIEND is definitely worth a
rental, even if just to see what this film is all about.  UROTSUKIDOJI
is available on Anime 18 videocassette and may now be available at a
video store near you.  The version that I saw is the English language
version.  The voices listed are those of the English language version,
I assume that the Japanese version has different voice talents.  The
video cassette also mentions the conclusion to the film, UROTSUKIDOJI
2: LEGEND OF THE DEMON WOMB coming soon.  This film is Japanese
animation at it's best, but a word of warning, like the videocassette
box states in big lettering, this film is not for children.
     The animation for this film is extremely well done, much better
than what most U.S. studios are putting out.  It is animated so that it
looks quite realistic, down to putting "sunlight" on the "camera
lens".  These small details make the film more enjoyable to watch.
     The story, if nothing else, is certainly an interesting one.  I
don't think I have ever seen anything like this film before.  I found
the story to be a gripping one, filled with surprise twists and
pleasing ideas.  The film does run about fifteen minutes too long for
the material it has.  The characters don't get developed really well,
but that doesn't hurt the film too much.
