Title
Review for TekWar (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Good literature, more often than not, tends to turn into bad
cinema. This sad state of affairs, however, has more
positive side - same creative processes can use bad
literature as inspiration for good cinema. One of such
example is TEKWAR series of science fiction novels, written
by famous Canadian actor William Shatner in 1980s. For many
of the critics, those novels were nothing more than the lame
excuse for the famous actor to satisfy his vanity or cash in
his STAR TREK charisma. Nevertheless, a decade later, those
movies inspired brief series of TV films, starting with
TEKWAR, directed by Shatner himself in 1994.
The plot takes place in 21st Century, in a world where
chemical drugs got replaced with electronic stimulation
devices called Tek. Protagonist of the film is Jake Cardigan
(played by Craig Evigan), ex-policeman who awakens after
four years of cryogenic sleep - punishment for the crime he
didn't commit. Cardigan wants to clear his name and bring
back the estranged family, so he joins his ex-partner Sid
Gomez (played by Eugene Clark) and two of them agree to work
for mysterious business tycoon Bascom (played by William
Shatner). Their first task is to locate missing scientist
whose research might have brought cure to Tek plague.
Cardigan would soon have to face powerful forces behind Tek
trade, as well as the world that changed beyond recognition.
Since Shatner not only wrote original novel, but also
directed this film, the expectations, based on his previous
directorial effort work in STAR TREK V, weren't great, to
say the least. However, Shatner did rather decent job this
time, giving arguments to those who put all the blame for
the failure of STAR TREK V on penny- pinching producers
instead of actor-director. With more creative control and
CGI technology at his disposal, Shatner created quite
believable high-tech world of the near future that looks
more "cyberpunk" than other better known examples of that
still-born movie genre. Shatner contributed this film as an
actor too, with his brief appearance as character whose
moral alignment remains the mystery until the very end. Fans
of the early 1980s pop music might also enjoy the cameo of
hardly recognisable Sheena Easton. All in all, TEKWAR looks
like rather good TV pilot, which can arouse interests for
future sequels, even among those who don't particularly like
Shatner, science fiction or cyberpunk.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
