Title
Review for Cry Freedom (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Manavendra K. Thakur
Cast: Denzel Washington, Kevin Kline, Penelope Wilton, John Hargreaves,
      Alex McCowen, Kevin McNally, Zakes Mokae, Ian Richardson, Josette Simon,
      John Thaw, Timothy West, Miles Anderson, Tommy Buson, Jim Findlay,
      Julian Glover, Kate Hardie, Alton Kumalo, Louis Mahoney, Mawa Makondo,
      Joseph Marcel, John Matshikiza, Sophie Mgcina, Wabei Siyolwe,
      Gwen Watford, Juanita Waterman.
     Recently, a reviewer for THE BOSTON PHOENIX (a local arts and news weekly)
called the film MATEWAN an example of "liberal Pavlovian movie making."  This
is a far more apt label for CRY FREEDOM, Sir Richard Attenborough's new film
about Stephen Biko (played by Denzel Washington), the black South African
student activist leader, and his friendship with Donald Woods (played by Kevin
Kline), a white South African newspaper editor who considered his own liberal
views as his contribution to the reform of Apartheid.
     CRY FREEDOM begins by showing Woods' initial contact with Biko in 1975 and
ends with the Woods' family's escape from South Africa after Biko's death under
mysterious circumstances while in police custody in 1977.
     Technically, the film is thoroughly conventional.  Sir Richard himself has
said that this was the easiest of his films to make.  There are inspired
moments, however.  The sound montage that accompanies a series of freeze-frame
images of a pre-dawn police raid on a shantytown is quite effective as part of
the film's opening sequence.  Flashbacks are sparingly used, and the film is
blessed with good performances from the major leads as well as the large number
of supporting characters.  The widescreen composition and stereo sound are
serviceable, but they break no new ground.  George Fenton's and Jonas Gwanga's
music is notable, as is Sir Richard's expertise at directing large crowd scenes
with as many as 15,000 extras.
     The film's major flaw stems not from its production qualities, but from
the sacrifices under which Sir Richard made this film.  These sacrifices become
especially apparent as the film progresses from its first half to its second.
Within its limitations as a major Hollywood film, CRY FREEDOM works quite well,
but the very existence of its compromises prevents the film from completely
fulfilling is avowed educational purpose.
     The first half of the 155-minute-long film focuses on the power of Biko's
charismatic personality as Biko leads Woods to understand for the first time
the harsh realities blacks face both as third class citizens and as "banned"
persons.  The depth of Biko's confidence in the humanity of himself and his
fellow blacks is demonstrated time and again as Biko refuses to succumb to the
authorities' provocations.  The genius of Stephen Biko is that even as he urges
Woods and others to "Drink up!"  while relaxing in a bar in a black township,
he is able to point out the stark contrast between Woods' opulent lifestyle and
the poverty of of black shantytowns.  It is in eloquent scenes such as these
where individuals and events in South Africa are allowed to speak for
themselves that the film is at its greatest.
     Unfortunately, Biko's death comes almost exactly halfway through the film.
In order to make the film palatable to Westerners--which is to say white
audiences--the second half of the film concentrates on the Woods family as they
flee South Africa and the personal turmoil Biko's death has created for them.
The family eventually settled in England, where Donald Woods published his two
books BIKO and ASKING FOR TROUBLE on which the film is based.
     There is no denying that Mr. Woods and his family suffered greatly during
their ordeal, and their story deserves to be told as well.  The film, however,
trivializes and cheapens their escape from South Africa by degenerating into an
inane melodrama worthy of a made-for-TV movie.  The film goes so out of its way
to help audiences identify with the Woods family that it becomes self-apparent
and almost begins to wallow in cheap sentimentality.
     The film's most inexcusable moment comes when Mrs. Woods and her five
children pause during their flight to freedom at the white line on the bridge
between South Africa and Lesotho.  Instead of hurrying over the bridge to
safety, they take one slow step over the line under a torrential downpour while
Donald Woods waits for them at the Lesotho end of the bridge.  Efforts like
this one to heighten suspense and drama fall flat because the Woods family did
make it out and Donald Woods did write his books.  When the end result is
known, viewers can relax because they know subconsciously that the Woods'
family's current predicament will be resolved in their favor.
     Furthermore, the film is factually mistaken at a point where it most needs
to be accurate.  The finale of the film--quite stirring and moving in its own
right--wrenches the audience back to the horrors the Woods family escaped from
by recreating the 1976 massacre of several hundred black students in Soweto who
were protesting mandatory teaching of the Afrikaans language in schools.  This
incident touched off rioting and protests and is an important part of the
history of black struggle in South Africa.
     The film shows the attacking policemen to be all white, whereas in
actuality, many of them were black.  Sir Richard told The New York Times that
he took cinematic license here so as not to confuse Western audiences away from
the film's central reminder that Apartheid is "an obscenity."  This
simplification of complex political realities demonstrates the sort of
compromises Sir Richard made in order to assure box-office success.  It is
exceedingly unfortunate that Sir Richard feels he must disguise his
intelligence and sensitivity in order to bring his message to American
audiences.
     When Biko first meets Woods, he makes a comment that he is about to begin
"the education of a white liberal."  These words describe the film exactly.
Conservatives like Jesse Helms and Jerry Falwell will deride the film and
attempt to discredit it by calling attention to its few but significant
deviations from journalistic accuracy.  Those who are already sympathetic to
the issue of racism yet know little or nothing about the details of South
Africa pass laws and other restrictions will find this a moving and distressing
film.  This film will challenge them to seek ways to help dismantle Apartheid
in whatever small way they can.  Those who have kept up with current events and
know more about South Africa will find little new in the film.  Indeed, some
may even consider the "liberal Pavlovian" second half demeaning and insulting
because of its typical Hollywood oversimplifications.
     In spite of all this, Sir Richard must be commended for creating the film
in the first place.  His commitment against Apartheid was made clear when he
refused to attend South African premieres of his previous film GANDHI in 1982,
and his meetings with Winnie Mandela and other black leaders in 1984 gave him
the background necessary to make a film such as CRY FREEDOM.  It is no
exaggeration to say that Sir Richard is more qualified than any other director
to make this film.  Sir Richard's humanity and conviction is unassailable.
     Nevertheless, given his stature and his avowed purpose to help educate
people about Apartheid, it is somewhat frustrating that his film has not
carried the debate past its state last fall when both houses of Congress voted
to override President Reagan's veto of a limited economic sanctions bill
against South Africa.
     The most notable accomplishment of CRY FREEDOM is its stirring portrayal
of Stephen Biko and its effort to keep the issue of South Africa's racist
policies alive in the news in Western countries.  For now, that will have to be
enough.
Directorial Filmography of Sir Richard Attenborough:
Sir Richard Attenborough is an actor-producer-director who has been involved
with film since an early age.  He has acted in films such as THE GREAT ESCAPE
(1963), DOCTOR DOOLITTLE (1967), DAVID COPPERFIELD (1969), and LOOT (1971).
His films have been critically acclaimed, especially A BRIDGE TOO FAR and
GANDHI.  He won an Oscar for Best Director in 1982 for GANDHI.  He was knighted
in 1976, and he won India's Padma Bhushan award and the Martin Luther King
Peace Prize in 1983.

Author
Peter van der Linden
     The latest in a cycle of social-conscience films from director Richard
Attenborough, CRY FREEDOM succeeds well in translating and interpreting a
foreign land, a foreign culture, and a struggle for redemption in a system
which offers little hope for nine-tenths of its population.
     Depicting the fight against the repressive Apartheid system in South
Africa, CRY FREEDOM slowly informs its audience, just as activist Steve Biko
gradually educates liberal white editor Donald Woods to the reality of the
system which supports him (Woods) in odious luxury.  This is a powerful film of
contrasts; of black and white, of luxury and grinding poverty, of brilliant
sunshine and dank chambers of torture.  Attenborough's direction is evident,
but never overwhelming.  He lets the characters and events tell their own
story.  Woods and his wife were consultants to the film, so we are assured of
veracity.
     Contemporary press accounts of Biko's murder by the South African security
forces in 1977, and the subsequent callousness and cover-up made much of his
unique qualities as a leader of "black consciousness": his physical strength,
his charisma, his maturity.  Not all of this came across clearly in Denzel
Washington's portrayal of a challenging role.  In a sense, this doesn't
detract from the film at all.  The fight against racism, against repression,
against hatred, must take place in all lands and societies.  In South Africa
in particular, this struggle is much bigger than one man alone.
     This is one of the very few films I have seen, in which the audience did
not stampede for the exits just as soon as the closing credits began to roll;
rather they remained seated, stunned by the enormity of what had just been
witnessed.  "What permits such wickedness to continue in the twentieth
century?" was the unasked question on every lip.  The  answer of course, lies
in our own hearts.
     If you view the cinema primarily as a medium of light entertainment, then
this film is not for you.  If you also appreciate the wider context of
education, of politics, of brutal reality, and of artistry in film-making, then
you simply should not miss this tour-de-force.
