Title
Review for Girl 6 (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Joan Ellis
Spike Lee's "Girl 6" is an inexcusable bore. The
producer/director has turned lazy. Don't look for a story; don't
anticipate a laugh or a tear or a surprise;  don't go. But do ask
yourself how anything this thin and badly done could make it out
of Lee's head, much less onto the multiplex screens.
Girl 6 (Theresa Randle) wants to be an actress. If you're
going to build a movie on that shopworn notion, you better have
fairy dust in your pocket. To pay the rent she takes a job as
girl #6 in a phone-sex telephone bank. "O.K., that's a new one:
what shall we do with it?  Let's string together all the phone
sex words and images we can muster and blow the audience away."
Mr. Lee, it seems, is unaware that mainstream America is
bombarded daily in our multimedia culture with the words and
images he finds so hilarious. Girl 6 sits in her cubicle
responding to the "hear me, hit me, fix me" phone calls that come
in from men who sneak their telephone pleasure. Mr. Lee seems
gleeful in informing us that many of them are corporate
executives. Wow. Really?
As added interest, he promotes Girl 6 to the rank of
"Fantasy Caller."  Same game, with the added freedom of working
from home--the better to abandon yourself, you see.
We wait in vain for one of the phone calls to develop into
an interesting subplot. A love story perhaps?  A crime? 
Anything?  No. Operating on a zero baseline, Lee shoots his
picture full of celebrity cameos, sure that this will do the
trick in a society that values such things. 
It's a little hard to tell whether Quentin Tarantino is
playing himself or a fictional Hollywood hotshot of the month.
Madonna once again enjoys assuming a disguise--this time, a
small-time boss in the world of secondhand gratification. The
marvelous Halle Berry is on hand, to no effect. The failure of
the presence of these proven performers to ignite anything is
just further proof that Lee forgot to build the fire.
The Spike Lee who captured pieces of American culture with
such piercing precision in "Jungle Fever" and "Do The Right
Thing" seems to have succumbed to the inevitable. There's an
unattractive arrogance to thinking that millions of people will
be interested in one long, rotten, hypocritical evening of
telephone sex without any connective storyline. He even dares to
imply a comparison to Meg Ryan's sublime coffee-shop orgasm in
"When Harry Met Sally" without any of the sly humor to put it
across. 
Lee's assumption that this hodgepodge can grab an audience
is astonishing. His callers count their fantasies in minutes, but
he smothers us for almost two hours with his own. The inescapable
conclusion is that he too has chosen the easy road to
self-gratification. Don't let it be at your expense.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Spike Lee's new comedy is a disjointed disaster that starts bad and
stays there.  Theresa Randle (BAD BOYS) plays an aspiring New York
actress who takes a phone-sex job as a way to make ends meet.  Soon, the
job becomes an adventure that, I think, is supposed to go something like
this:  girl excels at job, girl gets addicted to job, girl goes cold
turkey from job, and girl grows from having job.  Lee, who continues to
beat to a very different drummer, never makes this progression very
clear.  He's too busy inserting extraneous dream sequences and grainy
footage of the various male callers.  (One of the few funny bits has
Randle imagining herself as blaxploitation heroine Foxy Brown.  Shut
your mouth!) A steady stream of Prince plays on the soundtrack, while a
steady stream of cameos (Quentin, Madonna, Naomi, etc.) play before the
camera, and it all adds up to nothing.  Forget the Oscars; boycott this
movie!
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Zak Forsman
I'm not sure how I feel about GIRL 6. I mean, if it had been done by anyone
else I would probably have thought more of it. But, because it is a Spike
Lee joint, well, I just expected more. The film explores an up and coming
actress' brief experience as a phone sex operator. It's something she twice
refers to as, "just a job," but it quickly becomes obvious that
she is addicted to the new found power she holds over her callers.
As with many films, the weakness lies in its foundation--the screenplay.
Here the problems arise not with dialogue, but with the depths the writer
was willing to go. I didn't feel we were given many chances to really understand
the motivations of Theresa Randle's character. That was a major flaw in
my opinion. The screenplay could be described as an exercise in symbolism.
With this I mean, "the little girl who fell down the elevator shaft"
sequences she watches on the news. Also, the caller, Bob Regular, who promises
to meet her at Coney Island but ultimately stands her up. From this scene
I take it that she is looking for what she needs where she won't find it.
These are the aspects of GIRL 6 that worked very well for me, but that's
only half a screenplay. I just felt that those aspects were grounded in
a lazy script.
Spike Lee continues to change and explore new filmmaking techniques. In
CROOKLYN, he shot a sequence, with an anamorphic lens, during which Troy,
the little girl, is out of her normal environment. The film was primarily
shot flat, so the anamorphic scenes looked squeezed or skinny. This effect
lasted until the little girl returned home. In GIRL 6, Spike uses that same
technique to instill an awkward and unsettling feeling toward the subject
whenever he feels necessary. He also shot all of the callers in HDTV--which
compared to film has less resolution. Spike has said that he did this to
example by visual means their lack of power. Theresa Randle was shot on
film, her image was stronger, she was in control. This technique was also
applied to the two videotaped auditions that she has. She is asked, by Quentin
Tarantino, to show her breasts. After some fussing, she concedes. At that
moment, Spike cuts to the video image of her being taped as she removes
her top. The moment is effective.
The film's cast is great, although no one is given much time to developed
other than Theresa Randle, but then, she's the important one. Spike Lee's
role as Jimmy is one of his better cameos--very funny. The other phone sex
operators fill their characters well. I especially got a kick out of seeing
Naomi Campbell in a shirt that read, "Models Suck."
Like I said earlier, if the film had been done by someone without a track
record as good as Spike Lee's, I'm sure I'd be recommending that you see
this film. With that in mind, if you approach this film as an exercise in
film technique or if you're just a fan of Spike Lee (as I am), you will
appreciate it more than the average moviegoer. There's really not much depth
to this story. I liken this situation to when Martin Scorsese does projects
like AFTER HOURS or CAPE FEAR. The film is good. The film-maker is capable
of much more. 
P.S. The title of this review is in reference to the film's self-indulgent
use of technique to express something (a story) that is devoid of any real
substance.
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Author
irina@IMAP2.ASU.EDU
I would like to add my own review of "Girl 6," the latest film from Spike 
Lee.  Theresa Randle stars as a would-be actress struggling to pay her 
bills and keep her dignity while auditioning for parts.  After a series 
of minor misfortunes, she begins to look for work in the phone sex 
industry.  The company that initially hires her is very professional in 
that it has an office manager and a phone operator, both of whom randomly 
monitor calls.  In the training session for the new "girls," we meet the 
various women who have found themselves seeking this line of work.  The 
multicultural crew is told that, unless requested, they are "white."  
They are encouraged to develop stereotyped personae that men find 
intriguing, such as teenage nymphets, dominatrixes, etc.  (Naomi 
Campbell, as one of the girls, exhibits self-deprecating humor by wearing 
a t-shirt that says, "models suck.")  Theresa Randle's character, Judy, 
steps into this impersonal, role-playing world, and finds it suits her 
current circumstances.  She develops a regular clientele, but begins to 
lose herself in the role that she has created as "Lovely."  She makes the 
understandable mistake of trying to meet a client who confides his 
problems to her, but when he doesn't show, she slips even more into the 
nowhere land of identity loss.  She becomes withdrawn from her co-workers 
and her neighbor, played by Spike Lee, a baseball-mad nebbish (very 
reminiscent of some of Woody Allen's roles).  A phone sex "madam," played 
by Madonna, gives Judy the necessary contacts to set up her own business 
at home, where she can field any and all calls with no inhibitions.  At 
this point, Spike Lee uses a cinematographic method that shows how 
distorted Judy's sense of self has become, as her body moves in the 
opposite direction of the receding/approaching background, which is a 
smear of hallucinogenic colors.  She feels like the little girl that is 
shown on her local nightly news, the victim of an unlocked elevator door 
that allowed her to fall all the way down the elevator shaft.  What snaps 
Judy out of her victimization as a male fantasy object is a phone call 
from a man who threatens her life.  Judy realizes that she has become 
derailed from her dreams, and gets back on track.  Whether or not she 
makes it is of less importance than the fact that she is in control of 
her life again.  I thought that this film was unfairly dismissed by the 
media and movie-going public.  It is subtle and deals with issues of 
self-perception on an emotional level, not as a comedy or even a drama, 
but as the deceptively simple tale of a woman who finds work in a 
business which negates one's humanity.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Ten years ago with SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT, his first 
film, Spike Lee made a critically-acclaimed movie about a woman 
who wanted sex without commitment. Now, with GIRL 6, he tells 
the story of a woman who wants sex without physical contact. 
Played by Theresa Randle, the main character is a struggling 
actress who is trying to break into film but finds it impossible 
to get a decent role she doesn't have to take her clothes off 
for.
        Apparently, Randle herself didn't have this conviction, 
for even in the scene in which Lee is trying to show the corruption 
of the movie business in taking tits over talent by having guest star 
Quentin Tarantino (as "QT," the hottest director in Hollywood) 
force Randle to expose her breasts in an audition, Lee has her 
appear topless. If this isn't the irony of ironies, I don't know what 
is.
        Randle can't find a decent acting job, so she decides to 
settle for another type of acting -- phone sex. She makes her 
rounds of the New York phone entertainment scene, including a 
Bell brothel headed up by Madonna, who tells Randle a typical 
phone sex conversation may include "toilet training, bestiality, 
foot fetishes, butt plugs, three ways, five ways, six ways..." 
Coincidentally, those seven things are all on Madonna's "To 
Do" list most days.
        Randle eventually becomes Girl 6 at an upscale phone 
sex operation, where the operators are model-gorgeous women 
worth paying five bucks a minute for. Naomi Campbell is even 
one of the phone operators, seen wearing a t-shirt inscribed 
"Models Suck" (but let's leave what they have to do to get 
their contracts out of this). I'm pretty sure Lee's view of the 
women behind the phones isn't quite as accurate as the Aerosmith 
"Sweet Emotion" video, where the obese housewife with a crying 
baby on her shoulder did the chores while seducing horny guys 
on the phone.
        Girl 6 finds she does a pretty good job of getting men 
off, from her dominatrix character April to girl-next-door Lovely. 
Soon she finds herself enjoying the power she has over men and 
the no-strings-attached thrill of it all. She slowly begins to withdraw 
from the real world and into the phone sex one, while her close 
friend Spike Lee and ex-husband-but-still-in-love-with-her Isaiah 
Washington grow more and more concerned about her.
        Even though almost all the beautiful women working 
there are black (with the exception of the absolutely sexy Kristen 
Wilson), they're instructed to identify themselves as white unless 
someone requests another slice of the racial pie. But we're constantly 
reminded of Girl 6's race by her intrusive fantasies, where she 
pictures herself in the role of great black women through 
entertainment history, from Foxy Brown to Thelma on "The 
Jeffersons." (Seeing Spike Lee play George Jefferson is well 
worth the price of the video rental.)
        Those scenes, and many others in this 108-minute movie, 
are needless padding that bring the movie down. GIRL 6 starts out 
a decent movie, and some of the early phone sex scenes are 
simultaneously hilarious and fascinating, but the movie crashes 
and burns fast, leaving a surreal climax and about fifteen boring 
minutes after that. The entire time, old and new Prince songs play 
constantly in the background, from opening credits to end credits. 
The last lyric before the fade-to-credits is something like, "Nothing 
good lasts forever," which describes GIRL 6 all too well.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Scott Marcus
GIRL 6 is, in a word, a mess. I was never able to determine what
Spike Lee was trying to accomplish with this film. There was no sense
of where the film was going, or any kind of coherent narrative.
If there was a point to the film, I missed it. Girl 6, by the way, is
the way Theresa Randle's character is addressed in the phone sex
workplace; all the girls are known by their numbers.
The plot, such as it is: Theresa Randle is a struggling N.Y. actress,
and eventually takes a job as a phone-sex operator. She begins to lose
contact with reality, as her job consumes her.  Also, she must deal
with the advances of her ex-husband (Isiah Washington). He is an ex-
con thief, and she tries to keep him away, while at the same time,
it's clear that she still harbors feelings for him.  Her neighbor,
Jimmy (Spike Lee) functions as the observer; mediating between the ex-
husband and Girl 6. He also functions as a point of stability, as he
watches her become seduced by the lurid world of phone sex.
The soundtrack, consisting of songs by Prince, was jarring. It kept
taking my attention from the film - not altogether a bad thing, I'll
grant you, as what was transpiring onscreen wasn't that riveting. For
parts of the middle of the film, the music stayed blissfully in the
background. In the opening sequence and one scene later in the film,
however, the music was particularly loud and distracting. Of course,
I've never really cared for Prince's (or TAFKAP if you like) music.
Prince fans might love the soundtrack, but it will probably be
distracting, even to die-hard fans.
Of the performances, the only one that stood out was Spike Lee's buddy
character, Jimmy. He was excellent as the always-broke neighbor of
Girl 6. He should have stuck to acting in this film. There are several
sequences that gave me the impression that he'd like to be Oliver
Stone when he grows up. There are scenes shot with different types of
film, which are purposely grainy, and reminiscent of some of the
scenes in Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN KILLERS. In that film, they
worked to propel the narrative. In this film, they just made me more
confused.
There are some amusing moments, and a few insights into the lives of
the women who use their voices to make the phone-sex industry the
multi-billion dollar industry that it has become. Other than that,
though, nothing much happens. There are a few intense moments, as when
one caller becomes frightening, but even that is rather lackluster.
I'm not the biggest fan of Spike Lee, though I'd agree that he has
done some very good work in the past. In GIRL 6, though, he seems to
be floundering. He had an interesting idea, a fairly good setup, and
seemed to wander aimlessly from there. GIRL 6 earns a grade of D.

Author
James Berardinelli
     GIRL 6 is the first major motion picture about the phone sex 
industry.  Director Spike Lee (DO THE RIGHT THING, MALCOLM X) places 
would-be actress Judy (Theresa Randle) in a position where her best 
chance to earn a living is by talking dirty to anonymous men over the 
phone.  All day long, she sits in an office cubicle, next to dozens of 
other girls in similar cubicles, using her disembodied voice to play 
dominatrix, schoolgirl, housewife, and any number of other roles.  
However, Judy falls prey to the profession's dark side.  It's easy to 
become hooked on the fantasies, and, especially with a little Marijuana 
to augment the experience, reality can become a tenuous thing. 
     When it comes to details, GIRL 6 is excellent.  Lee's film is 
sprinkled with touches that give his phone sex world an aura of 
verisimilitude:  dark-haired, black women pretending to be busty 
blondes, someone flipping through a magazine while moaning into the 
receiver, and workers scarcely able to contain laughter at callers' more 
absurd requests.  The phone sex mantra is simple:  "Listen, appreciate, 
and don't judge -- you want them to like you."  The girls go by numbers, 
not names; hence, Judy becomes "Girl 6".
     Unfortunately, as good as GIRL 6 is with the fine points, the 
larger brushstrokes are erratic.  Lee may have a keen sense of setting 
and dialogue, but his characterization is off.  Other than Judy, no one 
has any depth, and even she isn't afforded much development.  Theresa 
Randle (SUGAR HILL, MALCOLM X) is okay in the role, but not a 
revelation.  The other characters, especially Judy's ex-husband (Isaiah 
Washington) and her baseball memorabilia-collecting neighbor, Jimmy 
(Lee), are virtual nonentities.  
     Psychologically, GIRL 6 is superficial.  Unlike EXOTICA, which cut 
deeply into the motivations of those who work in and frequent strip 
clubs, this film is content to skim the surface of a similar industry.  
One scene of poignant disillusionment notwithstanding, Judy's burgeoning 
addiction to the illusory aspects of her job is used more as a plot 
device than a means of exploring her psyche.
     Is being a phone sex girl exploitation or just another job?  The 
question is raised, although Lee doesn't really probe it.  While GIRL 6 
is considerably more effective than SHOWGIRLS at exploring the issue, 
there are times when this film seems like the proverbial triumph of 
style over substance.  Cinematographer Malik Hassan Sayeed, who worked 
with Lee on CLOCKERS, uses a battery of odd camera angles and 
experimental shots.  Most of these work on a purely visual level, but 
their attempts to telegraph emotional states are less successful.
     The highlights of the film are a trio of parody fantasies.  In two 
of these, Lee dresses Judy as Dorothy Dandridge and Foxy Brown.  In the 
other, he fills the role of George Jefferson in a sendup of the hit TV 
series.  There's also an impressive list of cameos:  Naomi Campbell 
(Girl 75), Ron Silver (a sleazy Hollywood director), Peter Berg ("Bob 
Regular"), John Turturro (Judy's agent), Madonna (the manager of a work-
at-home phone sex operation), Halle Berry (herself), and Quentin 
Tarantino (portraying, and mocking, himself).  Give Lee credit for using 
Madonna and Tarantino in roles they're capable of playing.
     If nothing else, GIRL 6's perspective of the industry is 
fascinating.  The fantasy is that phone sex women are all beautiful, 
young, and hot.  The stereotype is that they're ugly, wrinkled, and 
haggard.  The reality, at least in GIRL 6, is somewhere in between.  
None of the revelations here are especially shocking -- we've seen a lot 
of this stuff before, anywhere from TV news magazines to Robert Altman's 
SHORT CUTS (where Jennifer Jason Leigh played a phone sex girl), but Lee 
puts it all together and adds a few twists. Unfortunately, while certain 
aspects of GIRL 6 are handled with flair, the film's dramatic scope too 
often isn't compelling enough for subject matter of such rich and varied 
possibilities. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
