Title
Review for Husbands and Wives (1992)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Frank Maloney
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES is a film written and directed by Woody Allen.
It stars Allen, Mia Farrow, Judy Davis, Sydney Pollack, Juliette Lewis,
Liam Neeson, and Lysette Anderson.  Cinematography  by Carlo Di Palma.
Rated R for subject matter, language, and scenes of simulated sex.
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES is going to be the most widely seen and
discussed film made to date by Woody Allen.  Despite the aroma of
scandal and lurid headlines that clings to the film, it is not only
possible, but important, to view HUSBANDS AND WIVES as a film, not some
weird and vaguely shocking extension of tabloid scandal-mongering.  You
and I have no real knowledge of the situation in the Allen's and
Farrow's lives, the only thing we can know, the only thing we can judge,
is the impressive achievement this film represents.
     The writing and acting in this film are distinguished, inspired,
and very moving.  The camerawork is problematical.  The writing is
entirely accessible, unlike some of Allen's recent work (SHADOWS AND FOG
springs to mind here) which seemed calculated to appeal to some
specialized readers of "New Yorker" magazine and the smarmier film
students among us.  The writing is about the chilling and disorienting
experience of growing old with someone else, about our dependence on
others, about the importance of compromise in real life.  It is also
creative and inventive, moving us between a "conventional" dramatic
movie and a talking-head documentary (a technique used in elsewhere).
The documentary portions represent some of the best moments in the film,
with the characters speaking into the camera words that always have two
meanings to the audience.  Of course, Allen has always been a leading
purveyor of irony, but here in this film he rises to a new level of both
irony and insight.
     As for the acting, every one of the principals has gotten into the
heart of the meaning of his or her character.  Especially impressive is
Judy Davis, who largely dominates the cast, although Mia Farrow rises to
the occasion with the best work I've ever seen from her.  Sydney
Pollack, the director of OUT OF AFRICA, TOOTSIE, THEY SHOOT HORSES,
DON'T THEY, and others, is comfortable and natural as Davis's estranged
husband; Pollack is an occasional actor, and it will be a pleasure to
see him again.  Juliette Lewis, who was the best thing about POINT FEAR,
is amazing and hilarious as the brilliant writing student in Allen's
class.  They share a scene in the back of a taxi (in which we never see,
only hear, Allen) that is one of the high points of the film.  Allen
himself is quieter, more serious than is often the case.  His own
characterization as Gabe is complex and uncompromising in his
willingness to stand up to the x-ray vision of his own filmmaking.
Finally, I should mention Liam Neeson (THE MISSION), if only because
he's got a sweet accent and an attractive face and figure; fortunately,
he's also a capable actor whose character has a nice hint of the
manipulative doofus you and I suspect all good looking, earnest,
sensitive people to be and who gets instructively out-maneuvered and
out-manipulated by someone even "nicer" than himself, all without ever
catching on.
     (By the way, Allen is still casting cameos, a la SHADOWS AND FOG.
Look especially for Nora Ephron in a very funny party scene.)
     Carlo Di Palma's hand-held camerawork will either drive to you to
distraction or to delight.  Fortunately, the jiggliest, most
disorienting technique is confined to the opening scene, after which the
camera largely settles down.  Slightly upsetting, too, are the jump-cuts
Allen throws in at random; jump-cuts look like a snippet of film is
missing.  The effect is interesting once or twice, but mostly I was not
entirely sure that we were not looking at a damaged print.  If it hadn't
been opening night, I would have entertained the idea even more
seriously.  Some of you will see in these camera and editing techniques
an homage, perhaps, to Cassavetes and Godard; others may bemoan the
abandonment of Allen's former standard of visual elegance.  As I say,
sometimes it works, sometimes it's distracting.  In either case, it is
not the reason why this is one of Woody Allen's greatest movies ever.
     And it is a great movie, brilliant, sparkling, insightful, moving
and touching, thoughtful, challenging, and a whole lot more.  You simply
must go to HUSBANDS AND WIVES.  Pay what you must.  You will be amply
rewarded.  Fortunately, because of events entirely outside this film, it
has opened much more widely than is usual for a Woody Allen.  It will be
very interesting to see if TriStar's calculated and possibly cynical
marketing gamble pays off.
[Note on r.a.m.r. #1526: Due to my error, the movie I referred to as THE
PANAMA CONNECTION should have been referred to as THE PANAMA DECEPTION.
My apologies for the inconvenience.  -Frank Maloney]

Author
Jon Webb
     What a great film.  The story revolves around two couples, one of
whose marriage has just broken up, as we learn in the opening moments of
the film, and the other whose marriage seems stable.
     Woody Allen shows incredible insight into human relationships and
vast skill as a director in portraying them.  I particularly loved the
fight scene as the one couple is leaving the party, and the scene
between Allen and Juliet Lewis in the kitchen.  The latter was deeply
moving, for me, without being cloying or sentimental.
     The acting is first-rate; in particular Judy Davis stands out.  The
layers of feeling she portrays as she tries to cover up her pain and
anger or tries to play a role on a date are complex and convincing.
     This is perhaps Allen's greatest film; it will almost certainly be
his most financially successful, as the controversy surrounding it will
draw people in for a look, and its quality will sustain it.  As a
commentary on that controversy, the film is very compelling; the film
portrays the complexity of human relationships, and seems to be telling
us who are ready to judge Allen as a father or husband, "You do not
(cannot) know the whole story; love is strange; don't judge, it could
happen to you."
     Without the controversy, this film would get Allen nominated for a
Best Director Academy Award, and Judy Davis for Best Actress.  As it is,
who knows.  But this work of art will far outlast the disorder in
Allen's life, and goes a long way to establish him as the greatest
living American director.

Author
David Dalgleish
"People grow apart; it's a lot of little personal things."
Starring Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, Judy Davis, Sydney Pollack, Liam 
Neeson, Juliette Lewis
Written & Directed by Woody Allen
Cinematography by Carlo di Palma
In MANHATTAN, Woody Allen filmed a love letter to New York; it was a 
romantic, sentimental vision of a city and its people, full of glorious 
black-and-white postcard shots and charming portraits.  Diane Keaton's 
character's obsessive self-analysis came across as an endearing 
mannerism, while Mariel Hemingway's teenage love interest did not 
represent anything unhealthy, but simply a stabilizing influence and a 
naďve faith in life to counter the Allen character's angst.
My, how things change.  HUSBANDS & WIVES, fifteen years later, turns 
MANHATTAN inside out.  If the earlier film was an unequivocal 
declaration of love, then the later one is the divorce proceedings after 
the relationship has broken down.  Here, we see a New York that is drab 
and brown and anonymous, filmed with a jittery hand-held camera.  Mia 
Farrow's character's constant dissection of herself and her relationship 
is aggravating in the extreme; Juliette Lewis, the precocious love 
interest, represents nothing healthy at all, but instead typifies the 
Allen character's self-destructive obsession with unstable women.  
  It is occasionally very funny (e.g., when Judy Davis's character 
reveals what she actually thinks about during sex), but more often than 
not it is painful and uncomfortable.  Where MANHATTAN was three-quarters 
comedy and one-quarter drama, HUSBANDS & WIVES inverses those 
proportions.  It pries into the characters' innermost lives, and exposes 
them, warts and all--although, figuratively speaking, when you take away 
the warts, there isn't much left. 
But they seem to be happy enough, when we first meet them.  Gabe and 
Judy (Allen, Farrow), a married couple, are about to go out to dinner 
with their good friends Sally and Jack (Davis, Sydney Pollack), when 
Sally and Jack drop a bombshell: they are planning to separate.  This 
stuns Gabe and especially Judy, who is more upset than either Sally or 
Jack, both of whom discuss their separation with equanimity.  No one's 
angry, they say; it's not a tragedy.  But they are; it is.
The "happy" separation lasts until Jack moves in with someone else.  
Then, in one of the finest scenes, Sally, furious, calls him up and 
rants at him, as her date for the evening listens from another room.   
Sally hurls accusations at her ex, then walks out, smooths down her 
dress, and assures her date that she's fine ... then walks back to the 
other room, calls Jack again, and raves some more.  The violently raw 
emotion of Sally's monologue makes us cringe; the reaction shots of her 
date in the other room make us laugh.  Allen, handling his material as 
well as he ever has, is able to make both the drama and the comedy work: 
the tone is always just right.
After Sally and Jack separate, and reveal the cuts that have been 
festering beneath the band-aid of their marriage, Gabe and Judy in turn 
analyze their own relationship.  She wants a baby; he doesn't.  They 
argue.  Finally, he agrees to have sex without contraception, and she 
doesn't want to: now she's not ready for a baby.  This kind of emotional 
doublethink is second nature to these people, and Allen sees it very 
clearly, as when Judy sets up Sally with one of her co-workers (Liam 
Neeson), only to admit later that she was attracted to him herself.
While there is a cutting edge to his wit, Allen is not cruel to his 
characters.  Jack's new amour, a "tofu and crystals" New Age woman, is 
lampooned quite savagely, but she comes across much better than Jack in 
one startling sequence, when he becomes furious with her for embarassing 
him at a party, and ends up embarassing himself more than she ever 
could.  Nothing is straightforward.
Allen could treat these people with disdain, with their euphemisms and 
their analysts and their rationalizations and their self-absorption, but 
instead he sees them for what they are: fairly average people struggling 
to make some sort of accomodation with life, to make some sense of their 
incoherent emotions.  And while there is sympathy, there is also a 
refusal to allow them to make any excuses.  This even-handedness, this 
maturity, is what distinguishes the movie from similar--but more 
simplistic--comedies of modern-day manners.  MANHATTAN may be the better 
movie, but HUSBANDS & WIVES is the wiser one.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This Woody Allen film takes on an extra layer of meaning 
in light of the over-publicized custody hearings with Mia Farrow. 
Woody plays an over-the-hill professor / writer who's having 
doubts about his marriage to Mia, doubts she shares once two of 
their friends (Sydney Pollack and Judy Davis), who seemed so 
happy with their marriage, announce they're splitting up, in a long, 
unbroken, one-camera shot. The most annoying thing about 
HUSBANDS AND WIVES is that Woody tries to make the whole 
thing into a documentary, using one camera to go from person to 
person instead of cutting between cameras and sticking interviews 
with the main characters between scenes.
        The motion is intentionally jerky and the edits are clumsy 
and obvious. God knows why the man did this -- maybe it's to 
illustrate how unstable a relationship is by the time a couple has 
been together that long. Or maybe he's just a clumsy jerk. But for 
whichever reason, the movie looks like THE REAL WORLD WITH 
WOODY ALLEN. It's a little too late for him to appear hip and 
trendy, especially considering this movie starts out with the same 
white on black credits / jazz music sequence his old movies were 
known for.
        HUSBAND AND WIVES focuses on those two husbands 
and those two wives in their extramarital pursuits. A typically 
creepy Woody finds himself drawn to one of his students, played 
by a typically creepy Juliette Lewis. Somehow those two seem to 
belong together. The freak factor matches up rather well in this case, 
although I'm sure she's no Soon-Yi. (Not every part of this movie 
was autobiographical.) Mia wants to pursue a relationship with a 
Scotsman at work (and see what's under that kilt), but he's already 
been set up with Judy, thanks to Mia. And Sydney is currently 
having a fling with his New Age vegetarian aerobics instructor.
        Most Woody Allen movies offer us a window into his life, 
but this one seems to offer one into Woody and Mia's collective life. 
It's all incredibly voyeuristic and addictive. The message here, as 
Juliette Lewis so succintly puts it, is that when you reach that age 
you can either have loneliness or suburban discontent with no 
passion or romance. But love at that point isn't about romance, as 
Judy so succintly puts it, it's more of a companionship issue, actually 
having someone to grow old with. Woody doesn't have Mia anymore 
but he does have Soon-Yi to retire with. When he's 70, she'll be 30, 
so it all works out -- as I so succintly put it.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Woody Allen
Starring: Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, Judy Davis, Sydney Pollack, Juliette
Lewis, Liam Neeson
Woody Allen usually mixes a lot of broad humor in his handling of
serious topics.  Even "Crimes and Misdemeanors" had the usual typical
Woody Allen one-liner that he's so famous for.  But "Husbands and Wives"
is straigh-forward bitter.  I mean, it was filmed around the time the
whole Soon-Yi thing came out.  Yet, even while it's not a typical Woody
Allen drama, what he has created here is a kind of black, black, black
comedy.  I mean, this is almost as comically black as "Dr. Strangelove."
"Husbands and Wives" is an ironic tale, told in a pseudo-documentary
feel (with headache-enducing hand camera for realistic shots - but it's
justified in the name of art), centering around two couples: Woody Allen
and Mia Farrow, and Sydney Pollack (the director) and Judy Davis.  The
two are best friends and go everywhere together.  The one particular
night, when Pollack and Davis come to Allen and Farrow's house, they
announce they're splitting up.  Not divorcing, but splitting.  Both
Allen and Farrow are in total shock, but Farrow takes it especially
hard.
While Davis and Pollack have actually split and are carrying on with
their lives, they're both kind of jealous of the other.  In a
brilliantly executed scene, Davis goes to the house of a man she has a
date with, and constantly is leaving to use his phone to call Pollack
who has already met someone and is moving her in and bitch him out as
only Judy Davis can do.  Meanwhile, Pollack is dating an aerobics
instructor half his age (because she makes him feel young again - duh),
and Davis settles down a bit, and begins sort of dating a man Farrow
works with - Liam Neeson, who likes Davis a lot, but she's too testy and
argumentative to let him really near her.
On the other side, Allen and Farrow are slowly drifting apart.  Allen,
who teaches English at a local college, begins to hang around with one
of his more intelligent students (Juliette Lewis, in a bit of bold
casting, seeing how many times she's done the ditz role), who has had
relationships with older men before (many many older men, as she
hilariously tells Allen).  She's very cerebral and free-spirited, which
turns Allen on, because Farrow's so tight.  And then there's Farrow who
begins wishing she didn't let Davis have Neeson.
The film ends on a kind of depressing, half up/half down note, but armed
with a lot of cynicism towards the prospect of marriage, and also on a
quite ironic note.  It's satisfying, realistic, yet still a big downer. 
It basically elongates the little aphorism Woody used in his
masterpiece, "Annie Hall:" love fades.  The people in this film are in a
"blessed union" where, if drawn out, the two people joined are stuck
together until whomever dies first.  And thanks to the contemporary
prospects such as "trial seperation" and the ever-popular "divorce,"
people don't have to waste their lives with someone who they don't love
anymore.  Allen and Farrow's characters don't love eachother anymore,
it's more like a comfortable fit.  But the four characters in this film
all get to go around and try on some other people, and compare.  The
result is pretty much depressing, yet totally realistic.
As far as the Allen/Lewis thing as well as the Pollack/aerobics teacher
thing, they are both handled with the utmost sense of maturity.  This is
really one of his most mature films.  Bitter, yet grown-up.  Anyway, the
Allen/Lewis thing only results in one single kiss, while the
Pollack/aerobics teacher thing results in refreshment at first, then a
big disaster.  "Husbands and Wives" explores the whole threat of
mid-life crisis, as well as if a marriage is worth wading out for "death
do us part."
The script by Woody Allen is fantastic, featuring only a couple great
typical one-liners that are the writer/director's trademark.  He
intertwines the stories in the great use of the pseudo-documentary,
which is handled more like a personal documentary instead of one like
"Zelig."  And he creates well-defined characters who have a lot of great
dialogue to speak.  And although the handheld bit gets annoying, it
works for the film, showing that there's always some way to better a
technique that doesn't really work most of the time.  And Woody nicely
balances all four characters' stories, evening it all out.
And the acting is amazing.  We not only get gripping performances from
Woody Allen, Mia Farrow (who you have to respect for the sole reason
that she did the film even after discovering those nasty photos), and
Sydney Pollack, but we also get a fantastic peformance from Juliette
Lewis, a wonderful, almost cameo-bit of acting by Liam Neeson, and an
Oscar-worthy performance by Judy Davis (who was nominated for an Oscar
for it).  None of them are truly scene-stealers (except Davis when she's
with someone I didn't mention), and it works because they all seem human
and all mesh well together.  This is not only one of the best directed
and scripted films, but also one of the best acted.
This is one of Woody's best films, but it's also extremely bitter.  It
doesn't overcome the meaning though, which is attributed to Woody's
tight direction and writing.  And, yes, I laughed a lot in the film,
mainly due to some of the pure human-ness of it all.  But anyway, this
is just one amazing film, and I highly, highly reccomend it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian L. Johnson
120 min., R, Comedy/Drama, 1992
Director: Woody Allen
Cast: Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, Juliette Lewis, Sidney Pollack,
      Judy Davis, Liam Neeson, Cristi Conaway, Blythe Danner
     Woody Allen's newest film, HUSBANDS AND WIVES, focuses mainly on
two couples.  The first couple, Allen, and often co-star, Mia Farrow,
are having problems with their relationship, but neither wants to break
it to the other.  The second couple, Sidney Pollack and Judy Davis, are
breaking up.
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES is definitely not one of Allen's best films.
The only people who I can suggest this film to are big fans of Woody's
work, and for those I can only recommend that they see it on video
cassette.  On a scale of zero to five, I give HUSBANDS AND WIVES a two.
HUSBANDS AND WIVES is rated R for explicit language, adult situations,
adult humor, and brief female nudity.
     The biggest problem with this film is the camera techniques used.
The film at least looks like it was shot with a hand held camera, so
motion is very jerky.  At some points when the camera pans to follow
somebody moving, it moves so quickly that everything becomes blurry.  If
more professional looking camera techniques had been used, the film
would probably have gotten a rating between a three and a four (with
reservations).
     The other main problem with this film is that at some points it
seems to want to be a comedy, whereas in others it seems to want to be a
drama.  If the film had been evened out so that the comedy and drama was
equal in each scene, the film would have ended up much better.  If
viewed as a drama, forgetting about the few comic bits and ignoring the
horrendous feeling I got from the camera work in the opening scene,
HUSBANDS AND WIVES is able to squeak a three out of me.
     One other distraction that comes to mind is the frequent jump cuts
that disrupt the viewing.  All of the cast does a wonderful job and in
that aspect this film is perfect.  Another good aspect of the film is
the documentary type style that Woody uses.  It is original and makes up
for some of the lousier parts of the film.  The hand held camera works
in the rooms with the interviewer because I got the feeling that I was
there in the room watching what was going on.
     I much preferred Woody's other film that was released this year in
my area, SHADOWS AND FOG, although that didn't get as good reviews from
the critics.  My suggestion, rent the video for HUSBANDS AND WIVES (when
it comes out, of course) along with your favorite Woody film (mine is
EVERYTHING YOU EVER WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT SEX* BUT WERE AFRAID TO ASK)
which will make up for the disappointing parts of this film.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Interlocking stories of two married couples as they go through some tough
times during their long-term marriages. This film combines a
faux-documentary to its narrative seamlessly, offering us a further glimpse
into the thoughts and feelings of the parties involved.
CRITIQUE:
Thinking of getting married? Think again, and watch this movie with your
loved one. It's sure to get you talking for days. This film isn't only for
those getting married either, the feelings, situations and conclusions
brought up in this film, can be appreciated by anyone who's ever been in a
relationship. They are the questions and thoughts that cross all of our
minds. And despite Woody Allen's blatant cynicism towards the subject (See
Little Known Facts below for all the dirty details), this film does offer
many varying opinions on the subjects of love, fidelity, trust,
companionship, lust, and ultimately, marriage.
The performances in this film are top-notch with Judy Davis and Sydney
Pollack tearing up the screen with reality, and Woody and Mia eerily
wandering through, what probably was, real conversations which they were
having in their own relationship together at that time. Liam Neeson was
another knockout performer, and the writing by Allen was simply inspired. I
could watch this film over and over again, and always laugh or notice
something new that I missed the times before. I also loved the documentary
style of this movie (Some people were really annoyed by the handheld camera,
but not me), but certainly could've done without Juliette Lewis' presence
(Her scenes seemed to go on a little too long, if you ask me, but hey,
Woody's a genius, so what the hell do I know? :)).
All in all, this film is geared towards anyone who's had a loving
relationship and thought about whether or not that person is the right
person with whom they would like to spend the rest of their lives. It's fun
to watch, interesting to hear, and revelatory to discuss.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actress Mia Farrow and Woody Allen lived together for a lot of years, and
had three children, two of whom were adopted. In 1992, Mia found nude
pictures of her adopted daughter Soon-Yi, a College student at the time, in
Woody's things. It was revealed later that Woody and Soon-Yi had been having
an affair together. Mia broke up with the perv, and filed sexual abuse
charges against him and their other kids. The charges were never proven to
be true, and Woody eventually married his "stepdaughter", Soon-Yi Previn, in
1997. NOW watch the movie again, and see if you can pick out the umpteen
references that you could make in regards to "art imitating life, or life
imitating art". Scary, eh?
Emily Lloyd was originally cast as Rain, and had actually filmed some scenes
when she was replaced with Juliette Lewis.
Director/writer Nora Ephron shows up as a "dinner party guest" in this film.
She was also a "wedding guest" in Allen's 1989 pic, CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS.
This film garnered two Oscar nominations in 1993. One for Supporting
Actress, in the way of Judy Davis, and another for Best Original Screenplay
presented to Woody Allen. Neither of them won.
Woody Allen's full name is Allan Stewart Konigsberg. Mia Farrow's full name
is Maria de Lourdes Villiers Farrow. By 1994, she had 13 children, 9 of whom
were adopted. Six came from her previous marriage to Andre Previn, 3 of whom
were adopted, and 3 from her time with Woody Allen, 2 of whom were adopted.
She was also married to ol' blue eyes himself, Frank Sinatra, for about two
years back in the late 1960's.

Author
eric walker
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES stands to be Woody Allen's biggest hit, thanks
to the supposed parallels between this movie and the much- publicized
real-life affair between Woody and Mia Farrow's adopted daughter.
TriStar Pictures is cashing in on the controversy by promoting this
movie a lot more than they would normally advertise Woody's pictures,
and they're giving it a much wider release than usual.  As a result,
many people are going to see a Woody Allen movie for the first
time--they may have heard of ANNIE HALL and SLEEPER and CRIMES AND
MISDEMEANORS, and they may know that Woody refuses to take part in the
Academy Awards process and he plays the clarinet every year instead of
going to the ceremony, but that's all they know about him.  And now
they're going to see HUSBANDS AND WIVES, out of curiosity more than
anything else.
     I think people will find themselves forgetting about Woody Allen
and Mia Farrow when they watch that movie, because they'll be too busy
enjoying the drama unfolding on the screen before them.  This may be one
of Woody's best films--it gives us some of the most deeply developed,
interesting characters in his films so far, full of the nuances and the
failures that make them ordinary human beings like you and me.  While
the characteristic Woody Allen angst and philosophy of life is there,
the movie doesn't wallow in it--rather, it's used to flesh out the story
and make us believe it all the more.  The principal characters in this
story aren't even Woody and Mia, even though they're given the obvious
top billing.  This is really the story of Jack and Sally, played by
Sidney Pollack and Judy Davis.  They're the best friends of Gabe and
Judy (Woody and Mia), and the movie begins with them marching into
Gabe's apartment and casually announcing that they're splitting up.
     Gabe and Judy can't believe this, because they've been friends with
these two for all of their lives, and it comes as a complete shock.
Well, maybe not that much of a shock--for as the movie progresses, we
see how Jack and Sally essentially became fed-up with each other over
the year.  It's always the little things that build up over time--the
subtle criticisms of each other, the white lies that grow into bigger
lies--and finally these two decide that they want to try living on their
own for a while.
     Meanwhile, Gabe and Judy are going through their own mid-life
crisis.  Here's where the movie ventures into territory first charted in
ANNIE HALL and MANHATTAN, but this isn't just a retread of those movies.
It could easily tell those stories over again, but in fact it's just a
backdrop to the story of Jack and Sally.  Woody Allen's eternal
pessimistic has been fleshed out so well over the years that we're not
really watching his betrayal of his wife (as he slowly falls for
19-year-old Juliette Lewis) as we're seeing an old friend tell a
favorite story one more time.  It's a favorite story because we know how
it's going to end, and it's not really happening to us.  This has always
been Woody Allen's appeal: he's the Charlie Brown of the movies.  He
takes all of our own fears and anxieties and plays them out for us,
making us laugh so that we don't share his depression as we're feeling
sorry for him.  And the romance between Gabe (Woody) and little Rain
(Juliette Lewis)?  It's interesting in that it's a part of the
archetypal Woody Allen story, though Rain could just as easily be a
45-year-old woman instead of a 19-year-old college student.  Lewis'
character is very mature for her age, as she suffered from a few
traumatic relationships of her own when she was younger.  The movie's
funniest moment comes when Rain is telling Gabe about her previous
affairs, while Gabe just sits there with a classic Woody Allen look on
his face.  It's a delight.
     Aside from the "romantic" angle of Gabe's affair with Rain, I
suspect that much of the uneasy feeling that this is real life we're
seeing here comes from the way the movie is shot.  Hand-held cameras are
often used, giving us the feeling that we're right there with the
characters on the screen, looking over their shoulders and interacting
with them instead of merely watching them from our seats in the theatre.
It's a way of breaking the "fourth wall" of the movies, breaking down
the barrier between fiction and reality, and this adds to the movie's
entrancing effect.
     Furthermore, the film is structured in a quasi-documentary style,
in which the characters are "interviewed" in "Annie Hall" fashion;
there's even narration by the unseen interviewer as he probes into their
pasts and coaxes their deepest secrets from them.  In fact, the
interviewer is us--he's asking the questions that we want to ask, and
he's the one poking into their private lives with his camera.  (The
film's editing adds to this effect, as it occasionally jumps from one
moment to the next in the style of home movies.)
     If you go to see HUSBANDS AND WIVES expecting a detailed look into
Woody Allen's real-life affair, then you will probably be disappointed.
But don't let this stop you from seeing this film: as a slice-of-life,
realistic look into the lives of a quartet of New York characters, this
is one of Woody's best.

Author
Peter Reiher
     The press has been suggesting that more filmgoers will see Woody
Allen's new film, HUSBANDS AND WIVES, than any of his recent films.  If
that's true, it's a pity, because few of them are likely to come back
for a second helping.  HUSBANDS AND WIVES is definitely not one of
Allen's stronger efforts, though certainly he's done worse.
     The film concerns two couples who are going through trying times in
their marriages.  One couple is (predictably) played by Woody Allen and
Mia Farrow.  The other, less predictably, is played by Sidney Pollack
(better known as a director than actor) and Judy Davis, a fine
Australian actress not terribly familiar to the typical American
filmgoer.  At the outset of the film, Pollack and Davis announce they
are splitting up, after twenty-five years of marriage.  Their breakup
has traumatic effects on Allen and Farrow's marriage, as does the fact
that both Allen and Farrow begin to find themselves attracted to other
people.
     This scenario should bring to mind certain other films Allen has
done--ANNIE HALL, MANHATTAN, HANNAH AND HER SISTERS, perhaps INTERIORS
and SEPTEMBER.  It does share some characteristics with those films, in
that Allen builds the film out of seemingly random incidents in the
characters' lives.  Some of the incidents are momentous moments in the
characters' lives, some are everyday and serve to contrast the
characters' normal lives to their more stressful moments.  But HUSBANDS
AND WIVES has a different structure than Allen's earlier films.  It's
built like a pseudo-documentary.  In some scenes, the characters are 
being interviewed by an off-screen voice, talking directly to the
camera.  Allen's cinematographer, Carlo DiPalma, uses a handheld camera
that visibly shakes and wobbles throughout the film.  Allen uses other
stylistic touches borrowed from the world of the documentary, as well.
     Clearly, Allen had a particular effect in mind, since this isn't
the way he ordinarily shoots his films.  The whole approach of HUSBANDS
AND WIVES is somewhat sociological, as if Allen wanted us to accept the
film as a case study of certain marital behaviors, rather than as a
story.  In addition, the photographic techniques he uses clearly attempt
to make the viewer a participant in the film, by never permitting him to
forget that there is a camera there.  So criticism of the style of
HUSBANDS AND WIVES should be based on a failure of execution or
conception, rather than incompetence or lack of purpose.
     In some ways, just as INTERIORS was Allen's Bergman movie, and
STARDUST MEMORIES was his Fellini movie, HUSBANDS AND WIVES is his
Cassavettes movie.  But, just as INTERIORS was bargain basement 
Bergman, and STARDUST MEMORIES was faux Fellini, HUSBANDS AND WIVES is
clunky Cassavettes.  Allen isn't Cassavettes, just as he isn't Bergman 
or Fellini, and he has too strong a personal style to merely copy them.
Unfortunately, his personal style clashes with his model in each of
these films, to the detriment of the finished product.
     In particular, HUSBANDS AND WIVES suffers from problems in the
script, in the acting, and in the cinematography.  Cassavettes tended to
focus on people who were in the working class, or the middle classes.
Allen, as usual, focuses on New York intelligensia.  Cassavettes-style
grit and realism do not work nearly as well with in that milieu.
Allen's script also fails in the characterization.  The primary couple
are just plain dull, and their problems and concerns are hard to
sympathize with.  The secondary couple are better drawn, but are also on
the screen less.  
     The problems with the central characters is exacerbated by the
performers.  Woody Allen himself is an actor of limited range, the John
Wayne of New York urban angst.  In more challenging roles, his
limitations begin to show themselves, and the part he's given himself in
HUSBANDS AND WIVES is beyond his range.  He lacks the ability to show us
any depths to the character he is playing.  We can accept that he is the
person he is stated to be, but we cannot see anything beneath that
character's surface.  Since opacity is not part of the character's
conception, Allen's performance is a failure.  Mia Farrow does little
better with her role, falling back on her rather wan acting habits,
rather than creating a character.
     The two secondary players are much better.  Sidney Pollack, a fine
director whose acting has previously been limited to small parts, shows
tremendous talent in the rather cliched part of an aging husband who
leaves his wife for a young blond airhead.  Pollack's vitality suggests
that there is much more to the character than the cliche.  He tends to
take over every scene he is in, especially those with Allen.  Of course,
his is a showier part, but he outacts Allen even in smaller things.  For
instance, we see both characters in their workplaces.  Pollack looks at
home behind his desk, while Allen's professor looks like he's never
stood up in front of a class in his life.  (Of course, I knew professors
like that, too....)
     Judy Davis is probably the most talented performer of the leads,
and she does very well with a somewhat thankless part.  Her Australian
accent seems completely replaced with a New York one, she looks
perfectly at home in the city, and she establishes a rapport with
Pollack that makes the fiction of their characters' lengthy marriage
seem true.  But her performance and Pollack's are not enough, especially
given the amount of time they aren't on the screen.
     The only other major characters are the other partners in the
principal couples' lives.  Liam Neeson and Juliette Lewis have the
largest of these parts.  They're fine, but the script doesn't allow them
much opportunity to be anything but wish-fulfillment figures.  They lack
reality.
     The cinematography doesn't help the film.  As mentioned earlier,
DiPalma uses a handheld camera throughout, so the frame is perpetually
jiggling.  DiPalma further emulates the documentary style with
semi-controlled zooms into performers' faces, bringing them closer than
normal Hollywood photography does and chopping off the top and bottom of
their faces; and by jogging around with the camera when characters move,
rather than cutting to a new angle that frames them better.  These
techniques are annoying, but might have worked if Allen and DiPalma had
not undercut them with a lighting style that doesn't match them at all.
DiPalma uses the same rich, golden lighting used in most of Allen's
later films (and by most American films shot by European
cinematographers, for that matter), sort of the Dutch masters school of
lighting.  The studied, careful lighting simply doesn't match with the
pseudo-casual handheld framing and camera movement.
     Allen is too good a director to produce a complete bust, and
HUSBANDS AND WIVES is by no means Allen's worst film.  It has some
energy (unlike INTERIORS), a few funny lines and situations (unlike
ANOTHER WOMAN), and some interesting scenes (unlike SEPTEMBER).  These
virtues are enough to make HUSBANDS AND WIVES worthwhile for Allen fans,
but not nearly enough to convert those who do not know or like his
films.
