Title
Review for Microcosmos: Le peuple de l'herbe (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what is beneath your feet?  When told to be more observant,
most people cast their eyes skyward to see what might be above them
that they are missing.  Few of us get down in the dirt to see those
little critters who live in the grass jungle.  And none of us have
sensitive enough ears to heard the cacophony as the insects scurry
about.
     Now in theatrical release, the documentary MICROCOSMOS tells the
life story of insects.  Viewers, other than certified entomologists,
will find the world of the insects a totally unknown and magical one
full of sound and fury.
     The film can even be seen as a romantic comedy, but this was the
part my son liked least of all.  When two snails begin their love
dance, I found their white slime to have a gossamer radiance that was
touching and beautiful.  "Yuck," he said and had that scene at the top
of least favorite list.
     For the comedic part, there are two beetles that begin a romantic
entanglement of such intensity that they almost shake themselves off
the tiny branch on which they are perched.  Like two lovers parked in a
Volkswagen, their choice of locale is just too confining.
     The brilliance of the documentary is not in the directing (Claude
Nuridsany and Marie Perennou) nor the editing (Florence Ricard and
Marie-Josephe Yoyotte) although both are well done.  What makes the
film come alive is the technical mastery of the cinematography by
Thierry Machado, Claude Nuridsany, Marie Perennou, and Hugues Ryffel.
     Most sequences start with your typical view of a field and then,
as in HONEY I SHRUNK THE KIDS, the cameras move down to ground level.
They use special lens to bring insects to life in incredible detail and
with colors so bright they would put Disney to shame.  Their color
palette has an enormous range from reds to purples.  If you are not in
awe of nature before you enter the theater, you will be when you exit.
     The photographers use some slow motion effects as when flowers are
open.  When a spider is busying turning grasshoppers into mummies, they
speed up the action.  Most of the scenes however are at normal speed.
The action, however, will seem anything but normal to humans.
     There are many great scenes in the picture.  Perhaps the funniest
is when two convoys of insects run into a traffic jam in the desert.
Eventually they join forces and end up in an infinite loop.
     Easily the most fascinating scene is that of the sacred beetle
rolling its sheep dung pellet.  How does a sacred beetle push a sheep
dung pellet you ask?  Well, he climbs on it with his nose to the ground
and pushes it backwards.  When it gets stuck on a small twig, the poor
beetle's brain is too small to figure out the simple solution -- just
go to the other side and push it off.  Instead, our little guy uses
sheer perseverance and hard work to dislodge it.
     The insects' environment is full of hazards.  A rain storm is a
terrifying event to a water bug for example.  Imagine you are out on a
lake and drops the size of cars start pounding you.  Pretty
frightening.  This is one of many times in MICROCOSMOS where the sound
is even more impressive than the images.
     There are some problems with the film that would have been easy to
fix.  The show bogs down toward the end.  The last quarter operates at
a slower pace, and little of interest is shown.  My son fell asleep
during this part, and I don't blame him.
     The narration by Kristin Scott Thomas is almost non-existent.  She
says a few words at the start and at the end, but nothing more.  More
narration, as the wonderful Disney nature films from the 1950s showed,
can add interest, humor, and enlightenment.  I kept wondering what
insect was I seeing and what was he doing.  Finally, the music by Bruno
Coulais is quite effective but is used all too sparsely.
     MICROCOSMOS is a technical tour de force.  I can't image missing
something this unique.  Besides, where else can you see a show suitable
for kids without a single product tie-in?
     MICROCOSMOS runs just 1:20, but would have been better with the
last 15 minutes excised.  The film has no humans and hence no human
sex, nudity, or violence.  Yes, the insects do have sex, but your
little ones will never figure out what is going on unless you care to
tell them.  There is nothing in the show to scare even a two year old.
My son Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, gives the show a "thumbs up but so slightly
down that you couldn't tell."  I recommend the film to you and your
whole family and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Few animal documentaries have ever done well as feature films.
Perhaps the last successful feature film about insects was THE
HELLSTROM CHRONICLE, made just over a quarter of a century ago.  But by
anybody's standards MICROCOSMOS is a remarkable documentary.  What we
have is a close-up look at a French meadow on a nice day.  We are here
in a secret garden to appreciate the afternoon of the fauna.  In the
course of the film we are going to spend a pleasant interlude just
admiring the very small forms of life, mostly insects, and learning to
appreciate their beauty and their noble traits.  Occasionally we see
something a big as a pheasant, and it does look grotesquely big and
ungainly as it pecks up unsuspecting ants.  But more often what we are
watching are ladybugs, caterpillars, and the occasional snail.  True
these are mostly animals you found boring in biology class, but in
MICROCOSMOS you will see them like you never saw them before.  This is
a G-rated film that is full of erotic sex and violence like your
teacher would never have wanted you to see.  Your high school would
have never let you observe the chance afternoon encounter and love-
making between two snails.  This is the scene that had members of the
audience panting.  For violence there is a knock down drag out fight
between two beetles that is genuinely exciting, even if you can't tell
one beetle from the other.  Spiders capture grasshoppers, spin webs and
knit them up, then suck their blood. Then there is the sheer beauty and
symmetry of a mosquito emerging from water, stretching its wings and
then disappearing faster than the eye can see.
     In the course of the film some of the creativity of insects is
amazing.  A water spider builds an underwater sanctuary by repeatedly
going to the surface, catching air on her body, returning underneath
the surface to contribute the air to a growing bubble.  When the bubble
is finally large enough, the spider pulls herself and her prey into the
bubble to peacefully enjoy a well-earned under-water meal.  Then there
is the dogged persistence of a scarab beetle rolling a ball of dung up
a hill, accidentally impaling it on a thorn, and then having to figure
out why it will no longer move.  Now admittedly, much of what we see
might be able to see free on NOVA.  But there they probably would
insist on telling you what you were seeing.  But the insects live
perfectly happily without names or words and with the exception of a
sentence or two at the beginning and end of the film the film is just
music and a few humorous sound effects.  There is no shortage of humor
and surprisingly some insects are natural comedians.  For example,
wonder turns to humor as we are watching a long caravan of caterpillars
walking nose to tail.  As they walk they merge with another line of
caterpillars like two traffic lanes merging for a tunnel.  When the
camera pulls back we realize that the line of caterpillars has merged
with itself and in now walking around in a pointless loop.  Or for the
pure amazement of it we watch an ant trying to break through the
surface tension of a drop of water to get a drink from the interior.
     MICROCOSMOS is directed by two French biologists, Claude Nuridsany
and Marie Perennou.  It took three years to shoot with special
photographic equipment that took two years to develop and with a
knowledge of wildlife that took fifteen years to accumulate.  Nuridsany
and Perennou have an incredible savvy for finding the parallels between
animal and human behavior, or just a knowledge of what is beautiful in
the animal world they take us to a prehistoric world with huge and odd
vegetation and strangely-shaped creatures.  They fumble, crawl, and
tumble for 77 minutes.
     MICROCOSMOS is entomological "Candid Camera."  Besides a few
overly corny sound effects, there is little to fault the film on.  I
rate it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Kristin Scott Thomas's narration occupies only about ninety seconds
of the dazzling documentary MICROCOSMOS, which made it even easier to hear
every comment in an audience composed largely of families with young
children.  Ordinarily, the prospect of an afternoon spent with a crowd of
garrulous youngsters might send me screaming for an IV drip of Valium, but
the 75 minutes I spent in MICROCOSMOS may have been the most uplifting 75
minutes I've spent in a theater in years.  Here were 9- and 10-year-olds
asking questions about insects, enraptured by the natural world,
chattering excitedly in the lobby afterwards about their favorite scenes.
It was one of those rare occasions when a film left me a bit more
optimistic about our collective future as inquisitive beings.
     MICROCOSMOS is the result of nearly twenty years invested by
film-makers Claude Nuridsany and Marie Perennou in creating the
technology, researching their subject and actual filming which would
provide a never-before-seen perspective into the insect world.  Their
marvelous miniature camera work allows them to present a documentary which
is structured as a "day in the life" of the universe beneath your feet,
from a butterfly "waking up" in its chrysalis to an evening alive with
sound.  In between, they confront the big subjects which face all God's
creatures:  birth, sex, work, death and natural disasters.
     It is a simple enough concept (though the process was anything but
simple), but what makes MICROCOSMOS so consistently enthralling is the
ability of Nuridsany and Perennou to find stories in their tiny subjects,
stories which give them a personality.  The quest for food is presented
with protective ants attacking a ladybug which has happened across their
feeding ground; the quest for water finds caterpillars moving across
parched ground like a fuzzy caravan, and ants gathered around a watering
hole.  Mating is not shown in clinical detail with a dry narrative
description -- instead, two snails meet, caress and embrace in a strangely
beautiful moment set to a soaring aria.  In perhaps the film's most
memorable sequence, a sacred scarab beetle rolls a small ball of dung
until he is halted by a briar jutting out of the ground.  Over the course
of three minutes, that beetle becomes Sisyphus moving his stone, and its
success sends up a round of applause.
     The ability of that sequence to turn a beetle into a hero
demonstrates that Nuridsany and Perennou have a talent most feature
film-makers only dream about.  Most of us have seen nature footage of
birds or amphibians which made the insects the insects upon which they
snacked insignificant bit players in the food chain.  MICROCOSMOS is like
a novel based on another novel's supporting characters, turning sub-plots
into life stories.  You find yourself vaguely sympathetic when a bird
lands and begins feeding at an anthill, each peck reverberating like a
massive footstep.  One exceptional shot captures the bird's eye through
the entrance to the ants' tunnels like an ogre peeping through a keyhole
at his prey; another represents the bird as a monstrous shadow.  The
film-makers want to show you parts of our world you may have taken for
granted, and to show you in a way which grabs you as a narrative as much
as an entomology lesson.
     In fact, the only time MICROCOSMOS sags is when it does resemble
conventional nature footage.  It is interesting watching a spider
speed-wrap a grasshopper caught in its web, but it is a purely
intellectual interest; the same is true of a spider which constructs a
kind of underwater diving bell for itself.  These are moments which might
make you go "hmmm," but they don't fascinate you like a battle between
stag beetles which seems to personalize the combatants.  Yet one of the
best moments in the stag beetle sequence is a seemingly throwaway scene of
another, smaller insect being tossed to the ground during the titanic
struggle like a nameless patron in a Western bar room brawl.  It seems
that even within this world there are supporting characters, and the
wonderful thing about MICROCOSMOS is that you find yourself waiting for
Nuridsany and Perennou to follow the unfortunate fellow on his own
adventure, to the delight of children and adults alike.

Author
Vince Waldron
An odd import that's currently making the rounds of the country's art house
circuit, this lushly photographed documentary gives us a fairly novel
close-up at a bunch of insects as they mate, eat, fight and generally
cavort for a series of extremely patient documentary film makers in France.
Though not without its charms, it's now here near the cinematic revelation
promised by the well meaning reviews that were hyped in the press when the
film made a recent stop in LA on its current rounds of the art house
circuit.  Though the local reviewers seemed to find this a thrilling and
unique slice of cinematic magic, I was less impressed by the film's
admittedly state of the art cinematagraphy, finding nothing more than a
modern variant on those disney true life nature films that were so popular
in third grade science class in the sixties.  Nicely shot, yeah--but its
still just bugs.  
By coincidence I happened to catch a revival of another movie that adopts 
the point of view of our six-legged friends:  the 1941 animated
feature "Mr Bug Goes to Town" (which was screened  as the final entry in the
LA County Museum's tribute to the animated films of the Fleischer brothers.)
Those looking for the classic bug's eye view movie might do themselves a favor
and track down the republic studios videocassette of this one.

Author
Tim Voon
Director: Claude Nuridsany & Marie Perennou Written by: Claude
Nuridsany, Marie Perennou, Hughes Ryffel, and Thierry Machado
Cinematography: Claude Nuridsany & Marie Perennou Music: Bruno Coulais
I never thought an insect movie could be this thought provoking until I
watched "Microcosmos". Let me explain.
An ant milks some aphids on a branch. Enter a ladybug who feeds on the
aphids. The ant responds by knocking the ladybug of the branch. It tries
to climb back on, but on it's travels bumps into another ladybug. They
start copulating. My, my, the wonders of nature.
Here's another scenario. Remember snails, those slugs who wear a shell,
and are frequently trampled on if not eaten at a French restaurant.
Well, I've just learnt how they copulate. The sex was elegantly set to
the moving music of Opera. I'm not sure how to explain this, but it's
like velcro. I'm beginning to understand why it must have taken
directors Nuridsany and Pernnou so long to film this movie. Although,
they could have helped the process along by let's say sticking the
snails together, but you'd have fingers in the way, and that can really
spoil the mood. At least fifteen years of research hasn't gone down the
drain, we have this glorious footage of snails forever petrified in our
minds and on film. Ya gotta see it ta believe it.
It's not all about sex, even though much of nature is interconnected
with reproduction. We have a narrator Kristin Scott Thomas who speaks a
few words at the beginning and at the end of the movie. She does much
better here than in "The English Patient". There are lots of other
insects who scurry and flutter about the screen like busy human beings.
The most memorable performances are from a dung beetle with a
problematic dung ball; hardworking ants busy at work gathering food for
the winter months; a pheasant who makes a Godzilla entrance before
terrorising the ants; a thunderstorm in the middle of the day
reminiscent of an air raid; and an ending which deserves more that a
swat and "damned mosquito".
This movie was so profound and meditational that I could have slept
through it, but I didn't. Educational to say the least, but I longed for
violence let's say between the wasps and the bees, or the preying mantis
and the black widow spider, or the ants vs. the termites. Oh by the way,
if you've ever stuck a hose into an ant hole, then turned it on - don't
do it again, cause all their food supplies are down there. :-)

Author
Cynthia A. Bussiere
Narrator (English version):  Kristin Scott-Thomas
This documentary film (which I have affectionately dubbed LITTLE BIG
BUG) observes a day and a night in the lives of a bunch of bugs in a
pre-selected field in Aveyron, France.  The extraordinary point of the
film and, of course, the reason to see it, is that the cameras get right
down into the grass -- not to mention into the honeycomb, inside the
ants' storeroom, and behind the dragonfly in flight -- to give us a bug's-
eye view (and, occasionally, a bird's-eye view) of life.
A lot of things happen in a day, to humans as well as to bugs, and
this film captures the essentials common to both species:  Birth, 
death, dinner, sex, fights, weather, physics, and endless grooming.
Birth is fascinating because quite often it includes re-birth in the form
of the emergence of a winged insect from its cocoon.  Death and 
dinner are inextricably entwined, inasmuch as there is generally a 
causal relationship between the two throughout the film.  Sex ranges
from a ladybug quickie to a stately, erotic, lovely encounter between
two snails.  The fights are cool because, at this range, you might as
well be watching GODZILLA vs. ANY LAND-BASED CREATURE.
The weather aspect is interesting because the film examines the effect
of "massive" raindrops falling not only on a single ladybug sitting on
a blade of grass, but also on a crowd of skeeters floating on the
surface of a pond.  The physics aspect is great fun as the camera
observes a beetle confront and ultimately solve the problem of contin-
uing to roll uphill a ball of dung that has become stuck on a stick.
(Rest assured that the Sisyphean nature of this task has not been lost
on the filmmakers.)  In fact, the physics of water and air play out in
unusual and enlightening ways throughout the film, and your name
doesn't have to be Dr. Science for you to figure them out.  Finally,
the grooming pays off because these bugs *look marvelous* -- sleek,
shiny, and beautifully colored.  Moreover, they are set in gorgeous
backgrounds of foliage and flowers designed to make them look
their best.
The film took three years to complete and an additional six months to
edit.  Apparently, some of this time was spent creating and perfecting
the photographic technology to complete the picture.  To say that the
film makes extraordinary use of close-up photography is a redundancy.
Additionally, the film uses time-lapse and slow-motion photography to
great effect.  Finally, the film makes outstanding use of feature film-
making techniques.  The work of Jean Renoir and Theo Angelopoulos
came immediately to mind as I watched particular shots.
There are several reasons why this film is eminently watchable by all
but the most diehard bug hater.  First, because these are beautifully
photographed bugs in a natural, clean, lush environment, rather than
an ugly bunch of cockroaches living in filth, the disgust factor is
eliminated.  Second, because most of the bugs are shot almost
exclusively in close-up, and therefore appear to be larger-than-life
size, the creepy-crawly factor is kept to a minimum.  Third, because
the bugs are *never* shown attacking humans or other non-insect life
forms, the fright factor is eliminated.
Overall, this is a delightful and witty anthropomorphic film with
mercifully low cute and gross-out quotients.  Its displays of humor
and, occasionally, high comedy, are tempered by the overriding
intelligence and compassionate empathy that pervade the film.
The film has great respect for its subjects, and at no time does it
laugh at them.  Moreover, the film's use of music, both instrumental
and vocal, only serves to enhance the expression of its viewpoint.
In a very sweet, conclusory touch, the end titles list and describe
the creatures in the film under a heading that translates as "With
the participation of, in order of appearance:"

Author
James Berardinelli
Director: Claude Nuridsany & Marie Perennou 
Producers: Christophe Barratier, Yvette Mallet, Jacques Perrin 
Written by: Claude Nuridsany, Marie Perennou, Hughes Ryffel, and 
      Thierry Machado 
Cinematography: Claude Nuridsany & Marie Perennou 
Music: Bruno Coulais 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films  
     MICROCOSMOS is a delightful little documentary -- emphasis on 
little.  This film offers a view into a world more bizarre than anything 
depicted in the most special effects-intensive science fiction.  
Intrigued?  Well, if not, you will be once you start watching 
MICROCOSMOS, Claude Nuridsany and Marie Perennou's fascinating portrait 
of life "beyond anything we could imagine, and yet almost beneath our 
notice." 
     MICROCOSMOS literally has a cast of thousands -- insects, that is.  
Beetles, ants, bees, wasps, dragonflies, butterflies, snails, 
mosquitoes, darning needles, and dozens of other assorted bugs fill the 
screen, going about their everyday chores.  They build nests, find food, 
pollinate flowers, battle over territory, and procreate.  For viewers 
with spiritual inclinations, there's a fair amount of quasi-religious 
imagery:  mantises that pray and bugs that walk on water.   
     The microscopic drama of MICROCOSMOS is surprisingly engrossing, 
primarily because of the exquisite detail of the photography.  Nuridsany 
and Perennou's cameras take us from normal-scale overviews of their 
locale deep into the world of the insects, where blades of grass are as 
tall as houses, trees are unimaginably large, and lakes become oceans.  
Everything is shown up close and personal, with a level of clarity and 
intimacy never previously obtained in nature films.   
     Although no people are ever shown, nor is there any indication of 
their presence (the specially-created cameras take us closer to the 
ground than any eye could get), there is a human voice in MICROCOSMOS.  
It belongs to Kristin Scott-Thomas, who gives short, unnecessary 
introductory and closing statements.  In between, the only noises we 
hear are the whirs, buzzes, and chirps of the starring creatures.  
That's over an hour of nothing but the sounds of nature. 
     MICROCOSMOS uses time lapse photography to speed along certain slow 
processes -- a caterpillar inching its way along a branch, a vine 
snaking skywards, blossoms opening, and a sundew enveloping its helpless 
victim.  There are a few cameos by non-insects as well.  We see a 
pheasant attack an ant colony with predictably disastrous results for 
the tiny warriors.  Then there's a frog who chooses a group of water 
bugs for an afternoon snack. 
     Transpiring in a specially created "field studio" in Aveyron, 
France, MICROCOSMOS took three years to film and six months to edit, but 
the results more than justify the necessary time, effort, and patience.  
At only seventy-seven minutes, this is one of the shortest movies of 
1996, but it offers some of the most unique images, surpassing the fine 
LEOPARD SON with its perspective of life in the wild.  After watching 
MICROCOSMOS, it will be impossible to take a walk in the woods without 
being aware of the amazing tapestry of activity going on all around, yet 
out of sight. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
