Title
Review for Act of Violence (1949)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ACT OF VIOLENCE (1949) Directed by Fred Zinnemann. Written by Robert 
L. Richards. Story by Collier Young. Photography, Robert Surtees. 
Editing,  Conrad A. Nervig. Art direction,  Cedric Gibbons, Hans 
Peters. Music, Bronislau Kaper. Cast: Van Heflin, Robert Ryan, Janet 
Leigh, Mary Astor, Phyllis Thaxter, Berry Kroeger, et al. An MGM 
film. 82 minutes.
Except for the setting of this movie (in California, along with too 
many thousands of others, in all genres), it is a pretty effective 
work. It starts out  quickly and directly, from the first images. So 
does tension which will not ever abate. There are asides, 
embellishments or "fioriture."
Tall, limping  WWII veteran Robert Ryan, packing a revolver, travels 
to a small California town with vengeance written all over his face 
and his heart. A prominent citizen, Van Heflin, is his prey. Heflin, 
who has done well as a building contractor, is being celebrated by 
the locals after a project has finished.
He has a pretty young wife (Janet Leigh), a very young boy, good 
business and a nice home. (Remember that this was 1948 or so. What 
passed for nice houses would be grade C today).
The two men had been P.O.Ws in a German camp, with Heflin the ranking 
officer and Ryan his friend and second in command of a group of 
twelve airmen. When Ryan informed Heflin that the men were digging a 
tunnel, Heflin was entirely against the planned escape as hopeless, 
but as his opposition fell on deaf years, he betrayed the plot to the 
Nazi commandant.  As a result  ten men died horrible deaths. After 
the war,  survivor Ryan set out to avenge the dead.
When panicked Heflin discloses his dark past to his wife, he tries to 
find excuses, to rationalize his treachery, to blame the Germans' own 
treachery for not keeping their promise to thwart the escape without 
killing anyone. But not so deep down he acknowledges his guilt, his 
having traded his denunciation for precious food.
Heflin's terrible guilt and terrible fear are grippingly shown 
through economical dialogue and acting. The hunter-hunted motif is 
developed mercilessly, but it is the theme of guilt that dominates 
the movie, in believable film noir visual, atmospheric style and, 
above all a "noir" conscience.
Where the story goes from there I cannot reveal except that it 
encompasses a friendly prostitute (good acting by Mary Astor), the 
involvement of the underworld, and inexorable "no exit" development. 
The movie -- powerfully dramatic and tragic--  does not cop out, 
attempt to adorn matters, invent solutions. Strong stuff.
(One relatively amusing thing for us today is that when Heflin is 
asked about the worth of his business, he says 20 thousand dollars, a 
small fortune then, peanuts today.)
Austrian-born director Zinnemann (1907-1997) made his debut in 
Hollywood around 1937. His films are humanistic, intelligent, 
thoughtful. He had made over two dozen movies in America. Arguably, 
the best was The Seventh Cross (1944). Made during WWII and starring 
Spencer Tracy, this was the story of a group of anti-Nazi Germans who 
escape from a German concentration camp in the mid-1930s.
Just before Act of Violence, he filmed made the classic The Search 
which was the first role of Montgomery Clift and the first Hollywood 
shot in post-war Germany. In this gem, American GI. Clift cares for a 
Czech boy, a displaced person, and reunites him with his mother. A 
warm, highly praised movie, it was mostly known only in film 
society-type circles.
Act of Violence which followed has remained largely unknown, probably 
because of its depressing subject. Then came the works that made of 
Zinnemann a household name, starting with The Men (1950, Marlon 
Brando's screen debut) and several more, including Member of the 
Wedding, High Noon, A Hatful of Rain, The Nun's Story, From Here to 
Eternity, The Sundowners, A Man for All Seasons, The Day of the 
Jackal, Julia.
War, politics and their effects were never far from Zinnemann's mind, 
along with  matters of principles, morality, conscience and 
psychology. He died at age 90, leaving us a major legacy of works 
that rise to great heights.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/
