Title
Review for Videodrome (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Almost twenty years ago I read the review of David
Cronenberg's SCANNERS and the author explicitly described
that film as "the work of a sick man". Such harsh words
shouldn't surprise anyone familiar with the films that
Canadian director used to make in 1970s and early 1980s -
science fiction films based on some disturbing ideas of
dehumanisation in modern society. Even more disturbing thing
for the contemporary audience was the graphic depiction of
such dehumanisation in the form of explicit violence and
realistic gore. One of such films is VIDEODROME, written and
directed by Cronenberg in 1983, science fiction thriller
which dealt with the effects of television on human
perception of reality.
The protagonist of this film is Max Renn (played by James
Woods), producer of the small TV station in Toronto. In
order to fight more powerful competition, he based his
program almost entirely on the broadcasts that feature
realistic violence and soft-core pornography. Recently, a
mysterious satellite program called "Videodrome",
unscrambled by his trusted technowizzard Harlan (played by
Peter Dvorsky) has caught his attention. It consists of
nothing more than scenes of torture and Max, although warned
that "Videodrome" might actually be snuff film, begins
searching for their producers. This happens after his
girlfriend Nicki Brand (played by Debbie Harry) got aroused
by the programme and expressed desire to star in the
program. After some time, Max is convinced that the author
of "Videodrome" is Brian O'Blivion (played by Jack Greley),
eccentric TV theorist who communicates with the rest of the
world via recorded tapes. In the meantime, Max begins
suffering from bizzare hallucinations involving his
television set. Explanation for such phenomenon is given by
O'Blivion's daughter Bianca (played by Sonja Smits) -
"Videodrome" is actually a signal which is able to cause
brain damage to the viewers and permanently alter their
perception of reality.
VIDEODROME is often referenced as one of the Cronenberg's
most ambitious works. Dehumanisation as the consequence of
technological progress - Cronenberg's favourite subject -
here takes shape in the form of media manipulation and
technology able to totally blur lines between real world and
artificial realities. Cronenberg, whose Max Renn might be
seen as some sort of alter ego, however absolves technology
from its share of responsibility for media-induced
alienation. In the endless debate about the role of media in
the rise of modern-day violence and other forms of human
depravity, Cronenberg puts some of the blame on primordial
instincts of human subconscius, with media being solely the
catalysts for subsequent destructive behaviour. Because of
that VIDEODROME is considered prophetic film by many.
However, those fine ideas have great difficulties in
reaching audience. In the beginning plot and characters work
quite nicely, but gradually film begins to deteriorate as
quickly as the mental state of its protagonist, and
practically nothing on screen makes sense, except Rick
Baker's make-up talents, responsible for some effective but
often revolting effects (like protagonist's stomach turning
into vagina- like VCR) and numerous scenes of gratuitous
violence. These scenes of carnage are here probably to
compensate lack of Cronenberg's ideas, manifested in his
ability to find adequate or comprehensible ending. To make
things worse, some of the quasi- ideological technobabble
and television idolatry now looks terribly outdated in the
age of Internet and virtual reality. On the other hand, some
of the images in the film are quite impressive - especially
Jack Greley as television guru (probably inspired by real
life Canadian TV theorist Marshall MacLuhan) and American
rock-singer Debbie Harry playing some really sick puppy.
However, those scenes can't save VIDEODROME from being seen
as a movie that failed to fulfil its potentials.
Review written on September 25th 2000
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
