Title
Review for Eréndira (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Erendira is not a bad film. But it does show that the Mexican community has
a knack for doing something strange, or weird, or just plain bad. This film
fits into the area of the Jodorowsky material, or some of the very odd
things that get made.  It isn't a great film, but it is rather unusually
written with its many biblical references, and an undertone
that one has a hard time deciding if it is worth laughing, or crying.
But it does try to do something with its material, and one wonders if it is
Irene Pappas that tries to save, what would otherwise be a bad film. It
comes off, as a colorfully bad Luis Bunuel film, with the themes right in
front of us, but we never see them.
It is the story, based on Gabriel Garcia Marquez' novel, of a young woman
who is kept by her mother, and is forced into prostitution to pay for
everything that the girl has ever done wrong, as a way to pay her debt to
the mother.  But as is often the case, the
young girl does get attached to one young man, and an impossible situation
arises.  She can't pay her debts, and the mother does not wish the daughter
to leave, or she would be all alone in the "desert" which is where most of
the film takes place.  But the
daughter has her clumsy moments, and these are the excuse that keeps her
trapped.
In between, is a bunch of stuff that makes little sense, it seems, as the
mother goes into a trance like state during her sleep, and tells many
stories that range from the weird to the very strange.  One thing is
obvious, they are some of the things that went through
her mind when she was a young girl, and also forced into prostitution. A
daydream coming alive.  The young girl thinks that the mother is losing it,
which she is.
And to save their love affair, the young one decides the young man has to do
a deed for her, and this deed, is unfortunately what is also going to get
her cursed into becoming exactly what her mother was. In the end, nothing
has changed it seems..... in between, there are these rather amusing, and
gypsy like settings in the beach and the desert which keeps our attention on
what is going on, which is not much, but makes us wonder.
Irene Pappas is not bad, although the way many film makers have used her,
has not made her look attractive, or strong as an actress. This film has
enough dialogue for her, but it is one of those situations where it is
really hard to figure out whether she is
helping the whole project or not. I venture to say that she makes it better,
but that may not be the case.
A strange film, well photographed, very colorful, but otherwise dull.
3 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1996. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association
