Title
Review for Flight of the Phoenix, The (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
The Flight of the Phoenix (1965) 148m. 
I was mightily impressed with Robert Aldrich's enthralling story when
I was a youngster and was glad to see none of its power had been
diminished upon viewing it again as an adult.  James Stewart is a
pilot for an oil company whose cargo plane crashes 130 miles off
course in the Libyan Desert.  It soon becomes apparent to the small
contingent of survivors that they are beyond any hope of rescue.  When
it appears they have no other choice, Stewart reluctantly agrees to go
ahead with aviation designer Hardy Kruger's bold idea to construct a
new plane by cannibalizing parts of the old one - if they can stay
alive long enough to see their project through.
Absorbing study of men under pressure never flags: there is no wasted
dialogue, no maudlin 'I got a gal back home' or 'I was gonna open my
own business' soliloquies.  There is always a conflict, a new plot
turn, a grim revelation.  It's grueling just watching the men in their
despair, knowing that a stroll from the shade of their wrecked plane
can mean death.  The friction and tension between members of the group
only exacerbates their situation (it's fun watching Aldrich's sweaty,
confrontational closeups - you can almost see the testostersone
dehydrating off them in the desert heat).  There is no bonding of
survivors here - if anything, they split apart and dislike each other
even more intensely than when they were airborne.  Stewart isn't
interested in having us sympathise with his character - he's short
tempered and stubborn - but some viewers may prefer him to Hardy
Kruger's self-possessed designer (my favorite performance in the
film).  Their conflict is the hinge of the story, in which the need
for leadership within the group is eventually distilled down to these
two protagonists. Within the group two camps emerge, those who want to
organize and assume some form of control, and those who are unwilling
to do anything unless ordered (and even then do it begrudgingly). 
This highlights an interesting human/animal trait (is it purely
masculine?), namely the automatic higher positioning of any one
individual within a group and the behavior system's subsequent pecking
orders and heirarchies.  And in FLIGHT OF THE PHOENIX's case, survival
isn't necessarily only for the fittest.
Acting performances all around are magnificent.  You'll admire Peter
Finch's captain, one of the few truly likable characters.  He's ably
supported by Richard Attenborough, Dan Duryea, Ernest Borgnine,
Christian Marquand, Ronald Fraser, and Ian Bannen.  Who survives and
who doesn't is almost abitrary by the film's end - you'll be more
concerned about the progress of their rebuilt plane than the
passengers themselves, especially at the heartpounding climax. 
Tragically, stunt pilot Paul Mantz was killed during these final
scenes.  Prolific novelist Elleston Trevor wrote the source novel,
Lukas Heller the sharp screenplay.
