Title
Review for Demoiselles de Rochefort, Les (1967)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films/Zoe Productions
 Director:  Jacques Demy
 Writer: Jacques Demy
 Cast: Catherine Deneuve, Francoise Dorleac, George
Chakiris, Danielle Darrieux, Grover Dale, Michel Piccoli,
Jacques Perrin, Gene Kelly
   Neither a commercial nor a critical blockbuster, "The Young
Girls of Rochefort" was a disappointing finale to Jacques
Demy's early-career trilogy.  "Rochefort" is a far cry from
Jacques Demy's earlier "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg," a
smashing musical which in which every syllable is sung and
which spotlights a bittersweet romance between the precious
Catherine Deneuve and handsome Nino Castelnuovo. 
"Rochefort" sank quickly in 1967,  allegedly because it was
neither here nor there--a Hollywood musical made by a
Frenchman who adored the genre.  Spike Lee once said that
movies about the black experience should never be made by
white directors.  Steven Spielberg et al prove him wrong, but
perhaps American musicals should remain domestic category
unsullied by the inspiration of composers from lands across
the sea whose love for this all-American invention will usually
exceed their proficiency.
   The plot of "The Young Girls of Rochefort" is contrived, but
that's no problem.  This is the fate of many an opera and
musical as well.  The real flaws, however, appear early on. 
For one thing, Michel Legrand's music may be grand enough,
but it's repetitive.  You may leave the theater humming his
melodies, but that's only because a single air dominates
virtually every song.  When a film bursts with tuneful energy
almost throughout its over two-hour length, redundance is
lethal.   For another thing, Demy loses focus repeatedly. 
Whereas a romantic work by Comden and Green, or Lerner
and Loewe, or Rodgers and Hammerstein will center on two
characters, Demy's cinematographer, Ghislain Cloquet, is all
over France's southwest provincial city of Rochefort, spending
most of his time displaying the color of the townspeople--
whose women all have bell-shaped figures and whose men
can dance like Gene Kelly.  Granted: the director is in love
with the coastal towns of France, principally Nantes,
Cherbourg, and Rochefort, but to keep such a piece on a
human scale demands a fix on two, or three, or four
individuals at most.
   "The Young Girls of Rochefort" seemed an unlikely
candidate for restoration, that honor belonging in recent
months to classics like "Gone With the Wind," and "8-1/2." But
Jacques Demy's widow, filmmaker Agnes Varda,  pays
homage to her husband in restoring the print and digitalizing
the sound track.  The colors appear faded after thirty-one
years but the voices and music come across just fine.
   As with "Umbrellas," Jacques Demy gives the lucky town
the appearance of a Grimm's fairy tale. light on the grim. His
Rochefort is a happy place filled with people who are 90%
young and all dreaming of love love love, but only if they can
share it with their ideal men and women: a Cinderella and
Prince population.  The principal characters have not found
partners and given their good looks and pure souls, we can't
help wondering why not.  The middle-aged Yvonne (Danielle
Darrieux) had once rejected a lovely man simply because she
thought his name, Simon Dame, was laughable (think
"Messieurs dames," a greeting one gives when he enters a
public place).  Her daughter Delphine (Catherine Deneuve)
teaches dance, has just broken up with an overbearing artist,
and seeks an unknown painter who has done a portrait
likeness of her.  Delphine's fraternal twin sister Solange
(Francoise Dorleac--who was Deneuve's real-life sister) awatis
her prince while artist Maxence (Jacques Perrin), an incredibly
handsome painter, seeks the woman whose face he has
painted purely from his imagination.  When two workers with a
traveling fair, Etienne (George Chakiris) and Bill (Grover Dale)
offer to drive the women to Paris, they inadvertently lead the
title characters to the men of their dreams.
   Deneuve and Dorleac are both heavily made up and come
across like kewpie dolls ready for immortalization in Tussaud's
wax museum.  One critic describes Deneuve's appearance as
that of "a novice on her way to a brothel."  "Rochefort"
features also Michel Piccoli in the role of the jilted Simon
Dame, who now owns an impressive music shop in the town,
and Gene Kelly as Dame's American friend Andy--who bumps
into Solange on the street and falls instantly in love.  No
matter that Kelly is 55 years old and Dorleac is 23.
   As the plot is not ample enought to exploit the substantial
length of the movie, Demy spends a good deal of time fixed
on the residents of the town who are so cheerful and
wholesome that we don't wonder that the girls want to leave
the place for Paris.  They dance and sing, they sing and
dance, one dance like every other, each song a recap of the
previous one.  Over and over, Deneuve and Solange croon,
"We are twin sisters born under the sign of Gemini/
mi,fa,sol,la,mir,re,re,mi,fa,sol,sol,sol,re,do.  The second verse
pretty much describes the extent of the film's variety.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

YOUNG GIRLS OF ROCHEFORT, THE (Demoiselles de Rochefort, Les)
(director/writer: Jacques Demy; cinematographer: Ghislain Cloquet;
editor: Jean Hamon; cast: Catherine Deneuve (Delphine Garnier),
Françoise Dorléac (Solange Garnier), George Chakiris (Etienne), Gene
Kelly (Andy Miller), Michel Piccoli (Simon Dame), Grover Dale (Bill),
Danielle Darrieux (Yvonne Garnier), Henri Crémieux (Subtil Dutrouz),
Jacques Riberolles (Guillaume), Patrick Jeantet (Boubou), Genevičve
Thenier (Josette), Jacques Perrin (Maxence); Runtime: 125; Miramax
Films/Zoe Productions; 1967-France)
This is one terrific musical, outdated or not. Jacques Demy (The
Umbrellas of Cherbourg) has created a grand work, though when this film
originally came out it was panned by some of the major film critics and
shunned by the public, but over the ensuing years it has come to be
recognized by many for the great film it is. The song and dance numbers
are playful, the story is meaningful, the performances are marvelously
refreshing, and the plush settings are very colorful. It is a film that
borrows freely from the Hollywood musical, but adds its own very French
touch of romantic spice, allowing the film to spring forth with a burst
of vibrancy. The film's musical score is an easy one to remember by
Michel Legrand, and its story is told almost exclusively by song, with
lyrics by Demy. There is also a tribute to swing music, with a large
portion of the scat music being from the likes of Louis Armstrong, Count
Basie, Duke Ellington, and Lionel Hampton. Johann Sebastian Bach is also
brought into the musical picture in a most revered way. The spirited
choreography caught my fancy, even though it probably was not as perfect
as Jerome Robbins would do, but it was a good enough imitation that was
attempted by Norman Maen. It is a film where music is everywhere, when a
fair comes to town, the pedestrians suddenly break out in a dance
number, giving the film an odd but potent touch of reality, as the film
does not aim for plausibility. Everything about this film was hopping,
there were no dead spots.
As in his other romantic films, Demy points out that love depends more
on chance and good timing than anything else. In this film, there are
dreams about meeting the ideal mate and yearnings about losing the one
who should have been their mate. It takes place over a long weekend,
with most of this operetta centered in the town square, which is painted
in stunning pastel shades.
Maxence (Perrin) is a handsome, blond sailor stationed in Rochefort, who
is finishing his tour of duty by the end of the week, after travelling
the world and being unable to locate his feminine ideal. In his spare
time he is a poet-artist. In one of his portraits, he has painted the
ideal woman and this hangs in a local gallery owned by Guillaume
(Riberolles). The gallery owner plays the heavy, a rich artist who tries
unsuccessfully to woo the lovely twin Delphine Garnier (Catherine
Deneuve). As a coincidence, the portrait painting he has hanging, is an
exact replica of what she looks like. When Delphine sees it, she is
intrigued to meet the artist, amazed that he could draw his ideal woman
sight unseen and that he has drawn her. Guillaume refuses to give her
the identity or the address of the artist, and throughout the film, the
two prospective lovers will just miss running into each other. That they
don't meet is odd, since her mother Yvonne (Danielle Darrieux) has a
refreshment stand where he hangs out, and he has even invited her to see
his painting, which she can't do because she is always busy working to
support the family.
Yvonne had the twins Delphine and Solange (Françoise Dorléac) from a
former lover. Ten years ago she met in Rochefort a wonderful man from
the music conservatory who had a funny name, Simon Dame (Michel
Piccoli). Just as people in real life don't marry for the silliest
reasons, she ran away from him because she didn't want to be called
Madame Dame, having a friend of hers end the relationship by telling him
she went to live in Mexico with a tycoon. He returned to Paris pining
for her love, but now after ten years he has returned to Rochefort to
open a music store, not expecting to see her again but hoping to
rekindle those happy memories by being in the spot where they met.
Unbeknownst to him, she had a child by him called Boubou (Patrick
Jeantet), who is now ten. He has never seen the twins, since they were
away in boarding school, though he knew about them, which will explain
why he doesn't recognize them when they meet.
The twins are first seen in a lively skit, after giving dance lessons to
a group of children they give music lessons to, as they go into a song
and dance explaining their close relationship and interests in life, and
how they feel unfulfilled living in this small coastal town in the
southwest of France, hoping to go to Paris soon. Delphine is a dancer,
Solange a composer and singer (They were real-live sisters but not twins
-- after the film Dorléac, 23, who is one year older, died in a car
accident). They change into shift dresses (terribly out of fashion in
the late '60s) and gloriously sing "We're a pair of twins, born under
the sign of Gemini/Who love catchy tunes, silly puns and repartee."
Solange befriends Simon in his store and when he hears what she
composes, he tells her about his American friend he attended the
conservatory with, the now famous songster who is stopping off in Paris
on his world tour, Andy Miller (Gene Kelly). He promises that he will
write to Andy and see if he can get him to give her a break. She bumps
into the middle-aged stranger in the street, but she does not know who
he is (Kelly was 55 at the time of this film -- his voice was dubbed and
he wore a toupee). When she meets Boubou after school, he has a tantrum,
knocking over her bag, but to the rescue comes Andy, as they fall in
love at first sight. She is so dazed, that she leaves her musical
composition on the street, which Andy picks up but doesn't have an
address where to return it to. When he plays her song, he falls in love
with her for sure.
To add to the romantic chase, two free-spirited carnies come to town for
the fair, Etienne
(George Chakiris-- he danced in West Side Story) and Bill (Grover Dale).
They are looking for a quickie romance, bragging about their exploits
with other girls, as they hang around Yvonne's stand. Their motto is
delivered by song: "They call us carnies, but poets are what we are." In
an emergency situation they pickup Boubou as a favor for Yvonne and meet
the twins, falling madly in love with them. But the girls do not trust
them. When the dancers performing in their show, run away with two
sailors, they make a deal with the girls, that if they perform in the
show, they will give them a ride to Paris.
All the lovers' stories intertwine, there is even a slasher story thrown
into the mix, as the town is fearful that there is a madman on the
loose. Demy is in the habit of referring to his other films, keeping his
films alive as an ongoing saga, here the victim is Lola, who was the
heroine in one of his first films- "Lola" (61). Her gruesome murder is
made into a jolly song, continuing with the upbeat mood of this surreal
film. Everything seems to work, no matter how awkward, there was just so
much energy and good chemistry, that mistakes were made unimportant. I
simply loved it for its vitality, realizing that if I saw it in the
1960s, I might not have been so taken with its lack of political
perception. Though, there was an attempt to show how the ordinary
citizens of the town are filled with spontaneous song, breaking into
dance whenever the mood strikes them, as opposed to all the soldiers in
town forced to march, thereby leading repressed lives.
It was a film that had bad timing for its release date, it was the wrong
time to pay homage to Hollywood musical films, such films were already
passe and revolution was in the air and in the arts, and this film was
just an anamoly. But like Demy says, love is a matter of chance
meetings, and years later, as this film is released on video for the
first time, after Demy's wife, Agnes Varda, led the efforts for
restoration, audiences have a chance to catch up with a great film that
has been passed up through no fault of its own.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Young_Girls_of_Rochefort_(Les_Demoiselles_de_Rochefort)_ (G) *** (out
of ****)
Director Jacques Demy and composer Michel Legrand's 1967 musical follow-up
to their classic 1964 jazz opera _The_Umbrellas_of_Cherbourg_ is by no
means the masterpiece that film was, but it is not without its frothy
charms.  Catherine Deneuve, who also starred in _Umbrellas_, and her
real-life sister, Francoise Dorleac, respectively play fraternal twin
sisters Delphine and Solange Garnier.  Delphine is a dancer; Solange is a
composer, and both have dreams that stretch beyond the boundaries of their
small hometown of Rochefort--first and foremost being finding true love.
Little do they know that their perfect matches are also wandering the local
streets: poet/artist/sailor Maxence (Jacques Perrin) and American composer
Andy Miller (Gene Kelly), respectively.  Delphine and Solange's mother
(Danielle Darrieux) also pines for a true love--a lost one--who, yes, also
happens to be in town: music shop owner Simon Dame (Michel Piccoli).  These
six characters constantly run into each other, but, of course, each just as
constantly misses his or her match.
Although much of _Rochefort_'s creative team, from the director, composer,
and lead actress to many of the dubbed-in singing voices are the same as
those of _Umbrellas_, the two films could not be more different.  While
_Umbrellas_ was entirely sung but without a single dance number,
_Rochefort_ is a more traditional musical, with spoken interludes between
lavish production numbers and wall-to-wall dancing.  But the most crucial
difference is the tone; where the heartbreaking _Umbrellas_ was tragically
bittersweet, _Rochefort_ is unremittingly sunny, which fits the light
storyline.  However, all the lightness makes this film, unlike the
emotionally sweeping _Umbrellas_, a completely disposable entertainment.
Nonetheless, _Rochefort_, while an overlong 125 minutes, is a delightful
confection, made all the sweeter by Legrand's jazzy, toe-tapping score,
Bernard Evein's candy-colored production design, and the energetic cast.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
