Title
Review for Let It Be (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        "Let it Be" is exactly what they should have done with the 
miles and miles of film documenting the worst Beatles album since 
Beatles For Sale. This film is a chore even for a die-hard Beatles fan 
like me who owns every CD from Revolver on. I'd hate to think of 
the viewing experience that awaits someone who doesn't consider 
him or herself a fan. Most Beatles fans probably won't even like this 
movie, you'd probably have to be a Beatles fanatic. I'm somewhere 
in between those two distinctions, I guess you could call me a 
Beatles fanat.
        That means hold the band in high enough esteem to love 
most of the album tracks that never receive radio airplay, but I don't 
love them enough to track down every bootleg and outtake in the 
band's history. That's a fanatic, and a fanatic would probably be 
interested in Let it Be simply because it offers a lot of rehearsal and 
live versions of every song on the Let it Be album and a few from 
Abbey Road. It's painful for me to see unpolished rehearsal versions 
of such great songs as "Get Back," "Maxwell's Silver Hammer," and 
"Across the Universe," though.
        For someone who's not familiar with these songs, hearing 
such trashed versions will give off a bad impression. I'm sure more 
than one person, upon hearing the performances in this film and/or 
the Anthology albums, has thought, "This is the greatest band in 
rock and roll history?!" When you're used to the perfect album 
version of a song, hearing take two or three isn't the same. This 
movie sent me running for my Abbey Road and Let it Be CD's.
        The first 45 minutes of LET IT BE is precisely that -- studio 
run-throughs of about 20 songs, some of which never made it onto 
any album. For the person interested in outtakes and rehearsals, this 
should prove fascinating, although it's interesting to note that, as 
with the alternate versions on the Anthology albums, a lot of these 
songs are edited down or not presented in their entirety. You'd think 
that someone who's actually interested in hearing this stuff would 
get pissed at not being able to hear it all.
        The rest of us are left during this opening half of the movie 
to ponder such things. There are a few interesting moments for the 
middle-of-the-road Beatles fanat like myself, like learning George 
Harrison pretty much wrote "Octopus's Garden" for Ringo Starr, 
hearing certain band members complain to each other about other 
band members, and seeing Yoko Ono penetrate every aspect of the 
band without ever saying a word. LET IT BE also got me wondering 
why Paul McCartney had time to write all those brilliant songs but 
couldn't find a few minutes each day to shave. Things that make 
you go hmmm, right?
        After the rehearsals come a few "music video" type 
performances of "Two of Us," "Let it Be" and "The Long and 
Winding Road," followed by the famous rooftop concert at their 
Abbey Road studio. Things pick up from there, as we get passable 
versions of "The One After 909," "Dig a Pony," "Don't Let Me 
Down," "I've Got a Feeling" and "Get Back" twice before those 
stuffy bobbies come up and make them quit. You were wondering 
who broke up The Beatles? It was those damn bobbies!
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!
