Title
Review for Dream Lover (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz
DREAM LOVER (director/writer: Nicholas Kazan; cinematographer: Jean-Yves
Escoffier; editors: Susan R. Crutcher/Jill Savitt; cast: James Spader (Ray
Reardon), Madchen Amick (Lena Reardon), Bess Armstrong (Elaine), Larry Miller
(Norman), Fredric Lehne (Larry), William Shockley (Buddy), Clyde Kusatsu
(Judge); Runtime: 103; Gramercy Pictures; 1994) 
A far-fetched thriller that bogs done in an incredible situation by the film's
last 20 minutes. Dream Lover takes the law into its sordid hands. James Spader
plays Ray Reardon, a successful, handsome architect, recently divorced and on
the lookout for the perfect soulmate in his quest of all his yuppie dreams.
Attending his obnoxious friend Norman's (Miller) art gallery party, he bumps
into an attractive and mysterious brunette who arouses his sexual curiosity. She
contrives to meet him again at a supermarket and he soon becomes intimately
involved with his so-called dream girl, Lena (Amick). 
After several years of marriage, kids, and bliss, things begin to fall apart for
Ray. He catches her behaving strangely and in many lies: she lies about the
college she attended, where she's from, hiring temp workers to pose as her
friends, the bruises she has on her body, that she is sleeping with one of his
close friends Larry (Lehne), and how she setup the meeting with him to trap him
into marriage. Lena plays the villainous femme fatale without smoke. There's
something dry about her performance. There's also the lack of chemistry in the
relationship she has with the Spader character. Instead of steamy sex we get
absurd plot contrivances of how manipulative she is and how she gets the law to
back her in her quest to take Spader's money. The filmmaker wants us to believe
that Spader is suddenly, out of the blue, after a lifetime of being a model
citizen and a credit to the business world, ruled insane by the judicial system.
He is sent to a mental institution on only the word of his wife and her shrink,
all because he slapped her around after finding out she's been unfaithful to
him. Spader's attempt to tell about her false history and that  she's a
psychopathic liar are ignored by the judge. In the laughable trial at his
insanity hearing, no mention is made of all her deceits into roping him into the
marriage, or of any of the other things she did that were deceptive. He's
suddenly kept drugged in an mental institution and his only plan of escaping his
nightmare, is to conspire with Larry's wife Elaine (Armstrong) to come up with a
totally insane plan to get revenge on Lena. 
This was not a very satisfying thriller: it lacked conviction, memorable
performances, and intelligent dialogue. An example of the film's inane dialogue
can best be heard in a typical conversation between the two protagonists.
Spader: You're a psychopath. Amick: Even psychopaths can still love somebody.
This kind of talk might be especially appealing to the psychopaths in the
audience. There weren't many layers to peel away from this story before
discovering how manipulative it was, how it was without a strong actor's
presence, and how it failed to make a strong psychological imprint; the
characters were made into objects of a contrived tale causing the film to lag. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
JON RIDGE
[This is a re-posting to correct the authorship of the review.  It was not
written by David Wong Shee, but by "z_ridgeje@ccsvax.sfasu.edu," and the
error in attribution was entirely mine.  -Moderator]
     "Psychopaths can love people, too.  Can't they?"
     The directorial debut of Nicholas Kazan stars James Spader as an
architect in search of happiness, and the above is between him and what
he's settled for.  By that point in the film, Ray has had his life
turned upside down, inside down, inside out--but that's jumping a bit
too far ahead yet.
     The film's start finds Ray in the midst of divorce from the wife
he found in bed with another man.  He'd be the first to admit divorce
isn't what he wants--and the feeling is mutual, it would seem, as his
unfaithful wife (who was only looking for a reason to leave their
marriage) tells him: "I know you'll find the right person, and when
you do, she'll be the luckiest woman alive"--but Ray has never been
very good at containing his anger (especially under those
circumstances), and ultimately struck his wife.
     Time passes, and his friends feel it time for Ray to start a new
life, with a new woman. Ray agrees: "I want the kids, the dog, the
Volvo," but would be satisfied if everyone just left him alone while
finding these things.  Namely, the wife part.  That doesn't stop a
business colleague/best friend (Larry Miller) from hooking him up with
a ditsy broad, anyway, whom Ray encounters at a party.  "We're
practically engaged," she tells him, which doesn't make him all that
happy.  What Ray really needs is the right woman--the perfect woman--to
give him the life he wants and get the friends, who only want the best
for him, off his back.  Salvation comes (well, maybe) in the form of
Lena, whose nice dress Ray ruins with a clumsy wine spill.  He offers
to help her clean up, but she's clearly pissed beyond the point of
reprieve ...  or, at least, to engage in polite conversation.
     Their second encounter proves a bit more fruitful when Ray runs
into Lena while shopping at a grocery store.  He is taken aback by her
beauty (as are we).  He can't take his eyes off her (neither can we).
He takes her to dinner, she tells him her interests in life, and then
walks her to her apartment where he ends up spending the night.  He's
hooked.  Problem is Ray can't find his one-nighter afterwards and so,
like a lover confused, he stalks her apartment, waiting outside to
finally see her ... with another man, who Lena is quick to explain is
only a "friend."
     Before she has the chance to get away from him again, Ray married
this sensuous woman he hasn't taken the time to know anything about.
They're very happy for a while, too, matching sexual drives pound for
pound, and have a child together.  He's in love with her, his friends
love her; it's all so perfect.  Too perfect.  This is one mysterious
lady Ray's decided to spend his life with, but it takes him a while to
see past the facade that's blinded him and wake up to the lies she's
feeding him.  Easy to see why; as Ray tells a friend (the friend who
may, in fact, be sleeping with his new bride): "The most gorgeous
creature I've ever seen, and she chose me."  When suspicions do arise
withing Ray that perhaps Lena has been as untruthful as any one person
can be with another, he simply forgets it all and loses himself in her
beauty.  Even when he overhears her immersed in flirtatious phone talk,
Ray continues putting aside any good judgment aside.  He should know
better.
     Eventually Ray hits his wife (again) ... and then hits her harder.
The "I bruise easy" BS she gave Ray comes back to haunt him with a
vengeance when he's committed to a mental institution for
wife-beating.  Ray denies emphatically having inflicted the injuries
that can so vividly be seen on Lena's face; he appears cool, calm,
collected and completely in a healthy state of mind until other people
start lying on his wife's behalf.  That sets him off, spewing
profanities left and right and putting up fight with security.  Ray is
there to stay.
     The woman responsible for tearing this Everyman apart with her
bare hands is Lena (Thelma/Sissy), and she is played by Madchen Amick.
She is drop-dead gorgeous, using her sexuality to get exactly what she
wants from men.  Her latest innocent devises a plan to get back at her
and then ending, when that plan comes to head, is a genuine surprise.
Not because of what takes place, but because of the rationale behind
it--Kazan's screenplay finds a way for Ray to get revenge, while
pointing a finger at the irony involved with the court system in
America concurrently.  It's brilliant; a real surprise.  Lena gets what
she deserves, leading us to assume that eventually Ray will, too.
     Kazan directs Spader and Amick the way you'd expect a first-timer
to: professionally, but not exceptionally.  We get a lot of eye
close-ups that would seem to give some sort of dark insight as to
what's going on within the heads of these people.  We can tell by
looking at Spader's face exactly what Ray is feeling, so seeing his
eyes enlarged on-screen makes them bigger, not anymore meaningful.
Kazan's script isn't anything all that fresh, just an outline of
thriller cliches.  And as a thriller, DREAM LOVER is notably a low-key
film.
     What makes it all work are the two stars at play.  James Spader is
an interesting young actor, at times giving a concentrated stare that
suggests pain, frustration, anger, and subtle attraction all at once.
He always seems to have more than one thing on his mind, and feels one
step ahead of the audience even when the screenplay calls for him not
to be.  Spader is quite good at portraying more feeling than the film
really deserves, and aside from JACK'S BACK, I'm not sure he's been
this good.
     At the opposite end is Amick, who isn't all that competent an
actress, but passable as the femme fatale.  She pinpoints Lena's angle
right off, playing it sweet and relaxed during the first third of the
movie--like a confident sexpot would--and becoming less so toward the
end.  She even starts enjoying herself as Lena lets her true colors
shine:  After Ray punches her in the face, she sits up with a grin and
says, "Is that all?"  But we understand all of this; Amick never moves
on.  If nothing more, you may be intrigued to simply look at her; she
truly is smashing.  Both she and Spader look great in the film, so
credit the make-up and costume designers for doing a bang-up job.  In
face, while watching DREAM LOVER, I found myself examining the actors'
(just the leads) faces and not thinking a lot about what was going on
around them.  Their scenes together are sexy and believable and
well-performed.
     But I believe I've hit upon something else.  It's probably best to
not take under consideration the majority of what happens in DREAM
LOVER--no one involved with the project did.  We find out that Lena is
not he housewife Ray wants, but a woman with a specific purpose.  She
even asks Ray to give her credit for becoming a different person
because in Lena's opinion, not many people could do with their lives
what she's done with her own.  Ray isn't concerned with philosophy; all
he wanted was to be in love and have children with a wife.  That's why
what finally happens is more damaging for Ray that for Lena.
     It isn't a complicated process, but the film isn't ever boring,
either.  It could've been executed more successfully; Director Kazan
would perhaps have had a better film on his hands having wiped out a
few of the dream sequences in translation of script to screen; the
sequences are excessive and pointless (there are four long ones), and
one too many uninvolving scenes linger.  Overall, though, what's here
makes for a serviceable little erotic mystery that is marvelous to look
at.
     Forget the plot.  Feast your eyes on Spader and the
heart-stoppingly beautiful Madchen Amick.  Two actors never looked this
good in a movie.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Nicholas Kazan
Starring: James Spader, Madchen Amick, Fredric Lehne, Larry Miller, Bess
Armstrong, Kathleen York, Michael Milhoan, Clyde Kusatu, Erik Avari
"Dream Lover" is that kind of bizarre, non-conformist erotic thriller. 
The trailers hint at just a film filled with sex, and a bit of Hitchcock
tossed in for good measure.  But "Dream Lover" is far more complex than
that, and is surprisingly enough a good film, even if its previews come
off as stupid and randy (which isn't always a bad thing).
"Dream Lover" deals with Ray (James Spader), who has just divorced his
wife (Kathleen York), and has re-entered the wonderful world of dating. 
After going to his rich friend's (Larry Miller) party, he spills wine on
an attractive woman (Madchen Amick, who was on "Twin Peaks"), who freaks
out and humiliates him.  A week later, they run into eachother at the
supermarket, laugh over the accident, and soon go out to dinner
together.  The next day, Ray can't find her, but eventually tracks her,
and they begin having some wild sex.  After what has to be a huge
elipsis, they're married, and soon have a kid.  Everything's great for
Ray.
But gradually, things begin unraveling.  Ray finds out that her real
name, and that she has parents who he has never even heard of.  She
seems to have this whole other past which she claims to have left behind
when she moved to the city, but curiosity gets to Ray.  And as he
unpieces parts of her hidden life, his mental state gets worse and
worse.  Soon he's obsessed with finding where she is on Wednesday
afternoons when she disappears, and mysteriously has a matchbook from a
hotel in her purse.
The ending, I think, is cool, but does wrap things up way too nicely. 
But it's a great time watching Ray's sanity unravel, and the writing and
directing lets things unravel nicely and gradually.  The plot twists are
plotted nicely, allowing the film to move smoothly.  And the writing
lets us guess a lot over the mysterious Madchen Amick character.  And
while this may be found in the "suspense" section, there is no violence,
action sequences, or big scenes of stabbing/shooting/whatever else; just
good character assasination.
Also, the whole sex bit does not overcome the storyline, like it did for
"Basic Instinct."  I personally saw the "rated" version, but there's
apparently an unrated "sexier" version, but I'm sure it's not TOO
overbearing.  Although even in the "rated" version, you get to see the
lovely Madchen Amick in all her glory and splendor.
There's a bit of surrealism with the direction too.  The film is
intercut with fantasies Ray has at being at a bizarre carnival where the
cheif clown mocks Ray and his luck with women.  And there's even a fat
woman on a stage presenting Ray's dream lover of the title, whomever it
may actually be.  It's an interesting little thing to do, especially for
a film promoted as an "erotic thriller."
The acting is also very good.  James Spader, who's actually a cool actor
(even if he sometimes mumbles), plays Ray wonderfully, making him
interesting and likable.  Madchen Amick as the mysterious wife/dream
lover gives us a totally interesting character, making her sexy,
seductive, and even likable in that sick kind of way.  It's cool to see
a femme fatale in an erotic thriller who can actually act.  And Larry
Miller is, as usual, pretty funny, although him playing a playboy is
more questionable casting than interesting.
"Dream Lover" was a shock for me in how intelligent it was.  Sure, there
was some big taudry sex, and we had to see James Spader's butt and all,
but the plotting is wonderful, and the film becomes a good old
Hitchcockian mind twister, in the good sense.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dragan Antulov
Too many thrillers in 1990s relied on the same formula -
protagonists having to deal with seemingly innocent and
pleasant individual who is in reality a dangerous
psychopath. So, whenever authors of such thriller tried to
evade or bring fresh spin for this formula, results were
usually better than average. One of such examples is DREAM
LOVER, 1994 thriller written and directed by Nicholas Kazan.
Protagonist of this film is Ray Reardon (played by James
Spader), successful and rich architect who is recovering
from the painful divorce. On one of the parties he meets
Lena (played by Madchen Amick), beautiful and mysterious
woman who would arouse his curiosity as well as his lust.
Two of them gradually start a relationship, end in bed, get
married and raise a family. Ray's idyll begins to crack when
strange incidents begin to cast doubt about both Lena's
identity. Faced with the great possibility that he was lied
for years, Ray loses grip on reality and all that leads to
unexpected finale.
Nicholas Kazan, son of famous director Elia Kazan and
well-established screenwriter of his own, reverses 1990s
thriller formula by avoiding use of dangerous lunatic as
convenient villain. Psychotic character in this film is
actually the protagonist, while villain happens to be normal
person with immoral, but quite understandable agenda. Kazan
also reverses the formula by turning protagonist's
affliction into advantage instead of weakness. Rather
unconventional and totally surprising ending is also one of
the advantages of the film. Acting is very fine, with James
Spader allowing darker overtones to manifest in his screen
personality. Madchen Amick, one of TWIN PEAKS beauties, is
also quite impressive as femme fatale, and male audience
would probably appreciate her willingness to perform nude in
front of cameras. Unfortunately, Kazan shows some problems
in pacing - the ending is somewhat too abrupt, and the
scenes featuring Ray's insane fantasies seem too distracting
and "artsy". However, DREAM LOVER is definitely film worth
watching and one of the most underated 1990s thrillers.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
