Title
Review for Close Shave, A (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frankie Paiva
The countless numbers of short films that play at your local film festival are
endless. They are not just the hardest pick for your office's Oscar pool. There
are many ideas that can be expressed in just forty-five, thirty, or even
fifteen minutes. The sad thing is that non-festival goers will probably not
have a chance to see any of these films. Despite the occasional Spike & Mike
festival or the new short film websites that are popping up everywhere on the
Internet, these (sometimes) masterpieces don't get much play. That's why it's
amazing when a thirty minute short about the strange relationship between a man
and his dog, and the adventures they go on, became a huge hit. The first two
Wallace and Gromit films (The Wrong Trousers and A Grand Day Out) were big
successes. The Wrong Trousers even grabbed the Oscar for best Animated Short. A
Close Shave is the latest release from Aardman Animations, an Australian
animation company headed by Nick Park (the director of this movie). Aardman is
the front runner (some would say pioneer) in bringing animation to the
mainstream film audience. With the series' recent success, it's not hard to
seek this lovable pair out on video. In fact, I suggest you do so immediately.
Wallace lives in a cozy house somewhere in England with his dog Gromit. Wallace
is an inventor and has all sorts of different gadgets in his house. (For
instance, when he wakes up in the morning, Gromit pulls a rope and his rises
until he drops through the floor into his chair. He is then dressed by a
machine, and gets his toast delivered directly to his awaiting plate.) The
running gag of all these movies is that Gromit is smarter than his master. He
is a literally a person with feelings and sophistication. His favorite
magazines include Technology for Dogs and he always reads the newspaper instead
of fetching it. The duo have regular jobs as window washers and one day they
are invited to clean Wendolene's, the owner of the town’s wool shop, windows.
Wallace falls in love almost instantly, but Gromit has other troubles.
Wendolene has a mean and evil dog named Preston who seems to control her every
move. There is a wool shortage in the city, and the wool has to be rationed,
yet Wendolene has plenty of it. Could she and the dog be stealing sheep to make
wool? You'll have to watch the incredibly funning conclusion to find out.
Every moment of A Close Shave is filled with extremely funny sight gags, many
of which are priceless and will not be forgotten. One of the things I like
about these movies is that the characters are so darn likable that you always
know who to root for, even if you are laughing at them in the process. All of
the animal characters behave in a human manner giving the film an unneeded
comic touch. There is so much funny stuff here that it seems impossible to add
anything more to this wild roller coaster ride. I also enjoy the replay value
that this film has. I own all three shorts (this is by far my favorite) and I
constantly find myself watching them again and again, and I still laugh. Go to
your local video store now and seek Wallace and Gromit out, you'll thank me
after it's over. This short animation masterpiece gets **** stars.
The Young-Uns: There is one scary scene near the end involving a vicious dog,
(I won't say which one) but otherwise there's nothing in the film that's
harmful. Good Age: 4 and up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html

Author
Max Scheinin
When making a statement regarding the animated cinema, one can't be broad
in scope -- you have to narrow things down to a point where you really know
what you're talking about. Disney has revolutionized this area, with their
sometimes brilliant, sometimes mediocre animated films -- from Snow White
And The Seven Dwarves, to Hercules. But outside cel animation, there are
different masters -- the up-and-comer Henry Selick, of The Nightmare Before
Christmas and James And The Giant Peach. Even more notable, is the
excellent Nick park, creator and animator of Wallace And Grommit. Of all
these films, considering A Grand Day Out, and The Wrong Trowsers, the best
is A Close Shave -- by turns, deliciously exciting and wonderfully funny,
the animated masterpiece is a near perfect example of story-telling. How
much of a story can you cram into thirty brief minutes? This is just about
how much. With humor, both physical and sophisticated, and action, truly
exciting, the storyline pulls together in unexpected moments -- the
expressions we see on the faces of our heros (Wallace and Gromit) are far
more then we have came to expect. This is an excellent example of how well
good stop-motion can communicate to the audience. 
- Max Solovitch Scheinin (Scheinin not stirred)
Read more of Max's work -- reviews, essays, theories, links -- @
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
To subscribe to Max's work (includes all essays, theories, thoughts) write
him @ solo@cruzio.com with the word "subscribe" in the header. You will
receive e-mail on an irregular basis, considering that Max is a lazy/busy
kid. 
"Movies are really a kind of dream state, or like taking dope. And the
shock of walking out of the theatre into broad daylight can be terrifying.
I watch movies all the time, and I am also very bad at waking up."
- Martin Scorsese, from Scorsese on Scorsese
