Title
Review for Falkens öga (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) If a bird were to make a documentary about itself -- free
from any human commentary or anthropomorphizing -- it might look
something like KESTREL'S EYE, showing at the International Film Series
on Wednesday.
Filmmaker Mikael Kristersson placed remote control cameras in and around
the tower of a Swedish church where a pair of kestrels live. These
cameras observe the comings and goings of the birds to and from their
nest. Another camera watches the birds in a nearby field where they
hunt. Still another camera flies low over the country landscape to give
a kestrel's-eye view of flight.
On PBS or The Discovery Channel, this footage would be set to sober
narration or emotional music. The voiceover would explain what the
kestrels were doing, and why. The footage would be edited to emphasize
what fierce hunters these birds are, and what cute downy chicks they
have.
Instead, Kristersson edits the footage chronologically, and at a
leisurely and lifelike pace. Most daring of all, he adds no narration
and no music.
The first scenes of the film show the birds in their surroundings. The
important landmarks soon become familiar -- the nest in the tower, the
cemetery in the churchyard below, the field off in the distance, the
nearby brick rooftop. This is the entire world, as far as our kestrels
seem to know.
Once we're settled in, Kristersson begins to show us the day-to-day life
of the birds. For food, one bird goes to the field. It hovers over the
grass, waiting for prey to come into view. When it spots a target, it
tucks its wings and falls on its prey. When it finally catches a mouse
or a lizard, it brings the prize back to be shared with its mate.
Another sequence shows the process of mating and egg-laying. Without
narration, Kristersson tells us that each mating results in a single
egg. When the kestrels are done, there are six eggs.
Finally, Kristersson shows us the process of hatching the eggs and
fledging the chicks. By the end, the young birds have taken their first
awkward steps toward independence.
Although there's no narrator, there is a human presence. After all, the
birds live in a church, in a village. Joggers pass by on the road in
front of the nest. People walking dogs say hello in the street. And the
groomed-gravel cemetery in the churchyard gets constant attention from
the groundskeepers.
Occasionally the church becomes noisy with music and revelry as the
humans mark some birth, funeral, or wedding. But the birds proceed with
their own lives, oblivious to the similarities between our rituals and
their own.
At its worst, KESTREL'S EYE is a little slow. Sometimes the birds do
little else but watch the world go by.  
"I'm running a sex orgy, for a couple of freaks, on government funds!" 
-- [the cop], The Thomas Crown Affair(1968)
