Title
Review for Scary Movie (2000)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Scary Movie" was the original title for Wes Craven's ultra-popular "Scream." That is probably the best thing I can say in favor of this slapdash, lackadaisical spoof of the "Scream" movies and the slasher film genre in general. As with most spoofs, there are far too many desperate gags to inspire much laughter in the audience. 
Anna Frais deftly plays the Neve Campbell role (she even mimics shrinking her eyes as Campbell did in the original "Scream"), the virginal dimwit whose father is a drug runner with the Colombians. Enter the pot-smoking teen (Marlon Wayans), the jock superstud who has homosexual tendencies (one of the other Wayan brothers, I forget which), the mentally challenged (or "retarted retard" as he is referred to) police deputy (Dave Sheridan aping David Arquette), the opening "death" cameo by Carmen Electra as Drew, and so on. Oh, and the killer wears the same Edvard Munch mask with a glinting knife and hook! 
Most of the cast act like gaping idiots seeking attention, and none exude the charm or straight-as-an-arrow acting style (central to spoofs as a rule) of Leslie Nielsen in "The Naked Gun" or for that matter, Val Kilmer in the superbly hilarious "Top Secret." The trick is to play it straight, not to act like a total buffoon otherwise, you are letting people know you are in on the joke as well. 
The central problem with "Scary Movie" is that the script does not skewer the slasher genre as much as pop culture hits like "The Matrix" (which actually works), "The Blair Witch Project," "Amistad," and "The Usual Suspects." When it does spoof the slasher films, as in the obvious "Scream," it fails miserably mainly because the "Scream" movies were already poking fun at themselves. They were postmodernist jokes on the rules and do's and don'ts of the slasher film genre - how can you spoof what was essentially a spoof? This shows a real dearth in imagination, which as far as I am concerned, the Wayans (Shawn and Marlon co-wrote the screenplay) do not possess a lick of. 
"In Living Color" at least showed some talent from the Wayans brothers, as did the underappreciated "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka." Here genuine laughs come in extremely short supply (though Electra's cameo is quite good), and there are far too many gross-out gags, homosexual locker-room humor and exaggerated bodily fluid jokes that went out of style shortly after "Porky's" and its slew of rip-offs a decade ago. 
In its 90 minute running time, I chuckled four times and only let out one big laugh for "Scary Movie." It is a roller coaster ride of missed opportunities - where are the Zucker brothers when you need them? By comparison, "Scream 3" was a lot funnier. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Jon Popick
Making a film that's a spoof of an entire movie genre is kind of a
strange proposal. They say that imitation is the sincerest form of
flattery, and even though Mel Brooks has built a pretty successful
career out of sending up westerns, space adventures and (unfortunately)
vampire flicks, the whole idea of the genre parody doesn't seem much
different than Beavis, Butt-Head, Tom Servo or Crow tearing movies apart
in their living rooms.
But what about a movie that spoofs a movie that spoofed a genre? That's
what we have with Scary Movie, the latest collaboration from the
brothers Wayans. They've already lampooned blaxploitation flicks (I'm
Gonna Git You Sucka!) and gangsta films (Don't Be a Menace to South
Central While Drinking Your Juice in the Hood), and here they satirize
the Scream trilogy, among other horror films. Even its title is taken
from the one that Scream abandoned.
Scary Movie begins with Carmen Electra (Hyperion Bay) making popcorn and
receiving a phone call from a masked killer, a la Drew Barrymore's
memorable opening scene in the first Scream picture. The story is more
than a little familiar  knife-wielding lunatic begins slashing his way
through a small clique of friends and is pursued by a soulless news
reporter (Cheri Oteri, Saturday Night Live) and a retarded deputy (Dave
Sheridan, MTV's short-lived Buzzkill). Even the school principal is
played by a down-and-out 70s television sitcom star (Henry `The Fonz'
Winkler in Scream, and David `Squiggy' Lander here).
It isn't long before Scary Movie moves from Scream to I Know What You
Did Last Summer. After a funny automobile accident involving oral sex
and a beehive (don't ask) that occurred exactly one year ago, the band
of boobs starts receiving notes that threaten to expose their big
secret. While they're at it, the Wayans also toss in a scene right from
Dawson's Creek, a show that was created by Scream and IKWYDLS
screenwriter Kevin Williamson.
There isn't really too much else to say about Scary Movie without giving
away a lot of its gags. Some of the jokes fall flat, but most are direct
hits. In addition to sending up the two recent horror hits, the film
also briefly tackles The Matrix, The Blair Witch Project and The Sixth
Sense. There are also unexpected homages to Amistad and The Usual
Suspects (the latter seemed to go over the head of just about everyone
in the theatre), and a sick, X-rated version of Johnny Depp's death
scene in A Nightmare on Elm Street.
Scary Movie was directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans (A Lowdown Dirty Shame)
and its script was cobbled together by no less than six screenwriters.
Originally, the film's production was supposed to take just a few weeks
at the end of the summer of 1999 and slated for a fall release. But then
the Wayans' script (originally titled Last Summer I Screamed Because
Halloween Fell On Friday the 13th) merged with a similar project that
spoofed horror pictures (called Scream If You Know What I Did Last
Halloween), and the production was stretched out long enough for the
film to include a parody of the `Wassup' Budweiser commercials.
1:26 - R for strong crude sexual humor, language, drug use and violence

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans. Screenplay by Phil Beauman, Jason
Friedberg, Buddy Johnson, Aaron Seltzer, Marlon Wayans, Shawn Wayans.
Starring Anna Faris, Marlon Wayans, Regina Hall. Running time: 86 minutes.
Rated AA for mature subject matter and offensive language by the MFCB.
Reviewed on July 7th, 2000.
How do you review a film like "Scary Movie"? Certainly not on the basis of
plot. The "story" of a spoof is usually just a framework for gags -- to
assess it on that criterion would be like judging a dress on the quality
of the hanger. Acting isn't really all that important either, as long as
the performers possess a certain amount of charisma and some notion of
comic timing. Direction? Virtually irrelevant. Cinematography? Get real.
No, all that matters in deciding whether or not "Scary Movie" is any good
are the laughs. And "Scary Movie" is the first parody I've seen in years
that has laughs in droves. But fair warning first: I'm a big fan of the
"Naked Gun" movies. I enjoyed "Spaceballs". If your sense of humor runs
contrary to my own, this review likely won't apply much to you.
"Scary Movie" started life as two separate screenplays -- "Scream If You
Know What I Did Last Halloween" and "Last Summer I Screamed Because Friday
The 13th Fell On Halloween" -- which were merged into one by director
Keenen Ivory Wayans. Ironically, the final moniker was a working title for
"Scream", the progenitor of the current crop of teen-oriented slasher
films. If you haven't already guessed, "Scary Movie" is a pastiche
of this whole genre. If you've been avoiding these sorts of pictures, you
might want to give this one a pass too, as you might not get many of the
jokes.
The storyline of "Scary Movie" broadly follows the plot of "Scream", with
elements of other films (notably "Scream 2" and "I Know What You Did Last
Summer") thrown in for good measure. We again start off with a Big Star
making popcorn. In "Scream" it was Drew Barrymore (playing "Casey 
Becker"), here it's Carmen Electra (playing "Drew Becker", wink wink). The
phone rings, and sure enough it's a serial killer on the other line,
wearing the same Ghostface get-up as in "Scream". The voice on the phone
wants to know what the noise is. Carmen explains she just farted. The
killer was referring to the popcorn.
Soon Carmen is racing through the house and across her lawn. She comes to
a signpost with arrows reading "Safety" and "Death" pointing in opposite
directions. You can probably guess the rest. The movie plays out
predictably from there, as teens are stalked and slain by the masked
villain -- or is it villains? But, really, who cares about the story?
It barely even makes sense, and the ending is particularly incredulous.
What is important is the way "Scary Movie" subverts its source material,
and this it does very well. The "Father Death" mask, for instance, has
gained the miraculous ability to reflect its owner's mood, generating some
bizarre visuals when the killer is toquing up. Toward the end, the(?)
murderer does a terrific imitation of Matthew Lillard, one of "Scream"'s
homicidal teenagers.
"Scary Movie" doesn't just target the slasher genre, either. Everything
from "The Matrix" to "Dawson's Creek" is up for grabs here, and there are
some great send-ups of human behaviour. One of my favourite scenes has
black actress Regina Hall attending a showing of "Shakespeare In Love". In
a terrific pastiche of rude moviegoers (and, in particular, the reputation
African-Americans have of talking back to the screen), Hall just doesn't
stop chattering. She even talks on her cell phone, loudly, to the disgust
of the all-white, upper-middle-class crowd. Ghostface slinks into the
audience to stab Hall, but the audience gets to her first, pulling out
their own weapons. "This is for 'Schindler's List'!" exclaims a
Hassidic Jew. You'll have to hear for yourself what film Hall ruined for
the Pope.
(When I saw "Scary Movie", there was a moron waving a laser pointer across
the screen during certain scenes -- the first time I've encountered this
particular brand of rudeness at a local theatre. Intriguingly, they 
stopped doing it after the scene I've just described. Coincidence?)
Not all the jokes are winners, though, and "Scary Movie" is hamstrung by
following the plot of "Scream" a little too closely; greater variation
would have made for a funnier, more dynamic film. Some of the humor is
rather tired -- the gag of giving the characters cutesy, referential names
("Buffy" Gilmore) was even done already in "Scream 3". And sometimes
"Scary Movie" just doesn't know when enough is enough, like the running
gag about Ray (Shawn Wayans) being a closet homosexual.
Furthermore, whereas the truly great spoofs set you up with an obvious
joke, then knock you down by taking it one step further, "Scary Movie" is
often content to go only halfway. A parody of the confession scene from
"The Blair Witch Project", for example, is an awful lot like every other
"Blair Witch" parody of the past year.
No doubt the most controversial aspect of "Scary Movie" will be the sheer
explicitness of many jokes. Remember two years ago, when the "franks and
beans" scene in "There's Something About Mary" was considered 
groundbreaking? Well, there's a "franks and beans" scene about every
fifteen minutes here, although for the most part they're pretty amusing,
fortunately. Consequently, parents may want to be wary of letting younger
children attend "Scary Movie". It strikes me as a movie for strictly high
school age at minimum, and even that might be pushing it.
Amongst the cast, the only real standout is newcomer Anna Faris, playing
Sidney -- er, Cindy Campbell, succeeding impressively at portraying the
virginal heroine while uttering and engaging in sheer filth. It's almost
eerie. Otherwise, the castmembers are basically just vehicles for the
jokes. There aren't characters here, just ciphers and cliches.
Yes indeed, "Scary Movie" is plotless, crude, and possessed of mostly 
marginal performances -- all the things film critics are supposed to 
abhor. But did I laugh my ass off anyway? You bet I did. Do I recommend
"Scary Movie"? God help me, yes.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/ScaryMovie.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Scary Movie (2000)
Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Cheri Oteri, Shannon Elizabeth, Anna Faris, Jon
Abrahams, Lochlyn Munro, Regina Hall, Dave Sheridan, Dan Joffre, Carmen
Electra, Kurt Fuller, David L. Lander. Screenplay by Shawn Wayans, Marlon
Wayans, Buddy Johnson, Phil Beauman, Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzer.
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans. 88 minutes
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with the
word "subscribe" in the subject line.
How raunchy is "Scary Movie?" Director Keenan Ivory Wayans held a private
screening of the comedy and, when the camera got up close and personal with
a high school girls' gym teacher, his own parents walked out of the theater.
They won't be the only ones. The spoof of teen slasher flicks pushes the
R-rating envelope further than any other film to date, including "South
Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut." Make no mistake, "Scary Movie" is
unbelievably gross and juvenile. It's also the funniest thing I've seen
since the Farrelly brothers' "There's Something About Mary."
A love-it-or-hate-it film, "Scary Movie" will likely provoke a slew of "how
low can we go?" articles from self-appointed social guardians. Already,
several early reviewers have had conniption fits over the film's graphic
sexual imagery. Fuck 'em if they can't take a joke. For all of our
freewheeling posturing, the United States remains painfully squeamish about
carnal matters. It's part of the lingering fallout from peer pressure
exacted by the Puritans on neighboring communities over 200 years ago, which
resulted in our collective "sex is great as long as you feel terrible about
it afterwards" mentality. Many years ago, at a Caribbean cultural festival,
a gorgeous Haitian fire dancer summed up our national mindset beautifully
when she said to me, "America is such a constipated country."
For 88 sidesplitting minutes, Keenan Ivory Wayans takes the sexual images
that make us squirmy and rubs them in our faces, one-upping the Farrellys
along the way. Did the "buns and wieners" scene in "There's Something About
Mary" make you wince? Keenan gives us an erect penis used as a lethal
weapon. And where "Mary" featured the legendary "hair-gel" scene, "Scary
Movie" offers a geyser of semen.
Utilizing the scattershot comedy approach that filmmakers have tried to
replicate (usually without success) since "Airplane," the story is a
take-off of "Scream," meshed with "I Know What You Did Last Summer."
Somebody dressed up in a ghost-face costume is murdering teenagers and
stalking four kids who accidentally killed a man on a dark highway a year
earlier. The most memorable scenes from both movies get spoofed here, along
with loads of other films, including "The Exorcist" and "The Usual
Suspects."  Wayans and company even manage successful send-ups of "The
Matrix" and "The Blair Witch Project," two films that have been parodied to
death.
"Scream" honey bunnies Courteney Cox Arquette and David Arquette receive
special attention. In a lively performance, "Saturday Night Live's" Cheri
Oteri tweaks Gale Weathers, Courteney Cox Arquette's take-no-prisoners
newscaster character, as Gail Hailstorm (hey, I never said the writing was
sophisticated), author of the hit exploitation book, "You're Dead, I'm
Rich." Dave Sheridan tackles David Arquette's Deputy Dewey, along with the
actor's real-life goofball persona, as Doofy, a drooling idiot with a paper
star pinned to his chest. Doofy, incidentally, is the creepiest element in
the production, playing too much like a mean-spirited mockery of a retarded
person.
Most of the cast does solid work, primarily because the filmmakers
remembered the most important lesson from "Airplane": Actors in spoofs
aren't funny unless they play it straight. Kurt Fuller adopts a riotous
deadpan as the local sheriff (at a press conference, he solemnly intones
"The killing of these teenagers is tragic, but, you know, shit happens") and
Anna Faris, in the Neve Campbell spot, creates the film's most well rounded
character.
The slapdash production, while extremely funny overall, contains some
missteps. Lochlyn Munro, whose turn as a lunatic student in "Dead Man on
Campus" was the one great note in an otherwise leaden movie, disappears
early in the story. A running joke about a barely closeted gay football star
(Shawn Wayans) is beaten into the ground. And, on several occasions, the
filmmakers merely recreate scenes from slasher films without bothering to
enhance them.
Still, the laughs come fast and furious, with Wayans tackling everything
from "Riverdance" to race relations (when the killer comes after Anna, she
e-mails the authorities with the message "White woman in trouble!" and a
slew of police cars show up in seconds). As with "Airplane," "Scary Movie"
lobs dozens of jokes at the wall and, while some fall to the floor, most of
them stick. That's pretty good for a film SO FOUL, SO DISGUSTING AND SO
DEPRAVED THAT IT WILL LIKELY MEAN THE END OF CIVILIZATION AS WE KNOW IT!!!!

Author
Homer Yen
Since "Scary Movie" is nothing more than a silly
spoof, it would be unfair to measure it against the
same standards as you would any other kind of film. 
The plot, thin as it is, revolves around the myriad of
horror movies that have ever come out, and in
particular "Scream" and "I Know What You Did Last
Summer."  In fact, one of the original titles
considered was "Scream If You Know What I Did Last
Halloween."  
In this parody, a mad slasher donning the frock and
ghost mask from "Scream" is plaguing a local high
school, and no one can figure out who it is or why
he/she is doing it.  But if you're even thinking about
trying to determine his/her identity or motive, then
you're completely in the wrong mind set.  Meanwhile,
the characterizations, shallow as they are, serve no
other purpose other than to usher us from one setup to
another.  The players in this film are a few of the
Wayan's brothers and a few other 20-something actors
who either fall victim to the mad slasher, scream at
the top of their lungs, and/or engage in heavy
tongue-kissing.  
Thus, the question that begs to be asked is: is this
funny enough to endure the 100-minute running time? 
In many ways, watching "Scary Movie" might remind you
of any recent installment of "Saturday Night Live." 
It starts off with funny material but then quickly
spirals downward as it becomes mired in unfunny
gross-out gags, jokes that are insulting rather than
irreverent, and a lineup of skits that strains for
laughs but instead is greeted by heads nodding in
disappointment.
The funniest, most clever, and probably least
offensive segment happens at the beginning of the
film.  Desperately trying to escape the masked killer
is a dumb, nubile blonde.  She comes across a table
loaded with a variety of powerful weapons...and a
banana.  Guess which one she picks?  Then, as she runs
outside, there are two road signs.  One points towards
safety.  The other points towards death.  Guess which
path she takes?  
There are some other funny tidbits including a take on
the "Wassup" beer commercials and a parody of "The
Matrix" (which would have been funnier if I hadn't
seen the movie trailer a dozen times), but the clever
ideas are at a bare minimum.  The tone of the movie
begins to shift.  Jokes become extravagantly gross
such as the butch, Swedish woman named Miss Mann who
has a secret that 'she' wants to expose.  This spawned
more "Ewwwws" rather than chuckles.  Gags also focus
heavily on sex.  There's a running theme about a
boyfriend who encourages her virgin girlfriend to
explore.  And there's another ongoing gag about an
effeminate jock who acts gay in every way possible but
constantly denies it.  The film also engages in heavy
stereotyping.  Admittedly, I was glad to see a movie
patron, who talked incessantly on her cell phone and
screamed at the onscreen actors as if they could hear
her, get what she deserved.  But the pleasures are
slim at best.
Juvenile, lewd, and only sometimes funny, "Scary
Movie" scores a 9 out of 10 on the Dumb-o-Meter, a 5
out of 10 on the Laugh-O-Meter.  And a 3 out of 10 on
the Whether-You-Should-See-This-Or-Not-Meter.

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated R: strong sexual humor, language, drug use and comic violence/gore. 
Starring: Shannon Elizabeth, Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Carmen Electra, 
Anna Faris, Kurt Fuller, Regina Hall, Cheri Oteri. 
Spoofs have always been a favorite of mine in the movie genre. You go into 
the movie theatre and laugh until your side hurts. Movies like "Airplane" and 
"The Naked Gun" are some of my favorite spoofs. We haven't had many 
full-force spoofs of horror movies lately, and since "Scream" itself was a 
modest spoof why not spoof "Scream", one of the biggest grossing horror films 
of all time. Hey why not also spoof "Friday the 13th", "Blair Witch", "I Know 
What You Did Last Summer", "Matrix" and "The Sixth Sense", not to mention a 
ton of other films. "Scary Movie" is just that, a well-made horror movie 
spoof that isn't short on its laughs. 
The movie starts out just like the movie it is spoofing, "Scream". Drew 
Becker is at home all by herself, popping popcorn when she gets a call from 
an all too familiar voice asking her if she likes scary movies. If you've 
seen scream, then you know the rest, except this time you get some comical 
twists and a clever opening title. The film then goes to B.A. Corpse High 
School where we meet Cindy Campbell  (Anna Farris) (notice a trend?) who has 
just informed her friends Buffy Gilmore (Shannon Elizabeth) and Jill that 
Drew Becker was killed last night. Gail Hailstorm (Cheri Oteri) is right on 
the spot as she tries to get some tidbits from Deputy Doofy. The killer then 
stalks Cindy and her friends, as she starts to think maybe her boyfriend is 
the killer. As they get comically killed off one by one, they must try to 
stop him before the movie is over! 
The movie is chock full of sexually explicit jokes and sight gags, as well as 
prostethic organs, as well as some blood. The violence though played for 
laughs is surprisingly a bit strong, although never offensive or anything. 
The jokes are played out very well, and the dialogue is extremely smart. 
About 80% of the jokes work, but on occasion they get old and worn out, 
because it seems to go on and on. The film references to films are at times 
utterly hilarious, and the sight gags are extremely funny as hell. The scenes 
that were the funniest had me laughing so hard I couldn't breathe. 
The cast plays the film out very well with Shannon Elizabeth the standout. 
Newcomer Anna Farris plays Cindy Campbell very well, and plays the victim 
very funnily. Marlon and Shawn Wayans who also wrote the film together, do a 
great job with their characters Shortie and Ray. Some of the jokes in the 
film are at times pretty risque, but always ride the line of never being 
offensive, except some of the prostethics in the film. The film's best spoof 
scene is of  "The Blair Witch Project" and even though I love that movie, I 
will admit it was a very funny scene. 
The main problem with "Scary Movie" is that it follows "Scream" to a T with a 
few surprises here and there, with a clever twist at the end. The characters 
are all a standout, and the actors bring them out with full force, forcing us 
to laugh hard. The direction by Keenan Ivory Wayans is classic, and very well 
done. Horror fans and fans of the movies it spoofs will get alot out of this 
film, that might go down as a spoof classic along the lines of "Airplane" and 
"The Naked Gun". It's far from being a perfect film, but I could definatly 
watch it over and over and laugh each time at something new and funny. 

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Keenen Ivory Wayans
Written by: Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Aaron Seltzer, Phil Beauman, Buddy 
Johnson, Jason Friedberg
I'm going to keep the plot summary fairly short, because "Scary Movie" is 
really nothing more than a mix of different slasher films rolled into one. 
Cindy Campbell (Anna Faris) is your typical high school student. Her 
problems include: dealing with school; her overly amorous boyfriend, Bobby 
(Jon Abrahams); a pushy reporter (Cheri Oteri); a psychotic, though inept, 
serial killer stalking the student body; and the fact that she and her 
friends, Buffy, Brenda, Ray, and Greg (Shannon Elizabeth, Regina Hall, Shawn 
Wayans, and Lochlyn Munroe respectively), ran over a fisherman and dumped 
his body in the ocean. They've all managed quite well to move on with their 
lives after killing that fisherman, but problems are developing. Now the 
serial killer is after the group, and they can't help but think it may be - 
oh forget it - if you've seen "I Know What You Did Last Summer" and/or 
"Scream", you know the rest. Those two current teen-slasher films are the 
main targets of "Scary Movie".
Someone at the MPAA should be fired (preferably everyone) for allowing this 
movie to hit theaters with an "R" rating. Children shouldn't have been 
allowed to view this film, and I saw several in the audience. The movie 
features such colorful scenes as a girl being plastered to the ceiling by 
her boyfriend's, um, release while the two are having sex; or a character 
being killed by a male's, uh, organ being shoved through his head. However, 
none of that really matters, because "Scary Movie" is intended for adults. 
So how does it succeed on that level you ask? The results are varied. When 
it's spoofing other movies, "Scary Movie" can be fairly amusing. When it 
starts hurling gross-out jokes at the audience, it falls flat on its face.
So what films fall victim to this most recent spoof's attacks? Obviously, "I 
Know What You Did Last Summer" and "Scream" are the primary targets, but 
"Final Destination", "The Usual Suspects", "The Blair Witch Project", "The 
Matrix", and a dozen or so others take a beating as well. How well these 
jabs work seems to depend on the film being spoofed. "The Blair Witch 
Project" is hit fairly well, with Cheri Oteri talking into the camera ala 
Heather Donahue's now famous moment. The small jab at "The Usual Suspects" 
doesn't work half as well because it doesn't fit in with the rest of the 
film. "The Matrix" takes an interesting hit; while it works brilliantly at 
first, the scene drops dead when Anna Faris starts doing an Irish jig in 
mid-air, for no apparent reason.
This is the part of the review I usually devote to an analysis of the acting 
in a film. However, that's a touch more difficult with a movie like this 
because it's difficult to tell if the actors are intentionally acting badly, 
to add to the satire, or if they simply cannot act. So I've decided to rate 
the actors based on their comic abilities and timing. Marlon and Shawn 
Wayans (best known for starring in the WB's horrendous "The Wayans 
Brothers") give two very different, though equally irritating performances. 
Marlon (in the role of Randy, made famous by Jamie Kennedy from "Scream") 
overacts to the extreme, while Shawn (as the gay boyfriend - that's funny 
right?) underacts to the point where we believe he's dead long before the 
character actually bites the dust. Newcomer Anna Faris gives an interesting 
turn, switching from a horrible performance to a great impersonation of 
Jennifer Love Hewitt in a split second. The film's best performance comes 
from Shannon Elizabeth ("American Beauty") as the school's resident phony. 
Watch for the scene where she confronts the masked killer for one of the 
movie's best moments. Kurt Fuller ("Wayne's World") shows up in an amusing 
performance as the town sheriff, and watch for a cameo by David Lander 
("Laverne and Shirley") as the school principle.
The only times "Scary Movie" really works well is when the jokes are clever 
observations about the faults in horror films. The movie fails when these 
observations are about as idiotic as possible, and this happens fairly 
often. The joke about David Arquette's character from "Scream", Deputy 
Dewey, is one of these moronic jokes. Gee, we'll make his character 
handicapped in this one and have him drool - that's funny too, right? The 
quick jab at "Final Destination" is more unexpected than funny, but that's 
more than we get out of most the film's jokes. "Scary Movie" runs a quick 88 
minutes, but it feels a bit longer than that. I'd recommend it only to those 
who are big fans of the Wayans brothers (assuming there are any out there) 
and fans of gross-out humor. I did notice that even people who found that 
kind of humor amusing seemed to get tired of it after a while. When the 
movie started the audience was cracking up, but by the end this had died 
down to nervous chuckles. For a lot of wasted opportunities, I give "Scary 
Movie" three out of five stars. By the way, if you enjoyed this movie I'd 
suggest seeing 1981's "Student Bodies", assuming it's possible to find it 
anywhere.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans.
Cast: Anna Faris, Jon Abrahams, Shawn Wayans, Regina Hall, Shannon Elizabeth, 
Marlon Wayans, Dave Sheridan, Lochlyn Munro, Cheri Oteri, Carmen Electra, 
Kurt Fuller, David L. Lander.
2000 - 88 minutes
Rated R (for comic violence, gore, profanity, sex, male and female nudity, 
and extreme scatological humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 8, 2000.
A "Naked Gun/Airplane!"-style parody of the recent '90s resurgence of slasher 
movies was bound to happen sooner or later, and using the mother of them all, 
"Scream," as its major outline, one couldn't ask for a film much more funny 
or outrageously ballsy as "Scary Movie," mercilessly directed by Keenen Ivory 
Wayans (1988's "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka"). Borrowing major plot points, and 
then skewering them, from "I Know What You Did Last Summer," "The Blair Witch 
Project," "The Matrix," "The Usual Suspects," and, yes, "Scream," the act of 
watching "Scary Movie" is akin to getting, on average, five jokes, puns, and 
one-liners, thrown at you per minute. As is always the case with spoofs, not 
every comedic moment works, but so many are thrown at you, and there is such 
an unusually high success rate, that anyone open-minded about humor that is 
almost always in bad taste should have the most rib-ticklingly good time at 
the movies this year so far.
Occasionally a scene-for-scene lampoon of the original "Scream," "Scary 
Movie" has taken its basic plot, and added a prominent plot point from "I 
Know What You Did Last Summer," to unleash its rapid-fire line of gags. 
Carmen Electra opens the film in the Drew Barrymore role of Drew Decker, a 
high school student home alone who receives a phone call from a stranger. 
While jiffy popping some popcorn, they prattle on about their favorite scare 
movies, including Drew's personal favorite, the Shaquille O'Neal genie movie, 
"Kazaam!" Soon, however, the fun ends as she is being chased around her house 
by a killer in a ghostface Halloween costume. She inevitably is killed (but 
not before getting her clothes torn off and given the opportunity to strike 
some tantalizing poses while in the midst of her yard sprinkler; getting her 
breast implant stabbed out; and getting hit by her dad's car while he is 
receiving roadhead from her mother). If this already doesn't sound like your 
cup of tea, I hasten to add that this opener is only a relative taste of far 
raunchier things to come in the next 80 minutes.
The next morning, rumors are abuzz at B.A. Corpse High School, where the 
innocent virgin Cindy (Anna Faris) suspects the murder is related to a man 
she and her friends, including her boyfriend Bobby (Jon Abrahams); closeted 
football player Ray (Shawn Wayans) and his sassy girlfriend Brenda (Regina 
Hall); hunky Greg (Lochlyn Munro); and his lover, the snotty sex-on-legs 
Buffy (Shannon Elizabeth), accidentally hit with their car and dumped in the 
lake a year before, on Halloween. Soon, the six students are receiving 
threatening notes and being slaughtered one at a time, by someone who knows 
what they did. Also getting in on the action is cutthroat bitch reporter Gail 
Hailstorm (Cheri Oteri), who will go to any lengths to get her story, and 
Deputy Doofy (Dave Sheridan), Buffy's retarded brother.
The less you know going into "Scary Movie," the more unexpected and humorous 
it will undoubtedly be, so to discuss many of the brighter moments would be 
unfair. Suffice to say, if ever there was a movie that proves how unjustified 
the MPAA actually is, it is "Scary Movie." With no less than three scenes 
showing the male organ (one of which portrays it erect), and an unstoppable 
barrage of equally naughty behavior and images (does an "orgasmic explosion" 
mean anything to you?), the film has somehow passed as an R-rating, when much 
less extreme films have received (1998's "Orgazmo," 1995's "Showgirls") or 
been wrongfully threatened (1999's "Eyes Wide Shut") with an NC-17. Alas, 
"Scary Movie" turns out to, indeed, be scary--scary that director Keenen 
Ivory Wayans and screenwriters Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Buddy Johnson, 
Phil Beauman, Jason Friedberg, and Aaron Seltzer (whew!) had the courage to 
write such un-PC, potentially offensive material. That there are six writers 
involved in the film is usually a negative sign, but not this time. 
Apparently, all six had some really slam-bang, witty ideas and they morphed 
them all together into a sure-to-be-classic whole.
The whole cast of "Scary Movie" keep straight faces throughout, which is the 
right way to go. By making everything seem serious and real, it only proves 
more funny for the audience watching it. And if the sold-out audience whom I 
saw it with is any indication, there is going to be major repeat business 
just to catch all of the jokes that were easily missed the first time around, 
in part due to the loud, infectious laughter that swept over everyone. 
The token virginal heroine, Cindy, is played by newcomer Anna Faris, and her 
delicious, likable turn is as good as it possibly could have been. Also 
taking advantage of the chance to test out their comedic skills are Shawn and 
Marlon Wayans; the delightful Regina Hall (1999's "The Best Man"), as 
loudmouth Brenda, who gets her much deserved comeuppance in one of the 
picture's best scenes, when she causes an uproar at the local movie theater 
showing "Shakespeare in Love;" Shannon Elizabeth (1999's "American Pie"), who 
is distraught that her boyfriend is killed until she learns she has just won 
the town's beauty pageant as Miss Fellatio; and Dave Sheridan and the sadly 
underused Cheri Oteri (TV's "Saturday Night Live"), as Deputy Doofy and Gail 
Hailstorm, obvious takes on the David Arquette and Courteney Cox Arquette 
characters in the "Scream" movies.
"Scary Movie" is never anything less than silly, but amidst it all are some 
fairly knowing moments of social commentary, including material on race 
relations, homosexuality, the portrayal of teenagers in Hollywood movies, as 
well as sly truths about teenagers and young adults. After hitting the 
unknown man with their car and deciding to do away with the body, Buffy says 
to Cindy, "We'll just pretend it never happened. Like the time we were drunk 
and went down on each other." It may not be art, but it does have a ring of 
honesty to it.
When film parodies work, they really smoke, but it is a particularly tricky 
genre in which most attempts fail. For every "Airplane!," there is a "Spy 
Hard," a "Wrongfully Accused," and a "Jane Austen's Mafia!," and "Scary 
Movie" is one of the very, very few recent ventures that belong in the former 
category. If you are in the mood to go to the movies, have a great time and a 
lot of big guffaw laughs--oh, and if you aren't faint of heart--it would be 
absolutely foolish to pass up "Scary Movie."

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I generally rate "spoof films" by the number of jokes that work in the film
versus those that didn't. Classics like AIRPLANE, TOP SECRET and NAKED GUN
get high marks for achieving an exceptionally high ratio of jokes that hit
their mark, while others like MAFIA, HOT SHOTS and HIGH SCHOOL HIGH barely
rattle off an average of 50%. This film is Keenen Ivory Wayans' third shot
at the "spoof movie" gold, and after a decent effort with I'M GONNA GIT YOU
SUCKA and lackluster results with DON'T BE A MENACE..., it looks like he's
finally found the right formula. SCARY MOVIE is a funny movie.
PLOT:
Hmmm...how could I put this? Do you remember the story line from the
original SCREAM? Well, it's basically the same story but played out as a
parody. A bunch of teens pursued by an unknown mask-wearing killer. That's
about it. Mix in a few other lampoons of other films, and there you have it.
CRITIQUE:
The funniest movie that I've seen so far this year, I couldn't help but
crack up during every other second of this film's first 30 minutes, with
jokes a-plenty, an excellent re-creation of the spoofed films and spot-on
potshots at the teen horror genre. Parody films work when most of the jokes
in the film click, and this one had no problem delivering plenty of gross,
over-the-top and clever moments in supposed tribute to those films which
passed before it. Admittedly, the second half of the movie doesn't really
keep up the joke-a-minute pace that the first half hour establishes early
on, but plenty of funny moments still reside, lots of big laughs and a
pretty neat ending keep it enjoyable all the way through. Mind you, I was a
little hesitant about the film initially. I love the whole "spoof" genre and
worried about the six (count 'em, six!) people credited as screenwriters for
this movie. Fortunately for me, my worries were very short-lived as the
jokes began rattling of my funny bone within the first few seconds of this
flick.
Of course, the actors are always a very big part of movies such as this.
They have to able to play their roles very seriously, and I give the most
credit to Anna Faris in this regard, as she nailed the lead role down to a
tee. Shannon Elizabeth was also good as the big-boobed bimbo, as was Marlon
Wayans as the heterosexual jock with a few issues locked away in his closet.
I think Cheri Oteri's character was a little underused, and despite finding
most of the pot jokes pretty hilarious, I didn't really appreciate Shawn
Wayans' over-the-top goofy pothead character. But hey, maybe that's just me!
I also could have done without the whole MATRIX parody, which was already
covered in DEUCE BIGALOW, earlier this year. Overall, the movie delivers
laughs, clever moments a plenty, references galore, a cameo here and there,
and even some pretty gruesome moments of murder (although they do still
manage to lace those moments with humor just the same). In the end, I really
liked the movie because it basically made fun of all of the stuff we always
find unbelievable in horror films, and they did it while maintaining the
authenticity from the original films.
Incidentally, this film also makes fun of retarded people, is loaded with
fart jokes, gay humor, dick shots, sexual innuendo and provides enough
disgusting behavior to disgust anyone who...well, is disgusted by stuff like
that! For the rest of ya'll, if THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY and SOUTH PARK
were enjoyable to you, this one should be just another walk in the park.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
SCARY MOVIE was the original title of Kevin Williamson's SCREAM screenplay.
Some of the films that are spoofed in this one include the SCREAM flicks,
the I KNOW WHAT YOU DID... flicks, THE SIXTH SENSE, THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT,
PULP FICTION, AMISTAD, TITANIC, THE USUAL SUSPECTS, THE MATRIX and a couple
of others, which I am sure to have missed. There is also an entire sequence
which essentially parodies a complete "whazzup!" commercial.
Carmen Electra's character spoofs the role Drew Barrymore played in the
original SCREAM movie. Which is why her character's name is Drew in this
one. Get it?
Shannon Elizabeth's name is Buffy in this film, an obvious reference to
"Buffy, The Vampire Slayer", the popular TV series starring Sarah Michelle
Gellar. Note that Shannon's dad in this film is referred to as "Mr. Gellar".
Just as in the original SCREAM movie, in which Henry Winkler played the
principal (he's best known for having played The Fonz on TV's "Happy Days"),
this one slapped another goofy leather-jacket wearing TV-star from the 70s
as the principal. Principal Squiggy is played by David Lander (best known
for his role as Squiggy on TV's "Laverne & Shirley").
This film was spliced together from two spoof scripts respectively named:
"Last Summer I Screamed Because Halloween Fell On Friday the 13th" and
"Scream If You Know What I Did Last Halloween".

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Keenen Ivory Wayans
WRITTEN BY: Marlon and Shawn Wayans
CAST: Anna Faris, Shannon Elizabeth, Cheri Oteri, Dave Sheridan 
MPAA: Rated R for strong crude sexual humor, language, drug use and violence.
Runtime: USA:112 (unrated version)
Most good comedies can be recognized by a solid script with twists,
turns and funny surprises. "Scary Movie" is comedy in Leslie
Nielsen-style, which consists of canned satirical whacks and rough
jokes tied together by slapsticks. It makes fun of practically every
scary movie that has been released during the last decade: Borrowing
the overall plot on an almost scene-by-scene basis, director Keenen
Ivory Wayans sharpens his knives and starts cutting away at characters
and situations. He then throws in sliced-and-diced pieces from I Know
What You Did Last Summer, Scream 2, Election, The Blair Witch Project,
Titanic/Amistad, The Sixth Sense, The Matrix, The Usual Suspects, The
Exorcist and probably a few others into a colorful and sometimes crude
mix.
''Scary Movie'' peaks pretty early when a bodacious high school
student Drew Becker (Carmen Electra, who cheerfully toys with her
image) making popcorn when the phone rings. A voice on the other end
inquires what her favorite scary movie. Frightened she looks around
and then at the table. On it she sees: a gun, a grenade, a condom and
a banana. Naturally she chooses the banana. Soon, she's running
through sprinklers in her underwear with a masked man in pursuit. She
then sees two traffic signs. One says ''Safety,'' the other says
''Death.'' She obviously knows the rules of a slasher movie and
chooses "Death". The next day, her murder is big news at the local
high school, and pushy reporter Gale Hailstorm (Cheri Oteri) is
shoving her mike into the faces of the glazed teens and shrieking at
her cameraman while trying to harvest material for a sequel to her
bestseller ''You're Dead, I'm Rich.'' Meanwhile, cute and innocent
Cindy (Anna Faris) begins to worry that the murder might have
something to do with a man she and her friends accidentally killed
last Halloween. Her closest pals, Buffy (Shannon Elizabeth) Brenda
(Regina Hall), and her boyfriend Bobby (Jon Abrahams), try to convince
her otherwise. But the killer is soon stalking her, and not even the
efforts of Deputy Dufy (Dave Sheridan) can save the day. The whole
thing ends with a "Wild Things" epilogue.
Ever since ''Friday the 13th,'' ''Halloween,'' and ''The Evil Dead,''
the genre has rested on a solid, if inexplicable, base of teens
rushing to dark, lonely places where they know violent murders
occur. And director Wayans portrays their uncovered stupidity,
primitive dialogue through ironysing every rule of scary movies --
every cliche of the horny teen horror genre, the teenage students
played by actors in their 20s and early 30s, the sex kittens, and
fringe characters like the student pothead and the doofus cop.
"Scary Movie" proves to be the kind of film that will offend the
cultivated elderly audience and leave just about everyone else
laughing until tears run down their cheeks. However, the films is far
from perfect. The most obvious element is that "Scary Movie" requires
that the viewer is familiar with the movies it so hard tries to
parodieses. But even then you are not guarantee. Only about 40% of the
jokes in Scary Movie work. The movie is a strange combination of
bright satirical remarks and unbearably stupid jokes. It moves from
clever parallels to farts and body fluids and back again in a
second. There are a lot of crude moments, and some that are simply too
dumb to generate a response. However, considering the sheer quantity
of material that is thrown at us, even a gigantic failure rate
represents a lot of laughs. The film has a significantly higher laugh
quotient at the beginning than near the end, the satire is sharper,
the jokes funnier. During the final half-hour there are several
noticeable dead spots, when there is no laughing in the theatre, just
an awkward silence. In addition it is absolutely necessary to remember
that "Scream" was also a slight parody on the slasher films as
well. And so "Scary Movie" becomes at times a pushy parody on a parody
on a parody, which is kind of unnecessary.
The question facing the target audience for ''Scary Movie'' is whether
the funny bits will be enough of a payoff for sitting through the
tedious stuff between them. Many have written angry remarks about the
risky content of this film -- the discriminating "gay humor", the
disturbing remarks on culture and art. This is very unfortunate. I
believe that "Scary Movie" doesn't take anything too seriously,
including itself. Being somehow provoked by this movie is completely
unnecessary. I admit that it does push too hard at times and often
crosses the line of decency and good taste, but the laughs are coming
in a row - non stop and that's a sign of a successful comedy. And
speaking for myself -- this is certainly my favorite scary movie in a
very long time.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Scary Movie (2000) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jon Abrahams, Carmen
Electra, Shannon Elizabeth, Anna Faris, Kurt Fuller, Cheri Oteri, Marlon
Wayans, Shawn Wayans and Regina Hall. Written by Phil Beauman, Jason
Friedberg, Buddy Johnson, Aaron Seltzer, Marlon Wayans and Shawn Wayans.
Directed by Keenan Ivory Wayans. Rated R. Running time: about 88
minutes.
 "Scary Movie" sets new highs in low comedy.
 It is crude, vulgar and provides something to offend everyone - blacks,
women, teens, gays, lesbians, the mentally challenged, cops and
teachers.
 "Scary Movie" also is the funniest movie of the year, a shameless,
unapologetic, savage spoof of teen slasher flicks such as "Scream," "I
Know What You Did Last Summer," their sequels and various rip-offs, as
well as a satiric tip of the cap to "The Sixth Sense," "The Blair Witch
Project" and "The Matrix."
 Despite all its crassness, "Scary Movie" is a very smart and expertly
done burlesque, ranking with the likes of "Blazing Saddles," "Young
Frankenstein" and "Airplane."
 Director Keenan Ivory Wayans, with the help of six screenwriters, has
created a movie that not only lampoons the genre's well-worn formulas,
but does so by reproducing the cinematic techniques familiar from those
films: the closeup of the hand reaching for the locked door, the
character who suddenly jumps into frame, the telephone unexpectedly
ringing, and so on.
 Usually when you see six names in a writing credit, it means trouble;
the cliché about too many cooks is true, especially in screenwriting.
But "Scary Movie" is an exception. The movie has a cohesiveness and
single-minded focus that is maintained from opening reel to closing
credits - and beyond. (Viewer alert: Do not leave after the end credits,
there's more to see.)
 This is one movie in which you cannot discuss the jokes. Most are too
tasteless, involving various sexual organs, bodily functions and fluids,
appliances and garden tools. Ironically, the nudity is held to a
minimum, and it's mostly male.
 The cast consists basically of young, bland performers, the types you
usually find in such movies. The `Drew Barrymore cameo' role is played
by Carmen Electra as the flatulent Drew.
 Also in the cast are Marlon and Shawn Wayans, as well as "Saturday
Night Live" regular Cheri Oteri as Gail Hailstorm, doing a broad spoof
of Courtney Cox's "Scream" news reporter, Gail Weathers.
 Oteri also figures in a wild salute to "The Blair Witch Project" that
will leave you reaching for a hankie and laughing until you hurt.
 For a film buff such as myself, there is nothing as satisfying as a
top-notch sendup. And "Scary Movie" fits that description. I laughed
from beginning to end, not only at the jokes, but at the recognition of
the ambiance created by director Wayans.
 "Scary Movie" is hilarious. Filmgoers without a sense of humor or who
are easily offended might as well stay home. This is not for you.
 But for the rest of us who want to feel our bellies shake and we
guffaw, giggle and scream with delight, "Scary Movie" scores a
bulls-eye.
 It's a gem, a small treasure, a bit tarnished as well as ribald,
scatological and unrefined. And the first chance I get, I'm going to
rush out and see it again. You'll want to do the same, I guarantee it.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Bloom's reviews can be found on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Chad Polenz
The title is no misnomer, what's so scary about this movie is that with all 
the easy targets for a zany spoof
comedy available and the backing of a major studio this is all they could 
come up with. 
Directed by Keenan Ivory Wayans and written by Wayans among six or so other 
writers, this outrageous
comedy takes aim at the 90's horror movie genre and hits below the belt.... 
waaaay below the belt. You've
probably never seen so many lowbrow sex and genitalia jokes crammed into one 
movie before. The
comedic elements at play here at the over-the-top gags and really cruel black 
comedy that are so extreme
the film often comes off as a pure B-movie. It's a miracle the film avoided 
the NC-17 rating. 
Be that as it may there's still some laughs to be found here, especially if 
you see it in a crowded movie
theater. It's the kind of comedy where the jokes work once and are powered by 
a big audience (if you catch
it on video in the fall you probably won't laugh at all). See it on the 
weekend for a good time for 90
minutes, but you won't exactly be enlightened or bettered in anyway by doing 
so. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Laura Clifford
The Wayans Brothers ("I'm Gonna Get You Sucka, TV's "In Living Color")
go the way of the Zucker Brothers ("Airplane") with their parody of
recent teen scream flicks "Scream" "Scream 2" and "I Know What You Did 
Last Summer"  with the ironically titled "Scary Movie" ("Scream's" 
original title).
Not since "Kentucky Fried Movie" (written by the Zucker Brothers, directed
by John Landis) in 1977, has a parody flick been so gleefully vulgar.
"Scary Movie" pushes the limits of the R rating even further than last
year's "South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut."   It's also pretty funny
in the Zuckers' tradition - if one joke falls flat, two or three more
will come along rapid fire that work.  
The story most closely follows the plot of the original "Scream," with
Carmen Elektra gamely appearing in the infamous first scene (her character's
appropriately named Drew), being tormented by the Edvard Munch masked killer
over the telephone as she makes popcorn.  Within minutes, the Wayans have
established good will by larking on the likes of Dennis Rodman, Jiffy Pop,
and teen flick T&A.
Cut to seven friends.  Cindy and Bobby (nudge, nudge) are the Neve
Campbell/Jennifer Love Hewitt, Skeet Ulrich standins with virginal Cindy 
leading on the always enthusiastic Bobby.  Regina Hall ("Love and Basketball") 
is Brenda, a "Clueless" standin and girlfriend of the sexual 
identity-challenged Ray (Shawn Wayans, getting one of the best laughs early 
on while asking for fashion advice).  Greg's (Lochlyn Munro) obnoxiousness 
teamed with girlfriend Buffy's (Shannon Elizabeth, "American Pie") beauty queen
dreams recall the "Last Summer" couple played by Ryan Philipe and
Sarah Michelle Gellar.  Marlan Wayans is Shorty, a stoner who tries
to remind the others how a black man can survive a horror flick.
Just by the character's name (Gail Hailstrom), it's easy to guess
who SNL'er Cheri Oteri is spoofing, although she only gets to shine in
the Wayan's refreshing brief (and therefore more effective) "Blair Witch"
reference.  Hilariously over-the-top, to the point of near cruelty,
is their handling of "Scream's" Dewey (played in those films by David
Arquette) as Doofy, although actor Dave Sheridan gets to redeem Arquette's
name in an amusing coda.
David L. Lander (TV's "Laverne & Shirley") has a cameo as Principal Squiggy
(take that, Henry Winkler!) and Jayne Trcka gets the loudest howl as
the girls' gym coach, Miss Mann.
Along the way, the Wayans have a ball with the "Scream" killer and his
mask, particularly in a scene where he gets stoned off an aquarium bong set
up by Shorty and his pals after receiving an invite that spoofs
a popular TV ad.  The essential mask changes shape to fit
the mood, such as the killer's befuddlement at some of his victim's utter 
stupidity.
It's a credit to the Wayans (Keenen Ivory directs and cowrote with Shawn,
and Marlon as well as Buddy Johnson, Phil Beauman, Jason Friedberg and Aaron 
Seltzer) that even cultural references which seem already overmined for
parody still come off well in their hands.
It's tight, it's outrageous and it's definitely not for small kids.
"Scary Movie" will have audiences screaming - in either laughter or in
surprise at the lengths the filmmakers go to gross people out.
"Airplane" collides with the Wayans brothers' "In Living Color" as helmer
Keenen Ivory Wayans leads his ensemble cast of family and friends in the spoof 
that spoofs the spoofs, "Scary Movie."
>From its hilarious ode to "Scream" beginning to its "The Usual Suspects"
sendoff  ending, "Scary Movie" takes no prisoners and bars no holds. Strongly 
influenced by the zany, machine-gun paced humor of the Zucker brothers, the 
screenplay, with a bevy of credited writers including many of the Wayans 
family, hits the comic bull's-eye more often than not. The raunchy nature of 
a lot of the gags caused screams - mostly of laughter, but sometimes, of shock 
- at the screening we attended. Shock value is definitely an important aspect 
of the humor here, but it is certainly not the only humor.
"Scary Movie" takes on the task of making a parody of the film that
re-established the horror spoof as a genre, "Scream." At the start, we see Drew
Decker (Carmen Electra), a beautiful high school student with a flatulence
problem, being stalked a la Drew Barrymore in the original - but with slapstick
hilarious, not tongue-in-cheek witty, results. Electra shows one hell of a good
sense of humor in capitalizing on her voluptuousness in the film's extended
opening before the title. The film goes on to poke fun at "Scream" from
beginning to end.
"Scary Movie," though, is not just a spoof on "Scream." As you watch, the
sizable ensemble cast move on to make fun of a bunch of horror flicks like "I
know What You Did Last Summer," "The Sixth Sense," and "The Blair Witch
Project." The parodies are almost universally over the top as the
comedian-actors slap you along side the head with their nasty, in your face
gags. And horror movies aren't the only ones that are used for the fun of it.
"The Matrix" gets its nod, as does the aforementioned "The Usual Suspects."
But, they don't stop there as they move on to all sorts of teen cliches, with 
no sacred cow un-skewered. Gays, virgins, handicapped people, retarded people,
straight people, stoners, beauty queens, transvestites, weird sex practices,
snot, movie goers, fat people, pubic hair, penises, dildos and more are fodder
for the many gags. It's surprising how many of them work, too.
The big cast got the chance to adlib and put their own spin on their
characters.  The free flow of imaginative humor is evident here as the actors 
give their own personalities to their roles. You can match the characters to 
their counterparts in the films being spoofed. Marlon Wayans as the constantly 
stoned Shorty, is like the Randy character in "Scream." He knows everything 
about horror movies and what you shouldn't do - split up, go into a dark room 
alone, answer the phone - but is too wasted to be of any help. Newcomer Anna 
Faris makes her debut as the central character, Cindy Campbell, putting a 
good-natured spin on the dour Neve Campbell role in the original. Regina Hall 
("Love and Basketball") plays the girlfriend to the sexually uncertain Ray 
(Shawn Wayans), the BMOC football player who likes to take showers with his 
teammates and has Brenda dress up in his football pads and helmet. Hall is 
outstanding when she gets to be the movie-goer-from-hell and a film critic's 
worst nightmare. The other players - Dave Sheridan as town simpleton Doofy, 
Shannon Elizabeth as high school sex kitten Buffy, Cheri Oteri as the 
cutthroat TV reporter Gail Hailstorm, and the rest - also help make the 
humor happen.
The behind the camera work befits the efforts of those in front of it with
costuming, by Darryle Johnson ("The Wood"), matching the tone of the films
being spoofed. The same goes for the production design by Robb Wilson King 
("Rush Hour") and photography by Francis Kenny ("Harriet the Spy").
To tell you about all the gags, puns, funny bits and shocks of "Scary Movie"
would be to deprive you of the pleasure of having it all come as a nice
surprise. But, be forewarned, the "R" rating for this film is completely
warranted for the raunch factor. Some think that an "NC-17" rating would be
more suitable. I go with the hard "R" and it is very hard. Parents beware of 
taking younger teens and below to this one. I give it a giggling B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Dimension Films/Wayans Brothers Entertainment
 Director: Keenen Ivory Wayans
 Writers:  Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Buddy
Johnson, Phil Beauman, Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzer
 Cast: Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Chari Oteri,
Shannon Elizabeth, Anna Faris, Jon Abrahams, Lochlyn
Munro, Regina Hall, Dave Sheridan, Dan Joffre, Carmen
Electra, Kurt Fuller, David L. Lander
   What's the story on this movie?  Is this the sort of film
that requires the mentality of an immature 12-year-old or
by pushing the envelope on vulgarity has crossover appeal
and the makings of a breakout smash?  The first, if you go
along with AP critic Christie Lemire, who's apparently
afraid of being considered a prude. The latter if you're at
one with Joe Leydon of  "Variety," whose mind is keen and
way, way open for the likes of the Wayans brothers.
    To get the answer simply add those reviews and divide
by two and you get a movie which, when it's funny, it's
very funny; when it's vulgar, it's very very vulgar; and as 
for immature and repetitious and bordering on tedium, it's
that too.
   If you took your Aunt Sherry from Sioux Falls to see this
and if the last movie she saw fell under the Hollywood
code, "If a couple are in bed, each must have at least one
foot on the floor," she'd disinherit you.  She wouldn't
believe her eyes.  If you introduced the movie to your
open-minded intellectual friend Herbie and Herbie never
saw Scream 1, 2 or 3, he wouldn't have the foggiest about
what's going on.  But if you've been brought up on the
likes of "Friday the 13th," the "Scream" Trilogy, "The Blair
Witch Project," "Amistad," "The Sixth Sense" and others
and at the same time appreciate some darn good smut
and offensiveness (think "Clerks" or anything by the
Farrelly Brothers), you are the targeted audience whether
you're 18 or 80.  
  The no-holds-barred script is by committee and it shows. 
"Scary Movie" does not have a tight narrative. In fact you
could not be faulted for wondering whether the plot serves
only as Krazy Glue for a succession of one-liners, sit-
comish wisecracks and practical jokes, the best coming
during the opening half hour when the unwavering, swift
pace hits you with the first gag within 30 seconds.  The
movie is so up-to-the-minute, citing even a quickie from
"Big Momma's House," that you'd think it was made fresh
for the audience of the day only to be recycled for the next
day's crowd with the addition of something to rib the
producers of whatever came out last Friday.  Keenan Ivory
Wayans is best known to the movie crowd for his take-off
of the 1970s blaxploitation films with his "I'm Gonna Get
You, Sucka" (with Wayans in the role of Jack Spade out to
avenge the death of his brother who died of an o.g., or
overdose of gold chains).  Wayans has not changed his
style in the dozen years since that one hit the market, still
playing it loose and good-natured, making clear at every
point that we're watching actors who are self-consciously
watching the cameraman.   The performers playing high-
school kids are all in their twenties and thirties, co-opting
those who would find fault with that sort of casting by
cracking a joke about that very shortcoming.  
   Some plot points: Having run over a pedestrian on the
highway whom they thought dead and dumping him into the
river, the kids have made a pact to tell no-one about their
actions that night.  But when a knife-wielding creature with a
scream mask begins drawing blood on the campus of B.A.
Corpse High School, they naturally assume that the brute is
the hapless pedestrian out for revenge.  The first juicy killing
brings in reporter Gail Hailstorm (Cheri Oteri), who will do
anything to get a story--and she means anything--thereby
leading to a line of smutty jokes that pop up here and there in
this freewheeling story.  We are soon introduced to the
characteristics of each player, including the virginal Cindy
(Anna Faris) and her horny boy friend Bobby (Jon
Abrahams); a goofy cop named Doofy (Dave Sheridan)
who is modeled on the slow-thinking Dewey of the Scream
series; a sheriff with an eye for the young 'uns (Kurt
Fuller); a pot-smoking doofus and bmoc football player
(Marlon and Shawn Wayans); and a number of others,
each with a sharply individual personality.
   At time these individuals take themselves so seriously--
steering clear of winking to the audience in a way that
could ruin the effect of the satire--that feminists in the
audience might actually take offense at the beatings that
only the women seem to be getting at the hands of the
men.  If the great English satirist Jonathan Swift were
alive today, he'd think his "A Modest Proposal" was too
modest indeed.
Rated R.  Running time: 88 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Faust667@aol.com
"Scary Movie" was the original title for Wes Craven's ultra-popular "Scream". 
That is probably the best thing I can say in favor of this slapdash, 
lackadaisical spoof of the "Scream" movies and the slasher film genre in 
general. As with most spoofs, there are far too many desperate gags to 
inspire much laughter in the audience. 
Anna Frais deftly plays the Neve Campbell role (she even mimics shrinking her 
eyes as Campbell did in the original "Scream"), the virginal dimwit whose 
father is a drug runner with the Colombians. Enter the pot-smoking teen 
(Marlon Wayans), the jock superstud who has homosexual tendencies (one of the 
other Wayan brothers, I forget which), the mentally challenged (or "retarted 
retard" as he is referred to) police deputy (Dave Sheridan aping David 
Arquette), the opening "death" cameo by Carmen Electra as Drew, and so on. 
Oh, and the killer wears the same Edvard Munch mask with a glinting knife and 
hook! Most of the cast act like gaping idiots seeking attention, and none 
exude the charm or straight-as-an-arrow acting style (central to spoofs as a 
rule) of Leslie Nielsen in "The Naked Gun" or for that matter, Val Kilmer in 
the superbly hilarious "Top Secret." The trick is to play it straight, not to 
act like a total buffoon otherwise, you are letting people know you are in on 
the joke as well. 
The central problem with "Scary Movie" is that the script does not skewer the 
slasher genre as much as pop culture hits like "The Matrix" (which actually 
works), "The Blair Witch Project," "Amistad," and "The Usual Suspects." When 
it does spoof the slasher films, as in the obvious "Scream," it fails 
miserably mainly because the "Scream" movies were already poking fun at 
themselves. They were postmodernist jokes on the rules and do's and don'ts of 
the slasher film genre - how can you spoof what was essentially a spoof? This 
shows a real dearth in imagination, which as far as I am concerned, the 
Wayans (Shawn and Marlon co-wrote the screenplay) do not possess a lick of. 
"In Living Color" at least showed some talent from the Wayans brothers, as 
did the underappreciated "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka." Here genuine laughs come 
in extremely short supply (though Electra's cameo is quite good), and there 
are far too many gross-out gags, homosexual locker-room humor and exaggerated 
bodily fluid jokes that went out of style shortly after "Porky's" and its 
slew of rip-offs a decade ago. 
In its 90 minute running time, I chuckled four times and only let out one big 
laugh for "Scary Movie." It is a roller coaster ride of missed opportunities 
- where are the Zucker brothers when you need them? By comparison, "Scream 3" 
was a lot funnier. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Susan Granger
  It's ironic that Miramax, the studio that launched the
teen-horror satire genre back in 1996 with "Scream," has now done its
own raunchy spoof of the trend. Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans, it
dives into Farrelly brothers territory, wallowing in obscenity,
profanity and splashing semen, boldly challenging the accepted NC-17
taboo of male genitalia. The shallow, sketchy plot, attributed to six
different screenwriters combining two different screenplays, involves
a serial killer who is pursuing a group of young people. In the
opening scene, lifted directly from Drew Barrymore's sequence in
"Scream," nubile starlet Carmen Electra gets a mysterious phone call,
expels gas, sheds her clothes, runs through a sprinkler and gets
stabbed in her breast implant.  But Carmen and the other hapless
actors are stereotypical caricatures of teenagers, played by 20 30
year-olds. They don't converse; they chatter. And most of the jokes
are gross and offensive, centered about the pubic region of human
anatomy - funny only to those with the most sophomoric taste. There's
already much controversy about the R-rating for "strong, crude sexual
humor."  Obviously, the 13-member, Los Angeles-based MPAA rating
committee is tougher on serious, rather than comedic, sexuality. Among
the movies parodied are the "Scream" series, the "I Know What You Did
Last Summer" series, "The Usual Suspects," "The Matrix," "American
Pie," "The Blair Witch Project," even "The Sixth Sense." On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Scary Movie" is a crude, lewd 2 - its
full 88-minutes are aimed specifically at the Gen-X and Gen-Y
audience. What's really scary is the amount of money it will probably
earn while far more worthy films pass, unnoticed, onto the video
shelf.

Author
Christopher Null
     A cynic would say any filmmaker is looking for trouble by trying to
make a spoof out of another spoof.
     Scary Movie is just that spoof, a Wayans brothers special that's a
flat-out parody of Scream -- both of which ironically were produced by
Dimension Films.  Studio spoofs itself -- now that's comedy!
     Oddly, I have very little to say about this picture at all. 
There's not much point to discussing the plot of Scary Movie (mercifully
renamed from Scream If You Know What I Did Last Halloween).  If you've
seen Scream (and Scream 2), I Know What You Did Last Summer (and its
sequel), The Sixth Sense, The Blair Witch Project, and, delving into
more curious spoof choices like The Matrix, The Usual Suspects, and the
Budweiser "Whassup" commercials -- then you'll "get" Scary Movie.
     Not that there's much to it to "get."  As usual with this genre,
there's no story; the Wayanses simply pummel the audience with gag after
gag.  My humor-o-meter pegs the success rate of these jokes at about one
in three, including (at best count) three fart jokes, two penis jokes,
one testicle joke, and at least three jokes about Scary Movie not being
real, but, you know, actually being a movie instead.  And that's not to
mention countless gay jokes, sex jokes, and gay sex jokes.  Yeah, one in
three is about right.
     Ironically, Scary Movie spoofs the teen horror genre but is so
raunchy it's shocking it isn't rated NC-17.  I guess the old
phallus-through-the-head gag is a-ok these days.
     While this is the best film Keenan Ivory Wayans has been involved
with since his first film, 1987's Hollywood Shuffle, that isn't saying
much (did you see The Glimmer Man?).  Still, if you're looking for a
little gross-out raunchiness and you've already seen Me, Myself & Irene,
Scary Movie may be the perfect late-night fix.  Just consider yourself
warned.
Director: Keenan Ivory Wayans
Producer: Eric L. Gold, Lee R. Mayes
Writer: Phil Beauman, Jason Friedberg, Buddy Johnson, Aaron Seltzer,
Marlon Wayans, Shawn Wayans
Starring: Jon Abrahams, Carmen Electra, Shannon Elizabeth, Anna Faris,
Kurt Fuller, Regina Hall, Lochlyn Munro, Cheri Oteri, Marlon Wayans,
Shawn Wayans, Marissa Jaret Winokur, Mark Hoeppner
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Ross Anthony
The Wayans brothers are back, bringing their wacky "scare tactics" to the
screen. It's goofy silly humor, from the most graphic sex jokes you'll ever
see on film to those old, tired, pot-head gags, to truly funny spoofs of the
fright genre from "I Know What You Did Last Summer" to "The Sixth Sense."
There are also some real (in a cinematic sense) hacking murders.
So if you like that kind of thing ... this is the kind of film you'll like.
Not over the top, gut-busting, but still pretty darned funny.
A group of college age friends harbor the secret of the poor bloke they
accidentally killed a year ago. All the while some psycho-killer in a K-mart
Halloween mask targets them.
I especially enjoyed the use of "The Matrix" special effects in a comedic
setting. Inventive fun.
Kudos to director Keenen Ivory Wayans for keeping the picture "lively" and
hoppin'. He's a smart creative force from whom I'm always excited to see new
pieces.
Scary Movie. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Jon Abrahams, Carmen Electra, Shannon Elizabeth, Anna Faris, Kurt
Fuller, Regina Hall, Lochlyn Munro, Cheri Oteri, Dave Sheridan, Marlon
Wayans, Shawn Wayans.
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans
Written by Shawn and Marlon Wayans, Buddy Johnson & Phil Beauman, Jason
Friedberg & Aaron Seltzer.
Produced by Eric L. Gold, Lee R. Mayes at Dimension/Miramax.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Keenen Ivory Wayans's SCARY MOVIE is a sweet little farce in the spirit
of the old AIRPLANE movies.  Every sentence has a different joke with
each being sillier than the last.  Although called SCARY MOVIE, the film
spoofs everything from horror movies (I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER)
to teen sex comedies (AMERICAN PIE) to action flicks (THE MATRIX).  And
if the humor eventually starts getting a little repetitive and tiresome,
you can't fault the large writing committee of Phil Beauman, Jason
Friedberg, Buddy Johnson, Aaron Seltzer, Marlon Wayans and Shawn Wayans
for not trying hard, as they throw everything they can think of at us in
the hopes that we'll find something to laugh at.
Without a pretentious bone in its body, the movie is 100% spoof.  One of
its favorite subjects of ridicule is the movie itself.  "This is like a
movie," remarks Cindy (Anna Faris), the movie's canonical virgin.  "It
is a movie," says her boyfriend Bobby (Jon Abrahams), pointing off
camera.  We then cut to the film's director, camera operator and script
supervisor.
In the opening episode, a blonde bimbo is being chased by the story's
villain, a masked guy with a hook -- quick, name that movie.  The mask,
cleverly, has different expressions, depending on the killer's mood.  As
the blonde runs away, she freezes in her tracks.  Two warning signs, one
labeled "Death" and the other labeled "Safety," point in different
directions.  She is confused as to which one to choose.  She doesn't
choose well, but her silicone gel implant momentarily saves her from the
killer's knife.
When we meet Cindy, her sexual escapades are severely restricted.  Her
father has put a chastity belt on her in the form of an electrified
chain link fence, complete with warning sign.  Subtlety is not the
movie's strong suit.
The teenage girls in the film are environmentally concerned.  Cindy
tells her friends to abandon the use of their brand of lipstick because
the manufacturer tests it on animals.  She shows them a picture to prove
it.  Imagine the shame of that poor animal in the picture with lipstick
on his face.
The story's most enjoyable sequence comes in the retribution that a
movie audience inflicts on a talkative viewer.  The audience eventually
has enough of the inconsiderate woman and engages in a slash-a-thon.
Maybe in the future theaters could run this sequence when it is time for
their "Silence is Golden" message.  There is nothing worse than asking
people to be quiet only to have them look at you like you are an idiot
for asking and then go on talking anyway.  Maybe if they felt a little
fear, they wouldn't run roughshod over the rights of others.
SCARY MOVIE runs 1:28.  It is rated R for strong, crude sexual humor,
language, drug use and violence and would be acceptable for most
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
SCARY MOVIE
(Dimension)
Starring:  Anna Faris, Regina Hall, Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Jon
Abrahams, Lochlyn Munro, Shannon Elizabeth, Cheri Oteri, Dave Sheridan.
Screenplay:  Marlon Wayans & Shawn Wayans and Phil Beauman & Buddy Johnson
and Jason Friedberg & Aaron Seltzer.
Producers:  Eric L. Gold and Lee R. Mayes.
Director:  Keenen Ivory Wayans.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, adult themes, drug use, profanity,
brief nudity, violence)
Running Time:  85 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     SCARY MOVIE's least obvious joke -- and this is a film that never met
an obvious joke it wasn't willing to beat to a slow, bloody death -- is
its title. SCREAM, one of the 1990s horror films that inspired this genre
parody, went into production with the working title of ... SCARY MOVIE. 
SCARY MOVIE, on the other hand, went into production with the working
title SCREAM IF YOU KNOW WHAT I DID LAST HALLOWEEN. That title may have
rolled off the tongue slightly easier than that of Shawn and Marlon
Wayans' previous genre parody, DON'T BE A MENACE TO SOUTH CENTRAL WHILE
DRINKING YOUR JUICE IN THE HOOD, but that ain't saying much. These
particular members of the Wayans clan seem singularly fond of spelling out
not just the general type of film they're sending up, but each and every
individual film they're going to acknowledge within that send-up.
     I'm not sure whether the entire concept of scattershot genre parody
is beyond my appreciation at this point, or whether SCARY MOVIE simply
made me feel like that was the case. I do know that it ended up making me
cringe more often than it made me laugh. The set-up involves a group of
high school students reacting to the murder of one of their classmates
(Carmen Electra). Virginal heroine Cindy Campbell (Anna Faris) wonders
whether the killing may be related to an accident the previous year, in
which Cindy and several friends hit a pedestrian in their car and disposed
of the body. Her friends pooh-pooh the idea, but one by one they begin
dying terrible deaths with very familiar m.o.'s. Who will be next? Cindy's
sexually frustrated boyfriend Bobby (Jon Abrahams)? Her best friends
Brenda (Regina Hall) and Buffy (Shannon Elizabeth), and their boyfriends
Ray (Shawn Wayans) and Greg (Lochlyn Munro)? Or maybe Buffy's "slow" 
brother and honorary deputy Doofy (Dave Sheridan).
     As much as SCARY MOVIE owes to the Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker team in its
basic structure, it may owe even more to the Farrelly brothers. Simply
put, this is as breathtakingly crude and tasteless a film as you'll see
without going into the curtained-off area of your local video store. It's
not that some of the crude sight gags aren't funny; a few of them are 
worth big embarrassed chuckles. Unfortunately, far more are either lazy or
get really old really fast. SCARY MOVIE boasts not one, not two, but three
flatulence jokes, in addition to not one, not two, not three, etc. but at
least half a dozen oral sex jokes. And that's saying nothing of the entire
GLAAD protest's worth of cheap sexual orientation gags. I suspect the
Wayans Brothers know their audience well enough to know that nothing will
get the guffaws going better than an effeminate football player, or a
butch girls' gym teacher, or a forest of overgrown pubic hair. I also know
I've rarely felt as pandered to for so little playful pay-off.
     When the Wayans' finally do turn their attention to gags with
specific reference points -- the SCREAM trilogy, I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST
SUMMER, even an improbable nod to THE USUAL SUSPECTS -- their batting
average doesn't improve much. Inevitably at least a few gags are going to
hit, most of which involve the pre-title attack on Electra. Others are
seemingly obligatory swipes at already-tired targets like THE SIXTH
SENSE's "I see dead people" line, TITANIC's "king of the world" line, 
Heather's confession in THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT and the ubiquitous
"Wassup" guys from the Budweiser ads. There's rarely any confusion over
the source of any referential gag, because director Keenen Ivory Wayans
will usually let a scene run on for two or three minutes of set-up before
ever getting to the punch line. A film like this has to jab and move,
letting its gags stand or fall without someone pointing to them and
shouting, "Hey, isn't _that_ funny?"
     Before SCARY MOVIE's release, several critics wondered aloud how it
could satirize a film that was itself a satire of other films. The
premise wasn't entirely accurate, since SCREAM was always a horror film
itself, albeit a deconstruction of horror films within the genre. SCARY
MOVIE's problem isn't that it tries to do things SCREAM already did
better, but that it's not funny enough often enough. Perhaps if more of
the humor had hovered around the margins (like the labels on a restroom
condom machine) instead of over-staying its welcome (like the fate of a
talkative movie theater patron), SCARY MOVIE could have felt less like a
marketing hook in search of some actual comedy. It doesn't take much
creativity or wit to nudge an audience with pop culture references. It
just takes naming your film something obvious like SCREAM IF YOU KNOW WHAT
I DID LAST HALLOWEEN.
