Title
Review for Waking the Dead (2000/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 WAKING THE DEAD (director/writer: Keith Gordon; screenwriters: Robert
 Dillon/based on the novel by Scott Spencer; cinematographer: Tom
 Richmond; editor: Jeff Wishengrad; cast: Billy Crudup (Fielding
 Pierce), Sandra Oh (Kim), Jennifer Connelly (Sarah Williams), Molly
 Parker (Juliet Beck), Janet McTeer (Caroline Pierce), Paul Hipp
 (Danny), Hal Holbrook (Isaac Green), Lawrence Z. Dane (Governor
 Kinosis); Stanley Anderson (Ed Pierce), John Carroll Lynch (Priest)
 Runtime: 105; USA Films/Polygram; 2000)
Waking the Dead is based on a novel by Scott Spencer, the screenplay is
by Robert Dillon, and it is directed by actor-turned-filmmaker Keith
Gordon ("Chocolate Wars"). It's a metaphysical love story with a bit of
mystery thrown in. There's also more than a bit of a political allegory
to it that holds the film together in an intelligent way, as both of the
main characters are motivated by political concerns. One as the
idealistic rebel who is an outsider, the other as an insider who wants
to change the system from within. The film is set during the 1970s and
early 1980s.
The love story is complex and is the heart of this engrossing film, a
film that deals with the ambiguities that propel people to be who they
are. It's especially pleasing because Jennifer Connelly plays a Catholic
activist named Sarah Williams in such a touching way that her innate
beauty shines forth as an angelic figure who happens to fall for her
opposite, an ambitious politician. It's a relationship filled with all
sorts of possible pitfalls. Billy Crudup plays the wheedling Fielding
Pierce who's stuck in an empty world of deceit, in a political role much
like the Robert Redford character in the Candidate. Both candidates
think they can make a difference to help their constituents by going
after power positions in the government, even though that can't help
noticing how corrupt the system they are willing to serve really is;
but, they are still willing to compromise themselves to serve. In
Fielding's case he never shows that he's even a liberal, only that he's
blinded by an urge to achieve success. The calculating working-class
hero has gone to Harvard to be a lawyer, joined the Coast Guard to get
out of Vietnam duty and because it'll look good on his resume.
Eventually Fielding ends up as a congressional candidate for the
Democrat machine and questions his sanity after seeing the love of his
life, whom he presumed to be dead, suddenly emerge. He will never be
quite sure if what he envisioned was real or a figment of his desires,
but his sanity at this point is certainly questionable.
The film opens in 1972 as the young Coast Guard officer goes up to the
NYC office of his brother Danny (Paul Hipp), who is a hippie book
publisher. Here he is attracted to his brother's new assistant Sarah and
they both fall in love; even though, they are miles apart politically.
She states: "I want a life that makes sense." He says: "I want to be
president." The film wavers back and forth between the following years
1972, 1974, 1982, and1983.
In 1974 the couple live together in Chicago and he attends law school
while she works as a church activist, even travelling to Chile for the
cause of freedom. The following tragedy that occurs will haunt Fielding
in the ensuing years: Sarah is reported dead in a car bomb explosion in
Minneapolis while transporting two leftists Chilean refugees.
In 1974 Fielding has been befriended by Chicago power broker for the
Democratic machine, Isaac Green (Hal Holbrook), who hooks the Bobby
Kennedy lookalike Fielding up in the district attorney's office. Then in
1982 when Fielding is 32 and a bachelor, and going out with the niece of
Isaac's, Juliet (Molly Parker), he's offered a chance by the governor to
run for congress in a special election. But after getting the nomination
Fielding starts to come psychologically apart, imagining that he sees
the real Sarah or her ghost following him around wherever he goes. It
culminates with Fielding winning the close special election in 1983 and
going to Washington, where his mind is made up to do good for his
constituents.
I don't really know how great this film is, but it did catch my
attention; especially, the way Gordon was able to get his main
characters to act out who they were and struggle to make their life and
their love viable, despite the different directions they would have to
go to get where they wanted to be. There was something soap opera like
about this tragic love affair that was not only baffling but sad, yet it
was more dramatic than that. We weren't overwhelmed by them as
stereotypes, forced into accepting them. I think how we accepted them
really relates to our life experiences. I know I felt very comfortable
with Jennifer Connelly's performance; I thought it was subtle,
soft-spoken, and unforgettably powerful. It was easy for me to relate to
her and what she was about without feeling I was presented with a
character who was being foisted on me in a "Love Story" tear-jerker way.
The film was passionate, intelligent, and real. The best scene is on a
subway between Fielding and Sarah -- a single 3 1/2-minute shot -- where
they are having a heart to heart talk that seemed so unbelievably real.
The Jennifer Connelly character is really the subject of the film and
her spirit fills the screen whether she's on it or not. This is because
she came across as someone with a real heart and is always haunting us
throughout the film because we care about her. We don't really care
about him. The two actors were just terrific, giving the story its
potency and purpose.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/786e07986556523a88256967000409ea?OpenDocument
        Keith Gordon is one of the best filmmakers we have working today, and
he's been quietly building a strong body of work which merits attention.
His cult classic anti-war film, A Midnight Clear and his tour de force
adaptation of Kurt Vonnegut's Mother Night were two of the 15 or 20 best
American films to come out in the 1990s.  Gordon is particularly good at
visualizing internal landscapes, particularly slow collapses into
paralyzing madness and terrible guilt.
        It's difficult to say whether or not Waking the Dead is his best film,
since it's one of those movies which seeps into you as you view it, then
stays with you in the days that follow.  It's certainly his most
challenging in terms of tone, structure, and theme, deliberately
convoluted and fragmented, moving back and forth between two different,
contrasting eras (the idealistic '70s and the aggressively opportunistic
'80s) and the evolution of its deeply troubled central character,
Fielding Pierce (Billy Crudup).
        Fielding has idealistic hopes in his youth to do some small good in the
world within a liberal political system, but for much of the film he is
caught between his personal ambition for success and those hopeful
dreams of social change.  He comes from a struggling blue-collar family
and has worked enormously hard to get to where he is, but where is that
place, and what is it he really wanted in the first place?
        Gordon's theme is idealism, and that is closely connected with
Fielding's spiritual love and connection with Sarah Williams (Jennifer
Connelly,) a young hippie and political activist who works with
Fielding's deadbeat brother (raspy Paul Hipp).  The opening scenes in
1972 play out as colorful and a little goofy, and Gordon draws out a few
silly moments between Fielding and his brother to the point where an
audience may become a little restless, but stick with the film.
        It's slow, methodical, economical -- it requires some patience because
it's a movie with allows itself to breathe, easing slowly into a
romantic story on par with Casablanca, a fine companion piece which was
also more a story about struggles with idealism than true love.  If you
ask me, that makes the romance in these films all the more powerful and
stirring.
        This romance plays out against the backdrop of political change and
social activism. They care for each other because they both want to make
those changes to better society, but their approaches are wildly
different.  Fielding wants to change from the inside, administratively,
first as a district attorney and, ultimately, as the president.  Sarah
moves in different circles, with protestors and radicals.  The film
could have easily become bogged down in moral postulating, but it keeps
its message clear and direct.
        Gordon is also particularly good at handling the sensual nature of
their relationship, which is playful and sweet.  When they're debating a
hot issue, and Fielding is starting to go off on her, she starts kissing
his stomach.  "Hey, what are you doing?  Stop that.  I'm having a moment
here." he says, laughing.  "I had a point I was trying to make..."
        The opening scene in the film clearly establishes the event which will
haunt Fielding through the entire film, as he witnesses a car accident
on television and learns that Sarah is dead.  Throughout the rest of the
film, whether in the flashbacks of the '70s or Fielding's campaign in
the '80s, Sarah is ever present -- a ghost when not onscreen.  He is
convinced that she is there with him at all times, but what her purpose
is will perhaps always remain unknown.  As his obsessive love for her is
rekindled, he believes she is physically there with him in the
sidelines, but Gordon allows you to decide whether this is a ghost story
or the slow fragmentation of one man's life, when time collides and the
past and present merge.
        It sounds very complicated from the plot description -- a mix of
political struggles and true love.  While it is a rigorous story, moving
in a non-linear mode which can be difficult to follow, the emotions are
simple and clear, and the central relationship between Sarah and
Fielding is the heart of this film, accessible and within the realm of
understanding.  It's one of the most accurate depictions of romantic
love I've seen onscreen.
        Keith Gordon has always had a great gift for working with actors,
having once been an actor himself.  Gary Sinise and Nick Nolte gave the
best work of their careers in A Midnight Clear and Mother Night,
respectively.  Here, Billy Crudup establishes himself as a handsome
leading man who can also act.  He has a powerful scene late in the film
where he's breaking down at a dinner table, repeating the same sentences
over and over again.
        Jennifer Connelly is a revelation -- an actress I've never found
compelling or interesting before, yet wonderfully dynamic and funny
here.  There's just something about her performance, the way she tilts
her head or says something, which rings true.  When she says to Crudup,
"It's infuriating how much I love you," after a fight, it's a moment
we've felt before.  The word I would keep coming back to is honesty in
her work with Crudup.  Gordon brought something out of her, something
radiant and powerful, which hasn't been evident before.
There's also something of Kubrick in the austere visuals.  Fielding
sitting in a chair with a vast wall behind him, or the proximity of his
face to Sarah's as they lay in bed together, or the slow, slow zooms in
to Fielding's face as he begins to crack, amplified by the slow,
brooding electronic score which runs through all of Gordon's films.
        The deliberately disorienting movement of the story from past to
present and dwelling on smaller beats in-between takes us through an
emotional arc we're not used to in our expectation of a story.  I wish
more films adopted this collage approach, allowing each small piece to
build until we have a vivid picture which throws a more accurate
reflection of the life we know than the standard three act formula
plot.  Think about it: How our memories guide and define our actions
today, and how the implications of our days past affect our moral
choices now.
        By the time Gordon has reached his penultimate scene, we've had a
staggering journey through a person's life, and a small moment of
clarity that may not be easy, or even what we want, but it sums up
Sarah's point made earlier in the film.  "Some people fulfill their
dream, and that's a pity. Then there are some people who find what
they're meant to do."
Director: Keith Gordon
Producer: Keith Gordon, Stuart Kleinman, Linda Reisman
Writer: Robert Dillon, Keith Gordon
Starring: Billy Crudup, Jennifer Connelly, Janet McTeer, Molly Parker,
Hal Holbrook
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
