Title
Review for Naked (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Mark Takacs
FineLine Features / 126 mins / unrated
Open in January in Seattle theatres
Tak Rating:  see once at full price  (sorta more.. see discussion at end)
TV-Style-One-Line-Summary
-------------------------
     A bleak, apocalyptic derelict flays the comfortable illusions away
from everyone he meets, strangers and friends alike.
Tak Summary
-----------
     This movie doesn't have much of a "plot" in that the characters
are out to save the world, solve a mystery, or avoid a slasher.
Rather, it's a character study.  We're watching Johnny, a likable
slimebag as he moves about from bars, to his ex's apartment, back to
the streets, and back to the the apartment.  That's about it.
     But, oh, the things you'll experience along the way. Just let
director Mike Leigh yank your emotions over various sugar-coated
razors, gilded knives, and warm, fuzzy, cuddly, parasites.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     Ok, first a confession.  I missed the first fifteen minutes, as
we had difficulty finding the theatre. (Yeah, I know, how hard can it
be?  Trust me, this one's *obscure*.)  So there may have been things
(perhaps important things) at the beginning that I missed.  However, I
think the rest of the movie was compelling enough to warrant a review,
or perhaps I should call it a "warning."
     Think back to that movie you saw that really, really, disturbed
you--but in such a way that you just *might* wanna watch it again,
tell some friends about it, or at least think about it for a long time
to come.  Was it perhaps ERASERHEAD or other David Lynch madness?
Maybe it was DELIVERANCE?  How about the pain and anguish in FAREWELL
MY CONCUBINE? Or maybe some little scene hidden in an otherwise
innocuous movie like FLATLINERS?  Well, NAKED shoves all those right
aside to get my vote as most disturbing movie.
     The title is aptly picked.  NAKED is not about naked flesh (more
on this in a bit), it is about naked emotions. After watching this
movie, I felt as if my defenses had been stripped away, and held high
over my head, leaving my naked emotions bubbling up all over the place
and making a mess.  (Where'd that come from?! -self_editing_tak)  I
think the director's main tool in achieving this is the "satanic
angel," Johnny.  He's such a likable guy on the surface.  You really
*want* to like him.  I actually found myself making excuses and
forgiving this slimebag.
     Why's he a slimebag?  Well, he's the essence of the abuse of
power.  And he really gets into it--in all kinds of ways.  There are
several scenes where he date-rapes women, and numerous other equally
disturbing scenes without physically abuse.  No, far worse, he merely
*talks* to them and presents them with a black and twisted reflection
of their life.  I think that's far worse.  In one scene, he charms his
way into a lonely, shy, and painfully co-dependent waitress's
apartment.  He charms her into feeding him, steals her favorite book
while her back is turned, uses her shower, then turns on her verbally.
He exposes all her little self-lies about where her life is headed,
what she's doing now, what she did in the past, and tries to toy with
her sense of pity.  Luckily, she has the sense to throw him out, but he
leaves her shattered and crying at the top of her stairs.
     Aside from all that, he's a likable character.  I think I liked
him because he's a surly bastard/cuss.  He's got a razor sharp wit,
cutting sarcasm, a sense of irony, and a broad-ranging knowledge.  But
it was disturbing to find yourself liking Johnny and suddenly
remembering or seeing more of his atrocities.  Makes me really wonder
how I could like someone so thoroughly nasty.
     Not *once* is sex or nudity portrayed in anything close to a
sensual, erotic or even desirable fashion.  Actually, I was rather
repulsed by the whole concept of nudity and sex for awhile after this
movie.  Eeah.  The only time you see flesh is when it is being sexually
or physically abused.  Jeremy, as loathsome a figure as Johnny,
continually struts around in nothing but skimpy briefs that show off
his trim figure.  Leigh seems to be associating sexuality and the body
image with some very unattractive behaviors and ideas.
     At one point in the movie Johnny is offered a chance to change his
life around.  We see him dreaming of a better life in another place.
But when Louise, the strongest character in the movie, offers him a
chance to realize his dream, he declines.  I'm left with the impression
that he's much more comfortable complaining about how bad life is,
rather than doing anything about it.
     This movie is *ripe* for moral analogies.  In one interpretation,
Johnny represents the petty abuses of power.  He's a derelict and his
crimes are senseless and random.
     Jeremy also abuses power, although he is wealthy, confident,
irrepressibly arrogant, smug and in a traditional position of power.
The most disturbing thing about his rape scene was not the actual act,
but the inevitable acceptance with which Sofie accepted it.  I saw it
coming a mile away, and so did she.  She actually shrugged and sighed,
as if to say "Not this again..."  At that point, it wasn't "rape," but
"sleeping-with-your-pig-of-a-boss" kind of attitude, but it quickly got
way outta Sofie's control.
    The main women in the movie seen to represent a broad spectrum of
how people in society deal with abuses in power.  Sofie puts up with
it, another ignores and denies it, and Louise won't take any of it.
     On a good note, Johnny has some fascinating speeches.  Two of my
favorite scenes in the movie were when Johnny explains that bar codes
are the "sign of the beast" foretold in Revelation, and a when Johnny
tries to re-unite some oddly matched Scottish(?) lovers.  And a scene
toward the end of the movie where the distraught apartment owner tries
to restore sanity to her house provides much needed comic relief.
Technical Comments (bitch-n-moan section)
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     This is a hard one. I really did like this movie, though it wasn't
exactly fun. I'd definitely recommend you experience it (Don't just
*see* it).  But it is disturbing and you'll need to talk/brood about it
afterwards.  I might be tempted to see this again, but only in the same
manner that you'd pick at a scab or carefully worry a toothache that is
capable of sharp, piercing pains.
ps: And here's some more text from the Press Release....
Press Synopsis/Scream sheet
---------------------------
     Two major awards were bestowed upon NAKED at last spring's Cannes
Film Festival--Mike Leigh (HIGH HOPES, LIFE IS SWEET) garnered the Best
Director prize and David Thewlis' riveting performance resulted in the
Best Actor reward.  For writer/director Leigh, NAKED marks a shift from
the skewed and wildly imaginative themes of his earlier work to one
that contains a deeper and darker undercurrent as he renders a
provocative and moving vision of contemporary England.  Still remaining
at the core of a Leigh film is a gallery of eccentrics coupled with
offbeat black comedy.
     Johnny (Thewlis) is a vagrant enduring a life devoid of meaning or
direction. His scroungy good looks inspire trust and beneath the skinny
frame and sad expression there is a sense of reassurance.  But it is
all a disguise.  This satanic angel is as capable of expressing love as
is Jack the Ripper.  Wandering London, Johnny leaves a trail of living
corpses--wild flights of absurd rhetoric are interspersed with the most
eccentric of characters.  All the while, he is half-hearted in his
avowed goal of reconciliation with his former girlfriend.  As seen
through the eyes of Johnny, NAKED is a compelling portrait of urban
existence where the viewer alternately sees the violence and
gentleness, the comedy and tragedy of life.  Acclaims were embellished
upon NAKED as it premiered at the recent New York Film Festival with
critic Vincent Canby stating, "a brilliant somersault of a movie that
lands Leigh in new cinematic territory."

Author
Edwin Jahiel
NAKED  (UK, 1993) *** 3/4  Directed and written by Mike Leigh. Photography,
Dick Pope. Production design, Allison Chitty. Editing, John Gregory. Music,
Andrew Dickson. Cast: David Thewlis, Lesley Sharp, Katrin Cartlidge, Peter
Wight, Greg Cruttwell, Claire Skinner, Ewen Bremner, Susan Vidler, Deborah
Maclaren, Gina McKee. 126 min. Rated R (language, violent sexual situations)
My  high rating comes with a warning.  "Naked" is terrific  but not to
everyone's taste. It is sleazy, unsettling, foul-mouthed and definitely not
uplifting. At  last year's Cannes Festival, it received two top prizes:
Best Director to Mike Leigh ("High Hopes," "Life Is Sweet,")  and Best
Actor to  David Thewlis, whose unforgettable performance outshines that of
any male  in the recent Oscar race. The  critics and cinephiles were also
very high on the film but some of the locals who saw it reacted with the
Gallic equivalent of "yuk."
Thewlis plays Johnny, a drifter who comes in from the cold -- or tries to
and fails, because he keeps undermining his own self. A grungy,  marginal
nihilist, he is also an intellectual and round-the-clock philosopher who
throws around words like "solipsism" within his scatological rhetoric.
He is first shown in  a dark  street of his native Manchester, raping a
woman (or more likely, having  brutal sex), then stealing a car and driving
to the London flat of ex-girlfriend Louise (Sharp) . She's out. He engages
in casual, violent and demeaning sex with spaced-out  house mate Sophie
(Cartlidge). All this goes comes with a  before, during and after stream of
talk :  insults, apothegms, incisive notions, the whole shebang.
Johnny is a fascinating 1990s anti-hero, brilliant but dysfunctional--
easily a borderline psycho. Though self-assured he also seeks ( in his
peculiar way)  truths and values.  He is cold, cynical and contemptuous
,yet understanding at times. He is a loner but one in need of human
contact.
He meets several characters, all distinctive for better or for worse, some
sleazy, all desperately lonely and  maladjusted, all powerfully drawn, all
of them naked -- naked meaning here not just bodies but minds and hearts.
There's something Russian about this "The Lower Depths" meeting "Dead
Souls", and there's something most British too: a blend of a certain
English life today and throwbacks to the 50s and 60s anger of British
cinema.
Johnny deals with those oddities with a mixture of sadism, contempt and
occasional flashes of sympathy.  He befriends briefly an inarticulate young
Scot and his girl, then  finds a kindred soul in a night watchman. Visiting
an older woman, her  pathetic offer of sex elicits a cruel refusal from
Johnny. A waitress provides a bath then turns him out. And there's more in
this semi-picaresque tale.
Some of these characters  do not reappear, others do, like Jeremy (who also
poses as Sebastian Hawkes), a wealthy, supercilious, vicious playboy who is
the flat's landlord, treats women like dirt and gets away with it, and
plans to kill himself at age 40.  Jeremy ( Cruttwell) is an uncanny Dirk
Bogarde look-  and sound-alike, with touches of Laurence Harvey.
Brian the watchman( Wight),  a calmly warm and likable older man with "the
most tedious boring job in England," symbolically guards an empty building
that Johnny calls "this post-modernist gas chamber."  Both men are the two
faces of the same coin and suffer from malaise.  Both are cultivated
readers, know the Bible inside out, have unfulfilled possibilities,
understand each other and engage in  talks full of metaphors, paradoxes,
Nostradamus prophecies, the Mark of the Beast, Revelations, the Apocalypse,
evolution ... It is a rambling session of sometimes delirious, sometimes
astute arguments on philosophy, sociology, metaphysics and theology.  It is
a like a medieval "disputatio, " the ancestor of debating societies.
You might want to meet Brian, but none of the others, including the often
sadistic Johnny. Yet whatever your reactions to him, he has undeniable
presence and his intoxication with words and ideas has life. Johnny makes
us question the intellectual complacency of most people.
"Naked" has no plot strictly speaking. Mike Leigh's method is to have his
actors repeatedly improvise and come up with dialogues and situations out
of which the final script emerges, a non high-concept scenario that defies
description, not to mention summing up.
Leigh himself said: " My feelings about "Naked" are as ambivalent as my
feelings about our chaotic late-20th century world, and probably as
ambivalent as the film itself, which is, I hope, as funny as it is sad, as
beautiful as it is anarchic. But I really don't want to pontificate about
the film. I'd rather let it speak for itself." It does that, loudly,
inchoately  and mesmerizingly.
[Publ. April 1, 1994, by Edwin Jahiel]
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  David Thewlis, Lesley Sharp, Katlin Cartlidge, Greg
Cruttwell, Peter Wight, Claire Skinner.
Screenplay/Director:  Mike Leigh.
     I can thoroughly understand someone either loving or loathing Mike
Leigh's NAKED.  On the one hand, it is a rather unpleasant visceral
experience with troubling images of violence against women; on the
other hand, it is unflinching in its acidic humor and features a
tour-de-force performance by David Thewlis.  Yet for my money, there is
another level at which NAKED approaches brilliance.  This film is a
warning designed for the self rather than for society, a startling
examination of one mind's response to dehumanization.
     NAKED focuses its attention on Johnny (David Thewlis), an
intelligent but extremely bitter drifter from Manchester who takes off
for London as the film opens.  There he looks up old girlfriend Louise
(Lesley Sharp), but first finds her roommate Sophie (Katlin
Cartlidge).  They get along famously, perhaps a bit too famously as
Sophie becomes rather clinging.  Johnny spends his days wandering
through London, sharing his unique philosophies with characters like
Brian (Peter Wight), a mild-mannered night watchman.  Meanwhile, Louise
and Sophie have a run-in with their sado-masochistic landlord Sebastian
Hawkes (Greg Cruttwell), who makes himself a bit too much at home.
     With Johnny, Mike Leigh has created a magnificent character who
serves as a prophet of the apocalypse, an apocalypse he describes in
terms rather different from what one might expect.  He is intensely
aware that humans, including himself, are becoming something less than
human, and his commentary is filled with references to monkeys.  As he
watches Brian perform his mundane job, Johnny notes that it could be
done by a "tall chimp."  On another occasion, Louise asks him, "Why are
you such a bastard?"  "Monkey see, monkey do," is his response.  Still
later, Johnny asks Sondra (Claire Skinner), Louise and Sophie's
high-strung third roommate, about her experiences as a nurse:  "Is it
true some babies are born with, like, fur all over them?"  And on and
on, too many instances to mention, all connected to Johnny's larger
obsession with evolution.  The fact is that in his own unique way,
Johnny is a true optimist.  When he "preaches" to Brian about the end
of humanity as we know it, he is describing an event he looks forward
to.  We are not the ultimate expression of creation, he realizes; we
are far too base.  Johnny acknowledges the animal aspect of his nature,
but he doesn't revel in it.  When he speaks of our new form being like
the angels, he is speaking with hope and passion.  The title of the
film itself becomes an acknowledgement of our status in the universe:
when all the frills are stripped away, we're just big monkeys, monkeys
who seem to have stopped reaching for more.
     All the brilliance in the world in the writing would have counted
for little withough a perfect actor for Johnny, and David Thewlis is
that actor.  His sarcastic, often bilious musings easily could have
come off as smug and self-congratulatory, but Thewlis pours a great
deal of emotion into his lines.  Yes, he believes that he is more aware
than those around him, but he derives no pleasure from that knowledge,
instead finding only disgust with it.  Thewlis is supported by several
other fine performances, most notable Claire Skinner's small but
memorable role as the frantic Sondra; only Cruttwell rings false with
his slimy Sebastian.
     NAKED is not without its faults.  An encounter between Johnny and
a young Scots couple who can't seem to find one another is funny, but
doesn't really connect to the rest of the film.  The Sebastian
character is way too much, too crudely drawn to work as the
representation of gilded brutishness he is meant to be.  NAKED has a
semblance of a narrative through-line, but basically it's a collection
of snapshots viewed through Johnny's singular lens, and that collection
can appear somewhat unfocused.  But from its first jarring frames to
its final shot of Johnny limping down a London street, it risks showing
us the side of ourselves we don't like to see, and hoping we won't turn
away.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: As bleak and unsparing a movie as could be imagined, and also one
of the finest.
"No matter how many books you read," says Johnny, "there is something in
this world that you never ever ever ever ever fucking understand."
Johnny should know. His world has caved in around his head; when he spits
his venom at the audience and at the others in NAKED, Mike Leigh's scalding
and brilliant movie, he's not so much inflicting abuse as reporting from the
front.
Johnny appears at the beginning of NAKED with no preface, no history. He
steals a car and makes his way to London, where he ingratiates himself with
Sophie (Katrin Cartlidge), the flatmate of an old girlfriend who's on
holiday. From the way he talks to her -- and she's as zombified and
out-of-it as he is, she just has more socially acceptable reasons for being
like that -- we wonder how he could have ever entertained a relationship
with anyone. We wonder how he could even stand to be near a mirror, or how
they can even stand to be near each other. They embody each other's deepest
disgusts, and make no bones about it. And on a deeper, uglier level, they
justify each other.
I've known people like Johnny (played unblinkingly and with frightening
power by David Thewlis). They don't have a fixed address, method of income,
bank account, or even a consistent set of clothes. What they do have is a
philosophy, an outlook -- the one thing they can take with them to the
grave, and they are convinced that is exactly where they and everyone else
on the besotted planet are headed. Johnny has been stepped on by life --
stripped naked, as per the title, and what's left is not something anyone
who can wrap themselves snugly in a cozy house and a good-paying job wants
to look at. Thewlis makes Johnny fascinating, because he is obviously
intelligent and not without a certain amount of heart, but so badly beaten
that it's a miracle he's not one giant walking lump of psychic scar tissue.
And -- quel irony -- there is another character, Jeremy (Greg Cruttwell) who
is not only far safer than Johnny will ever be (or could), but is happily
awaiting his own destruction. The sooner he's out of here, the better, but
there's no reason he can't have some fun toying with others on the way on
the way.
Mike Leigh is one of my favorite directors, because he refuses to force his
material to fit a mold. He takes actors who are his friends, then has them
play out improvised scenes with characters in mind and then develops a
script from that material. No screenwriter could have come up with the
material in NAKED; it's just too confrontational and too raw. One scene
which is almost agonizing to watch -- but it's the agony that preludes
ecstasy, in a way -- has Johnny confronting a night watchman and
systematically trying to break down the man's pat defenses against lunatics
like himself.
NAKED is not a fun film; it's not a piece of "entertainment". But that's
precisely why it works -- it is not only honest and unsparing, but true and
properly observed. After seeing it, I was forced to confront my own sense of
nihilism, and wrestle with it a little harder than I had before. Like IKIRU,
this is one of those rare movies that really does, in my opinion, have the
power to cause people to analyze themselves and maybe make changes in their
lives. It's painful, but not without cause.
The movie's rationale is simple: There are no safe exits or manufactured
redemptions for anyone here. We are all far closer to the abyss than we
think. Even Johnny, who has cultivated the act of staring into the abyss,
does not understand until it's too late that there's no such thing as the
bottom. Only down.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Mike Leigh has always been known as a creator of exceptional,
insightful character studies.  Often, his films do little more than
trace activities in the life of a person or persons over a several-day
period--that he manages to make such seemingly-mundane stories so
involving speaks highly of his talent.  However, whereas comedies such
as LIFE IS SWEET and HIGH HOPES showed Mr. Leigh's whimsical side,
NAKED is anything but charming.  This film is brutal and raw, and its
sense of humor comes with a serrated edge.
     We meet Johnny (David Thewlis) on the benighted streets of
Manchester, pinning a woman against a building as he rapes her.  Then,
threatened with bodily harm, Johnny takes off for London, to find his
old girlfriend Louise (Lesley Sharp).  Their reunion is
less-than-affectionate, and propels Johnny into a violent and
self-destructive sexual relationship with Louise's flatmate Sophie
(Katrin Cartlidge).  It doesn't take long for Johnny to start feeling
trapped by his new lover's unexpected dependence, and he takes to the
streets, wandering through the backways and alleys of the city's
underprivileged districts (where a rat is always less than thirty feet
away), meeting an assortment of people even more bizarre than himself.
     There are so many thought-provoking themes and issues addressed by
NAKED, that it's impossible to mention them all, let alone do them
justice, in the space of a movie review.  Johnny, who may have the
appearance of a tramp, has the heart and mind of a philosopher, and
isn't afraid to express his views.  In line after line of energetic,
dazzling dialogue delivered at a rapid-fire pace, we are exposed to the
lead character's views on why everyone is bored; the importance of
cliches; the interrelationship between the past, present, and future;
the Apocalypse; evolution; God's relationship to man; and life in
general.  He's not particularly choosey about his listeners, entering
into conversations with the vacuous Sophie, a middle-class guard named
Brian (Peter Wight), a lonely woman who he initially observes from afar
through a window, and a man putting up posters.
     A reckless, restless intensity pervades NAKED as it follows Johnny
on his odyssey through London.  The film's mood and tone change
suddenly and frequently, but never radically.  It could be argued that
the running length is a little on the long side, but it's hard to
figure which scenes could have been cut.
     Don't expect a happy ending, or a happy anything, for that
matter.  As true-to-life as NAKED is, it hides nothing.  Brutality
abounds, from the thugs that attack innocent pedestrians on nighttime
streets to the hidden lifestyle of the rich Jeremy (Greg Cruttwell),
whose sadistic sexual excesses are presented in such a manner as to
leave little to the imagination.
     David Thewlis didn't get his deserved Oscar nomination, but his
work here is extraordinary, and possibly better than that of any of the
five nominees (including Anthony Hopkins).  Mr. Thewlis creates an
amazing character--someone with a keen intellect and ugly appetites,
who can be reviled, understood, and respected.  He and writer/director
Leigh have clearly established a rapport (they previously worked
together on LIFE IS SWEET and a Channel Four short film THE SHORT AND
CURLIES) that yields astounding results.
     NAKED is one of those rare, powerful motion pictures that refuses
to slip easily from memory.  Its images and themes linger long after
the viewer has left the theater, and the most stark of these are
commonly the most disturbing.  Those in search of escapism should not
look to this motion picture, but anyone willing to assume the risk of
facing the ugliness of Johnny's world will find a startling,
gut-wrenching, eye-opening film.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Chloe Wright
     Whoa! Be ready to ride that emotional roller coaster.  We go from
laughing, to being captivated by the intellectual wit of Johnny, our
vagrant main character, and are then thrown into repulsion, disturbance
and disgust through graphic, and stomach-churning rape scenes.  A goal
of Naked is to illicit strong emotions from the viewer, and this goal
is one well accomplished.  The film transforms the viewer into an
active participant through the manipulation of very deep emotions.  I
left the Preview Theater in Seattle disturbed and astonished ... but I
loved the film.
     The film centers around the life of a man who lives on the outside
of "society."  Johnny runs around spouting various apocalyptic
philosophies onto unsuspecting strangers, such as a neck-twitching
weirdo and his squatter girlfriend.  Most of these apocalyptic ideas
are ones which we've all heard before, nontheless, the movie pulls off
the "intellectually superior tortured soul" routine rather well.  We
are captivated by Johnny's ramblings more often then not.
     Johnny encounters people who exist on differing levels of society,
and there are various messages embedded within each encounter.  For
example, Johnny happens upon a night security guard who lets Johnny
into the building which he is watching over.  The guard represents a
person "playing the game" in society.  He represents order, through
being older, clean-cut, and (the big marker of social worth) he holds a
full-time job.  The tedium of the security guard's job is highlighted,
thus making us question who really has it "better," a vagrant living on
the streets, who at least gets to spout his own opinions and ideas, or
the rest of us who are tied down to alienating jobs which have little
or nothing to do with our individuality.
     An important premise of the movie is exposed on a dark staircase
during this encounter with the night security guard.  Drawing on a
recurrent theme that good cannot exist without evil, rather then evil
being a necessary agent in the maintenance of the overriding power of
good, Johnny expresses his belief that good and hope are just tools for
the maintenance of the overriding power of evil.  Johnny's actions
throughout the film embody this concept of evil--most blatantly through
his behavior towards the women whom he encounters.
     One man highlighted in the movie is an asshole rapist from Hell.
Literally, the character was granted no positive qualities.  He differs
from our main character Johnny because he is rich and well-groomed, and
has nothing interesting to say.  The two strangers share an evil side,
in this sense they are connected in the manufacture of evil.  However,
the rich guy was more of an asshole, and represented the epitome of the
abuse of power.  This seemed to be a blatant commentary on wealth.  The
rich guy exploits his privilege as an apartment owner and invades Sofie
and Louise's home.
     A cool scene is towards the end when the rich asshole is standing
at a bedroom door and Louise, Sofie and Johnny are cowering at his
feet.  This is after Johnny gets beat to a pulp, so here Johnny
switches roles, from the one who is in control, to the one who is
exposed and defenseless.  Hence, we see the cycle of abuse full circle,
the abuser is also the victim.
     During the film, our senses are assaulted through disturbing
scenes which are meant to stay with the viewer long after he or she
leaves the theater.  The graphic rape scenes don't allow the viewer to
maintain a safe distance from the movie's commentary on evil and
abuse.  Rather then distant observers, we are forced participants.
Thus, we ourselves are stripped Naked of our defenses.
     Women, watch out!  The level of violence was close to
intolerable.  I almost walked out on one potential rape scene in lieu
of multiple ones before.  It was as if the director, Mike Leigh, had
enough sense to realize that emotional disturbance limit, although he
sure pushed it as far as it could go!  Having been forced to endure
this level of powerlessness, you'll leave the theater angry.  The
Andrea Dworkin side of me was screaming, "this is wrong of this
film-maker to show this brutality against women ... especially since a
*man* made this film and he doesn't know how disturbing it is for a
woman to watch this shit!"
     However, I soon learned that my male companion was equally as
disturbed.  Men and women tend to identify with the same gender
character.  Hence, an interesting dynamic is created when a woman is
forced to identify with the rape victim and the man is forced to
identify with the rapist.  According to my movie-going male companion,
being in the perpetrator's shoes, so to speak, is as violating as being
the recipient of that abuse.  So I could venture to say that all will
leave the theater needing a close friend to vent their feelings with.
     Never-you-fear, you PC-hacking mongrels, the freedom of artistic
expression side kicked in and said, "now let's look at the violence in
the context of the movie, and the film's attempt to explore certain
concepts and emotions."  Thus, the movie gets an A+ for it's portrayal
of humanity's dark side.  The intensity of the scenes was an important
part of the film-makers' goals ... they wanted you to feel the abuse
happening, not just observe it.  We are also somewhat empowered in a
scene where Louise, the relatively strong female character, almost
pulls a Mrs. Bobbit, in order to defend herself and reassert her
power.
     Naked explores abuses of power, it juxtaposes differing lives, and
dazzles us with it's strangeness.  It even has us laughing hysterically
at times.  This is a must see movie, but bring your cast iron stomach
and a friend, so you can debrief afterwords over a latte or a
beer ... and don't forget to play your 7 Year Bitch album when you get
home.

Author
Pedro Sena
Acting, weather on film or on a stage can be two things:  One, a style is
offered, and everyone has to follow it this way or that. An actor camps it
up, or one does it such and such.  This is idealistic acting at best since
it has no basis in any reality except an idea.  Two, is a school of work
that started with Stanislavsky and still lives today in different forms, the
more advanced ones being the likes of Grotowski, and the Living  Theatre.
This work depends on the actor's ability to push their experience levels to
the deepest parts of themselves, to define acting moments with more strength
and inner direction.  The inevitable "you got to feel it" type of work.  One
should say that there is no style here, beyond the last vestiges of any
culture.
This film, however unpleasant and brutal it might be, is about these depths
that acting can take a character. And the story is loosely centered around
the ability of these actors to move around and inter relate between each
other.  The director throws a few monkey wrenches here and there and we see
the characters take their brow beatings.
As an intense piece of characterization, this film is not for everyone.  It
is boring, if one likes action.  But if you could mix action with this, you
would have a movie that would keep you awake up at nights.  But as an acting
exercise, with a solid sense of direction, although not one for an audience,
it is an absolutely RIVETING, and exciting piece that is unpredictable,
lively, never fake, and very intense.  Excellent theatre, if you will.
In the process, the characters find themselves stripped of any conventions
and have to find their own inner motivations for responding, be it "stay
with it" or "quit" and move on.  Johnny seems to move on when it is time to
discuss any thinking, something he is starting to enjoy ( with men only ),
but ready to quit when it comes to women.
There is a sense of vulnerability in all the characters, who are rather
insecure at these levels, but all in all, the women seem to survive these
things a bit better, though we would like to think that these exercises
would not affect us.  THEY DO.  And they change one's ability to work into
another level.
Loosely, the story centers around Johnny, who has moved from the inner parts
of England to the metropolitan life that is London. And while survival for
him is a matter of movement, for everyone else it has become a matter of
comfort and ease, if almost all of the women are the hint.  And one comes to
love him, but not satisfy him.  The first one used to be his girlfriend.
And in one instance he tries to pick up a cafe girl, who stands
her ground despite her obvious weakness.
A very talky film, with excellent rushes, nevertheless it leaves many of us
feeling unfulfilled. It is a beautiful premise for a director to work with
reminiscent of the work of Peter Brook, who has done this a step further by
mixing actors from various cultural backgrounds to put together the
MAHABHARATTA, also an astounding piece of acting.
