Title
Review for Man Who Knew Too Little, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Bill Murray, Peter Gallagher, Joanne Whalley, Alfred Molina.
Screenplay:  Robert Farrar and Howard Franklin, based on the novel "Watch
That Man" by Robert Farrar.
Producers:  Arnon Milchan, Michael G. Nathanson, Mark Tarlov.
Director:  Jon Amiel.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, adult themes, mild violence)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     At last we can answer the question that has plagued movie-goers for
ages:  what would the PINK PANTHER films have been like if Bill Murray had
played Inspector Clouseau?  All right, perhaps "plagued" is too strong a
word.  In fact, it's likely that no one has ever asked the question,
probably because the answer seemed obvious.  Murray's stock-in-trade is
the guy who pokes holes in everyone around him, smugly convinced that he's
one step ahead of the pack.  Clouseau was similarly convinced; he was also
thoroughly self-deluding.  Playing Clouseau would require Murray to play
dumb with complete earnestness.  Could he really stop winking
self-knowingly long enough for us to buy him as an idiot?
     The answer, unfortunately, is not really.  THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO
LITTLE is a de facto Clouseau premise, casting Murray as a schlub named
Wallace Ritchie whose unreasonable dreams of acting prowess have been
diverted into working at a Blockbuster Video in Des Moines, Iowa.  While
on a birthday trip to see his successful brother James (Peter Gallagher)
in London, Wallace gets a chance to perform again when James signs him up
for an audience-participation role-playing experience called Theatre of
Life.  No sooner is Wallace expecting a call to send him on a staged
adventure than he receives a call which sends him on a real (unknown to
him) adventure, one which places the future of Anglo-Russian detente in
Wallace's oblivious hands.
     Though the comedic mistaken-identity premise is sporting more than a
few gray whiskers, it can still work with the right lead performer.
Murray is a wonderful comic actor, the kind who can turn a simple reaction
take into a monster laugh, but he is at his best when asked to stand
outside the action and comment on its absurdity.  There's never a moment
in THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE when Murray convinces you that he isn't hip
to exactly what's going on; he's too self-aware to immerse himself in
cluelessness.  Eventually, the premise begins to feel like an elaborate
waste of Murray's time.  He's forced to play a fake pseudo-suave agent who
accidentally outsmarts the bad guys, when he should be playing a real
pseudo-suave agent who quite intentionally outsmarts the bad guys.
     Ironically, THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE is still at its funniest when
it just lets Murray be Murray.  His off-hand quips are frequently good for
a chuckle, providing goofy running commentary on the overly elaborate
silliness of secret agent capers.  They're also entirely out of place for
his character.  Murray is sharper than this concept, and he shows it by
spending most of his time looking for gags in all the wrong places,
fighting against the premise instead of trying to make it work.  Like a
superstar on a mediocre high school basketball team, he begins
freelancing, leaving the rest of the team to stand around and wait for him
to do whatever it is he wants to do.
     There are a few worth-while moments for the supporting cast, notably
Alfred Molina as a Russian agent who develops a grudging respect for his
"brilliant" American adversary, which show signs of life in a generally
under-whelming script.  For the most part, THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE is
a less-than-stellar episode of The Bill Murray Show, sporadically amusing
when it doesn't burden the top attraction with an over-stuffed plot --
German businessmen, British and Russian secret agents, a
hooker-with-a-heart-and-wardrobe-of-gold, exploding Matryoshka dolls, and
what the McGuffin was going on with those carefully tied letters everyone
gets so worked up over? -- ill-suited to his talents.  It all adds up to
more stuff for Murray to smirk at, in a role where smirking should have
been strictly prohibited.  For a man who knows too little, he acts like he
knows it all.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Man Who Knew Too Little (1997)
Bill Murray, Peter Gallagher, Joanne Whalley, Alfred Molina, Richard 
Wilson
Rated PG, Two and one half out of five stars.
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly.
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
In one of the commercials for "The Man Who Knew Too Little," Bill Murray 
gives his assurance that the new comedy works, wrapping up his pitch by 
saying "If you don't think it's funny, I'll personally give you your 
money back. That is, if you can find me. I mean, I'm not easy to find, 
but if you do, if you stop me on the street or something, I'll give you 
some money." 
While Bill and his wallet won't have to go into hiding, the unfortunate 
truth is that the ad is funnier than most of the actual movie. "The Man 
Who Knew Too Little" is a cute film with a clever premise. It's sometimes 
funny and frequently amusing, but rarely breaks into flat-out hilarity. 
That would be enough from most performers, but with Bill Murray you just 
expect more.
Remember, we're talking about the man who single-handedly took the hack 
comedy "Meatballs" and made it a success. Murray is a one-of-a-kind 
talent, a putty-faced comic anarchist capable of taking the lamest 
premise and making it side-splitting. His early work, in films like 
"Stripes", "Ghostbusters" and "Caddyshack," was marked by an ironic 
deadpan delivery, punctuated by explosive outbursts at unexpected moments.
 Murray was dangerous, one of most outrageous of the SNL bad boys, and 
all of his manic energy came out onscreen. He became a legend by playing 
the ultimate wise-guy, and when he tried to depart from that persona, his 
work suffered. Murray took fewer and fewer starring roles, focusing 
instead on inspired cameos in films such as "Little Shop Of Horrors," "Ed 
Wood," and "Kingpin." 
In recent years, Murray has returned to lead roles, recapturing some of 
his former glory in "Quick Change," "What About Bob," and "Groundhog Day."
"The Man Who Knew Too Little" finds Murray playing a less neurotic 
version of the wide-eyed innocent from "What About Bob."  Murray's 
Wallace Ritchie is an amiable loser, a clerk in a Des Moines Blockbuster 
Video who tells strangers he "works in film." When his younger brother, a 
successful businessman living in England, sends him money for his 
birthday, Ritchie impulsively hops a plane to London to visit him. 
Wallace's arrival startles brother James (Peter Gallagher) and wife 
Barbara (Anna Chancellor.) Hours away from an important business meeting, 
they can ill-afford an unpredictable guest, so James buys his brother a 
ticket to "The Theater Of Life," a participatory experience where he will 
assume a character and join a group of actors to play out a mystery story 
in real-world settings. Wallace reluctantly accepts the gift and begins 
the evening as directed, by going to an assigned street corner and 
waiting for a nearby pay phone to ring and begin the experience. 
Unfortunately, Wallace gets a call intended for a hired-assassin. 
Thinking it part of the play, he trots off to begin his adventure, not 
realizing that the international intrigue surrounding him is not only 
real, but potentially lethal.
The screwball comedy has the feel of a 60s spy film. Layered with 
subplots, the story overflows with secret agents, blackmail, bombs and 
murderous henchmen. The humor comes as Wallace navigates from one 
incredibly dangerous situation to the next, believing it all to be part 
of an elaborate game. Meanwhile, his adversaries are stunned by the cool 
fearlessness of this mysterious American. 
"The Man Who Knew Too Little" is filled with clever scenes that are 
*almost* a riot, but rarely slip over the edge into hilarity. The problem 
certainly isn't Murray, who clearly has a ball playing the hapless 
Wallace. The supporting cast is also fine, particularly Joanne Whalley as 
Lori, Wallace's confused partner in intrigue. The set-up is amusing 
enough, especially a subplot involving British and Russian spies 
desperately trying to insure job security by re-igniting the Cold War. 
So why doesn't "The Man Who Knew Too Little" soar? The problem lies with 
director Jon Amiel ("Copycat", "Sommersby",) who just doesn't have a 
knack for comedy. Amiel takes the spy motif too far, using camera angles 
that accentuate the suspense elements of the story, but mute the humor. 
He seems more interested in unreeling the convoluted story than in making 
the audience laugh. The result is a muffled comedy. The performances are 
there, the situations are there, everyone is really trying, but the 
damned thing just isn't funny enough. At least not funny enough for a 
movie with Bill Murray's name on it.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Every year there are some bad movies but they usually involve
non-stars.  That Bill Murray should be in a film that is so bad is
pitiful.  It is not alone the story; it is Murray himself who has
grown chubby in the face, looks dissipated but still tries to exude
the boyish charm and glib speech for which he has been noted lo
these many years.  You cannot keep doing that; it palls.
The story reeks of contrivance.   Wallace (Bill Murray) is a video
store clerk from Iowa.  Flying to London to celebrate his birthday
with his wealthy brother James (Peter Gallagher) he is treated to a
surprise by James who takes him to a "Theater of Life" where the
audience gets into the act and takes on a role.    Wallace takes it
seriously and is soon unable to distinguish the participatory part
of the theater with real life.   Not very funny.
When Wallace takes a phone call, it is a wrong number call which
should have gone to government-hired assassins who wants to overthrow
the current British government and start another cold war with
Russia.  Wallace becomes involved with this assassination group.
He thinks it is part of the acting he is doing.  Are you still with
me?   This is as far as I will go.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
We seem to be at a point in time where the big name comedy actors are
changing. While Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, Bill Murray, and Eddie Murphy used
to run the gamut, they're now getting old and we're bringing in a new batch
with the likes of (sic) Jim Carrey, John Leguizamo, and Chris Tucker. It's a
very sad time. Luckily those comedians who ran the 80's are still attempting
to go strong, and while their later efforts are considerably poorer than we'd
like, it's their familiarity that keeps us smiling and endeared to their
withering performances. Murray, who is one of the best, is still charming,
it's just that his roles don't deserve him. Such is the case with THE MAN WHO
KNEW TOO LITTLE.
Murray stars as Wallace Ritchie, a Blockbuster Video employee in Des Moines,
Iowa who travels on his birthday to visit his brother James (Peter Gallagher)
in London. The two reunite with affection, but James regrets informing his
brother that an extremely important dinner with some German businessmen will
prevent him from celebrating with his brother. Brainstorming ideas, James
finally comes to a brilliant conclusion that will serve both as his brother's
birthday gift, and as a deterrent to Wallace's wild antics ruining the
important dinner. Wallace has always wanted to be an actor, and the latest
sensation around town is an interactive play where you become the lead
character in a crime caper put on by professional actors. Dubbed the "Theater
of Life", Wallace jumps at the chance, but when he intercepts the wrong phone
call, he is put on the trail of a completely real espionage ploy involving
England and Russia.
Heading from place to place, Wallace continuously runs into bad guys and
assassins whom he suspects to be actors, and when he never takes them
seriously, they assume him to be a highly skilled American secret agent. While
the entire plot is very unclear, we know that it has something to do with
blackmail and a stack of letters in the possession of British prostitute Lori
(Joanne Whalley-Kilmer), Wallace's first encounter who winds up joining his
side. We also know that somehow it all leads back to an elaborate scheme to
reactivate the Cold War by deactivating a bomb planted inside a Russian
Matryoshka doll at a treaty signing. And just in case you're wondering why
they want to start up another Cold War, it's actually quite simple: it keeps
the secret intelligences employed. (Roll your eyes as you see fit)
We spend an hour and a half watching Murray do what he does best - acting
flamboyantly silly in the midst of highly serious dealings, which in turn
annoys others and leaves us, the audience, laughing hysterically. THE MAN WHO
KNEW TOO LITTLE never gets quite that good, but you can tell it really wants
to. You will find yourself laughing here and there - it's something you just
can't avoid when watching Murray be such a pretentious buffoon - but you will
also be sadly aware that this comic legend is on his way out, and Dr.
Kevorkian can't even help a dying career be less painful to watch.
Aside from Murray, THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE is laced with dime-a-dozen
performances. Gallagher is the best he's ever been, which means he's just bad
instead of awful this time around. Gaining more and more prominent film roles,
Gallagher's slowly blossoming career, jump started by playing a comatose
businessman in the 1995 hit WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, is in dire need of a
talent boost. He gave us an absolutely nauseating performance in TO GILLIAN ON
HER 37TH BIRTHDAY, and while almost being decent here, he still suffers from
subtle overacting that is more embarrassing than anything.
Murray makes this film ache to be recommendable, but it just isn't. Although
Murray is almost always worth watching, here he is drowned out by lame, low-
effort filming and direction that leaves a potentially funny film potentially
worthless. With a PG rating and a high-level of silliness, this would appear
to be a family comedy, and while it isn't offensive, it's too silly for adults
to enjoy yet suffers from a plot too political to grab children's attention.
Perhaps it would work better as a more mature, darker comedy, but one gets the
feeling not a lot could've saved this, and it's a real shame when a plot with
so much ability is destined for nothing more than an eternal resting spot on a
video-rental shelf in Des Moines, Iowa.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bill Murray, Joanne Whalley, Alfred Molina, Peter Gallagher, 
      Richard Wilson, Geraldine James, John Standing, Anna Chancellor
Director: Jon Amiel
Producers: Arnon Milchan, Michael Nathanson, Mark Tarlov
Screenplay: Robert Farrar and Howard Franklin based on the novel 
      "Watch That Man" by Robert Farrar
Cinematography: Robert Stevens
Music: Chris Young
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     With a title like THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE, one might reasonably 
assume that actor Bill Murray's latest endeavor is a parody of 
Hitchcock's twice-made film, THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO MUCH.  In fact, 
although the movie takes a few stabs at mocking Hitchcockian plot 
twists, it's mainly a satire of the James Bond pictures.  Unlike many 
similar productions, this one has a smart, knowing script that 
understands just how to play up all the tricks and contrivances of the 
secret agent genre to their best comic effect.  It's a breezy, fun film 
that offers more than a few solid laughs.
     Murray plays Wallace Richie, an American from Des Moines who 
decides to celebrate his birthday by purchasing a plane ticket and 
flying to see his brother, James (Peter Gallagher), and sister-in-law, 
Barbara (Anna Chancellor), in London.  And, while James is delighted to 
see Wallace, the visit comes at an inopportune time – he is on the verge 
of closing a big deal with some German businessmen and he needs an 
quiet, conservative dinner party without a wild card like Wallace around 
to disturb things.  So, for a birthday present, James gives Wallace an 
evening's participation in the "Theater of Life," an experimental form 
of entertainment that allows normal people to act out their fantasies.  
Only, instead of becoming involved in this "Theater of Life," Wallace 
accidentally intercepts a phone call intended for a real hit man, and, 
as a result, he becomes embroiled in a web of espionage, attempted 
assassinations, and a would-be terrorist attack at the signing of a 
peace treaty between Russia and England.
     It's vitally impossible for the premise of a mistaken identity to 
sustain an entire motion picture, but THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE 
employs enough variations that, until the very end, proceedings remain 
surprisingly lively.  Of course, it could be argued that the situation 
in this film is so outrageous that it's as much a "fish out of water" 
scenario as a "mistaken identity" one.  Wallace is, after all an 
"innocent" American thrown into the midst of a European game of murder, 
mayhem, and blackmail.  There's a little of CROCODILE DUNDEE's charm at 
work here.  It helps that Murray, whose films vary from the good 
(GROUNDHOG DAY) to the horrible (SCROOGED), is in top form.  Throughout 
the entire film, Wallace is completely oblivious to his danger, and, as 
a result, Murray gets a chance to develop his own brand of comic-action 
hero -- a bizarre mixture of Dirty Harry, James Bond, and Austin Powers.  
The running joke is that everybody mistakes Wallace for one of the best 
in the spy business because of the ease with which he dispatches his 
enemies, even though every one of his victories is accidental.  
     Every secret agent movie, no matter how silly, demands three 
accessories:  a beautiful woman, a nasty villain, and a threatening 
henchman.  THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE possesses all of these.  Joanne 
Whalley (the British actress best-known for her role in SCANDAL) is 
Lori, the femme fatale who becomes involved with Wallace after she mis-
identifies him as a hit man intending to kill her.  Richard Wilson is 
absolutely delightful as the very proper Sir Roger, a top-level diplomat 
who yearns for the return of the Cold War, and who is absolutely 
terrified that the skilled and dangerous Wallace may confound his plans.  
Alfred Molina, last seen in a brilliant cameo in BOOGIE NIGHTS, is Boris 
the Butcher, the killer assigned to eliminate Wallace, but who becomes 
increasingly impressed by his quarry's amazing skills.
     For roughly three-quarter of the film's 93-minute running time, 
director Jon Amiel (COPYCAT) keeps things rolling along, effectively 
blending satire with almost every imaginable variation on the mistaken 
identity plot device.  However, since this is essentially a one-joke 
movie, it runs out of steam before the end credits arrive.  The last 
twenty minutes of THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE are a little too 
repetitious, and even a brief appearance by respected British actress 
Geraldine James (THE JEWEL IN THE CROWN) in an over-the-top role as a 
torturer can't restore the film's earlier inventiveness.
     Despite the floundering ending, THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE still 
leaves a favorable impression, and the closing scenes are not completely 
without humor.  Murray recovers nicely from his elephantine flop, LARGER 
THAN LIFE, to essay a character who is both likable and funny.  Most of 
the humor here works – including a mugging where things don't go as 
planned, a boatload of double-entendres, a unique car chase through a 
construction zone, and a hilarious bit with some nasal spray.  Although 
THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE is less audacious than AUSTIN POWERS and 
lacks all of the '70s references, it's frequently as enjoyable, if not 
moreso, and that makes it a worthy choice for a frothy, funny evening.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" is "Gone with
the Wind" on mescaline, then "The Man Who Knew Too Little"
might be called "Austin Powers" on Seconal.  "The Man Who
Knew Too Little" is embraced by the camp-spy subgenre of
film, a category so broad that it includes not only the usual
suspects like 007 but even allegedly serious cloak-and-dagger
tales like "The Jackal," which are so overblown that they
traverse the boundary into spoof.
   The major plus of "The Man Who Knew Too Little" is Bill
Murray, one of the funniest comedians around, a man who
has carved a special niche by understated humor.  Rejecting
the flamboyance of a Mike Myers, Murray evokes laughs
largely by playing the guy without a clue, an innocent who is
not so much dumb as he is unaware.  While his current movie
is a drawn-out, one-joke affair based on Murray's
obliviousness, the funniest scene--one which will be
appreciated by those in his mostly youthful audience who
have traveled to other countries--occurs near the beginning. 
When Wallace Ritchie (Bill Murray), a Blockbuster Video
salesclerk from Des Moines, Iowa, arrives at a London airport,
he chats up the man at passport control as though the
bureaucrat were an old friend.  "Charming accent--are you
from around here?" he asks naively, in a barrage of
commentary that results in his being the agent's only
customer of the day.
   After that scene, it's pretty much downhill as Ritchie
proceeds from event to incident.  The single-joke concept
begins when Ritchie shows up by surprise at the London
home of his very successful brother James (Peter Gallagher)
on the very day that James is to make a presentation before
a group of German executives.  Eager to get the bumpkin out
of his way at least until the evening is over, James buys
Ritchie a ticket to a Performance Theater event, in which the
patron interacts with the performers at a murder mystery,
improvising his own dialogue.  When Ritchie answers a pay
phone call giving him an assignment, he thinks it's part of the
game and plays along, involving himself unwittingly in a plot
by British and Russian agents who are planting a bomb at a
state dinner in order to sabotage the signing of a peace treaty
between Britain and Russia.
   Taken from a novel by Robert Farrar who, along with
Howard Franklin has adapted the story to the screen, "The
Man Who Knew Too Little" is directed as a laid-back piece by
Jon Amiel--with thoroughly restrained buffoonery.  If the
humor is British, it is not of the Monty Python variety--even
the usually hilarious Alfred Molina is toned down in the role of
Boris the butcher, a guy who appears too gentle to have
decapitated one of his victims.  
   If the airport scene is the unwitting comic highlight of the
film, the physical comedy reaches its peak with a merely
whimsical Russian dance which finds Mr. Murray imitating the
steps of the professional troupe which surrounds him,
providing entertainment for the diplomats who are about to
initial the new treaty.  While Murray is at his best in roles
involving his simply responding to the provocations of others,
"The Man Who Knew Too Little" needs to cut its supporting
actors more rope.  They are people who lampoon too little.
Rated PG.  Running Time: 95 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey
Karten

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Bill Murray is a wonderful comic who has trouble picking decent
scripts.  At his best, as in GROUNDHOG DAY, his delicious brand of wry
humor provides one delightful moment after another.  But without the
right material, as in LARGER THAN LIFE and many other recent pictures
of his, he tries to ham it up too much in order to make up for the
film's lack of natural humor.  In these latter movies, the result is
bad slapstick.
     THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE, which bears no relationship to THE
MAN WHO KNEW TOO MUCH, provides the perfect vehicle for Murray's
talents.  Clearly enjoying his part, Murray takes this one-joke movie
and milks the joke for all it's worth.  Although the hilarious
GROUNDHOG DAY was a classic one-joke movie, comedies with a single idea
are the hardest to sustain.
     When the story starts, Wallace Ritchie (Murray) has just arrived
in London to visit his brother.  Blockbuster Video clerk Wallace with a
tartan hat and bad tourist clothes goes to visit his upscale brother
James.  Peter Gallagher plays James with all of the genuine horror of
someone who has an uninvited guest arrive at an inopportune moment.
     James is hosting a large dinner party of Germans to pitch them a
big deal.  Having his country-bumpkin brother on hand would be a
disaster, so James attempts to solve the problem by signing Wallace up
with a "Theater of Life" company.  They stage pretend murders in real
houses, and the participant gets to live a fantasy criminal life.
Since the theater lasts until almost midnight, this seems the perfect
mechanism for James to rid himself of his unwanted brother.
     The one joke is that there is a real crime afoot, and Wallace, as
a sunglassed, pretend secret agent, gets in the middle of it by
mistake.  Wallace never realizes that he is in any danger so he has
great fun shooting and getting shot at.  When he finds a dead body, he
compliments the corpse on how real he looks.  Nothing fazes Wallace
including a real mugging.
     The purposely overcomplicated plot involves stolen letters of a
call girl named Lori, played by Joanne Whalley, who is blackmailing a
high government official.  The most dastardly deed comes from two
groups of secret agents, one British and one Russian.  As a job
security program, they plan on bombing the delegates in town to sign a
world-wide peace treaty.  After the explosion, they figure that the
heyday for the spooks, the cold war, will be back in full swing.
     With any actor other than Murray, the audience would probably grow
tired of the story within the first half hour.  But his subtle and
serious approach to the humor provides at least one big laugh every ten
minutes and lots of little ones in-between.  Murray makes Wallace so
believable that it is easy to live his secret agent life for a night
vicariously with him.
     Whalley, one of the most beautiful actresses working today, has
talent that is rarely utilized effectively.  Her performance in
SCANDAL, a film about the real Christine Keeler and John Profumo
scandal in the British government, shows what a tremendous actress she
can be.  Even in bad films, such as TRIAL BY JURY, she has managed to
stand out.  In THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE she complements Murray's
part perfectly without ever trying to upstage him.
     "Do you think I look silly in this outfit?"  Lori asks demurely
when Wallace first sees her in a slightly revealing maid's outfit with
a big heart on it.  "I could take it off if you like."  The occasional
sexual innuendo never gets much stronger than this, allowing director
Jon Amiel to bring in the picture with just a PG rating.  Given that
his last film was the excellent, but hard R picture, COPYCAT, Amiel
shows more versatility than most directors.
     THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE is a film more to be savored in person
than discussed after the fact.  Wallace himself says it best when asked
by a policemen what it is like to be a secret agent.  "They pay all
your expenses and your 'license to kill,'" explains Wallace.  "But
there's a downside.  Torture."  Well, actually not, but one must keep
up one's image.
     THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO LITTLE runs 1:33.  It is rated PG for
language, innuendo, and comic violence.  Kids need to be ten to
appreciate the humor but the film would be acceptable for those a bit
younger as well.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Jon Amiel
Writers: Robert Farrar and Howard Franklin (based on the novel "Watch That
Man" by Robert Farrar)
Starring: Bill Murray, Joanne Whalley, Peter Gallagher, Alfred Molina,
Richard Wilson, Geraldine James, John Standing, Anna Chancellor, Nicholas
Woodeson, Simon Chandler
Weeks before Bill Murray's new vehicle, "The Man Who Knew Too Little,"
opened, we the television viewing public were forced to see commercial
after commercial after commercial of Bill Murray claiming that this movie
was so funny that if anyone thought otherwise and was able to track him
down, he'd pay him money back.  I'd like to trash this, saying I'd love to
track him down just for the whopping 75 cents I paid to see this at my
college's crap movie theater, but the truth is, yes, I did laugh.  A bit. 
While it's nowhere near a good film, this is entertaining enough for me not
to crucify it and the commercial Bill was so full of himself to make.
Contrary to the title (which is, admittingly, a very good, funny title),
"The Man Who Knew Too Little" is not a spoof on the old Hitchcock classic
twice made (both by him), which featured a family's pursuit for their
kidnapped daughter by thugs who are planning to assasinate a public
official.  This is a film about a kind of slow-witted guy, Wallace Ritchie
(Murray), who accidentally gets involved in international intrigue via a
giant misunderstanding, and never finds out the truth.
Wallace's brother, James (Peter Gallagher), lives in London and is shocked
by his unannounced arrival at his house, and the night he gets in, James is
holding a major business dinner, and doesn't want Wallace to muck it up. 
So...he gets Wallace tickets for a weird kind of live theatre called "The
Theatre of the Living Arts," who set up the paritcipant in a complex
situation involving international intrigue and all that good Bond-ian
stuff, all starring actors, of course.
But when Wallace picks up the phone he's told to by the actors, he instead
gets a call from a real group of baddies, and subsequently gets himself
into a giant international incident.  The film's script is delicately
written so that everything is able to be understood in two ways, so Wallace
never finds out that it's real, and the bad guys never find out that he's
not.
Along the way, Wallace runs into a seductress trapped in the incident, but
needing a way out - Lori (Joanne Whalley - formally Joanne Whalley-Kilmer,
but not as of around the time "Batman Forver" came out) - who soon starts
to fall in love with Wallace.  Also involved are some Russian assasins
(they always have some part in internation incident films), headed by
Boris, played by Alfred Molina, a chameleon-esque actor who's starred in
dozens of popular films, but never looking or sounding the same (last seen
as the "Sister Christian"-loving dope drug dealer guy in "Boogie Nights").
While the film is pretty nicely written (for a Bill Murray vehicle anyway),
it does drag on a bit as it never changes its tune.  I kinda respect that
everything can be taken both ways, but maybe a change somewhere in the
storyline might result in a film which is funnier and less redundant. 
Sure, it's funny for awhile, and the film does have some comical set pieces
(I actually dug the window ledge scene a bit), but they get tiresome.
The ending, featuring Wallace somehow accidentally involved in a Russian
Cossack dance troupe, is funny, but afterwards feels forced.  The set-ups
for not letting anyone know Wallace is not a spy get especially clumsy, and
several things feel forced.  And the credit sequence, featuring Murray
doing a long rant of comedy, is so annoying that I high-tailed it out of
there before it blackened up (but since the credits were already up, I
don't think that really constitutes as "walking out").
I will say that Murray is really funny, and his character is likable, but
this is not the best character Murray has ever played.  Murray playing a
droll, intelligent goof is what he does best, as is what he did in
"Ghostbusters" and "Groundhog Day" (although he was also a jerk at the
beginning of the latter...but a likable jerk).  He's a brilliant comic at
his best, but any less and he either seems just likable or annoying.  His
performance here is merely likable, but at least it's competent.
But I will say that the direction is surprisingly good (I'm going out on a
limb here).  Jon Amiel actually works very well with the camera, and
creates a film which feels like the faux-spy film it should feel like.  The
dark lighting creates a great mood to the film, and at several instances in
the film, I was actually into it.
But unfortunately, "The Man Who Knew Too Little" is not good enough to
garner a positive rating (at least from me).  The gimmick runs very thin as
it goes on (luckily enough this was only a 93 minute film), and by the end,
I just didn't really care or laugh enough for me walk out with a smile on
my face.  But still, it's not a bad film, and therefore, gets a "not bad"
rating out of me.  Better luck next time, eh Bill?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Sanford
What a long, strange trip it's been for Bill Murray. After ascending to
the heights of box-office popularity in the 1980s with such films as
"Caddyshack," "Stripes," "Ghostbusters" and "Scrooged," he's been all
but missing-in-action during recent years. "The Man Who Knew Too Little"
is unlikely to bring on an encore of his glory days, but it's a pleasant
reminder of why Murray has always been one of the most accessible comic
talents to come out of the "Saturday Night Live" factory. Even now, he
shows none of the smug self-indulgence of Eddie Murphy or the
anything-for-a-laugh desperation of Chris Farley or Adam Sandler.
That said, it should also be noted that "The Man Who Knew Too Little"
is not one of Murray's sturdier vehicles. It's a mild variation on the
age-old innocent-guy-stumbles-into-espionage plot, with Murray as
Wallace Ritchie, a guileless American whose brother (Peter Gallagher)
signs him up for an elaborate role-playing game called "Theatre of
Life." On his way to the show, however, Wallace intercepts a message
that leads him into a real-life escapade involving blackmail, murder and
a scheme to sabotage the signing of a U.K.-Russian peace treaty, thus
bringing on a new Cold War. The joke of the story is that Wallace is
completely oblivious to the danger around him and continues believing
it's all just part of the "Theatre of Life."
It's silly stuff to be sure and far from unpredictable, but Murray's
boyish charm goes a long way toward carrying the picture and director
Jon Amiel ("Copycat," "Sommersby") keeps the nonsense perking along.
Joanne Whalley is well-matched with Murray, and veteran character actor
Alfred Molina seems to savor the chance to ham it up as an assassin
called "Boris the Butcher." "The Man Who Knew Too Little" is forgettable
fluff, but it's hard to slam any film in which the villains take a break
from chasing and shooting at each other to play the old Kerplunk! game.
James Sanford

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Bill Murray, Joanne Whalley, Alfred Molina, Peter Gallagher,
Richard Wilson, Geraldine James, John Standing, Anna Chancellor
Director: Jon Amiel
Screenplay: Robert Farrar and Howard Franklin based on the novel "Watch
That Man" by Robert Farrar
The problem with spy movies carrying comedy at every turn, is the
necessity to retain credibility with the audience and yet sustain the
slapstick humour right till the very end. A prime example that fails to
do both are the NAKED GUN movies. On the other hand, I feel THE PINK
PANTHER movies succeed solely because of the classical Sellers
performance they contain. Parallels can be drawn between THE MAN WHO
KNEW TOO LITTLE and Inspector Clouseau, yet it pales in comparison
because of Bill Murray.
The plot begins with an ordinary, down and out actor, Wallace Ritchie
(Bill Murray), who visits his successful, wealthy brother James (Peter
Gallagher) in England. In order to get the odd ball, family failure out
of his hair, James arranges for Wallace to join a live street theatre,
where the acting is played out in the real world. Unfortunately, Wallace
is in the wrong place at the wrong time and gets involved with actual
murder and mystery. However, Wallace remains totally ignorant of this
fact even when his life is in constant danger; and this is where the
problem lies - trying to maintain his naivety. The role of Wallace
requires the charms of an innocent fool; a role not suited to Murray (he
can play the fool, but with little charm or innocence), but a role ideal
for the late Peter Sellers.
Overall there are some amusing scenes with misplaced bombs, assassins
who are assassinated, playful torture scenes and wild car chases all
reminiscent of the 60's PINK PANTHER, but sadly missing Sellers. Bill
Murray tries his best but unfortunately is unable to carry out the part,
not because he is a bad actor, but because it requires a certain type of
actor. Joanne Whalley-Kilmer is adequate as a slightly, ditzy bombshell,
whilst Alfred Molina has fun with his role as Boris the Butcher.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Homer Yen
Starring Bill Murray, TMWKTL is a light comedy that offers a clever
premise.  Wallace Ritchie (Bill Murray), a meek and likable doofus,
somehow manages to unwittingly immerse himself in an international
espionage plot without even being aware of what's going on around him.
This happens because when he pays an unexpected visit to his
successful brother, James (Peter Gallagher), who is hosting a very
important dinner, Wallace is asked to leave and to return later that
evening.  To keep Wallace busy for the next several hours, Ritchie
buys him a ticket to the Theatre of Life, an interactive,
participatory game for only one person.  Consider it a low-tech
version of Michael Douglas's experience in "The Game".
Trepidatious and oozing with humility, he waits by a phone booth where
a soon-to-come phone call from the Theatre of Life will set the game
in motion.  Ring-ring-ring!  The shadowy voice on the other side
instructs Wallace to go to an address.  Wallace thinks that the game
has begun, but that particular phone call was intended for a hit man
who would arrive minutes later.  Wallace, believing that this is all
part of the show, in all his folksy glory, begins to bumble his way
through a series of amusing episodes, never really knowing the
imminent danger that he is in the or the high stakes of the situation
that he has entered.  It's all just fun and laughs for him.  However,
he seems to enjoy his time slightly more than the audience.
This movie does boast several positive points.  What you'll find
entertaining is the neutral dialogue that is exchanged as Wallace
meets up with all sorts of bad guys and even the woman that he is
supposed to kill.  The conversations take on a double meaning with
Wallace meaning one thing and the bad guys assuming another.  Also,
you'll chuckle at the way he unknowingly outraces police cars,
outsmarts villains, and outmaneuvers pursuers.  Blissfully unaware of
the real danger and just plain lucky, Wallace manages to flummox the
evil-doers at every, ridiculous turn.
What this movie lacks is the manic energy required to fuel this kind
of screwball comedy.  There are some very funny scenes, all thanks to
Murray's comical abilities.  But all the while, it seems like an
explosion of laughter should be imminent, but it never quite elevates
itself beyond grins and giggles.  Murray is not the kind of star that
can take a film by himself to great comical heights.  The comedy
produced here is a result of his reaction to his situation, which he
views as just another impromptu scene in the Theatre of Life.
However, the lack of energy is not really his fault as the story
prevents him from 'working the audience.' 
Still, Murray is affable, the unraveling of the story is fun to watch,
and at 94 minutes in running time, it's very tolerable.
