Title
Review for Brassed Off (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 5/23/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:47
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/1/97 & 5/3/97
Cast: Pete Postlethwaite, Tara Fitzgerald, Ewan McGregor, Jim Carter,=20
      Philip Jackson, Peter Martin, Stephen Tompkinson, Sue Johnston,=20
      Mary Healey, Lill Roughley
Director: Mark Herman
Producer: Steve Abbott
Screenplay: Mark Herman
Cinematography: Andy Collins
Music: Trevor Jones
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Unemployment is a bane almost everyone can appreciate -- a=20
universal affliction that becomes a sobering reality for many people=20
during even the best of economic times.  And, while the loss of each=20
individual job is traumatic, that's nothing compared to what happens=20
when the livelihood and identity of an entire community are jeopardized=20
by a round of mass layoffs.  BRASSED OFF!, written and directed by Mark=20
Herman, takes a look at the plight of the British coal miner -- a dying=20
breed.  Once, mining was a thriving industry in rural England, with=20
whole towns built around each mine.  But, during the early 1980s, the=20
Tory government began converting the country to nuclear power.  The=20
resulting drop in demand devastated the coal industry, with hundreds of=20
pits being closed and a quarter of a million miners made "redundant." =20
     Grimley Colliery is a mine on the verge of shutting down.  The pit,=20
which employs more than 1000 miners, has been targeted for closure, but,=20
to sweeten the bitter taste for the workers, a healthy severance package=20
has been offered.  Still, there are those who are willing to fight to=20
the end, believing that no amount of money can make up for the damage=20
that Grimley's closure will bring.  Among the most vocal of the anti-
closing brigade are Andy (Ewan McGregor), a brash, young miner whose=20
lungs are still relatively clean, and Phil (Stephen Tompkinson), a=20
family man who's deep in debt and needs his job to make ends meet. =20
Meanwhile, Phil's father, Danny (Pete Postlethwaite), wants the mine to=20
stay open for a different reason.  He's the conductor of the Grimley=20
Colliery Brass Band (in fact, it's his life), and, if the mine closes,=20
the band will come to an end.  In fact, several members are considering=20
tendering their resignations to Danny when a pretty young trumpet=20
player, Gloria (Tara Fitzgerald), arrives in town and asks to sit in on=20
the practice sessions.
     BRASSED OFF! is a traditional feel-good motion picture with an=20
element of social commentary thrown in for good measure.  The film might=20
have been stronger had it displayed a little more anger throughout=20
instead of opting for a big speech at the end to get the point across,=20
but at least it imparts a measure of the pain that unemployment can=20
cause.  And BRASSED OFF! is less glib than Michael Moore's ROGER AND ME=20
in pursuing a similar aim.  While Moore's chief goal was a caustic=20
attack against General Motors, BRASSED OFF! shows the human toll of mass=20
layoffs.
     Even though two of the most prominent names in the cast are rising=20
stars Ewan McGregor (TRAINSPOTTING) and Tara Fitzgerald (THE ENGLISHMAN=20
WHO WENT UP A HILL=85), their performances are among the least noteworthy. =
=20
The best acting turn belongs to Pete Postlethwaite (IN THE NAME OF THE=20
FATHER), whose Danny is poignant and proud, followed closely by such=20
British stalwarts as Jim Carter, Philip Jackson, Peter Martin, and=20
Stephen Tompkinson.  If Danny represents BRASSED OFF!'s heart, then the=20
miners represent its body and soul. =20
     Actually, McGregor and Fitzgerald appear to be on hand largely to=20
inject some youthful appeal into the film.  Neither of their characters=20
is particularly necessary or effective.  However, without their rather=20
unconvincing romantic subplot, the movie probably wouldn't reach as wide=20
an audience.  They may not do much, but they're there, and their=20
characters fall in love.  That will be enough for certain viewers who=20
would otherwise ignore a dramatic comedy about a bunch of old geezers=20
who play in a colliery brass band.
     The plot itself is littered with familiar feel-good elements:  the=20
big competition, the critical illness of a key character (win one for=20
the Gipper!), and the redemption of someone who's viewed as a betrayer. =20
Despite this, or perhaps partially because of it, BRASSED OFF!=20
successfully presents its theme without ever becoming overbearing. =20
Certainly, this isn't a hard-hitting motion picture like GERMINAL, but=20
its heart is in the right place, it has a great soundtrack, and it keeps=20
the viewer entertained.  Anyone seeing BRASSED OFF! for its lighter,=20
less effective elements (the love story, the band competition) should at=20
least understand the message that Mark Herman is conveying.=20
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The distraught son, Phil (Stephen Tompkinson), rants in front of a
shocked group in church.  He blames the Tory party for the local mine's
misfortunes.  As they show him the exit, he stops to complain to a
statue of the Virgin Mary.  He wants to know why she has let Maggie
Thatcher live while his father and the mine's band leader is ill.
     Welcome to MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS recast as the coal miners' union
struggle against management.  Except for the periodic political
diatribes, BRASSED OFF is a quite pleasant but rarely challenging
formula picture that telegraphs every punch.
     Pete Postlethwaite gives a moving but too frequently saccharine
performance as Danny, the leader of the Grimley Colliery Band.  Whereas
Richard Dreyfuss was effusively optimistic, Postlethwaite is dead
serious.  His face seems incapable of smiles.  Band conducting being
business, he permits himself no frivolities or distractions, even if he
coughs like he is certain to die at any moment.
     The band has a proud history, having been started in 1881, and
Danny reveres its legacy.  The other band members are much less
dedicated to the band, but they are bound to Danny.
     When management wants to close the pit, the miners have to decide
whether to take a management cash settlement and let it close or go on
strike.  (Writer and director Mark Herman's political agenda keeps
getting in the way of logic.  One scene has management bragging that
they know the mine makes them a good profit, but they plan on closing
it anyway.  How this makes any sense is never explained.  The film
assumes that the audience is a priori on the side of the union, hence
management can be completely and illogically stereotyped as evil
incarnate without need for explanation.)
     The band members and their families are dirt poor and obsessed
with the vote, but not Danny.  His singleness of purpose is directed
totally to the band's winning the national championship.  The
tabulating of the union vote happens conveniently while they are
playing at the semifinals.  The band members say the band dies when the
pit closes, but Danny sees the band living on forever in order to
maintain its grand tradition.  ("I love the band -- we all do -- but
there's other things in life that are more important," reasons his son.
"Not in my book," Danny solemnly replies.)
     Although the rest of the band, other than Danny, seem to blend
together, there is one whose acting rises above the others, Tara
Fitzgerald as Gloria.  Tara, who gave delightful performances in THE
ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL, BUT CAME DOWN A MOUNTAIN, A MAN OF NO
IMPORTANCE and SIRENS, manages to charm the audience again.  As the
only female member of a previously all-male brass band, she gets both
come-ons and grief from the others, but is eventually accepted.
     The show teases us with an interesting romance between Gloria and
Andy (Ewan McGregor from EMMA and TRAINSPOTTING), but refuses to
develop the story.  When they get to her flat, she asks, "Do you want
to come up for a coffee?"  But he responds, "I don't drink coffee."  In
a cute piece of dialog, she adds, "I haven't got any."  Cut to the next
morning and that is about all we get of that relationship.  Too bad
since the preliminary chemistry between them is quite intriguing.
     Like the truncated relationship between Gloria and Andy, the
families of the married miners make brief appearances with the sole
purpose of tearing at our heartstrings.  When Phil's wife leaves him
and takes the kids, he becomes morose, what with that and the problems
at the mine.  His son, missing his grieving dad, tells his mom, "I
don't want to see Dad sad, mom, but I'd rather see him sad than not see
him at all."  A telling commentary on the effect of divorce on
children.
     As soon as you hear the film's setup, you can write the movie's
conclusion yourself.  Yes, after a manipulative sequence designed to
force you to tears, there is the obligatory and completely predictable
ending.  Only a minor twist changes it slightly, but the writer is so
afraid of breaking formula that the twist is taken back as soon as it
is introduced.
     BRASSED OFF's best part is its rousing and beautiful music of a
type rarely heard in movies.  Just ignore the movie's heavy political
dogma, accept that you know its conclusion, and kick back and enjoy the
music and the sweet acting.
     BRASSED OFF runs 1:45.  It is rated R for a little bad language.
Given the film has no sexuality, no nudity, no drugs, and nothing other
than a couple of bad words that I missed but supposedly were there, I
would consider the film basically PG.  Kids need to be about 9 or so to
be interested, but the picture would be acceptable for any age.  I
recommend this formula film and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Writer/director Mark Herman is so concerned about sounding the
trumpet to deliver a "message" in BRASSED OFF that he almost ruins a
perfectly good character study.  The story is set in the Yorkshire town of
Grimley, where Danny (Pete Postlethwaite) prepares to lead into
competition the brass band made up of workers at the local colliery (coal
mine).  Danny seems blissfully unaware of the issue which preoccupies
every other band member, including his own son Phil (Stephen Thompkinson):
the government program of coal pit closures which is threatening to make
Grimley the latest target.  Still the band, including a lovely new arrival
named Gloria (Tara Fitzgerald), plays on, trying to make progress toward
a national competition at the Albert Hall while a union vote over the fate
of the colliery looms.
     BRASSED OFF is at its best painting a vivid portrait of life in a
northern coal town.  Long days of hard labor are punctuated by pints with
the boys and nearly wordless exchanges between husbands and wives.
Meanwhile, the battle of wills between Danny and the other band members
points out a profound gap between what the band means to each side.  For
the players, it is a social club which provides a rare opportunity to blow
off steam, demonstrated in an amusing montage of ever-more-inebriated
performances.  For Danny, the band is a symbol, an enduring tradition and
the one beautiful thing in a dark, dusty world.
     If Herman had kept his focus on this clash between pragmatism and
idealism, best exemplified by the relationship between Danny and Phil (an
exceptional performance by Stephen Thompkinson), BRASSED OFF could have
been a minor gem.  Unfortunately, Herman is determined to make sure we
leave the theater enlightened about the injustice of the pit closure
program.  Phil rails against Margaret Thatcher in a church; Danny uses the
band competition as a soapbox for the miners' cause; statistics of job
losses roll by as the film ends.  Like too many directors of films about
social issues, Herman doesn't trust our sympathy for the characters to
create all the resonance the story needs.  Add an over-dramatized but
under-developed romance between Fitzgerald and Ewan McGregor (as a young
miner) and you have a film which strays from its strengths.  The human
drama of BRASSED OFF makes for much sweeter music than strident
sermonizing.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Since the 1950s the British have certainly known how to make
modest but affecting films in ways that American filmmakers rarely
attempt.  Some simple comedies from the post-war era gave us eloquent
and loving pictures of British village life still memorable today.
That tradition is strong in BRASSED OFF, but mostly in the first half
of the film.  Director/writer Mark Herman hooks the audience with a
light comic view of the mining village of Grimely, but increasingly the
replaces the comedy with serious drama.  We see the village having its
most difficult times with the pit closings of the Margaret Thatcher
administration.  Finally, with the viewer hooked and caring about the
characters, the film gets in its angry speech about the policy of pit
closings of Thatcher's Tory party.  Not that it is a total surprise
with the opening of the film making some angry remarks about closing
mines to replace with nuclear power plants.
     The heart of the Yorkshire town of Grimely is its colliery.
('Ere.  of Grimely--well, most of it anyway--is the Grimely Colliery
Brass Band.  The band has been around for a hundred years.  But these
are hard times for Grimely.  The company looks like it might close the
colliery and if there really is a pit closing, the whole town might
just as well dry up and blow away.  Already there are those in the band
who are so depressed about what is happening to the town that they are
ready to quit the band.  Band leader Danny (Pete Postlethwaite, the
currently best thing about THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK) cannot
believe that people in the town will let the band die, even if the mine
goes under.  Just as the band is starting to founder, new life is
breathed into it by a new member.  Gloria (the radiant Tara
Fitzgerald), granddaughter of a former great band member, returns to
the town of her birth with her grandfather's flugelhorn.  The first
woman ever in the Grimely Colliery Brass Band plays the flugelhorn as
well as her grandfather did.  Suddenly the band starts looking and
sounding better to the band members.  While the future of the town is
souring, the men are distracted for a few hours a week by music and a
little flirting.  And of course some of the wives are jealous.  But
things grow grimmer in Grimely as the company offers a job buyout.
While some band members are sacrificing food for music, most of the
town is looking at whether they want to mortgage the future of the town
in the buyout or hope the mines are not closed.  Mark Herman has a feel
for the humanity of the people, no doubt based on his youth in
Yorkshire.
     Pete Postlethwaite is one of the British actors who does a great
job and nobody seems to make much of a fuss about.  He had major roles
in films such as IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, or bit parts in films such
as THE USUAL SUSPECTS.  His bicycle-riding band leader in denial about
how serious the town's problems are is entirely different from roles he
has done before.  Tara Fitzgerald is a decent actress, and though I
have not seen her in any really demanding roles, she is certainly a joy
to watch.  Ewan McGregor, like Postlethwaite, is also in two current
films, this and THE PILLOW BOOK.  And with his Scottish name it goes
without saying that he was in TRAINSPOTTING.  Veteran character actor
Jim Carter (THE ADVOCATE, BLACK BEAUTY, and RICHARD III), looking like
a heavy-set Leonard Rossiter, usually can be counted on for a bit a
color.
     Americans will be at a slight disadvantage in seeing BRASSED OFF.
They will be informed at the outset what a colliery is, but the
Yorkshire accent takes a little getting used to.  What very likely were
some funny lines will go past viewers not quick enough to pick up what
is said.  Curiously the anti-Tory sentiments may hit home from
similarities in policy between the Conservative Tories and the
Republican Party.  But the political arguments will lose a little
impact since coal-mining is shown to be a dangerous profession which
shortens lives.  The viewer may decide that it is just as well that the
next generation is saved from going into the pits and instead is forced
to find other work.
     Not surprisingly, the score by Trevor Jones is big and brassy with
some nice brass renditions of popular light classical themes.  The
score is played by the Grimethorpe Colliery Band who also supplied
extras for the story's band.  No doubt Grimely is based in no small
part on Grimethorpe.  This is a film that has more than a few moving
moments and it worth looking for.  There is more to this film than the
trailers would lead one to think.  I rate it a low +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) BRASSED OFF is set in the British mining town of Grimley.
The town's colliery (coal plant) is its lifeblood and its backbone. It's
even the reason for the existence of the local band - the Grimley
Colliery Brass Band. Needless to say, when the colliery is threatened,
the whole town feels threatened. 
The movie opens after it has been announced that Grimley is on the list
of mines being considered for shutdown. Two of the band members head off
for their last practice with the band. The instability of the situation
at the colliery won't allow them the luxury of paying their band dues,
and the feeling is common among the band members. 
The band isn't dead yet, but the only things that keep them going are
the determination of Danny the bandleader (a moving, if melodramatic,
Pete Postlethwaite), and the surprise arrival of a pretty young woman
(Gloria, played by Tara Fitzgerald) who wants to join the band. 
The movie uses the band as a way to introduce the audience to the town
of Grimley and to the plight of miners all over Britain who are losing
their jobs. The movie is unapologetically pro-labor and anti-Tory, but
the tone is righteously angry, not just preachy. Once the movie hooks
you, it shows you all the division, pain, anger, and loss that a plant
closing in a one-industry town can cause. 
But the townspeople are not just victims who get wiped out. The movie
also shows how people cope and survive during economic peril, the brass
band serving as a positive outlet for their frustrations. 
The movie does a good job of keeping track of many characters, each
adding to the collective sense of community. Postlethwaite obviously
stands out as a star, and a subplot involving Gloria and Andy (Ewan
McGregor), gets a fair amount of screen time, but the rest of the movie
is nicely episodic, never lingering on any one person or story for too
long. 
The movie is very message-heavy without FEELING too heavy-handed, though
I can't imagine British conservatives appreciating the movie at all.
Perhaps it's hard as an American to feel manipulated one way or the
other about an issue so far removed from daily life. In this country the
movie plays as a bittersweetly charming movie. It's a nice change of
pace from the blaring summer action fare. 
But because of the biting condemnation of Thatcherism, I wonder if
perhaps it was intended as something else.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     BRASSED OFF!, the only musical mining drama that's likely to grace
our shores this (or any other) year, has, to its credit, a strong cast
(headlined by Pete Postlethwaite, Tara Fitzgerald, and Ewan McGregor),
several compelling characters, and plenty of fine brass music.  (Music
and dialogue rendered on a recording so crisp that I actually had
trouble paying attention to the movie!  Since when did small films start
sounding so big?)  What sends this British import right down the crapper
is a weighty mix of dour drama-- striking miners, families strapped for
cash, clowns trying to commit suicide, etc.-- and heavy-handed politics.
Ugh.  By the end, when the colliery band makes it to their final competi- 
tion, there's nothing left to celebrate, except, perhaps, the impending
restoration of blood flow to a certain bum deal.  An interesting movie,
I suppose, but way too bitter to be bittersweet.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Pete Postlethwaite, Tara Fitzgerald, Ewan McGregor, Stephen
Thompkinson, Jim Carter. Screenplay: Mark Herman. Producer: Steve
Abbott. Director: Mark Herman.
When swamped by the sorrows of life, when day becomes night, and the
will to survive sinks with the burden of each breath, some of us will
sing, some of us will cry and some will blow their ‘flugel'. It's during
these times of turbid turmoil, when the power of music can for a brief
moment, lift us above the troubled waters which is bitter with despair.
This is the story of music and the struggle of the ordinary working man
to keep his job, support his family, and keep the passion for music
alive. In a small Yorkshire community the coal miners work by day and
play the music of ‘brass' by night. A shift of fortunes brings our
mining musicians to face the threat of mine closure, the end of their
livelihood and the dilemma of ‘how can we play music when there is no
food on the table.'
The director Mark Herman has nicely blended the music of ‘brass' with
the struggle of the human spirit. Sit and listen, and the two become
one, as the miner's plight is as much felt in the music they play as
seen on screen. When the corporate powers of the world attempts to bind
the fight of these men, we have the transformation of emotions into
music, which is the blend of ‘brass' and sorrow, and the creation of one
of the most powerfully moving yet lamented sweetness that is heard.
The ending may not be as triumphant as one would have hoped for, but for
a brief moment these few men soared the ‘high places' where most of us
only dream. Strong performances by Pete Postlethwaite as the Brass band
conductor dying of ‘Coal Miner's Lung', and good supports from Tara
Fitzgerald and Ewan McGregor.
Comment: On the seventh day the trumpets sounded and the Walls of
Jericho fell.

Author
Ben Hoffman
In Yorkshire, the town's livelihood depended on the pit mines.  This
was true of many towns in England; this film then  applies to the other
towns in England, South Wales and Southern Scotland that were
devastated when in 1992 many pit mines were being closed, leaving the
people, the miners, the storekeepers without any income.   For hundreds
of years these coal mines were the life's blood of the country and its
people. Suddenly, they were being shut, one after the other.
This film is about the plight of one representative town and how it
fought the authorities and the independent mine owners to keep the
mines open.  The title, BRASSED OFF, I assume is a pun meaning "pissed
off"  as indeed the townspeople were but also refers to the brass band
which they loved and gave them inspiration in a time of depression.
Leader and conductor of the band was Danny (Pete Postlethwaite) who had
worked in the mines all his life and was now slowly feeling the
debilitating effects of the lung disease to which miners are prone.
Danny's spirit kept the town from complete despair but was not enough
to keep the amateur musicians happy in the face of the mine's imminent
closing. Luckily, along came Gloria (Tara Fitzgerald) a lovely young
woman who used to live in the town but had left some years ago. . . and
she could play music beautifully, giving a lift to the unhappy people
at a time when they needed it badly..
Intermingling the story of the mine's closing  with the music of the
brass band gives the film a unique feeling.    They play beautifully
and spiritedly but when Danny becomes suddenly ill, the spirit of the
band falls to earth like so much coal being dumped.    Add to this that
Gloria is in love with a young miner, her teenage boyfriend Andy (Ewan
McGregor) when the miners find out she is employed by the Coal Board.
Despite her protests that she is on the side of the union, of the
miners, she is scorned.
This, then, is the very well told story of the mines, of the people and
their band. It also is the revealing story of the Coal Board.  When
Gloria accuses the head of the Board of having made up his mind to
close the mines two weeks ago before she could get statistics to
suggest they keep the mine open, he replies "That is not true.  We made
the decision to close the mines two years ago.".
Fine acting, uplifting music and a slam-bang ending make this a most
worthwhile film to attend.
Tautly Directed by Stephen Tompkinson.
