Title
Review for Playboys, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE PLAYBOYS is a film directed by Gillies Mackinnon from a
screenplay by Shane Connaughton and Kerry Crabbe.  It stars Aidan Quinn,
Robin Wright, Albert Finney, and Milo O'Shea.  Rated PG-13 for mature
themes and humor.
     THE PLAYBOYS is a Irish charmer, co-written by the author of MY
LEFT FOOT, Shane Connaughton, and filmed in the author's home village,
Redhills, employing the local people.
     Unfortunately, it appears as if the film was rather clumsily edited
down to a commercial running time, so that some of the subplots appear
to have been abruptly abandoned before they were resolved.
     The main story is a romance between an independent, unwed mother
(the year is 1957 and the village is not pleased by the woman's refusal
to name the father, much less marry him) and an itinerant player, whose
company The Playboys settles in for a week's stay in the village green.
The mother, Tara, is played the American actress, Robin Wright, whose
previous credits include the PRINCESS BRIDE.  The player, Tom, is played
by Aidan Quinn.  The romantic story proceeds more or less predictably
for these two: she initially repulses him, he perseveres.  The spoiler
in the village police Sgt.  Hegarty, played by Albert Finney, who also
has plans for Tara.
     The theme of the film is probably more interesting than the
romance, just as the acting by all the professional performers raises
the whole film above its own shortcomings.  The theme is change.  The
village priest is against it.  "Change is a dangerous thing," he warns.
All change is inherently bad, but the village, like Ireland and the
world, is changing despite his maledictions and clumsy opposition.
Television here, as in last year's AVALON, marks the end of the old
ways.  We see the first antenna being erected over the village pub,
"high up in the air, where the pictures are."  Tara's personal morality
is also a mark of change; for it is easier for us in the audience to
understand her actions than it is for us to understand the anachronistic
villagers.  The priest and the villagers try to shame into conforming to
their narrow ideas.  One of the women asks, "Who's the father?"  "Ask
your husbands," Tara replies.  They tell her that until she marries the
father, bad times are going to plague the village and indeed a local
tragedy is laid directly at her feet.
     As subplots, we have Tara as a smuggler and black marketeer and we
have a mystery about an IRA bomber operating in the locale.  Neither of
these is resolved at the end of the movie, but they certainly are part
and parcel of the theme of change.
     Despite this, the actors give us some fine performances, and no one
better than Albert Finney, who is one of the great actors of the
English-language cinema.  As a man in enormous pain and conflict, a man
seeking salvation and forgiveness, he makes an unsympathetic character
understandable and forgivable, if not quite likeable.
     Another fine performance is turned in Milo O'Shea as The Playboys'
impresario and lead, vain, ridiculous, as myopic as the priest in his
own way, bravely carrying the tradition of the provincial troupe, a
tradition soon to be extinguished by the advent of TV.  The Playboys'
performance provide with some wonderful comedy, btw, especially their
hastily improvised version -- a send-up if only they knew it -- GONE
WITH THE WIND, which is playing in the local cinema.
     The script captures the writer's native village -- its cadences,
its worldview, its blindnesses, its superstitions (what do we make of a
miracle in the show tent?).  It likes these people without overly
romanticizing them.  And it's as rich with Irish humor as it is with
their insularity and pettiness.
     THE PLAYBOYS is a lightweight, but charming, film that I can
cheerfully recommend to you even at full price.
     (In the Seattle area, THE PLAYBOYS is playing at five theaters,
Guild 45th, Alderwood, Renton Village, Seatac 12 South, and Kirkland
Parkplace.)

Author
George V. Reilly
     THE PLAYBOYS is a film directed by Gillies MacKinnon and written by
Shane Connaughton.  It stars Robin Wright, Aidan Quinn, and Albert
Finney.
     Tara Maguire (Robin Wright) is a young unwed mother living in a
small village in Ireland in 1957.  Her state is the cause of much
scandal---the parish priest demands from the pulpit that she reveal the
name of the father---though she is being courted assiduously by the
local police sergeant and others.  Tara is defiant and independent, and
she withstands local opinion hardily.  She wants no man's help in
bringing up her child and supports herself by working as a seamstress
with her sister and occasionally smuggling goods across the nearby
border with Northern Ireland.
     Sgt. Brendan Heggarty (Albert Finney) is the unnamed father of the
child.  The sergeant is a middle-aged recovering alcoholic who has been
posted to this small village as a punishment for his former
transgressions.  Dark, brooding, and jealous, he repels Tara more than
he attracts her.  He is determined that if he can't have her, no one
else will either.  
     Matters continue in this uneasy fashion until the arrival of the
playboys, a troupe of itinerant actors.  The last of a waning tradition,
now made obsolescent by the arrival of television, the playboys wander
from village to village, setting up their tent on the green, where they
treat the villagers to their cheesy renditions of OTHELLO, GONE WITH THE
WIND, and music-hall songs for a few days before moving on.
     Tom (Aidan Quinn) is the advance man for the playboys and also
their young male lead.  Cocksure and handsome, he attracts women easily,
so he takes it as a challenge when he is rebuffed by Tara.
     Predictably, Tom and Tara start to fall in love after a while.
Sgt. Heggarty, equally predictably, does everything that he can to win
Tara for himself.  The centre of the plot revolves around the three, Tom
and Tara's burgeoning love and Heggarty's ever more determined efforts
to destroy Tom, including framing Tom for arson and (wrongly)
imprisoning him for being an IRA bomber.  
     Robin Wright gives a surprisingly good performance as Tara.  Wright
is best known for playing the title role in "The Princess Bride", but
here she proves that she has some talent as well as a pretty face.
     Aidan Quinn is also good as a likable rogue.  His role is
undemanding for the most part, but he plays it well.
     Albert Finney gives the most interesting performance as the proud,
jealous, driven lover.  He is quite believable as a man in pain,
tortured by his inner demons and his unachievable love.
     Milo O'Shea, as the vain, aging actor-manager of the playboys, is
mostly there for comic relief.  Niamh Cusack, as Tara's sister Bridget,
also gives a good performance.
     Many films set in Ireland have an unfortunate tendency to be
patronising and pander to stereotypes---leprechauns, drunken brawls in
the streets, smiling rogues, and so on.  THE PLAYBOYS more or less
succeeds in avoiding these temptations.  The three leads also succeed in
adopting fairly convincing Irish accents.
