Title
Review for I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (1998)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
DeWyNGaLe
I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: B
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
In October of 1997, audiences were dazzled by the horror surprise hit I Know
What You Did Last Summer.  The film went on to gross over 70 million dollars in
the U.S., and even developed a cult following, much like the previous year's
100 million dollar grossing Scream.  When the trailer hit theaters in September
attached to Urban Legend, it looked like a wonderful follow-up.  Did it live up
to the first film?  The answer is no.
Jennifer Love Hewitt returns as Julie James, a survivor of the serial killer
that attempted to kill her and her friends a year before.  She has been so
upset since the incident.  Nightmares haunt her all over the place, but she has
to move on.  She know attends college, and is best friends with a funny,
outgoing girl named Karla (Brandy), who is trying to hook Julie up with Will
Benson, played by newcomer Matthew Settle.  Karla's boyfriend is Tyrell, the
funny, outgoing type, who is played by Soul Food's Mekhi Phifer.  Freddie
Prinze Jr. also returns as Ray, Julie's boyfriend from a year ago.  One
morning, Julie and Karla are called up by a local radio station who are
offering four tickets to the Bahamas if they can correctly identify the capital
of Brazil.  Of course, they answer it correctly, and they are off to the
Bahamas.  Julie wants Ray to come, but he declines the offer, so Karla secretly
invites Will instead to help boost her plan of hooking him up with Julie. 
After they arrive at their hotel, it is just them and the staff on the island. 
It starts off as the weekend of their dreams.  Something just had to come to
mess up the one care-free weekend of Julie's life though.  Ben Willis (Muse
Watson) is back, and he isn't letting anyone survive this time.  Will Ray come
to the rescue before he can kill them off one by one?
Jennifer Love Hewitt and Brandy turn in respectable performances.  Brandy in
particular was impressive, considering this is her first feature film.  You
could see that the characters were horrified, and they would do anything
possible to survive.  Matthew Settle and Freddie Prinze Jr. are a completely
different story.  Let's start with Settle.  Matthew is completely fake in this
film.  You could not believe a word coming out of his mouth.  You could tell he
was acting, and its reasons like him that this one isn't as good as the first
one.  He does do a good job towards the end, but that doesn't clear up the
scars he already left on the film.  Freddie Prinze Jr. is almost as bad as
Matthew Settle was.  He is almost completely unbelievable, and the majority of
his lines are completely meaningless and out of place.  We don't see him as
much as Settle, otherwise he could have done just as much damage as Settle did.
 Mekhi Phifer is alright as Tyrell, but yet again the dialogue is out of place.
The plot of I Still Know turns out to be a pretty good one at the end of the
movie.  I like where the filmmakers went with this second installment, but
maybe if it occurred in the same town as the first one, it would have been a
bit better.  The cinematography and setting of their island are simply
wonderful.  There are a lot of very nice shots around their hotel.  The sound
is pretty good, but still not as creepy as the first film's.  Jennifer Love
Hewitt's song, "How Do I Deal" is also played for about thirty seconds.
I Still Know What You Did Last Summer is nothing compared to the first film. 
The first film was very suspenseful, and it contained some very memorable
scenes.  The last fifteen minutes of I Still Know What You Did Last Summer
really picked up, and almost reached the same level as the first film.  Before
this part in the film, there are many unnecessary deaths and fake scares.  That
is okay though, because the film is still very much fun and there are a few
suspenseful scenes.  I think the reason this film wasn't as scary as the
original was because in the first one, the killer terrorized the people
involved in the incident.  He made them suffer for what they did.  In the
second film, Ben Willis just kills anyone he feels like.  He doesn't stick with
Ray and Julie, who were the ones he is actually after.  He had to go after
Karla, Will, and Tyrell.  If the characters he stalked were in some relation to
the incident that went on when he was ran over by Julie, Ray, Helen, and Barry,
it could have been much better, and it would have made a lot more sense.
The Bottom Line- Not a disappointment, but a third in the series would be out
of hand.   

Author
Berge Garabedian
I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
RATING:  6 / 10 --> Barely recommendable
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Kevin Williamson-less sequel to the US$107 million original I KNOW WHAT
YOU DID LAST SUMMER (7.5/10). This follow-up features the tightest
shirt in the West, Jennifer Love Hewitt, a dash of Brandy (the singer,
that is), and British director Danny Cannon at the helm, the man behind
the abominable JUDGE DREDD (5.5/10).
PLOT:
One year after the original summer murders in her hometown, Julie
(Hewitt) has yet to overcome her fears, but has managed to move onto
College, a new love interest and a new spicy roommate. After winning a
trip to the Bahamas, Julie and her newfound friends find themselves in
a similar predicament as the psycho fisherman with hook as hand, slices
and guts his way to their extinction. Screams and murders ensue.
CRITIQUE:
The paper-thin plot, the cheap thrills, and all of the clinging wet
shirts that you could shake a stick at, make this follow-up to the
slick original, a standard 90's horror fare without much to get excited
about. Jennifer Love Hewitt returns as the girl who can never seem to
button her blouse all the way to the top in this transparent sequel,
which never seems to take off from its predecessor's solid base.
Many of the killings in this film are pretty obvious, while the plot
seemed ridden with holes. For example, we are never told why the killer
is killing everyone in his path in this one. Or for that matter, how
everyone on the island suddenly disappears within a 24-hour period.
Then again, horror films weren't exactly known for their Oscar worthy
scripts, but this one just doesn't seem to bring anything original to
the table. The dialogue was standard and dull, the acting was there but
not fascinating, and the mystery of the killer wasn't as cool as it
could have been.
Having said that, I did enjoy some of the murders in this film, Jeffrey
Combs' standout performance as the pissed-off hotel owner, and the
continued creepiness of the killer's fisherman's outfit. Also, Mekhi
Phifer was funny as the horny guy who just can't seem to get laid, and
Freddie Prinze actually acts a little in this one. Also, I will admit
that I did not turn away at the umpteen shots of Jennifer Love Hewitt
in her cut-off tight shirts and bikinis. For further analyses of her
extremely ample assets, please visit this hilarious gentleman's
homepage at http://jenlovehewitt.simplenet.com/ who minutely breaks her
success down into a couple of specific prize possessions. This film
also delivered the most rain in any film since the stunning SEVEN
(8.5/10). All in all, it's okay as a generic piece of 90's horror game,
with the cheap thrills and fun kills for showcase. On the other hand,
it doesn't really attain any of the mystery of the original, but then
again, most sequels don't. See it if you're bored and want to turn your
brain off for a while and charge up your woodie, otherwise skip this
limp sequel and munch on some snacks with the original classics SCREAM
(8/10) and I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER (7.5/10).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Jennifer Love Hewitt once dated actor Joey Lawrence. She has released
two CDs, "Let's Go Bang" in 1995 and "Love Songs" in 1992 under Love
Hewitt. She also plays Sarah Reeves in TV "Party of Five" series,
alongside the SCREAM (8/10) queen herself Neve Campbell. Jennifer's
bust size is reported to be 36C.
Jennifer also has her own romantic comedy screenplay "Marry Me Jane" in
development at New Line Cinema. It's about a wedding planner who falls
for one of her betrothed clients.
Brandy also stars in her own TV sitcom called "Moesha". She went with
the NBA's Kobe Bryant to his high school prom. Kobe is best known for
jumping from high school straight to the NBA.
Both Hewitt and Brandy have reportedly signed on for a third
installment of Last Summer.
Freddie Prinze Jr. considers his big break to be his four-line part in
TV's "Family Matters" in which he played a punk kid who brought a gun
to school.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (1998)
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
A film with a title as long and clunky as I Know What You Did Last
Summer poses a problem for film makers:  what should be done in the case
of a sequel?  Well, it wouldn't suffice to shorten it to something like
I Know 2 or Summer 2; so, the makers of this particular sequel came up
with the even-longer I Still Know What You Did Last Summer.  The only
problem with this title is that the "summer" in question was two summers
ago in the context of this film.  A more appropriate title would have
been I'm Still Aware of What you Did Two Summers Ago, or You Know What
You Did Two Summers Ago?  Well, I Still Know.  If they make a third film
in the series, we might have something like Remember Me?  I'm The Guy
Who Knows What You Do in the Summer, and I'm Back for More!
And yet, something tells me that more time was spent naming this film
than actually thinking about it, for I Still Know... is a film so
painfully awful and pointless that it makes me realize just how vapid
the horror-film genre can be.  I've written a lot about violence
pornography lately, but no film illustrates my point better than this
one:  this film is banking on its excessive and exploitative use of
violence and gore.  The picture fails on a fundamental level:  I can
appreciate successful pornography to a degree, but I Still Know... is
not scary.  It's not disturbing.  It's a stupid and hateful chunk of
hackwork without a glimpse of intelligence or worth.  And, to top it all
off, it features every cliche known to the genre:
1.  The heroine survivor of the first film, Julie James (Jennifer Love
Hewitt), is having nightmares about her horrible experience.  In
response to this, she never hesitates to investigate strange noises in
the dark while holding a sharp knife.  The strange noises usually turn
out to be Karla (Brandy), who is too-cool-for-words.
2.  Since the film can't take place in a setting similar to the first
film, the girls conveniently win a vacation to go to the Bahamas.  They
win by incorrectly guessing the capital of Brazil (they say Rio, when,
in fact, it is Brasilia...but this has a point later!).  Even though
Julie really misses her boyfriend Ray (Freddie Prinze, Jr.), the two
girls bring along Tyrell (Mekhi Phifer) and Will (Matthew Settle) for
sexual reasons.
3.  Well, when they arrive at the Bahamas, there are some convenient
discoveries:  it's storm season, and there won't be any boats going to
or from the island.  Also, there are no guests because it's storm
season.  The only people present are a few employees of the hotel. 
Since police officers are useless in horror films anyway, it's no big
deal that the hotel has no security guard or anything like that.
4.  People start dying.  The Bad Dude in a Slicker with a Hook goes
around sticking his weapon in people's mouths and hands, and plunges
giant sharp objects into people who pose no threat whatsoever.  Later
on, the killer's identity is discovered and everyone who had more than
three lines survives.  But this isn't before a profoundly dumb series of
plot devices is employed to land our heroes in a final confrontation in
a tropical rainforest.
>From a screenwriting standpoint, I have trouble believing that someone
over the age of ten composed this script.  To call it amateurish is
pretty kind; I'm more inclined to believe that a middle-school
horror-flick freak wrote it as a joke for his friends.  I mean, come on,
I've seen horror films that aren't entirely original, but I Still
Know... is pathetic.  The Bad Dude in a Slicker with a Hook, like Freddy
and Jason and Michael Myers, is really good at killing people violently,
never being seen, and instantly cleaning up his mess so the person who
saw the dead body looks crazy to all her friends.  In addition, he has
immense strength, and can lift hundreds of pounds with one arm.
The acting is very bad.  I love to look at Jennifer Love Hewitt, but
she just isn't any good in this movie.  She's at her best when she's
being nice, but the rage part of this (shouting "Come and get me!  I'm
right here!" in the rain) doesn't quite work.  Brandy is spunky and all
that, but really just annoying.  Settle and Prinze, Jr. do what they can
with non-characters, but Phifer is the absolute worst, mixing dreadful
overacting with his dreadful dialogue.  There aren't any characters
anyway, so caring about any of these people is not an option.  
But let's talk about the violence.  The movie was incompetently
directed by Danny Cannon; even a lousy script can be turned into
something slightly interesting and suspenseful by a good director, but
Cannon seems to think that huge bursts of music are scary.  He seems to
believe that people walking down dark hallways is frightening.  He
obviously thinks that teenagers want to see buckets of blood, because
that's the only thing you can count on getting out of I Still Know... 
But, unfortunately, Cannon just wants to exploit the violence.  We don't
care about characters who are introduced and killed in the same scene --
it's nothing but gratuitous crap.  The scariest movies I've seen leave
everything up to the imagination:  Seven and The Shining qualify as
truly frightening films, because they have a level of humanity that the
typical teen-slasher ignores completely.
It upsets me to know that teenagers live and die for this kind of
thing, and that Hollywood is happy to provide it for them.  I Still
Know...  is as bad as they come -- it makes me realize the good things
about a moderately stylistic film like Urban Legend, and the interesting
character aspects of H20.  While watching people get stabbed and diced
to bits for no other reason than to please popcorn munchers, I got a
sick feeling in my stomach.  No thought was put in to this movie -- it
exploits mindless violence for the purpose of making money.  
This is not a moral issue; I can live with a film that just wants to
entertain, as long as it at least tries to be art in even the vaguest
way.  I Still Know..., like too many movies, has been made for the sole
purpose of making money.  It's rare that a film so bad is also so
inherently offensive.  Violence can be art, but not like this.  Violence
can even be funny if its done in the right way.  I'm not saying that I
expected this film to be smart or satirical, but I at least expected it
to do its job.  It makes me wish that a thoughtful script were more
important than a lot of dead bodies.  The fact that it's not worries me.

Author
Steve Rhodes
There is a scene, a few dead bodies into this week's slasher flick, that
occurs when one of the minor characters has his hand nailed into the
table with the killer's signature hook.  As the mad slice-and-dice man
chooses among the long blades to finish off his prey, the victim pleads
for his life with a "No, seriously, don't do that."  The movie's
remaining dialog has the same level of sophistication.
Which movie featured a slow moving killer in a rain slicker, who gored
his targets with a hook?  Yes, it was I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.
Guess what?  The serial murderer wasn't killed last time after all.  He
lives again in the sequel called I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.
And he'll probably maintain his immortality as long as teen audiences
keep flocking back for more.
The completely formulaic script by Trey Callaway is directed by the
numbers by Danny Cannon.  Frightening scenes, filmed in murky shadows
and accompanied by creepy, ominous music, have surprises that are a
careful mixture of evil and innocence.  Sometimes there will be a
bloody, dead body behind that door, but just as often it will prove
empty.
The dead bodies once found will, of course, disappear when people come
to investigate.  And the person you least suspect will be one of the
guilty parties.
The setup this time has the film's charismatic star, Jennifer Love
Hewitt as Julie James, going to the hotel from hell on a small island in
the Bahamas during a rainstorm that cuts off all communication and
transportation out.  Along with Julie is her buddy Karla Wilson, played
by Brandy Norwood, and two young men.
The hotel starts off with a staff of 5, but, as you can guess, their
numbers will rapidly dwindle.  The film should have been played for
maximum parody but wasn't.
The director has no compunction about chopping up human bodies with less
compassion than your butcher.  But when it comes to nudity, he draws the
line.  In scene after scene he titillates the audience by making them
think they will get a glimpse of Jennifer Love Hewitt nude, but nothing
is ever shown.  Swimsuit ads are more revealing.
Even if the killer shows no mercy to his victims, the director does.  He
calls a halt to the proceedings after just over an hour and a half.
I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER runs 1:36.  It is rated R for
gore, sexuality and some dope smoking and would be acceptable for most
teenagers -- for whom the movie was obviously written.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Danny Cannon.
Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Brandy, Freddie Prinze Jr., Matthew Settle, 
Mekhi Phifer, Jennifer Esposito, Bill Cobbs, Jeffrey Combs, Jack Black, 
Muse Watson.
1998 - 96 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, and drug use).
Reviewed November 14, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
So much for sweet returns. After smart horror films were starting to be 
made again after the exploitative 80's slasher movies, starting with 
1996's "Scream," and followed by "Scream 2," "Urban Legend," and the 
original, "I Know What You Did Last Summer," a film like, "I Still Know 
What You Did Last Summer," was bound to be made sooner or late. It is a 
perfect example of the exact reason why horror films temporarily burned 
out, and that is because they reached for the lowest-common-denominator 
in filmmaking, favoring non-stop deaths and gore for suspense, and 
trading in fleshed out, likable characters for one-dimensional nitwits. 
It has been exactly one year since Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt) 
suffered through the ordeal of being terrorized by Ben Willis, a 
psychopathic fisherman whom her friends and she accidentally hit in the 
middle of the road, and then, thinking he was dead, dumped him into the 
ocean. Since then, Julie has relocated to Boston University, and 
although often paranoid and haunted by bad dreams, she has been able to 
put her life back together. When Julie's friend, Karla (Brandy), is 
called up by a radio station and answers correctly what the capital of 
Brazil is, she wins a vacation to the Bahamas for four people, which 
also includes Karla's horny boyfriend, Tyrell (Mekhi Phifer), and Will 
(Matthew Settle), who Karla sets Julie up with after her own boyfriend, 
Ray (Freddie Prinze Jr., also returning from the original), doesn't show 
up. When they reach the secluded island, they discover it is the last 
day of the open season, and will be stranded there for the 4th of July 
weekend with a few employees to fend off a violent storm headed for 
them. Of course, Julie, her friends, and the workers aren't the only 
ones there, as the murderous Ben Willis, dressed in fisherman garb, 
returns to seek revenge on Julie once and for all.
It is a sad state of affairs when a movie like, "I Still Know What You 
Did Last Summer," is made. I am a very big fan of horror movies, and so 
it is especially disheartening to find out that this sequel to 
"IKWYDLS," which I am a fan of, is almost an exact replica of a "Friday 
the 13th" movie. While the original focused more on the story and 
characters, as well as genuinely suspenseful moments, thanks to the 
screenplay by Kevin Williamson (who didn't return to write the sequel, 
and it shows), "I Still Know..." has no story to speak of, and is so 
vacuous of ideas, that the filmmakers, were forced to have a murder 
occur every five minutes just to keep the audience interested. Also gone 
are any signs of character development, and since every single character 
died before I got to know them, all I was left with was to stare at the 
screen, indifferent to what was going on. While I cared about the fates 
of the characters in the original, it made no difference to me in this 
sequel who lived and died. They were all paper-thin and pointless, 
except to become victims to the lethal hook of the fisherman.
Another element that made the original so memorable were some superbly 
crafted set-pieces, like the store sequence with Sarah Michelle Gellar, 
but there are none to speak of in this sequel (although they do come 
close at one moment with Brandy). Since so many people were killed every 
couple minutes, the suspense and scares evaporated faster than salt in 
water. Also of note is the mystery of the second killer, and accomplice 
to Ben, but it is obvious from the first frame who it is, and so I 
couldn't even have fun at that, like I did in the "Scream" movies and, 
"Urban Legend."
It figures that just as slasher films were starting to get some 
recognition again, a film would come along and ruin it for everyone 
else. Maybe the people who made, "I Still Know What You Did Last 
Summer," should have realized that in order to make a good movie, you 
must have a screenplay---or at least one that isn't such a black hole 
for thoughts and ideas. The ending of the film inevitably leaves the 
door wide open for a third part, but judging from this amazingly 
lackluster first sequel, everyone involved should have quit while they 
were still ahead. 

Author
Jason Wallis
"I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" * 1/2 (out of four) 
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt, Brandy, Mekhi Phifer, Matthew Settle,
Freddie Prinze, Jr., Jennifer Esposito, Muse Watson and Jeffrey Combs 
Rated R for violence, gore and profanity 
The first in a very long list of things wrong with "I Still Know What You
Did Last Summer" is the title. Think about it for a second. If the last
movie was called "I Know What You Did Last Summer", wouldn't the next movie
have to be "I Still Know What You Did Two Summers Ago"? If anyone working
on this movie had an I.Q. greater than five would have thought about it
logically and said, "Hey... wait a minute". But alas, the people behind
this film are obviously idiots, so I won't hold them to that. What I will
hold them to is the fact that they have a pretty bad movie on their hands,
even for a teenage slasher flick. 
I guess I'm one of the few critics who actually kind of liked the original
film (emphasis on the "kind of"). It wasn't great or anything and maybe not
even necessarily good, but at least it didn't have me glancing at my watch
every minute or so like it's sequel did. 
There are just so many problems with this movie that it's hard trying to
figure out where to start. First of all, I guess, is the setting. The movie
offers no rational reason why the film had to take place in the Bahamas,
other than the fact that the producers wanted a seaside setting. Exactly
why does the fisherman want to go through all the trouble of faking a radio
contest to get Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt, one of the only survivors
of the first film) and her new college buddies out to the islands before he
hacks them up? 
The movie suffers from this kind of logic all the way through. In one
scene, Julie is in a tanning booth at a deserted gym when the hooked
fisherman with the slicker comes in and seals up the booth so the damsel in
distress can't get out, no matter how hard she tries. When Julie discovers
she's going to slowly fry to death, she screams for help and her friends
come to her rescue. Now, this is all fine and dandy except for one thing;
instead of spending five minutes trying to bust open the booth, why not
just turn the freakin' thing off? 
In another scene, one of the characters, after having their significant
other all but decapitated by the man in the slicker, says to Julie, "Just
don't tell anybody it rained the whole time." Oh yeah, I've just been
terrorized by a hook wielding sociopath and had some of my best friends
gruesomely slaughtered, but hey, I'll crack jokes anyway. After all, it IS
in the script. 
The film's only saving graces are a few well-executed suspense sequences
and a really cool cameo by the "Re-Animator himself, Jeffrey Combs. He
brings some good comic relief and life to an otherwise limp movie. Way to
go , Jeffrey. 
I have a hunch that the reason this film fizzles while the first one at
least kept it's head above water is the recent absence of writer Kevin
Williamson. With "Scream" and even it's sequel, he displayed a real talent
as a screenwriter. His ear for dialogue and the terrific endings he puts on
all his films make him a standout from all the rest of the horror writers,
and I think "I Still Know" has really suffered by not having him on board.
The cool atmosphere is still there this time around, but I just didn't like
the characters or the writing as much as I did in the first one. 
Even though the movie doesn't have Williamson, it still has a hacky ending,
trying to do what Kevin did with the first two "Scream"s by (some may
consider this a spoiler, but if you have seen any horror movies whatsoever,
then you should be able to guess the identity of the madman within twenty
minutes) having two killers and, this time, having one of them being a
family member to the other. I think someone in the audience put it best
when, after the movie had ended with another "the killer is back!"
cliffhanger, he said "Who is this time, the Grandma?" 
All in all, "I Still Know" tries to be as successful as the first the film
was, but really fails in the attempt. I mean, it's okay when slasher movies
rip-off each other, but when they start copying themselves...
*Find all of Jason's reviews at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475
**Complimentary movie ticket courtesy of Valley Cinemas at
http://www.movie-tickets.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_I_Still_Know_What_You_Did_Last_Summer_ (R) * (out of ****)
It is now official--_Scream_writer Kevin Williamson is a genius--that is,
when it comes to writing horror movies.  Everyone else who attempts to
write in the genre these days are hacks, as shown by the recent
_Urban_Legend_ and now _I_Still_Know_What_You_Did_Last_Summer_, the unscary
and thoroughly boring Williamson-less sequel to the Williamson-penned
sleeper of last fall, _I_Know_What_You_Did_Last_Summer_.
A sequel to _I_Know..._--no more nor less than an effective formula genre
piece--was just about doomed from its inception.  To start, in addition to
the absence of Williamson (Trey Callaway and Stephen Gaghan wrote this
installment), there's the absence of who was by far _I_Know..._'s most
interesting and magnetic star, Sarah Michelle Gellar, whose character was
among the film's body count.  Then there's the title:
_I_Still_Know_What_You_Did_Last_Summer_?  In the new film, two years have
passed since the pivotal hit-and-run accident that kicked off the original.
 _I_Still_Know_What_You_Did_Two_Summers_Ago_ or simply _I_Still_Know_ would
have been a better fit.  Also, any continuation of the story would
completely negate one of _I_Know..._'s most unexpected pleasures, a shock
ending where snooze-inducing heroine Julie James (the vapid Jennifer Love
Hewitt) got her just desserts, being put out of her--and the
audience's--misery by the hook-handed killer fisherman.
A line of dialogue early in _I_Still_Know..._ explains away that jolting
conclusion as that all-too-familiar of cinematic copouts, a dream.  Julie
is still alive and kicking, attending college as she was at the end of the
last film.  Btu she's still haunted by the thought that Ben Willis (Muse
Watson), the vengeful hook-handed fisherman she and her friends hit with
their car and left for dead in _I_Know..._, is still out to get her.  She's
right.  As Julie and some new friends head for a vacation in the Bahamas,
so does Ben, leaving the usual trail of bloody bodies in his wake.  But
fortunately for Julie, not too far behind is her true love, Ray Bronson
(Freddie Prinze Jr., also returning), who knows that Ben is back.
It's a standard slasher sequel set-up, and that's the problem.  Part of
what made _I_Know..._ work was the mystery of the killer's identity and the
lingering suspicion that one of the four friends was behind the killings.
With the killer now clearly known to be Ben, _I_Still_Know..._ plays like a
cheesy '80s era chiller, a la any given _Friday_the_13th_ sequel.  That
formula extends to the new supporting players, each summed up by one
characteristic: Julie's spunky roommate Karla (Brandy, acting as if she
were still in a _Moesha_ episode), her horny boyfriend Tyrell (the talented
Mekhi Phifer, braving an insulting role), and Julie's nondescript suitor,
Will (nondescript Matthew Settle).  As thin as those characters are, they
are prime steak compared to the background characters in the Bahamas, in
particular a snooty hotel desk clerk (Jeffrey Combs), a tough cookie
bartender (Jennifer Esposito), and, most annoyingly, a perpetually stoned
white rastafarian pool guy.  Needless to say, I didn't care if any of these
characters lived or died.
Characters, or course, are not the point of a film like _I_Still_Know..._;
it's the scares, and in that department, Callaway and director Danny Cannon
fail miserably.  The first hour's purported scares are mostly telegraphed
fakeouts, some of which violate logic.  In one scene, as Julie washes her
hair in the bathroom sink, the fisherman can be seen leaving the room in
the background, punctuated by an ominous cue on the soundtrack.  Suddenly,
Julie lifts her head and starts to look around.  How could she suspect
anything unless she heard the music?  When the film supposedly kicks in to
high gear toward the end, the unsuspenseful chases and unimpressive gore
are not worth the wait; there's nothing as scary as the beauty pageant
murder or the store/alley chase-and-evasion sequence in the
original--there's just nothing scary, period.
Callaway and Gaghan are poor substitutes for Williamson, who gave the
original some flashes of wit and, for the most part, managed to sidestep
the irksome thriller cliches.  Cliches are in full force this time around,
never so clearly in a scene where a scared Julie slowly walks in a darkened
apartment; if she's so scared, why doesn't she turn on a light?  Plot is as
irrelevant as character in this film, but the number of holes in Callaway
and Gaghan's story are ridiculous.  For example, an injured Ray escapes
from a hospital back in the States and calls Julie's hotel in the Bahamas
from a pay phone.  How did he know what hotel she was staying at?  More
ruinous, though, are some key plot developments which attempt to shed some
light on Ben's past.  I won't give anything away, but one twist makes
absolutely no sense within the context of the first film, and the new
backstory cheapens the original, in a sense letting the four irresponsible
friends off the hook.
_I_Still_Know..._ leaves the door open for more sequels
(_I_Will_Always_Know_What_You_Did_Last_Summer_?
_I_Still_Know_What_You_Did_the_Last_Three_Summers_?), but, if there's any
luck, after this dreadful installment the franchise will heed the words of
its heroine: "JUST FUCKING DIE!"
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (R) * 1/2
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt, Brandy Norwood
Directed by Danny Cannon
A Review by Frankie Paiva
Obviously, the hook-handed Ben Willis is at it again, this time it's on an
island in the Bahamas where the lush surroundings are just bound to turn
deadly.
In the middle of summertime, Julie James (Hewitt) and her friend Karla
(Norwood) are called up by the local radio station. They have to guess the
capital of Brazil to go on their dream vacation, scrambling around the kitchen,
they find a bag of coffee that says it was produced in Rio. They guess that,
and their vacation begins.
Karla brings along Tyrell (Mekhi Phifer) and reluctant Julie is forced into
bringing Will (Matthew Settle) because her old boyfriend Ray (Freddie Prinze
Jr.) has to work. Apparently Julie still can't get over the fact that they cut
off Ben Willis's hand and threw him into the water to drown in the last movie
but, "they never found the body!" Oh my! What shocking horror! 
The capital of Brazil isn't Rio, it's Brazilia, Ben has set them up. He's once
again on a vengance gig, back for more action this time killing everyone in
sight. I mean, come on, does the housekeeper or the bartender have any idea
what Julie did last summer? And what happened to all the people that were on
the island?
This film is greatly lacking Kevin Williamson, who brought spark and witty
dialouge to the original. Sarah Michelle Gellar is also not here, couldn't she
have been resurrected from the dead in a demonic ritual or something? This film
is so predictable, and it even surpasses the number of cliches that Scream
mentions and features. I don't care how little Hewitt has on for most of the
film, so I give it * 1/2 stars.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: I Still Know What You Did Last Summer
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Brandy, Mekhi Phifer, Matthew Settle,
Freddie Prinze Jr., Jennifer Esposito, Muse Watson, Bill Cobb
Director: Danny Cannon
Screenplay: Trey Callaway
Australian theatrical release: November 26, 1998
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 1
star
In Scream, the killers are teenagers who slice their way into the news,
loving every second of rampaging across town weary kooky white masks.
In Urban Legend (which has been slated for a January '99 release), one
particularly troubled college student decides to bring myths like
"there's an axe-murdered in your back seat" to life.  Upon the release I
Know What You Did Last Summer, audiences tried to guess the identity of
the murderer, examining the four central characters then moving back
into sub-characters, then sub-sub-characters.  The dire mistake that was
made in the script of IKWYDLS was that the killer - a man with a very
nasty hook - was none of these characters, and revealing his identity
was just as useful as a poke in the dark with a sharp stick.
Well, the man with the hook is back.  And he, um, isn't happy.  Surprise
surprise, Mandalay Entertainment is taking a stab at a movie franchise,
this time hiring director Danny Cannon and screenwriter Trey Callaway; a
completely different combination from the Jim Gillespie-Kevin Williamson
duo responsible for the original.  The only man of these four whose
contribution is credible (if not crucial) is Williamson, the sharp
writer behind Scream, Scream 2 and Halloween H20.  Even though his
script for IKWYDLS failed to remain as quick-witted as some of his other
efforts, there were at least two or three genuinely well-written scenes.
Its sequel has no such luck.
It is now two years since the original group of teenagers (one of them
the lovely Sarah Michelle Gellar) committed hit and run on an abandoned
highway, but Julie James (the even lovelier Jennifer Love Hewitt) has
not been able to shake it from her memory.  When Julie's best friend
Karla (Brandy, of TV's Moesha) wins an all expenses paid trip to the
Bahamas, they both take their respective boy friends along and get ready
for the time of their lives.  Little do they know, fisherman Ben Willis
(Muse Watson) is still out to get Julie for aiding in the near fatal
accident, and decides to gatecrash their party with a splurge of blood
and revenge.
There is nothing in I Still Know that hasn't been done better before.
The thought of a killing spree on a luxurious holiday island is quite
appealing, but the setting fails to enhance the film because the setting
is not necessary.  Visions of sun and surf diminish when the island is
tormented by an aggressive storm; so what is left looks sort of like
parts of the theme park in Jurassic Park.  At least something that the
original film did was make use of its urban surroundings - the beauty
pageant, the street parade, the clothing store - but nothing that its
sequel does seems to justify its need for doing so.
Jennifer Love Hewitt is yet again gorgeous to look at, this time in a
"I'm not gonna die on this island" sort of way.  She carries the film as
far as she can, but good-looking actors in teen slasher films rarely
have much to do except look the part. Brandy doesn't contribute anything
that couldn't be found in an episode of Moesha, and the rest of the cast
looks suitably silly in barely developed roles.
Those even vaguely familiar with the horror scene with recognize the
usual cinematic traits: uncomfortable music builds up for the kill or
the bluff, characters make the worst possible choices for their
survival, and the killer is seen without a disguise only at the very
end.  Every one of these elements are included in I Still Know, and
Cannon makes it all so formulaically that the film is almost a satire.
It definitely could have been one, if the screenplay had not deluged
itself in its own seriousness. One of the reasons why Scream worked so
well was that it wasn't afraid to take the piss out of itself on
occasion moments, keeping tongue-in-cheek with the audience and
subsequently remained witty and sly. Calloway's screenplay suggests no
such accomplishments in this flick, as I Still Know's story is developed
with bad timing and the sluggishness of an inexperienced writer.
I Still Know What You Did Last Summer is a cheap thrill.  It is designed
for audiences who want a shriek and a squeal, and nothing in particular
to keep in their memory.  Get inget out.  There are better killers to
watch.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Susan Granger
 After its predecessor, "I Know What You Did Last Summer," did
screamingly well at the box-office, a sequel was inevitable. Jennifer
Love Hewitt and Freddie Prinze Jr. are back but, this time, they're
spending a Fourth of July weekend on a remote Bahamian island which
seems a perfect locale for the stabbings, shootings, and stranglings
that occur in the predictable script by Trey Callaway, directed by
Danny Cannon. The premise set up in the original film is that four
teenagers are being hunted by a hook-handed fisherman, the victim of a
supposedly fatal hit-and-run automobile accident that took place in
North Carolina. Two of the original four are back, along with the
vengeful Muse Watson, joined now by the pop singer Brandy and her
boy-friend, Mekhi Phifer, along with clean-cut Matthew Settle. They
have won this trip, courtesy of a radio station contest, and check
into a seedy hotel where the desk clerk murmurs, "I see four spoiled
city kids who would not know a hurricane if it blew up their ass."
Which is somewhat relevant since a hurricane's approaching. Like its
predecessor, there are the usual false alarms and bloody butchery as
the body-count rises. What made the original somewhat interesting was
trying to figure out the identity of the killer, plus the lingering
suspicion that one of the perky, paranoid four friends was at
fault. Both those elements are missing from this cheesy,
teens-in-jeopardy chiller. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "I
Still Know What You Did Last Summer" is a slasher 3. It's just another
formulaic fright flick.

Author
Craig Roush
* 1/2 (out of 4) - an unremarkable movie
Release Date: November 13, 1998
Starring: Jennifer Love Hewitt, Freddie Prinze Jr., Brandy Norwood,
Mekhi Phifer, Muse Watson, Matthew Settle, Bill Cobbs, Jennifer Esposito
Directed by: Danny Cannon
Distributed by: Columbia Pictures / Sony Pictures Entertainment
MPAA Rating: R (intense terror violence and gore, strong language, some
drug use)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/istillknow.htm 
The obvious reason for producing a sequel to an immensely popular movie
is to acquire continued profits. The rationale is sound, but in many
cases of this and recent years, the sequel is a shoddy product that's
exposed for the cash-milking vehicle it really is. Last year's SPEED 2
and SCREAM 2, as well as this year's SPECIES II have all been products
that have been decisively less than satisfactory. In some cases, a
sequel can even discredit its predecessor, as with the latest
neo-slasher flick, I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER. Whatever
uniqueness the original might've had now seems trite and overplayed when
paired with this abominable thriller. 
Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt) and Ray Bronson (Freddie Prinze Jr.)
are back from the original to star in I STILL KNOW, reprising their
roles in typical fashion. Julie and Ray experience a rather predictable
falling-out at the beginning of the movie, leaving the door wide open
for newcomer Will Benson (Matthew Settle). Will and Julie hit it off,
and along with friends Karla (Brandy Norwood) and Tyrell (Mekhi Phifer),
the foursome heads off to a radio station-giveaway vacation in the
tropics. Unfortunately, things aren't so peachy once they arrive, and
with a regularity you could set your watch by, the infamous fisherman
(Muse Watson) is back with his hook. It's another bloody showdown,
complete with cliffhanger ending. 
There's not much that's original about I STILL KNOW, and with the market
saturated by Gen-X thrillers like this one, it's unlikely that I STILL
KNOW will get any recognition other than that of a bad sequel. For
die-hard fans of the genre, this will be required viewing material, but
the bottom line is that the material here is just recycled from the
original I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER. The aura of thrillerism
surrounding the plot isn't heightened by skillful scripting or camera
work, but rather a tense, string-based score and manipulative editing.
The man with the hook ends up becoming very belittled this time around
when the script gives him too many lines of dialogue -- he goes from
being a scary figure to a nutcase in a few short and painful moments. 
Much of the mystery is dropped for the sake of getting the point. The
whole reason the plot exists - Julie and Karla must guess the capital of
Brazil in order to win the trip from the radio station - is a dead
giveaway, lessening suspense and creating a hurry-up-and-wait timing
problem. And, whereas the killer's identity might've been a question in
the first movie, it's almost a given here, which changes the dynamic of
the movie drastically. Three or four teens run automatically from a man
in a rain slicker they nonchalantly refer to as "the killer." They're
almost used to it, and the performances show it - not Hewitt, nor
Prinze, nor Brandy, nor Phifer give a decent show. And so, in the end,
it's left wide open for a third movie and - most likely - a brand new
supporting cast. God help us.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (1998)
Jennifer Love Hewitt, Freddie Prinze Jr., Brandy, Mekhi Phifer, Muse 
Watson, Bill Cobbs, Matthew Settle, Jeffrey Combs, Jennifer Esposito, 
John Hawkes. Screenplay by Trey Callaway, based on characters in the film 
written by Kevin Williamson and the novel by Lois Duncan. Directed by 
Danny Cannon. 101 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Remember the scene in "Scream 2" where the film student ranted about how 
slasher movie sequels are almost always crap? "I Still Know What You Did 
Last Summer" is a textbook example of everything he was talking about. 
Aside from a grim relentlessness, this generic offering has absolutely 
nothing to warrant a viewing. I'm required to see films like this -- it's 
in my job description -- but you don't have to.
In this colorless Xerox, Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt) is away at 
school, dividing her time between nightmares and hallucinations of Ben 
Willis (Muse Watson), the slicker-wearing, hook-wielding killer from the 
original film. She continues her romantic involvement with fellow 
survivor Ray Bronson (Freddie Prinze Jr.), but he's back home in North 
Carolina, and the distance, coupled with Julie's phobia about returning 
home, is straining their relationship.
Julie's chronically perky roommate Karla Wilson (Brandy) wins a vacation 
for four to the Bahamas and she invites her stressed-out girlfriend to 
come along. When Ray fails to show up, a dejected Julie takes off with 
Karla, Tyrell (Mekhi Phifer), Karla's horny boyfriend, and Will Benson 
(Matthew Settle), a boy-next-door type with a serious Julie fixation.
Of course, there's a good reason why Ray didn't show up. While traveling 
north with a buddy to surprise Julie, he encountered a body in the middle 
of the road. Oh my goodness, it's a trap! Quicker than you can say "here 
we go again," Ray's pal has a major new body piercing and our fisherman 
friend is chasing after Ray.
"I Know What You Did Last Summer" had a few qualities that raised it a 
notch or two above standard slasher fare. The dark murders were set 
against the background of a colorful small town festival and the contrast 
was refreshing. The kids were brighter than most denizens of slasher 
films and the mystery of the killer's identity livened things up somewhat.
"I Still Know" contains none of those elements. The film starts off grim 
and nasty and never wavers in tone. The Bahamian setting is murky and the 
action scenes lack a distinct sense of place. The supporting cast members 
are uniformly obnoxious and each primary actor has exactly one 
identifying characteristic, from which he or she never wavers.
Jennifer Love Hewitt is the most tiresome. She starts the film in a state 
of borderline hysteria, and the borderline soon disappears. Of course, 
the real star of the film isn't Hewitt, it's her breasts, which are 
featured so prominently in various form-fitting outfits that they almost 
deserve their own screen credit.
After the requisite false scares, the extremely bloody production settles 
into a repetitive, relentless groove, aping stylistic techniques from 
other genre films well enough to build some tension despite the 
inevitability of the story. If, after the first ten minutes of the film, 
you can't predict who will be alive at the conclusion, you're just not 
trying. 
True to form, there is the mandatory plot twist towards the end, and the 
film's godawful closing scene offers the possibility for yet another 
sequel. The prospect of a third installment of this derivative series is 
much scarier than anything that happens in the movie. In 1997, "I Know 
What You Did Last Summer" was a surprise hit. Hopefully, audiences will 
be discerning enough to make "I Still Know" a surprise failure.

Author
Justin Felix
I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER (1998)
A film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1998 Justin Felix.  
All of my film reviews are archived at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix  
This review also appears in the Shrubbery --
http://www.theshrubbery.prohosting.com/0199/movie2.html 
Screenplay by Trey Callaway.  
Directed by Danny Cannon.  
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt, Brandy, Freddie Prinze Jr., Mekhi Phifer.  
Rated R (contains violence and profanity)  approx. 90 mins.
Synopsis:  Sullen Julie James, still haunted by nightmares of the killer Ben
Willis from I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, perks up when her new best
friend Karla Wilson wins a trip for four to the Bahamas.  Arriving at the
start of the hurricane season, Julie and Karla run around in very tight
clothing and realize they've walked into a trap set by the rainslickered
slasher with a huge hook for a hand.
Comments:  I may be showing some pop culture illiteracy here, but I have
never seen an episode of the Fox TV series "Party of Five."  I am only
vaguely aware of the show's premise, and my knowledge of it comes from brief
commercials I half-paid attention to while watching the tube.  "Party of
Five," I do know however, seems to be the starting ground for actresses in
the teen horror genre.  Neve Campbell, Scream Queen of the 90s and star of
SCREAM, SCREAM 2, and THE CRAFT, is a regular of the show.  So too is
Jennifer Love Hewitt.  Lo and behold, following in the footsteps of
Campbell, Hewitt now has a horror franchise of her own: the I KNOW WHAT YOU
DID LAST SUMMER line.  Though the original film, released last year, was
watchable enough, this insipid sequel had me looking at the theater's
glowing red EXIT sign longingly throughout.
Jennifer Love Hewitt is a very good-looking young leading lady; however,
unlike Neve Campbell, Hewitt struggles with acting.  She just isn't
convincing in this film (and she wasn't in the original either).  This puts
many young males, including myself, in a paradoxical quandary: she's very
attractive, but the annoying, spoiled, Valley Girl-type character she tries
to play here is annoying to the extreme and ruins many of the scenes which
emphasize, exploitatively, her figure.  Add to the mix the equally pleasant
yet irritating Brandy, another rising teen TV star, and you get one
frustrated male audience.
I've spent so much time on Hewitt and Brandy for a reason.  I STILL KNOW
WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, though cashing in on the success of the original,
ultimately serves as a vehicle for these two young actresses.  Nothing else
here is original or interesting.  This movie, in fact, makes other recent
so-so horror films like URBAN LEGEND and JOHN CARPENTER'S VAMPIRES seem like
stunning works of high art.  I STILL KNOW relies heavily on tired slasher
film cliches: an isolated location, a storm, parentless teenagers, false
alarm nightmares, lots of blue-lighted darkness scenes, a garbed slasher who
walks around in the background without the characters seeing him, knives and
other sharp instruments lying around everywhere, etc.  You get the picture.
The entire audience knows all the secondary characters introduced in the
film are going to receive the business end of the killer's hook.  They may
as well have huge targets painted on them.  Like SCREAM and its numerous
knockoffs, these secondary characters are supposed to serve as comic relief.
Unfortunately, I STILL KNOW's characters aren't all that funny.  In
particular, one character, a chain-weed-smoking guy, is obnoxiously annoying
and certainly doesn't die soon enough.  The death scenes, by the way, are
relatively violent for a theatrically released horror film.  Several of them
are uncomfortable to watch, and they reminded me of the sickening gore
scenes in HELLRAISER: BLOODLINE, a truly sadistic movie.  This, too, did not
help the supposed humor I STILL KNOW was shooting for.
And what is the deal with the slasher himself?  I know that the slasher film
is not a particularly intelligent genre, but Ben Willis has got to go down
as one of the most silly slashers in mainstream horror.  Come on, the guy
looks like the Gorton's fisherman, and his gruff voice makes him sound like
a Disney pirate.  Though his lightning-lit appearances ellicited much-needed
laughter in the theater, his appearance borders on the absurd in the horror
film, and that's *really* saying something.
So, all that's left to talk about here is Jennifer Love Hewitt and Brandy.
Both prance about in tightfitting, revealing outfits or in various states of
undress, yet neither of them ever actually do a nude scene.  Hewitt,
however, does do a post-shower scene in which her thin bathrobe is quite. .
.titillating.  This scene alone made this one-star turkey earn two stars
under my rating system.  Otherwise, Hewitt and Brandy both grate on the
nerves.  Early in the film, for instance, Brandy wins the trip to the
Bahamas.  She and Hewitt jump around and scream and screech for what seems
like forever.  I needed extra-strength Tylenol after that part.  Oh, and the
film's conclusion, talk about repetitive!  People who saw I KNOW WHAT YOU
DID LAST SUMMER will predict I STILL KNOW's ending at least 5 minutes before
it happens.  Boring!
I saw this movie with my brother at the local downtown movie theater.
Admission is only one dollar on Wednesdays, and we often go see bad movies
on these days just to ridicule them.  It's usually a fun thing to do along
with the rest of the audience, who don't seem to mind participating in a
mass "Mystery Science Theater 3000"-type viewing.  I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID
LAST SUMMER, however, produced several lengthy uncomfortable silences from
the audience, underscoring how bad it *really* is.  If it weren't for the
main actresses' revealing wardrobes, I'd have had a very, very hard time
sitting through this lame sequel.  I can't imagine trying to watch it on
video (horror films seem 10 times better in a theater because they rely
heavily on audience participation) and wouldn't recommend it to people,
unless they're horror film fanatics or huge fans of Hewitt and Brandy.  I
read on a website somewhere that another sequel is already in the works.
What a depressing thought.  Hewitt apparently needs to spend more time on TV
figuring out how to act.  
Rated R, this film contains lots of violence, several gory scenes, and a
couple nubile, horny teenagers--though the sex act itself is always
thwarted.  I'd say this is unsuitable for kids, but teens wouldn't have a
problem sitting through it, especially since they obviously compose the
film's target audience.

Author
Bill Chambers
I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER *1/2 (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (wchamber@netcom.ca)
(Enter the I REALLY DO STILL POSITIVELY KNOW WHAT YOU DID TWO SUMMERS
BEFORE LAST SUMMER contest at Film Freak Central!
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers
Mind the furniture!)
It seems like I'm reviewing cheeseball horror movies on a monthly
basis now. Scream revitalized a genre the studios are now intent on
burying into the ground again-the serial killers in these new slasher
movies have nothing on Sony and Miramax in the "relentless"
department. I Still Know What You Did Last Summer is a terrible film
in many respects, but in the wake of the stupefyingly bad Urban
Legend, it's Citizen Hook. 
Jennifer Love-Hewitt reprises her role as buxom teenager Julie
James-who apparently escaped certain doom at the end of the last movie
by...waking up. She lives in fear of Ben Willis, the vengeful
fisherman-victim of a hit and run by Julie and her pals. Paranoid and
beat, she accepts a free trip to the Bahamas from her friend Karla
(Norwood), winner of the local radio station's 4th of July getaway
giveaway. Bikini-ready Julie invites boyfriend Ray (Prinze, Jr.),
who-and here's the movie's biggest mystery-TURNS HER DOWN, but changes
his mind and plans to surprise her before take-off. Until he gets a
roadside visit from Captain Hell-liner himself, that is. Unaware of
this and feeling shunned, Julie goes on vacation, anyway, with Karla,
Karla's boyfriend (Pfeiffer), and Will (Matthew Settle), a real
boy-next-door type who's sweet on Julie. 
To make a long story short-I can't believe it took a paragraph to
describe the set-up for this gratuitous sequel-the trip is a disaster.
Not only is it storm season, not only is the desk clerk (The
Frighteners' Jeffrey Combs) a jerk, not only are the few island
residents and our heroic vacationers getting picked off by the
resourceful Willis one-by-one, but the Karaoke machine isn't working
properly! (You think killing is hard? Try reprogramming a LaserDisc so
that Gloria Gaynor's "I Will Survive" now contains the lyric "I still
know what you did last summer!") All is not lost-Ray is on his way to
save the day, and a helpful witch doctor is saying little prayers for
Julie and co. 
This picture is really about breasts: two of them. Julie, like a good
horror heroine, never does up her shirt to the collar, always wears
white in the rain, and keeps sexy underwear on in case of a sudden
desire to tan. Based on the hormonal charge I got out of the movie, I
can't imagine what it was doing to the ten year old boy who sat next
to me-he gets Jennifer Love-Hewitt, and my generation got Heather
Langenkamp! Lucky bastard. 
I didn't like I Know What You Did Last Summer and I can't say I liked
this continuation any more or less. The pacing in both films is
languid-how is it that so much time passes with neither murder nor
character development? I Still Know What You Did Last Summer has a
better sense of humour than the first one, though, and at least it
explains away Willis's random selection of victims. (I don't think the
hotel maid or the stoner dude had the slightest idea what Julie did
last summer.) Director Cannon (Judge Dredd) is a competent filmmaker
but not a particularly imaginative one-if there is a part three (what
on Earth would they call it?), and the fun denouement suggests there
will be, here's my suggestion: hire a filmmaker with flair, someone
who can really energize this stillborn series-someone who won't rely
on so many shock notes. And let that person run wild with the camera.
(Aside: if Blandy [sic] must appear in the next one, try to keep the
number of times she says "baby" to a minimum. Thanks in advance.) 

Author
Matt Williams
You've got to love the slasher genre's amazing productivity, despite the
lack of imagination.  It's a little like a broken factory: it keeps
churning out faulty parts, but at least it does it efficiently. With the
latest slasher sequel, clumsily and inaccurately titled I Still Know
What You Did Last Summer, it proves that you don't need fresh ideas or
an innovative script to create a movie...as long as you're not hoping
for a good one.
Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt) is still recovering from the horrific
events of I Know What You Did Last Summer, when the evil Gorton's
Fisherman, aka Ben Willis (Muse Watson), stalked and killed several of
her friends for accidentally killing (or was it not killing) him the
summer before.
Now, Julie is attending college, and has a whole new set of fresh meat,
uh, er, friends.  The closest of which is Karla (Brandy), who has the
disturbing habit of creeping around in the dark and making scary noises.
Julie still maintains contact with Ray (Freddie Prinze Jr.), another
survivor of the previous film, but he's a link to her past...one she
would rather forget.
But someone still remembers...three guesses who...  Yep, that's right,
Ben Willis, back from the dead.  Yawn.  He's still as bland as in the
original film, but with even less of a motive this time.  His first
several victims lack even a tangential connection to the accident which
supposedly started his murderous rage for revenge.  (Speaking of that,
why don't any of these victims ever come back from the dead to haunt
Ben?) In any case, in the new film, each time he has a shot at finally
getting even with Julie James, he tries for revenge in rather unorthodox
ways (one scene has him cursing her with a really really bad tan).
This time, the sequel, with a larger budget, naturally takes place in
the Carribbean (where the Gorton's Fisherman doesn't look the least out
of place).  Julie and Karla have brought their respective boyfriends,
Will (Matthew Settle) and Tyrell (Mekhi Phifer), to this island paradise
right before a torrential hurricane hits.  So, naturally, aside from a
few cannon fodder hotel staff, the island is remote and deserted.  It's
the perfect place for a little mass murder.
The script for I Still Know What You Did Last Summer was written by Trey
Callaway rather than the original's overrated Kevin Williamson.  Though
it wouldn't take much to improve quality over the first, Callaway
doesn't give it any effort, turning in a script that lacks any spark of
originality and wit.
Don't count on the actors to carry this film, either.   The hotel's
eclectic staff are leagues more interesting than the central foursome,
and you certainly wouldn't want to spend an entire movie with them. At
least the cast looks good (presumably their only qualification)...but
you wonder why the four of them can't take on the feeble old Ben
Willis.  I mean, even one-on-one, one of the athletic teens would likely
succeed against the guy... four-on-one would be no contest.  I guess,
then there'd be no movie (but that would actually be a good thing.)
This one's for die-hard genre fans only.  And even then, it's only good
to snicker at the obvious cliches and overall predictability.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Jamie Peck
I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The filmmakers would have at least made sense with the shorter "I Still 
Know," the longer "I Still Know What You Did Two Summers Ago" or the 
appropriate "Stupid People Getting Hacked to Bits." That last suggestion 
is the preferable one since the characters in this film do things that 
are the polar opposite of smart. For example, if your roommate is 
plagued by terrible nightmares as a result of being stalked and nearly 
murdered not long ago, would you sneak into her room late at night and 
hide in the closet, even if it was just to locate and borrow a cute 
little dress? 
Probably not, but that's precisely what college student Karla (pop diva 
Brandy) does to best friend Julie (Jennifer Love Hewitt), resulting in 
the first in a long line of phony frights. Julie, you'll recall, was one 
of the sole survivors at the end of 1997's surprise hit "I Know What You 
Did Last Summer," after a slasher with a grudge to bear - it's a _long_ 
story - began trying to pick off her, her buddies and various others in 
their coastal Carolina village. In this installment, the plot picks up 
as Karla wins a trip to the Bahamas, and Julie, yet racked by guilt, 
decides that maybe a tropical getaway will help ease her mind. 
Yeah, right. Their island paradise has room, of course, for one more in 
the form of the still-alive killer (Muse Watson) from the first film. He 
sports the same Gorton's Fisherman get-up, a heavy hat and rain slicker 
that mask his identity, but why he's still trying to stay anonymous is a 
mystery this movie never solves ... though I suppose his hook-hand would 
look funny protruding from the sleeve of a leisure suit. In a sense, 
that's the movie's glaring flaw - everybody knows who the bad guy is, 
thus evaporating the level of paranoid tension nicely sustained by its 
prequel. 
The murders and attempted murders in that film were vivid and scary, but 
Trey Callaway's derivative "I Still Know" screenplay makes the Fisherman 
just as dumb as his pretty potential victims. When Julie lays blissfully 
unaware in a tanning bed, giving him a perfect chance to wreak vengeance 
once and for all, what does he do? He twist-ties the lid shut and cranks 
up the UV rays - you'd think he'd want her gutted now instead of a skin 
cancer victim later. Even prequel "Summer" lovers might balk at how 
little there is here beyond sporadically amusing absurdity and a few 
neat-o shots of blood flowing from toned teenage flesh. 
The innovative gallows humor that scribe (and "Scream" wunderkind) Kevin 
Williamson injected into "I Know"'s unfolding story is sorely missed, 
replaced with the grating antics of a white Rastafarian cabana boy who 
smokes weed and tosses off slang like "yo"; you'll cheer - not shriek - 
when he ends up with a pair of hedgetrimmers firmly implanted in his 
chest. If "I Know What You Did Last Summer," however effective, was just 
the kind of movie that those subversive "Scream" flicks poked fun at, 
then the deadly "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" deserves a 
full-blown roasting on "Mystery Science Theatre 3000."

Author
Homer Yen
It's now the anniversary of the slayings of Julie James' (Jennifer
Love Hewitt) best friends.  Still besieged by nightmarish memories of
the man responsible for it all, she seems to be on the verge of a nervous
breakdown.  She can't concentrate on her schoolwork, can't get a good
night's sleep, and is even frightened by the shadows and the blinking
strobe lights at a local dance club.  Everywhere she looks, she sees
visions of the man in a rubber slicker with the hook on his hand.
In the first movie, `I Know What You Did Last Summer', Julie and three
of her friends accidentally kill a man, running him down while driving
down a dark mountain highway.  To cover their misdeed, they dump the
body into the ocean.  However, he never quite died and returned to
hunt down Julie and her friends.  Julie and one other, Ray (Freddie
Prinze Jr.), survived only to make this dismal sequal.  Needing some
desparate rest and relaxation, she is elated to learn that her college
roommate, Karla (Brandy), has won a trip for four to a secluded
tropical island.  Accompanying these two girls are Karla's overbearing
boyfriend, Tyrell (Mehki Phifer) and a potential beau for Julie.   
But was this contest too good to be true?  The resort is filled with a
skeleton staff that seemed like Love Boat rejects.  Meanwhile, the
hotel is practically deserted as the storm season is about to begin. 
This presumably creates a venue where they will be secluded and will
have no possible means off the island.  Eventually, they will be
hunted down during power outages and chased around during intense
lightning storms.  As you might have guessed, somewhere in the shadows
lurk a mysteriously strange figure that is wearing a rubber slicker
and wielding a hook.   Julie tries to convince her friends that the
killer is on the island (an eerie touch is when she is singing "I Will
Survive" at the karaoke bar and the words scroll "I Still Know..."),
but her friends chalk it up to paranoia.  But the body count soon
starts to rise, and for Julie, it's going to be the worst vacation of
her life.
The funny (yes, I used the word 'funny') thing about this movie is
that I heard more chortling and giggling (maybe it was MY giggling)
than I heard screaming.  This movie boils down to a mindless slashfest
that never conjures up any amount of wry wit or even a quirky
campiness.  There isn't even any suspense that leads up to the deaths.
 Here's an appropriate example.  Knock-Knock.  "Housekeeping", says
the diminuitive cleaning lady.  The door suddenly opens up.  SLASH. 
Next victim!  
Is there any reason to go and see this movie?  Not unless you want to
see four uninteresting college kids run around in circles for about 90
minutes.  But I do want to say one thing about this movie that
satisfied me.  I was thoroughly irritated with Tyrell, who incessantly
ranted and raved about his sexual libido.  I secretly  wished for him
to get filleted.  Did he get 'hooked'?  Well, let's just say that if
he didn't, I would give this film a grade of "D".  


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Say what you want about cell phones--how intrusive they
are, how bad-mannered their users who seem to prefer to
speak on the phone rather than to the people they're with--
the lovable foursome that star in this movie could have sure
used one.  "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" has
its fair share of scream-scenes like its predecessor, "I Know
What You Did Last Summer," and ups the ante with more
atmospheric geography and a mystery murderer who is as
responsible as the guy with the hook for the pileup of bodies. 
"I Still Know..." is directed and written by fresh hands but its
core performers--Jennifer Love Hewitt and Freddie Prinze,
Jr.--are amiable holdovers from the box office smash that
took in $125 million earlier this year.
   Most of the action takes place on a remote Bahamian
island (actually filmed on an earthquake-torn resort two and
one-half hours' drive south of Mexico's lovely Puerto
Vallarta).  This is an ideally secluded location for stabbings,
shootings and hangings, particularly with the phones all dead
and a hurricane insuring that no outside help will disturb the
glorious mayhem.  Since its principal character, Julie James
(Jennifer Love Hewitt) has purportedly wasted a fisherman
who preferred to catch human beings on his large and
threatening hook, she is plagued by hallucinations and
nightmares and can scarcely know them from reality.  After
the traditionally scary opening scene, this one taking place in
a church confessional to which Julie has retreated to
acknowledge her role in a killing, she receives the first good
news in a while.  Her best friend Karla (Brandy) has just won
four tickets to a remote island in the Bahamas for guessing
the capital of Brazil on a radio contest.  (If you think
something is fishy in her answer, "Rio de Janeiro," you might
be the only one in the predominantly teen-aged audience to
presume so.)  When Julie's main squeeze, Ray (Freddie
Prinze, Jr.) plays hard to get, she settles for handsome Will
Benson (Matthew Settle) as her roommate while Karla invites
her favorite beau, Tyrell (Mekhi Phifer).  
   Director Danny Cannon knows how to give a Hitchcockian
air to an island-style Bates Motel, where the four young
people run into a hotel with a manager, Mr. Brooks (Jeffrey
Combs), whose distaste for teenagers leads him to express
some of this movie's few witty lines: "I see four spoiled city
kids who would not know a hurricane if it blew up their ass." 
Brooks, whose hotel is empty because of the approaching
hurricane, gives the quartet the two honeymoon suites and
advises them that if they need help, he has "a marginally
trained staff of five" to serve them.  
   Like the previous blockbuster, "I Still Know..." follows the
usual conventions of the horror genre, playing up the false
alarms in the opening scenes while piling stress upon tension
the closer it approaches its climax.  The usual scenes of
savage butchery are there, courtesy of Ben Willis's (Muse
Watson) prosthetic arm, and nine bodies pile up at strategic
points along the way.  The killer could have done away with
the object of his disaffection several times but prefers to
torture her, at one point by sealing her into a coffin-like sun-
tanning box and turning up the juice.  But the most endearing
torment occurs as Julie performs in the hotel's karaoke bar,
the song lyrics on the screen suddenly changing to "I Still
Know What You Did Last Summer."
   It's a strange thing about these slasher movies.  The
heroes are usually people about the age of twenty.  The
formula is followed to the letter, and in fact, in this case, most
of the conclusion is predictable as soon as Ray takes off from
his job and heads for the tropics.  Yet because the youthful
performers know how to project abject fear while at the same
time projecting their thirst for revenge, we care about them
and get caught up in the tautness.  This time around, you're
going to be surprised by the identity of the second killer in a
movie with a good deal of humor supplied by Mekhi Phifer,
whose idea of action has nothing to do with the fisherman's
agenda and with special joie de vivre by Brandy Norwood as
the excitable gal who may not know the capital of Brazil but
who is so charming that the radio d.j. gives her the prize
anyway.  "If anyone asks," she counsels, "Don't tell 'em it
rained all the time."  Here's a young woman who at the age
of 20 already knows how to make the homebound friends feel
envious and wish they were there.

Author
Scott Renshaw
I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER
(Columbia/Mandalay)
Starring:  Jennifer Love Hewitt, Brandy, Freddie Prinze Jr., Mekhi Phifer,
Matthew Settle, Muse Watson.
Screenplay:  Trey Callaway.
Producers:  Neal H. Moritz, Erik Feig, Stokely Chaffin and William S.
Beasley.
Director:  Danny Cannon.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, drug use, adult themes)
Running Time:  96 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER seems like exactly the kind of
film at which SCREAM and SCREAM 2 took their satiric jabs.  In this sequel
to last fall's horror hit, Julie James (Jennifer Love Hewitt) is still
traumatized after surviving a killing spree by a gortex-clad, hook-handed,
vengeance-minded psycho (Muse Watson).  A year after the events in the
first film, she's terrorized again -- this time on a tropical holiday with
her college roommate Karla (Brandy), Karla's boyfriend Tyrell (Mekhi
Phifer) and a classmate named Will (Matthew Settle) with a crush on Julie
-- in all the expected ways.  People begin dying in reverse credits order.
Shadowy figures flit across the background.  Small creatures dart out to
the accompaniment of blasts of music.  The electricity goes out.  The
killer moves...very...slowly towards potential victims.  And no matter how
violently the killer meets his apparent demise, he always turns up to
suggest yet another sequel.
     Aside from its chronologically-challenged title -- if this is
happening a year after the first film, shouldn't it be I STILL KNOW WHAT
YOU DID TWO SUMMERS AGO? -- I STILL KNOW SHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER is
constructed with an almost benign predictablity.  Yet in a way, that's the
appeal of the teen horror film.  There's nothing truly scary about the
film, nor was there ever intended to be.  It's a Halloween funhouse with
spaghetti for intestines and peeled grapes for human eyeballs.  There's
nothing dehumanizing about the way characters are gleefully dispatched,
because they're never meant to be any more human than a mannequin being
decapitated.  You scream because it's what you're supposed to do, and you
laugh about it afterwards.
     That doesn't make it any more fun for the average viewer of voting
age to watch a film where you can identify every twist or turn several
minutes before it happens.  This is the kind of film you go to for only
one reason:  you're a teenager, you're on a date, and you're ready for an
excuse to grip someone tightly.  You're not going for the chance to see
Jeffrey Combs' demented turn as a hotel manager with an attitude.  You're
not going to care about the inane attempts to give our protagonists actual
personalities.  You're certainly not going to care about the silly
dialogue, or the less-than-terrifying prospect of Julie becoming an
ultraviolet McNugget while locked into a tanning bed.  You'll pay your
money for a hug and a shriek, and you'll get exactly what you pay for.
     If I STILL KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER didn't feel as long as its
title by the time the credits finally roll, it might have warranted even
more slack.  After all, it's a genre film doing what a genre film is made
to do.  It's also a film which feels blasted into production on a shaky
premise with virtually no attempt at creating a quality product.  It might
seem strange to see a film like this after SCREAM turned its kind into
comic relief, but there's still an audience for this sort of grind-it-out
funhouse ride.  I'm not it, but you know who you are.

Author
James Brundage
I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (1998)
I was told, when I entered into the business of film criticism, that you
have to find the bad in the good and the good in the bad. That your job is
to be both pessimist and optimist, whatever the situation desires. But, you
know, it's hard to be optimistic about a film where pretty much all of the
theater groans at the end of it and is more fun making jokes about it than
watching it. I suppose, though, that I can say this about ISKWYDLS (or I
Still Know What You Did Last Summer, or ye movie with a title five words too
long): it never once uttered the words "I'll be right back."
After all, it hit every other cliché in the book on its bad attempt at
thrills in Paradise. Those who had sex died, the psychotic liars died, hell,
they even stuck in a witch doctor casting spells on Julie's toothbrush to
make things fun.
This time good old Captain Hook (aka Ben Willis) is alive and well (minus a
hand) and on a tropical island enjoying himself... gutting people. Julie's
there, of course, with her roommate (played by Brandy, my number one pick
for people who should be gutted this year), Brandy's horny boyfriend Tyrell,
and Julie's suitor, Will Benson. You have a psychotic bartender and an
annoying hotel clerk and, by the way did I mention that Julie and co. are
staying in the suites where murders occurred? Writers, can you say "trite"?
Now, as far as horror goes, I have nothing against cliché. Cliché is the
trademark of horror. If it's not cliché, it's either Dark Comedy (Scream,
Scream2) or Noir Horror (Lost Highway, Jacob's Ladder, Se7en). I watch
horror because I'm a violence happy 80s freak, who loves to laugh at the
dumb things or use them as an excuse for a date. Having no date the night I
saw it and therefore being forced to endure this incredibly cheesy movie
with no ability for comic element, and nothing laughable about it, I had to
resort to my own cracks which my neighbors found very annoying because, of
course, they had dates.
I liked the first one, but, Williamson (as said in Scream 2, ironically) is
right. Sequels suck. And, compadres, especially this one.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Jennifer Love Hewitt; Freddie Prinze Jr.; Brandy; Mekhi Phifer &
Muse Watson
I have to admit that I avoided going to see this film in the theater. Quite
frankly, while I am a fan of Jennifer Love Hewitt's breasts, I don't think
that they should be the entire selling feature of a movie. That is how it
seems to be in I Still Know What You Did Last Summer. The more accurate
title might have been I Still Know What Jennifer Love Hewitt's Breasts Did
Last Summer, since they appear to be the stars of the show. And very
impressive stars at that... But, I digress. Of course the other obvious flaw
in the title of this little gem is the fact that the events referred to in
the title actually happened two summers before this film takes place. So I
don't think that it requires some sort of advanced university degree to
figure out that the title really should be I Still Know What You Did Two
Summers Ago. Either the producers think that the audience that is stupid
enough to pay to watch this thing will miss this small point or maybe they
aren't real adept at reading a calendar. This second option holds some
appeal for me since it is fairly obvious that they aren't real adept at
making movies either.
If this were some B-grade straight-to-video knock off that had at its core a
bad story, dumb villain and an abnormal obsession with Ms. Hewitt's breasts,
I'd say, "OK, I'll happily sit here and watch her breasts for a couple of
hours". The fact is that this is a sequel to one of the better horror films
of the past few years, so I expected a little more. (Story wise, not breast
wise.) If you are beginning to think that I might have some sort of
obsession with Ms. Hewitt's chest, it's really not so. Although I am an
admirer. It seems that this film is truly based around her chest. All of the
publicity shots from this film inevitably show her in some low cut number.
And she always seems to be a little damp. Every time this turkey gets a
little slow (which is all too frequent) the camera inevitably pans over and
focuses in on her chest. I kid you not. It almost makes me think that the
producers knew that what they had on their hands film wise wasn't what you'd
call a masterpiece. So they figured that the only way that they were going
to get anyone in theaters was to pander to the lowest denominator --
over-sexed teenage boys. My guess is that this group predominated the
tickets sold for I Still Know's theatrical run.
Gone is the clever Kevin Williamson script from the first film. In its wake
is every tired and overused horror film cliché from the past twenty years. I
guessed who the killer was the first time that that person was on camera,
and I'm not exactly a rocket scientist. I'm not even going to get into the
ending of the first film that, without giving it away, didn't exactly seem
to lend itself to a sequel.
No matter, here we are again and Jennifer Love Hewitt is back at university
a year after most of her friends were killed by a hook-wielding fisherman.
She has finally getting a little good luck in her life. Her roommate
(Brandy) wins a radio contest and the two roomies, with two guys in tow,
head off on a free weekend in the Bahamas. Of course, the hotel is on a
small and mostly deserted island (how convenient) and a hurricane is just
blowing in as they arrive (you can't make a formula horror film without high
winds and rain). Sorry if I spoil any surprise kids, but guess what? Our old
buddy the hook-wielding fisherman turns up on the island with them and
starts slicing and dicing people one by one.
The only positive thing that I can say about this movie is that at least
this time the killer fisherman, who I have long considered to be one of the
dumbest slasher film killers ever (he would be the dumbest if it weren't for
Leatherface) is at least dressed somewhat properly here. Since they are in
the middle of a hurricane, his black rain hat and slicker don't look too out
of place. Unlike in the first movie when he seemingly wandered around
unnoticed in the middle of a hot sunny day wearing the same ridiculous
getup.
Acting wise -- lets just say everyone avoids embarrassing themselves. Not
much else can be said for the cast. Holdovers from the first film Jennifer
Love Hewitt and Freddie Prinze Jr., proved in the original that they are
talented actors. Unfortunately, the script of this latest film doesn't give
them any material to enforce that.
In the end, this is a B-grade slasher flick from the word go. If it wasn't
for the fact that it is the sequel to the very clever I Know What You Did
Last Summer and for the fact that it boasts Jennifer Love Hewitt and Freddie
Prinze Jr. in the cast, this film would wind up collecting dust on the shelf
of your local video store. Sadly, it is very obvious that Hollywood hot shot
Kevin Williamson was not involved in this project to give it the same depth
that he injected in to the first one.
6/10 -- 4 for the movie and 2 for Jennifer Love Hewitt's breasts

Author
James Sanford
        Jennifer Love Hewitt may be a limited actress, but she does have two
sizable assets: a robust scream, and a gift for filling out a clingy white
tank-top. Both her talents are put to use in "I Still Know what You Did Last
Summer," a pointless sequel to last year's hit about four teens stalked by a
fisherman they mistakenly believed they killed during a post-graduation
celebration. The original at least offered a couple of suspenseful moments
and a genuinely creepy cameo by Anne Heche; "Still" throws all logic out the
window, raises the gore quotient and offers more offensive racial
stereotypes than any WB or UPN sitcom.
 The key addition this time around is R&B singer Brandy (star of the
not-bad UPN comedy "Moesha") as Karla, new best friend to troubled Julie
James (Hewitt), one of the two survivors of last year's murderous mayhem.
While there are a few giggles to be had listening to the squeaky-clean
Brandy's attempts to swear, what's not so funny is the movie's depiction of
young African-Americans as having nothing more on their minds than sex and
violence. One can only hope Mekhi Phifer, as Karla's walking hormone of a
boyfriend, was well-paid for portraying a character as one-dimensional and
grating as the shuffling, wide-eyed servants black actors used to be
relegated to playing back in the pre-Civil Rights era.
 Of course, no one goes to a movie like this expecting sharp
performances or strong writing, but "Still" is so stupid even the dopiest
viewers may give up on it before the film's ridiculous finale. Julie, Karla,
Tyrell (Phifer) and Julie's potential new boyfriend Will (Matthew Settle)
wing down to a remote island in the Bahamas, hoping for a bit of summer fun.
But when Julie's old nemesis the fisherman turns up, partytime is over and
the movie becomes one scene after another of scream-run-stalk-slash.
 All the tired old tricks are trotted out by director Danny Cannon,
including "shocker" dream sequences and the deathless "oh my God, it's just
you" scenes, in which someone realizes what they thought was a killer is
actually just a friend creeping silently around in the dark for no
particular reason. Those looking for a real cinematic scare should check out
"The Siege" and take a look at Bruce Willis' toupee -- it's far more
frightening than anything Hewitt and company have to offer.
James Sanford
