Title
Review for Small Faces (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From the director of A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE and THE PLAYBOYS,
Gillies Mackinnon's SMALL FACES is another drama of troubled, working
class, Scottish youths.  Since I recently had the bad luck not to like
another Scottish working class movie, TRAINSPOTTING, it was with
trepidation that I went to see this one.
     My review of TRAINSPOTTING was considered a sacrilege on the
Internet and created quite a flurry of diatribes.  Most were along the
lines of I was stupid not to like their favorite film or stupid because
I got one character mixed up in one scene, and being stupid, I was, a
priori, not worthy of publishing the review.  So much for the value of
contrary opinions.  Maybe next time, I'll take a poll and see what I
supposed to like before composing my review.
     At any rate, SMALL FACES is a frequently frightening, but always
moving and poignant show which does get a thumbs up from me.  I can not
speak for its degree of realism, but the script by Billy and Gillies
MacKinnon is certainly convincing.  This is a tragic show with an
excellent performance by Ian Robertson as the MacLean family's youngest
son Lex.  Although he does not say a whole lot in the show, even
without speaking Robertson can convey a wide emotional range.
     Set in 1968 in Glasgow, Scotland, Lex lives in cramped quarters
with his older brothers Alan (Joseph McFadden) and Bobby (J. S. Duffy)
and with his widowed mother Lorna (Clare Higgins).  Although Alan's
wall is full of his paintings and he shows great promise as an artist,
more typical of the area and time is Bobby who spends his time hanging
out with a local gang run by Charlie Sloan (Garry Sweeney).
     Lex is one confused and troubled kid who has some artistic skills
himself.  Most of all, however, he wants to be liked and spends more
time trying to figure out what others want him to be than be himself.
His attempts at running around with the bigger boys get him into a lot
of trouble.  When he goes with them to peak in on an artist's nude
model, the boys push him in the room by himself where the artists laugh
at him, and the model turns out to be a fat guy in a jockey strap.  Lex
is extremely embarrassed.
     Contrasted against the film's tragic theme is the mother's warmth.
She flips through examples of great artist's paintings, flashcard
style, and asks her sons who painted this or that.  She has a great
voice, and her soulful Gaelic singing at family gatherings is something
I would have liked to have heard a lot more of.
     Although the film is in English and not Gaelic, the thickness of
the Scottish accent may cause you to miss some lines.  As a lover of
the cadence of the melodic Scottish tongue, I did not mind since the
language has always sounded almost like singing to my ears.
     Like most tragedies, bad luck is an ingredient.  Lex takes an air
gun and fires into the distance where he expects to hit nothing, but it
happens to injure soccer player Malky Johnson (Kevin McKidd), a maniac
and a leader of a rival gang to his brother's.  I remember as a boy
firing a friend's BB gun for the first time.  Although I aimed at a
window far away, I did not expect to hit it.  Well, I did so I had to
spent the money I had been saving for my own BB gun to repair the
window.  I learned a valuable lesson and gave up on the idea of ever
becoming a gun owner.
     Many characters in this intimate and sad show seem about to
explode.  Sometimes they do and the result is bloody violence.  Gang
members hit each other with pipes and with bricks, and the blood flows
freely.  Gangs want members who can be "mental."  Mental members are
those who when told to kill will do it without asking any questions.
     The music (John Keane) features the theme song "Keep on running.
Keep on hiding," which seems so appropriate to the almost hopeless
environment into which these kids are born.  It is also a high energy
song with a heavy beat which goes well with the high energy of the
picture.
     The cinematography by John de Borman is fairly straightforward
except for the scenes of the desolate wasteland that surrounds the high
rise tenements where one of the gangs lives.  Borman uses sharp color
and dark clouds to give it a surreal feeling.  Very ominous as if the
grim reaper is just about to arrive.
     SMALL FACES runs 1:48.  It is rated R for gory violence and some
bad language.  This is a serious film that would be fine for serious
teenagers.  Although this show of gang violence is not exactly the
sugarcoated one from WEST SIDE STORY, it nevertheless deserves to be
seen so I recommend it.  It is a fairly depressing show so it is not
for everyone, but it gets ** 1/2 from me.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 23, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SMALL FACES (director/writer: Gillies MacKinnon; screenwriter: Billy
MacKinnon; cinematographer: John DeBorman; editor: Scott Thomas; cast:
Lex Maclean (Iain Robertson), Joseph McFadden (Alan MacLean), J.S. Duffy
(Bobby MacLean), Laura Fraser (Joanne MacGowan), Garry Sweeney (Charlie
Sloan), Clare Higgins (Lorna MacLean), Kevin McKidd (Malky Johnson),
Mark McConnochie (Gorbals), Ian McElhinney (Uncle Andrew), David Walker
(Fabio); Runtime: 102; October Films; 1995-UK)
A hard-hitting tale about Glasgow street life in a working class
neighborhood, set in 1968. The three MacLean brothers live with their
widowed mother, Lorna (Higgins), in a small flat in the outlying area of
the city. They all miss very much their dead father, though it is the
eldest Bobby (Duffy) who misses him the most, troubled by nightmares,
lack of intelligence, and an uncontrollable anger. He belongs to the
local gang 'The Glen.' Alan (Joseph MacFadden) is the 18-year-old middle
brother who is studying at an art school, trying to avoid gang life and
is having a flirtatious relationship with an enchanting 19-year-old,
Joanne (Fraser). She is two-timing the psychopathic gang leader of the
Tongs, Malky Johnson (Kevin McKidd) by somehow going out with the
eccentric gang leader of The Glen, Charlie Sloan (Garry Sweeney). The
central figure in the story is the troubled baby-faced 13-year-old Lex
(Iain Robertson), who is caught in the middle of choosing between both
his older brother's lifestyles. He is also faced with problems in school
and uncertainty of his future, but on the positive side he has shown
some passion for playing the trombone, drawing and only getting into
childish trouble. He witnesses razor fights, beatings, and terror in the
neighborhood, as he struggles to find himself with no one to guide him
properly, in this striking coming of age film. The film is told from his
view of things.
The mischievous Lex, while out in the park with Alan, fires an air-gun
and accidently hits Malky between the eyes while he is playing soccer.
By this rash action, he thereby brings all the MacLean brothers into the
gang feud, and that requires protection from The Glen. Charlie Sloan is
a Mick Jagger fan and somewhat artistically inclined, who brings the
feud on with the rival gang to a new height of violence.
There is one telling scene of the extended Maclean family together in
one of their happier moments, as their mother sings traditional Celtic
folk songs in a beautiful lilting voice and a visiting uncle
(McElhinney) from the States gets drunk and joins in the singing, and
shows off the tattoo of his ex-wife on his back.
It is a deliberate film, doing a grand job of setting up the characters
and the tough situation they are in, with the visuals telling the story
as powerfully as it can. The graffiti
buildings, the anxious faces on the main characters searching for
something good in their life, and the invisible line that is always in
danger of being crossed, the line between real big trouble and childhood
trouble, is always one step away for these working class toughs, as the
film stresses the problems those youths in the community face.
The brick fights between the rival gangs and the angst of the mother,
not understanding what to do, seemed genuine, in this
semi-autobiographical work by the MacKinnon brothers, Gillies and Billy.
Spoiler in the next paragraph about the film's ending.
The film comes to its most tense moments when the confused Lex feels put
upon by the roughhouse tactics of Sloan, especially when for no reason
the gang pummels an artist friend (Walker) of Alan's, someone who had
been kind to him. Lex visits the housing project area of the Tongs,
where he accidently meets the brother of Malky, Gorbals (McConnochie),
on his way to join the gang to get even with Charlie Sloan. The story
moves along in a disarmingly violent pace -- culminating in the murder
of one of Lex's brothers, which leaves Lex guilt-ridden as the cause of
his brother's death.
It is a film that tried to say more than what it is capable of saying,
but when it was on message, it had a stunning affect, showing how the
lack of good parenting and a poor environment could be deadly. It caught
something real about growing up in such a rough environment, but the
acting was not that great by the kids and when all is said and done, the
brothers were made into stock characters.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1995
U.S. Release Date: beginning 9/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:48
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Ian Robertson, Joseph McFadden, J.S. Duffy, Laura Fraser, 
      Garry Sweeney, Claire Higgins, Kevin McKidd, Mark McConnochie
Director: Gillies MacKinnon
Producers: Steve Clark-Hall and Billy MacKinnon
Screenplay: Billy MacKinnon and Gillies MacKinnon
Cinematography: John de Borman
Music: John E. Keane
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     SMALL FACES, Gillies MacKinnon's first feature after turning away 
from Hollywood (his previous film, A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE, was the SILAS 
MARNER modernization starring Steve Martin), brings the director back to 
the kind of small, personal story he feels most comfortable with.  
According to MacKinnon, while in Hollywood, "I began to have a sense of 
losing roots... as if my strength was drawn from something within my 
past, that I was moving away from that and I had to go back."
     In examining SMALL FACES, three things stand out.  The first is 
that, despite a fairly unambitious storyline, the film retains a large 
element of unpredictability.  Because it eschews cliches and formulas 
typical to "coming of age" stories, it's difficult for the viewer to 
guess what's going to happen and how certain situations will be 
resolved.  Secondly, when the movie ended, I was a little disappointed -
- not because there's anything inherently dissatisfying about the 
conclusion, but because I would have enjoyed spending more time with 
these characters.  Finally, despite the accents, this isn't another 
TRAINSPOTTING.  
     SMALL FACES opens in 1968 Glasgow and introduces us to the brothers 
MacLean.  There are three of them:  thirteen year old Lex (Ian 
Robertson), who's our guide through the story; sixteen year old Alan 
(Joseph McFadden), an introspective, budding artist; and eighteen year 
old Bobby (J.S. Duffy), an illiterate ruffian who runs with a gang.  The 
boys' father is dead, so they live alone with their mother, Lorna 
(Claire Higgins).  As gang warfare intensifies in Govanhill, Lex and 
Alan are unwittingly drawn into the conflict because of their brother's 
association, and they soon find themselves caught between the sadistic 
leader of Bobby's group, Charlie Sloan (Garry Sweeney), and the head of 
the rival Tongs, Malky Johnson (Kevin McKidd).
     SMALL FACES starts out oddly.  The first twenty minutes are jumpy 
and disjointed, and, at times, it's difficult to sort out characters and 
circumstances.  Once we've resolved the complexities of Lex's home life 
and the nature of the gang friction (not to mention who's in which 
gang), things clear up considerably, and MacKinnon's story begins to 
flow.  Lex is a splendid lead character:  smart, stubborn, and 
passionate, yet, largely because of his age, impotent in the face of the 
wave of violence that threatens to drown his family.
     SMALL FACES gets the details right, which is largely why it works.  
Small, apparently-innocent actions, like firing a pellet gun, set major 
events in motion.  Seemingly unimportant characters, like Lex's older 
friend, Gorbals (Mark McConnochie), play critical roles.  Alan's 
relationship with a local girl is developed perfectly, with an eye 
towards realism rather than sentimentality.  And there are several 
stark, memorable images like a streak of crimson on a background of 
white ice after a bloody body has been dragged across it.
     Other than Claire Higgins, who does a fine job portraying a mother 
who can't protect her sons, the major players are relative unknowns.  
Ian Robertson's performance as Lex reflects the reality of being 
thirteen -- he thinks he's brave and smart enough to do anything until 
the time comes for him to take action.  As Alan, Joseph McFadden 
fashions a sympathetic character -- a somewhat naive boy who wants 
nothing to do with the violence around him, but who can't escape it.  
Then there's Laura Fraser, the strikingly appealing actress to play 
Alan's girlfriend, Joanne.
     SMALL FACES shows the personal, often-tragic toll of gang violence.  
Though it takes place during another decade in another country, 
MacKinnon's movie has universal implications.  For, while the causes of 
such violence may differ from culture to culture, the inevitable 
consequences, both physical and emotional, are familiar.  We can 
identify with what these characters are feeling.  Ultimately, this movie 
is less about the situation than the people who are trapped by it, and 
that simple, human element provides SMALL FACES with its core strength.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
