Title
Review for Hocus Pocus (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Bette Midler, Sarah Jessica Parker, Kathy Najimy, 
           Omri Katz, Thora Birch, Vinessa Shaw
Director:  Kenny Ortega
Producers:  David Kirschner and Steven Haft
Screenplay:  Mick Garris and Neil Cuthbert
Music:  John Debney
Released by Walt Disney Pictures
     It's 1693 and a trio of witches (Winifred, played by Bette Midler;
Sarah, played by Sarah Jessica Parker; and Mary, played by Kathy
Najimy) are preparing a spell that will ensure them immortality and
eternal youth.  However, before the magic is complete, the people of
Salem capture and execute the three for consorting with the devil.
Before their deaths, the witches vow to return on some future All
Hallow's Eve.  Three hundred years later, a skeptic by the name of Max
(Omri Katz) ventures into the ruins of the witches' house, daring the
supernatural to manifest itself.  Heedless of warnings of his sister
Dani (Thora Birch) and schoolmate Allison (Vinessa Shaw), Max lights
the dreaded Candle of Black Flame.  Suddenly, the three Sanderson
sisters have a second lease on life, and this time they don't intend to
waste it.  Now it's up to Max, with the help of Dani, Allison, and a
talking black cat, to correct his error and stop them before it's too
late.
     Like so many films that mix genres, in trying to do too much,
HOCUS POCUS succeeds in very little.  The comedy is sporadic and not
often tremendously funny, the horror won't frighten anyone over 8, and
the adventure is dull and routine.  As a family film, HOCUS POCUS is
passable--you can take the kids to it and they'll probably have a good
time--but there doesn't seem to be any great advantage in venturing
into a theater to see this movie.  It's unremarkable enough that it
won't lose much on video.
     It seems that the root of HOCUS POCUS' weaknesses lies in its
inability to develop believable characters.  In the absence of nonstop,
uproarious comedy or pulse-pounding action, strong characters are
needed.  What we get, however, are a number of poorly-written creations
that are taken from the writers' stock of readily-available
personalities.  For the most part, the scenes that are intended to set
up relationships are laughably absurd and difficult to accept.
     Poor acting comes into play.  Omri Katz is a bad choice for the
hero of this piece.  Actually, "hero" might not be the right word for
his role--Max is so stupid and annoying at times that we wish the
witches would stick him in their kettle and boil him alive.  He treats
his little sister like a burden (which is not entirely unrealistic for
someone his age) and does some of the most amazingly stupid things.
Everything that happens in HOCUS POCUS is essentially his fault.
     The normally-steady Bette Midler has some fun chewing on the
scenery in a part that is played as intended:  over-the-top.  Clearly
in Ms. Midler's shadow, Sarah Jessica Parker and Kathy Najimy give such
muted performances as to be virtually invisible.  They do a lot of
Three Stooges' physical gags, but without having mastered timing.
     Generally, HOCUS POCUS lacks energy.  The direction by Kenny
Ortega (who began his career as a choreographer) is flat, and the
camerawork workmanlike (this is surprising considering that the
cinematographer is Hiro Narita).  The audience's basic disconnection
with the characters is part of the problem, but that's not all of it.
HOCUS POCUS is not a lot of fun.  The film basically amounts to a great
deal of pointless running around.  The inventiveness that we keep
expecting never materializes and by the end we're still wondering if
and when something's going to happen to either galvanize us or cause us
to double over with laughter.
     The previews for this film give a good indication of the movie's
overall quality--it's like a live-action "Broom Hilda."  The best part
of the movie--a couple of cameos by brother and sister Gary and Penny
Marshall--are also highlighted by HOCUS POCUS' theatrical trailers, so
they aren't much of a surprise when they happen.
     There are a few special effects in HOCUS POCUS, but nothing new or
ground-breaking.  The walking corpse isn't a masterpiece of design, but
it's done well--neither too real to be genuinely frightening nor too
fake to be laughable.  The parts of the film with the zombie try too
hard to be campy, the results of which are less-than-successful.  For
fun at the expense of the dead, see Sam Raimi's latest directorial
venture, ARMY OF DARKNESS.
     At any rate, HOCUS POCUS is an occasionally dull, mostly pedantic
motion picture with little to recommend it.  It belongs on the long
list of summer movies that will quickly be buried and forgotten until
it surfaces on video in another six months.  Frankly, that's the fate
it deserves.  It isn't putrid but, for my money, there are quite a few
other films I'd see before this one.  HOCUS POCUS never lives up to
what little potential the premise has.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Welcome to Salem, and being the late 1600s, its time for witches.
Taking center stage as our three conjurers are Bette Midler, Sarah
Jessica Parker, and Kathy Najimy, playing the three hags known as
Winifred, Sarah, and Mary.  HOCUS POCUS was Disney's 1993 ode to
Halloween, and one of Disney's lamest comedies.
     Lifelessly directed by Kenny Ortega, it starts with the three
crazy witches in old Salem.  They have kidnapped a little girl of about
six so they can kill her, thereby draining out her youth and making
themselves younger.  When her brother, Thackery Binx, finds his sister
dead, he tries to get out of the witches' house, but Winifred turns him
into a black cat (voice by Jason Marsden) and dooms the feline to live
forever.
     After that "promising" beginning, the show skips 300 hundred years
forward to the present when it is, of course, almost Halloween.
Teenage Max (Omri Katz), his 8-year-old sister Dani (Thora Birch) and
their parents have just moved to Salem from LA.  Salem now has some
classic juvenile delinquents like Ice (Larry Bagny III) who steal Max's
shoes so he hates the place, that is until he meets Allison (Vinessa
Shaw), the local rich girl.
     The town is obsessed with the legend of the three witches, and on
Halloween, Max, Dani, and Allison go to the witches' home and light the
forbidden candle.  Like most teenagers, Max ignores all warnings,
including the one that explains that if a virgin lights the candle at
the right time, the three witches will return.
     Well, they do come back to life, but for all the laughs they get
they should have stayed firmly in the grave.  The script by Neil
Cuthbert, Mick Garris, and David Kirschner never finds its footing.
Sometimes it tries to be a BEETLEJUICE clone, and other times it thinks
it is a romantic comedy.  It never has any convictions about its
direction and stays constantly adrift.
     The best that can be said about the acting by the witches is that
it is, well, bizarre.  And rarely funny.  For some reason, Midler gets
most of the dialog and the screen time.  As for the other two, maybe
their background roles are an advantage so that most people will not
realize they were ever associated with this picture.
     What do the witches do when they make their grand appearance
before the town?  Making like The Supremes, they jump right in and sing
and dance their hearts out on stage.  Too bad, they couldn't have
conjured up a little imagination and at least a few token laughs.
     HOCUS POCUS runs 1:36.  It is rated PG for language and for some
frightening images including a resurrected corpse whose head and
fingers get chopped off and a cat that gets run over by a bus.  The
show should be acceptable for kids around 8 and up.  My son Jeffrey,
age 8, thought the show was "good" but complained that he thought "the
language was inappropriate."  I do not recommend this bland comedy, and
I give it just a single *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     Touchstone Pictures, an offshoot of the Walt Disney Studios, was
established partly to showcase films of a slightly more adult nature.
But its latest release, a corny, slapstick affair called HOCUS POCUS,
is strictly for kids.
     Bette Midler, Kathy Najimy, and Sarah Jessica Parker play the
Sanderson sisters, three Salem witches circa 1693.  So broad are their
performances that HOCUS POCUS often feels like a high school theatrical
production--and not a particularly good one at that.
     Midler's Winifred looks like a cross between a hamster and
Margaret Thatcher on steroids.  Sporting diabolical costumes and
devilish hairdos, this Miss M is anything but divine.  Bette's scenery
chewing histrionics include an obligatory musical number, "I Put a
Spell on You," although the Screamin' Jay Hawkins' original seemed more
integral to the plot in Jim Jarmusch's STRANGER THAN PARADISE.
     Najimy gets less mileage out of her role as Mary Sanderson.  Much
as you would expect from an actress whose previous performance was that
of a fat nun in SISTER ACT, Najimy plays a big broad with a big nose.
Mary's a little simple, but delights in that fact that she can smell
children a mile away.  Food for thought indeed.
     But Parker steals the show as Sarah, a squeaky femme fatale with
long, blond, Rapunzel-like hair and blackly made-up eyes.  Her
alluring, boy-crazy bimbo is a treat for this or any other Halloween.
     Three hundred years after the sisters are hanged for witchcraft,
three young trick-or-treaters sneak into the deserted Sanderson
domicile and unwittingly bring our ghoulish gals back to life.  This
they achieve by lighting the black flame candle--the deal is the
spirits will return if the candle is lit by a virgin on Halloween
night.  And boy do the producers milk *that* joke for all its worth!
     As it so happens, Winnie, Mary and Sarah can stay young forever by
eating the town's children, or turn into dust when the sun rises,
whichever comes first.  With the help of a talking cat, Binx, the three
kids try to undo their egregious error and condemn these Sisters of
Satan to eternal damnation once and for all.
     Omri Katz plays the young hero Max Dennison, Thora Birch is his
annoying kid sister Dani, and teen heartthrob Vinessa Shaw is the one
with the "yobbos."  (Remember.  HOCUS POCUS is a family film; this is
easily the dirtiest word spoken in the entire movie).  They're a
tried-and-true bunch of semi-likable, smart-alecky movie kids whose
parents tend to act younger than they do.
     Predictably, that oft-used plot device--strange-looking outsiders
can pass virtually unnoticed on Halloween night--comes in quite handy
here.  It is best utilized in a brief scene with Don Yesso (from TV's
FRANK'S PLACE).  He plays a bus driver who "picks up" the three hags
and gets some of the film's biggest chuckles in the process.
     There are bubbling cauldrons and a magical spell book and a zombie
that keeps losing its head and cinematic prestidigitations and
overacting like crazy but it's all in good, clean, laugh-out-loud fun.
     You're more likely to laugh out loud if you're under thirteen,
however.  THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK it ain't.
     Director Kenny Ortega has a lot riding on this film, as his only
other directorial effort was the disastrous movie musical, NEWSIES.
HOCUS POCUS was reputed to have cost $28 million--high for a Disney
production--and it makes sense when you realize the cat stand-ins
alone (all eight of them) earned $200 a day!  What *doesn't* make sense
is why they are releasing this holiday film now, at the height of the
summer.
     In any case, the money doesn't really show on the screen.  The
effects are downright cheesy, especially the talking cat, whose
computer-animated facial expressions look worse than if they'd spread
peanut butter on its lips.  Everything looks cheap and obvious, from
the suspended-on-wires flying broomstick sequences to the
electricity-from-the-fingers that Winifred uses to keep the kids in
place.  The set design is elaborate and fanciful, giving the haunted
Sanderson house the look and feel of something out of HANSEL AND
GRETEL, but the whole fabricated fantasy wobbles precariously between
high-tech and low-cost.
     "We're talking about three ancient hags versus the twentieth
century!" exclaims Max exasperatedly at one point during the movie.
"How bad can it be?"

