Title
Review for Bhaji on the Beach (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kim Vithana, Jimmi Harkishin, Sarita Khajuria, Mo Sesay, 
           Lalita Ahmed, Shaheen Khan 
Director:  Gurinder Chadha 
Producer:  Nadine Marsh-Edwards 
Screenplay:  Meera Syal 
Cinematography:  John Kenway 
Music:  Craig Pruess, John Altman, and Kuljit Bhamra 
Released by First Look Pictures 
     Bhaji is an Indian snack food whose identity has been
"Westernized" in the British Isles.  Director Gurinder Chadha has
chosen bhaji as a metaphor for the lives of the women in this, her
first feature film.  Although Indian by birth, the
characters--especially those of the younger generation--have been in
large part shaped by the culture of England, the country in which they
live.  BHAJI ON THE BEACH not only examines this cross-cultural
conflict, but looks at sexism and the generation gap, as well.
     There are so many stories that it's sometimes difficult to keep up
with each one, especially in the beginning, when the characters are
being introduced.  If there's an obvious failing in Chadha's work, it's
that she's too ambitious.  She has a lot to say and, apparently, wants
to say it all in one movie.  The result is a controlled chaos that can,
upon occasion, become confusing.
     The main characters are three twenty-something Asian women who
have grown up in England.  There's Ginder (Kim Vithana), a young mother
who is seeking a divorce from an abusive husband (Jimmi Harkishin),
bringing scandal down on both families.  Hasida (Sarita Khajuria) is a
pre-med student engaged in a secret affair with Oliver (Mo Sesay), an
African British man.  This affair has resulted in an unexpected
pregnancy that throws Hasida's entire future in turmoil, especially
since Oliver won't commit to anything.  Simi (Shaheen Khan), the third
member of the trio, doesn't have a "story" of her own, but is
instrumental in attempting to resolve everyone else's problems.  She is
the coordinator and the voice of reason.
     There are other characters, as well.  Asha (Lalita Ahmed) is a
dutiful, middle-aged wife who is suffering from headaches and visions.
There are a pair of teenagers looking to pick up white boys, and a
geriatric lady who refuses to accept anything that threatens her
strict, conservative views of morality.
     All these women are participants in the "Saheli Asian Women's
Group" outing to Blackpool.  There, on the beach, each of these tales
reaches some sort of crossroad.
     Throughout much of the movie, Chadha keeps the tone light--a
demanding task considering the amount of material she's juggling.  The
final fifteen minutes, which include an overload of melodrama and a
shocking display of violence, are not as well directed as the previous
eighty-five, and the mood is at variance with what came before.  Like
her creative idol, Ken Loach, the director attempts to blend gritty
realism with natural comedy, but her success is qualified.  She has an
accurate grasp of the little details of life, but sometimes the broader
strokes elude her.
     For the most part, the characters are richly drawn, and this helps
to maintain balance among the different stories.  There aren't
sequences in BHAJI ON THE BEACH where the action bogs down because
we're waiting for the focus to shift.  Admittedly, certain subplots,
such as Hashida's relationship with Oliver, are better-presented than
others, but nothing stands out as being obviously superior.
     There's a line of dialogue in BHAJI ON THE BEACH that sums up the
film: "It's not often that we women get away from the patriarchal
demands made on us in our daily lives, struggling under the double yoke
of racism and sexism."  When Simi says this, she does so with a broad
smile.  It's a serious statement, but not one ponderously made.  And
that seems to be Chadha's view of filmmaking:  explore themes, but let
the philosophical issues blend into the story, not dominate it.  If she
continues to abide by this creed, it may not take many more films
before she's turning out pictures to rival Loach's RIFF-RAFF and
RAINING STONES.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
hans@dcs.ed.ac.uk
[as seen at the Edinburgh Film Festival, Friday August 20, 1993]
Directed by Gurinder Chadha.
Country of origin: United Kingdom (1993)
     What do women talk about when there are no men around?  Hey, what
do *Indian* women talk about when there are no men around?
     In this film, the directing debut of Gurinder Chadha, we finally
get the answer to this last question.  BHAJI ON THE BEACH is another
good example of a project that has been partially funded by Channel
Four (MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE and in particular THE CRYING GAME are
two Channel Four-co-sponsored films that those outside the UK will
probably be familiar with.)
     The film is about a group of Indian women from Birmingham on a day
trip to that great bastion of British tackiness, the seaside town of
Blackpool.  All the well-known archetypal characters are present on the
bus.  There's the old, Victorian aunt who keeps asking what the world
is coming to.  There's the independent, leather-jacket-wearing woman
(who of course organised the event and drives the bus).  There's the
young middle-class woman who has just discovered that she is pregnant
with a guy that she hasn't told her her parents about because he is
black.  There are the 15-year old girls who are only after one thing:
boys!  There is the young, single mother with an obsessive ex-husband.
There is the middle-aged woman who was a lively, talented girl when in
college but is now, 30 years later, stuck with a fat, balding husband
and a career selling newspapers in his corner shop.  All familiar
stereotypes, here with the twist that they are Indian.
     (And then of course there is a "real" Indian woman from Bombay who
manages to make the other women look very old-fashioned!)
     But it isn't going to be an entirely untroubled outing!  The
obsessive ex-husband goes to Blackpool to get back his ex-wife and
their child, helped by his two brothers, a shell-suit wearing yob and a
very reluctant "nice guy."  The Afro-Caribbean guy who got the young
middle-class woman pregnant doesn't know what to do when she breaks the
news, but finally he gets on his motorbike and drives up to Blackpool.
As to what happens next...  I am not going to tell you.  Go see the
film when it opens!!
     Yes, I am sure to disappoint some of you: I liked this film.  It is
certainly not a kitchen-sink drama; even though the film deals with
some pretty serious subjects and is never afraid to treat them
seriously, the film never gets depressing and there is plenty of comic
relief along the way.  There is actually something typically British
about the approach and the humour. (After all, it is set in Blackpool.)
Yes, the characters are almost all Indian and female but they are also
pretty universal (and there is none of the misanthropy of a Hanif
Kureishi here).  The same goes for the storyline, actually.  You
definitely don't have to be Indian or female to enjoy this film.
