Title
Review for Muppet Movie, The (1979)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING: Charles Durning, Austin Pendleton, Scott Walker, and the
voices of Jim Henson, Frank Oz, Jerry Nelson, Richard Hunt and Dave
Goelz
DIRECTOR: James Frawley
WRITERS: Jack Burns and Jerry Juhl
RELEASED: 1979
"A bear in his natural habitat... a Studebaker." --Fozzie Bear, The
Muppet Movie 
What do you get if you cross a bug-eyed, banjo-strummin' frog, a
wisecracking bear, a love-struck pig with delusions of grandeur, a
brilliant script, astonishingly catchy music, and cinematography that
occasionally borders on magic? Well, in this state you'd probably get
arrested... but that's okay, because you'd also get one of the most
charming and endearing films to claw its way out of the 1970s. 
The continuing appeal of The Muppet Movie is easy to understand after
a viewing or two. It's a fun film, featuring some of cinema's
loveliest melodies (both the musical score and its mesmerizing
signature tune, "Rainbow Connection," were nominated for Oscars). But
"fun" doesn't necessarily equate with "greatness," and it's not the
only justification for the film's continued popularity. It touches a
nerve with viewers. Its simple message ('Believe in yourself, and
nothing is beyond your reach') is one we all want to believe... and in
the hectic '90s, with weekly political scandals and perpetual conflict
in the Middle East, we can all use some quality time with the Muppets
and their values. 
Kermit the Frog (voiced by the late Jim Henson) is a simple fellow. He
lives in a swamp, and passes the time by singing songs and catching
flies, yet somehow he feels unfulfilled. A passing fisherman (Dom
DeLuise), who moonlights as a Hollywood agent, encourages the talented
frog to consider a career in show business. Kermit is still hesitant,
until the agent mentions that Kermit's talent could entertain millions
of people. Wanting nothing more than to share his gifts with the
world, Kermit sets off for Hollywood (by bicycle, no less! The sight
is a visual marvel!) to seek his fortune. Along the way, he meets a
number of other friends, all of whom have the same dream. The most
significant of these are the amiable Fozzie Bear (voiced by Frank Oz),
whose dream of being a stand-up comic is not at all hindered by the
fact that his act isn't the least bit funny; the lovely Miss Piggy (Oz
again), who falls hard for the dapper Kermit; and the strange
turkey-like Gonzo (Dave Goelz) a plumber who dreams of being... well,
a plumber. But having nothing better to do, he tags along for the
ride. 
And what a ride it is! The Muppet Movie is not just another 90-minute
kiddie flick, like so many of today's so-called family films. No, this
one is the real thing: a warm comedy, with a message that actually
says something significant to its audience; as such, it can be enjoyed
by parents and kids alike. As with their spiritual ancestors, Rocky
and Bullwinkle, the Muppets' humor is sophisticated enough to offer
smiles and laughs to all ages. Kids will laugh at Gonzo's physical
stunts, while Mom and Dad will smile at the clever verbal jokes and
visual gags that sail right over Junior's head (the piano player who
looks just like Elton John, the recurring "hare krishna" motif, etc). 
(The complete review can be found at:
 http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/muppet1.htm )

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Jim Henson (Kermit the Frog/Rowlf/Dr. Teeth/Waldorf), Frank Oz 
(Miss Piggy/Fozzie Bear/Animal/Sam the Eagle), Charles Durning (Doc
Hopper), Austin Pendleton (Max), Milton Berle (Mad Man Mooney), Mel Brooks
(Professor Max Krassman), James Coburn (El Sleezo Cafe Owner), Dom DeLuise
(Bernie - The Hollywood Agent), Elliott Gould (Beauty Contest Compere),
Bob Hope (Ice Cream Vendor), Cloris Leachman (Lord's Secretary), Steve
Martin (Insolent Waiter), Richard Pryor (Balloon Vendor), Telly Savalas
(El Sleezo Tough), Orson Welles (Lord Lew), Carroll Spinney (Big Bird)
CERTIFICATION: G
THE MUPPET MOVIE is the first, and the best movie among the ever-growing
list of Muppet movies.  THE MUPPET MOVIE tells the story of how our hero,
Kermit the Frog, came to be a star.  A delightful movie for all ages, THE
MUPPET MOVIE is *bursting* with cameo appearances by countless Hollywood
stars of the 80's and today.
THE MUPPET MOVIE begins in a movie theater, where all of the Muppet stars
are anxiously awaiting the first showing.  Once everyone is settled down,
the movie inside of the movie begins.  It starts out with Kermit in a
swamp, playing his banjo and singing (this shot required Jim Henson to
spend hours underwater).  Kermit is discovered by Bernie, a big-time
Hollywood agent who happens upon Kermit by accident.  Bernie believes that
Kermit holds much potential to become a big star in Hollywood.  Kermit
ponders the idea of becoming a big movie star, where he could "make
millions of people happy".  Kermit decides to leave his swamp and make the
trip out to Hollywood.
Along the way, Kermit befriends his now famous Muppet companions, beginning
with Fozzie Bear, who had been spending his days doing stand-up comedy at
the El Sleezo Cafe, owned by James Coburn.  The two decide to team-up and
continue on their way to Hollywood.  But, Doc Hopper (Charles Durning),
the owner of a chain of french fried frog leg restaurants has a different
idea.  He wants Kermit to be his spokesman, but Kermit is humiliated at the
idea and spends the movie avoiding him and his assistants.
The trip continues, with Kermit and Fozzie meeting Miss Piggy, Rowlf,
Gonzo, the Electric Mayhem Band, and more Muppets who all share the same
wish: to make it to Hollywood.  Oh, and even more celebrities continue to
appear.  Kermit and Miss Piggy continue to get to know each other a little
better, including a rather funny scene at a restaurant with Steve Martin
as the waiter.
Eventually, Kermit and the group make it to Hollywood.  That is, after
Kermit is finally able to elude Doc Hopper and proclaim his freedom.  Lord
Lew, a big-time Hollywood producer portrayed by Orson Welles, gives Kermit
his shot at stardom and gives him the go-ahead to produce a movie.
THE MUPPET MOVIE is definitely a movie that is fun for all ages.  It is
also a sure-deal as one parents can watch, and enjoy along with their kids.


Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        What do you get if you cross a bug-eyed, banjo-strummin' frog,
a wisecracking bear, a love-struck pig with delusions of grandeur,
Steve Martin (in disturbingly short pants), Orson Welles, a brilliant
script, astonishingly catchy music, and cinematography that
occasionally borders on magic?  Well, in this state you'd probably get
arrested... but that's okay, because you'd also get one of the most
charming and endearing films to claw its way out of the dreck of the
'70s.
        The continuing appeal of "The Muppet Movie" is difficult to
describe, but not hard to understand after you've seen it.  In a
nutshell: it's a fun film, skillfully crafted, featuring some of
cinema's loveliest melodies (both the musical score and its lovely
signature tune, "Rainbow Connection," were nominated for Oscars.
Neither won, but the soundtrack is still in print.)  But simply being
"fun" doesn't necessarily equate with "greatness," and it's not the
only reason for the film's continued popularity.  It touches a nerve
with viewers.  Its simple message ('Believe in yourself, and nothing
is beyond your reach') is one we all want to believe... and in the
hectic '90s, with weekly political scandals and perpetual conflict in
the Middle East, we could all use some quality time with the Muppets.
        Kermit the Frog (voiced by the late Jim Henson) is a simple
fellow.  He lives in a swamp, and passes the time by singing songs
on his trusty banjo, yet somehow he feels unfulfilled.  A passing
fisherman (Dom DeLuise), who moonlights as a Hollywood agent,
encourages the talented frog to consider a career in show business.
Kermit is still hesitant... until the agent mentions that Kermit's
talent could entertain millions of people.  Wanting nothing more than
to share his gifts with the world, Kermit sets off for Hollywood (by
bicycle, no less!  The sight is a visual marvel!) to seek his fortune.
Along the way, he meets a number of other friends, all of whom have
the same dream.  The most significant of these are the amiable Fozzie
Bear (voiced by Frank Oz), whose dream of being a stand-up comic is
not at all hindered by the fact that his act isn't the least bit
funny; the lovely Miss Piggy (also voiced by Oz), who falls hard for
the dapper Kermit; and the strange turkey-like Gonzo (voiced by Dave
Goelz) a plumber who dreams of being... well, a plumber.  But having
nothing better to do, he tags along for the ride.
        And what a ride it is!  "The Muppet Movie" is not just another
90-minute kiddie flick, like so many of today's so-called "family"
films.  No, this one is the real thing: a warm comedy, with a message
that actually says something significant to its audience; as such, it
can be enjoyed by parents and kids alike.  As with their spiritual
ancestors, Rocky and Bullwinkle, the Muppets' humor is sophisticated
enough to offer smiles and laughs to all ages.  Kids will laugh at
Gonzo's physical stunts, while Mom and Dad will smile at the clever
verbal jokes and visual gags that sail right over Junior's head (the
piano player who looks just like Elton John, the recurring "hare
krishna" gag, etc).
        In many ways, "The Muppet Movie" resembles the 1939 Judy
Garland classic, "The Wizard of Oz": a lowly hero is on a quest to
reach a far away place, and joins up with new friends along the way
who share the same goal.  Both films are full of bright colors, music,
and a message that one can never hear too often.  (Wizard's "You've
always had the power to go home" moral is perfectly in-tune with "The
Muppet Movie's" own sermon.)
        One of the reasons that it all works so well is the fact that
director Frawley and screenwriters Burns and Juhl treated the material
with respect.  The fact that our main characters are colorful,
fabric-covered puppets is incidental.  With only minor modifications,
the same script could've worked just as well with real people playing
all the parts.  That's the secret of the movie's success: it's not
just a good children's movie... it's a good MOVIE, period.  The pacing
is as tight as any "adult" feature: each scene takes place in a new
town, with a new adventure on the horizon for our heroes.  (Who knew
it was so difficult to get from Florida to California?)  Granted,
Kermit has more obstacles to face than the distance which separates
him from his goal: the evil Doc Hopper (a fun performance by Charles
Durning) and his assistant Max (Austin Pendleton) are pursuing Kermit
every step of the way, trying to force him into being the spokesfrog
for Hopper's chain of French Fried Frog Leg restaurants.  When Kermit
resists, a professional frog killer (Scott Walker) is brought in to
dispose of our little green friend.  But again, director Frawley has
used these characters as incentive to keep the pace flowing smoothly:
Kermit and his friends have to keep moving; otherwise, they'll be
captured.
        Cameos by nearly every celebrity you can think of are in this
movie, though children of the '90s are unlikely to recognize Bob Hope,
Edgar Bergen, Madeline Kahn and others.  But that's okay: adults will
get the joke, and the guest appearances never feel gratuitous or
intrusive.  My favorites: Richard Pryor's friendly balloon salesman,
and, at the opposite end of the spectrum, Steve Martin's wonderfully
rude, abusive waiter:
        I first saw this film in 1979, at age six.  Watching it now,
twenty years later, I'm astonished by how little of the fairy dust has
faded from that initial viewing experience.  The music is still
haunting ("Moving Right Along" will stay in your head for days), the
characters are still utterly charming, and time hasn't dulled the
sparkle of the dialogue one iota:
        Whether you're five or 50, everyone should see "The Muppet
Movie" at least once.  For 97 minutes, you'll be five years old again,
caught up in the magic of what movies can do.  Four stars, Mr. Henson.
Thank you very much.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
