Title
Review for Duke Wore Jeans, The (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Roger Mellor
Summary
Married without his parents consent, the Hon.Tony Whitecliffe (Tommy
Steele), whose main interest is cattle breeding,  is horrified when his
parents ask him to woo a European Princess (the reason being that they are
after her wealth). By chance, a cockney double (also played by Tommy Steele)
arrives at their stately home and the Hon. Tony plans to send Tommy to woo
the Princess in his place. Tommy travels to the Principality with his
manservant Michael Medwin in support (who has a nice 'tipsy' scene-
incidentally this is not the only 'pop' film in which he provided valuable
support - he was also in  the Billy Fury vehicle 'I've Gotta  Horse').  The
Princess initially takes a dim view of Tommy, but soon falls for his
informal, unstuffy style . By the end, Tommy wins over the court by proving
that he is an aristocrat after all- his parents being a 'Pearly King and
Queen', and leads them all in a 'knees up'.
This is a real old fashioned musical comedy plot, with doubles (cockney
pretending to be aristocrat, in order to woo a Pricess), which borrows
freely from vintage 1930s and 1940s shows such as  'Mr Cinders', Ivor
Novello (pretty foreign Princess, 'Ruritanian' atmosphere), Me and My Girl
(The Lambeth Walk /Cockney Pearly Kings and Queens), and the films of George
Formby (with Steele's, at times, outrageous mugging to camera)
This rather silly story is rescued by the vitality of Tommy Steele, (fondly
remembered for the leading role in David Heneker's musical 'Half a Sixpence'
in the West End, on Broadway and on film) who proves here that he always was
a 'family entertainer' even in the early rock n' roll' years. He is a
natural performer, and a much better actor than most other pop performers of
the era (compared with say, Billy Fury for example).
The film also stars (as the romantic lead) the deliciously pretty, beautiful
and graceful June Laverick (note the scene where she appears in the top half
of a bathrobe displaying her beautiful legs, 1950s cheesecake style!). June
made a couple of films under a Rank Contract (1958-1959), and is perhaps
best remembered for her weekly leading role opposite Dickie Henderson in the
'Dickie Henderson Show' (Associated Redifussion Television), a popular
sitcom of the late 1950s/early 1960s. June also appeard on stage with Dickie
Henderson in 'When in Rome' (Kramer(m)/Shaw and Miller(l)) at London's
Adelphi Theatre from late 1959.  In this musical she sang 'Sympatica', 'It's
So Nice to Sleep with No One' and 'Stop' (all recorded on Oriole (45)
CB1535/6/7)
The songs featured in 'The Duke Wore Jeans' are: It's All Happening  :What
Do You Do? (Tommy Steele duets with himself) :Our Family Tree (Tommy
introduces himself to the court) :Happy Guitar (the 'Top Ten' hit from the
film, a skiffle type number performed with 'The Steelemen') :Gotta Let Your
Hair Down (a 1957 Rock n' Roll number) : It's All Happening (Reprise)
(Ballad Version); May I Call You Princess? (an attractive romantic ballad,
with a lovely atmosphere, performed on nice studio set, with Tommy and June
on a tree swing); Photograph My Baby (a duet, perfomed by Tommy and June)
(June Laverick sang on the West End stage in 1959 (see note below), so
presumably this is her own voice): 'Thanks a Lot, I've Had a Ball' (in which
Tommy leads the court, and the Pearly King and Queens in a 'good old knees
up')
Songs in 'The Duke Wore Jeans' are all good, especially for such a modestly
budgeted movie (black and white, and no foreign locations beyond what seems
to be Elstree aerodrome!). All are attractive, in varying styles: from early
rock n' roll, to skiffle, to lush romantic ballads, with some fine musical
scoring by Bruce Montgomery. It is interesting to note that, in 1957, the
producers did not go for an out and out 'rock n roll' musical - they still
wanted to retain the older, family audience, so the film includes something
for everybody.
In summary, a pleasant, watchable but totally undemanding musical/comedy in
the George Formby tradition!
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com
