Title
Review for Carne trémula (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Jun Yan
Directed by Pedro Almodovar, "Live Flesh" is a complicated melodrama with
multiple angles of relationship, about the issue of love, desire, sex and
all the other passions in life.  
There are five players in this story and each becomes involved with
another one way or the other.  Victor Plaza is a hot-headed young man who
falls in love with the girl with whom he had his first sexual experience
in a public bathroom. This undeniably pretty girl, Elena, however, cannot
even remember his name.  She is the daughter of a rich Italian diplomat
and a drug addict on the verge of a nervous breakdown when Victor comes to
her door.  They got into an argument and Elena's gun is misfired, an event
that draws two policemen to the scene.  The two men have their own
problems though.  The older, obviously drunk cop Sancho just beat up his
wife Clara for her suspected extramarrital affair.  It doesn't take a
genius to realize that this somehow has to do with the younger, more
rational cop David.  
As a terrible misunderstanding and unexpected events go on in Elena's
apartment, Sancho and Victor struggle for the gun when a bullet is fired
to hit David and paralyzes him.  Victor is jailed for 6 years for this
crime that we later learn he does not commit.  When he is released, Elena,
the woman of his dreams, has straighten up and married David, who is now a
wheelchair basketball player.  Bitter for his misfortune, Victor dreams of
taking revenge on both of them, while fate takes him promptly to her door.
In the mean time, Victor meets this older woman who would sleep with him
and fall in love with him with all her desperate tenderness of an abused
wife.  Who could that possibly be in a melodrama like this?  Our Clara,
Sancho's wife, of course.  
All three men are head-strung and stubborn and jealous.  None would easily
back down from their love and desire.  The women are no push-overs either.
So the entangled relationships unfold...  At one point I really wonder how
this terrible mess would resolve itself, but the development and ending
are not easily predictable and relatively sensible.  
This is definitely a melodrama on the brink of soap opera.  The filmmakers
do not hesitate to use coincidence to carry the plot or push the
plausibility of the story.  However, these can be easily forgiven because
the fascinating and colorful characters.  None can be described with one
word nor can be categorized as good or evil.  David appears to be calm and
strong mentally, but also sleeps with his partner's wife and just as
jealous as Sancho.  Elena accepts her responsibility and at least tries to
correct her wrongs only to become the trigger of the tragedy once again 6
years later.  She also has this really brutal honesty that is just a bit
too... blatant.  Clara does sleep with other men behind her husband's
back, but she is also the victim of abuse and her pain and fear are
tangible.  Sancho is perhaps the least sympathetic character, at least to
us female audience, but he clearly loves his wife deeply and almost just
as desperate as she is, though for a different reason.  Is Victor the only
innocent soul?  Far from it.  He has no intention to back down from a plot
to destroy two marriages (although he is somewhat "entitled" to do so to
Sancho) and indirectely causes tragedy in the end.  And he is obviously
using Clara to teach him the techniques to please women while he does not
love her at all.  All characters are deadly passionate and seriously
flawed but still believable and morally ambiguous.  This is the ultimate
strength of this film.  Almodovar's relentless, uncompromising approach to
the characters is the key to make the film refreshing.  Not for once does
he show the laziness to lessen the mixed quality of these characters.  He
does not hestitate to push the emotional conflicts and moral dilemma to
their extremes and is willing to go all the way. 
The film has quite a few bold love-making scenes as well as dialogues.
Are they explicity?  Definitely.  Are they necessary?  Absolutely.
Without them, the audience will never be convinced why Elena should leave
David to be with Victor, even though Elena and David really do love each
other.  These scenes are brutally honest about love, sex and relationship
as much as Elena's confession.  Sex scenes are often boring and mechanical
on the big screen, more misused than not.  This is one of the few
occasions that they work appropriately as an essential factor in the whole
story.  
The style of this film is consistently passionate and intense as the
emotional texture of the story and the characters.  The colors are
dazzling; the images fantastic; the music hot-blooded.  The songs are so
completely Spanish and over-the-top that they make my blood run faster and
hotter.  Surprisingly, the style works with the story, but never replaces
the story and characters.  That is why it is a successful piece of work.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Liberto Rabal, Francesca Neri, Javier Bardem, Angela Molina, 
      Jose Sancho, Penelope Cruz
Director: Pedro Almodovar
Producer: Agustín Almodovar
Screenplay: Pedro Almodovar, Jorge Guerricaechevarria, Ray Loriga based 
      on the novel by Ruth Rendell
Cinematography: Affonso Beato
Music: Alberto Iglesias
U.S. Distributor: Goldwyn Pictures
In Spanish with subtitles
     Almodovar.  To those familiar with his body of work, that name is 
more than just a way to identify one of today's premiere directors -- it 
offers valuable insight into the scope and intent of a movie.  Since his 
debut in 1980 with PEPI, LUCI, BOM, Almodovar has been the "bad boy" of 
Spanish cinema.  His films have been offbeat, energetic, and wildly 
stylistic (often to the point of garishness).  With titles like WOMEN ON 
THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN, TIE ME UP! TIE ME DOWN!, and KIKA, 
Almodovar has constantly challenged his audience about some of the 
essential themes of life:  sex, love, and violence.  He pushes the 
envelope in a way that many film makers are uncomfortable even 
attempting.  Watch TIE ME UP! if you doubt this statement.
     Now, however, there are indications that Almodovar is maturing.  
His 1996 effort, THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET, was surprisingly conventional 
(and somewhat stagnant as a result).  With LIVE FLESH, based loosely on 
a novel by Ruth Rendell, Almodovar is back in fine form, yet signs of 
restraint are evident in nearly every frame of this movie.  By toning 
down his visual flourishes and curbing his tendencies towards excess, 
Almodovar has created what might be the finest work of his career to 
date.  LIVE FLESH is a superb, sublime motion picture that uses a 
quintet of fascinating characters to examine a few of the director's 
favorite concepts.
     The five principals come together on one fateful night in 1992 
Madrid.  Victor (Liberto Rabal) has fallen for a woman, Elena (Francesca 
Neri), whom he had sex with a week ago.  Elena, however, wants nothing 
more to do with Victor, and, when he shows up at her apartment, she uses 
a gun to scare him away.  A shot is fired and the cops are called.  
Arriving at Elena's apartment are two partners, David (Javier Bardem) 
and Sancho (Jose Sancho), who are in the midst of a crisis in their 
friendship.  Sancho, a chronic, abusive drunk, believes that his wife, 
Clara (Angela Molina), is having an affair, and he suspects David of 
being Clara's lover.  What happens when the police break down the door 
to Elena's apartment sets off a chain of events that reverberate through 
time to a period four years later, when circumstances bring the 
characters together once again, albeit in a vastly different situation.
     LIVE FLESH is really a mystery, which is why I won't give a more 
detailed plot description.  This isn't a crime thriller, however -- it's 
an exploration of characters' motives, secrets, and true emotions.  
While there is a little gunplay, the core of LIVE FLESH lies in the 
complexity of how these five individuals interact.  They are all wrapped 
in a web of consequences, with each one hurting the others multiple 
times, and the strands around them growing ever thicker.  These are 
rich, believable individuals involved in relationships that defy the 
facile conventions of what movies typically present as romances, 
friendships, and rivalries.  The ending is surprising, not because it 
doesn't fit, but because, knowing all that we do about the involved 
parties, it's the perfect way to offer closure to the tale.
     For LIVE FLESH's leads, the director gives us five strong 
performers.  The one who leaves the strongest impression is Italian 
actress Francesca Neri, who, as Elena, successfully balances fear, pity, 
and a deeply-rooted sense of longing.  As Clara, Angela Molina (one of 
the stars of Luis Bunuel's 1977 masterpiece, THAT OBSCURE OBJECT OF 
DESIRE) essays a woman looking for a little tenderness and a way out.  
Of the three men, Javier Bardem (JAMON JAMON) has the most difficult 
part -- showing the dark side of a person we naturally have sympathy 
for.  Jose Sancho smolders as the violent, conflicted Sancho, and, in 
the role with the most screen time, Liberto Rabal shows that while he 
may have the look and physique of a model, he has talent as an actor.  
In a brief prologue, Penelope Cruz (BELLE EPOQUE) has a cameo as 
Victor's mother.
     Not for the first time with LIVE FLESH, Almodovar offers a 
controversial viewpoint that seemingly contradicts the romantic's first 
rule of true love being the glue in long-term relationships.  Time and 
time again, LIVE FLESH shows that "true love" is overrated.  The married 
couples in this film love each other, but they're hopelessly, helplessly 
trapped:  one by a cycle of violence and the other by unwanted pity and 
selfless tolerance.  Obsessive sex opens the door to freedom.  Almodovar 
isn't denying the value of romance, but he's emphasizing the 
complexities of any love-based relationship and affirming that sex is 
far from irrelevant.
     One of the most delicious aspects of LIVE FLESH is its keen sense 
of irony.  There's also a fair amount of humor, some of which borders on 
the absurd (consider the scene where two men, who are exchanging blows, 
pause in the midst of their struggle to cheer when Spain scores a goal 
in a soccer game being shown on TV).  Yet there is never a time when 
Almodovar's appreciation of offbeat comedy endangers the integrity of 
the characters or the story.  Like the gorgeous cinematography (which is 
used to good effect to eroticize a sex scene), this is all part of 
Almodovar's stylistic package.  Never has it been more impressive than 
here, where everything (not just the flesh) is vibrant with life.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Eric Lurio
 This is what is known as melodrama. A loves B, but B doesn't remember A
 because she was too stoned to remember anything.
 Tragedy occers when C and D come along. So years later Fate steps in and A and
 B get back together, therebye infuriating C and D. It has to happen, there's
 no two ways about it. 
 Pedro Almodóvar's `Live Flesh' is an exercise in inevitablility.
 This is the life of Víctor Plaza(Liberto Rabal) from his birth in a bus in the
 dark days of Fascist Spain to the `divinely' mandated ending.
 A week before the real story begins, Victor has had sex with Elena(Francesca
 Neri), the rich daughter of an Italian diplomat and the aforementioned junkie.
 Victor manages to get into her apartment because she mistakes him for her
 dealer. Push comes to shove, and the police, namely David(Javier Bardem) and
 Sancho(José Sancho)  
 who gets into a fight with our hero, who winds up in jail for seven years in
 the Pokey.
 David is paralyzed, and gets not only an extremely guilty Clara, but fame and
 fortune as a wheelchair basketball star and Paralympic gold medallist. Sancho
 winds up with his cheating wife Clara(Angela Molina).
 So after six years in the pokey, Victor is out of jail. His mother is dead,
 and he visits her at the cemetary, where just at that moment, he
 spots....that's right!!!!
 The performances are fine, but the movie isn't. The characters, except for
 David, are completely uninteresting. One wonders why Almodóvar even bothered.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LIVE FLESH (CARNE TRÉMULA)(director/writer: Pedro Almodovar;
screenwriters: Ray Loriga/Jorge Guerricaechevarria; cinematographer:
Affonso Beato; cast: Liberto Rabal (Victor), Francesca Neri (Elena),
Javier Bardem (David), Jose Sancho (Sancho), Angela Molina (Clara),
Penelope Cruz (Isabel), 1997 - Spain)
It is a politically oppressive climate in the Madrid of the 1970s, with
the dictator Franco in power. A woman gives birth on a city bus during
Christmas time and the city honors her and her new born son, Victor
(Liberto), with a lifetime bus pass.Victor's mom supports her son by
being a prostitute.
The film flashes to 20 years later and we see Victor, and he seems to be
a social misfit, angry and disappointed that the beautiful, druggie,
Italian diplomat's girl Elena (Neri), the one he made love to (for him
it was the first time he ever made love) in a public toilet a week ago,
has broken her date with him because she thinks he is a jerk and a lousy
lay. A disasterous evening follows, as he tries to force his way into
her apartment to get an explanation for why she has rejected him, as
cops are called to the scene, and he ends up shooting and paralysing one
of the cops, David (Bardem). That is the cop Elena is immediately
smitten with upon seeing him enter the room. The other cop, Sancho
(Sancho), goads Victor unnecessarily into trying to wrestle the gun out
of his hand and the gun goes off hitting David, causing the injury.
Sancho, in response to the inward tension that was eating at him,
suspecting his wife of cheating on him, took out his jealous hatred on
the unfortunate Victor. So goes a story filled with coincidences,
frame-ups, despair, psychological traumas, political digressions, lies,
revenge, Biblical allusions to redemption, and marriage-go-rounds.
Victor is released from prison after serving 6-years, a time he spent
bulking-up, reading the Bible, learning Bulgarian (that's a funny one!),
and swearing he would learn how to make love to a woman.
Victor, upon his release from prison, immediately makes contact with and
starts an affair with Sancho's wife (Angela). Her husband is the cop who
caused his arrest.
He also finds that Elena is married to the paralysed cop, David, who is
now a star basketball player on Spain's special olympic team. Elena
cleaned up her act and is working as a director of a school, where he
finagles his way into a job there since he is so naturally good around
children. His motive in returning to see Elena, is to take her to bed
and show her how he has become a good lay and to show her what she is
missing by not being with him. The only problem with his strategy, is
that she is not happy to see him.
There are too many coincidences for me to be wholly convinced that I am
not being manipulated into accepting a story with a certain political
agenda to it, but there are so many wonderful gripping and beautifully
done scenes, that I found I was taken in by the relationships going on
and curious about what would happen to these folks, and glad that
Almodovar (Dark Habits, High Heels, Women on the Verge of a Nervous
Breakdown) has chosen to make a film this time that has a story that
makes some sense. I found most of his other films to be basically
sexually bizarre, with storylines that were not particularly lucid.
Clara, who is only a minor figure in this story, nevertheless, her story
is the one that moved me the most. Her failed marriage and her need to
be loved and love someone, was the most pathetic characterization in the
film, outside of Victor's.
The strength in the film was in the showing of the strong erotic links
to each of the main characters in the story through Victor's eyes. Elena
showed that she could change from the strung-out druggie depicted in her
first encounters with Victor, into becoming a respectable wife and
do-gooder. Victor could become the lover he never was and find a way to
redemption for his past injustices. His story is the most challenging
one, and the one that is hardest to comprehend. He is symbolic of modern
Spain.
Almodovar has shot a sophisticated film about characters who really
develop character-wise and who are in-tune with the times they live in.
Almodovar, by his intermingling of the past and the present with the
strange mixture of politics and religion that changes with the times,
has created a fascinating look at Spain in the 20th century. What he
shows, are the diverse ingredients found in modern day Spain that makes
his country so unique.
The closing optimistic scene of the politically new Madrid, the one
without the ruthless dictator Franco, who died of a heart attack in his
bed, is opposite from the opening scene of the oppressively sullen
Madrid. This film is definetly one of Almodovar's more resolute efforts.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
Ok, I'll admit it.  The only reason I went to see Tie Me Up, Tie Me Down
when it came out was because it was one of the first films to feature an
`NC-17' rating.  I was a horny teenager back then.  And, now I'm a horny
adult, so I've graduated to Pedro Almodovar's latest flick Live Flesh
(Carne Tremula).
The film opens in 1970 Madrid, when people apparently were too scared to
be out on the streets.  A hooker gives birth on an empty city bus, with
her motherly pimp and the driver acting as birthing coaches.  This is
one of the funnier baby delivery gags I have seen in a while and is
capped of the pimp (who resembles a Spanish Bea Arthur) gnawing the
umbilical cord off with her mighty incisors.
Flash forward twenty years  bus baby grows up to be Victor Plaza
(Liberto Rabal), a loveable oaf who wants only to start a relationship
with a coked-up wench named Elena (Francesca Neri) that he shagged in
the bathroom the previous weekend.  Way to set your sights high, Victor!
The feelings that Victor has for Elena are not mutual and, upon his
false entry into her apartment, the two struggle both aurally and
physically.  The police are called.  Shots are fired.  Victor goes to
jail.  The cop named David (Javier Bardem) is paralyzed and ends up
marrying Elena.  Poor Victor is forced to watch his beloved cheer for
her new husband as her becomes a successful wheelchair basketball star.
Most of the film takes place two years later, when Victor is released
from prison.  He starts by having an affair with the wife of Javier's
partner and it just gets wackier from there.  By the way, Elena has made
a miraculous transformation from Sandra Bernhardt to Dr. Quinn.  She has
even flattened and discontinued bleaching her foofy hair.  I did even
get that it was the same person, but I'm a frigging idiot.  So there.
Doesn't sound like your typical movie, eh?  It doesn't look like it
either.  Almodovar makes every scene look like a campy nightmare and can
only be matched in style to the work of Wong Kar-wai (Happy Together).
Live Flesh is a visual feast and, oh yeah, has some really hot sex
scenes.

Author
Alberto Farina
CARNE TREMULA (1997, Spanish) by Pedro Almodovar
"Those who do not drink believe they can solve any problem by not
drinking".
If you like Pedro Almodovar, look forward to "Carne Tremula", his latest
movie that just opened in Italy (and, I guess, in Spain). Almodovar's
last films, such as "Atame" (TIE ME UP! TIE ME DOWN!), "Tacones Lejanos"
and "Kika" looked sometimes as if the director felt the need to somehow
top his previous efforts in shocking and outgrossing the audience. His
latest so far, "El flor del mi secreto", was the opposite: deep, moving
and almost completely free from Almodovar's trademark "scandal" flavor.
"Carne Tremula" (a rough translation could be "Shivering Flesh") marks
the director's return to what he does best: off-the-wall melodrama, with
witty dialogue and a feeling of innocence that covers no matter what
perversion or scandal. The story is nowhere as erratic or poorly built
as in some of his previous efforts; the plot is loosely based on a Ruth
Rendell novel which provides the basic structure, but the whole film
feels totally Almodovar's: romantic, excessive -but not excessively so,
if you understand what I mean- and also extremely funny and moving. The
movie starts with the birth of the protagonist -Victor- on a bus in
Madrid on the night that general Franco's regime declares curfew. We
then cut forward twenty years and meet him as a young man trying to
trace down a girl with whom he's had casual sex in a night club toilet
the night before. The girl -played by italian actress Francesca Neri-
lets him in her house by mistake, assuming he is the local pusher who
should provide her some pot. From that moment on, the plot starts
spinning so fast and unpredictable that it would really be a shame to
recount it. "Carne Tremula" offers that kind of radical romanticism that
was the backbone of "Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!" but it doesn't share with
that movie the lack of spontaneity: it does not feel as something
*designed* to be radical and it is therefore much more effective. It
also features an interestingly Kieslowskian attention to the power of
chance and coincidence. This helps a lot in keeping the plot going
effortlessly through a notable richness of events and twists. Great
performances from everyone, although I particularly liked Angela Molina
as a middle-aged woman who is afraid of her violent yet loving husband
and therefore goes for younger boys: she reminded me of the great Anne
Bancroft performance as Mrs. Robinson in THE GRADUATE. The best from
Pedro since "La ley del deseo" (The Law of Desire) and "Matador".

Author
David N. Butterworth
        A standoff.  A man holds a woman, a diplomat's daughter, hostage in
his embrace, a gun pressed to her head.  A cop, impaired by drink due to
his wife's philandering, trains his gun on the man's nether regions,
threatening to shoot.  Another cop holds his gun to his partner's temple,
forcing him to disarm.  The scene unfolds like a foursome bidding in
bridge--upping the ante, signaling tacitly, going for game.  The second cop
retrieves the first cop's weapon, the suspect lowers his, and the woman
caught in the middle moves--in slow motion--to safety.  It is then that the
intoxicated officer makes his move, grabbing for the assailant's gun.  The
room turns upside down, a shot rings out, a cop is down.  Shot in the back
and paralyzed for life.  The young man who found himself in the wrong place
at the wrong time is sent to prison for six years for a crime he didn't
commit.
        Storytelling has always been one of Pedro Almodóvar's greatest
gifts and in "Live Flesh" he gives us a twisting, turning, compelling tale
peppered with well-written, colorful characters.  Characters who find
themselves, more often than not, in carefully-constructed scenes like
these.  Characters played by actors we might not know, but who look
strikingly familiar nevertheless.
        Take the ruggedly handsome Victor Plaza (Liberto Rabal), for
instance.  Before he gets out of prison he could easily be mistaken for
that Almodóvar favorite, Antonio Banderas.  When we first meet Elena
(Francesca Neri), the woman in the middle of the nervous shakedown, she
looks like Spice Girl Barbie with her frizzy shock of orange hair, but
later tones down her look sufficiently to pass for Juliette Lewis.  Elena's
husband David (Javier Bardem) is the cop crippled in the shooting and he
wears David Schwimmer's bemused expression throughout.  Playing the
inebriated cop and his cheating wife are José Sancho and Angela Molina--no
lookalikes spring to mind, but they round out the excellent cast.
        It's a credit to Almodóvar's craft that these five individuals
cross paths and intertwine with such credulity.  "Live Flesh" begins and
ends with a live birth and the film's contradictions come almost as often
as the contractions.  Between the two childbearings, coincidence, irony,
and a hefty dollop of sex form the key elements of this thoroughly
entertaining film.
        Although based on a Ruth Rendell story, "Live Flesh" is brimming
with the acclaimed Spanish director's high-heeled flourishes.  Women are at
times alluring and repulsive, their extravagant hairdos and animal print
coats providing colorful highlights to the intricately-woven drama, an eye
bruised by an abusive husband here, a mouth bloodied by an impromptu
delivery there.  While in prison, Victor learns Bulgarian from an inmate
and learns to love the Bible, quoting from Deuteronomy thereafter not
unlike the way by which David and Sancho refer to themselves as "guardians
of a sick flock."  Victor's pre-fab inheritance is a shambles in a slum
resembling Sarajevo.  "Dear son, I got cancer" his mother writes to him in
jail.  She dies before he is released and it's at the cemetery that Victor
is reacquainted with Elena--redemption, ultimately, substituting for
revenge.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   New York magazine calls this movie "The Calming of
Almodovar," though "Live Flesh" is hardly a laid-back
production. The calmness is only in contrast to the wilder
Almodovar, a product of a style of filmmaking fashionable in
the 1980s. During that decade directors were encouraged to
experiment freely, especially in a Spain experiencing 
prosperity and freedom unknown during the Franco era. His
current picture owes a debt more to Alfred Hitchcock than to
his hero, Luis Bunuel: Spain's most notable director departs
radically from the cartoonish abandon and exploitation of the
subconscious to tell a solid story with devastating
consequences. Unless you remain a diehard fan of
Almodovar's Age of Delirium, a devotee of the garish, wildly
inventive and unrestrained in your movies, you may consider
that "Live Flesh" is the director's most accessible and realized
film to date.  When you consider that this youthful-looking
forty-six year old man plans to make his next movie far from
the Iberian Peninsula--in Miami of all places--you can relax,
assured that you will not leave the theater bewildered and
hammered over the head with blatant caricatures passing as
satire.  "Live Flesh" is remarkably taut, logical, even well
framed, featuring the usual elements which make life worth
living: revenge, lust, and guilt and redemption.
   Played out like a game of musical chairs, "Live Flesh" is a
merry-go-roundelay featuring four characters whose
connections to one another prove to be as surprising to us as
they are troublesome to the hapless people.  The opening
scene is startling--comic, yet contained, with political
overtones that will impress those in the audience familiar with
the repressions of the Franco era in Spain.  On one freezing
January night, Victor--not yet even born--begins to make his
presence felt as he jolts his mother from her bed screaming
from labor pains, only to be born inside a bus. The streets are
deserted, the Madrilenos cowered by Franco's emergency
decrees that allow citizens to be arrested and detained
without cause.  Twenty years later, we are pitched back into
the Madrid streets as we witness police officer David (Javier
Bardem) trying to calm his partner Sancho (Jose Sancho), a
troubled man drinking and cursing and trying to forget that his
wife is having an affair with a man whose identity remains
secret.  As they race up the stairs to settle what they believe
to be a rape-in-progress, they encounter Victor (Liberto
Rabal) in the midst of a terrible argument with Elena
(Francesca Neri), a drug-addicted daughter of an Italian
diplomat.  In a struggle over a pistol, David is shot in the back
and paralyzed from the waist down, his alleged shooter,
Victor, sentenced to several years in jail.  
   The young Victor is innocent, however, and when he is not
exercising in his cell, learning Bulgarian, and studying Bible
he is plotting revenge--a plan which may bring to mind a
similar design by Chad in Neil LaBute's wonderful tale of
betrayal, "In the Company of Men."  In the remarkably short
interval of an hour-and-a-half, Almodovar blends a tapestry of
lust, vengeance and redemption involving sexual liaisons that
engage the four principals--Sancho, his wife Clara (Angela
Molina), his partner David, and the young Victor.  
   Employing the psychological reflections common to the
works of another Spanish filmmaker, Carlos Saura, Almodovar
manager to cast sidelong aspersions against the Church,
whose teachings of original sin lead Elena into a guilt-induced
marriage with the paralyzed David, and a compulsive
generosity--before her ultimate realization that redemption
does not lie in effecting a 180-degree change in one's life.  A
liar, druggie, and crude youth, she will give way to an
obsessively truthful and offensively honest inversion--which
does not serve to resolve her life of unending psychic pain. 
Nor does the brutal Sancho learn much from his experience
in brutalizing his wife almost weekly for her indulgences of
infidelity.  
   While none of the performers is as known to an American
audience as Antonio Banderas--whom Almodovar introduced
to the world some time ago--those familiar with Spanish
cinema will recognize names like Javier Bardem, most
recently seen in "Boca a Boca."  Considered by some to be
Spain's top male actor of his generation, Bardem moves
about in his wheelchair with more energy and speed than
most healthy individuals, apparently possessed by demons
that will not allow him to rest.  The strikingly attractive
Francesca Neri inhabits the role of a diplomat's daughter who
changes from the muck of dope addiction to the solidly
middle-class but repressed middle-class life.  Angela Molina
shines as the frustrated, abused wife afraid of leave her
sadistic husband but eager to teach young Victor the
sensuous arts--to realize the youth's dream to become "the
world's best lover."
   "Live Flesh" is a fully fleshed-out drama with Greek-tragic
resonance, evoking the searing pain of individuals controlled
by the Furies.  Rated R.  Running Time: 91 minutes.  (C)
1998 Harvey Karten

Author
David Dalgleish
Starring Liberto Rabal, Francesca Neri, Javier Bardem, Ŕngela Molina, 
José Sancho
Directed by Pedro Almodóvar
Written by Almodóvar, Jorge Guerricaechevarria & Ray Lorriga
Cinematography by Affonso Beato
LIVE FLESH is as lurid and sensual as you'd expect, with a title like 
that.  It's a sultry melodrama populated by larger-than-life people, 
brought together by a series of far-fetched coincidences.  It is 
preposterous and outrageous, but by the time the final credits roll, 
you've actually come to care about these peculiar people and their 
mixed-up lives.  Pedro Almodóvar takes sensational material and, 
through a tricky artistic balancing act, manages to keep it both 
touching and wildly implausible, without ever becoming too sappy or 
too silly.
It is a tale of five criss-crossed lovers.  Sancho (José Sancho), an 
abusive, alcoholic cop, is married to Carla (Ŕngela Molina), who is 
cheating on him.  Victor (Liberto Rabal) had sex with a stoned Elena 
(Francesca Neri) in a public washroom a week before, and is determined 
that she honour a date she barely remembers agreeing to.  Sancho and 
his partner David (Javier Bardem) are called to Elena's apartment when 
Victor appears there, demanding that she go out on the date with him, 
and is then mortally offended when she tells him that he was a lousy 
lover and she isn't interested in him.  Four of the five characters 
meet, there is a struggle, and a gun is fired.
Fast forward several years.  Victor has just been released from 
prison, ending his sentence for the shooting of David.  David, 
paralyzed from the waist down, has become a wheelchair basketball star 
(this is one of many nice touches that give the movie its quirky 
allure) and is now married to Elena, who is living clean and helping 
deprived children.  Carla is still trapped in her marriage to the 
violent, possessive Sancho, and she begins an affair with Victor.  All 
five will feel the effects of that one gunshot for the rest of their 
lives, and those lives are irrevocably linked.
This plot could have been lifted straight from a weekday afternoon 
soap, with one major distinction: this soap opera is less than two 
hours long, even though it has enough sex and betrayals and reversals 
and confrontations to keep a daytime show running for a year or more.  
In other words, it keeps all the fun stuff, but leaves out the tedious 
exposition.  The atmosphere is fun too.  Almodóvar films Madrid 
lovingly, in bright colours, whether it be a verdant, sun-drenched 
cemetery or a city bus at night where a baby is being delivered.  He 
has an eye for sensuous details: the beads of sweat on lovers' bodies 
and the flash of gunpowder from a gun's muzzle are as important as any 
of the plot twists.  LIVE FLESH shares some of film noir's sensibility 
in the intoxicating way it combines moodiness and melodrama.
But as exuberant and over-the-top as it is, LIVE FLESH is also a 
trenchant examination of sexual politics, and Almodóvar does justice 
to the complexities of desire.  Several of the relationships have a 
sadomasochistic element--be it mental or physical--and, in all of 
them, what is called love is really a welter of guilt, insecurity, 
need, lust, and martyr complexes.  In his own inimitable fashion, the 
flamboyant Spanish director is exploring some murky territory here; he 
could easily get lost, but does not.  It helps that the women are not 
demure and passive, seeking only to please their men, as they so often 
are in American films.  No, here they have their own desires, and are 
not afraid to act on them, or speak about them--as Victor finds out in 
one tender, amusing scene, when Carla explains to him why he has a 
long, long way to go before he can become the Best Lover in the World, 
as he would like to be.
There is something absurdly touching about this hope of Victor's.  
His motivation is simply to prove to Elena--a woman he did not know, 
whom he had sex with only once--that he is not a bad lover.  This 
motivation, which drives the entire film, is the motivation of a hurt, 
insecure adolescent.  And here, I think, is the key to the movie's 
success: all these characters are, on some level, simply confused 
adolescents acting on desires they do not fully understand.  Their 
sometimes humourous, sometimes painful struggles are the struggles we 
have all been through, and you can't help but feel for them.
A Review by David Dalgleish (February 22/98)
