Title
Review for Mute Witness (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Bryant Frazer
Written and Directed by Anthony Waller
Edited by Peter R. Adam
Cinematography by Egon Werdin
Music by Wilbert Hirsch
Starring Marina Sudina, Fay Ripley, Evan Richards, and Oleg Jankowskij.
Russia/Germany/Great Britain 1995
     MUTE WITNESS is really two movies in one. The first half is a
creepy, nearly hallucinatory thriller with style to burn and camera
moves torn from Brian DePalma's playbook. The second half is a comic
action picture, with quick bursts of violence perforating the corkscrew
plot and ugly Americans tearing up the roads of Moscow. The switch-over
is disconcerting until you get into the mood of the film.
Writer/director Anthony Waller has created a skillful homage to scary
movies, and if the whole thing winds up off-balance, it's probably
because he's still a little loopy from years of intoxication on pseudo-
political thrillers and cheap slasher films. You can smell it on his
breath, and this film is his way of passing you the bottle.
     Russian actress Marina Sudina stars as Billy Hughes, the
witness of the title. She's an American make-up effects artist shooting
a dreadful horror picture on the cheap in Moscow with her sister Karen
(Fay Ripley) and an American B-movie director, Andy (Evan Richards).
She can't speak, which makes her situation all the more precarious when
she's locked into the old film studio after dark--she resorts to
telephoning her friends and tapping urgently on the phone receiver to
try and get their attention.  While she's trying to find help, Billy
stumbles stumbles across a threesome (the cameraman and an actor from
Andy's film, along with an unknown woman) who are apparently shooting a
porn flick on the sly. But as Billy watches from the shadows, the movie
turns into a snuff film--the woman is brutally murdered at the end of
the scene.
     As Billy runs away, she's plunged into a cat and mouse game
with the two men. Chased through hallways, stairwells, and even an
elevator shaft, she searches for a way out of the building in a
breathless series of set pieces that emphasize her hopeless physical
disadvantage against the larger men. MUTE WITNESS has a keen sense of
geography, and the camera movement is choreographed against the
positions of the actors to sustain a remarkable cinematic tension.
Sudina has a keen sense of her character, too, playing Billy as
determined but terrified, smart but vulnerable. Her performance, along
with Waller's sure, straightforward direction, render some of the
script's more obvious implausibilities irrelevant in favor of sharp
audience identification with Billy. And when the veracity of what she
saw is called into question--was the "murder" she witnessed really
just a clever special effect?--the audience, too, is forced to
reconsider its own experience of the murder on screen.
     This one was a labor of love, and it shows. The film's history
dates back at least to 1985, when Waller, then a director and editor of
movie trailers and music videos, filmed the scene featuring Sir Alec
Guinness as "The Reaper." Principal photography finally began in
October of 1993, and was subject to bad weather and delays. MUTE
WITNESS was originally written to take place in Chicago, but was moved
to Moscow, partly for economic reasons. The relocation works wonders
for the story, adding a layer of isolation for both the American
characters in the film, and for the (primarily English speaking)
audience watching it. The fairly extensive Russian dialogue is not
translated, and we're as much at a loss to understand those
communications as Billy is to make her own meaning clear. An excellent
score, composed and recorded in Russia by Wilbert Hirsch, adds texture
to the largely wordless environment, underscoring Billy's silent
screams with piercing crescendos. And the ready-made movie environment
of the Mosfilm studios is a wonderful backdrop for some virtuosi
filmmaking.
     Unfortunately, too many of those truly exciting moments are
crammed into the first segment of the film, and the remainder dwells a
bit heavily on the expected unexpected plot twists and a missing item
that bears no relation at all to what's important in the
film--Hitchcock would call that a MacGuffin, and its presence is just
one of the ways that MUTE WITNESS makes reference to its own genre.
Still, a bogus gimmick is a bogus gimmick, and Waller isn't quite
Hitchcock.  Even worse is Waller's decision to bring Karen and Andy
back into the picture as ineffectual comic relief. It's probably part
of an efficient joke about bumbling young American directors working
abroad, but Andy's presence is a little more irritating than it should
be.
     But if MUTE WITNESS ultimately disappoints, it's because it
starts running too fast and just can't keep up the pace.  Joyously
manipulative and happily morbid, the movie's style might be closest to
Danny Boyle's downbeat SHALLOW GRAVE or Kenneth Branagh's even more
exuberant DEAD AGAIN (it's better than the former, but not up to the
high standards of the latter). Still, MUTE WITNESS is a hard-won battle
from a filmmaker who has already doubtless started looking for ways to
top himself.  When Waller figures out how to apply this giddy level of
craft to a project that doesn't meander and muck about in the trappings
of its own genre, it should certainly be something to see.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MUTE WITNESS is a Hitchcockian film that tests the limits of good
taste, but nevertheless is a real treat if you can appreciate strange,
off-beat movies.  I predict many people will be turned off by it and a
fair number will walk out, but I was surprised at how much I thoroughly
enjoyed it.
     MUTE WITNESS tells the story of an American film company shooting
a low budget picture in Moscow.  The single scene of the grade B movie
within the movie that we see features the bloody and heavily overacted
death of a young woman.  The director of the grade B movie, Andy (Evan
Richards), has no talent.  His wife, Karen (Fay Ripley), is helping out
with the picture.  Karen's sister, Billy Hughes (Mary Sudina), is the
special effects makeup artist, and Billy is mute.
     The central premise of the movie is that Billy accidentally
witnesses a porn film being made by Sergei Karlenkov where the actress
in it is actually stabbed and murdered.  Or was she?  Billy tries to
cry out, but, being mute, her scream is silent.
     When the crime is reported to the Russian police they do not know
what to make of her story.  In a great role, Oleg Jankowskij plays a
mysterious guy who is a Russian cop.  Or is he?
     Despite its frequent crudeness, MUTE WITNESS works for two
reasons.  First, you keep being tricked on what is real, and what is
fake; who are the bad guys and who are the good.  Second, first time
movie actress Mary Sudina gives a compelling performance.  When she is
in danger, it feels real and her performance makes you sincerely care
for her character.  Her muteness makes her extremely vulnerable in her
situation and strikes genuine fear in the audience when she keeps
getting deeper and deeper in trouble.  I hope to see Sudina in many
more films since she has a lot of talent.
     Anthony Waller is a first time director and writer who is
innovative, shocking, and involving.  Assuming you do not get turned
off by the Psycho style violence and leave immediately, you will find
yourself being drawn into the complex web of the story.  The movie is
like a one of those paper mazes where you are trying to help Billy find
her way out to a safe spot without moving her into one of the many
squares where she will be killed.
     Waller has seen and learned from many of Hitchcock's best movies.
The scene where Billy goes to phone and tries to tap out help on the
receiver is full of tension and one that is evocative of the great
master.  Another complication is that Billy can hear fine, but the
people who may or may not be bad guys speak in Russian, and she can not
understand a word they say.  The special effects are simple but
effective.  Is that supposed to be real blood or fake, a real gun shot
or a blank?
     The cinematography by Egon Werdin, the editing by Peter R. Adam,
and the camera work also by director/writer Waller use many dramatic
cuts.  One minute we are watching a scene where someone is being
stabbing with the blood (or is it really blood?) spurting to a scene of
rare meat in a restaurant being sliced.  Vegetarianism may find many
converts from the people who see this film.
     There are many little treats in the show.  For one the dialog is
frequently quiet funny without any traces of being slapstick.  Another
is that the lead bad guy who is called The Reaper.  He appears for only
a few seconds in two scenes and the credits list him simply as "Mystery
Guest Star".  I refuse to give away his identity, but I did read that
he made the scenes ten years ago when the director first had the idea
for the movie.  The director just keep the scenes in the film canister.
If you see the movie, you will recognize him.
     The ending of the show is the best part - one twist after another.
Just as soon as you think you know what is real and what isn't, you
find out you don't, and this confusing state keeps iterating until
finally the truth is revealed.  Whew.
     MUTE WITNESS is a joint American-German-Russian production.  It
runs a fast 1:38.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, and lots of blood.
I found the blood a little shocking but not overdone, nevertheless,
I think the film borders on being NC-17 and is not appropriate for
teenagers.  If you feel like something out of the ordinary, and you
like mysteries, I recommend MUTE WITNESS to you.  It was a *** movie
for me.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 19, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     The making of MUTE WITNESS must have been an incredible process.  The
first shots were taken back in 1985, when a chance encounter with the
film's "Mystery Guest Star" led to some on-the-fly cinematography.  In
1993, principal photography began in Moscow, only to be interrupted by
"fines" in customs, Boris Yeltsin's "October Revolution," -23 degree
weather, a diphtheria epidemic, a drug addicted actor, and another with
kidney disease.
     Nothing was boding well for first-time feature film writer/director
Anthony Waller (even this morning's screening was plagued with
difficulties).  But eventually, everything worked out, and MUTE WITNESS
has finally hit the big screen.
     After such an ominous start, you might be expecting a dismal film. 
Or, you might be the optimist and expect a gem.  MUTE WITNESS is neither. 
(At least they didn't call it SPEAK NO EVIL, completing the trilogy of
"handicapped victim of a killer" flicks.)
     The story is catchy:  an American, mute (not deaf) special
effects/makeup artist, Billy Hughes (Russian actress Marina Sudina), is
working in Moscow on a film.  Trapped in the studio after hours, she
witnesses a snuff film in the making, or so she thinks.  After escaping
from the bad guys, she tells her sister (Fay Ripley), her director/boss
(Evan Richards), and the cops, but no one believes her story.  Regardless,
an enigmatic man known as The Reaper (the "Mystery Guest Star"--I won't
spoil it), who organized said snuffing, wants Billy killed, and the chase
is on.
     Making the film-within-a-film in a Russian setting puts a few unique
spins on the classic stalker movie.  First (and worst) is lots and lots of
Russian dialogue, which I'm doubting many American viewers will
understand.  Second is a fair amount of obvious improvisation on the
screen, which tends to make the plot quite difficult to follow at times,
particularly when it goes off on its blackmail/double-cross tangent at the
end of the film.  Fortunately, the money saved on shooting in impoverished
Russia allowed Waller to spend it on some cool photography, a nice score,
and some of the best Russian actors the country has to offer.
     I really enjoyed Sudina's performance, and given that she has no
lines, it's easy to mistake her for a seasoned American pro, rather than a
Russian novice.  Supporting performances are fine, and Waller's clever
direction always gives us something interesting to look at, even if you
the script doesn't make any sense.
     All-in-all, MUTE WITNESS is a fair first effort, but believe me, it's
better than a lot of the crap Hollywood is passing off as thrillers these
days.  (Note:  In Russian, English, and sign language(!) without
subtitles.)
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mary Sudina, Fay Ripley, Evan Richards, Oleg Jankowski,
      Igor Volkov, Alec Guinness
Director: Anthony Waller
Producers: Alexander Buchman, Norbert Soentgen, and Anthony Waller
Screenplay: Anthony Waller
Cinematography: Egon Werdin
Music: Wilbert Hirsch
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     It's not often that a slasher/thriller is released by a recognized
distributor of art-house fare (in this case, Sony Pictures Classics),
but that's the case with MUTE WITNESS.  Of course, it's somewhat unfair
to pigeon-hole this movie by using the word "slasher", since that term
conjures images of FRIDAY THE THIRTEENTH, and this picture aims
considerably higher.  In approach and execution, if not in content, MUTE
WITNESS belongs in the same category as another low-budget edge-of-the-
seater:  THE STEPFATHER.
     It goes without saying that it's not a good idea to think deeply
about this sort of movie while it's on-screen.  There are gaps in logic
-- many obvious, others less so--but these occur in service of a
better-paced, more taut storyline.  MUTE WITNESS isn't a masterpiece of
plotting or originality, but it provides the requisite shocks and
scares, includes a few unexpected twists, and mixes together a fair
number of the genre's requisite cliches.  It's slick and fun, but not
great.
     MUTE WITNESS opens on the set of a low-budget, schlocky horror
flick being filmed in Moscow.  Director Andy Clarke (Evan Richards) has
brought the production to Russia because costs are low (the same reason
MUTE WITNESS was filmed there--art imitating life).  Only two other
Americans are with Andy on this journey:  his lover/assistant, Karen
Hughes (Fay Ripley), and her sister, the movie's special effects/makeup
maestro, Billy (Mary Sudina), who is mute but not deaf.  The cast and
crew are all locals, many of whom don't speak English.
     One night, Billy becomes locked in the studio after dark.  As she
searches for a way out, she comes upon two men filming what appears to
be a porno movie.  All is not as it seems, however, and the sex act
turns violent.  While the camera rolls and Billy looks on in silent
horror, the naked woman is brutally hacked to death.  As Billy turns to
flee, she knocks over a coat rack, and a chase through lonely, deserted
corridors ensues.
     Director Anthony Waller keeps the tension at a high level that
atones for many of the film's faults.  Several thriller staples appear
to have been deliberately included--not because the plot requires
them, but as a kind of "wink and nod" at the knowing audience.  There
isn't a need to show Billy emerging naked from a bath, but Waller does
it anyway.  There's a thinly-disguised playfulness about how he
approaches this, as well as other, traditional slasher/thriller
elements.
     The last half-hour is nicely convoluted.  The situation is
complicated to begin with because of the communications
difficulties--hardly anyone speaks the same language, and Billy can't
talk at all.  On top of that, MUTE WITNESS toys with us by making it
unclear who's on whose side.  Things are sorted out by the last frame,
but it's fun to guess along the way about who can be trusted.
     The only "name" actor in the film is Sir Alec Guinness, who has
     the briefest of cameos as "The Reaper"--the vile instigator of
all that takes place.  Everyone else in the cast is an unknown.  The
best acting job is turned in by Mary Sudina, whose mute performance is
lively and convincing.  Fay Ripley and Evan Richards don't fare as well
dramatically, although several of their scenes contain a portion of
comic relief.
     There's nothing especially artsy about this film.  The issue of
communication, and the resulting vulnerability and isolation that occur
when there's no common language, is one of MUTE WITNESS' most compelling
themes, but it's too often used as little more than a plot device.  This
film has its share of blood, gore, chills, and thrills, and Waller is
competent, although not masterful, at blending these elements without
bothering too much with the abstract--and potentially more
interesting--aspects of his production.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Justin Felix
MUTE WITNESS (1994)  
A film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1999 Justin Felix.  
Any comments about this review?  Contact me at justinfelix@yahoo.com  
All of my film reviews are archived at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix 
Written and directed by Anthony Waller.  
Starring Marina Zudina.  
Special cameo by Alec Guinness.  
Rated R (contains brutal violence, nudity, and profanity)  90 mins.  
Synopsis:  An attractive mute makeup artist, working on an ultra-cheesy
slasher movie in Moscow, witnesses the production of a brutal snuff film and
is subsequently chased by really bad Russians.  Meanwhile, the artist's
sister and boyfriend clumsily try to save her.  
Comments:  MUTE WITNESS came as a surprise to me the first time I watched
it.  Drawn by the clever artwork on the video box, I rented the film
expecting a complete turkey.  MUTE WITNESS, however, was original, offbeat,
and well-made.  It's one of those cool little finds that no one seems to
know about.  I've subsequently found it at most video rental places I visit,
and it may be seen, on occasion, on the Independent Film Channel.  
The first hour of MUTE WITNESS is extremely tense, as Billy, the quite
believable mute heroine, sees members of the Russian mob brutally kill a
prostitute while filming an illegal snuff film.  The rest of the film takes
good advantage of Billy's vulnerable position as a mute foreigner in Moscow
being pursued by powerful criminal figures.  To throw a curveball into the
fray, Billy's sister Karen and her filmmaking beau become bizarre figures of
comic relief to offset several violent sequences in what are some genuinely
funny scenes.  
A disappointingly trite ending and occasional comic blunders are the only
two things which mar this otherwise suspenseful film.  Look for Alec
Guinness (Obi-Wan Kenobi from the first STAR WARS trilogy) in a small role
as the evil Reaper.  Definately check this movie out; although, as a word of
warning, it does contain several scenes of rather grisly violence which
certainly aren't for the squeamish.  
