Title
Review for Stereo (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Stereo (1969) & Crimes of the Future (1970) 65m each.
David Cronenberg once had ambitions to be an "obscure science fiction 
novelist" prior to his film-making career, and it shows through in these two 
trial works, which are so similar to each other and yet so distinct from his 
other films that they cannot help but be discussed together.  They are not 
recommended as general viewing but should be of interest to Cronenberg 
completists in that they establish the themes of sexuality, mutation and 
medicine prevalent in most of his subsequent work.
Cronenberg's debut STEREO is the result of his interest in underground film 
- it may aspire to be experimental but comes across more like a student 
project.  There is no live sound, but a voice-over spoken by different 
narrators who sound as if they are taking turns reading from the same 
medical journal.  The storyline - if it can be called that - describes an 
experiment by a research facility in Ontario to accelerate telepathic 
abilities among a group of young subjects.  As a kind of punchline, the film 
ends inconclusively, with the narration stating that all the events we have 
seen in the film are in need of yet further analysis.
It's hard to say whether STEREO succeeds or fails without knowing 
Cronenberg's real intent - as a stand-alone experimental film it's no better 
or worse than many other student features, but if its aim is to portray a 
fictitious medical report in a documentary style, then it does so suitably.  
All of this is to the expense of involvement, however.  The bloodless 
delivery of unending pseudoscience makes this difficult viewing, although 
there are some intriguing nuggets buried within (Cronenberg's wry take on 
heterosexuality, for example).  In fact, STEREO rejects the notion of film 
as a medium of communication and sets out, almost as a put-on, to alienate 
its viewers instead: Cronenberg is more interested in framing his 'actors' 
within chic, modernist buildings than providing his visuals with any human 
impetus; the lengthy silent passages give us a rest from the unwieldy 
narration but do not serve to clarify what anyone in the film is feeling; 
and the only real 'action' sequence, in which someone is chased through a 
building, is no more than a psychic projection.  I don't think this is 
misjudgment on Cronenberg's part.  By crafting his film in a subconscious, 
elusive manner, he may have hoped to simulate the subject of his story - 
because we see no characters speak and understand only fragments of what we 
hear in between the silences, it may be that STEREO tries to be a conduit to 
its own telepathic essaying.
STEREO has much in common with its nominal companion piece, CRIMES OF THE 
FUTURE.  They have identical running times, the same cast, and share the 
same filming approach (silent with voice-overs added) and visual sense 
(people continuously framed against architecture).  The narration of the 
latter is a little less technical, but just as oblique and delivered even 
more soporifically.  It is these similarities that make it hard to separate 
the two beyond the most technically apparent features - that is,  CRIMES is 
in color and its soundtrack is punctuated by intrusively dubbed biological 
sound effects.  But whereas STEREO examines the evolution of mental 
processes that would eventually culminate in films like SCANNERS and THE 
DEAD ZONE, CRIMES ponders on the evolution/regression/mutation of the body 
itself - ideas which Cronenberg would develop more fully in RABID, 
VIDEODROME, and THE FLY (THE BROOD would be his ultimate collision of both 
themes).  The storyline of CRIMES is more expansive and science-fictional: a 
young doctor explores different medical disciplines/factions that have 
evolved from research into an apocalyptic disease.  These vary in scope from 
dermatology to neo-venereal diseases to a sort of therapeutic podiatry - by 
the time it gets to this level you get the impression that Cronenberg is 
pulling the audience's leg as well his cast's.
Delivered once again in the stoic, emotionless manner of STEREO, CRIMES, 
like its predecessor, also serves to alienate, although this time it uses 
the device as a reflection of its characters.  Theirs is an austere, 
clinical world in which the child-bearing female population has all but died 
out.  The only purpose of the male survivors is to formulate, research, and 
experiment.  By the film's end their conclusions should be provocative but 
instead become just as detached as everything else that has gone before, 
leaving us to wonder what the 'crimes' of the future really are.  Or 
perhaps, ending where the film does, the title refers to crimes of the 
future beyond that of the present story.  It could be for this reason that 
in the final scene the protagonist sheds a single tear.  It's about time: 
after two features and two hours of calculation, Cronenberg is ready to put 
his obsessions to more direct work.  What's probably most interesting about 
this intimate pair of films is that they give no indication of the global 
cult status and success that their director was to earn.  Footnote: 
Cronenberg gave 1998's eXistenZ the working title CRIMES OF THE FUTURE, 
which led to many fans anticipating - or dreading - a revisitation of his 
early experimental style.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com
