Title
Review for Black Sheep (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christophe Boone
Opens nationally Friday, February 2nd.
        I can't decide which was more annoying--the fact that this movie 
was so horrible or that the two middle-aged women behind me laughed 
incessantly throughout the movie?  Why should people laughing the whole 
time bother me?  Well, for one reason, and for one reason only...
        Chris Farley and David Spade team up again for TOMMY BOY REDUX, I 
mean, BLACK SHEEP.  Penelope Spheeris (WAYNE'S WORLD) directs this latest 
in a series of bad Lorne Michaels, "Saturday Night Live" extensions.  Farley 
plays an earnest brother of a gubernatorial hopeful who just wants to do 
what he can to get his brother elected.  Unfortunately, bad luck seems to 
follow Farley around.  Enter David Spade as one of the candidate's advisors 
who volunteers to try to keep a lid on Farley until after the election.  
Of course, Spade has no control over Farley's luck.  In fact, some rubs 
off on him, with one of the few inspired moments in the score when the 
electric guitars start to play "Dueling Banjos" from DELIVERANCE.  The 
guitars are inspired.  The scene isn't.
        So, every strange mishap that could happen does happen, including 
bumping into Gary Busey as a psycho ex-Marine still fighting Vietnam in his 
mind and living in an abandoned school bus with a 27 inch TV.  Okay, this is 
where I lose it.  This movie is horrible.  Gary Busey's enormous, buck teeth 
usually are the most annoying thing on the screen, but they take a back seat 
this time to the drivel that passes as a screenplay.  Throughout the entire 
film, I laughed once, when Farley does his own thing on stage at a 
Rock the Vote concert.  This is the Chris Farley that made me laugh on 
Saturday Night Live.  His entire performance of 60 seconds in WAYNE'S WORLD 
as the overinformed security guard was better than his turn in BLACK SHEEP.  
Occasionally, the script tries to become dramatic, making Farley's character 
pathetic, so we should care for him.  Whatever.
        Then, there is David Spade.  I almost forgot he was even in this 
movie.  Spade has absolutely no shining moments in this film.  I used to 
think his "Hollywood Minute" on SNL was funny.  Then, his new "Spade in 
America," (or "I only have time to do 2 minutes in between my busy film 
schedules") started to get on my nerves.  Then, in BLACK SHEEP, his 
"I've got a little present for you, it's in my pocket," routine was funny 
when my friend did it to me...in seventh grade (said with Chandler-like 
inflection).  When schticks like that are all they have to put in a 
screenplay, it's not worth writing.  Unfortunately, that didn't stop 
the studios from producing this first draft of a not-so-funny comedy.  
Spade's character could disappear from this movie, and you'd never know it.  
That's a problem if he is one of the headliners.
        Unfortunately, Lorne Michaels has a hold of the executives' attention 
at Paramount for some reason, and they let him produce this redundant 
material that isn't even suitable for an SNL sketch.  Granted, WAYNE'S WORLD 
was funny, but the slew of extended skits recently (TOMMY BOY, BILLY 
MADISON, STUART SMALLEY SAVES THE WORLD, IT'S PAT, how many of you caught 
those last two?) have proven, maybe with the exception of TOMMY BOY, that 
this stuff just isn't successful.  But just slap "From the Director of 
WAYNE'S WORLD," on the poster, and it's in the bag...or maybe not.  
Remember THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES?  They tried the same thing.  It didn't 
work.
        Despite my lack of amusement throughout all 87 minutes of this flick, 
on the whole, the crowd liked it.  Maybe they enjoy predictable humor, or 
maybe they were just smoking crack.  Either way, don't waste your money.  
Maybe check it out when it hits video, but I'd wait until HBO decides to 
show it every night for a month, kind of like WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S.  Oh wait, 
I hope they don't do that.  I couldn't handle the thought of another 
TOMMY BOY, I mean, BLACK SHEEP.  I keep doing that.  I wonder why.
        A footnote from the author:  The best part about this entire film 
was grabbing a free t-shirt that was tossed into the crowd and stealing 
it from the two women behind me who thought they had it.  Sorry, ladies.  
Justice is served.  The second best thing was shredding this movie in this 
review.
