Title
Review for Art of War, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
This movie was doubly interesting to watch for me since I was one of the few
to see an early test screening of the film back in January. The original cut
of the film that I was shown didn't include any special effects, lacked a
score and needed a bit of tightening up. All in all, it was an okay popcorn
flick, and after having seen the completed version, I must say that I stick
close to my original interpretation of the film. It doesn't cut into any new
ground, gets a little convoluted and serious at times, but overall, gives us
plenty of action for the sake of action, and if that's what you're looking
for, you will likely get a pop out of this corn.
PLOT:
An undercover UN agent who is an expert at expediting "international
relations" gets caught in over his head when a Chinese ambassador's
assassination leaves him as the ultimate fall guy. Running away from
everyone including the Chinese triad and the FBI, the fugitive hooks up with
a translator girl who attempts to help him find the real masterminds behind
the slaying, and clear him of all wrong-doings.
CRITIQUE:
Despite its pretentious title, convoluted plot and overly serious tone, I
chose to enjoy this film as an action-packed popcorn ride starring badass
Wesley Snipes kicking butt all over the place, and by God...it worked! I do
wish they would have cut about 20 minutes from this film and maybe even cut
some of its dreary political dialogue, but I liked the movie despite some of
its shortcomings, because it delivered a typically intense Snipes as a
pretty cool James Bond/Ethan Hunt wannabe. So don't go into this movie
expecting an terribly interesting plot (you forget it all minutes after you
walk out of the theatre), Oscar-caliber acting (Anne Archer walking the fine
line between acting and over-acting) or unpredictable happenings (I guessed
the "bad guy" about 12 minutes into the film). Go into this movie with the
intention of seeing some pretty cool action scenes, plenty of gun play,
Wesley kick-boxing everybody in sight and Maury Chaykin thankfully present
as the much needed "comic relief".
This film is violent, packs a punch and doesn't really let up, save for a
couple of downtimes in the middle. The director's style is slick, very
lively, a man who obviously enjoys the over-the-head shots and doesn't mind
utilizing the infamous MATRIX bullet zoom effect for added wattage either.
The high tech game is another one that generally appeals to me, so enjoy I
did the many cooky technological gadgeteries utilized by Snipes in his
pursuit of the bad guys. It's funny because I actually feel like I'm
defending this movie in my review and I guess that could only mean one
thing...yup, guilty-pleasure syndrome!! Perhaps it's because I know that
deep-down inside the film won't hold up under closer scrutiny, doesn't leave
much room for unpredictability and washes its clothes in the same machine as
many of the others, but what can I tell you...I enjoyed it! So if action is
what you're looking for, this flick should just about cover your bases. And
the reason I haven't mentioned either Michael Biehn or Donald Sutherland in
this review is because either one doesn't really have much to do in this
film. But love it or leave it, I think we can all agree that Wesley Snipes
is one charismatic actor who continues to hold your attention, no matter
what the circumstances. And the Art of this Review is coming up with a
typically idiotic play on the title way of finishing it off... :)

Author
Robin Clifford
The slumbering giant, China, is about to enter into a major trade agreement with
the west, led by the United States, when a freighter is discovered in New York
Harbor with a grisly cargo of dead Chinese refugees. Negotiations are further
strained when Chinese Ambassador Wu (James Hong) is assassinated while giving a
speech to a large, media-saturated gathering of diplomats at the UN. Special
United Nations agent, Neil Shaw (Wesley Snipes), is framed for the murder and he
goes on the lam to clear his own name and uncover what may be a conspiracy of
massive proportions in "The Art of War."
Director Christian Duguay ("Screamers") leads a talented cast and crew in what
starts off as a pretty slick actioner for the first hour. After that, the story
degenerates into a routine thriller where the good guy not only has to save the
day, he has to do so while being betrayed by his own people. The film starts out
interesting enough with a massive Millennium celebration in the heart of Hong
Kong. Neil Shaw, the covert spook for UN Secretary General Douglas Thomas
(Donald Sutherland), performs a high tech information theft under the noses of
the North Korean security officers. He then blackmails their finance minister
and makes a daring escape jumping from a skyscraper with a parachute. All of
this is slickly done with shoot-outs, kung fu and lots of eye-popping action.
Things move along pretty well with the set up and execution (forgive the pun) of
the assassination of the ambassador (an under-utilized Hong), then the fast
moving action as Shaw chases the real killer through a maze of obstacles only to
get himself arrested for the murder. FBI boss Frank Capella smells a rat over
the arrest, but Shaw is hijacked away by the henchman for the conspiracy to stop
the historic trade agreement from happening. Shaw makes a daring escape from his
captors, kicking butt and taking names in the process. Then things grind to a
halt.
Pretty UN interpreter Julia Fang (Marie Matiko) is brought into the mix as the
beautiful innocent bystander who is drawn unwillingly into the nefarious plot.
She, of course, provides Shaw with invaluable assistance - after all she is an
interpreter - while he saves her time and time again from the bad guys. We've
been there many times before, but, this time, there isn't even any romantic or
sexual innuendo between Shaw and Julia, until the tacked on epilogue where they
live happily ever after together. There is no chemistry between Snipes and
Matiko and this does serious injury to the film.
The rest of the mumbo jumbo of the second half of the movie is plagued with the
proliferation of bad guys. In the first half, mysterious and ruthless Chinese
businessman Chan (Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa, "Rising Sun") is painted as the
puppet-master pulling the strings of the conspirators from behind the scenes.
When he is abruptly killed by Shaw, the focus of the film changes as a larger,
more secretive conspiracy looms and Shaw learns that his partner Bly (Michael
Biehn) and boss Eleanor Hooks (Anne Archer), supposedly his friends, are really
his enemies. The jingoistic explanation - basically, America-For-Americans and
Say-No-To-China - as to why these highly trained, intelligent people would
behave the way they do is so trite and simple-minded, I just shook my head.
Screenwriters Wayne Beach and first-timer Simon Davis Barry have cobbled
together a mishmash of a story that starts off OK, but goes downhill when the
rapid-paced action stops and the "character development" begins. Unfortunately,
where Wesley Snipes excels is as the smart-ass, wisecracking action good guy who
puts his life on the line for God and country. He does that here in "The Art of
War" but his character lacks any of the mirth that makes the actor so likable.
His Neil Shaw is a stoic good guy who is betrayed and must get his justice done,
but there is no passion in the character or the performance.
There is a big supporting cast playing around in this celluloid sandbox, but
none, with the notable exception of the great Maury Chaykin, has much to do.
Chaykin, whom I first saw and respected in Atom Egoyan's 1991 Canadian film "The
Adjuster," has always had my admiration as a fine character actor who is capable
of humor and drama. As Frank Capella, he brings to life the sketchy character,
making the savvy FBI agent a sympathetic character (you're shocked when he is
gunned down, point blank, and breathe a sigh of relief when he pulls off his
bulletproof vest) and, ultimately, the one who believes in Shaw. The rest of the
cast - Donald Sutherland, Anne Archer, Michael Biehn, Marie Matiko, and
Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa - goes through the motions dictated by the lame script,
collecting a paycheck along the way.
Technically, things are of high quality and give the film a good crisp look with
lots of nighttime photography (by Montreal-based Pierre Gill), garish,
bright-colored sets and flashy action choreography, none of which help to save
this disappointment. I like Snipes and enjoy his films like "Passenger 57." As
for "The Art of War"? It should surrender. I give it a C-.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "ART OF WAR" (Warner Bros.)
  Talk about synchronous ideas: the same week that
psychologist Richard Hatch became ultimate "Survivor," "Art of War"
celebrates the concept of manipulation and control. It's all about
using strategy to understand your opponent and defeat him. The idea of
"Art of War" is based on an ancient handbook by Sun Tsu, a powerful
Asian general who believed that wars can be won without ever having to
actually fight. Many great generals, including Napoleon, used Sun
Tsu's philosophy, and its tenets are as applicable to business,
politics and winning TV game shows as they are to war. In the
international suspense thriller, Wesley Snipes plays a covert American
agent, a "fixer," who gets involved in the emerging trade relations
between China and the Western world as a group of murdered Chinese
refugees is found in a container in the New York harbor and the
Chinese U.N. Ambassador is assassinated in the midst of delivering a
speech. Because he was in the wrong place at the right time, Snipes is
accused and the only witness who can prove his innocence is a Chinese
translator (Marie Matiko).  Meanwhile, Donald Sutherland is the
U.N. Secretary General, a Canadian, with Anne Archer as his
iron-fisted chief of security. Maury Chaykin is a senior FBI agent
with his own agenda, while Michael Biehn is Snipes' partner. And
Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa is a successful entrepreneur, an Eastern cowboy
straddling two cultures. Director Christian Duguay relishes the
gratuitous, realistic violence of Wayne Beach and Simon Davis Barry's
script, but it's Snipes' hip, cool charisma that ties the enigmatic
story together, On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Art of War" is
a slick, synchronous 7, the final summer popcorn picture. "It's the
game that makes us tick" - and Wesley Snipes is the winner here.

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated: R for strong violence, language, drug use, nudity, and some sexuality. 
Starring: Wesley Snipes, Anne Archer, Michael Chaykin, Donald Sutherland, 
Marie Matiko. 
I've never fully understood Wesley Snipes's career. He has his ups and downs, 
but mostly the downs. His best movie was one of the best of 1998 and that 
movie was entitled "Blade". He has had his typical action movies, "Boiling 
Point", "Passenger 57", but his new movie "The Art of War" should just be 
called "Rising Sun 2: The Art of War" cause basically it's a semi-remake of 
the same plot, with a different cast, and forced to be a ridiculously 
unbelievable thriller, that is high on style and low on substance. 
Wesley Snipes plays a James Bondish type secret agent working for the U.N. 
After a chinese ambassador is killed, he is on the track of the killer, 
trying to find out who it is, how it happened, where the killer was, and what 
to do. Anne Archer plays his "boss" type person of the U.N. and she has hired 
Snipes to track down the killer. Well Snipes is mistakenly framed as the 
killer, and is now an outlaw, kidnapping a Chinese woman with him, and having 
her help him along the way. All this leads to a finale that is so dumb, and 
so stupid that is it unbelievably dumb, and the stunts, dialogue and acting 
all ruin this movie. 
Wesley Snipes isn't one of my favorite actors because of the fact that the 
character he plays in every movie is the same character he plays in the movie 
before. The only good role Snipes has really had was in 1998's "Blade". I 
walked into "The Art Of War" expecting a good, high octane thriller, and all 
I got was a pile of mush. The only real 'good' thing the movie has is action, 
and plenty of it, but I noticed it is badly filmed, the camera is so shaky 
you cannot even tell what is going on. The ending finale is so worthless and 
pitiful, that it even tries to mock "The Matrix", laughably funny, it is 
undeniably stupid. 
Christian Duguay's direction is also not that great. His camera angles and 
sense of style are all in place, but sadly his lighting and editing are all 
badly done. Even the whole "Matrix" ending wasn't even good. The stunts and 
action are badly filmed, and badly choreographed. His placing of the 
characters, and the assination of the Chinese Ambassador, and the plotting of 
the movie are so predictable and laughable, that it just takes all the fun 
out of the entire movie. Anne Archer who is usually good in her roles, turns 
in a horrible job here. She is sour, downbeat, and dreadfully dull with her 
forced dialogue, and dumb moves. Even Donald Sutherland as a co-star can't 
save this movie from being a bust. 
So for an overall opinion: "The Art of War" is a total waste of time. It's 
not entertaining, nor exciting, or even action packed. It is a pointless 
movie, and makes absolutely no sense at all. If you really want to see a good 
version of "The Art of War", rent the Wesley Snipes and Sean Connery action 
vehicle of the same kind "Rising Sun", it isn't a great film either, but at 
least it's better than this. 

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Art_of_War_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        Sneaking onto screens relatively unheralded by its distributor
during the dog days of summer, _The_Art_of_War_ would appear to be one of
those dumpers/writeoffs with which the studios traditionally clog late
August.  But for a good portion of its running time, director Christian
Duguay's spy thriller is slickly, efficiently put together, featuring
more than a few effective action sequences.  Which makes it all the more
unfortunate that, in the end, the film slips off the rails.
        Wesley Snipes lends his usual blend of charisma and conviction to
the role of Shaw, a deep cover United Nations operative who is introduced
as he engages in some Bond-like derring-do at a millennium party in
China.  Little does he know this will be his introduction to some of the
key players in a conspiracy in which he later finds himself entangled. 
Six months later, a container filled with dead Chinese refugees is found,
and soon after, a Chinese ambassador is assassinated.  Accused of the
latter, Shaw goes underground and, with the help of a U.N. translator
(Marie Matiko), sets out to find the truth, which turns out to be more
complex and far-reaching than he imagined.
        As can be easily gleaned from the plot synopsis, Wayne Beach and
Simon Davis Barry's script for _The_Art_of_War_ is hardly groundbreaking,
and, in all honesty, neither is Duguay's direction of it.  But he does
make the material quite watchable.  The action scenes, many of which are
designed to showcase Snipes' martial arts skills, are decently handled,
and he comes up with some interesting stylistic flourishes, particularly
in one scene where Shaw studies the apartment of a murdered colleague;
the use of flashbacks proves to be an economical storytelling device--in
this instance, at least.
        While Snipes remains convincing throughout the entire film, the
film itself doesn't.  As is the case with these conspiracy thrillers,
there are late-inning twists abound, but the logistics render the already
cloudy plot even murkier.  The sense of overkill that ultimately does in
the script spreads to other areas in the film, including some of the
actors (whose names I won't divulge in the interest of protecting plot
points).  But no one gets infected more than Duguay.  His kinetic visuals
soon get out of control; the flashback device that had been employed well
in the early going gets overused, and for no apparent purpose.other than
to show off.
        Even if _The_Art_of_War_ didn't lose its way in the end, it still
wouldn't be a great film; it's much too standard a genre picture to be
something truly special.  But considering how right the film feels most
of the way, it wouldn't have been too hard for Duguay to make a
reasonably satisfying formula film.  Instead, _The_Art_of_War_
illustrates how easily one can drop the ball down the stretch.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Art of War (2000)
Wesley Snipes, Anne Archer, Maury Chaykin, Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa, Donald
Sutherland, Michael Biehn, Marie Matiko, Liliana Kmorowska, James Hong.
Screenplay by Wayne Beach and Simon Davis Barry, based on a story by
Beach. Directed by Christian Duguay. 117 minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Don't be misled by its title. "The Art of War" sounds intriguing, but
the actual film is just another glossy B-movie thriller, the kind of
forgettable action fare that turns up at odd hours on TV with titles
like "Strike Force," "Terminal Impact," or "Deadly Velocity." Besides
Wesley Snipes' charisma, the most interesting facet of this production
is its peculiar outlook on the capacities of the human body.
During most of "The Art of War," gravity is, at best, an inconvenience.
When chased by an opponent, characters routinely leap off the top of
tall buildings, plummeting hundreds of feet only to emerge unscathed.
Apparently, the trick is to use glass ceilings of adjacent structures to
break your fall. In the absence of a glass roof, simply tuck and roll
just before hitting the concrete far below. And don't worry about broken
glass. Although it makes a great sound while shattering, it will not cut
you.
Important safety tip: These rules apply only until the climactic battle
scene. During the-fight-to-end-all-fights, a 10-foot-fall will knock the
combatants into a stupor and a shard of glass can prove deadly (but only
to a bad guy).
Originally intended as a Jet Li vehicle, the story begins in Hong Kong
at a lavish party on December 31, 1999 (I wonder how long this lil' epic
sat on the shelf). China is finally ready to sign a trade treaty, with
United Nations Ambassador Wu (James Hong) and his assistant David Chan
(Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa) working closely with U.N. Secretary General
Thomas (Donald Sutherland) on the historic agreement.
Meanwhile, a group of dead Chinese refugees are discovered packed away
at the New York harbor by wheezy Agent Cappella (Maury Chaykin).
Cut to the U.N., where Wu is assassinated while delivering his key
speech. FBI Agent Neil Shaw (Snipes) leaps into action, chasing the
killer off several rooftops. It turns out that there is an elaborate
scheme to block the treaty, one that soon draws in Shaw, his
wisecracking partner Bly (Michael Biehn), their boss, Eleanor Hook (Anne
Archer) and U.N. translator Julia (Marie Matiko).
Readers concerned about plot descriptions that give away the ending of a
film have nothing to fear in this review. The convoluted storyline is so
confusing that I couldn't explain all the twists and turns even if I
wanted to. Basically, Agent Shaw spends 117 minutes chasing bad guys or
being chased by both good and bad guys, pausing only long enough to drag
poor Julia into the fray.
Director Christian Duguay seems far more concerned with style than
substance, devoting most of his attention to fights, flights and
gadgets. In fact, a way-cool palm sized computer gets almost as much
screen time as Snipes.
After roughly an hour of struggling to keep up with the plot, I
surrendered and simply tried to enjoy the excesses of the production. On
a guilty pleasure level, there are moments to savor.
Like the scene where Agent Cappella states, "So our boy gets rescued by
the Triad, pops one in the melon and turns the rest into Chinese salsa."
Who says that quality film writing is dead?
Or the early segment where Agent Shaw parachutes off the top of a
skyscraper. A bad guy leans over the edge and uses a machine gun to cut
the chute in half right down the middle, forcing Shaw to make one of his
dazzling tuck and roll landings. Now, to split a parachute in half from
above, the bullets must be aimed directly at the top of Shaw's head, but
somehow, he manages to land without a scratch. I guess top-notch FBI
agents come equipped with bulletproof hair.
Despite the tsunami of illogic, Wesley Snipes plays it straight and the
talented actor projects an appealing James Bond vibe. Several supporting
players also show some flair, although the overloaded screenplay allows
scant time for any of them to shine.
Compared to most of the utter dreck released this August, "The Art of
War" was easy to sit through. Remember, though, that due to my job, I
don't have to pay to see this stuff. For those who must shell out
hard-earned cash for movies, I suspect the minor pleasures of this one
will be best enjoyed on a TV screen at home, where it should turn up in
three to four months tops. In the meantime, stick with films like "The
Matrix," where invulnerable heroes making gravity-defying leaps remain
in a fantasy world more appropriate to their superhuman skills.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Christian Duguay's THE ART OF WAR, it's death by noise.  No, not the 
characters' deaths, yours.  With its explosive sound effects and Normand 
Corbeil's bombastic score, the film is an Excedrin headache for viewers.
Wesley Snipes (BLADE) works in a covert UN operation so tough that it 
would make the CIA envious.  (Bet you didn't even know that the UN had a 
secret operation.)  A high-ranking Chinese diplomat is assassinated on 
the eve of a big trade agreement, so Snipes, as agent Shaw, goes into 
action.  The generic plot isn't important as it just provides the 
pretext for lots of fighting and gore.  The high-kicking Snipes looks 
like a black Jet Li auditioning to be the next James Bond.  The picture 
itself, with its glitzy skyscraper locales, wants badly to be the next 
ENTRAPMENT, which it isn't.
With its awful dialog, the movie works best when it shuts up.  Eleanor 
Hooks (Anne Archer), aide to U.N. Secretary General Douglas Thomas 
(Donald Sutherland), says, for example, "My instinct tells me that 
something is lurking under the surface." 
What's lurking isn't a lot of brains.  When Shaw hears from his partner, 
Bly (Michael Biehn), over their communication system that Bly has been 
shot, Shaw doesn't bother asking his location.  Instead, Shaw goes 
around screaming and runs right into danger himself.  
Another time, as Agent Cappella (Maury Chaykin) is lying on the ground, 
the bad guys come in to finish him off.  These dumb villains have never 
heard of bulletproof vests, so they make sure that Cappella's dead by 
shooting him in the chest rather than the head.  Getting up alive 
afterwards, the director has Cappella take off his shirt to show us the 
vest.  He doesn't think we would be smart enough to figure that out on 
our own.
If all it takes to earn your entertainment dollars are audio assaults on 
your ears and bloody images for your eyes, THE ART OF WAR may be just 
your ticket.  Those who demand a bit more from a movie will be bitterly 
disappointed.
THE ART OF WAR runs 1:57.  It is rated R for strong violence, some 
sexuality, language and brief drug content and would be acceptable for 
older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
John Beachem
Agent Neil Shaw (Wesley Snipes) is a covert ops agent for the UN (I didn't 
even know the UN had a covert ops unit). He and his teammate, Bly (Michael 
Biehn), are employed by the Secretary General, Douglas Thomas (Donald 
Sutherland), and his right-hand man (his words, not mine), Eleanor Hooks 
(Anne Archer). His latest assignment involves spying on a Chinese diplomat 
(James Hong), who gets assassinated right in front of Shaw's eyes. Soon Shaw 
is on his own, after his teammates are killed, and he's running from both 
the Chinese and the Americans, since they believe he killed the diplomat. 
Thrown into the mix is a Chinese version of Donald Trump (movie's words, not 
mine), David Chan (Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa), who may know more about the 
assassination than he's letting on. The only person on his side is a Chinese 
reporter, Julia Fang (the very cute Marie Matiko), who knows he wasn't the 
assassin. Against him is FBI agent Frank Capella (Maury Chaykin), who is 
investigating a different crime which seems to link to the slain diplomat. 
Now Shaw and Julia have only 24 hours to clear his name, before...
... where was I? Sorry, I sort of drifted off for a minute there. "The Art 
of War" is something of an anomaly amongst action movies. It's an action 
movie which is intent on featuring as little action as possible. That's why, 
despite the fact that I'd had plenty of sleep, I was drifting off every 
twenty minutes or so. So what does Duguay ("Screamers") insert instead of 
action? Some of the worst dialogue you're likely to hear. "The Art of War" 
is an action movie with no action; a political thriller with no thrills; and 
a mystery you'll have figured out in the first twenty five minutes. Alright, 
alright, I know there's only one real question on your mind, and it's that 
you want to know if it's entertaining. I'm afraid not. In fact, you'll 
probably be indulging in one of three different activities rather than 
watching the movie. You might be snoring (quite a few people in the audience 
at my showing were doing that), you might me checking your watch (I wish I 
could have been doing that, but my pocket-watch has no indiglo), or you 
might be chatting with your neighbor (the rest of the audience was doing 
that). In case you're wondering, I was busy doodling on my notebook. Why am 
I sitting here, rambling about everyone's activities during the movie? 
Because writing a review for a truly dull movie is almost as bad as watching 
one.
Ah the acting, the acting is certainly one of the more dismal points to "The 
Art of War". Wesley Snipes has two acting modes: Slyly humorous and friendly 
(like in "Major League"), and gruffly stoic (like in "Blade"). Snipes is in 
full stoic mode in "The Art of War", which is a shame because he might have 
brought some humor to the script otherwise. Instead, the humor all comes 
from Maury Chaykin ("Cutthroat Island"). However, while Chaykin's brand of 
humor (which generally involves him quietly making strange comments) is 
rather amusing, it's completely out of place in this movie. Donald 
Sutherland does nothing more than chew scenery in a few scenes. Marie Matiko 
("Mystery Men"), who is a relative newcomer, plays Snipes's love interest (I 
think) in one of the most tacked on romances I've ever seen. That's not to 
say she does a poor job; it's just that her role was so useless she couldn't 
do much with it. Finally, we have Michael Biehn ("Aliens") and Anne Archer 
("Rules of Engagement"). I've always found Biehn to be one of the most 
underrated actors in Hollywood, turning in stellar performances in "The 
Abyss", "Terminator", and "Aliens". In "Rules of Engagement", Biehn seems to 
be going out of his way to prove me wrong. He overacts like no one this side 
of John Lithgow, he uses one of the worst Southern accents I've ever heard, 
and he fights like a girl. I could beat this guy up. Anne Archer, who I've 
never thought of as a particularly talented actress, just gives me more 
ammunition for my arguments against her.
Perhaps in the hands of a more skilled director, "The Art of War" could have 
been at least vaguely interesting. Afterall, Duguay's idea of neat 
directorial tricks are as follows: put little trails behind the bullets 
(pretty original, huh?); show us everything we've already seen in flashbacks 
as though we're too stupid to remember (I think the movie was actually an 
hour long, played twice); blast the soundtrack and sound effects at all 
times till the audiences' ears start bleeding; and throw in completely 
gratuitous nude scenes so as to appeal to young males who snuck in (most 
young males in my audience didn't catch the gratuitous nudity, they were too 
busy sleeping). Then again, with a script like this, maybe the director 
didn't make much of a difference. For all those (like me) who thought "The 
Perfect Storm" had horrendous dialogue, wait till you get to sit through 
this one. My personal favorite was Anne Archer saying: "My instinct tells me 
there is something lurking beneath the surface." She utters it with complete 
seriousness, and poor Donald Sutherland is forced to reply without bursting 
into hysterics (if you look at his face, it's obviously killing him).
So after all this complaining, are there any good points to "The Art of 
War"? Well, the first fifteen minutes have their moments. Snipes is sneaking 
into a skyscraper so he can blackmail a general into resuming peace talks 
(or something like that). The soundtrack during those few scenes is really 
quite good, and there are one or two decent action scenes (Snipes falling 
slowly towards earth using a damaged parachute). Also, Snipes may not be the 
world's best actor, but he does have some impressive moves. The film's 
ending goes on far past what was necessary, dragging on for about four 
scenes too many. One last thing - why do some directors (I won't name names) 
think audiences are so stupid that they feel a need to explain the most 
obvious ideas? In one scene, Maury Chaykin gets shot in the chest by an 
assassin after already being in a car accident. The assassin shoots him to 
ensure he's dead, obviously. After the assassin leaves, Chaykin stands up, 
curses a little, and proceeds to show us how he's miraculously still alive; 
a bulletproof vest! What wondrous invention is this? Apparently something 
fairly new since the assassin didn't even think to shoot Chaykin in the 
head. "The Art of War" runs an ungodly 117 minutes. I'd recommend it to no 
one and give it two out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
JONATHAN F RICHARDS
Screenplay by Wayne Beach and Simon Davis Barry
The Art of War is a movie that asks the question " How do you give a 
medal to someone who doesn't exist for something that didn't happen?" 
Specifically, it is Donald Sutherland who asks the question. Sutherland 
is the Secretary General of the UN, a post that this movie suggests is 
vaguely pathetic and faintly comical. He is speaking to the UN's head of 
covert operations, Anne Archer, to whom he sometimes plaintively 
suggests that maybe the UN shouldn't be doing this sort of thing. They 
are speaking of Wesley Snipes, the UN action hero who is under such deep 
cover that no one can acknowledge his existence. How anyone can break 
the amount of glass Wesley breaks and stay under deep cover is a matter 
of mystery. This is a man who will not go through the front door of a 
building if he can rappel down its face or crash through a skylight. 
When he does go through the front door, as he does at a diner, it's apt 
to be in a car. He has, quite literally, a chip on his shoulder.
This is neither as good a movie as you might hope, nor as bad as you 
might fear. There are some rousing action sequences, with Snipes showing 
off dazzling martial arts moves. He spends so much time leaping off high 
places he should get frequent flyer miles. There are flurries of clever 
dialogue. But it's a movie that gets lost in its elements, a movie that 
bogs down in a welter of plot and incident and action, a movie that 
ultimately fails because it is all trees and no forest. As the villain 
says, "You, like most people, fail to look at the big picture."
It's a movie built on racial profiling, a movie that believes that if 
you have one good Chinese you can make all the rest of them bad and 
you've covered your bases. You almost expect poor Wen Ho Lee to pop out 
of a closet waving some hard disks. Our good Chinese is Marie Matiko, 
who is Snipes's love interest, and who has something encrusted on her 
nose that you're relieved to discover is a diamond. There's no chemistry 
between them, but the movie comes up with a way of getting her naked 
that may catch on. Fleeing the scene of another explosion in a stolen 
car, Snipes tells her to get undressed. "Take all your clothes off," he 
orders. "How do you think they knew where we were? They've got you 
bugged!" What's a girl to do?
"The Art of War" is an ancient military text by Sun Tsu, who believed in 
winning by destroying the enemy from within. This movie is a step in 
that direction.

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/d891a13b4587813d8825694700009cdd?OpenDocument
Wesley Snipes is a master of selecting bad action roles.  Murder at
1600, U.S. Marshals, Money Train, Drop Zone, Boiling Point, and the
ultimate camp film - Passenger 57.  The Art of War is another entry in
this very ugly and unique category.  Ultimately, it is little more than
a ridiculous action film with a plot as believable as the Warren Report,
ugly violence that would have made Peckinpah cringe, and terrible acting
by B-list actors like Michael Biehn and Anne Archer.  Oddly, it feels
like the undiscovered sequel to another Snipes "masterpiece," Rising
Sun.
The movie revolves around the convenient story of a special UN operative
caught up in a secret murder conspiracy involving a Chinese ambassador,
the Chinese Triad Brotherhood, a rich Chinese businessman (played
bythat bad guy from Rising Sun, Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa) a Chinese UN
interpreter, and, inexplicably, Donald Sutherland.  The film ends with
more confusion than a boatload of Chinese immigrants trying to register
at Ellis Island.  Or should I say the film ends with the most blatant
ripoff of both The Matrix and all of John Woo's Hong Kong films
combined.
I am really at a loss to figure out why Wesley Snipes had the gumption
to not only star in this action dud but also act as one of the producers
of the film.  I usually enjoy Snipes' movies - though his dramatic roles
better show off his creativity as an actor than the flashiness of his
action films.  Simply, I am amazed by the how inane the script was,
filled with terrible cliches and extremely violent action sequences. 
Director Christian Duguay (Screamers) has a strange attraction to the
viciousness of violent acts -- showing splattering brains, people
impaled with broken shards of glass, and lots of gargling and gagging as
blood sprays everywhere.  It also sickens me to know that Oliver Stone,
one of the greatest directors working today, had his hand in producing
this monstrosity.  I guess Snipes sold Stone on the conspiracy angle and
Stone chose not to read the script, watch the dailies, be involved in
casting, or anything else -- or else he'd be filing a court order to
remove his name from the credits.
It's also seems evident that with the Russkies as our new bosom buddies
and the Middle Eastern terrorist angle being beaten to death in the last
couple of years that the new international enemies in Hollywood are the
Communist Chinese.  I'm sure over the next couple of months, even more
"Chinese conspiracy/martial-arts action flicks" are going to be popping
up in your local multiplex.
Hopefully they won't include Wesley Snipes.
Director: Christian Duguay
Writer: Simon Barry, Wayne Beach
Producers: Wesley Snipes, Oliver Stone, Dan Halsted
Starring: Wesley Snipes, Michael Biehn, Anne Archer, Donald Sutherland,
Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa, Maury Chaykin
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
