Title
Review for Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Scott Hunt
Review: Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999)
Review by Scott Hunt   Visit me at Movie Hunt
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html)
Cast: Forest Whitaker, Henry Silva, Cliff Gorman, John Tormey, Gene
Riffini, Victor Argo, Tricia Vessey, Isaach de Bankole', Camille Winbush
Director: Jim Jarmusch
Writer: Jim Jarmusch
Languid, yet pointed and focused, Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai
sublimely savages our cultural fascination with the mafia and the sleek,
ultra-cool, cinematic image of the hitman. Juxtaposing the samurai's
honor code of feudal Japan against the tradition bound modus operandi of
the american/italian mafia, it ceaselessly chips away with a sculptor's
precision at the archaic foundations of both as they lumber,
dinosaur-like, to function in the modern era. Director Jarmusch
gleefully plays the iconoclast, ripping into Mafioso precepts with
splashes of acidic wit. Using a palate of bleached colors, Jarmusch
lugubriously maintains a tone of desolation that belies the many sparks
of laugh out loud humor punctuating the film. He doesn't cater to
audience expectations of hyper-colorized, stylized violence and gunplay
where no one dies. The action is presented in flat, brutal codas.
Bullets have permanence. Death has consequences. The movie rises beyond
standard conventions to become a meditation on the concepts of honor and
loyalty. It is an anti-movie, of sorts. There are few photogenic,
empathetic characters for the audience to fall in love with. This isn't
a film that lovingly holds your hand. There are dark, contemplative
moments and the film firmly holds you by the shoulder, just so,
asserting itself for all to see.
The fulcrum for the movie's thematic balancing act is Ghost Dog, a mafia
hitman. A twist on the stereotypical image of the mob enforcer, Ghost
Dog is a hilarious contradiction in terms. Unlike the sleek, muscular
killing machines one is accustomed to, we are given an inner city black
man who is overweight and slovenly, replete with chapped, dirty hands
and rumpled clothing. He wears a hooded sweatshirt, which he often pulls
over his head, giving him a monk-like appearance. There are no acrobatic
back flips and shiny super guns in his arsenal. He uses old, worn
weapons and simply goes about his tasks in economical, efficient and
pleasureless fashion. Ghost Dog is a disciple of the old ways of the
samurai, distilling the essence of his life through the filter of a
book, which he reads daily, Hagakure: The Way of the Samurai. Life
consists of simple pleasures for him: ice cream, warm rooftop naps and
good books. Ghost Dog lives, as it were, by the basic tenet expressed by
his book; one should start each day considering oneself as dead. Living
atop an abandoned building, surrounded by his flock of pet carrier
pigeons, Ghost Dog exists in a netherworld lacking creature comforts and
friends. He craves nothing more. As he puts it late in the film, "I've
seen all I want to see." He exists in a spiritual world of the mind,
gaining moral sustenance from his readings.
Ghost Dog wasn't always as he is presented. In several Roshomon-like
flashbacks, it's shown how Ghost Dog was assaulted by racist white males
and beaten nearly to death until the timely intervention of a Good
Samaritan, that "Samaritan" being a foot soldier in an aging crime
family. Ghost Dog pledges his life to the service of the man, Louie
(Tormey), as repayment. After years of loyal service, Ghost Dog is sent,
by Louie, to kill "Handsome Frank", a made man within Louie's
organization who has run away with the crime boss's daughter, Louise
(Vessey). Ghost Dog wordlessly executes his task, witnessed by Louise,
whom he spares, as she sits watching a Betty Boop cartoon, clutching a
copy of the book, Roshomon. In a bit of synchronicity, Louise loans the
book to Ghost Dog.
Upset that Frank was taken out by someone not from the family, the mob
bosses, in turn, put out a hit on Ghost Dog in a perverse twist of
loyalty to their assassinated comrade. The rest of movie holds the dated
value systems of both the mafia and Ghost Dog up to the light of a new
millennium with many acerbic asides as the two come factions come into
conflict.
The theme of old cartoons flares up time and again, each time showing
cartoon violence that is in sharp counterpoint to the reality of Ghost
Dog's world. Each time a character is shown watching a cartoon, it's
from the same era, Betty Boop, Felix the Cat, etc., a reflection of days
gone by. Near the end, Louise is watching a cartoon that's a departure
from the previously shown ones. It's a bit of audacity on Jarmusch's
part that is nicely effective, despite it's surrealistic nature.
As Ghost Dog floats through his world, his life is touched by two
people. One is a sage little girl (Winbush) who connects with Ghost Dog
through their love of reading. She comes to symbolize a melding of the
old ways and  new sensibilities, just as Louise ultimately does. By
film's end, the fact that Jamusch is so effective at illustrating the
tenuous bond between the two is a testament to his skill as a writer.
The other person in Ghost Dog's world is an ice cream (de Bankole')
vendor who only speaks french, yet intuitively shares a rapport with
Ghost Dog. The vendor is the literal stranger in a strange land.
Jarmusch, through rapper/composer RZA,  underscores his film with rap
and reggae music, which at first blush seems dichotomous, but its primal
rhythms serve to strengthen the fundamental nature of the movie. Ghost
Dog seems to draw some type of strength from the rap music he listens to
as he negotiates the streets in various stolen cars. (Which, in and of
itself, presents another paradox about Ghost's Dog's sense of honor.)
The head Mafioso is played by Henry Silva with a stone faced
resignation. Of all the cartoonish mobsters, he is the only one who
appears self aware of his state in the world. Gorman plays Sonny, a
lieutenant who respects the old ways, yet has a quirky affinity for rap
music, a love comically shown in several impromptu displays. Ruffini
seems the truest reflection of the mafia. He is a husk of a man,
assisted by two hearing aids, who barks out advice without truly hearing
what he, or others are saying.
Whitaker carries the film by using what truly great actor's use, his
face. Ghost Dog is reticent to speak, often going for long periods
without doing so. The fact that Whitaker can convey such a wide range of
emotion through a gesture or look is a remarkable talent. Although the
film has a deliberate pace, some of the  late night drives and walks
taken by Ghost Dog dragged the momentum down.
Truly tragic is how Ghost Dog misinterprets Japanese honor in his final
confrontation with the mob. He reveals himself to be so desperate for
spiritual guidance through the Hagakure that he fails to truly adapt it
to what is real and true in his world. Carried on the shoulders of a
remarkable performance by Whitaker, Ghost Dog rises beyond being a
characterization or icon, into a figure that garners sympathy, if not a
bit of pity.

Author
Shay Casey
"Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai" is the kind of film that, despite
being written and directed by "arty" Jim Jarmusch, will be prematurely
dismissed by many as a superficial, testosterone-driven movie about
gangsta rappers with delusions of being samurai warriors -- a
glorified Wu-Tang album, so to speak. Containing music credited to
Wu-Tang producer RZA certainly doesn't help the film do away with that
sentiment. But such dismissals are unfair, because "Ghost Dog" has a
lot more substance to it than the trailers might have you
believe. It's a film that can be enjoyed on more than one level.  Upon
first glance, this is the adolescent fantasy of behaving like a
samurai in modern-day New York City. Upon deeper inspection, however,
there is a message here about adherence to tradition and adjustment to
change. Some viewers will see this, and some won't, just like the
characters in the film.
Forest Whitaker plays Ghost Dog, a large black man who lives in a
shack on a rooftop, raises pigeons, and studies the Way of the
Samurai. By night, he performs contract killings for an Italian
mobster named Louie (John Tormey).  We learn that Ghost Dog does this
because as a young man, he was saved by Louie from a pair of
ruffians. According to the samurai code, he must now take on the job
of Louie's "retainer," protecting him and obeying his commands. But a
problem occurs when Ghost Dog accidentally performs a killing in front
of the daughter of Louie's boss. The boss (Henry Silva) wants Ghost
Dog snuffed out. Louie explains that it won't be terribly easy,
because the assassin only communicates with him via carrier pigeon,
and he doesn't know exactly where he lives. The boss gives Louie a
choice: Ghost Dog's life, or his. For the sake of protecting his
master, Ghost Dog now must put his own life on the line.
There will probably be a large contingency of young males who consider
"Ghost Dog" a "cool" movie. And there is plenty of cool stuff going on
here: There are the ostensible and operatic fight scenes involving
lots of gunplay and slow-motion action. There is the hip-hop score
done by Wu-Tang's RZA, which is surprisingly not a *soundtrack*
(frequently a collection of songs thrown together to sell albums), but
is most definitely a film *score*, one written specifically to enhance
the movie it was written for. RZA does inspired, eclectic work here,
evoking various moods appropriate to particular scenes. The film is
also frequently funny, especially in a scene where Louie must explain
to his boss exactly who Ghost Dog is while the incredulous mobsters
look on. Despite its slow pacing and occasional inscrutability, "Ghost
Dog" has a good gangster movie plot and can most definitely be enjoyed
as a trivial popcorn flick.
There is, however, more going on in "Ghost Dog" than you'll see in
most popcorn flicks: It contains themes to be pondered. Director
Jarmusch firstly dives into the theme of displacement; he takes
ancient Japanese values and places them into a contemporary Western
setting. Whitaker, for his part, gives himself over to the material
thoroughly, every second presenting Ghost Dog as a man who staunchly
believes in his philosophy. He has nary a line of dialogue for the
first fifteen minutes of the film, and even afterwards his lines are
scarce, but Whitaker manages to deliver some inspired physical acting
to get his point across: His face will tell you everything, and he
moves uncannily well for a large man. The actor's conviction further
enforces the idea that Ghost Dog is a man who is out of place and
time, which helps bolster Jarmusch's vision. The director is
interested in how well such a man would handle modern-day values and
customs. The answer to Jarmusch's question is up for discussion.
Jarmusch starts his musing on the subject by contrasting Ghost Dog's
ways with that of his adversaries. The mobsters are portrayed as
bumbling fools who watch cartoons and stumble their way through
killings. There is a very good reason for this: All of them are at
least 50 years old. As presented by Jarmusch, the mobsters are past
their prime, a once-noble group that has lost its way and has failed
to attract any fresh blood. Ghost Dog, on the other hand, follows his
code very closely. He kills no one unnecessarily, and he lives in
constant obedience to his master. The mobsters don't remember their
code; they've begun killing people without verifying their identities,
and they've lost respect for the traditions they once held dear.
They've gotten sloppy. This is why, during a confrontation, Ghost Dog
is able to effortlessly move through their lair: He is moving with
graceful and controlled movement while the mobsters, caught entirely
off-guard, fall one by one. Ghost Dog remembers his tradition, and has
applied it to modern technology (he holds a large collection of modern
weaponry, much of it state-of-the-art).
There is also an interesting theme brought up about the supposed lack
of communication between seemingly disparate people. Ghost Dog's best
friend is a Jamaican ice cream seller who speaks only French. But
despite the language barrier (Ghost Dog only speaks English), the two
somehow manage to speak to each other, frequently not realizing each
of them has said exactly the same thing. The mobsters likewise fail to
see just how similar their ways are to those of the samurai,
inner-city blacks, and Native Americans. ( An amusing moment comes
when one of the head mobsters reveals himself to be a closet Public
Enemy fan.) All of the groups refer to each other by nicknames, and
all of them hold very strong familial bonds. The mobsters don't
perceive these similarities, going on about how different they are
from "niggers" and "Indians." Jarmusch seems to imply that the ways of
both Ghost Dog and the mobsters will only succeed if the followers
rediscover their roots, their tradition, and continually reapply it to
an ever-changing world. It is also suggested that a girl Ghost Dog has
befriended may carry on the tradition in just such a manner.
I suppose much of what I've talked about in this review makes "Ghost
Dog: The Way of the Samurai" sound like a boring, impenetrable art
house film. It 's not. Yes, it does have some "deep" messages to
deliver, but "Ghost Dog" is also very entertaining. Nor is it a
perfect film: The conclusion is drawn out far too long and some of the
excerpts from the book Ghost Dog reads don' t make much sense at
all. And sometimes they make perfect sense. "Ghost Dog" is maddening
in that way, but fortunately, it's usually a good kind of
maddening. Sometimes the films that are the most flawed also have the
most to offer.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writer/director Jim Jarmusch's movies are frequently described as an
acquired taste, as in a taste that most viewers will never have nor care
to.  Personally, I have found some of his movies (DEAD MAN) absolutely
mesmerizing and worth many viewings and others (STRANGER THAN PARADISE)
almost unwatchable.  His latest, GHOST DOG: THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI,
falls somewhere in-between for me.
Blending equal parts of movies such as THE SEVEN SAMURAI, GOODFELLAS,
BOYZ N THE HOOD and HIGH NOON, GHOST DOG tells the story of a modern-day
samurai named Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker).  Ghost Dog, a ghetto-dwelling
owner of carrier pigeons, works as the retainer of a Mafioso master,
Louie (John Tormey), who once saved his life.  Having done a dozen
contract killings with absolute perfection, Ghost Dog is an ideal
employee.
The story has the mob hunting down Ghost Dog when one of his contracts
goes bad, through no fault of his own.
As the movie advances, it stops regularly for long passages of the
samurai code to be displayed on the screen.  These are read in
voice-over by Ghost Dog, who tries to live his life according to the
beliefs of the samurai.  ("Matters of great concern should be treated
lightly.  Matters of small concern should be taken seriously.")  The
problem with the passages is that many are obtuse, and frequently their
relationship to the action is relatively minimal.
The film works best when it goes for dead-pan comedy.  "They whacked
him," one of the wise guys remarks to another after a close relative is
killed.  "What are you gonna do?"  This fatalistic humor resonates with
the audience, but it doesn't occur nearly often enough.  The visuals of
the "made men", who've never met a cannoli they didn't like, trying to
run up stairs are funny, as are the scenes of these would-be sumo
wrestlers bonding with each other with lots of bear hugs.
Is there a market for self-consciously stylish movies about gangsters if
the films operate in what seems like slow-motion?  Jarmusch's die hard
fans will certainly want to see GHOST DOG.  To the others who find
themselves watching it, they may think that Jarmusch got one of the
samurai rules ("Emptiness is form.") turned around.
GHOST DOG: THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI runs 1:55.  It is rated R for strong
violence and language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Black_and_White_ (R) * 1/2 (out of ****)
_Ghost_Dog:_The_Way_of_the_Samurai_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
Earlier this week, the _Los_Angeles_Times_ ran a story on how "hip-hop
aesthetic" has moved beyond the traditional cinematic barriers of urban
crime movies and into the work of established white filmmakers, as seen
in two films, _Black_and_White_ and _Ghost_Dog:_The_Way_of_the_Samurai_. 
Aside from that shared sensibility, however, the two films could not be
more different--in intent and quality.
The trailers for James Toback's _Black_and_White_ make it look like a
run-of-the-mill 'hood drama, but Toback has a deeper concern in mind.  As
the title suggests, his film wants to explore the relations between
blacks and whites, namely the influence of hip-hop culture on white
youths--this issue in addition to telling a crime story as a hook.  His
intention is noble, but it's in Toback's execution that he manages to
fail in everything he sets out to do.
Toback makes a fundamental miscalculation in his exploration of
hip-hop-influenced white kids.  While he does stick with a fairly large
core of characters (played by Bijou Phillips, William Lee Scott, Elijah
Wood, Gaby Hoffmann, and Eddie K. Thomas) as they are followed by a
filmmaker (Brooke Shields) doing a documentary on the subject, the focus
of this group is narrow.  The two characters that are given the most
attention--the ones played by Phillips, Scott, and Thomas--are from
wealthy families, and while they say otherwise, it's too easy to read
their embrace of hip-hop culture as an act of rebellion against their
strict parents.  Where are the hip-hop-loving white kids from
lower-income families, the ones who can best relate to rap's common theme
of the ghetto life?
Toback has slightly better luck with the more traditional
cops-and-crooks plot thread, which served as the main selling point in
the trailer.  A college hoops star (Allan Houston of the New York Knicks)
gets caught accepting a bribe to throw a game, and the only way he can
get himself off the hook is to rat out a childhood friend (Power), a
gangsta with aspirations in rap music.  Ben Stiller, as the police
detective on the case, gives the story a manic urgency that it would not
otherwise have, for the inexperience of two other key players--Houston
and Claudia Schiffer, who plays his girlfriend--shows up too clearly on
the screen.  But better performances would not be able to offset the
story's unsatisfying resolution.
Similarly, some smaller pleasures to be found in _Black_and_White_
cannot justify the excess baggage that comes with them.  The
much-discussed, and indeed memorable, mid-film scene between Robert
Downey Jr. (playing Shields' gay husband) and Mike Tyson (playing
himself) isn't worth having to sit through Downey's indulgent theatrics
the rest of the way--especially in the woeful climactic scene between him
and an even worse Shields.  Throwaway cameos, from everyone from Method
Man to Brett Ratner, provide fleeting interest but don't add much to the
mix aside from clutter--which contributes to how one most easily
remembers _Black_and_White_ as being: a mess.
The plot of Jim Jarmusch's _Ghost_Dog_ could easily be ripped from a
standard urban crime film: a hitman (Forest Whitaker, superbly subtle)
working for the mob has his employer turn on him when a hit goes awry. 
But this being a Jarmusch film, there has to be an idiosyncratic twist,
and here it is the hitman's philosophy of living by the code of the
samurai.  Instead of being a quirky gimmick, this character trait
enhances the film, turning what could be an average pulpy yarn into
something at once more solemn and exciting to watch: a poetic meditation
on mortality and honor that delivers the action and suspense of any good
gangster film--all set to a moody rap score (by RZA).  
Unlike _Black_and_White_, which is content to adhere to hip-hop's common
perception--that is, being brash and in-your-face--_Ghost_Dog_ is more
interested in exploring the additional possibilities of the aesthetic's
use.  While that alone doesn't make Jarmusch's film more effective, it
certainly is a major reason why.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/43351ef3c2564bcb8825688400610dcc?OpenDocument
GHOST DOG: THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI
A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright Filmcritic.com 2000
Written and directed by Jim Jarmusch, GHOST DOG: THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI
embodies a variety of genres from Mobster to Urban to Martial Arts.
Jarmusch, critically acclaimed for MYSTERY TRAIN (1989) and STRANGER
THAN PARADISE (1984), stays true to his uniquely languid and methodical
style in telling the fascinating story of Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker -
THE CRYING GAME, PHENOMENON), a contract killer who has isolated himself
from society by taking refuge in a shack atop an inner city rooftop that
he shares with a flock of pigeons.
 Ghost Dog studies the early eighteenth century Japanese warrior code
from the book, Hagakure: The Way of the Samurai, and the story is told
as a sequence of verses from the ancient text.  Each morning he bows to
the altar he has constructed and practices the ancient disciplines of
the samurai training.  In the spirit of the ancient warriors, he has
pledged his loyalty to a single master, a small-time mobster named Louie
(John Tormey - KISS ME GUIDO, JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE), who saved Ghost Dog's
life when he was young.  As an assassin, Ghost Dog communicates only via
carrier pigeon and moves through the night like a phantom, killing with
the skill and speed of a true Samurai.
 Louie is a foot soldier in a struggling and aging crime family headed
by Ray Vargo (Henry Silva).  Acting on orders, Louie hires Ghost Dog to
kill Handsome Frank (Richard Portnow), a "made man" and lover of the
boss' daughter Louise (Tricia Vessey).  Unfortunately, Louise happens to
be in Frank's apartment when Ghost Dog offs Handsome Frank, and now the
infuriated mob boss Vargo wants the hit-man dead.  Using the wisdom and
insight that he has learned from Hagakure and other ancient Eastern
books, Ghost Dog must now confront the notorious crime family, or die.
Jarmusch's signature of inimitable characters with distinctive humor is
apparent throughout, as both the mobsters and Ghost Dog are ruthless yet
remain loveable.  The film's score is a compilation of hip-hop and
reggae beats done by The Rza, Wu Tang Clan's founder, and it effectively
underscores Ghost Dog's ascetic spirituality along with the harsh tones
of the surrounding urban environment.  The story is well written, and
Forest Whitaker's performance is moving.  Also noteworthy is the jovial,
French, ice cream vendor, Raymond (Isaach de Bankole).  Raymond doesn't
understand a word of English, and Ghost Dog doesn't speak any French,
yet the two have a platonic understanding of one another that lets them
speak, despite the language barrier.
On the flip side, my only qualm is that the film is too slow at certain
points and may have benefited from some good editing.  Also, Ghost Dog's
stroll is appropriately meticulous in keeping with the method of the
Samurai, but towards the end, I was fed up with his overly deliberate
pace.
All in all, I highly recommend GHOST DOG -- it is truly an original.  No
other filmmaker has made such a bold statement about the parallels of
societal violence that exist between cultures, whether Ancient Eastern,
Mafioso, or Urban gangster.  Fans of any of the three genres will be
sure to enjoy this one.
Writer/Director: Jim Jarmusch
Starring: Forest Whitaker, John Tormey, Cliff Gorman, Frank Minucci,
Richard Portnow, Tricia Vessey, Henry Silva, Gene Ruffini, Frank Adonis,
Victor Argo, Isaach de Bankole, Camille Winbush
Producers: Jim Jarmusch, Ricard Guay, Diana Schmidt
MPAA Rating: R
Year of Release: 1999
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
In his previous films, writer/director Jim Jarmusch (Dead Man) seemed to
take great pride in fusing different cultures together, and Ghost Dog:
The Way of the Samurai is certainly no different.  The picture stars
Forest Whitaker (Light it Up) as the titular Ghost Dog, a stealthy
hit-man that follows an ancient Samurai code while working for New
Jersey mobsters.  Ghost Dog gives its protagonist a best friend that
can't speak English and features a blistering hip-hop score from Wu-Tang
Clan's RZA.
While that description may make Ghost Dog sound like a mess of a film,
it remains pleasantly simple.  Ghost Dog is a withdrawn, ninja-like
loner that lives in a shack on the roof of a Jersey apartment building
with his pigeons.  He makes homemade weapons and burglary devices, and
follows a strict ethical code that he follows to the letter.  Constantly
reading and referring to `Hagakure: The Way of the Samurai,' an 18th
century Japanese code for warrior discipline, Ghost Dog insists on
communicating with his bosses solely through carrier pigeons and is paid
annually on the first day of autumn for the previous year's work.
How does a guy this quirky get hooked up with the mob, you ask?  Years
ago, a young Ghost Dog was saved during a beat-down by a gangster named
Louie (John Tormey, Kiss Me Guido), who took the pup under his wing (in
this scene, Ghost Dog is played by Damon Whitaker, Forest's younger
brother) and slowly entrusts him with bigger and bigger tasks.
On one particular job, Ghost Dog is told to `take care of' a mobster
named Handsome Frank (Richard Portnow, Howard Stern's dad in Private
Parts), who is boffing Louise (Tricia Vessey, The Alarmist), the red-hot
daughter of Vargo (Henry Silva, The End of Violence), the family's Don.
Ghost Dog follows through on the hit, but is caught off-guard by
Louise's presence at the scene.  Louise's cool demeanor and the fact
that she's reading `Rashomon' momentarily unnerves Ghost Dog and he
quickly splits, becoming a target of the Mafia's wrath for leaving a
witness to the hit.
Throw in Ghost Dog's odd relationships with a French-speaking ice cream
hawker and a young girl from the projects that shares his fondness for a
good read, and you've gotwell, you've got a Jarmusch film.  His work is
generally geared much more toward character development than they are
plot-driven, and Ghost Dog is no exception.  His Mafia characters are
almost cartoonish in nature, a point that the director emphasizes by
having the Don watch Felix the Cat, Woody Woodpecker, Itchy & Scratchy
and Betty Boop.
Jarmusch also uses quotes from `The Hagakure' as title card bumpers
between scenes.  The idea seems okay, but some of them are particularly
absurd .  Imagine you're enjoying a film and are hit with something like
`There is something to be learned from a rainstorm. When meeting with a
sudden shower, you try not to get wet and run quickly along the road.
But doing such things as passing under the eaves of houses, you still
get wet. When you are resolved from the beginning, you will not be
perplexed, though you still get the same soaking.'  Dude, if I wanted to
use my brain, I would have stayed home and read a book.
Still, Jarmusch does wonders with the culture clash between gangster,
samurai and hip-hop.  One of the goons admits that Flava Flav is his
favorite rap star, quoting the Public Enemy second-fiddle with his tough
Jersey accent.  Cinematography wiz Robby Müller, who also worked on Dead
Man, gives Ghost Dog a dark, seedy look, and RZA's score is likely to be
one of the year's best.
1:55 - R for strong violence and language

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie scripts, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I'm gonna be honest here and tell you that I just wasn't a big fan of Jim
Jarmush films before I saw this movie. Okay, so I had only seen two of them,
MYSTERY TRAIN, which I barely remembered liking or not, and DEAD MAN, which
is pretty much the movie that I use as a benchmark to compare all other
movies that are crap on a stick. I truly, truly hated that movie. Besides
being boring, pointless and slow, it oozed of pretentious symbolism which I
personally found to be uninvolving, uninteresting and just plain
unentertaining.
So as you could imagine, I was carrying plenty of baggage when I entered the
theatre, but surprised was I to find myself truly, truly diggin' this son of
a bitch flick! Original, witty, engaging (okay, so he still hasn't learned
to move things along quickly, but somehow, the slowness worked in this
movie) and just plain cool.
PLOT:
The life of a loner, black, samurai hitman for the Italian mafia is uprooted
when the mobsters decide that they don't exactly want him around any longer.
CRITIQUE:
A quirky, unique fable featuring the most original character to hit the
screen in years, a kickass, groovy atmospheric hip-hop soundtrack, funny,
absorbing characters, all spread underneath a comforting layer of deep
philosophical Samurai gospel. Sound interesting to you? Well, like I said
earlier, initially this film didn't appeal to me either, but having seen it,
I feel like going out and buying myself a goddamn Ghost Dog T-Shirt! That
guy rules! And if you think Vin Diesel rocked in PITCH BLACK (7/10), wait
until you see this mutha! He's a mix between Travis Bickle and Jean Reno's
character from THE PROFESSIONAL, all spliced beneath an entertaining layer
of Zen-like philosophies. He's also a wee bit mysterious. Of course, this
film isn't for everyone. I could see how this wouldn't really "play" in the
big houses, with its deliberately slow pace, unusual tactics (one dude
speaks French the whole movie with subtitles) and overbearing soundtrack,
but it's like I said...it all seemed to work for me!
Maybe it's because I am really sick of all the same formula granola that
I've been served for the first couple of months of this movie season, or
maybe I just really haven't seen a character this cool in a long, long time,
but no matter what the reason, this film just grew on me despite having its
slow moments and symbolic undertones. Did I really understand all the
flashcards spouting samurai parables between every other scene? No way, in
fact, I didn't get most of them, but strangely felt compelled to listen
closely and ponder over every one. Am I losing it? Perhaps. Some might say
that I am "growing", since I actually liked a "Jim Jarmush" film (mind you,
it's a watered down Jarmush). All's I know is that this movie had a
compelling little tale to tell, one bad mutha as its lead, Forest Whitaker
and his lazy eye performing admirably, and surprisingly, plenty of humor to
pepper along the way. I especially loved all of the third rate mobsters,
obviously spent and past their prime, but still acting very much their role.
And let's not forget the bloodshed, kids. Okay, so it's not a Schwarzenegger
body count, but considering that our Mr. Ghost Dog is, in fact, a
hitman...plenty of murders do take place. All of which are handled with
great style and technique. Of course, the man is extremely serious about his
job (when he's not talking to pigeons that is), likes to live his life
according to the ancient teachings of the Japanese samurai and even swishes
his gun into his holster, just as a seasoned samurai would his sword.
All in all, a refreshing new gangster film featuring a standout performance
by Whitaker, many funny moments, the original stylings of Jimmy Jarmush and
an extra cool soundtrack. A soundtrack that will be making an appearance in
my collection any day now.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The flashback sequences featuring the young Ghost Dog getting his butt
whupped feature none other than Damon Whitaker as said youngens. Of course
he looks a lot like Forest...cause he's his little brother.
The soundtrack for this movie was composed by RZA, of Wu-Tang Clan fame.
Real name is Robert Diggs, and he also makes a cameo appearance in this film
as the camouflage Samurai.

Author
Faust667@aol.com
It pains me to write off Jim Jarmusch's "Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai" as half-baked, but it truly is. It is also a half-cooked and undernourished tale of a cold-blooded hit man with little or no sense of individuality. 
Ghost Dog is the name of the hit man (Forest Whitaker), a lone wolf in an urban wasteland who performs hits for the mob. Basically, Ghost Dog is the retainer but he carries no phone and seems to have no mailing address. His only contact in the outside world is through a pigeon carrier that sends notes back and forth to his "master." You see Ghost Dog was once saved by this mob affiliate, referred to as the master, and now he has paid him back his respect by killing people for a living. Ghost Dog also avidly reads the ways of the Samurai, figuring his sense of loyalty and his brand of violence stems from it. He couldn't be more wrong as both are tested to the limit when a hit goes awry and now the mob want to kill the elusive, enigmatic hit man. 
"Ghost Dog" tries to be a fusion of hip-hop and gangster cliches coupled with Jarmusch's own brand of poetry, mixing in the urban wasteland of the titled character with the sense of grace and freedom, as witnessed by several shots of birds above tenements. There are many scenes of beauty and grace and all are succintly photographed by Robby Muller (who also shot the beautiful black-and-white "Dead Man," also directed by Jarmusch). Jarmusch, however, is not a stickler for narrative consistency and fails to bring any inner life to the crucial character of Ghost Dog. 
How are we suppose to view this man? As played with panache and glum looks by Forest Whitaker (who also played a similar character in "Diary of a Hitman"), Ghost Dog is the classic Man With No Name character with no real background or real sense of individuality. He seems to bond with the local French ice-cream truck vendor and with a young girl who likes to read books such as "Frankenstein," but essentially, this man has no friends and no family. All he has are his nest of pigeons and his loyalty to the so-called master whom he hardly sees much of. In an ironic twist, Ghost Dog gets paid only once a year and always during the first day of autumn as part of his contract by the master. Rarely do we get a glimpse of any humanity in the character - as played by Whitaker, he is a hooded hulk bereft of emotion or purpose other than to kill. He may lack individuality and truly has erroneous views on what being a samurai is next to being a cold-blooded hit man, but coldness and detac!
!
hment seem central to the charac
ter. I simply felt nothing, not even pity, for this remorseless man. Why did he choose to lead such a life? 
The film has some virtues, such as the casting of Cliff Gorman as the second-in-command of the mob who has trouble keeping up the rent for a Chinese restaurant backroom. I also enjoyed the scenes where Whitaker bonds with the French-speaking ice-cream truck vendor whom he never understands yet reiterates exactly what the other says. The violence is strong and brief, and there is a fine moment where a drainpipe is used as an unusual method of shooting someone (a moment lifted from Godard's "A Band Apart"). I also enjoyed seeing the exhausted gangsters trying to find the hit man, going from one tenement to another and coming up empty. It is also nice to see Jarmusch leaving his main character mute for the first forty-five minutes, thus allowing us to watch a man who is coming apart at the seams through Whitaker's expressive, haunting face. Unfortunately, just when a glimmer of hope appears at the end, we are still left with the same glum Ghost Dog we started with.    
For more reviews, go to JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        He moves through the night with the lumbering bulk of the grizzly
bear and the stealth of the sleek panther.  He cruises the urban NYC
streets in stolen luxury cars listening to his favorite gangsta grooves on
the surround sound.  He worships at a makeshift altar with incense and
oranges.  He sleeps with the pigeons.
        When he strikes, his hits are swift, effortless, and final.  He is
Ghost Dog and his ways are those of the Samurai.
        He, Ghost Dog, is played by Forest Whitaker in a lumbering, sleek
performance and he, Whitaker, is directed by Jim Jarmusch, the decidedly
inventive filmmaker of such oddball classics as "Stranger than Paradise"
and "Night on Earth."
        Whether or not you're a Jarmusch fan, it's hard to deny that his
films--quintessential indie successes all--have all paid strong attention
to casting.  Think John Lurie's laconic, deadpan turn in the melancholic
"Stranger than Paradise," or Screamin' Jay Hawkins as the larger-than-life
concierge of "Mystery Train," or Johnny Depp in "Dead Man."  And let's not
forget Roberto Benigni's star-making role in "Down by Law."
        Ghost Dog is a professional killer who lives the life of an 18th
century Samurai.  His bible is the "Hagakure," a little ivory book which
contains the ancient rites and rituals of the Japanese warrior and from
which Whitaker narrates, in voiceover, accompanying the film's periodic
title-boards.  Ghost Dog is devoutly loyal to his Lord and Master, a
small-time mobster called Louie (John Tormey), who once saved his life.
Unfortunately, Ghost Dog's latest contract now has its "complications" and
the bosses who ordered the hit want Ghost Dog whacked.
        With his hooded fleece pulled up high above his head like a monk's
habit, Ghost Dog moves from hit to hit with a briefcase full of guns and
gadgets and a brooding look on his benevolent face.  Although his
reputation is that he speaks to no-one and has no friends, Ghost Dog shares
some literary advice with a young girl he meets in the park, and
"converses" with his best friend, a French-speaking Jamaican ice cream
vendor who understands no English.  (Odd.  Jarmusch himself appeared as an
ice cream vendor in Billy Bob Thornton's accomplished "Sling Blade."  But
anyway...)
        This is a thoughtful, compelling performance from Whitaker--would
that they gave awards for this kind of film.
        In truth, Jarmusch's latest outing doesn't have much more than a
"mysterious contract killer hounded by disloyal crime syndicate" plotline
at its center but, as in all of his films, the writer/director embellishes
a simple storyline with richly drawn characters, evocative music (here
provided by hip-hop artist THE RZA), lush photography (Ghost Dog is shot
from end-to-end by veteran cinematographer Robby Müller), and a wicked
sense of humor.  There's a scene in which Louie tries to explain to a trio
of crime lords (Cliff Gorman, Henry Silva, and Victor Argo, fantastic faces
all) just how little he knows about Ghost Dog that is truly hysterical.
        From its evocative, pigeon's eye view opener to its closing high
noon showdown, "Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai" is another offbeat gem
from the offbeat, irreverent genius of Jim Jarmusch.  And it's the latest
in a long string of excellent performances from Forest Whitaker.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Ghost Dog: the Way of the Samurai
Rated  [R], 115 minutes
Starring Forrest Whitaker, John Tormey
Written and Directed by Jim Jarmusch
website: www.wayofthesamurai.com
IN SHORT: Deliberately paced urban samurai flick. Magnificent
performance by Forest Whitaker.
Cranky walked in to the screening of Ghost Dog with two preconceptions.
First: Somewhere in Hollywood there's a guy (sic) in an office who's job
it is to think of various genres that have never been combined in a
movie script before, which is normally as bad an idea as it sounds.
Second: I've never seen star Forest Whitaker give a bad performance.
And I don't know much about the Samurai way of life, for which Jim
Jarmusch's film provides more than adequate background. Each major scene
is preceded by a quote from the Hagakure an 18th century "manual" (sic)
of Samurai thought and behavior. The quotes all have their purpose; they
keep this story to a slow and deliberate pace, not unlike the Samurai we
see in this story, called Ghost Dog (Whitaker). "Slow" is a deliberate
ruse on a Samurai's part. When it is time to battle, he moves like a
cyclonic wind -- quick and deadly. A weapon is never drawn unless it is
to be used; though we see a sword used for practice, Ghost Dog's
preference is an arsenal well equipped with things that go "boom!"
Ghost Dog serves a Master he has seen, prior to the start of this flick,
only twice. Made-man Louie (John Tormey) once saved a much younger Dog
from street thugs. As an adult Samurai pledged to his service, Ghost Dog
communicates through the use of passenger pigeons, cooped near the
ramshackle rooftop shed that he lives in. It's a nice touch, as the
Master/Samurai relationship is as long extinct in the modern world as is
this species of pigeon.
The mobsters we see are middle aged, mostly overweight relics of an
older era. Louie has ordered Ghost Dog to kill Handsome Frank (Richard
Portnow), but the hit is witnessed by the Mob boss' daughter, Louise
(Tricia Vessey). Louise wasn't supposed to be present at the hit. The
boss, Vargo (Henry Silva), orders Ghost Dog to be put down, else Louie
will take the blame. As for the Samurai, there is one more thing you
should know: It is considered the ultimate disgrace to allow one's
Master to be killed (Masterless Samurai are called Ronin, and that film
of Frank Miller's graphic novel languishes in development hell.) While
anyone with half a brain can see the Ultimate Showdown coming a mile
away, getting there is a trip.
The bloodshed, when it comes, is fast and furious. Balancing it all is a
surprising amount of humor in Jarmusch's script, highlighted by a
totally whack performance by rapfan mobster Sonny Valerio (Cliff
Gorman).
Is there enough violence to make the teens happy? Doubtful. Is there
enough characterization and story for us grownups? tons. Cranky hopes
Ghost Dog isn't too slow-moving to break out of the arthouse market.
Whitaker's performance is so well worth seeing, it becomes the first
name on the list we keep locked away until December comes rolling
around.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai,
he would have paid...
Well above the arthouse average and Recommended.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
It pains me to write off Jim Jarmusch's "Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai" as
half-baked, but it truly is. It is also a half-cooked and undernourished tale of
a cold-blooded hit man with little or no sense of individuality. 
Ghost Dog is the name of the hit man (Forest Whitaker), a lone wolf in an urban
wasteland who performs hits for the mob. Basically, Ghost Dog is the retainer
but he carries no phone and seems to have no mailing address. His only contact
in the outside world is through a pigeon carrier that sends notes back and forth
to his "master." You see Ghost Dog was once saved by this mob affiliate,
referred to as the master, and now he has paid him back his respect by killing
people for a living. Ghost Dog also avidly reads the ways of the Samurai,
figuring his sense of loyalty and his brand of violence stems from it. He
couldn't be more wrong as both are tested to the limit when a hit goes awry and
now the mob want to kill the elusive, enigmatic hit man. 
"Ghost Dog" tries to be a fusion of hip-hop and gangster cliches coupled with
Jarmusch's own brand of poetry, mixing in the urban wasteland of the titled
character with the sense of grace and freedom, as witnessed by several shots of
birds above tenements. There are many scenes of beauty and grace and all are
succintly photographed by Robby Muller (who also shot the beautiful
black-and-white "Dead Man," also directed by Jarmusch). Jarmusch, however, is
not a stickler for narrative consistency and fails to bring any inner life to
the crucial character of Ghost Dog. 
How are we suppose to view this man? As played with panache and glum looks by
Forest Whitaker (who also played a similar character in "Diary of a Hitman"),
Ghost Dog is the classic Man With No Name character with no real background or
real sense of individuality. He seems to bond with the local French ice-cream
truck vendor and with a young girl who likes to read books such as
"Frankenstein," but essentially, this man has no friends and no family. All he
has are his nest of pigeons and his loyalty to the so-called master whom he
hardly sees much of. In an ironic twist, Ghost Dog gets paid only once a year
and always during the first day of autumn as part of his contract by the master.
Rarely do we get a glimpse of any humanity in the character - as played by
Whitaker, he is a hooded hulk bereft of emotion or purpose other than to kill.
He may lack individuality and truly has erroneous views on what being a samurai
is next to being a cold-blooded hit man, but coldness and detac!
hment seem central to the charac
ter. I simply felt nothing, not even pity, for this remorseless man. Why did he
choose to lead such a life? 
The film has some virtues, such as the casting of Cliff Gorman as the
second-in-command of the mob who has trouble keeping up the rent for a Chinese
restaurant backroom. I also enjoyed the scenes where Whitaker bonds with the
French-speaking ice-cream truck vendor whom he never understands yet reiterates
exactly what the other says. The violence is strong and brief, and there is a
fine moment where a drainpipe is used as an unusual method of shooting someone
(a moment lifted from Godard's "A Band Apart"). I also enjoyed seeing the
exhausted gangsters trying to find the hit man, going from one tenement to
another and coming up empty. It is also nice to see Jarmusch leaving his main
character mute for the first forty-five minutes, thus allowing us to watch a man
who is coming apart at the seams through Whitaker's expressive, haunting face.
Unfortunately, just when a glimmer of hope appears at the end, we are still left
with the same glum Ghost Dog we started with. 
For more reviews, go to JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com
or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Film Four on May 5, 2000; certificate 15; 116 minutes; 
countries of origin France/Germany/Japan/USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Jim Jarmusch; produced by Richard Guay, Jim Jarmusch.
Written by Jim Jarmusch.
Photographed by Robby Müller; edited by Jay Rabinowitz.
The hit man has no name. People in the neighbourhood just call him 'ghost 
dog'. He lives on the roof of a New York City apartment block, in an iron 
shack, surrounded by pigeons. His only friend is a Haitian ice-cream vendor 
who does not speak his language. Completely disconnected from reality, he 
uses the code of ancient samurai warriors as a guide on how to conduct his 
life and work.
"Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai" was written and directed by Jim Jarmusch, 
the perfect and perhaps only filmmaker for this material. He's fascinated by 
the quietly insane, or at least the quirky outsiders, of society. Think of 
the layabouts in "Stranger Than Paradise", the mixed bag of oddballs in 
"Mystery Train", the trio of plodding inept crooks in "Down By Law". Good old 
Jim has dedicated his career to looking at nutcases with a tender grin.
In "Ghost Dog", he makes clear that the plot will contain no surprises, so he 
can devote his attention to observing little details. The early scenes show 
us that Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker) does contract killings for a gang of 
Italian mobsters. He feels indebted to one of their number for saving his 
life when he was a kid. For reasons I wasn't really paying attention to, it 
is decided that Ghost Dog himself must die, and by the end of the movie, of 
course, this is what's going to happen.
As ever, Jarmusch's pace is slow, and his camera stays pretty much 
stationary. Scenes are deliberately flat, lending a poignancy to the pathetic 
atmosphere all the characters live in, and also a comedic contrast to the 
topsy-turvy nature of the things going on. Realistic foibles are thrust onto 
action-adventure set-ups: The film is full of little moments like the one in 
which a pair of tough-talking gangsters sit around in serious, contemplative 
confusion at why Ghost Dog communicates with them by carrier pigeon. Try to 
imagine the scene in "Pulp Fiction" where the two guys are nitpicking about 
how to clean their blood-drenched car, spun out to feature length.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani 
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Oystein Brekke
GHOST DOG - THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI (1999)
Director: Jim Jarmusch
With: Forest Whitaker, John Tormey, Tricia Vessey, Isaach De Bankolé.
In a shack on a rooftop in a nameless big city, together with a flock of
pigeons, lives Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker). He spends his time meditating,
practicing Japanese martial arts, and reading a book called "The Way of the
Samurai." His life is completely removed from other people and the rest of
the world that he is living in. His best friend is a French
icecream-seller, Raymond (Isaach De Bankolé) who doesn't speak a word of
English. And no, Ghost Dog does not speak French. He lives by the codes of
the samurai, as described in the book. He never goes anywhere without his
black briefcase. What is in the briefcase, only he himself knows. Guns,
knives, burglay equipment. The tools of his trade, because Ghost Dog is a
hitman for the mafia.
He doesn't see it that way himself though. When he was young, mafioso Louie
(John Tormey) one day saved his life when he was being beaten up by a gang.
Several years later, Ghost Dog seeks out Louie, and offers him his services
as his "retainer". Ghost Dog sees the relationship between the two as one
between a samurai and his master, and he has no dealings with anyone else
in the mafia. Louie is bemused by the arrangement, but accepts it. Then one
day, something goes wrong. Ghost Dog leaves a witness to one of his
assassinations, and the witness is the mafia boss' daughter (Tricia
Vessey). To save face, the mafia set out to kill Ghost Dog. He, in turn,
sets out to kill them.
Seeing as the director's name is Jim Jarmusch, it will hardly come as a
surprise that the movie does not develop into a fast and furious
action-adventure. Rather, it is a study of people trying to live in a world
that is not the world around them. Ghost Dog behaves as if he lives in
ancient Japan. He commits his killings without emotion or feelings of
guilt, he is a samurai, and must serve his master. The mafiosi on the other
hand, are also portrayed as relics of the past. They are a bunch of tired
old men, confused by the changing society around them, nagged on by the
landlord for not paying the rent, while trying to live according to a code
of their own. Thus they and the mafia develop a sort of respect for each
other: "You know one good thing about this Ghost Dog? He is going after us
in the old way," says one of the mafiosi.
It is not a straightforward movie, and not something that should be chosen
for a relaxing evening's entertainment. The film has deeper levels which
every viewer will have to try and work out for himself. It is however
entertaining, at times funny, and with some good action-scenes as well, and
Forest Whitaker does a good job as Ghost Dog. 
Who should see this film: People who have seen too many Hollywood films
lately, and is looking for something refreshingly different - fans of
mafia-movies in particular.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
MPAA: Rated R for strong violence and language.
Runtime: Japan:116
'Ghost Dog' is a strange-looking movie with a unique atmosphere. It's
built of offbeat rhythms, outlandish jokes and a strange sensibility
in which cultures and subcultures of Japan, Sicily, Port-au-Prince and
the Wu Tang Clan seem perfectly harmonious. The experience is deeply
hypnotic and almost haunting.
In director Jim Jarmusch latest picture the main character is a
reclusive and mysterious inner-city hit man who lives and breathes by
the code of ancient Japanese warriors, and moves with so much
conviction that he barely needs to speak. Alone on the rooftop he
calls home, silhouetted against a smoky sky and the ragged chimneys
and TV antennas of neighboring buildings, Ghost Dog lives with the
pigeons and his books. His life is simple, harsh and bizarre. When he
is not on a mission, he writes his poetry with his sword. His only
friend is the ice cream-man in the park. Though the ice cream man
doesn't know English and Ghost Dog doesn't understand French, they
seem happy with their relationship. Ghost Dog has the heart of a
warrior, but he moves on little cat feet. As every samurai, Ghost Dog
has a master in the form of a mafia chieftain. They communicate with
the help of a carrier pigeon that lives on Ghost Dog's roof.
The film is divided into multiple chapters, where quotes from
"Hagakure: The Way of the Samurai", which is basically Ghost Dog's
bible, are projecting the events unfolding before our eyes, explaining
at times Ghost Dog's behavior and state of mind. Animated parables of
sex, envy, power and violence comment on the film's action as
well. Jarmusch moves dreamy and unhurried, slowly capturing the
audience in his world. At times it feels like no body is directing at
all, that the movie kind of lives on its own. But there are times when
you feel a powerful force behind the images. The clever parallels
between dream and reality and time and space. The comparisons,
philosophy and human emotions -- everything is implanted in a
strangely complex picture. It's an action movie for maverick
intellectuals, a noir thriller with a prankish streak, a genre film
that knows and mostly obeys the rules but keeps cramming in odd
insights, goofy jokes, offbeat allusions to cinema and literature. An
exploration of the mind and deeds of a man who moves mysteriously and
yet purposefully through a life filled with danger. There is also a
strange connection and complete understanding of the main character,
who is lost in dreams, space and time. He has simply lost all touch
with reality. There is a strange surrealism in Jarmusch's picture,
where parallel worlds virtually float into each other, co-existing
simultaneously. Ghost Dog's alienation from human society, his
loneliness, his attempt to justify inhuman behavior (murder) with a
belief system (the samurai code) has no connection with his life or
his world. The act of vengeance, a dream to return to the ancient
traditions - the purity of mind and soul and the nearest you can get
in our modern world is murder.
Ghost Dog appears in virtually every scene, yet he doesn't speak for
almost an hour and when he does, it is only in short, concrete
sentences. Yet, his presence is felt tremendously throughout the whole
movie. Every minute he's on screen, Whitaker makes "Ghost Dog" worth
watching. He basically carries the film on his shoulders, making the
diffirence between success and failure. There are moments where his
eyes and body language say more than any words ever could. It's
nothing less than an awesomely grave and sensitive performance.
"Ghost Dog" might feel too close to a genre film, but it resembles no
other mob story or action-revenge picture ever made.  It splices
together 18th century Japanese teachings, martial arts, mob
iconography, the military primer, The Art of War, hip-hop, mythology
and pop entertainment. There's the contrasty cinematography of Robby
Muller, for one, the pulsing score by the RZA, for another. And there
are those little Jarmusch touches -- the empty black spaces between
some of the scenes, for instance -- which give the film an utterly
unique sensibility. But there are times when the director's unhurried
style and slow pacing seem tiring, close to dull, which certainly is a
not very good element. In such moments Whitaker's presence helps a lot
and saves Jarmusch from a close flop. In the end you'll sit amazed and
a little confused by what you have seen. It's certainly not an action
film that will rock the box office. It won't make any headlines until
many years later, when many will wake up, remember embrace the
original and misunderstood director Jim Jarmusch.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  Writer/director/producer Jim Jarmusch re-imagines the
gangster picture as a quirky cross-culture fusion of Eastern
philosophy, hip-hop music, urban darkness, and movie iconography. He
focuses on Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker), an assassin who is obsessed by
the noble precepts of the 18th century warrior text, Hagakure: The
Book of the Samurai, applying them to his work as a contract
killer. In the samurai tradition, Ghost Dog has pledged his loyalty to
one master (John Tormey), a small-time New Jersey mobster who once
saved his life, with whom he now communicates only by carrier
pigeons. He's a loner whose only human contact is with a
French-speaking ice-cream vendor (Isaach DeBankole) and a curious
little girl (Camille Winbush) he meets in a park. The deliberately
slow-paced, character-driven plot involves a great deal of brutal
violence, stemming from vengeance, jealousy, and countless
double-crosses, climaxing in a blood-drenched finale. Curiously, Ghost
Dog doesn't speak a line of dialogue until 45 minutes into the
film. The blasting musical soundtrack by Wu Tang Clan's RZA
underscores both the hit-man's zen-like qualities and the lurking
menace of his allegorical environment. Jarmusch says he built his
characters from his experience living in New York's Little Italy,
where he witnessed the death of an old Mafia order. In fact, he
maintains, some of the actors came from that world: "They're gentlemen
to me, but they've also killed people." On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai is an offbeat,
thought-provoking 6. While it's not a film to enjoy, it's one
adventurous movie-goers may appreciate.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GHOST DOG: THE WAY OF THE SAMURAI (director/writer: Jim Jarmusch;
cinematographer: Robby Muller; editor: Jay Rabinowitz; cast: Forest
Whitaker (Ghost Dog), John Tormey (Louie), Camille Winbush (Pearline),
Cliff Gorman (Sonny Valerio), Frank Minucci (Big Angie), Isaach Bankole
(Raymond, Haitian Ice Cream Man), Victor Argo (Vinny), Damon Whitaker
(Young Ghost Dog), Henry Silva (The Big Boss, Vargo), Tricia Vessey
(Louise Vargo), Gene Ruffini (Old Consigliere), Richard Portnow
(Handsome Frank), Gary Farmer (Indian), 1999)
Ghost Dog is the seventh feature film, of arguably America's most
innovative and underrated director, Jim Jarmusch. I consider it a shame
that one of America's best directors had to get European backers for
this film and still receives a better reception abroad than he does in
his own country. He has created an almost masterpiece about the
influence of an ancient way of life has for a black man wrestling with
the present culture by meditating every day on the meaning of death by
considering himself a dead man. He has become a hit man, so he could
honor the samurai code by respecting solely a small-time middle-aged
Italian Mafia soldier, Louie (John Tormey), who saved his life eight
years ago when two white ruffians were going to kill him. The Ghost Dog
is a huge black man (Forest Whitaker), prone to wearing a hooded
sweatshirt, who lives in the inner city streets of Jersey City, on a
rooftop shack, where he maintains a carrier pigeon coop and spends his
time alone in silence like a monk, studying an 18th century book
Hagakure: The Book of the Samurai by Yamamoto Tsunetomo, whose excerpts
from the text appear periodically on the screen, to be read aloud by him
to explain the scene that is to follow according to the way an ancient
warrior steeped in Buddhist lore might see it.
Ghost Dog gets his assignments only via carrier pigeon from Louie and
follows the exact orders issued. Here, he is asked to hit a made
gangster called Handsome Frank (Richard Portnow) who has been fooling
around with the crime boss's mentally disturbed daughter, Louise Vargo
(Tricia Vessey). When Ghost Dog goes to the job, he plays rap music on
the car CD to keep alert and when there, he quietly enters the apartment
expecting to see only the intended victim, as the girlfriend he was told
was put on a bus. But the crime boss's daughter has returned without him
being aware of it and lounges on a chair, having just finished reading a
translation of Ryunosuke Akutagawa's Rashomon and then tossing it on the
floor. She is dressed in a red negligee and has a Betty Boop hair-do.
Handsome Frank is watching a Betty Boop cartoon on TV, as Ghost Dog
takes aim and fires away at him. After the killing, Louise indifferently
asks, "If he was sent by her father," as Ghost Dog reacts silently to
her presence. She then says in a low voice, "You can have it. I'm
finished with it." He quickly takes the book and withdraws.
The Mafia chieftains, all geriatrics, meet in the back of a Chinese
take-out restaurant, which they use as their clubhouse. They are so
unsuccessful in what they do, that they have trouble making the rent
payments for this dump. They sit around a table and tell the
slobbish-looking Louie and his underling Vinny (Victor Argo) that they
are disturbed with the hit because the girl was present. A secondary
boss, who distinguishes himself as a lover of rap music, Sonny (Cliff
Gorman), then orders Louie to murder Ghost Dog, telling him that
Handsome Frank was one of us. When Louie flinches, he says it is better
than if we murder you. The crime boss (Henry Silva) looks as if he could
be brain dead, as he impassively asks who the hit man was, in a
particularly monotone voice, and when they find out that Louie doesn't
know his real name or where he lives, that he pays him for the hits once
a year on the first day of the autumn and that their only contact is by
carrier pigeon, and on top of that, he's a black man. This becomes too
much for the fragile elderly consigliere (Gene Ruffini) to hear, as he
utters his first words on the screen in a machine-like unnatural voice,
by making vulgar remarks about the hit man's race, and the meeting
breaks up with a plan to get Ghost Dog. There is comedy here in the
absurdity of the situation even though no one cracks a joke. It doesn't
make sense that these Mafia bosses want to kill their contract killer,
especially since it was an untraceable hit. But, one of the points of
the story, is that things that happen don't necessarily make sense, they
just happen.
The most innocent encounter Ghost Dog has occurs on a park bench, where
a young black school girl, Pearline (Camille Winbush), strikes up a
conversation with him, as she recognizes him as an odd character who
lives in the neighborhood. They get around to talking about books, as
she takes out her bookbag and shows him she is reading Mary Shelley's
Frankenstein, as both agree the book is better than the movie. Reading
books is readily accepted by both parties as something that is cool.
Ghost Dog lays Rashomon on her, saying he just finished reading it and
only asks that when she finishes, she should let him know what she
thinks of it. When the girl says to him that everyone says he has no
friends, he takes her to meet the black Haitian ice cream vendor (Isaach
de Bankole) in the park, who speaks only in French, a language Ghost Dog
doesn't speak; but, even though they can't understand the other's
language, he explains to her, that they are still best friends and they
are still able to communicate with each other. The assumption is that
they both have soul and can talk the black man's rap. The girl and the
Haitian show their true human feelings toward the samurai warrior and
seem to understand something about him that is vital without being able
to comprehend him.
Ghost Dog prepares for all-out warfare from the mob, with the idea Louie
must be protected at all times because of the samurai code. He sends the
big boss a bewildering quotation from the Hagakure via pigeon, about
beheading and the boss is the only one of the aging Mafia present in the
room to respond, by saying, "It's poetry-the poetry of war."
The most artificial scene in the film, that seems to be too forced to
work effectively, comes after he finishes picking off the mobsters in
their country hideaway and spots on a country road a pair of redneck
camouflaged hunters with darkened faces who have just shot a black bear
for no reason except to kill it. It seems odd that Ghost Dog, after his
wholesale butchery of the mobsters, can take the high moral ground and
think that he has the right to take the law into his own hands against
these wayward hunters and execute them, even if he equates them with
racists and from his ecclectic reading and his discussion with his
Haitian friend, has a belief that bears in ancient civilizations were
considered equal to humans, and therefore what the hunters did was
tantamount to a crime.
The film is much influenced by Jean-Pierre Melville's stylized 1967
gangster masterpiece Le Samurai, which also quotes an ancient Japanese
ideology that influenced its hero, though in that film, it is from the
Book of Bushido, which is a fictional work. Ghost Dog remains for the
most part a parody of other movie characters. The film is influenced by
the gangster film genres, Japanese, black, and Italian cultures, the
present pop culture, the spirit of how the African-American had to
reinvent himself in the American cities, and how an unheralded
Italian-American mobster and an unheralded black samurai of "different
ancient tribes" can act with mutual respect for each other despite their
differences.
The film is slow-paced due to the stoppage to read from the excerpts
from the Hagakure texts by Whitaker. Its rhythm is further broken up by
attempts to link pop culture, rap music, cartoons, fancy cars stolen in
the dead of night, and the ugliness of the city streets with the lessons
that can be passed on from a different time that must be reinvented to
fit every new generation. The movie gets its fast-beat to counter the
slow-pace of the film from the hip-hop music of RZA (pronounced
RIZZ-ah), that fits coolly into the nighttime moods of the depressed
city and gives the monk-like samurai who listens to the music on the
radio's CD, a strange trance-like look of recognition that he is hip to
what is going down around him. It is a movie that is mostly invigorated
by Forest Whitaker's stunning performance of a man who is an icon, who
lives by myth alone, whose most memorable statement, is that "The end is
important in all things."
The most glaring error Ghost Dog makes, is in his strictly literal
interpretation of what he is supposed to do as a samurai warrior. He
mistakeningly takes the message from the book to mean that he must
become subservient to someone who doesn't respect what he believes in.
Buddhism specifically states that no killing is justified, so he seems
to have taken the wrong course of action in this lifetime despite his
belief that he got everything together by reading the book. He would
have saved himself a lot of trouble by putting his energy into trying to
help others, especially his new-found Mafia friend, in other ways than
by reinforcing his already bad karma. That would have been the true way
of a samurai warrior, whose lessons are meant for battle and seem to be
easily misinterpreted by someone living so cut off from human contact
and without the benefit of a teacher.
Jarmusch has in all his films displayed an interest of seeing how
another culture looks at the American culture, having already shown how
Hungarians, Native Americans, and Japanese react to seeing America. It
now seems to be the turn of the black man, as this film is basically
about the Forest Whitaker character making peace with who he is, and
showing that to be an American, it takes more than one culture to
influence you, whether it's the Mafia men absorbed by cartoons or rap
music or poetry, or the director himself, influenced to be a so-called
"hip" White Negro. For Jarmusch, America is an exotic place where
different cultures uniquely flourish in the most unexpected spots.
The shining points of the film come from the moving cinematography of
Robby Muller, the
 minimalist mise-en-scčne, the splendid expressive performance by Forest
Whitaker, the underlying humor, and the freshness of Jarmusch's approach
to filmmaking, proving that he is someone willing to take chances. There
are critics who constantly rave about less cutting-edge films more than
do about ones that are not afraid to mess with set-concepts. For this
film, they offer mostly faint and lefthanded praises. As for me, I'll
take my chances with heaping praise on a Jarmusch near-miss like this
one, over so many other forgettable praiseworthy hits that are so
limited in scope.
Jarmusch's first language is poetry and it is my belief that this film
is as close to a lyrical masterpiece as a film can be without being one.
Its weakest point being a lack of character development for the Mafia
figures, as the Mafia characters were more cartoonish than real, they
seemed to be created to fit a certain standard mold rather than to be
developed out of their own personalities. But that flaw, was also what
drove the film comically, therefore making that weakness more palatable
and understandable.
This film is similar in mood to his other ambitious work, which was a
masterpiece, Dead Man, and it is one that makes so many fine points to
justify its wide range of themes. It is foolish to try and tightly
categorize it, except to say that even though it is not exactly a
mainstream film, neither is it primarily an art-house film. It just
might be one of those intriguing films that requires an acquired taste
and once acquired, leaves no doubt about how good it is, no matter that
there are a few things in it that might be considered tasteless.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
