Title
Review for Mahler (1974)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
Eighth and last of Ken Russell's composer biographies (I think its
safe enough to discount LISZTOMANIA), which I walked seven miles to
see as a teenager when it appeared in a one-off screening.  Film is
still as difficult to see nowadays, but undoubtedly of interest to
Russell fans.  Story recaps the life of Austrian Jew Gustav Mahler
(Robert Powell) while he takes one last Freudian train journey back to
Vienna with his wife Alma (Georgina Hale).  Film doesn't reach the
heights of other Russell opuses but is still more interesting than
most slick productions you'll see in the mainstream.  The main problem
with it is that Mahler himself isn't that interesting and doesn't lead
a particularly exceptional life.  Granted, he did find fame and
success as a conducter (and something of a monstre sacre) but the same
could be said about a novelist, and the idea of watching someone
writing a book for two hours doesn't appeal to me either.  Another
problem Russell has to contend with is Mahler's music - it doesn't
have the instant appeal of other composers he has handled, and is an
acquired taste to anyone unfamiliar with 20th century composition. 
Neither does it seem to choreograph well with Russell's images - it
doesn't inspire me to buy the soundtrack, anyway, which I presume is
part of the reason Russell wanted to make this film, i.e.  to pay
homage to an artist he admired while bringing his life and work to a
mass audience with the same pop sensibilities he would use the
following year in TOMMY.
Russell gives his film visual impetus to keep his audience watching -
apart from the framing device of the train, MAHLER is made up almost
wholly of dream sequences, fantasies, and offbeat set-pieces.  But it
all seems flat this time around.  Maybe that's because many of the
heavily symbolic, hallucinatory images are immediately followed by
postscripts in which the characters explain to each other what we have
just watched.  However, I can also see this as Russell's way of
defusing accusations that he is being pretentious.  The most jarring
of these sequences is Mahler's conversion to Catholicism, filmed as if
it were a silent comedy (Russell himself is a Catholic convert, which
may explain his interest in this part of Mahler's life).  As a
stand-alone sequence it's a lot of fun, but it looks like it was
dropped in from a different movie.  MAHLER's preponderance with
visuals also reminds us that Russell is more of a technical director
than an actor's director.  His characters all sound alike - it's
obviously Russell dialogue that they're speaking.  Hale, as Alma, has
to switch from petulant to sweet to hardened to despairing, while
Powell just looks like a gloomy guy in a hat.  The logic behind
Powell's saturnine performance is explained at the end, when we
discover he has tonsillitis (a precursor to his death shortly after),
but by then it's too late for us to really care.
Still, Russell has enthusiasm, and does well with a limited budget
(instead of filming in Europe he once again returned to his favorite
location, the Lake District).  Mahler's daughter Anna, who was 70 at
the time of film's release, gave Russell permission to make his
biography after initial reservations about what he'd done with
Tchaikovsky in THE MUSIC LOVERS.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MAHLER (director/writer: Ken Russell; cinematographer: Dick Bush; cast:
Robert Powell (Gustav Mahler), Georgina Hale (Alma Mahler), Richard
Morant (Max), Antonia Ellis (Cosima Wagner),  Lee Montague (Bernhard
Mahler), Rosalie Crutchley (Marie Mahler), Angela Down (Justine Mahler),
Miriam Karlin (Aunt Rosa ), David Collings (Hugo Wolfe), Gary Rich
(Young Mahler), Ronald Pickup (Nick), Otto Diamant (Prof. Sladky), Benny
Lee (Uncle Arnold), 1974-GB)
The always obstreperous Ken Russell (The Music Lovers/Listomania/Tommy)
has come up with a wonderfully impetuous Freudian-like biography on
turn-of-the-century (1860-1911) Austrian musical conductor and composer
Gustave Mahler (Robert Powell), who obsessively plays him with proper
conviction. The troubled life of the neurotic Jewish composer, who
converted to Catholicism to appease the anti-Semites in Austria,
especially the powerful voice of Cosima Wagner (Antonia Ellis), so he
can gain career advantages, is powerfully covered by Russell elaborately
using a series of tableaux to get into the maestro's head and into his
music and into his perplexing marriage with Alma (Georgina Hale), who is
played by her with a succinct elegance.
Dreams and fits of anguish, interspersed with flashbacks to his
pressured upbringing by his pedlar Bohemian father who demanded he
succeed for the family's honor, and then to further flashbacks of other
important events in his creative life, enthrall this biopic with strong
emotional feelings, that make it clear that Mahler was someone who
struggled with his musical genius as he kept hearing music inside
himself, as well as his struggle with his hostile surroundings (always
the outsider), and with a wife who told him "You have succceeded in
taking the tunes out of me."
The film opens with the kind of excessive dream sequence one comes to
expect from Russell, where the composer's house on the lake is in
flames, and his wife is tightly wrapped in white linen, struggling to
free herself from the garb and is crawling on the rocks to a bust of
Mahler, which she embraces. Mahler tells his wife that the dream, which
she did not look kindly upon, thinking it was just another one of the
ways he always uses to put her in place; but to him, it was actually a
homage to her, as he tells her, "She is the living creature struggling
to be born." His bust on the rock, he says, signifies that, "I was the
rock and the rock was me." The visionary dream is evocative of the music
he created for the 1st movement of the third sympathy, as it is heard
and interpreted by Russell in a way that is highly complimentary to a
composer whom he obviously admires, flawed personality, not
withstanding.
We pick up the Mahlers on their last train ride before his death, where
the famous composer of ten symphonies (nine numbered) is returning from
a conducting stint at New York's Metropolitan Opera with Arturo
Toscanini, after hostility fomented by sections of the press forced his
resignation in 1907 from his prestigious conducting postion at the
Vienna State Opera. From a reporter who boards the train, we learn that
Mahler might have been forced to leave TheVienna State Opera because of
anti-Semtism, though Mahler claims he left for a change of environment
and is returning for the same reason. He also emphatically says, "I
conduct to live; I live to conduct," indicating that it is his composing
that makes life interesting for him, as he contemptuously dismisses the
reporter.
As a timid child, he meets a puckish sort of man in the woods (Pickup)
who saves him from drowning, and teaches him an invaluable lesson about
music, "The man who doesn't live in nature can't write a true note of
music."Mahler sees his compositions as a tribute to the music of the
spheres; and for him, a symphony is a farewell to love. When asked,
"What religion are you?" by a smug army officer named Max (Richard
Morant), who is a suitor of his wife, he replies, "I'm a composer."
What gives the film force and a sense of inspired madness, and makes
this a work the musical aficionado might question regarding its
authenticity but the film buff might applaud for its richness of
visuals, are a few very inventive scenes. At a mental institution he
visits his dear friend and fellow student at theVienna Conservatory, who
cracked up, Hugo Wolfe (Collins). He addresses Hugo as his majesty, and
from this charade he is grilled by the lunatic, accepting him as if he
were the real Emperor Franz Joseph, and comes away from this visit
realizing that he can only get places musically if he converts, since
his religion is holding him back in this anti-Semitic milieu. The
conversion scene becomes the most powerful and outlandish one in the
film, as it is filmed as if were a silent movie changing to a talkie at
the moment of the conversion. This scene comes on so strong as to drown
out any other attempt by Russell to have a more subdued film than he
usually shoots for. There are symbols galore, of crosses, Jewish stars,
Nazi insignias, money and fire gods. Cosima is depicted as a Nazi and
he, as a willing servant of hers, prepared to go into a cave and slay
the dragon of the old gods to gain her appproval, as she smilingly tells
him, when he has slain the dragon "You are no longer a Jew, you are now
one of us." He will then eat the non-kosher pig meat and drink a glass
of milk with it, completing his conversion.
After his real conversion, he will say it reminded him of having a
toothache. For Mahler, man is his own God, and God shares his love with
us all. But this conversion affected him greatly and continued to eat
away at his famished psyche, already terribly damaged from a childhood
of constant nagging.
Always insecure and troubled, never happy, always irritable and
petulant, a most unpleasant person, and a sexist; but, a musical genius,
is the impression of Mahler that Russell convincingly leaves us with. As
Mahler, in despite of his pettiness, bravely tells his wife, choose
between me and Max, but do not choose me because of duty, duty always
destroys. The choice in marriage must always be love. In a film, that
plays at times like a soap opera story of a beautiful wife who learns to
live with her genius husband, as the husband and wife fight for their
beliefs and for their love. But it is the music of Mahler that is
refreshingly digested, admittedly a music for acquired tastes, but a
music that I most heartily appreciated, that gives the film its
resonance. The film also plays like Visconti's Death in Venice gone
astray, where homo-erotic shots are coupled with coarse hetero-sexual
shots. The passion of Mahler's Germanic symphonies, evincing childlike
death-cries from his renown 6th symphony, as coincidentally, one of his
little girls died soon afterwards and he received one of his many heart
attacks after the symphony was completed... which result for Russell, a
director who has proven himself to be a music lover, who knows how to be
flamboyant and controversial, into making a film that was very
impressive. Though the film, like Mahler's music, is clearly not for
everyone.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
