Title
Review for Thieves Quartet (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Geoff Gloster
    Only the bare technical essentials of "Thieve's Quartet" reside in the
Internet Movie Database. Its a forgotten film that probably owes its place
at my local video shop thanks to a sympathetic review from cult movie critic
Jim Bob Briggs: his insistence that "Thieve's Quartet" is "Better than
Reservoir Dogs" screams from the front cover. Jim Bob is lying through his
teeth, but that's O.K, because its only a white lie, and white lies are
forgivable when they rescue the likes of "Thieves Quartet" from oblivion.
    Written and directed by Joe Chappelle, "Thieves Quartet" traces the
fortunes of a group of criminals who embark on an audacious crime. Sure,
that's a tad imprecise, but I wouldn't want to undermine Chapelle's
intentions. "Thieves Quartet" unfolds slowly, unexpectedly. The gang's
enigmatic statements and intentions are not immediately decipherable. This
doesn't mean that Chapelle has crafted a headache-inducing labyrinth, "The
Big Sleep" for the 90's (thank God!). The tiny suggestive riddles he poses
are answered swiftly, as they successively appear, until a convincing and
thoroughly tawdry picture has emerged. The audience has no choice but to
become thoroughly engrossed in the workings of Chapelle's tantalisingly
clever film.
    Character and motivation is developed with a similar care to detail. The
unlikely brains of the operation is Artie. Artie speaks the hippy lingo of
his youth and exhibits a gentle eccentricity consistent with his resemblance
to a balding Spalding Grey. A barman, Artie is eager to change his pitiful
circumstances. His good friend Jimmy, a retired football player whose stuck
working a car wash, is equally embittered by the cards life has dealt him.
Chappelle opens his film with a subtle pre-credit sequence in which Jimmy
tends to the needs of an everyday, and moderately annoying, customer.
Nothing really happens, but the resentment and barely concealed fury is
palpable. Artie's other two accomplices are a lot more volatile. Mike is an
ex-cop eternally bitter about the money he lost on a football game Jimmy
threw. In truth, he's more riled about Jimmy being black. In contrast, Art's
girlfriend Jessie is perhaps a little too friendly towards Art's friends.
She describes their relationship as a mutually respectful "arrangement".
Art's take on this "arrangement" is less genteel, more direct. Her
provocative behaviour encourages the advice "Just coz you ball half the
civilised world don't mean you have to advertise it!". Internal conflict,
wouldn't you know, soon threatens to scuttle the venture.
    Chappelle adds an interesting dimension to his film by imbuing his main
characters with social consciences. Jimmy and Art share an activist past and
have outspoken views on society's injustices. They consider their criminal
plans to be an extension of their political selves; to break the law is to
strike out against a society that is criminaly unjust itself. But it isn't
long before their reasonable musings on society's power-networks simply
become a means to deny that they have any responsibility for their own fate
or that of the people they encounter. Their activism degenerates into
expedient nihilism. When the bodies of the innocent start piling up Art
expresses scant regret and forsakes all blame: "I'm not God, man".
Ultimately, Art is no more principled than Mike, who coolly states "I didn't
make the world" after he "pops" a victim.
    Apart from an impressive script with well-rounded characters, Chapelle's
film is aided by its consistent style and edgy mood. As the title of the
film suggests, music is integral to the feel of "Thieve's Quartet". Jazz, in
particularly Miles Davis, fills Arts colourful conversation. This homage to
jazz is an essential component of the film's mood and pace, not an airy
pretension intended to telegraph the movie's sophistication. The music of
Frank Zorn is expertly paced to the rhythm and emotion of a film that veers
from careful reflection to feverish action.
    "Thieve's Quartet" is not perfect. Its conclusion, for instance, doesn't
really deliver the impact expected. But it is a sharp, original and stylish
directorial debut with the grim integrity of a Jim Thompson novel. Go see
it. You wouldn't want Jim Bob to look like a liar.
