Title
Review for Half Baked (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
I admit it.  I was actually looking forward to seeing this movie.  A
snappy pothead comedy laced with dick and shit jokes.  Well, it turned
out to be not so snappy and, would you believe, not one mention of dicks
or shit.  What a disappointment.
This is the first pot movie since the heyday of Cheech & Chong and,
sadly, left me yearning for the days of Nice Dreams.  Half Baked tries
to double the fun with four stoners instead of the conventional two.
There's Thurgood Jenkins (Chappelle), a janitor at Frankensence & Burr
Laboratories, who narrates the story.  There's Brian (Breur) a burnt
record store employee and Scarface (Diaz), who works in a burger joint.
And don't forget Kenny (Williams), the sensitive kindergarten teacher.
After work each day, they meet at Jenkins house and light up Billy Bong
Thornton and then fight over which toker is on `munchie' patrol.  On
this fateful evening, Kenny goes out for the snack foods and happens
upon a police horse named Buttercup.  Kenny feeds the horse all of the
junk food and is horrified to see the horse drop dead.  Apparently,
Buttercup was diabetic and Kenny is arrested for killing an officer in
the line of duty.  The bail is set at $1,000,000 and, thus, the plot
comes to life: Sell enough pot to free Kenny!
Somehow, Jenkins has access to an unlimited supply of pharmaceutical
marijuana at work and the four hit the streets to raise Kenny's bail.
Of course, a film like this wouldn't be complete with out the following
stock characters: the love interest (named Mary Jane and played by
Rachel True), the rival drug lord (Clarence Williams III) and the
strange guy who's been asleep on the couch for years (Steven Wright).
OK, maybe that last one wasn't standard fare.  There were also a few bad
cameos (Snoop Doggy Dogg, Janeane Garofalo & John Stewart) and a few
good ones (Bob Saget, Willie Nelson & Tommy Chong). `David', the guy who
got thrown out of house on the second season of MTV's `The Real World'
also makes an appearance, but who cares?
Don't get me wrong, there were some very funny scenes.  There is a high
point when Thurgood takes Mary Jane on a date with only $8 in his
pocket.  As the date progresses,  a counter on the bottom of the screen
shows how much he has left.  Kenny's tearful avoidance of painful jail
ass sex is also amusing.  Hey, ass sex is almost like a dick and/or shit
joke, isn't it?
I expected better from this group of people.  Director Tamra Davis
worked on the hilarious Billy Madison and CB4.  Maybe it was the script,
which was co-written by Chappelle (The Nutty Professor).  In addition to
Jenkins, he also played rap star Sir Smoke A Lot.
Granted, this probably would have been a lot better if I burnt a big
fatty before it started and I'm sure that's what the target audience of
this film will probably do.  Maybe the theaters should hand weed out to
the patrons as they file into the theater.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Tamra Davis
Cast: David Chappelle, Jim Breuer, Harland Williams, Guillermo Diaz,
Rachel True, Laura Silverman, Steven Wright, Clarence Williams
Rated R: Language, drug use
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    I think it might be mildly inappropriate for me to suggest that you
go out and smoke large quantities of marijuana before watching Half
Baked. Of course, if you are in the target audience for this film, it is
very likely that you will do so without my urging. Still, I think it is
necessary (and almost certainly intended) that viewers who want to enjoy
this film get stoned before hand. I, for one, did not. I just watched
it. All I had in my system was a sub sandwich and half a beer.
    And that's probably why I didn't like it. I guess I liked some of it
(I did laugh sometimes), but the film is far beyond all implications of
the word "stupid." It's a lawless and inept film with short bursts of
humor-inducing mayhem and even shorter bursts of creativity. These
bursts, although small, are still present at least, so I'm consciously
giving Half Baked credit for trying. But it's just so dumb.
    The best scene in the film is the first one, where we meet our four
heroes as young teenagers learning the virtues of smoking weed. They
first try it and, of course, it does nothing. Soon, though, they're
stumbling around in a convenience store saying "Woah" a lot. We see them
in ever-so-slow motion, holding gargantuan candy bars and bursting out
of immense soda cups. And it's very funny, even if you aren't stoned.
    But from there it's all down hill. It turns out the focus is on
Thurgood (David Chappelle), a custodian (who does not like to be
referred to as a "janitor"). He lives with his three buddies, Brian (Jim
Breuer), Scarface (Guillermo Diaz), and Kenny (Harland Williams). Kenny
accidentally kills a diabetic police horse (you read that right) and is
sent quickly to jail on $1 million bail. The three guys decide that the
only way to save their friend is to steal marijuana from the hospital in
which Thurgood works (it's *really* good weed) and sell it on the
street.
    Naturally, their plan works out until the local drug czar Samson
(Clarence Williams) finds out that much of his profit is going the way
of these dope heads and makes life very difficult for them. Meanwhile,
Thurgood is trying to maintain a steady relationship with a beautiful
woman whom he loves (Rachel True). Her father is in jail for trafficking
drugs, and she is adamantly opposed to them, so Thurgood has to lie
about what he spends all of his time doing.
I liked the acting. Chappelle is often funny, and Harland Williams as
the poor imprisoned Kenny is just about the funniest guy in the film.
But Half Baked is too silly to be taken seriously in any way. I know it
wasn't meant to be taken seriously, but it's not witty or satirical like
it could (and should) have been. And because it's so unreasonably
unrealistic, it doesn't serve as an effective portrait of today's youth
or anything else. It's mindless entertainment in its purest form. I
suppose I could advocate the makers and say that the film is so
backwards and psychotic because it is supposed to be through the eyes of
the characters, but I think I'd be giving them too much credit.
    Movies like this are typically destroyed because of their need for a
beginning-to-end story. The story in this one is particularly dumb. It
is dumb not simply because of its nature, but because of its completely
slapstick execution by director Tamra Davis. The fact that Kenny kills a
diabetic police horse is ridiculous enough (the scene is very funny,
actually), but the numerous scenes that follow--which include attempted
rape and frequent use of the phrase, "He's my bitch!"--push the envelope
of believability. And the last half of the film, including a
double-cross and a police stakeout, are so bad that I found myself
taking deep breaths and staring at the ceiling of the theater.
    I suppose that, maybe, I could have suspended my disbelief, but only
in comparison to the rest of the film. It's going along okay until the
heroes start flying through the air. Then Snoop Doggy Dog jumps out of
the bushes, Willie Nelson talks about the sixties, Jerry Garcia comes
back from the dead like a genie only to smash a drug dealer in the face
with his electric guitar, and I wanted to scream, "When did we enter the
Twilight Zone!?" I guess it was at the same point that I walked into the
theater to watch Half Baked.

Author
Matt Williams
Nostalgia for the 70s continues, as we see a revival of one of the
decade's greatest achievements:  the marijuana comedy.  However Half
Baked doesn't quite run with all its brain cells, and will make you
appreciate the questionable talents of Cheech and Chong all the more.
The plot follows the misadventures of four ne'er-do-well stoners.
There's the group's unofficial leader, Thurgood (David Chappelle),
Scarface (Guillermo Diaz), Brian (Jim Breuer), and Kenny (Harland
Williams).
Kenny gets into trouble, when, while on a munchie run, feeds his snack
foods to a diabetic police horse.  When the animal keels over, he finds
himself accused of killing a police officer, and facing a $1,000,000
bail.
His friends promise to raise money for a 10% bail bond, but have no idea
how. That is, until Thurgood stumbles upon a stash of pharmaceutical
marijuana being tested at the company where he works as a janitor.  Soon
the three guys are dealing dope to raise funds, while avoiding the cops
and rival dealer Sampson Simpson (Clarence Williams III).
For a comedy, the film is pretty humorless.  Not that it doesn't
try...it's just that the comic setups are obvious and the payoffs nearly
all fall flat.  The four leads are nearly all playing the same
character.  Only Williams stands out (while still performing on the
level of his humor-free comedy Rocket Man), but that is because he's
imprisoned throughout most of the film, giving a much needed change of
pace (but mostly swapping one set of obvious gags for another).
To help out, the film is packed full of cameos.  Steven Wright, Tommy
Chong, Janeane Garofalo, Willie Nelson, Snoop Doggy Dogg, and Jon
Stewart all make appearances at one point or another. None of them work,
beyond the simple "hey, that's _____" level.
In fact the funniest work in the film comes from Chappelle.  Not as his
bland pothead lead, but in his second role, as a pot-obsessed rapper,
Sir Smokealot.  Granted, it's pretty much a one-joke role, and there
aren't a ton of laughs...but this film needs every one it can scrape up.
To top it off, and in a move contrasting with the tone of the rest of
the film, Thurgood is given a love interest, Mary Jane (Rachel True).
Her role is that of the Public Service Announcement:  to inform us why
doing drugs (including pot) is wrong.  Her character seems fabricated
merely as a defense to the "your film promotes the use of drugs" camp.
The film would have been better off by sticking with the "rebel" tone it
so eagerly tries to claim.
Yet, in the end, it doesn't really matter.  Watching the film clean and
sober, you are bound to recognize how truly awful it is.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 500 upcoming releases

Author
Michael Dequina
The title of the comedy Half Baked actually gives the film a lot more
credit than it deserves.  Despite a few amusing moments and sporadic
flashes of wit and creativity, this silly and strange film as a whole is so
undercooked that its entirety can be summed up in three letters: P-O-T.
Even though it clocks in at only 82 minutes, Dave Chappelle and Neal
Brennan's script for Half Baked features barely enough plot to sustain even
that brief of a running time.  The threadbare storyline focuses on the
marijuana-selling operation pothead buddies Thurgood (Chappelle), Brian
(Jim Breuer), and Scarface (Guillermo Diaz) create to raise bail money for
their friend Kenny (Harland Williams), who is in jail for inadvertently
killing a diabetic police horse by feeding it junk food (don't ask).
Aside from a forced romantic subplot between Thurgood and the staunchly
anti-drug Mary Jane (Rachel True), the above is all Half Baked has in the
way of plot.  This would not be a problem if there were at least something
funny going on.  But there really isn't--though director Tamra Davis can be
credited with at least trying to make something unique.  Part of what gives
the film a decidedly strange feel is its reliance on elaborate, sometimes
inventive, sight gags, most of these depict the characters' state of mind
while high.  While some of the gags are interesting, such as the young
Thurgood envisioning and eating giant-sized candy bars after he has his
first puff, there are also quite a few lame ones, such as a recurring bit
where characters float in the air after trying some especially strong
product (in one instance, the wires carrying the actors are visible).  But
these mildly amusing (at best) gags are nothing more than an obvious
disguise for the thinness of the premise, as is the parade of celebrity
cameos, encompassing the likes of Snoop Doggy Dogg, Willie Nelson, Janeane
Garofalo, Stephen Baldwin, Steven Wright, Jon Stewart, and Bob Saget.
Strip all that away and what remains is lots of smoking, the main trio
acting stoned (Breuer especially lays it on thick), and even more talk
_about_ smoking.  Needless to say, all the pot use, wild antics while high,
and discussion about marijuana gets very old after a while--like five minutes.
I must say that I was actually found more amusement from Half Baked, which
was not screened in advance for critics (shocker), than I originally
expected.  The filmmakers obviously tried to make something strange and
different, which the film indeed is.  It's just that they forgot to come up
with more than one joke, and the one that they do have isn't very funny.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"If you chase something, then sometimes you never get it.
 If you put forth the work and all the attitude, next thing you know
 it's bestowed upon you."
--Michael Jordan
