Title
Review for Becoming Colette (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Mathilda May, Klaus Maria Brandauer, Virginia Madsen, Paul Rhys
Director:  Danny Huston
Producers:  Heinz Bibo and Peer Oppenheimer
Screenplay:  Ruth Graham
Music:  John Scott
Released by Castle Hill Productions
     BECOMING COLETTE is a biographical recounting of the early years 
in the career of French author Gabrielle Colette (Mathilda May), the
writer of such novels as LA VAGABONDE and CHERI.  The film follows
Colette's social and sexual awakening--her transformation from a naive
country girl to a Paris socialite.  In the process, it also attempts to
relate the tale of her disastrous marriage to Henri Gauthier-Villars
(also known as "Willy").
     BECOMING COLETTE is an empty period piece.  The settings are nice
and the costumes appropriate, but the characters placed within them are
flat and barren.  The movie is all window-dressing.  Even the fiery
Colette is weakly portrayed, never giving the audience more than a
glimpse of the verve displayed in her writings.
     There's an old saying that the road to ruin is paved with good
intentions.   That seems an apropos characterization of this production.
Undoubtedly, director Danny Huston (son of the late John Huston) had
the highest of motives in trying to bring Colette's life to the screen.
Unfortunately, too many wrong choices were made and the end result is a
limp, lifeless film that boasts only one scene (the climax) of genuine
strength and impact.   That's a poor track record for any movie.
     Klaus Maria Brandauer, normally an effective villain, is effete in
BECOMING COLETTE.  His performance is so subdued that it becomes
virtually lost in the scenery.  His character, Gauthier-Villars, is
supposed to be a bastard, but the actor never gets this across to the
audience.  
     Mathilda May was not an inspired choice for Colette.  The
inconsistency of her accent is matched only by the unevenness of her
performance.  About the only thing she does well is cry (there are a lot
of tears).  Other times, she's either wildly over-the-top or joining
Maria Brandauer in fading into obscurity.  
     Sex plays an important part in the movie, as it did in Colette's
life.  However, rather than being erotic, most of those scenes are
dull.  There is no chemistry whatsoever between any of the
participants.  The most "daring" of these moments, a lesbian encounter
between Colette and Polaire (Virginia Madsen), is notable only for its
lack of life.
     Writing is a passion, and a film about the genesis of a writer
should delve into the mind and heart of its subject.  That BECOMING
COLETTE tries to do this is irrelevant, because it doesn't succeed.
The superficiality of the plot and characters do a great injustice to a
powerful author.  While biographies such as MALCOLM X, HOFFA, and
CHAPLIN provoked an interest to learn more about their characters,
BECOMING COLETTE left me apathetic.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
Like another film about writers and their times, IMPROMPTU, this is not a
great story, or a great adventure, or even a great film.  But it is a nice
little tribute to a woman writer, who was an immediate influence  to the
likes of Anais Nin, and therefore a vital voice in the development of the
art of writing.
While Colette's writing was more what we would consider 'erotic', than
anything else, it still made its mark.  Her most important story, that of
GIGI, was turned into a film that still has won one of the largest acclaims
in the Oscar Award history.
The story of Gabrielle Colette starts innocently enough with a rogue who
takes on a dreamy country girl for a wife, only to discover that she is a
fairly good writer, and has an inspiring style.  His taste for women and
other pleasurable delights pretty much runs him into the ground, while he
attempts to gain as much as he can from his wife's prolific output.  And
since the writing she is coming up with is too erotic, it is published under
his name for quite a while, until it is finally discovered who the real
writer is.  And during the time of her growth, she experiences many of the
things which are the mark of many of her Claudine books.  From sex, to
drugs, and to many friends in the artistic community, it all pretty much
shows the decadent life styles which pretty much control the lives of many
artists during the
time.
With a fine portrayal, by Mathilda May and Virginia Madsen as one of her
lovers later, this film plods along rather nicely.  It is only indulgent in
the sensuality of the moments where an overdose of sex or
drugs is concerned, which is where the writer Colette really excelled as a
dreamy eyed participant.  Klaus Maria Brandauer plays the man who gains her
hand in marriage and benefits until his charm can no longer win her.  But
the film still seems to depict an era that developed many writers, Gabrielle
Colette being one of them.
