Title
Review for All the Pretty Horses (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
All the Pretty Horses (2000)
Matt Damon, Henry Thomas, Lucas Black, Penelope Cruz, Ruben Blades,
Robert Patrick, Julio Oscar Mechoso, Miriam Colon, Bruce Dern, Sam
Shepard. Screenplay by Ted Tally, based on the novel by Cormac McCarthy.
Directed by Billy Bob Thornton. 117 minutes
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"All the Pretty Horses" is a frustrating piece of work. The western, an
adaptation of the acclaimed novel by Cormac McCarthy, starts off great,
introducing two appealing cowboys and carefully establishing the
dynamics of their relationship, then adding a third, enormously likable
bad boy to the mix. But, just when the production gets rolling, the
movie separates the threesome and fractures, splintering into a series
of rushed vignettes.
Director Billy Bob Thornton's preferred version of the film was four
hours long. After many months of fighting with evil studio executives
who demanded a film that theatergoers might actually sit through,
Thornton hacked his pet project down to 117 minutes. The stitches show.
After a satisfying, leisurely opening, you can almost hear Billy Bob
exclaim, "Sweet Jesus, look at all the story I still have to cram in
there! Get me the shears and transparent tape, I've got to take some
elaborate plotlines and turn them into Cliffs Notes!"
What suffers most is a romance between cowpoke John Grady Cole (Matt
Damon) and Alejandro (Penelope Cruz), the daughter of a powerful
rancher. Many critics have complained that there is zero chemistry
between Damon and Cruz. Wrong. The chemistry is there, what's missing is
sufficient time for us to accept their relationship. As presented here,
the couple goes from "Pleased to meet you" to "I love you more than life
itself" in about the time it takes a boy band to croon a ditty.
But I'm getting ahead of myself. You probably would like to know the
basic story before I start telling you what's wrong with it.
In a small Texas town in 1949, John Grady Cole learns that, due to a
power shift following the death of his grandpa, the family ranch is to
be sold by hard-hearted city folk. Disillusioned, Cole and his best pal,
Lacey Rawlins (Henry Thomas), decide to head for Mexico in search of the
West they feel is slipping away.
So far, so good. Damon, looking lean and eager, creates a persona that
neatly blends practical skills with a romanticized outlook, while "E.T."
veteran Thomas is quite strong as Lacey, Cole's pragmatic, but
good-humored buddy. Together, they make a great team.
Shortly before crossing the Rio Grande into Mexico, the guys meet up
with trouble on a stick, in the form of young Jimmy Blevins (Lucas
Black), a twerp whose gunplay is as good as his grammar is bad. Perched
atop a horse that is probably stolen, Jimmy leeches onto the duo despite
their attempts to shake him. Black, who co-starred with Thornton in
"Sling Blade," is wonderful, stealing scenes and giving the whole
production a greater sense of authenticity.
So, naturally, he is the first to disappear. After losing "his" horse in
a hilarious lightning storm scene, Jimmy spots someone else with the
steed and decides to steal it back. During the chase that follows, Jimmy
splits off from Cole and Lacey, taking a goodly portion of the film's
vitality with him.
The guys hire on as hands at a massive ranch owned by the aristocratic
Rocha (Ruben Blades), where, in one of the best segments in the movie,
they prove remarkably adept at breaking horses, just as Billy Bob
Thornton begins to display his lack of proficiency in the editing
department. Cole becomes friends with Rocha, while Lacey fades
inexplicably (at least to me) into the background, taking more of the
film's vitality with him.
>From here on, the film adopts a choppy vignette motif. Cole and
Alejandra have their MTV montage romantic build-up, which includes a
skinny-dipping scene that only shows the couple from the shoulders up
(Note to Billy Bob: Covering up the bodies of Matt Damon and Penelope
Cruz is a terrible waste of natural resources). Then Cole faces off with
Alejandra's powerful Aunt Alfonsa (Miriam Colon).
At this point, you can almost see Billy Bob watching the clock as the
editing becomes even more abrupt. Bam! Cole and Lacey get arrested. Bam!
Jimmy returns. Bam! Face-off with cops in the desert. Bam! Shots. Bam!
Prison. Bam! Fights. Bam! Deals. Bam! More face-offs. Bam! Bam! Bam! Cue
the closing credits.
Regarding "All the Pretty Horses," Matt Damon told Talk Magazine, "The
four-hour version of that movie is the best movie I've been in in my
entire life." I'm looking forward to the DVD release of the film, where
we'll hopefully get the chance to see that version, instead of the
sometimes rewarding, but far too episodic Reader's Digest version in
theaters now.
A final note: After scanning quite a few critiques of "All the Pretty
Horses," I am proud to point out that this is one of the only reviews in
America not to employ the words "laconic" and "elegiac." Until just now,
that is.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films/ Columbia Pictures
 Director:  Billy Bob Thornton
 Writer:  Ted Talley, novel by Cormac McCarthy
 Cast: Matt Damon, Henry Thomas, Lucas Black, Penelope
Cruz, Ruben Blades, Robert Patrick, Julio Oscar Mechoso,
Miriam Colon, Bruce Dern, Sam Shepard
   While this year's character played by Tom Hanks, Chuck
Noland, found a spot of land undiscovered and free even of
bird life, a journey such as his is impossible in the U.S.  The
great historian, Frederick Jackson Turner, pronounced the
American frontier closed as of 1890, presumably leaving
some of the Cook Islands as the only area short of Mars that
has not been inhabited by humankind.  So what's a fella to
do if he's looking for wide open spaces, passionate romance,
and a chance to carve out a life free of the 5 o'clock rush-
hour traffic?  For John Grady Cole (Matt Damon), the central
figure of Cormac Mcarthy's major novel which has been
adapted to the screen by Ted Talley, the answer seems
clear.  He is in line to inherit a nice piece of Texas ranch
land, but when his grandpa dies and his absent mother sells
the land out from under him, he has no place to go.  No
place, that is, until he notes that all he had to do was cross
what amounted to a puddle of water ironically called the Rio
Grande and head out to the still not-so-developed Mexico.
   The adventures that befall Cole and hs best buddy Lacey
Rawlins (Henry Thomas) as they head out to the new frontier
in 1949 are the stuff of this film helmed by Billy Bob
Thornton, whose aim seems to be to capture the precious
dialogue in the McCarthy novel while showing his audience a
picture of post-World War II frontier life uncluttered by the
high melodrama of 1950's American Westerns.  No general
stores with barrels of food along the main street, no bars with
assertive women named Kitty, no duels at high noon here. 
Unfortunately, however, what is intended to be art is just
another horse opera made in an understated and
underproduced manner to give the viewer the impression that
he is looking at virtuosity.  Since the Romeo-and-Juliet
romantic interest that develops midway through the story
between Cole and the rich and forbidden Alejandra (Penelope
Cruz) is only about as fiery as the first sparks set off by
Chuck "Flintstone" Noland while rubbing sticks together on
his South Pacific island, and since the drama comes to
cinematic life only twice when an unfortunate fellow is
dragged away for execution and Cole must defend himself in
a prison fight, "All the Pretty Horses" gives us ample time to
concentrate on the title characters of the movie and put the
laconic human beings out of our thoughts.
   The journey of self-discovery on foreign land finds Cole
and Rawlins meeting up with the sixteen-year-old Jimmy
Blevins (Lucas Black), who is riding what they suspect is a
stolen animal.  Horsing around with him, they agree to let him
join the trek only to find that he becomes the source of much
of their troubles.  Cole and Rawlins are hired as help on a
prosperous ranch owned by the English-speaking Rocha
(Ruben Blades), giving Rocha's daughter the opportunity to
cast her come-hither eyes on the handsome young gringo,
Cole.  Engaging in forbidden love, Cole winds up in jail
together with Rawlins, where the former must prove his
manhood in the obligatory fight, which is well staged involving
a choreographed exit from the dining tables by all prisoners
save Cole and the man who is expected to kill him.
   Filmed by Barry Markowitz in a surprisingly conventional
manner with obligatory filtered National Geographic-style
shots on the rugged, uninviting landscape, "All the Pretty
Horses" fails to capture the nuances of the McCarthy novel,
particularly the humorous moments.  Despite that, the film is
overly talky, the adventurers expressing their sophomoric
dreams for the lives the want to lead.  A negative product
placement for the Mexican Tourist Board, "All the Pretty
Horses" is pretty much a neigh.

Author
Michael Dequina
_All_the_Pretty_Horses_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
If there's anything Billy Bob Thornton's _All_the_Pretty_Horses_ can't
be accused of, it's having a title that lies.  From its first image of
lovely equine specimens charging along, the horses are indeed pretty--not
just a few, but all of those seen in the film.  In fact, with a few
exceptions (to be addressed later), the images in this adaptation of
Cormac McCarthy's bestseller are absolutely stunning to behold.
That said, all the other charges commonly leveled against this
film--slow, dull, etc.--are not simply justified, but wholly, richly
deserved.  Much ink has been spilled on how director Thornton initially
turned in a four-hour cut of the film, which so freaked original U.S.
distributor Columbia that they switched domestic duties with their
co-producer, Miramax, which was originally set to handle the
international push.  While the uninvolving slog that is _Horses_' current
incarnation doesn't exactly whet my appetite for a director's cut DVD, I
can certainly see that longer version being a better film.
That's because _Horses_, as it stands, appears to be a hollow shell--the
frame of a story that either hasn't had a chance to fully gestate or a
more full-bodied beast that was ultimately stripped down to the bare
essentials.  Given the film's well-publicized history, the latter is more
than likely the case.  Matt Damon plays John Grady Cole, a young man in
1949 Texas whose lifelong ranch home is being sold by his mother
following the death of his grandfather.  So Cole and his best friend
Lacey Rawlins (Henry Thomas) head south of the border in search for some
adventure, but instead they find trouble--first in the form of a
hotheaded teen companion named Jimmy Blevins (Lucas Black)--and, for
Cole, romance: namely, Alejandra (Penelope Cruz), the daughter of the
wealthy man (Rubén Blades) who owns the ranch where the pair eventually
settle.
The pacing is slack, but Thornton and scripter Ted Tally's basic
narrative flow is fine and fluid as the story moves from its varied and
well-photographed (by Barry Markowitz) locations: the vast Texas expanse;
the ranch in Mexico with its (yes) pretty horses; the dark, dirty prison
where Cole and Rawlins find themselves with Blevins later in the story. 
Yet the film feels like a series of Big Dramatic Moments strung together,
skipping over the smaller details that gave said moments resonance in the
first place.  This is especially the case with the dud that is the
Cole/Alejandra romance, which is uncomfortably thrust into center stage
in the final act.  I'm guessing that in the film's longer version, the
love story feels less forced--maybe even not at all--and the intended
emotional connection between the lovers and between them and the audience
registers more strongly.
Or perhaps it doesn't, for based on what made this cut, the casting of
inexplicable Next Big Thing Cruz is a lost cause.  It's not so much an
issue of she and Damon not having chemistry--and let it be known that
together they are as exciting as watching paint crack and peel--than it
is her performance in general (though she can cry on cue very well):
stiff; robotic; flat as her body.  That leads me to another big element
of the mystifying hype surrounding Cruz; she has to be the most
unattractive so-called "beautiful" person to grace the screen in ages. 
Thornton's often close-up camera is incredibly unforgiving on her
not-even-close-to-being-as-pretty-as-the-horses face, and the crows whose
feet are planted around her eyes squawk for makeup assistance.
The other principals in the cast are better, but not too much better. 
The work of Damon and Thomas leans more toward the functional than
exceptional side, with Thomas making a stronger impression in a fairly
thankless part.  Trumping both of them in a sadly smaller part is Black,
who, with his strong work dating all the way back to his days on the
short-lived mid-'90s TV series _American_Gothic_ to Thornton's own
_Sling_Blade_, is clearly someone to keep watching in the future.
_All_the_Pretty_Horses_ is not a complete waste; there are some gorgeous
moments of visual poetry, and even with little to no context to support
them, some of those Big Dramatic Moments are striking.  But neither is
the film the grand yet intimate epic that Thornton obviously strove
for--at one point it may have been, but after seeing the release cut, I
imagine most viewers won't spend much, if any, thought on that now-moot
issue.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Susan Granger
    As muddy and meandering as the Rio Grande, this 1940's
Western is the soggy saga of two buddies, Matt Damon and Henry Thomas
(the "E.T." kid, now grown up), who ride across the border from Texas
to Mexico to be real cowboys. Faithfully adapted by Ted Tally from
Cormac McCarthy's fascinating novel, the concept is never fully
realized by director Billy Bob Thornton. Instead, the pace is
confusing and uneven, nuances that define the characters are
under-developed, even the visual style is inconsistent. As the
episodic story unfolds, Damon and Thomas are joined on the trail by a
cocky kid, Lucas Black ("Sling Blade") who is obviously riding a
stolen horse and carrying a stolen gun. They suspect he's going to be
trouble - and he is. Then there's the seduction of Damon by Penelope
Cruz, the lusty daughter of the aristocratic Mexican, Ruben Blades,
who owns the sprawling horse ranch where they've secured jobs. Despite
a nocturnal swim under the stars, director Thornton even manages to
make their love scenes dull; at one point, they're stupidly commenting
about having something up their noses. Miriam Colon scores as Cruz's
aunt who's rightfully suspicious about Damon, this gringo who winds up
in a Mexican penitentiary, albeit on false charges. Then there's what
seems like an awkwardly added epilogue with Damon telling his tale of
woe to a sympathetic West Texas judge, played by Bruce Dern. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "All the Pretty Horses" is ponderous,
pretentious 3. Basically, none of the characters - except Miriam
Colon's - exude passion or even interest. The actors seem to be going
through the motions - and the audience senses it on an conscious or
unconscious level, refusing to make an emotional commitment to the
tale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Zzzzzzz.  In ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, directed without an ounce of 
inspiration by Billy Bob Thornton, the title almost says it all.  The 
only possible things to admire in it are all the pretty horses since the 
human actors, with the possible exception of Matt Damon, deliver 
mind-numbingly dreary and lifeless performances.  The horses look 
surprisingly average but, nevertheless, manage to upstage the lethargic 
people in the story.  The handsome Rio Grande, as it carves out the 
canyon between Texas and Mexico, is the only really impressive part of 
the picture.
Ted Tally's thinly plotted and prosaically written script is based on 
Cormac McCarthy's novel.  Going for the poetic, the script instead 
achieves the soporific.  Fully 45 minutes pass before anything of 
consequence happens, and, even then, it is nothing memorable.  This 
might be somewhat tolerable if the actors were able to breathe any 
humanity into their roles, but they read their lines with the emotional 
impact of a teacher calling the roll.
The story, set in 1949, concerns two young Texans, Lacey Rawlins (Henry 
Thomas) and John Grady Cole (Matt Damon), who ride their horses across 
the Mexican border on an adventure.  16-year-old Jimmy Blevins (Lucas 
Black) joins them briefly before getting into some serious trouble for 
alleged horse stealing.  Lacey and John end up at the large ranch of Don 
Hector Rocha (Rubén Blades), where they go to work as cowboys.  
The owner's daughter, Alejandra (Penélope Cruz), is there for the sole 
purpose of providing a brief love interest to the story.  Damon and Cruz 
show absolutely no chemistry whatsoever on the screen, and the beautiful 
Cruz is completely wasted in her part.  The romance between John and 
Alejandra not only doesn't have any sparks, it rarely even smolders.
After Alejandra's aunt warns John, "Here, a woman's reputation is all 
she has," we cut to the young lovers skinny dipping.  But no sooner have 
we hoped that this thread to the story will take off than it is dropped 
like a hot potato.  
In ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, it is hard to know whom to blame more, the 
actors, the director or the screenwriter.  The acting by Henry Thomas 
(E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL) would be my choice for the worst part of 
the production.  His lack of energy is so pervasive that it seems to 
suck the life out of those around him.  
Like a candidate facing certain defeat who makes one last campaign swing 
before losing in a landslide, the movie finally tries for a little drama 
at the end.  The problem is that we have long since lost any interest in 
the characters.  Whether they live or die, we no longer care.
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES runs a long 1:57.  It is rated PG-13 for violence 
and some sexuality and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.  
Most kids, however, are going to be bored stiff by the picture.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ALL THE PRETTY HORSES (director: Billy Bob Thornton; screenwriters: Ted
Tally/ based on the novel by Cormac McCarthy; cinematographer: Barry
Markowitz; editor: Sally Menke; cast: Matt Damon (John Grady Cole),
Henry Thomas (Lacey Rawlins), Lucas Black (Jimmy Blevins), Penélope Cruz
(Alejandra), Rubén Blades (Rocha), Robert Patrick (Cole), Julio Oscar
Mechoso (Captain), Miriam Colon (Alfonsa), Bruce Dern (Judge), Julio
Oscar Mechoso (Captain), Sam Shepard (J. C. Franklin); Runtime: 112;
Miramax Films and Columbia Pictures; 2000)
A modern day Western adapted from Cormac McCarthy's National Book
Award-winning novel of 1992, which was accurately transferred to film by
Ted Tally's script, as it kept the same laconic cowboy dialogue from the
book intact, but was reduced considerably from the over three hour
length director Billy Bob Thornton originally shot it in, to under two
hours, the length the people from Miramax wanted it. It was hard to tell
if the film was missing anything because of this deletion, but I did
find the film to be directed with a skewed sense of rhythm. There were
also too many scenes that failed to go anywhere, making the film dull at
times. For a slow moving film, there was the contradiction of scenes
happening too fast to be developed and fully realized. As a result, "All
the Pretty Horses" failed to be engaging.
If the filmmaker was aiming for an epic, he sure didn't get it in this
sometimes elegaic film. What he got is something that plays more like a
slick magazine photo shoot on the travails of being a cowboy, or as a
touristy travelogue of what the Old West was like, or as a stylish film
that can't find what it wants to say and stumbles around in the grimness
of a prosaic story about youthful aspirations. What it lacked was some
emotional kick, as the scenes where the cowboys show off their spirited
exuberance, seemed more portentous than not and just didn't jive with
the unsure pace of the film.
What caught my attention in a positive way was how pretty the
picturesque vistas were and how the film gave off some good cowboy vibes
about friendship and loyalty and had some good cowboy lingo to go along
with all the pretty horses and with the hot-blooded senorita played by
Penélope Cruz.
The film opens in San Angelo, Texas, in 1949, where John Grady Cole's
(Matt Damon) grandfather has just died, leaving the big-spread ranch
John was born on to his remarried mother. She is divorced from John's
dad and he left the ranch in her hands because he screwed up, and to
John's bitter disappointment, she is selling the ranch to an oil company
because she has no interest in it or in him, but is interested in the
large sum of money she will receive. Since the young man's entire life
experience is ranching and his future has just gone up in a cloud of
dust, he feels he has no choice but to leave the area. He goes with his
loyal sidekick Lacey Rawlins (Henry Thomas) to Mexico to look for ranch
work, because that's where the pretty horses are and he can fulfill his
fantasy about being a real cowboy there.
It becomes an on-the-trail film, with a love story and a revenge story
filling in the life of the youthful cowboy drifters, as everything in
the film gets boiled down to a simplicity that is too simple-minded to
just accept without asking questions. The pardners motto is stated by
John Grady after they cross the Rio Grande and enter the foreign climate
of Mexico: He tells the 'doubting' Lacey "stick or quit."And,  he
further states. "How I was is how I am, and all I know is to stick." Now
that's some wicked cowboy talk 'pardner!'
The first danger sign for the two cowboys comes by way of meeting up
with a young kid on the trail, Jimmy Blevins (Lucas Black), who says he
is 16 and is running away from his mean stepfather and in whom they
sense trouble. He is riding a horse the cowboys think is too good for
him and surmise he stole it from his stepfather. I found him to be the
most interesting one in the film, as he adds his childish stubborness,
volatility, homespun humor, tough backbone for fair play, silly
superstitions about thunder and brings with him the hard-luck of someone
who never had a chance in this world, giving this complacent film,
seemingly so self-satisfied with its boring self, a chance to become
energized by his maverick portrayal. When Blevens is onscreen, the
shallowness of the story doesn't seem to matter, because his
coming-of-age story is better than John Grady's.
The kid somehow loses his pretty horse and gun, his two most valuable
possessions and winds up taking back his horse and later taking back by
force his gun from the Mexican who won't give it up so easily, and
thereby the kid winds up in a Mexican jail for murder. When he's out of
the picture, the story starts to drag. the film then turns its attention
to Matt Damon's coming-of-age story, as he and Lacey rode away from
Blevins after he got back his horse, realizing the kid is wreckless and
could take them down with him. They ride aimlessly into Mexico until
they land jobs as ranch hands. John Grady becomes a wild mustang tamer
and a lover of the sexy Alejandra (Penelope Cruz), the daughter of the
wealthy Mexican rancher (Blades) and horse breeder he works for, someone
with whom he forms an awkward father-son relationship with, as he
counsels the ranch owner on what horses to breed (the irony being that
the rancher accepts what he says about horses, but rejects him for his
daughter).
Mexico becomes for John Grady a place of adventure and romance, but the
romance never set off any sparks between him and Cruz, even as its love
at first sight, as they scope each other out, and though the two keep
telling each other how much they are in love, yet, in this case, seeing
is believing...and I'm not believing what I can't see.
The story then plays like a routine melodrama, of the aristocratic
father and the protective aunt (Miriam Colon), working to break up the
romance to protect the girl's honor. Of the law coming after the two
cowboys for being with Blevins, after the aunt and the ranch owner rat
them out to the authorities. Of them being confined unfairly in a
corrupt Mexican jail and being abused by the cruel police captain
(Mechoso), who tortures Blevins before taking him out to be shot, and of
their transfer to a slovenly penitentiary, which held some of the most
unbelievable scenes yet, where John Grady gets into a staged knife fight
in the mess hall with a convict, and there isn't a single prison guard
in sight, if you can believe that.
There might have been a good picture in this tale, but it just never
kicked in. Everything about the film felt choppy and not certain of the
direction it was going in. The star-crossed lovers had no depth or sense
of urgency in their lustful romance, and the film spent so much time
trying to tie up all the loose-ends about the romance, and yet it had
nothing much to say about it, as it always seemed hollow. The revenge
tale of going after the Mexican lawman who did them wrong, was also
thinly played out and had no teeth in its emotional outbursts. Though
the buddy story was well-played between Damon and Thomas, as Damon
showed that he could be expressive and wear his changing feelings in a
credible way. His problem was, even though he could physically do the
cowboy role, I was never convinced that he actually was one. But the
most disheartening thing about this film, was how out of whack it
seemed, as the story had no staying power, it kept going off the trail,
until it looked more like a Marlboro billboard commercial than an
enriching story of two decent young men living out their dream to be
cowboys. Something must have gotten lost in adapting the book to film,
because I couldn't find where the heartfelt story was in all the
superficiality I was surrounded by. The real star of this film was the
landscape, I couldn't take my eyes off it. I think Penélope Cruz can act
(at least she can in an Almodovar film), but in this film she's around
only as part of the beautiful scenery. I know Matt Damon can act and he
shows in this film that he can let us look inside him, but I don't think
he was up to being the romantic lead needed to make this film come
alive. Overall the film lacked a psychological breath to get us more
involved in the characters. The filmmaker only accomplished showing us
simple things, things we already knew, like Mexico's justice system is
corrupt while in Texas the judicial system is fair (Ummm!). After his
harrowing experience in Mexico, which left him scarred, Matt Damon feels
so comfortable with the Texas judicial system, that he has a
heart-to-heart talk with a kind-hearted judge (Dern). After seeing that,
I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Scott Renshaw
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES
(Miramax)
Starring:  Matt Damon, Henry Thomas, Lucas Black, Penelope Cruz, Ruben
Blades, Julio Oscar Mechoso, Miriam Colon.
Screenplay:  Ted Tally, based on the novel by Cormac McCarthy.
Producers:  Robert Salerno and Billy Bob Thornton.
Director:  Billy Bob Thornton.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  117 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In Billy Bob Thornton's adaptation of the award-winning novel ALL THE
PRETTY HORSES, two young Texans hit the trail for Mexico in 1949. And they
meet up with another young Texan. And they get into some trouble with the
law. And they go to work on a Mexican ranch. And one of them has some
trouble with a woman. And they have some more trouble with the law. And
then the same one of them has more trouble with the same woman. And then
there's more trouble with the law. And then the movie ends.
     Thornton and Miramax feuded for a year over the length of the film,
with the director originally turning in a two-and-a-half hour cut before
finally paring it down to under two hours. The resulting film is the best
evidence that Thornton was right. ALL THE PRETTY HORSES is a film that
wants to achieve an epic scope, but where plot points keep rolling by so
quickly that there's no time for anything to resonate. It's a picturesque
travelogue made for Short Attention Span Theatre.
     The tale does begin in 1949, where a young man named John Grady Cole
(Matt Damon) is at a crossroads. His mother is preparing to sell the
family ranch, leaving John Grady adrift. He decides to look for work as a
ranch hand in Mexico, joined on the journey by his best friend Lacey
Rawlins (Henry Thomas). Along the way they hook up with a young runaway
named Jimmy Blevins (Lucas Black), but separate again after one of the
aforementioned run-ins with the law. Eventually, John Grady and Lacey land
at the ranch of the wealthy Senor Rocha (Ruben Blades), where John Grady
becomes fascinated with Rocha's daughter Alejandra (Penelope Cruz). And
the complications progress from there.
     Boy, do they ever. One of the most impressive elements of Cormac
McCarthy's novel was how he was able to take such a plot-heavy story and
make it feel rich and profound. Ted Tally's script retains the laconic
cowboy dialogue, but the structure is a mess. The set-up concerning John
Grady's fragmented family is dispatched in a few snippets of film and some
voice-over, providing little foundation for the journey that is to come.
In some earlier incarnation, Tally may have provided more fleshing out for
the individual story elements, more gradual build-up for the drama. In the
two hours ALL THE PRETTY HORSES now takes on screen, there's a sense in
virtually every scene that someone was standing over the editor's
shoulder, tapping his watch and muttering, "Come on, we gotta get to the
skinny-dipping  come on, we gotta get to the knife fight."
     The really unfortunate part is that you can see a quality film
screaming to get loose. Damon continues to impress as an actor, finding
the search for stability and integrity in John Grady. Thomas is also
solid, and Lucas Black grabs the screen in his smaller role as the
high-strung Blevins. The film is strongest before the main characters
arrive at the Rocha ranch, lingering on the relationships between the
three travelers as they leave their familiar country. It's easy to
understand what the film-makers are reaching for in their exploration of a
changing country and the disappearance of a slower, simpler way of life.
It's far more difficult to get caught up in those themes while trying to
keep up with the latest dramatic development in John Grady's life.
     Ordinarily, it might be worth commending ALL THE PRETTY HORSES for
not arbitrarily turning the romantic sub-plot into the entire focus of the
film (though it's still the entire focus of the ad campaign). This isn't
really a story about John Grady doin' the hoochie-coochie with his little
senorita, and while Penelope Cruz is quite scrumptious to look at, she
doesn't exactly create a complex character. It's a bit of a surprise when
the film moves along for another twenty minutes or so of loose-end-tying
after the love story has been resolved, but in this case, it doesn't feel
like a daring or unconventional choice. It simply feels like another
example of a film that's almost never in the moment, so desperate to dash
off that you suspect the whole crew was renting its equipment by the
minute. So much for a celebration of a slower, simpler way of life.
