Title
Review for Geronimo (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
The sad part of this film, like most of those about the native Americans in
this country, is that they look so hopeless, and their fervor for life gets
taken out of them.  Few of them accept that they still have their spirit,
even if they are finally the caged beasts.  At least they didn't suffer as
many indignities as the blacks did for many years before, and
during, that time.
Geronimo, is well known in the schools of military strategy, because he was
able to escape for fifteen years, despite being chased by two armies for a
long period of time.  And it took, what might be considered a small act of
treason to bring him in, on his own terms, which were fake, and non
existent.
The complicated story of Geronimo starts when the American cavalry was
trying to place many of the native populations in areas, which were to be
called reservations ( and still are ), just to separate them from the white
man settler, and imperial owner.  The army's job is to uphold  the
government of the white man, for the white man, not for the native who is
considered the abuser, and the outlaw, and in the case of this
Geronimo, a rebel in every sense.
Despite the ruthlessness of the upper brass at the military, there are some
individuals that retained a certain amount of dignity and human decency, who
didn't take the chase of the natives as a victory for mankind.  And in due
time they are ( Gene Hackman in a fine role ) retired for people who 'can
get the job done' .  And now the full  army is after Geronimo, who may be at
any time either in Mexico, or in Arizona somewhere.  Eventually, the army
fails in its chase, and has to resort to the means which were used before to
meet Geronimo, which was a guide who had spiritual tendencies, and had
enough care for the life of a native, as a human.  Jason Patrick sets out
one final
time to tell Geronimo of the deal which the army has in mind, much to the
chagrin of the general who is embarrassed that several thousand men can not
find a warrior, but one man can.
The film is well written, albeit very much in a film fashion, rather than a
'natural' story, still from the point of view of the white man, rather than
the native warrior.  We get glimpses into the mind and spirit of the native
Geronimo, and his people, but they are mere flashes in the pan.  One could
spend much more time, EASILY, describing how
Geronimo, a true medicine man, could keep away from danger, or the army....
he used his trade and tools of the spirit.  The army only used ideas.  It
isn't the same thing.
The tiring part of the film is not the story, which is very good, or the
acting which is nice, and contrasting in styles. It is the brown tone of the
film, reminiscent of the old photographs whose fixer has faded and has
turned the picture yellow ( the bleach fix is red, and it turns yellow when
weak ), and the film does almost all of its work in this
tone, even using the famous photographs taken of Geronimo and the army as a
backdrop to its own scenery.
While this may be 'old' thinking on our part, or a distant 'memory' the film
is just that.  Probably the part which the native American is not very proud
of anyway.  To their credit, much of the native language is used, and not
sub titled.
It is a nice film, though a bit brutal in parts.
