Title
Review for Detention (1998/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
"All you have to do is keep them from killing each other on school
grounds," the principal's anal-retentive, pencil-pushing executive
assistant, Ms. Nunca (Gail Cronauer), tells the new substitute, Mr.
Walmsley (John S. Davies).
In the wonderfully sardonic DETENTION, by writer/director Andy Anderson
(POSITIVE I.D.), the bored students know that they can get away with
absolutely anything.  Their parents' lawyers have the school district
living in fear of lawsuits.  The fear is genuine since the high school
doesn't have any textbooks now.  It seems that 2 parents got an
injunction after they found some material objectionable in the current
books.  A judge has ordered the district to lock up all the books,
pending his ruling.
This smartly Kafkaesque tale has two distinct parts.  The darkly comedic
first part is followed by a shockingly dramatic second, each fascinating
in its own right, but both better together.  The comedy works because
the excellent ensemble cast takes it dead seriously, and the drama works
better because of the comedic relief.  Both are helped by being
outlandish yet frequently quite plausible, as any teacher, especially
substitute teachers, will tell you.
Mr. Walmsley, a first-time substitute goes to unruly Donner High in
which students are free to use profanity towards the teachers, but the
other way round will land the teachers in hot water.  Besides having to
look over detention, he teaches a variety of subjects, although most
students don't care about learning anything.  While there, he bonds with
Louise (Marsha Dietlein), a first-year art teacher, who is harassed by
her students.
Louise learns that even physical violence against a teacher gets turned
around and blamed on the teacher.  And, if the teacher fights it and
wins, her contract might not be renewed the following year since she'll
be labeled a trouble maker by the administration, which likes to settle
all disputes as quickly and quietly as possible by giving the students
whatever they ask.
"This is insanity!" Mr. Walmsley, who rarely raises his voice, correctly
points out.  "The lunatics are running the asylum."
But one mustn't go against the students.  "We can't disparage them, we
can't fight them, we can't call them out and, unfortunately, we can't
kill them," the principal (Lee Ritchey) tells Mr. Walmsley.
Teachers get strict lectures on how to approach students.  Both teachers
and students have rules, but only the teachers have to follow them.  In
one scene, we witness a lecture to the teachers about one of the
typically asinine rules that they must follow, lest they run afoul of
the law.  The school's attorneys have determined the recommended number
of teacher-to-student eye-contacts -- 8 per student per class since more
would constitute sexual harassment and less would be evidence of
discrimination.
In the dark second half, seven students (Susana Gibb, Meason Wiley,
Jonathan Brent, Rebecca Sanabria, Brandy Little, Kirk Kelley-Kahn and
Forest Denbow) find themselves at a summer school of sorts in which
tough love, very tough love, is practiced.
The challenging story, which asks thought-provoking and provocative
questions, is willing to tackle difficult subjects in surprising ways.
The director, who is as engaging and hilarious as his movie and who was
at our screening, told us of the reaction of a friend of his who had
seen the film: "If you're a kid, it's a horror movie; if you're an
adult, it's a fantasy."
DETENTION runs just a little over 2 hours.  It has not yet been
submitted to the MPAA for a rating.  Although it contains full male and
female frontal nudity and violence, the director told me that he
believes that it will be able to receive an R without cuts since there
is no sexuality associated with the nudity.  The film would be
acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Murali Krishnan
Many would consider the career of the public school teacher to be
among the most thankless of occupations. Stories of idealistic
individuals slogging through warlike conditions are sadly common. This
setting provides the backdrop for this film, a searing dark comedy.
This film is clearly constructed to make a case for teachers. In the
film, as in real life, teachers must face numerous obstacles. Students
are apathetic, hostile, and even violent. Administrators are
ineffectual, and oppressively burdensome with bureaucratic policies.
Parents threaten litigation in response to attempts at discipline. In
reality the situation is universally considered a tragedy, and this
film, like many good works of literature, successfully spins comedy
from tragedy.
The story begins by introducing Mr. Walmsley (John Davies), a man with
a shady past connected with the circus. He accepts a position as a
substitute teacher in a suburban public high school, a world perhaps
more bizarre than the one he left. Being new, he finds that he is one
of the few whose spirit has not been broken down by the system. He
finds a kindred spirit in the art teacher, Ms. Germaine (Marsha
Dietlein). Each in their own way fights a losing battle in their
effort to make a difference in the lives of their students.
Eventually Walmsley realizes that there is no way to reach the
students within the restrictions of the existing framework. He
fashions an extreme scheme to address some of the most troubled
students. He uses his circus background to fashion a more severe form
of "detention", which is a common and ineffective punishment for
students where they are required to stay after school hours and sit
quietly in a classroom. It is only a slight form of punitive
imprisonment. The approach taken by Walmsley will be jarring to many
viewers, and director Andy Anderson states that it is meant to be
comically disturbing.
The strength of the film is that the comedy is consistent (the story
does not follow the cliche of becoming serious and humorless at the
climax), and the comedy is often quite clever. The film is also
unpredictable. Although the viewer is aware of where the journey will
ultimately end, it is never clear how it will get there.
The primary weakness of the film is the transparent agenda that is
being pushed. This could have been a problem if the film was not so
entertaining. The other minor detriment is some of the acting.
Although most of the adult roles were convincing, the students never
emerge beyond typical adolescent stereotypes. However, the film is
well written, and reflects the satirical wit of the filmmaker.
Highly recommended. The film sometimes uses jarring imagery, but this
is to be expected in a black comedy. It is imaginative and funny, and
it results in an enjoyable experience.
