Title
Review for Summertime (1955)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Katharine Hepburn is one of the most vigorous, attractive, sophisticated women
to ever appear on the silver screen. She's also one of our most versatile
actresses with a body of work that includes "The Philadelphia Story,"  "Adam's
Rib," "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner" and, one of her last great roles, "On
Golden Pond."  "Summertime" is one of the most beautiful movies to ever take
place in Venice: a luscious, delicate comedy-drama by director David Lean ("Dr.
Zhivago"). For those of you who remember "Only You" - the sappy romantic comedy
with Robert Downey Jr.  set in Venice - this is far superior to that film. 
Based on Arthur Laurents' play "The Time of the Cuckoo," Hepburn stars as the
independent, lonely Jane Hudson who has just arrived in Venice: a secretary
from Ohio who is looking for romance and adventure. She stays at the "Pensione
Fiorini" hotel, converses with other fellow Americans such as the Yaeghers, an
older couple, and an unknown artist (a very young Darren McGavin), and she
spouts such Italian phrases as "bravo" and "prego" while filming every landmark
she sees with her 8mm film camera. One sunny day at a cafe, Jane notices a
handsome Italian gentleman staring at her - she is overcome with feelings but
she resists them (She wants to be around people but somehow finds an inner
peace when isolated). Eventually, she runs into him again at an antique store
just before buying an 18th century red goblet. The gentleman's name is Renato
de Rossi (Rosanno Brazzi), an antique store owner and, before you know it, they
fall madly in love. Naturally, Jane discovers that Renato is married. 
"Summertime" is a slight film compared to Lean's other works, such as "Dr.
Zhivago" or the underrated "Ryan's Daughter," but it is superbly acted,
well-written, and subtly directed. Hepburn manages to be likable, stubborn,
fierce, and loving. Brazzi makes a perfect companion for Hepburn: romantic,
charming and charismatic. Who can ever forget her her unforced and hysterical
walk into the river while filming with her camera? You'll have a delightful
time with the invigorating "Summertime" - it is more than a travelogue of
Venice.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com 
