Title
Review for In the Line of Fire (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jon A Webb
     This film is a series of cliches, strung together with great
talent and enough originality to give you the feeling that you're
watching real cinematic art, which in fact you are.
     The plot is familiar (legend of the Fisher King): discredited cop
gets a chance to redeem himself but must first overcome the demons of
his past.  The scenes are familiar: cop comes home to his empty
apartment, pours himself a drink, and gets The Phone Call.  Cop finally
looks like he's going to lay his object of desire, is interrupted (he
must of course stay pure, as the knights did in the antecedent of this
story).  Etc.
     Three people make this an interesting film: Wolfgang Petersen, the
director, who twists each scene and gives it a resonance informed by,
but not parodying, all the previous films that tell the same story;
Clint Eastwood, who (as in UNFORGIVEN) reflects on growing older and
how this affects his macho image; and John Malkovich, who explores his
character's psychosis with freshness and humor.
     For example, under Petersen's direction the scene where the cop
finally seems about to get laid becomes funny as weapons and hardware
fall to the floor (and Eastwood's comment later in the scene makes it
hilarious).
     Petersen understands the medium, he knows what kind of story he's
telling, and he doesn't waste time building up suspense when you know
exactly how a scene is going to end.  He just lets it happen, and then
gets back to the interesting stuff, which is what happens in between
the obvious stuff.
     Eastwood is getting old, and is more and more willing to expose
himself and let the camera do its worst. Here he's still holding on to
the idea of the macho cop who can lay any woman but you can see how
earnestly he needs to get that fix, the pretty lady who falls to his
charms, and how he's not willing to go all the way and give (as opposed
to risk) his life to get the bad guy.
     John Malkovich adds little touches to his portrayal of the psycho
who's out to kill the President.  The way he tilts his head after he
shoots a couple of people who present themselves as convenient targets,
the way he goads Eastwood to shoot him, this is great stuff.

Author
James Berardinelli
     In 1963, Frank Horrigan was among the "best and brightest" of the
Secret Service, the personal choice of President Kennedy.  On November
22 in Dallas, an afternoon that Horrigan will never forget, he became
one of the few living agents to lose a president.  Now, decades later
and only months before a presidential election (perhaps 1992 or
1996--we're never told exactly), Mitch Leary (John Malkovich) is
stalking the President.  Believing there to be an intangible bond
between himself and Horrigan (he says they were both betrayed by a
government they had once loved), Leary makes contact with the Secret
Service agent to discuss his intentions.  After his contact with the
potential killer, Horrigan acts quickly to get himself posted to
protection duty.  This time, he has no intention of failing and
believes that, given the opportunity, he will take the bullet.  But
Leary has everything on his side--time, opportunity, and a group of
pig-headed behind-the-scenes men at the White House who refuse to alter
the President's itinerary no matter how grave the apparent danger is.
And, as the election draws closer, Horrigan's chances of averting a
second tragedy seem progressively less likely.
     John Malkovich may be one of the big screen's most overlooked
actors.  Or, at least he was until this performance.  It isn't that
he's never done good work before--his version of Lenny in Gary
Sinese's OF MICE AND MEN was one reason for that film's place in my top
ten for last year--but most of the time he hasn't been recognized for
it.  However, like Anthony Hopkins in SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, now that
Malkovich has been given a highly visible role in a significant movie,
people will hopefully begin to rave about him.  The job he does in IN
THE LINE OF FIRE is certainly worthy of praise.  Hands down,
Malkovich's assassin is the best thing about this excellent thriller--a
villain that rivals Hannibal Lecter for intelligence and cold,
calculated viciousness.
     Rene Russo gives her strongest performance to date.  In truth,
she's little more than the "window dressing" that Frank Horrigan
suggests is the role of female Secret Service agents, but she manages
to do a lot with a thankless part.  She has quite a bit of screen
exposure, but not much meat to sink her teeth into.  But, even playing
second fiddle to Malkovich and one of Hollywood's most popular leading
men, she gets noticed.
     Eastwood is Eastwood, albeit a more vulnerable version akin to
what we saw in UNFORGIVEN.  He's still tough, and he still isn't afraid
to use his gun, but Frank Horrigan is a man haunted by his past.  He's
no longer sure whether it was simple indecision or an unwillingness to
take a bullet that led to his not being there for Kennedy, and the
possibility of the same situation arising a second time troubles him
day and night.  Horrigan gives us the human side of Eastwood--the side
that we never get in a Dirty Harry film, the side that isn't afraid to
shed a tear.
     Director Wolfgang Petersen, best known for DAS BOOT, but also at
the helm for the taut, twisted SHATTERED, is aware of what's necessary
to make a good thriller work.  He knows the importance of pacing, and
plays the tension in IN THE LINE OF FIRE like a virtuoso.  Petersen
takes what could have been a muddled motion picture and structures it
perfectly, creating a superlative piece of entertainment.  It helps, of
course, that he has a strong cast.
     Plot-wise, IN THE LINE OF FIRE is nothing extraordinary.  It's
basically a formula-type thriller with one or two twists thrown in to
keep the view off-balance.  However, strength of character, coupled
with a consistently high level of excitement, makes this film anything
but ordinary.  The most intriguing element of IN THE LINE OF FIRE is
the cat-and-mouse game between Horrigan and Leary.  The relationship of
these two characters to each other is fascinating, as it explores
psychological layers which many motion pictures find too difficult to
convey realistically.
     For an example of how badly this sort of story (protecting a
public figure from a dangerous assassin) can be botched, take a look at
last year's THE BODYGUARD.  While there are similarities in the
underlying plot structures of the two movies, development and execution
are radically different.  IN THE LINE OF FIRE is an intelligent motion
picture; THE BODYGUARD represents mindless entertainment.
     It's interesting how some of the most simple special effects can
be the most effective.  Video manipulation shows a few clips that
appear to have Horrigan right in the midst of JFK's Dallas entourage.
The editing is done exceptionally well; it isn't easy to tell that
Eastwood wasn't behind the President and First Lady.  If nothing else,
these scenes justify one of the themes of Michael Crichton's novel
RISING SUN--that video images can no longer be trusted to represent
the truth.
     A couple of negatives about IN THE LINE OF FIRE come to mind.
First, while the music by Ennio Morricone is effective at times, there
is at least one incident--during a rooftop chase--when it sounds like
a regurgitation of something from THE UNTOUCHABLES.  I know that many
composers (including Morricone) have certain "signature" tunes, but
this reuse of something he's done in the past is a little too blatant
for my liking.
     Secondly, Eastwood's Horrigan has one-too-many leaps of intuition
during the climactic scenes.  The overt nature of this plot device is
neatly camouflaged by the ever-growing tension of the sequence, but it
becomes apparent upon reflection.  After all, we're dealing with Frank
Horrigan, grizzled veteran of the Secret Service, not Sherlock Holmes.
There's nothing earlier in the film that would lead us to believe that
he possesses such powers of deduction.
     Overall, however, this is a fine film, and certainly one of the
most intelligent thrillers of the summer.  IN THE LINE OF FIRE doesn't
require the special effects bonanza of JURASSIC PARK to involve the
audience, nor does it rely on the mega-budget explosions and
mountaintop battles of CLIFFHANGER.  Compared to THE FIRM, a movie that
some have identified as a picture of similar appeal and temperament, IN
THE LINE OF FIRE is far better paced and scripted.  So, for a couple of
hours of entertainment, IN THE LINE OF FIRE is one of those rare "big"
movies that doesn't disappoint.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David N. Butterworth
     Who wouldn't relish the opportunity to redeem themselves for a
past failure if given a second chance?  That's the simple premise
behind IN THE LINE OF FIRE, the latest film to star Hollywood legend
Clint Eastwood.  But the movie takes this thin idea and runs with it,
resulting in a taut and genuinely believable political thriller that's
every bit as watchable as the laconic star himself.
     Eastwood plays Frank Harrigan, a Secret Service agent of long
standing with a Presidential skeleton in his closet--he failed to stop
the bullet that killed John F. Kennedy.  Thirty years later he gets the
chance to prove himself when a would-be assassin comes a-calling,
taunting Harrigan with threats of repeating the horror of Dealy Plaza.
     Eastwood's Harrigan seems like a real person.  He's a
self-confessed "borderline burnout with questionable social skills" who
collects jazz records, tinkles the old ivories, and likes to ride
public transportation.  He also "knows things about people."  Harrigan
refers to himself as "over fifty" in the film (Eastwood is actually
63), and one of IN THE LINE OF FIRE's strengths is that it doesn't
pretend otherwise.
     In fact, Harrigan is paired with a rookie cop, played by Fred
Dalton Thompson, to play up his comparative age and experience.  Then
there's a repeating theme about how Harrigan's just too old for this
line of work--the killer calls, the Feds trace the call, the Feds race
out the door, Harrigan huffs and puffs along.  Given his age, it's
remarkable that Eastwood does so much of his own stuntwork (i.e.,
running).  Finally, the touching relationship that develops between
Harrigan and agent Lilly Raines (Rene Russo) works because Eastwood
isn't playing a standard romantic lead.  Their abbreviated love scene
evokes a smile rather than a cringe.
     John Malkovich is convincing in the role of James McCrawley, an
obsessive paranoid who's as smart as he is dangerous.  He's not a
generic lunatic, suffering from some pat psychological disorder, but a
frighteningly plausible personality.  And he takes great delight in
pushing all of Harrigan's buttons.  There are lots--and I mean lots--of
shots of Eastwood, receiver pushed to his ear, temples pounding, brow
like a newly ploughed field.  "I don't have to listen to any more of
this!" he growls.  But he's paid to take this psycho's abuse.
McCrawley dribbles and snaps and flips out often; it's clear we're
dealing with a timebomb of a man who's likely to explode at any
moment.
     One of the things that makes IN THE LINE OF FIRE so realistic is
that the producers don't pretend Eastwood's a spry, 30-year-old action
hero.  He, Russo, and Malkovich all perform admirably.  In fact,
Eastwood comes awfully close to acting at times.  Some weak and obvious
wisecracks apart, he really shines.
     Also impressive are the film's supporting characters.  Dylan
McDermott plays Chief-of-Staff Harry Sargent whose role is that of the
typical shortsighted bureaucrat; he's so focused in on his job (in this
case the success of the Presidential campaign) that he's oblivious to
the threat of any real danger.  Gary Cole and John Mahoney play
high-ranking government officials with equal competence.
     But perhaps the nicest surprise is the way IN THE LINE OF FIRE
gives Presidential bodyguards their due.  Their role, protecting
someone as prominent as the U.S. President, is depicted as extremely
difficult and uncompromising.  At a political convention, with
flashbulbs bursting and photographers swarming, Harrigan is among the
anxious agents keeping order.  This is a tough job all right.
Ironically, Harrigan refers to some Secret Service operations as
"window dressing."  If someone wanted to take an anti-tank gun to the
President's limousine, a dozen Federal agents running alongside isn't
much of a deterrent.  All they really do is make the President look
more Presidential.
     What you need in a film like this is a tough, likable lead, a
sympathetic (but not whiny) sidekick/love interest, and a convincing
villain.  IN THE LINE OF FIRE has all three.  Add well-rounded
supporting characters, a surprisingly good storyline (from the pen of
Jeff Maguire), and brisk direction (by Wolfgang Petersen) and you've
got yourself a well-paced thriller worth watching.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In a suspense film, higher stakes do not make for more suspense.  That
was the mistake that the James Bond series made up through MOONRAKER.  They
started with villains trying to sabotage one missile or just to embarrass
the British Secret Service, and at the same time get a decoded.  As the
series progressed, you eventually got to villains trying to precipitate
nuclear war or to destroy all life on Earth.  But the best stories had the
least flamboyant villains and concentrated on credibility.  I mention this
because while IN THE LINE OF FIRE, with its psychotic trying to kill the
President, does not have an absurdly exaggerated villain, it is starting to
get up there.  This is essentially a Dirty Harry film with the stakes upped
a little.  This is also an anti-violence film like UNFORGIVEN, but it is an
Eastwood sort of anti-violence film.  That means that the good guys who
survive feel angst over the violence afterward.
     Frank Horrigan (played by Clint Eastwood) is an agent for the Secret
Service.  His independence and his insubordinate attitude get him in trouble
with the people for whom he works. And he is just a bit sexist, but for the
rare woman who can see beyond the attitude problem he is really a diamond in
the rough.  In other words, he is just like a Dirty Harry of the Secret
Service.  The one difference is that Horrigan was the Secret Service agent
protecting--or at least trying to protect--Kennedy in Dallas.  Twenty-nine
(or thirty-three?) years later, he is still in the Secret Service trying to
protect the President.  But now there is a new assassin who wants to kill
the current President.  He has nothing special against the Chief Executive,
but he really likes the idea of killing a President.
     First the bad news.  In spite of good advance critical comment, this is
a very familiar, if not out-and-out hackneyed, script.  The conscienceless
killer feels impelled to call the policeman (or Secret service agent) and
unburden his neuroses on the man looking for him.  It adds to the thrill of
the hunt, but it has been done many times since NO WAY TO TREAT A LADY or
even the real-life Jack the Ripper murders.  And, yes, there is an
attractive woman, Lilly Raines (played by Rene Russo, who looks a lot like
Blair Brown) in the Secret Service, and she goes from disliking the
obnoxious Eastwood character to feeling sorry for him to bedding him.  The
plot also has some real stretches of credibility.  And it has more than its
share of violence, including two scenes that could be disturbing to those
who are particularly susceptible being disturbed by movies.
     So Clint's Oscars have not earned him better scripts, but at least he
gets one heck of a good actor as the assassin.  John Malkovich, who usually
plays people either icy or irritating, gives a flesh-crawling performance as
an assassin who is both.  This is a polished and suspenseful action film,
perhaps a little more so than Eastwood's pre-UNFORGIVEN films.  Now I
recognize that I am assuming that Eastwood was not just an actor on this
film but actually had much of the artistic control.  That may be a false
assumption, but given his recent Oscars, I suspect it is not.
     The film is directed by Wolfgang Petersen, who directed the exceptional
war film DAS BOOT and the unexceptional science fiction film ENEMY MINE.
The score is by Ennio Morricone, who built his reputation on Eastwood's "Man
with No Name" films.  It's worth seeing as a reasonably crafted suspense
film, but a month from now I will barely remember it, while Eastwood's
OUTLAW JOSEY WALES and UNFORGIVEN will still be standing out in my memory.
I give this one a very flat +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
