Title
Review for Nina Takes a Lover (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Laura San Giacomo, Paul Rhys, Michael O'Keefe, Cristi
Conway, Fisher Stevens.
Screenplay/Director:  Alan Jacobs.
     I have this idea for a screenplay, and so do about a million other
people in the Los Angeles area alone.  The form seems so
accessible--three acts, 120 pages and a couple of meaty
characters--that the allure is easy to see.  Every once in a while, one
of these ideas will end up on the screen, and every once in an even
greater while, the writer will get the chance to direct his own story.
This can be both a good thing and a bad thing for a novice; a single
vision can be unifying or it can be self-indulgent.  Alan Jacobs' NINA
TAKES A LOVER is an extremely intriguing concept, and a handsomely made
film.  I just kept thinking that it needed another hand in the
production to point out some major distractions.
     The story of NINA TAKES A LOVER unfolds in flashback, as the
principles describe the events to a reporter (Michael O'Keefe) doing
a story on infidelity.  Laura San Giacomo plays Nina, a married San
Francisco woman whose husband is away on one of his many business
trips, this one for three weeks.  A close friend of Nina's (Cristi
Conway) is having an affair with a sleazy cafe' owner (Fisher
Stevens), but Nina doesn't seem to be the type.  One day, however,
she begins flirting with a photographer (Paul Rhys) that she meets
in a park, and the flirtation turns into a romance.  As the
relationship develops, Nina begins to realize that she is getting
much more out of her affair than out of her marriage.  She also
makes some discoveries about both her husband and her lover which
force her to decide which she wants more.
     On one level, NINA TAKES A LOVER works wonderfully, and that is
in the examination of Nina's character.  As the film opens, she is
something of a mystery, a shoe store owner given to lying around her
bed in a neglige.  Gradually, however, this somewhat bland Nina
makes sense.  She is a woman seeking, as her never-named lover
describes it, an "experience:"  something, anything different from
her marriage.  Her thrilling experimentation with her lover is
sometimes uncomfortably to watch; she asks him challenging questions
and expects answers, something that apparently is not possible with
her husband, and she feels more adventurous, more sexy.  NINA TAKES
A LOVER considers what it is that makes people stray, and succeeds
in showing people finding out that they were missing things that
they never realized they were missing before.
     The problem with this very affecting story is that it is
trapped in an awkward structure.  NINA TAKES A LOVER has the
confessional feel of a stage play, and it might have worked better
in that medium.  The segments involving the discussions with the
reporter heighten the staginess, pull the audience away from the
more interesting events of Nina's affair, and, perhaps worst of all,
suggest a rookie director resorting to telling you what he couldn't
figure out how to show visually.  The sub-plot involving the affair
between Nina's friend and her annoying lover is similarly
unnecessary, adding only some silly comic relief.  NINA TAKES A
LOVER seems best suited to being a two-character piece, since it is
the relationship between Nina and her lover which really works.
     Even that adjustment would not have addressed Jacobs' sometimes
distracting over-direction.  There are moments when scenes are
spliced together in a manner which is too self-consciously artsy and
draws too much attention to the strange cutaways, as though Jacobs
didn't trust the ability of his narrative to hold an audience's
attention.  The editing is also quite clumsy on occasion, the
choice of who is in a shot somewhat arbitrary in appearance, and
many of the performances pitched at a level of hyper-seriousness
which veers dangerously close to melodrama.  Jacobs' might have been
well-advised to have another voice around to tell him when he needed
to lighten up, or to let the story tell itself.  Still, NINA TAKES A
LOVER is a thoughtful, atmospheric film which tells a great story.
If Alan Jacobs the director could serve Alan Jacobs the writer
better, he could have a bright future.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NINA TAKES A LOVER tells the story of a journalist (Michael
O'Keefe) who is interviewing people about love and infidelity in the
90s.  Among the people he interviews is the central character of the
show, Nina (Laura San Giacomo), her friend (Cristi Conaway), and Nina's
lover, a photographer (Paul Rhys).  They each tell the stories of their
affairs to the journalist while sipping espresso in a quaint coffee
shop in what appears to be San Francisco.
     Nina's friend's lover (Fisher Stevens) is a guy with a scruffy
beard who makes perfect espresso at another coffee place.  This is
definitely a 90s movie.  We have heavy drinking in half of the scenes,
and it is all great coffee.  The 50s movies featured beer drinking
regular guys.  The 60s flicks were filled with young people doing
drugs.  In the 70s we had cocktails and certainly in the 80s we saw
lots of wine, especially white wine as the beverage of choice.  I guess
with the 90s here, rather than having characters being plastered and
passing out, we will have them wired and hyperactive.  But I digress.
     NINA TAKES A LOVER is a movie where not much happens and the tone
of it all is highly subdued which is reflected in the dreamy music.
Overall, this can be a very soporific movie so don't go to the 9:30
showing.  I would expect that the reaction of most people seeing this
movie will range from mild boredom to a mild rapport with the
characters.  It is not a movie that is easy to get excited about or to
dislike.
     Laura San Giacomo who was so wonderful, as was everyone else, in
SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE, plays a fairly reserved lover in this movie.
Her husband goes out of town for three weeks so she get bored and looks
to find a lover.  Her married friend is ahead of her and already has
hers.  Spouses are not visible or talked about much--romance is.
     The script and the directing were done by Alan Jacobs who needed
to put more oomph in both.  I like the characters he created, but I
kept hoping in vain for them to come alive.  Jacobs seemed interested
in creating a mood piece with a message.  He succeeded in the former
although I wish he had more ambitious goals, and he failed in the
latter.
     The cinematography by Phil Parmet was a little unusual.  In order
to emphasis the separateness of people in a relationship he was
constantly filling the frame with one person and then panning over to
the other.  It was a technique I could have done without.
     The script makes an attempt at a big switch towards the end of the
movie.  I did not like nor buy this part at all.  It felt as if they
had gotten bad scores when test marketing the show, and they tacked on
the changes as an attempt to make the movie more involving and to wake
up the audience.
     The movie is too long at 1:40.  It is rated R for numerous sexual
scenes and scenes of partial undress albeit, with one possible
exception, there is no nudity.  The movie would be fine for older
teenagers.  On the other hand, I do not recommend it to anyone, and I
award it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.
