Title
Review for Relative Fear (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Justin Felix
Written by Kurt Wimmer
Directed by George Mihalka
Starring Darlanne Fluegel, James Brolin, Denise Crosby, M. Emmet Walsh
Rated R (contains violence and profanity)  94 minutes
Synopsis:  The mother of an autistic boy becomes suspicious after three
people die in her home in as many days.  Also suspicious of the
"accidental" deaths, a police detective investigates by prowling around the
house uninvited and interrogating the four-year-old boy who has never
spoken a word in his entire life.
Comments:  RELATIVE FEAR is a better-than-average suspense film featuring a
very solid script.  Writer Kurt Wimmer crafts some well-developed,
believable characters, and his plot unwinds like a good Dean Koontz novel.
A piano teacher and a professor, and their autistic son, Adam, are the main
characters, and the sometimes strained relationship between the three
provide some interesting drama early in the film.  What's nice about
RELATIVE FEAR, though, is that a number of intriguing supporting characters
come in and out of the movie.  More attention is given to developing these
characters than is given to the cardboard cut-outs who typically populate
movies of this genre.  Wimmer's plot successfully manages to keep the
viewers guessing who the killer is, as Adam, the professor, and a tutor
appear to be suspects at different times in the film.  RELATIVE FEAR also
raises some questions about such social issues as home schooling and TV
violence without allowing those issues to take center stage and disrupt the
storyline.
The acting, for the most part, is pretty good.  RELATIVE FEAR sports a
strong stable of veteran actors giving fine supporting performances.  James
Brolin handles his police detective role in an authoritative manner, and M.
Emmett Walsh plays a suspicious, sickly old man convincingly.  STAR TREK:
THE NEXT GENERATION's Denise Crosby turns in a surprisingly creepy
performance as a mentally-disturbed prisoner who casts into doubt whose
child Adam really is.  Matthew Dupuis, the child playing Adam, also manages
to handle several suspenseful scenes in his near-silent performance capably.
RELATIVE FEAR is certainly not the turkey I expected it to be (which is
good), but it's not a perfect film either.  Its conclusion, when the killer
is revealed, is a little hard to believe, and it ends on a disappointingly
superficial and cliched note.  Overall, however, I would recommend this
film to someone looking for a good video rental.
