Title
Review for Flesh Feast (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1970. Director - Brad F. Grinter, Screenplay - Grinter & Thomas 
Casey, Producers - Grinter & Veronica Lake, Photography - Casey, Special 
Effects - Douglas Hobart, Makeup - Gayl Doucette & Bill Rogers, Art 
Direction - Harry Kerwin. Production Company - Viking International.
Veronica Lake (Dr Elaine Frederick), Phil Philbin (Ed Casey), Heather 
Hughes (Kristine Powell)
Plot: When a journalist is murdered while following an arms dealer, his 
editor Ed Casey follows the trail to Dr Elaine Frederick who is secretly 
conducting age rejuvenation experiments using flesh-eating maggots. 
Gradually Casey discovers that her backers are really Nazis and her 
intended test subject Adolf Hitler himself.
Veronica Lake, currently enjoying a revival of memory thanks to `L.A. 
Confidential', was one of the great cinematic beauties of the 1940s. 
After that decade though she fairly much faded from sight. `Flesh Feast' 
was her comeback after nearly twenty years and her last film before her 
death in 1973. It is anybody's guess what possessed Lake to choose such 
a dire and impoverished production for a comeback. In it she looks sad 
and aged - the film shoots her unglamorously and shows none of her 
former beauty. The climax of the film does offer the mildly fascinating 
spectacle of her going bonkers and laughing her head off like a maniac - 
it's sort of like one of the films that were the in-thing for awhile in 
the 1960s after the popularity of `What Ever Happened to Baby Jane ?' 
featuring aged stars going batty, but it comes without the layer of 
self-conscious freakshow appeal. The film is really dire. It has clearly 
been shot in someone's house where guest bedrooms double as hospital 
wards. The laboratory consists of a bench with two straps, an oxygen 
cylinder and two pieces of radio equipment. The whole film hangs on its 
twist ending - the revelation that the secret benefactor of Lake's 
flesh-eating maggot rejuvenation treatment is Adolf Hitler - but even 
though the film was the first to use such a twist, by the time it did it 
felt old hat. Sad.
Screening at the Christchurch 1998 Incredibly Strange Film Festival
Reviewed by Richard Scheib

