Title
Review for Fargo (1996)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Zak Forsman
The Coen Brothers' latest film, FARGO is a combination of their earlier
works--specifically BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING ARIZONA. I think what I'm
trying to say is that FARGO is at one moment hilarious and then sharply
horrifying.  I've always had mixed feelings over violence on the movie
screen. When watching TAXI DRIVER I'd be thinking that it just wouldn't be
the same film without reaching that 'catharsis-through-urban-violence'
finale. On the other hand, I went to see ERASER and felt that the violence
there was indeed gratuitous.  I had always felt that I was holding a
double standard until I realized that what makes violence gratuitous is
the integrity, or lack thereof, of the film exhibiting it. And in the case
of FARGO, I found myself disgusted and horrified at what I was seeing as
opposed to ERASER where alligators ripped arms from their sockets and the
effect on me was minimal.
FARGO, which claims to be based on actual events but isn't, is the story
of a car salesman (William H. Macy) who manifests a scheme to get nearly
one-million dollars in ransom money for the kidnapping of his own wife. 
Her extremely wealthy, grumbling and growling father will be forced to
pay. The film unfolds as nearly everything goes terribly wrong--sometimes
funny, often frightening. We follow a pregnant police detective (Frances
McDormond) as she uncovers the case. I won't go any further in case you
haven't seen FARGO other than to tell you that I was skeptical as to how
involved her character could be considering her physical condition. Let me
tell you her character is well-engaged by the story and her involvement in
the climax/resolution is truly memorable.
The film's screenplay was written with extreme care for detail and
narrative verve, all too often absent from contemporary works. There are
times, and this is a good example, when it is obvious that this screenplay
had reached a fully developed and final draft before principle photography
was started.  The dialogue alone is so new and devoid of clich that the
audience is (and this is rare) anticipating the characters' interaction
instead of predicting it. Even in so called 'talking heads' scenes, we are
mentally engaged by the film and certainly involved. Joel and Ethan Coen
have consistently shown a talent for dialogue, storytelling and the
ability to integrate both into the film's visual elements. They are also
one of the few filmmakers with a signature--when you see a Coen Brothers
film, you know it.
Not one actor in the film would be considered by a studio executive to
headline a movie on their own. This is a cast of all those people you saw
in supporting roles in other films. William H. Macy (Oleanna, Homicide,
ER) is a veteran of David Mamet's plays and performs here flawlessly. He
shapes his character so anxiously weak that we both condemn his for his
acts of cowardice and pity him for his lack of social courage. Frances
McDormond (Blood Simple, Raising Arizona) as the pregnant police chief on
the case has herself one of the most original characters ever written. She
is indeed quirky, and although quirkiness does not necessarily equal
originality, McDormond grounds the character in truly human qualities.
Then there is Steve Buscemi (Reservoir Dogs, Living in Oblivion) who's
been doing similar characters since his supporting role in Martin
Scorsese's short film, LIFE LESSONS from NEW YORK STORIES. Although his
character in FARGO is not much different, this time he does not come off
as though he's playing for the camera with the exception of a very funny,
"total silence" monologue. Buscemi seems to be making a career out of
playing himself and this is another of several films in which it works.
Also, by the end of FARGO, his character is so viciously frustrated that
it mirrors the "hilarious, but horrifying" theme of the film.
Although the screen credit for director goes to Joel Coen and the producer
credit goes to Ethan, they have said that they actually share the two
positions equally.  In directing FARGO, the Coen brothers seem to hold
back a little--using their trademark wide angle lens with more reverence.
They save their more visual shots for sequences in which they won't
smother the actors' performances and the story. In the context of this
film, I think they've struck a perfect balance. Their best scene, I would
say, is the triple homicide sequence at night--part of which was borrowed
from their own BLOOD SIMPLE. I guess practice makes perfect.
Much has been made of the scene where Frances McDormond meets an old
high-school friend, Mike, for lunch.  Later in the film, we learn that
Mike has had psychological problems and that everything he told Frances
McDormond was a lie.  Many claim the scene serves no purpose and, despite
being well-written, should have been cut.  My take on it is that even
though she can deduce genuine facts presented to her, Frances McDormond's
character, until this point, is unable to recognize deceit and human
corruption.  As with Mike, she must accept what William H. Macy's
character had told her because she cannot see the possibility of his
dishonesty.  She just can't conceive such things.  At one point she says,
"I doubt our suspect is from Brainerd," because she thinks of evil as
something abstract that comes from somewhere else.  In this case, the Coen
brothers chose to introduce deceit and corruption through Naturalism. 
Which is to say, something unrelated to the plot, affects and forwards
it.  Once Mike is exposed, she is able to question William H. Macy's
sincerity and returns to press him further.  I feel that each film has its
own universe and many times its ideas, themes and other devices have to be
introduced to the main character for them to be cinematicly valid.  For
example, in TAXI DRIVER, Martin Scorsese plays a man who tells Travis
Bickle that he's going to kill his wife.  He introduces "violence" into
Travis' moral universe.  Once exposed to it, he let's it consume him--and
we all know where it takes him.
Many people have been turned off by their own uncertainty as to whether to
laugh or cringe during this film. I know this was quite intentional and
would expect that the Coens take it as a compliment to their work to have
affected those people in such a manner. Anyway, FARGO is the best film
that's come out all year and I don't see anything coming in the future to
change that. It will certainly be nominated for Best Original Screenplay
if not Best Picture. Joel Coen has already won the Directing Prize at the
1996 Cannes Film Festival. I highly recommend you see FARGO. 
Ratings are based on the four-star system.

Author
Shane Burridge
I was getting worried about the Coen brothers.  I'd foregone their
last film, THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, after sensing they were settling
themselves into a period-movie rut.  FARGO, set in 1987, isn't exactly
contemporary but does place the Coens back on track with a winner
(Director Joel took the prize at Cannes). Their latest effort revisits the
smalltown-murder-gone-wrong of their debut BLOOD SIMPLE, but less
self-consciously.  Frances McDormand (Joel's real-life partner) is a
North Dakota cop investigating a triple shooting along an isolated,
snowbound highway.  Piecing together clues and statements she
gradually unearths what we, the audience, have known all along: that
the mayhem - and there is more to come - is all part of a kidnapping
stunt gone horribly awry.
Given that North Dakota is the birthplace of Paul Bunyan, latecomers
who miss the based-on-true-story disclaimer at the film's start may be
forgiven for thinking that the Coens have used their setting to spin a
tall tale of their own.  The landscape they film is as stark and
featureless as if it were made of White-Out.  The spectre of Bunyan
presides over all in the form of a spookily lit totemic idol.  And
yes, to perpetuate the metaphor, an axe is swung by one of the
villians - and if this suggests a violent side to FARGO then you can
take it as having been warned in advance.  The violence isn't of the
punky Rodriguez-Tarantino vogue, but is nevertheless painful to watch
because it is true and most of its victims are bystanders.
It is to the Coens credit that they pull off a difficult task with
agility and style; presenting a factual story as if it were a black
comedy without dishonoring those involved.  Their light steps from
darkness into light may be the cinematic balancing act of the year. 
Most of this is due to McDormand, who provides the film with a soul
that we can now see conspicuously absent from other Coen films.  Her
chipper equanimity persuades us that maybe she is the only ray of
sunshine able to penetrate the dark, cold world around her.  Her
performance, along with W H Macy, as an increasingly anxious car
salesman, and Steve Buscemi as, well, Steve Buscemi, make this the
Coen's best-acted film to date.  What's interesting is that the
storyline is so steeped with their usual trademarks that it makes one
wonder how long the Coens had looked for a true story before they 
found one that was a suitable reflection of their own fictions.

Author
Christopher Null
     The Coen brothers are back and in a big way.  Bigger, as a matter of
fact, than ever before, because with FARGO, the Coens have produced a
masterpiece of a film that outclasses anything they've done yet--from
RAISING ARIZONA to BARTON FINK to even BLOOD SIMPLE, the movie that put
them on the map.  FARGO is perhaps the best movie to come down the pike
since PULP FICTION--so good that it earns my seldom-awarded five-star
rating.
     FARGO is one of those rare pictures about which I have nothing
negative to say.  Based on a true story that took place in North
Dakota/Minnesota in 1987, FARGO is the instantly enthralling tale of the
financially-troubled Jerry Lundergaard (William H. Macy), a plan to kidnap
his wife (Kristin Rudrud), her wealthy father (Harve Presnell), the
halfway-competent criminals who screw everything up (Steve Buscemi and
Peter Stormare), and the pregnant cop who's on the case (Frances
McDormand).
     What makes a film like this, done a hundred different times in a
hundred different ways, so good?  Joel and Ethan Coen's script is the
base--a wickedly funny and quirky screenplay that is executed with
perfection by the leads, particularly Oscar-caliber Macy and McDormand. 
The brothers, who grew up in Minneapolis, where a large chunk of the
action takes place, have also imbued the film with a rich and realistic
regional flair--authentic from the weather to the clothes to (especially
good) the accents.  It's so real, I was actually hungry for back bacon
when I left.
     Every shot of FARGO is executed like it's a piece of art with the
Coens' typical style; there is nothing at all wasted in the film, as the
Coens make even what would normally be dull establishing scenes fun. 
Also, while FARGO is as black as black comedy can get, it isn't completely
over the edge (the problem that shattered THE HUDSUCKER PROXY).  More
restrained--very much "back to basics" a la BLOOD SIMPLE--the Coens have
truly found their stride.
     So don't read any more about the film.  Just go see it, and prepare
to have a blast.  Don't be daunted by the typically poor Coen brothers
film title of FARGO (not only is it nondescript, but not much of the movie
is even set in Fargo (that's North Dakota)).  Just bundle up against that
icy cold.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FARGO is an amazing true story of a small time crime gone wrong.
Think of the movie as a home spun and comical IN COLD BLOOD. It is told
in a highly stylistic fashion by the Coen brothers.  Joel Coen is
listed as the writer and director while Ethan Coen is listed as the
writer and producer.  Actually all of their films (BLOOD SIMPLE,
RAISING ARIZONA, MILLER'S CROSSING, BARTON FINK, and THE HUDSUCKER
PROXY) are totally collaborative works.
     FARGO has all the characteristics of a farce, but actually we are
told that the story is done exactly as it occurred in the cold and
snowy Minnesota winter of 1987.  The film starts with bright white
images on a snowy white background, and then the credits come on with
tiny black type with wide spacing which seems a metaphor for the
bleakness of the countryside.  A dishonest car salesman, Jerry
Lundegaard (W. H. Macy who was so wonderful as the hard nosed principal
in MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS), has contracted with two small time crooks to
kidnap his wife so that his rich father-in-law, Wade Gustafson (Harve
Presnell), will pay a random that Jerry will then split with the bad
guys.
     Carl Showalter (Steve Buscemi) and Gaear Grimsrud (Peter Stormare)
are the incompetent but cold blooded kidnappers and killers.  Carl
talks incessantly while Gaear rarely speaks and is more frightening.
Gaear has a constant gaze as if he has no morals or conscience.  They
both are willing to kill anything that gets in their way even though
they only hope to get $20,000 each from the deal.
     When a state trooper stops their car after they have kidnapped the
wife, Carl tells her, "Just keep it still back there lady or we're
going to have to, you know, shot you."  The deadpan way he delivers his
lines is at once funny, moronic, and scary.  The whole movie is a
seamless blend of comedy and tragedy.  One minute the audience is
laughing out loud and the next it is gasping for breath.  The closest
recent movie to it in effect is probably PULP FICTION.  In FARGO the
dialog is not as well written, but the images are craft much stronger.
     After the killers have murdered three people along a desolate
road, seven month and massively pregnant police officer Marge Gunderson
(Frances McDormand) is woken in the middle of the night so she can go
and investigate.  Before she leaves, her husband insists he fix her a
good breakfast first and to him this means one "with eggs."
     If this was the south, most of the people in the movie would be
called, good old boy types.  Instead, everyone in Coens's movie says,
"Ya, Ya" and has thick Scandinavian accents.  The Coens are from this
area so presumably this is authentic.  After she investigates the
crime, she stops by and gets a paper bag of night crawlers for her
husband.
     She sounds like a hick, which most people associate with
stupidity, but she is quite cleaver and brave, no matter how sweet and
hooky she is.  On the other hand, She has a partner who has an IQ
firmly in double digits.  Since his investigative skills are zip, she
keeps his spirits up with a little humor telling him, "Did you hear the
one about the guy who was too poor to get personalized plates so he
changed his name to J3L2404?"  The camera and the audience love her.  A
great character and an impressive piece of acting.  Actually, all of
the actors from the nervous W. H. Macy to the cocky Harve Presnell to
diabolical Steve Buscemi and Peter Stormare are all excellent.
     Many funny scenes are side plots that are not intended to go
anywhere.  Characters show up and are never seen again.  A good one is
of an old boy friend Marge runs into and decides to have a drink with
and who tries to put the moves on her.  There is another simple one of
her pigging out at the local smorgasbord
     If Roger Deakins does not get nominated for best cinematography,
then the Academy is asleep.  The snowy images are so strong.  One of
the best examples is a scene filmed from on high of Jerry walking
despondently across an empty parking lot filled with snow.
     Most of all, this is a Coen movie, and the best movie they have
ever made.  It brilliantly moves from comedy to poignancy to tragedy
and back constantly.  The images, not just of the sets like the huge
lit up Paul Bunyan statue, but of the expressions on the actors' faces
are as strong as branding irons.  The Coen's style is unlike that of
any other.
     In a complex film the scene at the end give some hints as to what
it might have all meant.  As Marge says, "There is more to life than a
little money."  Later she says of the tragedies, "I just don't
understand it," which may be the ultimate reality about the
senselessness of it all.
     FARGO only runs 1:38 thanks to fast pacing by editor Roderick
Jaynes.  It is rated R for bad language, some sex and nudity, and lots
of blood.  In one scene everyone in the theater went, "aaaaaaah", but
they cut just before the blood flew in that scene.  In others, people
bleed a lot so they they have to hold something on the wound to stop
the blood.  You may have to look away in some scenes, but even so I did
not find the violence excessive.  This is a film suitable for teenagers
only if they are quite mature.  I think the film is flawless,
brilliant, and certainly unique.  I recommend this film strongly to you
and give it my rarely awarded top **** rating.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     In the remarkably rich and furiously funny FARGO, brothers Joel and
Ethan Coen have returned to their roots, both thematically and geograph-
ically.  The "brats," as they are called by some, have effectively
remade their first film, BLOOD SIMPLE, as a Midwestern murder mystery
with a cutting comedic edge.  (Think of a snowy stew of darkness and
deadpan-- BLOOD SIMPLE mixed with a little RAISING ARIZONA.) More
importantly-- more hilariously-- the Twin Cities- born brothers have
concocted their first loving celebration of all things Minnesota.
     William H. Macy (last seen in what I call MR. HOLLAND'S ANUS) stars
as a scheming Minneapolis car salesman (and putz), whose idea for
raising cash involves kidnapping his wife to get the ransom from her
rich father.  Things quickly go wrong for everyone involved, including
two "hired hands" from Fargo (Steve Buscemi and Peter Stormare).  Three
murders, two hookers, and one jump-start later, the very-pregnant,
very-polite Brainerd (MN) Chief of Police Marge Gunderson (Joel's wife,
Frances McDormand) steps into the picture.  Or, rather, waddles.
     FARGO is the least-stylized and, probably, most-mature Coen film to
date.  The oft-criticized brothers have, finally, achieved a balance
between their love of eccentricity and their audience's base need for
feeling.  Simply, they've made a very quirky (read:  very Coen) film
with a heart.  Here are characters with real, negotiable emotions--
unlike the past cartoon creations that have been all too common in the
Coen universe.  (THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, for example, is both a visual tour
de force and an emotional black hole.  Jennifer Jason Leigh's
character-- the eventual force of good in the story-- never makes an
emotional impact.  She just talks fast.)
     As we're in very SIMPLE territory, expect plenty of grisly details
and sadistic flourishes.  (A couple of tree-clearing tools are used to
particularly fine effect.  Nods to Paul Bunyan?) The laughs are there,
too.  FARGO is recorded in sing-song, Scandinavian stereo, with dialects
and dialogue that you just don't hear south of Lake Michigan. (Yes, they
really *do* talk like that.  Yup, you betcha.) Don't expect an easy
explanation for it all, tho.  FARGO is more than a little intentionally
obscure.  For example, we don't know what to make of a hotel encounter
between Marge and an old schoolmate.  Is it a comment on her perpetual
politeness?  A deduction about her powers of reasoning?  For all we
know, the moment exists solely to hear an Asian-American who also talks
with that wonderful accent.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Pedro Sena
It's nice to see American directors come back to the old fashioned black
comedies and their off beat styles. FARGO is, aside from the deadly  serious
story line, one of those. But it becomes a black comedy by virtue of its
characters and their naivete, or should one say, on  occasion, their own
stupidity. At the bottom of all this, is the human
fallacy, that no one can see anything we do at all, and that we will  get
away with it all, even if something goes wrong.
Unfortunately, the film states that this is a true story, which might have
made the film that much more entertaining. The real story is that the film
is NOT entertaining and that these characters are real people with real
reactions, and over reactions. And, in between, is a half baked attempt at
making fun of the life and times in the Midwest, with its naivete and over
abundance of expressions and vernacular.
The story is basic enough. A man who has grand designs for financial gains,
trying to do what others with the capital do -- harmless enough, hires two
bums to kidnap his wife and set up a ransom situation, where upon he  would
split the money with the bums so that he would be able to go ahead on a deal
that he has his eyes on. So far so good. But the two bums that he hires are
an odd couple. One is vicious and the other is apparently a bit retarded, or
at least not all there. And in the process of doing their job, they get
stopped by the highway patrol. The vicious guy loses his  temper and kills
the trooper and then decides to go after a passer by that drove by during
the moment they were disposing of the trooper's body.... and on, and on.
Amidst all this is a police chief, Marge, who is pregnant, but seems to
have a pretty good handle on things, and a fairly controlled demeanor. She
and her husband look like the all American average Joe and Mary, boring as
heck, they probably go to the Twins games once a month, etc, etc. She is a
character. She has brains, in a place where other troopers do not seem to
have much of an eye for detail and attention. She decides to follow up the
case, and it kicks back to the man who has the grand designs. The getaway
car, seems to have a dealer's plate, and this seems to be the  only
dealership in town. The fact that his wife is also missing, is also  a
curious point to her. They couldn't be connected could they?
Eventually, the two bums kinda get out of hand, and the kidnapped wife
manages an escape. By that time, the police chief has done all her homework
and is already after the bums and the man with the big plans. End of story,
and film.
But in between, the whole thing is crazy, and off key, with the largest
array of off beat characters this side of FREAKS. And they all have an
expression, and they all talk funny, and they all say the darndest things,
right down to the two young gals that were picking up a couple of extra
bucks for their movies and fun. Unfortunately, the information they  provide
to the chief is really useless, but the moment is a treat.
Making serious films is one thing. Making fun films is another. But making a
funny serious film, is yet another one, and Joel Coen, has done a very nice
job on this one, right from the start. But, darn, the whole thing is really
depressing. But funny.
There is no doubt that Frances McDormand is very good in this role as the
police chief, and probably well of her Oscar... I did not see all the other
winners. But this one was good, in a role that is very difficult to balance.
One inch that way, the film becomes a total satire, and the story loses it.
One inch the other way, the story becomes another murder mistery and the fun
part of the film becomes annoying and distracting to us, as it may have been
for the police chief. In the balance lies the great piece of work in this
film.
Nice film to see, although not exactly enjoyable. Not recommended to be seen
before bedtime, that's for sure...
4 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
James Brundage
Starring Francis MacDormand, Steve Buscemi, William H. Macy
     The Coen brothers have a good track record with dark comedy.  Everyone
who knows the business knows this.  With Raising Arizona, the gave us the
funniest chase scene ever captured on celluloid.  With Fargo, however, they
through their track record with comedy out the window and attempt to be
serious.
     Well, not really.  Fargo still contains an offbeat humor.  It still
contains a sense of the quirky and strange.  However, it takes it into a
darker, more insane level.
     Fargo, like The Big Lebowski, and Raising Arizona concerns a
kidnapping.  This kidnapping's perpetrator is Jerry Lundergard (William H.
Macy).  The target of the kidnapping is Jean Lundergard.  Jerry, a car
salesman as dirty as the deals he does, is in debt.  He hires a couple of
thugs (including Steve Buscemi) to kidnap her.  They're going to be paid out
of half of an $80,000 ransom, a ransom which Jerry is telling his
father-in-law (who's paying the ransom) is $1,000,000.
     Unfortunately, something goes wrong.  When a cop stops the thugs car on
the road outside of Brainard, he is shot and killed, along with two innocent
people who witnessed the murder.  The thugs demand the full $80,000, and
tensions start to develop.  The smart Chief of police of Brainard, Marge
(Frances MacDormand) is brought in to investigate the murders and we have
the makings of an intelligent mystery.
     Taking its cue to generate humor on the Minnesota accent, the film is
dotted with it's famous (or perhaps now infamous) line of `yah', which
almost every character says at least once.  The profanity, as characteristic
of the area, is also low.
     Also, the Coens create one of the most startling works of imagery done
in recent years.  Using the snow as a symbol for both a moral and physical
bleakness (this was also used by their friend Sam Ramni in A Simple Plan),
the entire movie is set in the winter of Minnesota and North Dakota, an area
startling cold as anyone who's ever been there can tell you.  The characters
seem to be as cold as their environment.  Also, in another feat of imagery,
the statue of Paul Bunyan in Brainard is often displayed in a film noir
aspect: it is lit from below and shown at night to be a menacing item.  The
entire film has an aura of cruelty about it.
     In fact, cruelty seems to be its point.  Not being cruel to us, but
proving how bad cruelty is.  It displays its openly essayistic point a
little too blaringly at the end although moral ambiguity dots this film, no
one can misinterpret the message.
     That is the only fault I can find in this film.  The script, although
frighteningly odd and not at all part of any conventional formula, is
excellent, worthy and winning the Best Original Screenplay award in 1996.
The acting is top notch, earning it another Academy Award for Best Actress
(Frances MacDormand).  The direction is steely.  For this excellent film,
all I can say is I have no other complaints.

Author
Zak Forsman
The Coen Brothers' latest film, FARGO is a combination of their earlier
works--specifically BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING ARIZONA. I think what I'm
trying to say is that FARGO is at one moment hilarious and then sharply
horrifying. I've always had mixed feelings over violence on the movie
screen. When watching TAXI DRIVER I'd be thinking that it just wouldn't be
the same film without reaching that 'catharsis-through-urban-violence'
finale. On the other hand, I went to see ERASER and felt that the violence
there was indeed gratuitous. I had always felt that I was holding a double
standard until I realized that what makes violence gratuitous is the
integrity, or lack thereof, of the film exhibiting it. And in the case of
FARGO, I found myself disgusted and horrified at what I was seeing as
opposed to ERASER where aligators ripped arms from their sockets and the
effect on me was minimal.
FARGO, which claims to be based on actual events, is the story of a car
salesman (William H. Macy) who manifests a scheme to get nearly
one-million dollars in ransom money for the kidnapping of his own wife.
Her extremely wealthy, grumbling and growling father will be forced to
pay. The film unfolds as nearly everything goes terribly wrong--sometimes
funny, often frightening. We follow a pregnant police detective (Frances
McDormond) as she uncovers the case. I won't go any further in case you
haven't seen FARGO other than to tell you that I was skeptical as to how
involved her character could be considering her physical condition. Let me
tell you her character is well-engaged by the story and her involvment in
the climax/resolution is truly memorable.
The film's screenplay was written with extreme care for detail and
narrative verve, all too often absent from contemporary works. There are
times, and this is a good example, when it is obvious that this screenplay
had reached a final draft before principle photography was started. The
dialogue alone is so new and devoid of cliche that the audience is (and
this is rare) anticipating the characters' interaction instead of
predicting it. Even in so called 'talking heads' scenes, we are mentally
engaged by the film and certainly involved. Joel and Ethan Coen have
consistantly shown a talent for dialogue, storytelling and the ability to
integrate both into the film's visual elements. They are also one of the
few filmmakers with a signature--when you see a Coen Brothers film, you
know it.
Not one actor in the film would be considered by a studio executive to
headline a movie on their own. This is a cast of all those people you saw
in supporting roles in other films. William Macy (Oleanna, Homicide, ER)
performs flawlessly. He shapes his character so anxiously weak that we
both condemn his for his acts of cowardace and pity him for his lack of
social courage. Frances McDormond (Blood Simple, Raising Arizona) as the
pregnant police woman on the case has herself one of the most original
characters ever written. She is indeed quirky, and although quirkiness
does not neccessarily equal originality, McDormond grounds the character
in truly human qualities. Then there is Steve Buscemi (Reservoir Dogs,
Living in Oblivion) who's been doing similiar characters since his
supporting role in Martin Scorsese's short film, LIFE LESSONS, from the
film NEW YORK STORIES. Although his character in FARGO is not much
different, this time he does not come off as though he's playing for the
camera with the exception of a very funny, "total silence" monologue.
Buscemi seems to be making a career out of playing himself and this is
another of several films in which it works. Also, by the end of FARGO, his
character is so viciously frustrated that it mirrors the
hilarious/horrifying tone of the entire film.
The director, Joel Coen (Raising Arizona, Barton Fink) seems to have
matured a little--using his trademark wide angle lens with more reverance.
He saves his more visual shots for sequences in which they won't smother
the actors' performances and the story. If he sticks with it, I think he's
found a perfect balance. His best scene, I would say, is the triple
homicide sequence at night--part of which he borrowed from his own BLOOD
SIMPLE. I guess practice makes perfect.
Many people have been turned off by their own uncertainty as to whether to
laugh or cringe during this film. I know this was quite intentional and
would expect that the Coens take it as a compliment to their work to have
affected those people in such a manner. Anyway, FARGO is the best film
that's come out all year and I don't see anything coming in the future to
change that. It will certainly be nominated for Best Original Screenplay
if not Best Picture. I highly recommend you see FARGO. 
-- 
Zak Forsman, filmmaker       
Swan Pictures Independent
Send comments, praise, and insults to swan@nauticom.net
Or visit the The Zak Forsman Page http://www.nauticom.net/www/swan/

Author
Andrew Mitchell
I saw Fargo on Saturday night. I had to make a reservation at Roger's
video a week ahead to get it.  But it was worth it. And despite all
the hype I thoroughly enjoyed it and would put it on my top 10 list
for the year.
I liked the outlandishness of the situation and the reactions of our
Minnesotan neighbours. Didn't Rose from the Golden Girls come from
this part of Minnesota? The people in this movie sure seemed to be of
the same intellect. I think most of the people in Brainerd were of
Swedish descent. The accents were fun. Sounded very Canadian to me.
Reminded me a lot of "Blue Velvet" for the fact that a most horrendous
crime takes place in a small, happy town where the usual tragedy is
missing the weekly all you can eater. Frances McDormand was a
revelation. She captured the comic character without making fun of it,
thus creating a real person which seemed lacking in her police
partner. She reminds me of certain people who have an innate
brilliance for what they do but seem entirely vapid elsewhere. Or the
kind of person who would face a tragedy and not need therapy because 
they wouldn't comprehend the severity of the situation. I especially
liked the first breakfast scene with the long take of her husband
eating breakfast and then her coming back into the house to ask for a
jump for the car. Reminded me of that static scene at the end of Big
Night where Secondo is whipping up the omellette. I also liked the
scene with her and the Asian high school guy she met at the
Radisson(where they make real good food). Her reactions were priceless
from the fixing of her hair as she walked in to the place to her calm
solace after he made the moves on her. She remained reasonably sunny
all through and wasn't even phased later when she found out his wife
didn't die of leukemia as he purported. There are whackos all around
her but she manages to retain a safe distance from it all. Not even a
blemish. And after all that's happened, doncha know it, we get a nice
happy ending. Her hon gets his artwork published on a stamp!  
http://www.inforamp.net/~amitch/andrew.html

Author
Chad Polenz
**** (out of 4 = excellent)
1996, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[crime/satire]
Starring: Frances McDormand (Marge Gundersund), William H. Macy (Jerry
Lundergaard), Steve Buscemi (Carl Showalter), Harve Presnell (Wade
Gustafson), Peter Stormare (Gaear Grimsrud), produced by Ethan Coen, written
by Ethan and Joel Coen, directed by Joel Coen.
If I had to choose one word to describe "Fargo" it would be difficult
(literally); it's difficult to classify its genre, it's difficult to describe
its plot, and most of all it's difficult to explain why it's such an
excellent film. The Coen brothers have once again captured that sense of the
surreal and this time have made it very mainstream, so that as strange as
this film becomes, we never question its logic.
William H. Macy stars as Jerry Lundergaard, a bad car salesman who is
desperate for money and is really pathetic because he is such a bad liar and
not very smart either. The story starts out simple enough as Jerry hires two
goons (in the most literal sense of the term) to kidnap his wife so that when
her father pays the ransom they can split it. Steve Buscemi is hilarious as
Carl Showalter, the slightly smarter of the two goons, while Peter Stormare
is also quite funny as nearly mute Gaear Grimsrud.
The film doesn't put itself forward as any kind of serious, disturbing tale
of greed and crime, but more of a lighthearted drama with overtones of
satire. For example, as Carl and Gaear drive, they have a funny argument over
where to eat. Gaear says, "We stop for pancakes," Carl tells him that they're
going to stop for a steak, but then slowly caves to his partner's demands
even though he hasn't said anything.
The story starts to get a little choppy and confusing concerning Jerry's
deals with his distributor and his father-in-law's investment into a parking
lot system he has organized. Meanwhile, the goons are having a bit of trouble
themselves when they are pulled over by a cop for not having tags on their
licence plates. The scene ends in a triple homicide, and we are then
introduced to Brainerd Police Chief Marge Gundersund, played perfectly by
Frances McDormand with terrific charm. She seems more like a housewife that
happens to be a police officer than vice versa. Marge starts to put the
pieces together with very little clues and it is quite interesting to watch
this type of a story element in a movie that is the furthest thing from a
Hollywood mystery.
>From this point on the plot becomes irrelevant and it is a complete and
total exercise in character study and storytelling. The atmosphere of the
mid-western setting is pure satire in and of itself, because everyone seems
so innocent and naive, saying "Yah" and "'The heck ya mean?" all the time.
Even Jerry's son has a poster of Whitesnake next to "The Accordion King." 
It is the storytelling process that makes the film so excellent. Yes, there
have been other films of more complex storyline involving detective work and
crime, et cetera, but here it is completely different because the story never
takes itself too seriously. 
"Fargo" is an example of great filmmaking in all aspects: original plot;
great acting; good scripting; and excellent direction that brings it all
together and makes it so breezy and enjoyable. This is one of those films
that you like even though you have no idea why.

Author
John Schuurman
I've tried hard not to take it personally but I'm very
unhappy with what the Coen brothers think of me. It's
just not flattering -- not at all. And I don't think
its only me. Believe it -- these two are misanthropes.
Their new movie proves,(as if "Blood Simple," "Raising
Arizona," "Miller's Crossing," and "Barton Fink" were
not enough), that the Brothers Coen don't like anybody
very much. They have employed their considerable powers
of cinematic storytelling to say so.
That they possess genius can not be denied. This film
will be studied in film arts classes for years. "Fargo"
is a beauty. It is rich, rich -- and powerful too. Some
of the images of the film continue to linger with me
now a week removed from seeing it. But I have found
little to cheer about here. I can urge no one to see it
other than film scholars and those theologians who
would like to see Romans 3:12-17 displayed on a big
screen: "They have together become worthless; there is
no one who does good, not even one. Their throats are
open graves .... Their feet are swift to shed blood;
ruin and misery mark their ways, and the way of peace
they do not know."
Joel and Ethan Coen have given us a humanity bereft of
any sign of a superior order. Their movie is a savage
comedy about the darkness/stupidity within. You laugh
and laugh at the dumb mid-westerners with their
befuddled look at life, (no doubt by necessity because
they are so numb with the cold of the frozen north). Or
else you are chilled with terror at the evil of which
they are capable. There is little difference between
"good" guys and "bad" guys. Everybody is stupid or
worse, rarely better. 
Even seven-months-pregnant Police Chief Marge
Gunderson, cheery and chirpy and the best of the lot,
while smart enough to do respectable police work and
get her man in the end, is more laughed at than loved.
She captures the malevolent Grimsrud -- as lethal a
character as we have seen in some time, (and boy is
THAT saying something!) -- and while driving him to a
lock up lectures him on niceness and on how money never
really makes anybody happy. 
Through the caustic hand of these film makers the moral
universe of which Marge is a relic is rendered inane.
She is the lone hint in this degrading film that there
is perhaps some sort of moral presence somewhere but
there is no cohesion to it and it comes off as cute
home town nostalgia. "No kidding. There really are
people who think like this too yet."
One more bizarre thing in an odd and troubling movie.
At the opening credits we are told that the following
is an entirely true story. It happened in Minnesota in
1987. "At the request of those living, the names have
been changed. Out of respect for the dead, it is told
exactly as it occurred." But then at the very end of
the credits at the conclusion we have the typical movie
disclaimer, stating that the film is entirely fiction,
that any resemblance to real people living or dead is
wholly accidental. It is one last thumb in the eye for
you from the Coen brothers. 

Author
Kevin Patterson
Fargo  * * * 1/2 (out of four)
R, 1996
Directed by Joel Coen. Written by Joel and Ethan Coen.
Starring Frances McDormand, William Macy, Steve Buscemi, Peter Stormare.
As the Coens' "Fargo"  begins, shifty Minneapolis car salesman Jerry
Lundegaard (William Macy) drives down a snow-bound road to a bar in Fargo,
North Dakota, where he meets two thugs-for-hire, Carl Showalter (Steve
Buscemi) and Gaear Grimsrud (Peter Stormare). He has a rather unique
proposition for them; they are to kidnap his wife and demand $80,000 in ransom
from her wealthy father, then split the ransom money with Jerry. What is
instantly clear, however, is that, as well as being generally unsavory types,
Showalter and Grimsrud are dumber than a box of rocks and probably should not
be trusted with Jerry's laundry, much less his wife. Between that and the fact
that "Fargo" is the latest from Joel and Ethan Coen, who brought us "Blood
Simple" and "Raising Arizona," among others, it's a pretty safe bet from then
on that things are going to go haywire. Pretty soon, the very pregnant Sheriff
Marge Gunderson (Frances McDormand) of Brainerd, Minnesota is being called in
to investigate a triple homicide on an isolated highway and Jerry's
scatter-brained scheme is going hopelessly awry.
Yet "Fargo" is more than just a crime/suspense thriller. It is "about" this
kidnapping scheme, but it is about a lot of other things too. It is about
Northern accents and expressions like "you betcha." It is about ice on the
windshield and large quantities of snow. Most importantly, it is about how a
laid-back community of Northern Midwesterners come face-to-face with
cold-blooded evil in the persons of Showalter and Grimsrud, and how they deal
with it in their typically laid-back, golly-gee-whiz (or in this case, "oh
yah, yer darn-tootin'!"), easy-going way. McDormand herself has described it
as "miles and miles of pure white snow, splattered with red blood." 
Stylistically, "Fargo" occupies a middle ground between "Blood Simple" and
"Raising Arizona," it has both the disturbing violence of the former and the
wacky humor of the latter. Sometimes it even has both at once, such as when
Jerry finds a piece of Showalter's handywork in the form of a dead parking lot
clerk and mutters, "Oh jeez" with all the animation of someone who just
stubbed his toe. The kidnapping scene itself is a similar mix; Mrs. Lundegard
and Showalter stare curiously at each other through the window for a good
thirty seconds before the two thugs break in, and later, when she bites
Grimsrud's hand in attempt to escape, he goes upstairs to clean himself up in
the family's bathroom, leaving Showalter to chase her. The Coens do not make
the mistake of laughing off the violence entirely, however; the scene in which
Grimsrud hunts down two witnesses and kills them execution-style, for example,
is unabatedly vicious and brutal.
"Fargo" is sometimes black-comic and sometimes just plain black, but there is
plenty of good-natured humor as well, most of it deriving from the quirks of
the local culture and the charm of McDormand's character. "Oh, for Pete's
sake, he's fleein' the interview!" she exclaims at one point when a suspect
eludes her during an interrogation. Not only is she instantly likeable and
intelligent, she is also remarkably hardy and persistent for a woman seven
months pregnant. When she arrives at the initial crime scene, for example,
beset with morning sickness, she excuses herself momentarily to vomit, then
returns and promptly gets back to her job. The locals, meanwhile, are featured
in several scenes in which witnesses call the police with long-winded, banal
stories but can only describe Showalter as "a little fella, kinda
funny-lookin'." The interaction between Showalter and Grimsrud is also quite
amusing at times, such as when Showalter, frustrated by Grimsrud's lack of
interest in coversation, delivers a thoroughly un-silent monologue about how
"two can play at that game, buddy," and how he is going to be completely
[bleeping] silent.
The Coens claim (falsely) at the start that "Fargo" is based on a true story,
and they do take something of a documentary approach, allowing themselves to
go off on minor tangents about the various characters rather than sticking to
a carefully defined suspense-movie plot structure. This is a good idea, as the
characters and the regional culture are really the most interesting thing
about the film, but at times the Coens stretch it a little too far. A brief
segment in the middle when everyone involved seems to be more or less
twittling their thumbs is still a little out of place in a kidnapping story,
however loosely structured it may be. The duo also leave what is at least a
minor plot thread dangling, which is a surprise given how meticulous they
normally are in crafting their stories and the supposed "true-to-life" aspect
of the film.
Those who have hailed "Fargo" as the Coens' masterpiece are, I think,
overstating their case a little bit: it doesn't quite match up to the
unnerving surrealism of "Barton Fink" or the madcap comedy of "The Hudsucker
Proxy" and "Raising Arizona." Still, it is one of the better and more original
crime dramas of the past few years, and well worth seeing.
Visit my Film Reviews page at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Kevin Patterson
REVIEWER'S NOTE: For those of you who are paying attention, yes, I had already
written a review of FARGO some time ago. I recently saw the film again, and
while this isn't the first time I have changed my mind about a film after
another viewing, this is the first time that I felt like I had cheated a
four-star masterpiece out of its rating. See below for explanation. 
As the Coen Brothers' FARGO begins, shifty Minneapolis car salesman Jerry
Lundegaard (William Macy) drives down a snow-bound road to a bar in Fargo,
North Dakota, where he meets two thugs-for-hire, Carl Showalter (Steve
Buscemi) and Gaear Grimsrud (Peter Stormare). He has a rather unique
proposition for them; they are to kidnap his wife and demand $80,000 in ransom
from her wealthy father, then split the ransom money with Jerry. What is
instantly clear, however, is that, as well as being generally unsavory types,
Showalter and Grimsrud are dumber than a box of rocks and probably should not
be trusted with Jerry's laundry, much less his wife. Between that and the fact
that FARGO is the latest from Joel and Ethan Coen, who brought us BLOOD SIMPLE
and RAISING ARIZONA, among others, it's a pretty safe bet from then on that
things are going to go haywire. Pretty soon, the very pregnant Sheriff Marge
Gunderson (Frances McDormand) of Brainerd, Minnesota is being called in to
investigate a triple homicide on an isolated highway and Jerry's
scatter-brained scheme is going hopelessly awry.
FARGO is far from the typical crime/suspense thriller. It is "about" this
kidnapping scheme, but it is about a lot of other things too. It is about
Northern accents and expressions like "you betcha." It is about ice on the
windshield and large quantities of snow. Most importantly, it is about how a
laid-back community of Northern Midwesterners come face-to-face with
cold-blooded evil in the persons of Showalter and Grimsrud, and how they deal
with it in their typically laid-back, golly-gee-whiz (or in this case, "oh
yah, yer darn-tootin'!"), easy-going way. McDormand herself has described it
as "miles and miles of pure white snow, splattered with red blood." 
Stylistically, FARGO occupies a middle ground between BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING
ARIZONA: it has both the disturbing violence of the former and the wacky humor
of the latter. Sometimes it even has both at once, such as when Jerry finds a
piece of Showalter's handywork in the form of a dead parking lot clerk and
mutters, "Oh jeez" with all the animation of someone who just stubbed his toe.
The kidnapping scene itself is a similar mix; Mrs. Lundegard and Showalter
stare curiously at each other through the window for a good thirty seconds
before the two thugs break in, and later, when she bites Grimsrud's hand in
attempt to escape, he goes upstairs to clean himself up in the family's
bathroom, leaving Showalter to chase her. The Coens do not make the mistake of
laughing off the violence entirely, however; the scene in which Grimsrud hunts
down two witnesses and kills them execution-style, for example, is unabatedly
vicious and brutal.
FARGO is sometimes black-comic and sometimes just plain black, but there is
plenty of good-natured humor as well, most of it deriving from the quirks of
the local culture and the charm of McDormand's character. "Oh, for Pete's
sake, he's fleein' the interview!" she exclaims at one point when a suspect
eludes her during an interrogation. Not only is she instantly likeable and
intelligent, she is also remarkably hardy and persistent for a woman seven
months pregnant. When she arrives at the initial crime scene, for example,
beset with morning sickness, she excuses herself momentarily to vomit, then
returns and promptly gets back to her job. The locals, meanwhile, are featured
in several scenes in which witnesses call the police with long-winded, banal
stories but can only describe Showalter as "a little fella, kinda
funny-lookin'." The interaction between Showalter and Grimsrud is also quite
amusing at times, such as when Showalter, frustrated by Grimsrud's lack of
interest in coversation, delivers a thoroughly un-silent monologue about how
"two can play at that game, buddy," and how he is going to be completely
[bleeping] silent.
What the Coens have created in FARGO is not only an interesting, off-beat
slice of culture but also an examination of the moral conflicts underlying the
characters' behavior. It's almost like the flip-side to David Lynch's BLUE
VELVET: in both films, innocent, clean-cut protagonists from a seemingly
peaceful small town stumbles into a shockingly violent crime scenario that
reveals ugly secrets hidden underneath their heretofore laid-back existence.
But while Lynch's protagonist found himself unable to deal with the evil and
perversity that he discovered without first dealing with his own "dark side,"
Marge Gunderson emerges untainted. She investigates the crimes with notable
intelligence and stands her moral ground, as she confronts the criminals'
selfishness head-on, allowing herself to feel disgust and even bewilderment,
but never letting it shake her long-held perceptions of herself and of what's
right and wrong. 
The Coens have, throughout their filmmaking career, returned periodically to
the theme of an Ordinary Joe who perseveres even when confronted by nutcases
and two-timing jerks. FARGO isn't quite their best film (that honor still goes
to BARTON FINK, their 1991 surreal psychodrama that sent up artistic
pretension and Hollywood commercialism) but at the very least, Marge Gunderson
turns out to be an Ordinary Josephine who almost certainly outclasses all the
Coens' previous Ordinary Joes (which is not an easy act to follow). Poignant,
intelligent, and occasionally hilarious, FARGO is a fine example of filmmaking
that no one should miss. 
For one thing, I don't think I fully grasped the moral conflicts that I
discussed in the second-to-last paragraph above when I first reviewed the
film: at the time, I saw FARGO as mostly just an off-beat examination of the
local culture within the framework of a crime thriller. Also, I criticized the
film on two grounds which, in retrospect, were mostly irrelevant. The dangling
plot thread of which I spoke was incidental at best, and returning to it at
the end would almost certainly have disrupted the narrative flow. As for the
criminals taking too long to get things moving, there does seem to be a slight
amount of sloppiness - they seem to take half the day driving from the Twin
Cities to Brainerd, when in reality it's only a few hours - but again, this is
at most a minor flaw and not a serious detraction from the film's overall effectiveness.

Author
Rigor Mortis
        Joel and Ethan Coen make good movies, not great ones.  Some are 
very good and others just pretty good, but none are masterpieces, and, 
consequently, FARGO is by no means the masterpiece it has been hailed as. 
 I saw it for the first time on Cable recently.  Having my doubts, I 
refused to shell out seven dollars to see it in a theater, and I'm glad I 
didn't because the resulting experience was a quite ordinary and 
unmemorable one.  The film can't seem to decide what it wants to be and 
fails on all levels as a result: for a serious movie it's not serious 
enough and strangely structured; for a black comedy it's more disturbing 
and pathetic than dark and wicked; for a quirky comedy it isn't very 
quirky; and, for a straight comedy it's too gory and just not 
particularly funny.  The 'fresh and intelligent' dialogue I've heard 
critics gush over is really pretty ordinary, and littered with the 
obligatory profanity necessary to jazz up lame dialogue.  And, when all 
is said and done, you're left with the empty feeling of having been 
mildly entertained by something that's completely pointless, without even 
the satisfaction that comes with a solid crime drama that ties up all the 
loose ends:  What became of the suitcase full of cash that Steve Buscemi 
buried in the snow? What'll happen to William H. Macy's son now that he 
no longer has a family? And, what about the Japanese guy? What was he 
even doing in that film in the first place? Who knows? Then again, who 
cares?
        Frances McDormand's performance is not Oscar caliber.  Her 
character is one-dimensional and kept interesting (slightly) by a 
gimmick.  She smiles constantly and says 'yah' and 'you betcha',  and 
critics who had never seen and heard this before were fooled into 
believing it was some sort of stroke of genius (William H. Macy delivers 
the film's best performance but even it gets tiresome and gimmicky after 
a while).  But, there's a more obvious reason for McDormand's winning for 
Best Actress that represents the film's biggest gimmick, which critics 
and the Academy alike fell for hook, line and sinker.  McDormand is a 
female cop (1 point) who just happens to be pregnant (2 points) and who 
wears the pants in her family (3 points--automatic granting of an award). 
 It doesn't matter that this situation is absurd and illogical as long as 
it gives the impression of 'empowering' women and not the opposite.  The 
Coen brothers, although they deny it, are clearly making a feminist 
statement, but not a very good one.  They don't put McDormand into any 
situations that challenge her condition.  Her capture of the psychotic 
kidnapper at the end is a little too easy.  Given the things he did to 
other people throughout the picture, imagine what he could've done to 
her, and the danger that she puts her baby in everyday.  But, that aspect 
is never mentioned because it doesn't matter either.  Society is not 
going to keep her down, no man is going to keep her down and, by God, 
neither is the biological function of reproduction, no matter what the 
possible consequences because she's an Independent Woman. You go girl!  
The Coens are preaching to the converted, the blinded who don't have to 
be convinced of anything that fits into their agenda, and who won't 
accept anything that shatters their illusions, however truthful it may 
be.
        Siskel and Ebert both chose FARGO as the best film of 1996, which 
shows just how hard people--especially politically correct people--fell 
for its gimmicks when the truth of the matter is that it's a **1/2 movie 
at best and not even as good as the Coens' RAISING ARIZONA or another, 
similar film, RED ROCK WEST. 

Author
Michael Redman
The first thing you notice about this movie is that it's cold. Placed in
Minnesota and North Dakota during the winter, many of the scenes take place
outside with long scenes of snow-covered ground against a background of white.
Just what we need as Bloomington struggles out of the endless long cold night.
As with most Coen brothers films, this features outlandish characters in
nefarious schemes, each of which works out in the oddest way possible. A car
salesman hires a couple of hoods to kidnap his wife so that he can collect the
ransom from her father. Along the way everything that can possibly go wrong
does. In brief scenes of vicious violence, people get shot through the head,
in the back, face, chest and various other areas of the anatomy. There is also
one of the most unpleasant body disposal scenes yet seen on the screen.
Remarkably enough, most of the movie is played for laughs.
The only likable person in the film is the very pregnant sheriff (Frances
McDormand) who hunts down the killers while eating at every possible opportunity.
With every good film the audience gains new knowledge. Here you learn _two_
things. Everyone in Minnesota speaks in an annoying whining accent that would
drive you crazy. And don't do violent illegal business with low-life amoral
degenerate scum-sucking losers. Oh yeah, if you get shot in the face, using a
brightly decorated napkin to stop the bleeding just makes you look goofy.
[This appeared in the 4/18/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
James Berardinelli
     FARGO takes the usual "caper gone wrong" storyline and applies a 
new twist.  Based on a series of true events from 1987, the film 
examines what can happen when the police and criminals are equally dim-
witted.  The product of the Coen brothers' fertile (and twisted) minds, 
FARGO represents one of their least ambitious screenplays to date.  Even 
so, the finished product still bears several of their unmistakable 
trademarks, including atypical humor and an unmistakable visual flair.
     In many ways, FARGO is a departure for the Coens.  Their previous 
films, especially BLOOD SIMPLE, MILLER'S CROSSING, BARTON FINK, and THE 
HUDSUCKER PROXY, were stylistic treats, filled with offbeat characters 
and amazing images.  FARGO, on the other hand, is a more restrained 
picture.  Perhaps because it is based on non-fictional events, the Coens 
decided to tone down their approach.  Cinematographer (and long-time 
Coen collaborator) Roger Deakins relies primarily on traditional shots, 
and the characters are designed to be more "normal."
     FARGO opens, appropriately enough, in Fargo, North Dakota, with a 
meeting between Minnesota car salesman Jerry Lundegaard (William H. 
Macy) and two local thugs, Carl Showalter (Steve Buscemi) and Gaear 
Grimsrud (Peter Stormare).  Jerry wants this pair to kidnap his wife, 
then ransom her for $80,000.  While Jerry doesn't have that kind of 
money (in fact, he's strapped for cash), his father-in-law, Wade 
Gustafson (Harve Presnell), does.  When the cash is paid out, Jerry is 
supposed to receive a 50% cut, as well as the safe return of his wife.  
That way, everyone except Wade comes out ahead.  Unfortunately, with two 
such incompetent crooks, things are bound to go wrong, and Carl and 
Gaear are soon leaving a trail of dead bodies behind them.  A local cop, 
Marge Gunderson (Frances McDormand), is given the task of investigating 
the murders, and it's only with an amazing assist from fate that she 
ends up on the right track.
     A current of absurd humor runs through FARGO.  Even though the 
story is based on true events, it's hard to take certain aspects of this 
movie seriously.  Like David Lynch, the Coens are fascinated with what 
lurks behind the white picket fences of middle America.  In FARGO, 
everyone falls into one of two categories -- the motivated (who are 
greedy, duplicitous, or homicidal) or the simpleminded (everyone else).
     The problem with FARGO is that there aren't any substantial 
characters.  Everyone, from the overwrought Jerry to the methodical 
Marge, is a pure caricature.  None of these people are particularly 
interesting or sympathetic, and watching their exploits becomes a 
detached experience.  By the end of the film, you're more interested in 
how the filmmakers choose to tie together loose ends than whether any 
particular individual lives or dies.  In the past, the Coens have 
managed to create characters worth caring about; such is not the case 
here, and it greatly diminishes FARGO's effectiveness.
     Born and raised in Minnesota, the Coens know their home state, 
which accounts for their ability to reflect reality there (which is like 
unreality for most of the rest of the country).  People say things like 
"You're darn tootin'", "aw, geez," and "what the heck".  Knowing how 
strange the talk of Minnesotans will seem to the rest of the world, the 
Coens intentionally play it for deadpan comic effect.
     It's easy to admire what the Coens are trying to do in FARGO, but 
more difficult to actually like the film.  The absence of viable 
characters limits any dramatic impact, making this more of an 
intellectual exercise than a complete motion picture experience.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Simon Doherty
The best work to date of Joel and Ethan Coen, this fantastic film
refuses to be categorised.  At times it is a black comedy, then a
crime drama, then a quiet character study.  It was nominated for nine
Oscars, but picked up only two after coming up against The English
Patient.  Another case of what I wittily call the Chinatown Syndrome
(it missed out because of Godfather II).
The film, amazingly based on a true story, revolves around car
salesman Jerry Lundegaard (William H. Macy).  In financial trouble, he
hires petty criminals Carl Showalter (Steve Buscemi) and Gaear
Grimsrud (Peter Stormare) to kidnap his wife, in an attempt to extract
a ransom from his rich but skinflint father-in-law.  Frances McDormand
is the pregnant cop who investigates when the plan goes wrong and
blood is spilt.
The Coens always create memorable characters, and this is no
exception.  McDormand, in her Oscar winning role, gives her character
genuine warmth when in lesser hands she would have merely been
irritatingly perky and nice.  Macy is also brilliant as a nervous man
who is out of his depth.  The way he tries to keep up a confident
patter when inside he is panicking is reminiscent of Jack Lemmon's
stunning performance in Glengarry Glen Ross.  Buscemi excels as
always, and Stormare is convincing as a man who barely seems conscious
most of the time, only coming to life in moments of sudden violence,
when he becomes decisive and sure.  The transformation in his
treatment of his cigarette, from drooping out of his mouth to a
determined flick out the car window when chasing another car, is a
superb example of an actor using a prop to reinforce their character.
The other Oscar the film won went to the screenplay.  The story is
told efficiently, fitting in a surprising number of subplots in only
98 minutes.  The Coens do not bother with back story; we are dropped
into the lives of these people and pick up what is going on from their
actions and conversations.  There is also some darkly funny dialogue,
such as a lecture Buscemi gives to a car park attendant, and a
conversation between Jerry and his father in law. (This deal could
work out real well for me and Jean and Scotty.' Jean and Scotty
never have to worry.') The film reminded me of Pulp Fiction at
times, with people talking about ordinary things in a way that makes
it as engrossing as any special effects sequence.
Fargo makes a refreshing change from huge budget blockbusters, where
characters and conversations are just devices to move the plot
forwards.  What I find depressing is the number of people I know who
liked True Lies but found Fargo boring; the pleasures of this film are
not shoved in your face, but run much deeper for those willing to
discover them.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Joel and Ethan Coen have gone slightly eccentric in their last two
films.  With the exception of some work with Sam Raimi, they initially
came to the public's attention with BLOOD SIMPLE in 1984.  Since then
they made RAISING ARIZONA, MILLER'S CROSSING, BARTON FINK, and THE
HUDSUCKER PROXY.  One after another was both a popular and critical
success.  But THE HUDSUCKER PROXY was just a little too weird, like a
surreal, cartoonish imitation of Frank Capra films, and it was their
first critical failure.  To prove that they still have what it takes
they have returned with a film similar in style to BLOOD SIMPLE with
the same realistic approach but with more style.  FARGO is likely to be
a real winner for the Coen Brothers.
     Our story takes place in Minnesota and North Dakota.  Jerry
Lundegaard (played by William H. Macy) is an unsavory wheeler-dealer
who cheats on every human transaction he can manage, sometimes a
little, sometimes a lot.  As the film opens he is arranging to have his
wife Jean (Kristin Rudrud) kidnapped so his wealthy father-in-law will
pay the ransom.  Lundegaard expects to split the ransom with the
kidnappers and have the money for a land deal.  Hired for the job are
two thugs, the irascible Carl Showalter (Steve Buscemi) and the quiet
but violent Gaear Grimsrud (Peter Stormare).  Once the kidnapping has
taken place things get out of hand.  Police chief Marge Gunderson
(Francis McDormand) gets involved investigating.
     In a film of interesting characterizations, McDormand's Gunderson
stands out.  It is strange to see a pregnant woman as a police chief.
It is even stranger to find a police chief with cloying over-
enthusiastic mannerisms as if she is teaching Ding-Dong School.  She is
the sort of woman who answers a simple how- are-you? with "I'm doing
REALLY SUPER!"  But put her at the scene of a crime and that is just
what she does, super.  In moments she has a sophisticated forensic
analysis.  Her straight-arrow approach is in stark contrast to the
habitually scamming character played by William H. Macy, everybody's
worst nightmare of a car salesman.  Somewhat more familiar is Buscemi's
irascible and nasty smalltime hood getting a shot at bigger things.
But the Coen Brothers have a talent for creating memorable characters
even from people in small walk-on parts.  A cashier with an odd smile
and a rubber-faced prostitute each make unexpectedly interesting camera
studies.
     And not just the characters are interesting.  Even a lunch pulled
from a buffet adds texture to the film.  Joel Coen gambles he can make
interesting some unconventional subjects of shots and more often than
not he is right.  The Coen Brothers seem to have wanted to make a real
document of life in a deep, cold Minnesota winter.  It is as if the two
Texas-born filmmakers wanted to get it all on film once so they would
never have to return.  It is hard to blame them.  The cold of the snowy
environment pervades the whole film.  People are walking through snow,
constantly tripping, trying to get to their cars and scrape
windshields.  People talk to each other from inside cave-like fur
hoods.
     Carter Burwell's score works, but seems strangely unconventional.
The main theme sounds more appropriate for some sort of historical
epic, though perhaps it could also fit the epic struggle of against the
elements in the cold Northern winter.  This is a film with some heavy
violence and some good humor.  (One of the best laughs is in the
closing credits.  Be warned, early risers.)  Also notice that there
seems to be a little study of how different people use and react to
profanity.  This is an audience-pleaser that rates a high +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Joel and Ethan Coen, the Coen Brothers (a.k.a. the 
Brothers Coen), have brought the world a handful of bizarre yet 
funny movies, among them BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING 
ARIZONA, but none so bizarre or funny as FARGO. Cleverly 
morbid and supposedly based on a true story, FARGO tells a 
PULP FICTION-like story of crime gone wrong, when a car 
salesman with monetary troubles (William H. Macy) hires two 
criminals (Steve Buscemi and Peter Stormare) to kidnap his wife 
and split the ransom money with him.
        But things soon go wrong and people end up dead. 
Macy has no idea how to cover his tracks, Buscemi and Stormare 
don't get along and to top things off, pregnant police chief 
Frances McDormand is doing a damn good job of investigating 
the homicides. McDormand, like all the other actors in the film, 
does great justice to her quirky character and the bizarre food 
binges her pregnancy craves. She and the other characters talk 
in a hilarious Canadian / Super Fans dialect that emphasizes 
usage of the words "there" and "ya" as punctuation.
        The dialect blends with the surroundings -- North Dakota 
and Minnesota in the dead of winter, where shades of white and 
gray are the only colors you see outside and everyone plods 
around in oversized parkas. The snow itself plays an important 
role in the movie, from the scene where Buscemi buries a briefcase 
along the side of the road to the scene where McDormand examines 
three dead bodies in the snow and nonchalantly recreates the crime 
exactly as it took place.
        Although FARGO has only enough plot in its 98 minutes 
to have comprised one of Tarantino's three PULP FICTION 
segments, it shares Quentin's love for dialogue. Aside from the 
unique dialect and usage of phrases like "So you married ol' son-
of-a-Gunderson," the Coens drop in a few great scenes that don't 
have anything to do with the plot, as when McDormand meets a 
friend from high school who tries to seduce her even though she's 
married and very pregnant or when Buscemi chews out a parking 
lot attendant for charging him money even though he only drove 
through the lot.
        It all adds up to an incredibly surreal but entertaining 
experience that is one of the few truly original movies of the year. 
Nothing inspires originality like the absurdities of real life, although 
I'm sure Joel and Ethan added some embellishments of their own to 
make it an even more compelling story of crime and punishment, 
for -- and this is the last comparison I'll be making to PULP 
FICTION -- in the end justice is served to all the wrong doers 
and McDormand, her work done, is able to crawl back into bed 
with her husband, the same bed she dragged herself out of in the 
middle of the night as the crimes began. FARGO is an intricate, 
full-circle movie for people who enjoy doses of intelligence to 
go with brutality.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: William H. Macy, Steve Buscemi, Frances McDormand, Peter Stormare,
Harve Presnell Director: Joel Coen Producer: Ethan Coen Screenplay: Joel
and Ethan Coen
So the Coen brothers get this idea for a picture about real life, yah.
It's about life in Minnesota where everybody speaks like this, yah. It's
very cold, and people are a bit strange, yah. So this car sales man
wants to get some money from his mean father-in-law. So he gets two bad
men to kidnap his wife for money, yah. These bad men go crazy or
something and start killing everyone, yah. Sounds like fun, yah, but
it's real sick. We have a great female sheriff and she's having a baby,
yah. Her husband loves her a lot, and makes her breakfast every morning,
yah. She's having a baby so she likes to eat a lot. Anyway she is
looking into these dead bodies, and she's real smart, yah. Smarter than
them bad guys. Her name is Frances McDormand, yah and she gets chosen
for one of these golden men things, and wins it yah. So I didn't like
the picture because the story was real sick, yah. I felt like throwing
up when the wood machine thing was used for something real bad and
naughty, yah. But otherwise it's real smart looking and the people get
to say smart things if they aren't being killed, yah.
Comment: Far out, Far off, Fargo, yah.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Director: Oliver Stone
Writer: John Ridley (based on his novel "Stray Dogs")
Starring: Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Powers Boothe, Claire
Danes, Joaquin Phoenix, Billy Bob Thornton, Jon Voigt, Julie Haggerty,
Abraham Benrudi, Laurie Metcalf, Liv Tyler
If "U-Turn" is what Oliver Stone does to take a "vacation" from being all
politically cynical, then I wonder what he must do for real vacations. 
Stone has done so much awesome work lately in the arena of political
criticism, as well as media, some of it being barely-well received by
critics and audiences (remember "Nixon?"), and so it's about time he tried
to not be such a political cynic and open his doors to being just a regular
cynic like the rest of us.  The result is this.
"U-Turn" is basically a black comedy a la "After Hours," except that it's
basically a redo of all those old crap film cliches, like a town where
everyone's crooked, there's no industry but a couple convenience stores and
diners, and, well, everyone's just plain weird.  It's also one of those
nightmarish kafkaesque films where everything where Murphy's Law takes into
effect, and everything that could go wrong goes wrong.
But unlike "After Hours," which featured an innocent man plagued by some
kind of weird Job-like bad luck, we are given a detestable creature, a
person who's on the lowest possible rung of the criminal ladder: the slimy
rat who owes money but is constantly running from those who want to collect
it.  He's Bobby Cooper (Sean Penn, making the 97 rounds nicely), and we
meet him as he's driving down the road in the middle of a desert when his
convertible gets a blown radiator hose, and he is forced to stop at the
nearest Arizona town in an effort to get his car fixed.
There, he runs into all kinds of trouble as he meets odd people he probably
shouldn't, and ends up in situations in which he does not belong.  For
instance, he loses all his money when he goes to a convenience store and
some robbers come in and a little gun fight ensues, blowing all his cash
up.  And a bit later, he meets a teenage girl named Jenny (Claire Danes),
who's remarks to him that he wants him to father their "love child" get him
in trouble with her hot-headed and dim-witted boyfriend, Tobey N. Tucker
(Joaquin Phoenix), who says people call him "T.N.T" because when he goes
off, people get hurt.
A couple other people we meet: the inbred hick garage mechanic, Darrell
(Billy Bob Thornton, unrecognizable under about an inch of grease), who's
probably the most evil person in the film; a blind man (Jon Voigt) who says
a couple of meaningful and not-so-meaningful afforisms; the sheriff (Powers
Boothe), who has his paranoid eye on Bobby; and even a diner waitress named
Flo (Julie Haggerty).
But the most notable people he meets are a married couple named Grace and
Jake McKenna (Jennifer Lopez and Nick Nolte, respectively), who hate
eachother so much that each ends up hiring Bobby to kill the other without
the other knowing (a blatant rip-off of "Red Rock West"), causing Bobby to
do some character weighing to see which one he should off if either of
them.
The plot pretty much goes in circles, as we see Bobby being beaten up like
crazy in every other scene, get up, and get beaten up again.  The guy is
already missing two fingers from a scene before the movie (which we are
shown in flashbacks throughout the flick), and we see that this is
basically God's revenge on Bobby for being such a bastard.  The story
becomes a nightmarish revenge story, all the more nightmarish because Penn
makes Bobby such a likable person and we soon sympathize with his plight
and just want him to get the hell out of Dodge.
This is all done with the kind of overdirecting that Oliver Stone is
famous/infamous for.  We get all kinds of wacky camera movements and
angles, cataclysmic editing, some screwing around with the sound track, and
gorgeous cinematography which make this technically amazing, but still a
lot like the headache that "Natural Born Killers" was.  I almost wonder if
Stone can make a technically simple movie anymore, like some of his earlier
work.
Nevertheless, Stone has a personal staple he puts on the film, and all his
technical stuff works this time in creating sheer paranoia, and giving the
film a nightmarish edge that it needs.  Too bad he doesn't really take it
over the edge and give the film a deeper tone, which is what Scorsese did
with "After Hours," turning what could have simply been a "shit happens"
film into an almost brilliant black comedy.  The film needs more of a plot,
which it runs out of about forty-five minutes along, leaving some subplots
(Jenny/Tobey, the guys who he owes the money to, as well as a couple
others) dangling with very little closure.
Oh, and then there's the "attempt" to add a message about, oh I dunno,
manifest destiny and the way we hurt the Native Americans (Lopez's
character is a Native American corrupted by an American).  Just to make
sure we didn't miss his "message," he adds photos of Indian chiefs over the
end credits.  This approach is so underdeveloped that the photos at the end
are a big laugh, and the entire need to add a political subtext to the film
just should have been dropped all together if he couldn't have fit it in in
the film nicely.
But Stone still exhibits a great sarcastic cynical take on life, turning it
into a bit of a pessimistic allegory for life: we're beaten around a lot,
have to deal with people as if not more selfish than we are, and then we're
eventually given the big screw-over by someone we didn't even suspect was
scewing with us in the first place.  He's expanded his pessimism a little
further, but hardly promises the same relief that his political or media
satires promise: that learning from our mistakes can prevent similar things
from happening.  This is more like: life sucks and there's nothing we can
do about it.
Still, for fans of Stone's wild stylistic approach to filmmaking, and
anyone who is into wacky surrealism, as well as a film where every actor
goes deliciously over the top with their performances (yes, even Claire
Danes), this will be pretty pleasing.  It's not a great film, but the
result is a rather fun film which steals from many films (the ending is a
sorta rip-off of "Duel in the Sun"), but still comes off as being at least
marginally entertaining.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Living as we do in a crazy world, the weirder the story, the more
likely it is to be true.   Put the story in the hands of the Coen
brothers and we get a reality-based film that is quirky, funny and
still believable.   This one takes place in Minnesota in 1987.
Beautiful snow with photography by Britain's Roger Deakins.
     Jerry Lundegaard (William H Macy) is the business manager of an
auto sales company.  Business has been so poor that he is in dire
straits, needing money badly enough to come up with the idea of hiring
a couple of thugs (Steve Buscemi and Peter Stormare) to kidnap the wife
he loves.  She will be held for ransom, unhurt, while Jerry will hit up
his wealthy father-in-law, Wade Gustafson (Harve Presnell) for the
money to pay the kidnappers.   The kidnappers and Jerry will split the
ransom.
     A few mishaps and the whole scheme falls apart when several people
get shot.  This brings in the local police  chief, Marge Gunderson
(Frances McDormand) who is several months pregnant.  She can still say
"Yah" (for "yes") with the best of them.  While everyone in the cast is
more than adequate (especially Macy), it is McDormand who runs away
with the film.
