Title
Review for Evening Star, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Walter Frith
'The Evening Star' is the long awaited sequel to 1983's 'Terms of
Endearment.'  Shirley MacLaine returns as Aurora Greenway, the firey,
outspoken and no nonsense character we came to admire in the first film.  As
'The Evening Star' begins it is 1988, approximately 15 years since the
untimely death of Aurora's daughter Emma portrayed in 'Terms of Endearment'
by Debra Winger.  Aurora's three grandchildren are now fully grown and they
all have misguided and disfunctional lives.  Throughout the course of the
movie there are many sentimental moments on film which echo the tone and feel
of the first film as we are re-united with old characters and come to know
some new ones.  The problem 'The Evening Star' has is the inevitable scrutiny
it will come under in being compared to 'Terms of Endearment.'  If that
picture had never been made then there might be something here but while it
is entertaining and contains the realistic look of everyday life, it is a
disappointing follow up movie with absolutely nothing new to offer.  The most
memorable character from 'Terms of Endearment' was Garrett Breedlove played
brilliantly by Jack Nicholson and his character is desperately needed and
guess what?  He has a cameo but it comes at a bad time at about an hour and
forty five minutes into this movie which runs two hours and eight minutes.
 We are fed up with the film by the time he shows up and it's a case of too
little too late.  There is a ridiculous and silly storyline early in the film
which has Aurora carrying on an affair with here therapist which lasts about
half of the movie and it bored me silly.  It is hard to make a good sequel to
a movie that won five Academy Awards including Best Picture of the year.  For
those who don't want the memory of the first film tarnished stay away from
this one but if you long for more of the same you'll get it but only on a
superficial and less than ambitious level.  

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Shirley MacLaine, Bill Paxton, Juliette Lewis, Miranda Richardson,
Ben Johnson, Scott Wolf, George Newbern, Marion Ross, MacKenzie Astin,
Donald Moffat, China Kantner, Jack Nicholson Director: Robert Harling
Screenplay: Robert Harling based on the novel by Larry McMurtry
The death of a young mother named Emma,
Claimed by that deadly ill known as cancer,
Leaves three children in the care of their grandmother,
The ‘Grand Dame of doing things her own way'.
The sequel to ‘Terms of Endearment' is a bad move in the direction of an
awful movie. One should not attempt to make a sequel to a classic tale
of dying if it is to be as morbid and unhappy as this. There was enough
misery in the first movie, why torture the audience with more sorrow.
How does one top a finale like death? More people dying of course. Not
just one death this time, but a minimum of two. Let's not toy with
cancer again, it's soooo yesterday. Let's use a vague disease that
nobody's heard of, or perhaps a handy debilitating illness known as
stroke. Sorry chaps (director Harling and author McMurty), no sympathy
points will be gained for killing off little old ladies. There's nothing
new in this material that can't already be found in a Nursing Home.
Aurora (Shirley Maclaine) hasn't learnt much from the suffocating
mistakes she made with her own daughter. She now reeks dominance and
disaster on her grandchildren. History repeats itself as the three
grandchildren, now adults, rebel in very different ways. Stubborn,
strong willed and impulsive. The youngest (Juliette Lewis) follows in
her mother's footsteps and becomes involved with the wrong guy (Scott
Wolf) despite advice to the contrary. The eldest (George Newbern) who is
also the angriest, has a history of juvenile delinquency and is
currently caged in a penitentiary. The middle (Mackenzie Astin) who is
perhaps the most stable has no ambitions, but carries a job, a de facto
and a child.
I don't blame them and I don't back them either. If had a grandmother
like Aurora, I would be jumping off a high rise building to escape her
clutches, and if I had grandchildren like these ungrateful mutts, I
would be bagging them alive. In truth this unhappy family deserve each
other's tormented misery.
Aurora's life is in shambles. Numerous failed marriages and affairs,
leads this ‘unhappy come sleep with me' sixty year old, to hop into bed
with her much younger psychological counsellor (Bill Paxton). Things get
more tedious and fantastic when there is vying competition with Emma's
best friend (Miranda Richardson), a now wealthy divorcee who tries to
outshine and outdo Aurora in every way - including reading bed time
stories to the psychological counsellor.
Talk about unprofessional counsellor-patient conduct. Can you imagine,
Bill Paxton and Shirley Maclaine in bed ‘doing it' several times over
and over - Ewwwwwhl! What was the director thinking - the ‘turn on' of
the decade? Throw up.
Comment: Aurora - ‘The Evening Star' - ‘she who shines the longest and
burns the brightest', unfortunately doesn't also ‘fizzle out the
fastest'.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Paramount/Rysher)
Starring:  Shirley MacLaine, Bill Paxton, Miranda Richardson, Juliette
Lewis, Marion Ross, George Newbern, Mackenzie Astin.
Screenplay:  Robert Harling.
Producers:  David Kirkpatrick, Polly Platt, Keith Samples.
Director:  Robert Harling.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE EVENING STAR has so much good will working for it from the start
that it would have taken an effort to make it a complete catastrophe.
TERMS OF ENDEARMENT was a popular and critical success, and Aurora
Greenway gave Shirley MacLaine a character which re-defined her career.
Screenwriter and director Robert Harling is well-aware of this history,
and his opening credits sequence tries to make the most of it.  Over
pictures of MacLaine, Debra Winger and Jeff Daniels, Michael Gore's
familiar TERMS OF ENDEARMENT theme plays, working that good will like a
boxer works the body to soften up the opponent.  The unintended effect of
these familiar signifiers, however, is to remind you how much more focused
and satisfying a film TERMS was than THE EVENING STAR.
     The sequel (based on Larry McMurtry's sequel to his own original
novel) finds Aurora Greenway fifteen years older and little-changed.  The
same nearly-oppressive love which complicated Aurora's relationship with
her late daughter Emma has similarly complicated her relationships with
the three grandchildren she raised, all of whom are leading less than
perfect lives.  Tommy (George Newbern) is in jail for drug possession;
Teddy (Mackenzie Astin) is an unmarried father driving a tow truck;
Melanie (Juliette Lewis) is determined to run off to Los Angeles with her
aspiring model boyfriend (Scott Wolf).  An unhappy Aurora seeks help in
therapy, where she finds her young counselor Jerry Bruckner (Bill Paxton)
as helpful personally as professionally.  Through various trials and
tragedies, Aurora tries to make sense of her life by organizing photos and
mementos into a scrapbook which -- she hopes -- will explain her place in
the world.
     The key to the success of TERMS OF ENDEARMENT lay in its
pitch-perfect study of a contentious mother-daughter relationship, yet it
is not exactly because Emma is absent that THE EVENING STAR feels less
potent.  That one relationship focused TERMS, however; you knew exactly
what it was really about.  THE EVENING STAR is in desperate need of that
kind of focus.  In addition to Aurora's relationships with each of her
three grandchildren and with her counselor/suitor, the film examines
Aurora's friendship with her long-time maid Rosie (Marion Ross), Rosie's
romance with next-door neighbor Arthur (the late Ben Johnson in his last
role), Aurora's rivalry with wealthy divorcee Patsy Carpenter (Miranda
Richardson), Melanie's relationship with her boyfriend, and Aurora's
strange relationship with a former flame (Donald Moffatt).  Harling throws
a lot of stuff at the screen, and some of it sticks, notably some
exceptional moments for Ross and a few catty exchanges between MacLaine
and Richardson.  Unfortunately, there isn't enough of the stuff that
works, and plenty of down time as Harling searches for a narrative
deserving of Aurora's fire.
     Shirley MacLaine obviously has a blast returning to the role of
Aurora, and that obvious joy is likely to bring an audience with her
farther than the material itself deserves.  Aurora preens deliciously
after she spends the night with Jerry, smiles a venomous smile as she
catches Patsy in a deception, and generally makes overbearing motherhood
her own personal fiefdom; it's just plain fun to spend time with a
character this colorful.  If only MacLaine hadn't made so many of Aurora's
quirks so familiar by taking on a succession of infuriating-but-lovable
roles distinguishable from one another only by the film in which they
appeared -- STEEL MAGNOLIAS, POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE, GUARDING TESS, MRS.
WINTERBOURNE.  All found MacLaine doing riffs on Aurora with varying
degrees of success, and even a lively performance feels recycled after so
many precursors.  It doesn't feel at all like we have missed over a
decade of Aurora Greenway's life.  We've just been watching her using
aliases.
     The only time THE EVENING STAR hits a pure high note is when Jack
Nicholson makes an all-too-brief cameo as playboy astronaut-turned-family
man Garrett Breedlove (the role for which he won a Best Supporting Actor
Academy Award).  It is one of Nicholson's best and most restrained pieces
of film acting in years; he seems both genuinely pleased to see his old
love, and genuinely unsure about how to interact with her.  There is so
much affection and charm in those few scenes, as all the soap opera plot
developments and histrionics take a breather, that it almost feels like
1983 all over again.  Of course, that is what Robert Harling was going for
all along in THE EVENING STAR, but he only had a couple of pieces of the
puzzle available to him.  A Paul McCartney concert with a token appearance
by Ringo does not a Beatles reunion make, and THE EVENING STAR strives for
a similar appeal it can't hope to achieve.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Shirley MacLaine, Bill Paxton, Juliette Lewis, Miranda Richardson, 
      Ben Johnson, Scott Wolf, George Newbern, Marion Ross, 
      MacKenzie Astin, Donald Moffat, China Kantner, Jack Nicholson
Director: Robert Harling
Producers: David Kirkpatrick, Polly Platt, and Keith Samples
Screenplay: Robert Harling based on the novel by Larry McMurtry
Cinematography: Don Burgess
Music: William Ross
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Big-time Christmas Day releases have a history of disappointing 
(remember THE GODFATHER PART III?), so it comes as no surprise that THE 
EVENING STAR, the follow-up to James L. Brooks' phenomenally-successful, 
Oscar winning, 1983 feature, TERMS OF ENDEARMENT,  is a bust.  
Essentially, this is a big-screen soap opera that tries too hard, too 
often, and too ineffectually to open the tear ducts.  
     To start with, let me freely admit that I'm not a great fan of 
TERMS OF ENDEARMENT.  It's a little too manipulative for my taste, and 
even the flood of strong performances can't completely redeem the 
pedestrian story.  In many ways, THE EVENING STAR is cut from the same 
cloth, but there's one important difference:  the skill evident in 
crafting the first film is entirely absent here.  This time around, the 
performances are workmanlike, the screenplay (by STEEL MAGNOLIAS' 
screenwriter, Robert Harling, and based on the Larry McMurtry novel) is 
lifeless, and the direction (also by Harling, in his feature debut in 
this capacity) is confused. 
     A lot of leftovers are served around the holidays, and THE EVENING 
STAR has its share.  Shirley MacLaine, looking suitably aged, is back as 
Aurora Greenway, as is Jack Nicholson as astronaut Garrett Breedlove in 
a blink-and-you'll-miss-it cameo.  A number of other characters have the 
same names, but different faces.  The three Horton children -- Melanie 
(Juliette Lewis), Tommy (George Newbern), and Teddy (MacKenzie Astin) -- 
have grown up, so it's natural that the actors have changed.  Patsy and 
Rosie, on the other hand, were adults in 1983, so it's a little harder 
to explain why Miranda Richardson and Marion Ross have replaced Lisa 
Hart Carroll and Betty King. (I'd like to think that the original actors 
had the good sense not to do the sequel; in reality, however, they 
probably weren't offered the parts.)  
     Unfortunately, returning characters aren't the only familiar aspect 
of THE EVENING STAR, because huge chunks of the storyline have been 
recycled from TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, right down to the central family 
struggle.  In the original, the love/hate relationship was between 
Aurora and her daughter, Emma (Debra Winger).  This time around, the 
participants are Aurora (once again) and Emma's daughter, Melanie.  The 
only significant difference is that Melanie doesn't have a terminal 
disease.
     The re-tread plot goes something like this:  Aurora is involved in 
an ongoing feud with Melanie, who's in a dead-end relationship with a 
would-be actor boyfriend (Scott Wolf).  Melanie moves out, but, when she 
discovers that her boyfriend is being unfaithful, she moves back in.  
Meanwhile, Aurora takes time out on a regular basis to visit Tommy, 
who's in prison.  And she watches with clenched teeth as Melanie pours 
out her heart to Patsy, rather than to her.  When she gets trapped by a 
bout of depression, Aurora's busybody maid, Rosie, tricks her into 
seeing a therapist (Bill Paxton) with a mother-fixation.  They sleep 
together, which leads to a series of contrived complications.
     The entire film consists of marginally-related and largely-
uninvolving episodes strung together.  None of these really go anywhere, 
but we're not supposed to care.  The film's producers think it's enough 
that we're with familiar characters in a familiar setting.  However, the 
men and women populating THE EVENING STAR are caricatures of those in 
TERMS OF ENDEARMENT.  Cheap jokes and mawkish sentimentality abound 
here, and calling these characters paper-thin is crediting them with too 
much depth.  The tacked-on ending, which takes place some six years 
after the main story, has only one aim:  bring out the Kleenexes and 
handkerchiefs.  It, like the bulk of the movie, doesn't work.  In fact, 
not one of the "emotional" moments in this film provides a satisfactory 
catharsis.
     For the most part, the acting matches the writing.  Shirley 
MacLaine, who won an Oscar as Aurora for TERMS, is almost unwatchable.  
Miranda Richardson is painfully over-the-top, and Juliette Lewis gives 
her typical one-note performance.  The normally-reliable Bill Paxton 
looks like he'd rather be chasing tornadoes.  By the time Jack Nicholson 
appears (about one-hundred minutes into the film) to liven up the 
proceedings, THE EVENING STAR is long past the point of resuscitation.
     Because of its poor construction and shockingly dumb script, even 
those who number themselves among TERMS OF ENDEARMENT's fans are likely 
to have serious reservations.  Anyone who disliked the original, or who 
is offended by tearjerkers in general, will find this motion picture 
unbearable.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For those of you who have been waiting for the sequel to that
quintessential tearjerker and excellent movie TERMS OF ENDEARMENT
(1983), it is finally finished.  Called THE EVENING STAR, it is a
disaster.
     Shirley MacLaine is back as Aurora Greenway, but her humanity is
gone and only her humorous side remains.  The script is by the director
Robert Harding, and all his jokes fall like stones.  So what is good in
the film?
     In almost a cameo part at the end Jack Nicholson returns as
astronaut Garrett Breedlove.  His performance is fairly mechanical, but
infinitely better than the rest of the film.  The only other positive
aspects of the picture worth mentioning are the classic tacky clothes
that the costume designer created for Aurora.  They consist of
combinations of purples and pale blues accentuated with silly little
frills.  I have now exhaustively listed every good part of the film.
Do not bother looking for any others.  There are none.
     Set in Houston in 1988, the show contains a cacophony of bad Texas
accents, but the worst is Miranda Richardson's as Aunt Patsy.  She has
cliched lines including, "I'm just a poor little old Texas gal.  Struck
oil at the altar."  We even get a tour of her Imelda Marcos sized
walk-in closet.
     Winning the award for the worse performance in the film is Bill
Paxton as Aurora's therapist Jerry.  Poor Bill looks as though he
suffers from gas through most of the film.  I hope he has gotten to
feel better.  There is a unbelievable romance between Jerry and Aurora.
The romance is little more than a plot device inserted in a failed
attempt to shock the audience.  You see, Aurora is old enough to be
Jerry's mother.
     Usually interesting Juliette Lewis plays Aurora's granddaughter.
I just knew she would be able to make something out of her badly
written part, but she wasn't.
     The show is full of bad taste masquerading as comedy.  Patsy's
doorbell plays "The Yellow Rose of Texas."  Now, that is an original
idea.  When a sweet old character dies in the middle of the show, the
director peppers the funeral with little sight gags.  We can not even
bury the dead properly in this show.  Believe it or not, there is even
a airplane food fight between Aurora and Patsy.  Is the world ready for
TERMS OF ENDEARMENT meets ANIMAL HOUSE?
     Child actor Shawn Taylor Thompson plays Aurora's obnoxious
great-grandson Bump.  They cut away when he talks, and it sounds as if
they are using an adult to talk like a funny toddler.  Bad taste
abounds in this picture.
     The ending comes totally out of left field, but I guess I should
not have been surprised.  If it weren't for being a critic, I would
have been spared the ending.  There is no reason to stay if for some
reason you find yourself watching this movie.  Vote with your feet.
And vote early.  I wish I could have.
     THE EVENING STAR runs way too long at about 2:10.  It is rated
PG-13.  There are sexual situations, but no sex, nudity, or violence.
The language is much worse than it needed to be and had several uses of
the F word.  The film would probably be okay for kids 10 and up, but
why bother?  I recommend you stay as far away from this film as
possible.  This being the Christmas season, I am going to be charitable
and give it a single *.  My brain told me to give it less.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
the sequel to "Terms of Endearment" starts 15 years after Aurora
Greenaway (Shirley MacLaine, who won the Best Actress Oscar for the
previous film), lost her daughter Emma to cancer and was left to raise
3 grandchildren. 18-year old Melanie's (Juliette Lewis) battles with
Aurora echo Aurora's love-hate relationship with Emma; while older
brother Tommy glowers in jail on a drug charge and Teddy happily
drives a tow truck and lives with a woman Aurora despises and his
illegitimate son.  Faithful housekeeper Rosie (Marion Ross) silently
observes and supports Aurora as Aurora juggles lovers old and new,
jealously wars with Emma's best friend Patsy (Miranda Richardson) and
prepares for the departure of Melanie with her two-timing boyfriend
Bruce.
"The Evening Star" is far too episodic compared to the
better-strutured first film which concentrated on the mother-daughter
relationship between Aurora and Emma.  In this one, we get Aurora's
relationship with each of her grandchildren, her relationships with
past lovers, her relationship with her new lover, her relationship
with her deceased daughter's best friend, her relationship with her
friend/housekeeper and her relationship with her great-grandchildren.
Sheesh!
MacLaine's still in fine form as Aurora, but we've been watching her
do shadings of this character too many times in the interim (like
"Madame Sousaztka" or Tess in "Guarding Tess") to find any freshness
here.
Marion Ross may receive a Best Supporting Actress nomination and she's
fine, especially in the scene where she tells Aurora why she's leaving
her employ.  But the standout performances for me were Miranda
Richardson's hilarious and complex Patsy and Donald Moffat's sweetly
affecting performance as retired General Hector Scott.  Ben Johnson
also had his last performance as Aurora's neighbor who gives Rosie her
last hurrah.  I normally love Juliette Lewis' performances, but here
she never seems to rise above sitcom level acting - loud and obvious.
When Jack Nicholson finally makes his appearance, looking Aurora up
after all these years and now a family man, I was relieved mainly
because I thought I could now see the end of "The Evening Star" in
sight.  But no, it continues to meander on far too long past its
logical conclusion.
Some silliness along the way also doesn't help.  Bill Paxton as
Aurora's shrink-lover with a mother fixation doesn't really go
anywhere in the story. Juliette Lewis suddenly becomes a TV star on
the west coast (after her first and only audition).  We also get three
deaths for the price of one in this sequel, which considering the
hankie quotient of the first movie may not have been the wisest
choice.
"The Evening Star" is mostly just plain irrelevant, but some fine
performances raise it slightly over it's storyline.
Aside from giving Shirley MacLaine a chance to mug up to the camera, I
don't see the point of "The Evening Star."  Anything that may have
been compelling in "Terms of Endearmeant" is lost in this charmless
and stilted effort.
Writer/director Robert Harking renders a flat story with caricatures
rather than characters taking up screen time.  With the exceptions of
Marion Ross, who is quite wonderful as Aurora's housekeeper and
friend, and Donald Moffat as Aurora's former lover and friend, I
didn't give a hoot about any of the other "people" in the movie.
Aurora's grandchildren should  poster children for birth control.
Bill Paxton, as her much younger lover, is two dimensional, at best.
Also of note is Miranda Richardson, a fine actress, wasted heres,
although she tries to lend what depth and humor she can to the film.
The story is episodic in nature, woodenly moving from one incident to
the next, with the only interesting thing, for me, being to guess as
to when Nicholson will make his cameo.  I figured his arrival would
signal the end of the movie - boy, was I wrong.
Thinking about the original, I realize how shallow a cast and
character-writing effort was made or "The Evening Star."  No one
delves below the surface of their characters.  It ends up as a
hodge-podge of stories about people you don't care about.  And, they
all live happily ever after. Sort of.  I was going to talk about this
more, but why bother?
I don't like "The Evening Star" and I don't know why it was made.
Aside from its ties to "Terms," there is nothing about this movie that
recommends it.  Shirley MacLaine, as Aurora, is less likeable than in
the first.  With the exceptions noted above, no one else is likeable
much either. 
I give "The Evening Star" a D (for DUD).
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Evening Star (1996)
Shirley MacLaine, Bill Paxton, Juliette Lewis, Miranda Richardson, Ben 
Johnson, Scott Wolf, George Newbern, Marion Ross, Mackenzie Astin, Donald 
Moffat, China Kantner, Jack Nicholson, Jennifer Grant. Directed by Robert 
Harling. 129 minutes.
PG-13, 1 star (out of 5 stars)
I went into "The Evening Star", the sequel to "Terms Of Endearment", with 
an open mind. Really. I'd watched the 1983 original several times and 
enjoyed its rich, quirky characterizations and loping storyline. Heck, I 
even teared up at the appropriate moments. So I was in a receptive mood 
for another go around with Aurora Greenway and her dysfunctional family.
Over two hours later, I left the theater stunned. "The Evening Star" 
isn't simply a failed sequel. It's a veritable train wreck of a movie. 
Writers Larry McMurtry and Robert Harling (who also directed) are 
responsible for this mawkish, painfully slow, disaster. 
Here's the gory details. It's 1988 and Grandma Aurora (Shirley MacLaine) 
continues to fret over her late daughter's children. Remember Tommy, the 
oldest boy, who sulked through the last third of the original movie? Well,
 he's an adult now and he never stopped pouting. Aurora visits him 
regularly in prison, where he's serving his third stint for possession. 
She hands him brownies and clucks away until he sneers, tosses the 
brownies in the trash and stomps back to his cell. This scene is played 
out several times, for no apparent reason.
Back home, pleasant middle child Teddy lives with his girlfriend and has 
a cute kid who says "butthole" a lot. Since Teddy seems reasonably well-
adjusted, Aurora pays virtually no attention to him, focusing instead on 
little Mildred (Juliette Lewis), the film's ersatz Debra Winger. Millie 
divides her time between boffing her boyfriend (Scott Wolf as an aspiring 
underwear model) and screeching at Aurora on the many ways her life has 
been ruined by Granny's interference. As if this wasn't enough, longtime 
family friend Patsy (Miranda Richardson) hovers around the young woman 
constantly. Patsy never forgave Aurora for denying her custody of the 
kids, and spends most of the movie wreaking revenge. 
This muddled soap opera provides Shirley MacLaine ample opportunities to 
showcase Aurora's histrionics. In the original film, Aurora was a 
fascinating character; a loving, overbearing control freak engaged in an 
internal war between her basic romantic needs and her strong sense of 
propriety. Here, the character becomes a grotesque caricature of the 
original. When she's not sputtering venomous insults in all directions, 
she's engaged in set pieces straight out of second-rate situation 
comedies. One of the worst, a catfight with Patsy on an airplane, is as 
embarrassing as anything from the final season of "Roseanne."
Director Harling's attempts at emotional manipulation make the 
proceedings even more annoying. The leaden soundtrack tells you how to 
feel, with a whimsical refrain for every comedic scene and dripping 
strings for the "heartfelt" moments. He constantly surrounds Aurora with 
an indulgent audience, housekeeper Rosie (Marion Ross) and several ex-
suitors, who appear to exist solely to dote on her. Harling punctuates 
the screeching and slapstick by killing off a character every 30 minutes 
or so. Three seniors bite the dust by the film's end - - this movie has 
more death scenes than "Platoon." 
Along the way, Aurora fights depression and searches for a sense of 
meaning to her life, which leads her into the arms of a slimy young 
counselor with a mother complex, played horribly by Bill Paxton. The 
utter lack of chemistry between the two is astounding.
An hour and forty five minutes into the film, Jack Nicholson finally 
makes his appearance…for about six minutes. Their too-brief reunion 
provides a few moments of awkward charm. 
"The Evening Star" has a some touching moments. When you throw this much 
pathos on the screen, a little of it is bound to stick. At one of the 
many funerals, Millie, who was an infant when her mother died, asks 
brother Teddy what it felt like to have a family. Their exchange is 
simple and moving. A bonding scene between Aurora and Tommy also works, 
largely because both of them keep their mouths shut.
"The Evening Star" trivializes the rich characters from "Terms Of 
Endearment." If you enjoyed the original, watch it again and avoid this 
travesty at all costs. 

Author
Christopher Null
     What could be more foul than having your ashes spread over the
beach of the horribly polluted Gulf of Mexico?  Well, maybe having to
sit through THE EVENING STAR, the long-awaited tearjerky sequel to TERMS
OF ENDEARMENT.
     THE EVENING STAR picks up in 1988, and follows 8 more years of the
further adventures of Aurora Greenwood's (Shirley MacLaine)
uber-dysfunctional extended family.  Now, Emma's (Debra Winger in TERMS)
kids have grown up under Aurora's eye, and the jury's still out on how
well she did.  Their Aunt Patsy (Miranda Richardson) is now a wealthy
divorcee who is constantly one-upping Aurora.  The caustic Aurora finds
brief happiness in the arms of a younger man (Bill Paxton).  Rosie
(Marion Ross) is still in Aurora's kitchen, and a whole horde of minor
players weave in and out of the action, mainly serving to dredge up the
past and to breathe some new life into the ENDEARMENT franchise.
     THE EVENING STAR is so chock full of mystery illnesses & deaths,
Oedipal complexes, prison terms, illegitimate children, and other
staples of daytime TV that you'd think it would make a much better movie
than it does.  Instead, the film comes off as a pointless rehashing of
old story lines, part soap opera (see above illnesses, etc.) and part
sitcom (sample wacky dialogue: "How are we gonna get Aurora Greenwood to
see a shrink!?").
     ...and *all* cheese.  By killing off the entire senior citizen
population of Houston (where the film is set and was shot in), the
filmmakers go straight for the tear ducts, in the hopes that you'll be
crying too much to notice that this movie has no plot whatsoever.  When
someone's not gasping last words, the film is just a series of movie
cliches, one after another.  Why bother?
     While there are a few bright sparks in the film, notably the
fantastically over-the-top Richardson and the curmudgeony Ross, plus
some decent jokes here and there, overall the movie is a meandering tale
that, in the end, just reminds me even more of why I hate Houston so
much.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
