Title
Review for Adventures of Pinocchio, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Martin Landau, Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Udo Kier, Bebe Neuwirth,
Rob Schneider, Genevieve Bujold, David Doyle.
Screenplay:  Sherry Mills, Steve Barron, Tom Benedek, Barry Berman.
Director:  Steve Barron.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There is a single word which is quite conspicuous in its complete
absence from the production notes for THE ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO:
"Disney."  There are references to "the version most audiences find
familiar," and comments about the "watered-down" adaptation, but nowhere
does anyone acknowledge that Disney's 1940 animated classic presents a
rather tough act to follow, perhaps as though they are wishing upon a star
to erase that legacy.  Naturally, the film-makers have chosen to push the
fact that this version is more "in the spirit" of the 1883 children's tale
by Carlo Collodi than previous film versions, but while THE ADVENTURES OF
PINOCCHIO might be closer to the source material than that "version most
audiences find familiar," I suspect it won't be closer to the hearts of
many viewers.  It is a moderately diverting entertainment for children
with little to offer for adults.
     It is, of course, the story of a lonely puppet-maker named Geppetto
(Martin Landau), who many years earlier carved his initial and that of his
unrequited love Leona (Genevieve Bujold) into a pine tree.  Now an old
man, Geppetto unknowingly cuts down that tree, and carves the trunk into a
puppet boy he calls Pinocchio.  Miraculously, Pinocchio (voiced by
Jonathan Taylor Thomas) comes to life, and with a curiosity to explore his
new surroundings.  That brings him to the attention of Felinet (Bebe
Neuwirth) and Volpe (Rob Schneider), two money-hungry scoundrels who want
to bring him to the attention of wicked puppet show master Lorenzini (Udo
Kier).  Pinocchio is separated from Geppetto, and begins a series of
adventures which will bring him to the playland of Terra Magica and into
the belly of a giant sea creature on his quest to become a real boy.
     There are a number of new twists to this telling of "Pinocchio" which
are actually quite interesting, chief among them the portrayal of
Pinocchio himself.  Disney's Pinocchio usually seemed to be an innocent
victim of naivete; director and co-scripter Steve Barron (TEENAGE MUTANT
NINJA TURTLES) makes him a bit more of a mischief-maker in his own right,
never malicious but showing his share of the things that little boys are
made of so that he can experience real growth.  The Pinocchio puppet
created by Jim Henson's Creature Shop actually makes him look like an
expressive piece of wood, and Jonathan Taylor Thomas (no stranger to voice
work after doing the young Simba in THE LION KING) does a nice job of
allowing him to mature.  The production design is also exceptional, with
the Czech Republic town of Cesky Krumlov providing the perfect storybook
look for Geppetto's village.
     Still there is that legacy, and THE ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO finds
itself in the most trouble when it brings to mind the way similar
sequences were handled by Disney.  All of the most familiar moments are
here -- Pinocchio's triumphant performance at the puppet show; his
fib-enhanced growing nose; the transformation of Lampwick (Corey Carrier)
into a jackass; the escape from inside the whale -- but the changes in
those scenes are generally cases of trying to make them bigger rather than
better.  The transformation scene is particularly noteworthy in this
respect, placing Pinocchio, Lampwick and a pair of other boys on what
appears to be the Indiana Jones Adventure, rocketing through caverns at
maximum speed and volume.  Most disgracefully, Barron handles the
expectation for a cricket conscience by creating a computer generated
insect named Pepe (voice of David Doyle, erstwhile Bosley of "Charlie's
Angels" infamy).  Barron seems to have no idea what to do with him except
consistently have him magnified or placed in annoying perspective shots,
and his comments generally consist of limp attempts at anachronistic
humor.  Jiminy Cricket was a dignified voice of restraint; Pepe is a kooky
sidekick.
     On the one hand, I want to give Barron credit for trying to unify the
episodes of "Pinocchio," for eliminating the deus ex machina fairy and for
underscoring the relationship between Pinocchio and Geppetto which seems
to be an afterthought in Disney's version.  Unfortunately, he doesn't
really get where he wants to go, and he is too interested in keeping the
kids happy with slapstick and the ever-popular dog urination gag to pay
attention to the story which might mean something to adults.  THE
ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO has enough visual spark to please young audiences,
and a noble enough message to appease their parents, but it lacks the wit,
warmth and emotional highs to erase the memory it is trying so hard to
erase.  This PINOCCHIO may become a real boy, but he's not the real thing.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     A live-action Pinocchio made without Walt?  Jiminey Cricket!  The
first half of this Carlo Collodi adaptation is not without its charms:
the storybook look of Geppetto's village, shot on location in Prague;
nice underplaying by Martin Landau as the lonely puppet maker; Rob
Schneider and Bebe Neuwirth hamming it up as the minor villains Fox and
Cat; and the near-seamless special effects that bring a certain wooden
boy (voiced by Jonathan Taylor Thomas) to life.  While darker than the
animated version, the drama is still decidedly kid-powered, such as a
scene placing Pinocchio in peril on, gasp!, a rooftop.  The period
detail is also very nice, as is one fabulously photographed scene, at a
courthouse, where the costumes and the murals blend together.
     The movie takes a sour turn in the second half, during a hideous
production number that attempts to blend musical styles spanning a
couple of centuries.  This shrill, dissonant mess signals the beginning
of the end.  The movie never recovers from that misstep, despite such
interesting imagery as boys changing into jackasses and sea monsters
swallowing boats whole.  Pepe, the cricket-with-a- conscience, is also
on hand, albeit in computer-generated form.  He's voiced by David Doyle,
who, regrettably, makes no references to either whistling or wishing
upon a star.  And how about those tuneless tunes by Stevie Wonder and
Brian May?  Woof!  This version of PINOCCHIO may be quite the kids
movie, but the rest of us should stay put until Thanksgiving, when
Disney's 101 DALMATIONS is due.  Directed by Steve Barron.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Martin Landau, Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Genevieve Bujold, Udo Kier, 
      Bebe Neuwirth, Rob Schneider 
Director: Steve Barron 
Producers: Raju Patel and Jeffrey Sneller 
Screenplay: Sherry Mills, Steve Barron, Tom Benedek, and Barry Berman 
Cinematography: Juan Ruiz Anchia 
Music: Pachel Portman 
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema 
     There's an old adage that states:  "Just because something can be 
done doesn't mean it should be done."  Director Steve Barron (THE 
CONEHEADS) might have been advised to pay attention to this saying.  
There's no reason why movie audiences need a live action retelling of 
the story immortalized in 1940 by the animators at Disney.  Not only is 
the original PINOCCHIO (based on the satirical work by C. Collodi) a 
motion picture classic, but it makes this dull, feeble re-telling look 
like the product of second-rate hacks. 
     As in the Disney version, we're introduced to the kindly 
puppetmaker, Gepetto (Martin Landau), who lives alone with his 
creations.  One day, he carves a little boy out of a magical log, and 
Pinocchio (voiced by Jonathan Taylor Thomas) comes to life -- literally.  
At first, Gepetto is understandably surprised by this turn of events, 
but his shock turns to delight when the wooden boy calls him "papa".  
Like all children, Pinocchio is imbued with curiosity, and it soon gets 
him into trouble.  Before long, he is being pursued by the two evil 
lackeys (Bebe Neuwirth and Rob Schneider) of a nasty puppeteer (Udo 
Kier).  This leads to scenes on an island where bad boys become donkeys, 
and in the belly of a whale. 
     When I was young, PINOCCHIO was my favorite Disney animated film.  
It was, I thought, a perfect blend of adventure, fantasy, and 
excitement.  Even now, amidst quantum advances in animation, the scenes 
with the whale never fail to impress.  And then there's Jimney Cricket, 
one of Disney's best-ever sidekicks.  His rendition of "When You Wish 
Upon a Star" (obviously absent from this new version) is a highlight.  
PINOCCHIO is no less magical today than it was in 1940.  And magic is 
precisely the quality missing from New Line Cinema's THE ADVENTURES OF 
PINOCCHIO. 
     When everything is animated, it's easy to accept all that 
transpires during this tale.  However, put live actors on screen with an 
animatronic puppet, and, suddenly, there's an issue of credibility.  No 
matter how cute and imaginative this Pinocchio is, it never seems real.  
It's a walking visual effect, and the slight imperfections visible in 
the manner by which it is brought to life are painfully apparent.  In 
large part because of this, it's difficult to be drawn into the film's 
reality. 
     The only actor who isn't completely wasted is Martin Landau, whose 
performance as Gepetto is one of the film's few high points.  Jonathan 
Taylor Thomas is Pinocchio, but, mercifully, the young star's on-screen 
time is limited to a few scenes near the end.  Genevieve Bujold is 
completely wasted as Leona, Gepetto's long-time love.  In place of the 
unforgettable Jimney Cricket, this version gives us Pepe the 
grasshopper, a philosophizing insect whose voice is provided by David 
Doyle. 
     THE ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO offers parents an obvious source of 
midsummer entertainment for their offspring.  Alas, this is a pale 
imitation of what has come before, and yet another example of 
Hollywood's unwillingness to strike out in new directions.  This 
PINOCCHIO is representative of the mentality that has studios finding a 
comfortable, well-worn niche and hunkering down in its relative safety.  
So, although this particular stringless puppet might be transformed into 
a real live boy, he's stuck in a movie that's more pointless than 
lively. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When you hear that a classic animated film is being made into a
live action movie, your first reaction is curiosity as to how they will
do certain parts.  Upon further reflection, apprehension grows that the
studio will screw it up, and you will leave the theater angry at their
sacrilege.  Well, fear not this time.  In THE ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO
writer and director Steve Barron has made a wonderful adaptation of
Disney's 1940 classic film PINOCCHIO.  Certainly elements are changed,
but all of the basic parts are there and done with class and
imagination.
     If there is a single reason why this version works so well, it has
to be the design of the visual effects (Angus Bickerton) for Pinocchio.
His movements are a beautiful fusion of wooden jerkiness and human
fluidity.  He is simultaneously puppet and boy.
     In this version, the puppet Pinocchio (voice by Jonathan Taylor
Thomas) is made by Geppetto (Martin Landau) from an old tree that has
the initials of Geppetto and Leone (Genevieve Bujold) carved in it.
When Pinocchio comes to life, there are a series of sweet scenes where
he imitates everyone he sees.  When he tells his first series of lies,
his nose shoots way out.
     The imaginative script definitively answers many questions about
Pinocchio.  For example, we learn that if he sneezes when his nose is
fully extended, he blasts the room with sawdust.  The show is filled
with sight gags like this that are quite effective.  My favorite is
what happens to the natural enemy of a wooded boy, namely a woodpecker.
     Although not quite as well done as Pinocchio, the Jimney Cricket
role is played by an insect (grasshopper or cricket?) named Pepe (voice
by David Doyle).  Pepe has a mechanical look to him and yet seems
almost real at the same time.  He is the cute little philosopher of the
picture and is a veritable fountain of advice, including: "Insects are
people too you know," and "Applause may be good for the moment, but
love is everlasting."
     Although Pinocchio is surrounded by other actors, it is totally
his show, and he is up to it.  Only Geppetto and Pepe have some
importance.  Udo Kier playing the evil Senor Lorenzini gives the only
bad performance of picture.  His bad guy is neither vile nor
threatening, and he cannot even sneer effectively.
     The movie was filmed in Prague, and the director took full
advantage of the lushness of the environment.  The Renaissance sets by
Allan Cameron are lavish and gorgeous.  You may have admired his
creations before in THE JUNGLE BOOK, FAR AND AWAY, WILLOW, and LADY
JANE.  My favorite Cameron set here is Senor Lorenzini's puppet theater
which is a marvelous blend of an opera house and a vaudeville theater.
How he recreated Pleasure Island as a sort of outdoor Disneyland is
also imaginative.
     The costumes by Maurizio Millenotti are as elaborate as in a
Mozart opera.  The big wigs of that era are fun.  The cinematography by
Juan Ruiz-Anchia is a mixture of realism and fantasy.  The beautiful
blend of oversaturated blues and golds are highly evocative.  I do have
a minor quibble about the film.  The final morphing scene from puppet
to boy cuts away rather than show us the morph itself.
     THE ADVENTURES OF PINOCCHIO runs 1:36.  It is correctly rated G.
There is no sex, nudity, or violence and nothing to scare or offend.  I
recommend this magical film to you and your entire family, and I give
it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
