Title
Review for Body Melt (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
A sinister chemical corporation tests its new products on the 
inhabitants of a new housing estate.  Despite most of them being 
soapie stars, when they start exploding the police become concerned.
This most closely resembles the early creations of Peter Jackson ("Bad 
Taste", "Meet the Feebles") as an ultra-graphic yet funny splatfest.  
But though its heart is in the right place, "Body Melt" really doesn't 
have the Jacksonian stroke of genius or even enough of anything else 
to fill its (barely longer than one hour) running time.  Moral: it's 
easy for a deliberately bad film to be just bad.  "Body Melt" does 
feature a lot of Australian soapie stars in it, which provides some 
vicarious pleasure.
The situation, you see, is that power-vamp Shaan of the mysterious 
Vimuville Health Farm realises her head chemist is about to blab about 
their experiments on the occupants of a suburban culdesac.  Hence she 
injects him with toxic goop during some thankfully gratuitous sex.  
"The first stage is hallucinogenic!"  Stopping only to scarf some 
detergent at a service station (uh, why?), said chemist hurtles 
towards the test site.  "The second stage is glandular!"  By now 
moving into serious Bad Hair territory, he crashes the car.  "The 
third stage is ...  argh!"  Tendrils whip out of the deceased's torn 
neck and run up his nose.  Fersure.  Only later, gentle viewer, will 
you wonder what was going on here.
The police show up and you know the investigation will go nowhere when 
they're played by Gerard Kennedy and one of the ubiquitous Daddo 
brothers.  Sure enough, they excuse all the witnesses to go and get 
killed in their own scenes.  Cue the sartorially challenged police 
pathologist, who after some ferocious overacting examines the corpse 
and goggles, "He's healthy - too healthy!".  (Asides from the bubbling 
skin, protruding eyes, running sores and torn throat that is.)  It's 
obvious that the drugs are "cognitive enhancers" that will "take you 
straight into other inter-phenomonological dimensions".  Presumably it 
is within these dimensions that it is possible to understand what this 
movie is about.  But there's no cognition being enhanced in the cast 
as they're all still in the movie, waiting to explode.
Two teenagers head out from the estate and get lost, eventually ending 
up amongst a group of extras from "Deliverance".  It later will 
eventuate that their leader is the original inventor of the wonder 
drug.  This coincidence is not so much outrageous as it is standing on 
a box, mooning the audience.  But we find that out later, after the 
local retards have killed a stuffed kangaroo with a rock and started 
to feast on its pituitary system.  "It's an adrenal gland!"  shrieks 
one of the teens, showing an admirable identification of red, gloppy 
internal organs.  The scene cuts before the other teen can call out, 
"Look, it's the cortico-hypothalamic axis!", but they are dead soon 
anyway.
Back in suburbia, it seems (set warm grandmotherly tone to ON) that 
nice Lisa McCune is playing a young pregnant wife.  Aww.  But her 
doctor is pumping Vimuville drugs into her!  Oh no!  But just when it 
looks like she might survive, she is disembowelled by her own foetus.  
Now, that'd never happen on "Blue Heelers".  By now, even the police 
suspect something is wrong and skedaddle to the health farm where 
everyone is exploding.
It's gross, it's tacky, it's cheap.  But it's not enough of any of 
those things to make it really fun, even for its short length.  The 
pulsing electronic music and some moments of direction (particularly 
in the opening credits) are certainly well done, but don't make up for 
plot idiocies and the terribly banal dialogue.  [*/misfire] and "The 
Young Doctors" on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
p-m agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au)
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
