Title
Review for Dirty Harry (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
'Dirty Harry' is the film that made Clint Eastwood a bona fide North
American movie star.  His earlier work in the westerns he made in Italy
with Sergio Leone in the 1960's are excellent but they didn't really go
over with the North American audiences until years later when they found
their way on to late night television and eventually on home video.
1971 was a good year for Eastwood.  Not just because of his breakthrough
in 'Dirty Harry' but also because it marked the year that Eastwood made
his directing debut with another classic of his, 'Play Misty for Me'.
Eastwood's directing and producing would eventually pay off for him with
the ultimate recognition he received from his peers when Eastwood won
two Oscars for producing and directing his anti-Western masterpiece
'Unforgiven' in 1992.  Eastwood's venture into directing hasn't always
worked because he stretches out his story lines too long in many cases
and his films are at times just downright boring.  1997's 'Midnight in
the Garden of Good and Evil', directed by Eastwood was a somewhat
admirable film but is the first film in years that had me bored more
than any other time in recent movie history.
In 'Dirty Harry', Eastwood stars as San Francisco police inspector Harry
Callahan, a cop who bends the rules (sometimes breaking them), in his
pursuit of the criminal element.  America exploded with crime in the mid
to late 1960's and 'Dirty Harry' was a timely release that showed
Harry's quest to rid the streets of scum his way wasn't necessarily a
bad thing and despite some elements of police brutality, criminals will
win when they have no rules to play by while the cops do.  In fact, to
respond to charges leveled by critics that inspector Callahan was a
right wing cop with no regard for the constitutional rights of suspects,
Eastwood made the first of four sequels to 'Dirty Harry' in 1973
entitled 'Magnum Force' where a group of vigilante police officers
executed criminals with a greater disregard for the law and Callahan
would not go along with it because he knew where to draw the line in
dealing with scum and never crossed it to the point of becoming a
criminal himself.
The first time we see dirty Harry is on a roof top where the police are
investigating a shooting where a female swimmer was gunned down.
Harry's jacket and tie persona, complete with his legendary sunglasses
are an instant identification of his character and would strongly
establish him throughout the other four 'Dirty Harry' films.  The first
time we get a clear read on Eastwood's character is in the mayor's
office where Harry sarcastically insults the city's highest ranking
official and begins investigating the character known as Scorpio who
promises to unleash a wave of homicides on the city unless he's paid one
hundred thousand dollars.
Andy Robinson would prove to be one of the sickest psychotic villains in
movie history and in many ways, his character is still the most
frightening to date and his portrait of evil as a man suffering from
urban paranoia was arguably the best performance in the film.
The cat and mouse play between Eastwood and Robinson is taut,
suspenseful and horrifying at times to watch but as any fan of the
series will tell you, you can't stop watching it.
One of the film's scenes that makes for the most interesting debate
among movie fans and social observers is the scene in the D.A.'s office
after Harry initially captures Scorpio and is told that the suspect will
be set free because Eastwood violated his constitutional rights.  The
D.A. is joined by a judge in explaining Harry's violation of the
suspect's rights and the balancing of suspect's rights and the right of
the public to be protected by criminals is called into question, giving
'Dirty Harry' it's admirable quality of socially redeeming subject
matter and the film avoids becoming just another police exploitation
picture directed with talented scarring impact and colourful insight by
Don Siegel.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
