Title
Review for Highlander: Endgame (2000)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
HIGHLANDER: ENDGAME, as confusingly written by Joel Soisson, directed by 
Douglas Aarniokoski and edited by the committee of Chris Blunden, Rod 
Dean, Tracy Granger and Michael N. Knue, isn't merely a bad movie, it is 
a stupefyingly awful one.  Even though its story is ripe for lampooning, 
the movie takes itself quite seriously.
The fourth, and please last, in the HIGHLANDER series, it probably has a 
group of avid fans who understand it all.  I, however, not being a 
member of this cinematic cult found the plot to be an impenetrable mess.  
In a darkly-lit film, in which everyone wears the same dingy robes, it 
is hard to keep straight just who is who.  I'll try to tell you what I 
learned from the factoids that the movie threw at me, but I suspect this 
will be one of those reviews where HIGHLANDER groupies will discover 
errors aplenty.  (If you are a HIGHLANDER aficionado, please do not 
write me as this is not the sort of film that I care to waste my time 
discussing.) 
This much I know.  There is a group of people called the "immortals."  A 
hardy bunch, they relish being slaughtered so that they can rise from 
the dead to fight again.  One of the few ways for an immortal to die is 
to chop off his or her head.  You'll be glad to know that Immortality is 
an equal opportunity employer, including both sexes and many races.
The immortals appear to have started back in sixteenth-century Scotland, 
around the time that the mother of Connor MacLeod (Christopher Lambert) 
was burned at the stake.  After that, Connor and his kinsman, Duncan 
MacLeod (Adrian Paul), spend the rest of their infinite lives sword 
fighting their way through history.
When the movie, which switches timeframes frequently and delights in 
making them all look similar, is set in the present, the immortals' 
transportation of choice are noisy motorbikes.  They also love guns, all 
the better to spurt the blood.  
Some immortals are good and some are bad.  And sometimes they change 
sides -- I think.  There is also something about them getting a special 
charge when they actually manage to kill each other.  Personally, I 
would have gotten a really big charge if I could have killed them all.
Amid all the blood and the battles, the immortals pause briefly on 
occasion to share some bit of wisdom with us.  "Honor is not a weapon," 
Jin (Donnie Yen) tells us.  I have no idea what that means, but, since 
an immortal said it, you can be sure that it must be profound.
HIGHLANDER: ENDGAME runs 1:35.  It is rated R for violence and some 
strong sexuality and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Douglas Aarniokoski
Written by: Gillian Horvath, William Panzer, Joel Soisson
Let me warn you, this plot summary is only going to make sense to those of 
you who have seen the television show. An immortal has broken the rules of 
the game. Jacob Kell (Bruce Payne), considered by the watchers council to be 
the most dangerous immortal alive, has killed on holy ground. Now Kell is 
out to destroy the life of Connor MacLeod (Christopher Lambert), the man who 
killed his father centuries before. Kell's next target is Duncan Macleod 
(Adrian Paul), Connor's best friend and kinsman. Kell leads a group of 
immortals into battle (another rule which he broke), and one of them is 
Duncan's ex-wife from two centuries prior. His wife, Faith (Lisa Barbuscia), 
hates Duncan for having turned her into an immortal. She helps Kell because, 
as she says, he's the only person she's met who is capable of the level of 
hate she feels. Now Connor and Duncan have to find a way to stop the most 
powerful immortal alive, before he wins the game and the prize. Yet Connor 
knows that neither one of them is good enough to beat Kell on his own.
"Highlander: End Game" is one of those movies directed entirely at those who 
faithfully followed the television series. If you've never seen the series, 
you're in for a bumpy ride. In fact, if you've never seen the series, I'd 
recommend avoiding this movie. You're not going to know who the watchers 
are, or that there are now hundreds of immortals, or even who Duncan MacLeod 
is. Okay, that warning out of the way, the rest of this review is directed 
at those of you who have at least seen the television show once. I'm sorry 
to say that "Highlander: End Game" plays as nothing more than a slightly 
longer episode of the series. The effects are no more impressive, there have 
been no great changes in the characters of the series, and the production 
values are only slightly above those used in the show. Am I saying it has no 
features to elevate it up the show? That's exactly what I'm saying. If 
you've seen the show, you've seen the movie. If you enjoyed the show, you'll 
most likely enjoy the movie.
Christopher Lambert may have found some success in the first "Highlander" 
film, but that was back in 1986. Does anyone wonder why he hasn't found much 
work since then? If you've seen any of his performances, you wouldn't 
wonder. Lambert continues to display this lack of talent in "Highlander: End 
Game", shamelessly overacting at every turn. Adrian Paul is another story. 
While people may not know him from much besides the "Highlander" television 
series, the man is not an untalented actor. It's unfortunate that the 
dialogue in "Highlander: End Game" doesn't give him the chance to display 
his full acting ability. There are only two other important performances in 
the movie, and neither is much worth noting, but I'm going to note them 
anyway (I'm irritating like that). Bruce Payne ("Warlock III") plays the 
chief villain in such a gratingly over the top way, it will make your teeth 
hurt just listening to him. Lisa Barbuscia ("Almost Heroes") isn't quite 
that annoying as MacLeod's ex-wife, but she can't play the role requested of 
her. Faith is supposed to hate MacLeod with every fiber of her being, but we 
get the impression she just finds him vaguely annoying. Fans of the 
television series will be happy to see Jim Byrnes and Peter Wingfield make 
appearances as Joe Dawson and Methos, respectively. They'll be unhappy to 
see that the two fan favorites have about ten minutes of screen time between 
them.
The sad fact of the matter is, "Highlander: End Game" never should have made 
it to the big screen. As a direct-to-video release or a made for tv movie, 
the film would have worked quite well. Say what you will about "Highlander 
2" (and don't get me wrong, it deserves all your slander and then some), but 
at least it had the production values of a big studio release. As a major 
motion picture, there are simply too many points against "Highlander: End 
Game". The pacing is so poor you'd think a twelve year old had directed it; 
the dialogue is bad, bordering on painful; the special effects could have 
been done on a home computer; and like the previous sequels, this one just 
doesn't fit in with the "Highlander" timeline. I've actually got a theory 
about that - I think each "Highlander" movie is supposed to be an alternate 
timeline. If you think about it, that's the only thing that makes sense 
since each film destroys the entire mythos of the film or films preceding 
it. I suppose there never should have been a sequel to begin with, since if 
ever there was a film that didn't leave room for a sequel it was the first 
"Highlander".
Now that I've stomped yet another film into the ground, I should probably 
point out some of the movie's good aspects. The fight choreography (at least 
in one scene) is really quite impressive. The character involved in that 
scene, played by Donnie Yen ("Iron Monkey"), could have been a very 
interesting character, but he is never developed . The soundtrack is quite 
nice, being a lovely mixture of classical and Scottish music. However, I was 
surprised to find that the traditional "Highlander" theme song by Queen is 
missing. I have one quick, last question to all you "Highlander" fans out 
there. How strong is the rule which says immortals cannot fight on holy 
ground? I always took this more as a law than a rule, and if an immortal 
broke it something horrible would happen to them. Yet the rule is thrown 
right out the window in this latest film. "Highlander: End Game" runs a 
quick 88 minutes. I'd recommend it to die-hard fans of the television 
series, though even they might find the poor production values a bit 
irritating. I give the movie three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
And just when you thought JoBlo was getting a little soft around the
corners, not rating anything lower than your standard "this movie sucks",
along comes this cinematic atrocity and he's forced to take out his secret
weapon and spray it with a stench so thick, even the bravest movie-goer
would think twice about seeing this waste of time. Yes, despite being a
third sequel to a successful original movie, the latest HIGHLANDER doesn't
seem to have anything going for it. Oh stinky movie, let me count thee
ways...
PLOT:
(From what I understood) A really bad highlander dude comes to the present
looking to whack out the nice highlander dudes in order to gain their power
and become the mightiest immortal...or something along those lines.
CRITIQUE:
A complete and utter mess. Disjointed, incoherent, boring, corny, filled
with bad dialogue...and that's just the first thirty minutes! This film
doesn't seem to know what to do with itself. It's confusing to anyone who
doesn't know the series (I include myself in that group) and apparently
idiotic to those who do know the series (I include die-hard HIGHLANDER fan
The Arrow in that group). The film doesn't explain anything about
itself...it just goes from one inexplicable situation to another. One moment
they're in the present time, the next moment, they're in Italy in the 1600s.
Why? Who knows. What are they talking about? No idea. Flashbacks mixed in
with the present, mixed in with a few spontaneously cheesy fight sequences
every now and again, and I even remember seeing one flashback scene which
went even further into its own flashback scene!! Hullo...?!? Confused yet? I
was and I basically stopped giving a crap about anyone in the film when I
realized that neither the writer or director was interested in presenting me
with any kind of semblance of a story.
Random swordplay, Mad Max-like dudes showing up in motorcycles in the 1800s?
Or were they in the present at that time? Who knows...and to be honest...who
seriously cares! This series should have been shot in the head and put out
of its own misery a long time ago, but sadly, someone at the studio decided
that it still had a little life left in it. Please, please...for the love of
God and all that is holy in the world of movie-making, and mostly out of
respect for those who loved the original film, put this series to bed and
end it! Even Christopher Lambert knew enough to play second fiddle to Adrian
Paul in this one. The director also tries to do the best he can with the
muddled material, but all he could come up with is plenty of slo-mo action,
some fast-motion fight scenes and lots of smoke everywhere. And is there
anything spectacular about the sword-play or fight scenes? Nope. And I think
we all could have done without all those zooming Lambert face
close-ups...yipes, the man is not aging gracefully, is he? Oh boy, and I
haven't even gotten around to the greatest piece of over-acting that I've
seen in years. The man who plays Kell in this movie, Bruce Payne, should get
a ham trophy for literally chewing up every piece of scenery that he gets
near. Overacting is not a hobby for this guy...it's a living! He's also very
funny, not purposely though. All in all, the movie stinks. Nuff said.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Highlander:_Endgame_ (R) * (out of ****)
        I had never seen a _Highlander_ film nor an episode of its
spinoff television series in my life, so perhaps I'm not exactly not the
most qualified viewer to review the fourth and presumably (hopefully?)
final big screen installment of the cult sci-fi franchise.  However,
having little to no familiarity with the material perhaps makes me an
ideal person to review it--after all, part of an ongoing series shouldn't
only play to the converted.  But that, in a nutshell, is the problem with
_Endgame_.  If you're a fan, there could be something here to keep you
involved and maybe leave you satisfied.  But for newcomers, it's an
uphill battle to make sense of it all and just about impossible to care.
        _Endgame_ is a landmark film for the _Highlander_ faithful for it
brings together for the first time Connor MacLeod (Christopher Lambert),
the lead character of the features _Highlander_, the critically lambasted
_Highlander_2:_The_Quickening_, and misleadingly titled
_Highlander:_The_Final_Dimension_; and Duncan MacLeod (Adrian Paul), the
star of the syndicated _Highlander_ television series.  As anyone can
deduce from the character names, Connor and Duncan are related, but
exactly how will only be clear to followers of the series.  A throwaway
line of exposition to spell out their relationship is never offered in
_Endgame_.  The film's poster says that they are brothers, and while the
two use the term "a brother" once or twice, the context suggests a more
figurative meaning (as in close friend) than a literal one.  This idea
supported by one flashback scene where we see the two's first meeting;
Connor has to introduce himself to Duncan by name.  If the two were true
brothers, shouldn't they know who the other is?  (OK, maybe they were
separated at birth, but no explanation is ever offered.)
        Maybe I'm dwelling a bit too long on that point, but that's just
about the only thing in _Endgame_ that commands any thought; the plot is
your basic good guys versus bad bit.  Duncan and Connor are Immortals,
but that doesn't mean they are indestructible; Immortals can be killed by
decapitation, and when one is killed, the slain's lifeforce is absorbed
by his or her killer (called a "quickening").  The baddie that Duncan and
Connor must do battle with Jacob Kell (Bruce Payne, criminally
overacting), the Immortal whose father was responsible for the death of
Connor's mother some four centuries ago.  But as is standard issue for
stories like this, Jacob--having well over 600 quickenings to his
credit--is far more powerful than Duncan and Connor combined.
        But this fairly simple story is muddled by the murky _Highlander_
mythos, which scripter Joel Soisson makes no effort to make accessible to
non-cultists.  There is some mumbo jumbo about the Watchers (who, as the
name implies, watch Immortals); every now and again a character or two
that perhaps would be recognizable to those familiar with the series pops
up.  So while non-fans can be superficially amused by director Douglas
Aarniokoski's fast-paced assemblage of basic set pieces--a swordfight
scene here, a gratuitous sex scene there--none of it really adds up to
anything of worth.
        _Highlander_ fans, of course, would argue otherwise.  The film's
numerous flashbacks, which show the heretofore unseen shared past of
Connor and Duncan, should alone be enough to get them worked up, while
the uninitiated will struggle to comprehend what the big deal is all
about.  _Highlander:_Endgame_ is a film made for the devotees, and I'm
sure I speak for everyone else when I say that I am more than happy to
simply let that select group have and keep it.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
HIGHLANDER: ENDGAME (2000)
Rated R; running time 85 minutes
Genre: Action
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0144964
Official site: http://www.highlanderendgame.com/
Written by: Wayne Beach, Simon Davis Barry
Directed by: Christian Duguay
Cast: Adrian Paul, Christopher Lambert, Bruce Payne, Lisa Barbuscia,
Ian Paul Cassidy, Adam "Edge" Copeland, Damon Dash, Sheila Gish,
Jim Byrnes, Peter Wingfield, Donnie Yen
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamshighlander.html
After sitting through the torture that was this gag-inducing movie, I
feel sorriest for those faithful "Highlander" fans of both the original
movie starring Christopher Lambert as Connor MacLeod of the Clan
MacLeod, and the followup TV series starring Adrian Paul as his kinsman,
Duncan MacLeod; fans who waited all these years for the lightning that
once was Highlander to strike again.  And this lame longform (emphasis
on "long") version of a bad music video is the thanks they get?
It's been awhile since I've seen a movie that both sucks and blows at
the same time.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The main characters in the "Highlander" series and movies are an unknown
quantity of immortals (as in, men and women who can only die if one
removes their head from their body) who walk the earth in anticipation
of The Quickening (a gathering of immortals in which they go, excuse the
pun, head-to-head), with the end result being only one immortal left
standing.  After all, There Can Be Only One.
Some immortals - including the MacLeod kinsmen - see these duels as a
necessary evil.  Connor, even moreso than Duncan, after the latest Love
Of His Life is done in by a mysterious stranger.  Hoping to be rid of
the curse of immortality, Connor hides away in Sanctuary, on holy ground
(the one place where immortals do not do their dastardly deeds).  But
the Big Kahuna Immortal, Jacob Kell (Bruce "needs a membership to
Overactors Anonymous" Payne) knows no such boundaries; he seeks revenge
on Connor for Connor's having killed his "unarmed" priest father
centuries ago, when Kell Senior helped to burn Connor's mother at the
stake when the Kells discovered that Connor was...oh, must this madness
go on???
The Upshot:
The original HIGHLANDER movie was something of a cult hit, to the best
of my recollection; Christopher Lambert always struck me as someone
whose acting was probably best served when done in his mother tongue,
but the whole time-traveller concept from the first movie, was fun
enough to give in to, and served as fuel for many similar types of
flicks which followed.  Parts two and three were utter bollocks, but
they were easily forgotten - because those of us who liked the series,
starring Adrian Paul as Connor's kinsman Duncan, simply replaced the
conflicting bits of fodder with new canon from the series' creators.  It
also helped when Lambert made periodic guest appearances on the series,
so for awhile, all was well.
As with many syndicated TV series, holes began to develop in the show's
structure, and after awhile, HIGHLANDER the series fell off my radar.  I
kept up with it just enough to know that there was supposedly a movie
"in the works" (and remember, this was a few years ago that I first
heard this), and I waited.  and waited.  and waited.  for something to
come of it.
I had almost forgotten about the movie, until I saw it pop up on a few
"coming attractions" sites.  After seeing this travesty, I wish I'd
never seen any parts of those sites.
HIGHLANDER: ENDGAME is such a weak piece of sh...detritus, I hate
mentioning it in the same breath as the cheesy, but fun, series and
original movie.  This version Stinks, with a capital "S" - mostly
because the movie's Powers That Be took a good, already-established
concept, and wiped their butt with it in favor of one of the most lame
plots possible: a super-immortal, after all this time?  And suddenly,
Duncan also has this riot chick pop up from seemingly out of nowhere, as
part of his Distant, Secret Past?  That'd be like...like...like Captain
Kirk, suddenly finding himself with The Son He Never Knew He Had. Give
me a effin' break, will ya?
The only thing - and I do mean, the ONLY thing - that saved this flick
from the redlight district, is its use of mostly-effective "flashbacks",
similar to those done in the series (and, I believe, the original
movie).  They were the best thing about the series anyway, as the
"flashbacks" show the two leads in all their playful glory.  But can
someone explain for once and for all why Adrian Paul always seems to get
a thicker brogue the further back in time Duncan goes?
Too bad those "flashbacks" couldn't just be extracted from the whole
film, transplanted back to the small screen (where, I say in my
completely unopinionated manner, it belonged in the first place), and
made into a decent bon voyage to the series.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
All that, and Diva's Brotha Rule is in full effect too?  Will the
madness *ever* end?  Sheesh!
Bammer's Bottom Line:
What a horrible ripoff!  Highlander fans, y'all deserve better than this
dreck.  But please, Hollywood, no mas, no mas.
HIGHLANDER: ENDGAME (rating: flashing redlight):
I hope the term "endgame" is a promise, not an idle threat.  Man, did
this one blow.

Author
Susan Granger
 This is the fourth segment, the first in five years, and the
final episode of the series.  If you're not a die-hard fan, you need
to know some background. The Highlander is an immortal, born centuries
ago in the Scotland. He and the other immortals who walk the earth,
calling themselves "the seed of legend," can be killed only when
beheaded, which usually occurs in a sword-fight with another
immortal. The victor in such a duel gets the "quickening," absorbing
the strength and experience of the defeated amid bolts of lightning.
Morose Christopher Lambert stars, once again, as Connor MacLeod with
Adrian Paul as his protege, Duncan MacLeod, who - this time - go after
Jacob Kell (Bruce Payson), an evil, diabolical, power-hungry immortal
who has gone renegade. Kell's after Connor because, centuries ago,
Connor killed his father, which is understandable since Kell burned
Connor's mother at the stake. Make no mistake, this is a gruesome
group and the recitation of their history is often
contradictory. Plus, Duncan's got this girl-friend (Lisa
Barbuscia). Anyway, both MacLeods are determined that Kell will not be
the last immortal - "In the end, there can be only one." Problem is:
it's disjointed and tiresome. Even the choreography of the
sword-fights is clunky and choppy. Blame that on first-time director
Douglas Aarniokoski. The gimmick is that Lambert, who's starred in the
"Highlander" films, is now teamed with Paul, star of the syndicated TV
series (1992-98). The two, supposedly born 70 years apart in the 16th
century, have appeared together only in the first episode of the TV
series. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Highlander: Endgame"
is a dreadful, time-traveling, almost incomprehensible 2. As they say:
"That's one blessing of immortality - there's always tomorrow."

Author
Jon Popick
I've never seen any of the three Highlander films, or one episode of the
syndicated television series, so I don't know Highlander from Hi-C.  But
I do know a good action film when I see it, and Highlander: Endgame
doesn't fit the bill.  It's a slow-moving piece of garbage with choppy
fight sequences and bad acting.
The story merges the paths of Connor (Christopher Lambert, from the
first three films) and Duncan Macleod (Adrian Paul, from the television
series) – two brothers that are members of an exclusive club of
immortals.  Supposedly, each of the immortals battle each other, gaining
the power of each person they slay.  At the end, only one immortal can
exist, which makes no sense because immortal people shouldn't be able to
die!
In Endgame, a diabolical character named Kell (Bruce Payne, Howling 6),
who, according to the film's press notes, has become `the most
invincible immortal ever.'  Say what?  That would be like saying that
Mickey Mantle was the most Yankeeist Yankee of all time.  Anyway, Kell
has killed over 600 immortals and assumed the power of all of his
victims.  Only 5,000-year-old brothers Connor and Duncan can stop the
power-hungry madman.
Endgame's press notes also speak of `dizzying time shifts across the
eons,' and, boy, they aren't kidding.  In the film's first five minutes,
the setting switches from 1990 to 2000 to the 1500s.  Don't look down to
find your popcorn or, God forbid, leave to use the bathroom because
you'll be completely lost once you shift your attention back to the
film.
Endgame is the directorial debut of Douglas Aarniokoski, who cut his
teeth working as an assistant on the last three Robert Rodriguez films.
The screenplay was written by the sequel-happy Joel Soisson, who also
penned Maniac Cop 3, The Prophecy 3 and the upcoming Mimic 2.  It's
supposed to be the final film in the series, and to that, I can only
say, `Thank God.'
1:25 - R for violence and some strong sexuality

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c97ebb11df0b98398825694f005571d7?OpenDocument
He is Duncan MacLeod of the clan MacLeod.  He's been pimpin' it since he
was born in the village of Glennfillan in 15somethingsomething, and he
continues to pimp it in modern day.  He is immortal and he cannot die.
Well, I am typing this review up at about 4:20 in the morning, after
having endured the director's cuts of each previous Highlander, watched
a few more episodes of the series, and successfully ransacked my living
space to find my keys.  And, having done all of this, I offer to you
this critic's opinion of Highlander: Endgame.
There was a joke on Mad About You a while back that referred to what the
title of Die Hard 4 would be… Die Already.  Going into Highlander:
Endgame, anyone who has endured the three prior films and is still left
standing comes in with the same kind of attitude.  Have the gathering
already and be done with it… just don't have us hear either Duncan or
Connor MacLeod introduce themselves one more time… we're sick of hearing
it.
This time around, we get a spin off of both the series and the franchise
itself… which means we get to meet Connor, Duncan, Duncan's immortal
wife, that 5,000 year old Egyptian not played by Sean Connery (who was
great in the original Highlander) who sometimes guest stars on the show,
the watchers… just about everyone is here, and more heads are being lost
than in France circa 1780.
Viewed as a stand-alone film, Highlander: Endgame posses all of the
elements of a straight-to-video action movie.  Cheap special effects
that look cool, weak characters that still pull heartstrings, and a
bunch of actors no one really knows unless you have seen this or that
obscure flick.  And, taking that view, one wonders why the hell I even
had to watch Highlander: Endgame in theatres.
Regardless, due to the fact that I have some responsibility to inform
you and thus empower you to make the decision to not waste $8 to see
Endgame, I should tell you about the plot.  The watchers, who basically
work part-time to keep count of the battle between immortals (I suppose
it pays better than, say, the Army Reserve) run a place called The
Sanctuary, which a psychotic immortal (there's one in every Highlander)
called Kell (Bruce Payne) and his band of immortal cronies raid and
destroy… despite the fact that it is on Holy Ground and killing
immortals on Holy Ground is one of those Highlander no-nos.  Once again,
it is up to the Highlander(s) to stop the psycho, and this brings in a
kitschy Sean Connery/Christopher Lambert like relationship between
Connor (Lambert) and Duncan (Adrian Paul) and an even more kitschy
relationship between Faith (one of those aforementioned no-names) and
Duncan, who were once married until Duncan stabbed her in the stomach to
make sure they could be together forever. (Wasn't that the defense of
some murderer a ways back?)
The action sequences are decent, but the effects end up so god-awful
towards the end (such as a terrible face-morph from Duncan's face to
Connor's and back again) that all you can do is cringe.  In fact, the
only good thing you can get out of Highlander: Endgame is watching
obscure Kung Fu actor Donnie Yen kick some ass, and that only lasts
about 30 seconds.
What is really pitiful is that, when all is said and done, Highlander:
Endgame isn't really the end.  There are still more heads to chop off,
and at least two immortals remain on the face of the planet.  Which does
explain (and I say this was about as much rancor as a man anticipating a
root canal) why one of the four former titles -- Highlander: World
Without End -- was changed.
Director: Douglas Aarniokoski
Producer: Peter S. Davis, William Panzer
Writer: Joel Soisson
Starring: Christopher Lambert, Adrian Paul, Bruce Payne
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
