Title
Review for 23 (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Two computer hackers from Hanover, Germany, members of
the Computer Chaos Club get involved breaking into the computers of
major companies and of governments.  What starts as a game turns into
an international espionage incident.  The (basically) true story is
told here.  This is the story of the computer criminals that Clifford
Stoll caught as detailed in THE CUCKOO'S EGG.  Rating:  8 (0 to 10),
high +2 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Has-Christian Schmidt who co-wrote the screenplay.
   - The other side of Clifford Stoll's CUCKOO'S EGG.  In fact, the
     Nova dramatization would make a very good companion piece.  This
     is the story of the Hanover data bandits.
   - Begins with Karl Koch and his friend David's interest in the
     Illuminatus book by Robert Shea (unmentioned) and Robert Anton
     Wilson (who plays himself in a few short scenes).
   - Karl and David are 19 when taken with the hacker's ethic that
     information belongs to everyone.  They begin breaking into
     corporate and government computers.  A go-between suggests that
     the KGB will pay well for the right information.  From there life
     starts giving them big ups and bigger downs.
   - 23 is basically a morality tale of how the Hanover bandits ruined
     their lives.  With their fascination in conspiracies they actually
     bred conspiracies against themselves.
   - It is hard to keep up with the pace of the story telling.  The
     names are a little hard to follow.
   - It is hard to understand why the hacker's ethic would cause Karl
     and David to ally themselves with the KGB.
   - They use money from their hacking to buy cocaine and only make
     their lives worse.
   - They make obvious errors.  When the landlord no longer seems to
     care whether you are paying rent or not, get the heck out.
   - In tone similar to TRAINSPOTTING.  People trapped by shortsighted
     behavior.
   - The information that the Hanover bandits gave the Soviets was not
     the serious damage.  They stole much of the innocence of the
     Internet.  Imagine a village in which people feel secure and
     nobody locks their doors.  Two kids discover this and start petty
     thefts.  They may not steal much but soon everybody will realize
     they have to put locks on their doors.  Security becomes an
     industry.  That is what the Hanover bandits did to the world of
     computers.
