Title
Review for Dunston Checks In (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DUNSTON CHECKS IN is a kids movie that tells the story of an
animal various called in the movie either an ape or a monkey.  To be
precise an orangutan named Sam plays the part of Dunston.  He is the
best actor in the movie, but he has to suffer with a cliched script
(Bruce Graham and John Hopkins II) and a director (Ken Kwapis) who
seems lost.
     Dunston is an animal owned by an evil cat bugler who claims to be
a Lord Rutledge (Rupert Everett).  He checks into the Majestic Hotel
with the intention of stealing the jewels of the rich guests.
Actually, he just identifies the rooms, and Dunston has to do all of
his dirty work.  Just to show you how evil Rutledge is we are shown a
picture of Dunston's dead brother Samson whom Rutledge has killed for
not doing what he is told him.  This is one of several parts of the
movie that is mean spirited and inappropriate for its intended
audience, but, to be fair, most of the film is harmless.
     In a take off on Leona Helmsley we have the cruel owner Mrs.
Dubrow (Faye Dunaway).  She comes to her hotel and demands that the
first employee she meets be fired to show the employees how tough she
is.  The hotel's manager Robert Grant (Jason Alexander) doesn't
actually fire the employee, but makes Mrs. Dubrow think he did.  She
shares her business philosophy with the audience in such thoughts, "I
like psychotic people.  They get things done."  This continues our
children's education, via kids' movies, in how business owners are all
out to exploit their workers.
     At the beginning of the show, Grant's two sons Kyle (Eric Lloyd)
and Brian (Graham Sack) are up to mischief.  They shoot water that
knocks a fat woman into a fountain where she keeps slipping back in
when she tries to get out.  Most of the jokes in the movie are
slapstick, and few are funny.  I did like some of the wide camera
angles (Peter Lyons Collister) and the art deco sets (Rusty Smith) of
the hotel.  These provide a nice diversion from an otherwise dismal
film.
     Dunston is a lovable and quite serious ape with big eyes.  Seeing
him dressed in one crazy costume (Eugenie Krager) after another plus
his serious and soulful expressions are easily the best parts of the
show.  His miners outfit with his lantern on his head is my favorite.
Sad to say that besides having an owner that threatens to kill him, we
also get to see him smoke and learn that he is trying to give it up.
Why is this in a movie aimed primarily at the 4-10 set?
     Most of the movie has Lord Rutledge chasing Dunston all over the
hotel while the kids hide him and while Mrs. Dubrow gets angry.  Along
the way we get to meet two nice little old ladies only to see them pour
whiskey out of a hidden flask until they get drunk in the middle of the
day in the manager's office.  What is this scene doing in a kid's
movie?  We also get a scene of one boy urinating.  Why?
     The two boy actors in the show are cute but have no script with
which to work.  The others in the movie are all in the barely
acceptable category with the exception of Rupert Everett whose
theoretically funny version of an English aristocrat is so pathetic you
will find yourself looking at your shoes when he is on the screen.  He
asks questions like, "Where do you keep your champagne?  Near the
furnace?", and "From the look of my soup I'd say someone in your
kitchen has a serious hair loss problem."  These are actually some of
the better pieces of drivel the actors have to utter.
     In the sight gags, we have poor Dunston, who is naturally
compelling, being forced to do such silliness as drink perfume, put
women's underwear on his head, and drink water that is holding false
teeth.  None of these setups are original or funny.  In perhaps the
most out of place scene in the show, Dunston gives an erotic message to
a woman wrapped only in a towel.  She thinks he is someone else and
gets turned on by it.  Remember again, the age audience that is going
to see this film.
     Finally, we have Pee Wee Herman listed as Paul Reubens playing La
Farge.  He is an animal control expert who wears lavender suits and has
big shifty eyes.  A strange performance to say the least.
     DUNSTON CHECKS IN, wish I hadn't, runs 1:30.  Thanks to meandering
editing by Jon Poll, it feels much longer.  It is rated PG, but it
should be PG-13 for all of the above mentioned inappropriate scenes.
Most of these should have been cut out anyway in a movie certain to be
seen mainly by kids 4-10 no matter what the rating.  I do not recommend
this show to anyone.  To be fair, I should point out that my son
Jeffrey (age 6 3/4) liked it and gives it his usual thumbs up.  At
least there was nothing in it to scare him.  I give the movie * solely
for Dunston's potential and his great serious look.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 1/12/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:28
MPAA Classification: PG (Mild language, implied animal cruelty)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Jason Alexander, Faye Dunaway, Eric Lloyd, Rupert Everett, 
      Paul Reubens, Graham Sack, Sam
Director: Ken Kwapis
Producers: Todd Black and Joe Wizan
Screenplay: John Hopkins and Bruce Graham
Cinematography: Peter Collister
Music: Miles Goodman
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     Perhaps with eleven more orangutans, DUNSTON CHECKS IN might have 
come up to the quality level of TWELVE MONKEYS.  As it is, however, this 
movie is like a bad episode of FAWLTY TOWERS -- minus Basil Fawlty.  
Everything here will be familiar to fans of the '70s British comedy:  
boorish, insulting hotel guests; strange goings-on behind closed doors; 
the dominating wife of the hotel owner making life miserable for the 
employees; and a mysterious hotel inspector hanging around incognito.  
Yet without the antics of John Cleese to lend a manic edge to the 
proceedings, the humor level is way down.  
     There isn't much of a story.  The minimal plot exists exclusively 
to get the orangutan Dunston (played by "Sam") into as many odd, 
potentially-comic circumstances as possible.  Sometimes, these generate 
laughs (although not full-bellied ones); more often, they're greeted 
stone-faced by the audience.  I suspect younger viewers will find 
DUNSTON CHECKS IN a great deal funnier than older ones, but that's not 
surprising when you consider that the script seems to have been written 
with seven-year olds in mind.
     The Majestic Hotel, overseen by the pushy Mrs. Dubrow (Faye 
Dunaway), the owner's wife, is one of Manhattan's five-star venues.  
When word gets out that a hotel guide is about to create a "six-star" 
category, and that an inspector may soon be coming to the Majestic, the 
manager (Jason Alexander) has to be on the constant lookout.  But that's 
not all he has to worry about.  His youngest son, Kyle (Eric Lloyd), 
claims that there's a monkey loose in the hotel.  The animal controller 
(Paul Reubens) brought in to solve the problem turns out to be gun-
crazy.  Room 812 is burgled.  And one incredibly obnoxious guest (Rupert 
Everett) is doing his best to make life hell for everyone working at the 
Majestic.
     The best parts of this film are, by far, the ones that feature Sam, 
who easily outacts the human cast.  The orangutan is fun to watch in the 
way most screen animals are (remember Clyde in Clint Eastwood's EVERY 
WHICH WAY BUT LOOSE and ANY WHICH WAY YOU CAN?), but such limited 
amusement value doesn't justify a feature film.  If nothing else, 
however, director Ken Kwapis shows that he knows how to focus on the 
orangutan (although it is pretty obvious when animatronics are used).  
Actors Jason Alexander (from TV's SEINFELD) and Faye Dunaway appear to 
be going through the motions.  Paul Reubens (once known as Pee Wee 
Herman) and Rupert Everett have a scene or two worth a chuckle, but 
that's hardly a reasonable payoff for going so far over-the-top.  
     DUNSTON CHECKS IN is marginal entertainment (at best) for the 
under-12 crowd.  More mature viewers will find the lame plot and dumb 
jokes increasingly irritating as the film plods onward.  Considering 
this movie alongside FOUR ROOMS, it's looking like a bad time for the 
motion picture hotel business.   
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Ben Hoffman
        About the easiest way to make a comedy is to use a monkey
(in this case, an orangutan which is actually an ape)) as the film's
hero.  A monkey, by definition, is a comedic character.  Let him
run loose and you have a funny film.  Adults will laugh but the
kids will laugh even harder.  Money in the bank.
        Lord Rutledge (Rupert Everett) is a nogoodnik, a jewel thief
who owns and uses Dunston, the monkey, to do the dirty work of
stealing.  Dunston escapes his conniving master and checks into the
classy Majestic Hotel owned by Mrs. Dubrow (Faye Dunaway) and run by
the very efficient manager, Robert Grant (the Jason Alexander of the
Seinfeld show).  The comedy surrounding the antics and havoc as
Dunston goes ape (excuse the pun) is further enhanced by a youngster
Eric Lloyd,  and Paul Rubens as an animal control officer.
