Title
Review for Dumb & Dumber (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andrew Abramson
Starring: Jim Carrey and Jeff Daniels
     DUMB AND DUMBER was pretty good.  It wasn't as good as Jim
Carrey's first movie, ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE, but it was better
than his second, THE MASK.  Carrey plays Llyod Christmas, a really dumb
person who is poor, and goes across the country to return a suitcase to
a woman who he brought to the airport, but little does he know, the
suitcase was meant to be left there because it was full of money that
the woman put there to pay off someone who kidnapped her husband.
Daniels (Speed) plays Carrey's friend who goes across the country (to
aspen) with him.  They bring the suitcase, not opening it because Carrey
doesn't think that's polite.  By the time they reach Aspen, there poor
and out of money.  So Daniels is so fed up that he decides to open the
suitcase.  But Carrey jumps on top of him trying to stop him, but it
flies open and they see all the money.  So Carrey says "Let's just
borrow a little."  Well, they borrow just a tad bit more than they said.
They take the whole thing.  After that, there living large!!  An awesome
car, the richest hotel around, weird suits, about the best they can
get.  So they find the girl, but little does she know they have the
suitcase.  Until finally Carrey tells her and when she opens it, there's
no money.  Just little papers that say I.O.U. 1 thousand dollars, or
I.O.U. 20,000 thousand dollars.
     What keeps the money going, is the dumb things they do.  It's
about the dumbest humor you can get.  Toilet humor!!  If you thought
some of the thing's Carrey did in ACE VENTURA was stupid or sick, DUMB
AND DUMBER is *not* the movie for you.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1994, PG-13, 110 minutes [1 hour, 50 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jim Carrey (Lloyd Christmas), Jeff Daniels (Harry Dunn) Lauren
Holly (Mary Swanson), produced by Charles B. Wessler, Brad Krevoy, Steve
Stabler, written by Peter and Bobby Farrelly, Bennett Yellin, directed by
Peter Farrelly.
I've seen some pretty funny movies, but "Dumb And Dumber" is one of the
funniest I've seen in a long time. This is not your typical comedy, it's
almost like a live action cartoon, but it's funny because it's so off the
wall and it works. 
Jim Carrey and Jeff Daniels are perfectly cast as Lloyd Christmas and Harry
Dunn, a pair of bumbling idiots who struggle to survive and are oblivious to
the world around them. Lloyd is a limo driver who falls in love when he
drives the sassy Mary Swanson (Holly) to the airport, and notices that she
left a briefcase in the terminal. 
But since this is a commercial comedy there has to be a plotline of sorts,
which involves animal kidnappers to whom Mary was dropping off a ransom. Of
course Lloyd doesn't know this, and grabs the briefcase before the goons can
pick it up. One thing leads to another and eventually our heroes find
themselves being pursued across the country by two criminals, who they
constantly outwit and don't even know it.
The road trip has always been a staple storyline for comedies, which comes
into play here as the idiots travel from Providence, Rhode Island to Aspen,
Colorado. But the plot is really just a backdrop, the film is about these
crazy and hysterical jokes, such as Lloyd selling a dead parakeet to a blind
child, urinating in empty beer bottles (you can just guess where that joke is
going), and being so ridiculously stupid around normal people that it almost
becomes a sociological commentary.
It's difficult to convey the level of stupidity of this film. Usually
all-out idiocy like this doesn't work well, but these aren't recycled jokes,
they are unlike anything I've seen before. This film made me laugh right up
until the end.
Eventually the two make it to Aspen and open the briefcase, which contains a
cool million in cash, and you can just imagine what these guys will buy with
that much money. The balance between the plot and cause of jokes is handled
quite well because it doesn't try to take itself too seriously, and it
doesn't throw away the storylines that had been built up either.
"Dumb And Dumber" is not exactly the most intelligent comedy, but it isn't
bad at all. Just when we think these idiots couldn't be any stupider they
prove us wrong. Still, for all its idiocy I found myself laughing a lot, and
I don't usually find such lowbrow humor to be all that funny. I'll bet we're
all as stupid as Lloyd and Harry, we've just been conditioned by society not
to show it.
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jim Carrey, Jeff Daniels, Lauren Holly.
Screenplay:  Peter Farrelly, Bennett Yulin and Bobby Farrelly.
Director:  Peter Farrelly.
     1994 at the movies had many stories, but none may be as unlikely
as the emergence of Jim Carrey as one of the biggest box office draws
in the country.  The critically savaged ACE VENTURA:  PET DETECTIVE
made over $70 million, and THE MASK topped $100 million.  I enjoyed
both films on their own merits because they were made by directors who
had the good sense to get out of the way and let Carrey do what he does
best:  be a walking cartoon.  DUMB AND DUMBER is the kind of movie for
which "sophomoric" would be a compliment, but it could have worked with
Carrey's unique gifts at center stage.  Instead, it's just plain
stupid, and about as badly put together a movie as I saw all year.
     Carrey plays Lloyd Christmas, an idiotic limo driver who becomes
infatuated with a woman named Mary (Lauren Holly) he takes to the
airport one day.  When he sees Mary leave a briefcase at the terminal,
Lloyd decides that he must return it to her personally, even if it
means driving from Providence, Rhode Island to Aspen, Colorado to do
it.  He enlists the aid of best friend Harry Dunn (Jeff Daniels), a dog
groomer nearly as stupid as Lloyd, and together they head west in
Harry's customized sheepdog van.  What neither one knows is that the
briefcase contains a ransom drop, and that the kidnappers are tailing
them to get the money back.
     We've all seen comedies where every funny moment was already in
the previews, but DUMB AND DUMBER falls into an entirely new category.
Not only is the preview funnier than the movie, but it contains
different takes of the same scene than ended up in the final product,
and in every case the take that was used in the preview was funnier.
Among these are a scene where Carrey flips out an open jetway onto the
tarmac, and one where Carrey and Daniels try to recall Mary's last name
by checking the briefcase.  In another scene, where Carrey rear-ends
another car with his limo and ends up struggling with the air bag, the
shot is chopped short before the air bag is even fully inflated.  It
looks like director Peter Farrelly turned all his raw footage over to a
trailer production company, then promptly proved that he should have
given them the final cut on his movie.  Farrelly, quite simply put,
does not appear to have the slightest clue about comic timing.
     Jim Carrey knows plenty about comic timing, but he is really
adrift here, particularly in the first hour.  I have this feeling that
somewhere on a cutting room floor is a very funny performance, but it's
not on the screen in DUMB AND DUMBER.  There are a few moments when
Carrey gets to show off his talents, particularly an extended fantasy
sequence which includes an exaggerated kung fu battle in a restaurant,
but director Farrelly (working from a script co-written with brother
Bobby and Bennett Yellin) appears determined not to let DUMB AND DUMBER
become a Jim Carrey showcase.  He wants a buddy picture, and it doesn't
work because the buddy is played by Jeff Daniels.  And while Daniels is
a solid if unspectacular dramatic actor, he is way out of is element
here.  You've got to respect him for trying a part so far from his
image, but only for brief flashes is he a convincing moron.
     Once the twosome gets to Aspen, there are more laughs by far.  The
spectacle of Carrey and Daniels in gloriously hideous tuxedos, bright
orange and powder blue respectively, is enough to prompt a laugh, and a
hilariously gross scene finds Daniels suffering the effects of a
massive dose of laxative.  But for the majority of its running time,
DUMB AND DUMBER cranks out gags so predictable I was minutes ahead of
the punch lines.  To be fair, I don't think I'm in the target audience
for DUMB AND DUMBER; the fifty or so middle-schoolers at my showing
laughed loud and often.  At that age, a cop drinking a beer bottle full
of urine is about as hilarious as it gets.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Jim Carrey, Jeff Daniels, Lauren Holly, Karen Duffy, 
          Mike Starr, Charles Rocket 
Director: Peter Farrelly 
Producers: Charles B. Wessler, Brad Krevoy, and Steve Stabler 
Screenplay: Peter Farrelly & Bennett Yellin & Bobby Farrelly 
Cinematography: Mark Irwin 
Music: Todd Rundgren 
Released by New Line Cinema 
     Sometimes, a movie just can't live up to its advertising campaign
(or its name, for that matter).  DUMB AND DUMBER is one such case.
Take the newspaper ad, for example, filled with all those fake, witty
quotes.  That's rather clever (although not original).  Unfortunately,
the same kind of humorists weren't involved in writing the script.
"Dumb" actually overestimates the film's intelligence.
     At its best, DUMB AND DUMBER is like an Ernest movie with a
scatological bent.  Of course, there's as much a place in motion
pictures for lowbrow humor as there is for philosophical morality
tales, but that assumes the jokes actually work.  While I won't claim
to have gone through this entire film without laughing, there are some
long periods between chuckles.  It's frequently like that with
flatulence humor--you find it amusing the first time you're exposed
to it (at the age of maybe five or six), but it quickly gets tiresome.
     The thin plot thread upon which DUMB AND DUMBER hangs (not that
anyone is seeing this picture for its storyline) has limo driver Lloyd
Christmas (Jim Carrey) retrieving a briefcase left behind in an airport
by a beautiful client (Lauren Holly).  Along with his best friend and
roommate Harry Dunne (Jeff Daniels), Lloyd starts the long drive west
from Providence to Aspen to find his dream woman and return the locked
briefcase, which just happens to be filled with money.  The
cross-country trek isn't easy, however.  Not only are the intrepid duo
lumbered with IQs barely into the double-digits (they make Forrest Gump
look like a genius), but they're being pursued by a pair of crooks
(Mike Starr and Karen Duffy) who want the money.  Fortunately for Lloyd
and Harry, the bad guys aren't exactly Valedictorian material, either.
     While I found Jim Carrey tolerable (and, at times, even likable)
in THE MASK, here he's back to his ACE VENTURA worst.  If you
appreciate Carrey, his first movie, or anything featuring Jim Varney's
cinematic alter-ego, DUMB AND DUMBER is likely your sort of
experience.  Everyone else will either be offended, bored, or both.
     And has Jeff Daniels' career really come to this?  With GETTYSBURG
and SPEED, things had been looking up.
     For a movie that, with some reworking, could have come close to an
extended MONTY PYTHON-type skit (and there is a bit about a dead
parakeet), DUMB AND DUMBER ends up aiming a whole lot lower.  This is
more BENNY HILL territory.  Then again, that's probably being unkind to
the late British gentleman, since he did that kind of humor long before
this tiresome screenplay came along.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily
those of Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 
