Title
Review for Silent Night, Deadly Night (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This one caused a huge controversy when it was first 
released, but not for the right reason. While everyone was worked 
up over the fact that SILENT NIGHT, DEADLY NIGHT depicted a 
man in a Santa suit killing off horny teenagers, they should have 
been boycotting it because it's the worst slasher movie ever made.
        From the very first moment, the mysteries of the movie 
are 100% predictable. First we see a family driving along on 
Christmas Eve, talking about how Santa punishes naughty children, 
and we know the traumatized little kid in the back seat will become 
a psychotic killer who kills the "naughty" people (such as anyone 
who was associated with this movie).
        That plot development is further cemented when the family 
goes to visit catatonic grandpa and the parents leave the kid alone 
with him. It's obvious the old guy will suddenly start talking to the 
kid, filling his mind with more nonsense. And then, as a catalyst, we 
are shown a scene with a man in a Santa Claus suit pumping three 
bullets into a convenience store clerk. In the next scene, the family 
stops to pick up a stranded motorist in a Santa suit -- coincidentally, 
the same guy. Even more coincidentally, and for no reason, he kills 
the kid's parents, ripping mom's shirt open for the first cheap 
two-second breast shot.
        So this kid starts off with a Santa psychosis, which is 
continued in the next few scenes, as he and his baby brother are 
sent off to a Catholic orphanage, one of those orphanages where 
the nuns beat kids who engage in "naughty" sexual activities and 
are tied up if they leave their beds at night. Now the kid equates sex 
with naughtiness, naughtiness with punishment and punishment 
with murder. Flash forward to the present, where the kid, now 
eighteen years old, is given a job in a toy store. And that Christmas, 
after he starts shaking from seeing the giant Santa poster, the owner 
asks him to dress up as Santa Claus. And the filmmakers don't 
expect us to see any of this coming!
        After scaring every kid who sits on his lap, he notices 
two co-workers slipping into the back room for a quickie. That's 
when the fun begins and Santa first strangles the man with a strand 
of Christmas lights (which stay lit throughout the murder) and then 
hacks up the woman (after a cheap two-second breast shot, of 
course). The owner comes back to see what the commotion is about 
and gets killed himself. Then the last remaining woman gets shot 
with an arrow. Not only are we supposed to know any of the movie's 
plot twists beforehand but now we're also not supposed to wonder 
why there's a real bow-and-arrow set in a toy store instead of a cheap 
Nerf imitation.
        Just when you don't think it's possible, SILENT NIGHT, 
DEADLY NIGHT degenerates even further, as the killer Claus 
interrupts two people making love on a pool table ("Two ball in 
the corner pocket"), killing the girl by impaling her on a set of deer 
antlers (no kidding) and after the boy calls out to his girlfriend, 
"What are you doing up there?" (She was too dead to reply "Just 
hanging around.") Santa gets him too. But he spares the little girl 
because, when he asks her if she's been naughty, she replies that 
she hasn't. If some psycho with a hatchet asked me if I deserved 
punishment, I'd most likely respond in the negative as well, but 
that's just me.
        A few victims later, Santa returns to the orphanage for 
vengeance and the stage is neatly set for a sequel. Actually, there 
were four sequels to SILENT NIGHT, DEADLY NIGHT, none of 
which could possibly top the original for sheer awfulness. There's 
even a scene here where the killer walks by a snowman and 
decapitates it, something I actually jokingly suggested would 
happen beforehand. Like I said, you see everything coming in this 
movie, then they show you everything that's already happened in 
flashback scenes just so you won't forget why the guy in the Santa 
suit is killing all those people. This movie assumes its audience has 
a double-digit I.Q. -- which is probably the only demographic that 
would enjoy it.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
