Title
Review for Luzhin Defence, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  LUZHIN DEFENCE, THE (director: Marleen Gorris; screenwriters: Peter
Berry/based on the novel by Vladimir Nabokov; cinematographer: Bernard Lutic;
editor: Michael Reichwein; cast: John Turturro (Luzhin), Emily Watson (Natalia),
Geraldine James (mother of Natalia, Vera), Stuart Wilson (teacher, Valentinov),
Christopher Thompson (Jean De Stassard), Fabio Sartor (Turati), Mark Tandy
(Luzhin's father), Kelly Hunter (Luzhin's mother), Alexander Hunting (young
Luzhin), Orla Brady (Luzhin's aunt); Runtime: 108; Sony Pictures
Classics/Renaissance; 2000-U. K./ France) 
The Luzhin Defence was a dull, middle-brow film about an eccentric Russian-born
Grand Master chess champion approaching his biggest match ever and making things
more complicated by falling in love for the first time. It is a pretentious arty
film set in 1929, which failed to be credible or involving. The story was
emotionally flat and the contrived ending was ludicrous (this was not the same
ending in the novel). It is hard to find what Dutch feminist filmmaker Marleen
Gorris' (A Question of Silence/Antonia's Line/Mrs. Dalloway) tried to say in
this Merchant-Ivory styled literary film. It was a drawn out glossy affair
stuffed with empty gestures to the arts, and I could never figure out what John
Turturro was trying to do with his role as the chess genius, who is both a
social misfit and someone who is mentally unstable, except to ham it up by
acting over-the-edge. He plays Alexander Luzhin, the child prodigy, who comes to
a lush Northern Italian villa in Lake Como to compete for the World Chess
Championship against arch rival Turati (Sartor). There just never seemed to be
any point or excitement to this film, as adapted by screenwriter Peter Berry
from Vladimir Nabokov's ironic novel. This film is devoid of Nabkov's wit and
irony, it reminded me only of a film that was concerned with showing a pretty
face, some pretty scenery to look at, and eschewing any controversy. The film
was devoid of any Fascist's presence, even though Mussolini had come to power in
the early part of the 1920s, so even the period film's background history is
distorted. 
Luzhin has been addicted to chess since 10, and it is the only thing he likes
and can do well. He has immersed himself totally in chess, supposedly at risk to
his health. In continual flashbacks we see what his despondent childhood was
like, as he is raised in a socially upstart bourgeois household in Russia by
overbearing parents who sent him to the best boarding school possible and
expected him to climb the social ladder to success. It is disappointing to them
that after going through a lot of trouble to get him accepted there, that he's
asked to leave because of poor schoolwork. When his father (Tandy) realizes he's
good at chess he gets him out of his hair by turning him over to a slimy chess
teacher, Valentinov (Wilson), who exploits him for as much winnings as he can
and when Luzhin loses an important match he thinks the kid is not of a champion
caliber, so he dumps him unceremoniously in a city that's strange to Luzhin.
Luzhin is childlike and can't function in society, but to the chagrin of the
villainous Valentinov he is now competing for the world chess title. It has been
10 years since the two were together and when Luzhin sees him at the match,
there's no feeling of love or anger. Luzhin is obviously a person not possessing
all his marbles, therefore whatever happens to him seems misplaced in
importance. These flashbacks were an attempt at making crass amateur
psychological explanations for Luzhin's emotional unstability due to his
wretched upbringing. 
Valentinov is such a vindicative person that he comes to the chess tournament
only to curry favor with Turati to make sure Luzhin loses the match, as he hates
Luzhin so much that he wants him to lose so badly that he will do anything to
sabotage him. He tells Turati all Luzhin's weaknesses while he pressures,
distracts, and even has his chauffeur take Luzhin for a ride to leave him
stranded in the countryside, so he can miss a match. These scenes are
conventional and added little meaning to Luzhin's personal dilemma. 
Vacationing in the fancy resort is the regal Russian émigré Natalia (Emily
Watson), a quiet beauty who falls for the seedy looking and socially awkward
chess genius. She tells her snobbish and Jew-hating mother (Geraldine James),
who states the Jews invented radio to control the media, that she has just met
the most "fascinating, enigmatic, and attractive man" - much to the displeasure
of her mother. Her reaction is to break up this unlikely and embarrassing
romance as quickly as she could, as she wires her husband in Berlin to come down
here and help her in this endeavor. Mother is shocked that she chooses someone
as socially unacceptable as this one, over the more socially desirous fellow she
had in mind for a suitor. 
The maternal romance that develops between the overly dependent Luzhin and the
wealthy debutante who likes a simple man, seemed stuck in a vacuous
sentimentality. Everything about Luzhin seems heavy-handed and done only for
effect and not to develop his character. The comedy and romance attempted had
the feel of a Charlie Chaplin venture done with Charlie being played by someone
who couldn't stop doing pratfalls. His nervous breakdown and eventual suicide
before the big game, seemed not to come about from his own inward treachery but
from the treachery of others. Whatever happens to him seemed overwrought and
artificial. His over-acting and the way the film tried to make this unfeeling
love affair into a real one, had a disingenous feel to it. This film felt heavy
at all times, like it was load of manure being dumped on a story that deserved a
better fate than this film was able to give it. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Nine thousand, two hundred and sixty-three days, four hours and five 
minutes," that's precisely how long it has been since Alexander Luzhin 
(John Turturro) started playing chess, and he's the kind of guy who 
doesn't lose count.  Alexander, played with pensive intensity by John 
Turturro, is a compelling and endearing character who's rather like an 
idiot savant.  A chess champion, Alexander is at a fancy hotel where he 
is busy defending his title against an Italian Grand Master, Jean de 
Stassard (Christopher Thompson).  Alexander's former teacher and 
manager, Valentinov (Stuart Wilson), is there to cast an evil eye on 
Alexander in the hope of pressuring him into failure.
Marleen Gorris's THE LUZHIN DEFENCE, based on the novel by Vladimir 
Nabokov (LOLITA), uses chess not only as the sole focus of Alexander's 
life but also as a universal metaphor.  We learn, for example, that the 
king is the center of attention but has limited powers, whereas the 
queen is more cunning and agile.
Also staying at the hotel is Natalia Katkov (Emily Watson) and her 
mother (Geraldine James).  Two-time Academy Award nominee Watson 
(BREAKING THE WAVES and HILARY AND JACKIE), whose talent is so large and 
impressive that she quietly dominates most movies she appears in, 
manages to be no less accomplished this time, but her performance is 
eclipsed by an even better one by Turturro.
Thanks to strange but instant chemistry, Alexander and Natalia fall in 
love.  In order to convince Natalia's mother that he would make a proper 
son-in-law, Alexander has to engage in what is the most difficult thing 
of all for him -- small talk.  After a long pause, he tells her mother, 
"Your daughter likes -- uh -- cooling beverages."  With his bad suits, 
unkempt hair and constant need for a shave, Alexander sticks out like a 
sore thumb at the expensive resort.  No amount of awkward small talk can 
convince the mother that he is anything other than the last man on earth 
whom she would want her daughter to marry.  
The exquisite story, which is filmed in a Merchant-and-Ivory kind of 
period lushness, lays the proper groundwork for Alexander's many demons 
with several key flashbacks to his childhood.  We learn that he is the 
product of an uncaring mother and a philandering father and that he is 
basically addicted to the game of chess.  And, like a drug, chess is 
consuming his life.  You will be consumed watching the movie.  After 
several twists, only some of which are easy to guess, the story ends 
quite surprisingly and quite satisfactorily, although not in any 
conventional sense.  One shudders to think how a big studio version of 
this story would conclude.
THE LUZHIN DEFENCE runs 1:48.  It is rated PG-13 for some sensuality and 
thematic elements.  Although it would be acceptable for most kids, it 
has little to offer those under 13.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The Big Game - it's a cliché that's used in just about every sports flick.
The best films about competition are usually about something else besides
the contest, especially when they involve sports that aren't exciting enough
to build an entire story around.  That's the case with The Luzhin Defence, a
film that, at least superficially, is about a big chess competition in 1929,
but beneath the surface it tells the tale of a reclusive man coming out of
his shell.
The man is Alexander Luzhin (John Turturro, O Brother, Where Art Thou?) and
The Big Game is the World Chess Championships, which are being held at a
ritzy hotel in Italy's Lake Como.  Luzhin is an introverted Grand Master of
the game who dresses sloppily and shuns contact with other humans (kind of
sounds like a film critic, huh?).  He also suffers from what we can assume
is some form of obsessive-compulsive disorder and comes off a bit like the
Rain Man of chess, carefully planning out strategies every waking moment of
his day.
Enter Natalia (Emily Watson, Trixie), a young woman who just happens to be
staying at the same resort that is playing host to the chess tournament.
Natalia's mom (Geraldine James) is anxious to marry her daughter off and has
already lined up a wonderful suitor in Comte de Stassard (Christopher
Thompson).  But wouldn't you know it - Natalia ends up falling in love with
Luzhin.  The two meet cute when she retrieves an item that has dropped
through a hole in the pocket of his tattered clothes.  He proposes, almost
instantly, and she accepts, asking, "Would it not be appropriate to know my
name first?"  So you know her mom has got to be thrilled.
As the film progresses, we learn more and more about Luzhin, like that he
was a child prodigy who was managed by a man who now coaches his most
capable competitor.  We see clunky flashbacks to his mop-topped youth - his
parents fought and he was afraid of school, so little Luzhin poured all of
his energy into the piano and, before you know it, he's playing Rach III on
stage in front of...wait.  Wrong movie.  I meant chess. He pours his energy
into chess.  Seriously, though, Luzhin is more than a little similar to
Shine.  They share the same narrative structure, and there's even a tub
scene (Luzhin doesn't poop in the water, though).  Like David Helfgott,
Luzhin doesn't so much fall in love with Natalia as latch on to her.
Turturro does well, making a potentially unlikable character pretty
sympathetic to the viewer.  Like Enemy at the Gates, Luzhin is another film
where all of the Russian characters speak with English accents.  In addition
to Turturro's standout performance, Luzhin also features a lovely score
(Alexandre Desplat) and pretty cinematography (Bernard Lutic, I Dreamed of
Africa).
Luzhin was directed by Marleen Gorris (Mrs. Dalloway) and adapted from
Vladimir Nabokov's novel by Peter Berry.  Nabakov based Luzhin's character
on real-life chess Grand Master Curt von Bardeleben, who checked out in a
manner similar to Luzhin.  You know with a Nabokov story you're going to get
obsession that turns into tragedy, and Luzhin doesn't do anything to make
you think otherwise.  It's a simple, predictable story, and its chess scenes
aren't nearly as dazzling as Searching for Bobby Fischer, but Luzhin is
still moderately entertaining.
1:46 - PG-13 for some sensuality and thematic elements

Author
SSG Syndicate
X-Questions-to: graham@jetcity.com
X-Submissions-to: graham@ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #28300
Keywords: author=granger
Subject: Review: The Luzhin Defense (2001)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
Organization: None
Author: Ssg722@aol.com (SSG Syndicate)
Susan Granger's review of "THE LUZHIN DEFENSE" (Sony Pictures Classics)
  It's all about chess and madness, set in 1929 in the Lake
Como region of Northern Italy, where the World Chess Championship is
underway. The now-grown Russian prodigy Alexander Luzhin (John
Turturro) is the favorite, and his mind is totally focused on winning
- until he encounters a lovely Russian Emigre, Natalia Katkov (Emily
Watson), whose mother is determined to marry her off to the French
nobleman Jean de Stassard (Christopher Thompson), a chess enthusiast
who's come to watch the tournament. Socially inexperienced and inept,
Luzhin proposes marriage and, surprisingly, she accepts. But there's
opposition in the form of Luzhin's former manager, Valentinov (Stuart
Wilson), who is determined to see him lose. The suspense intensifies
as the contest comes down to Luzhin and Turati (Fabio Sartor), the
Italian Grand Master. Under intense mental pressure and becoming
increasingly unstable, the obsessed Luzhin devises a brilliant set of
moves, which come to be known as the Luzhin Defense. Checkmate!
    From the nicotine stains on his fingertips to his
disheveled clothes and clipped, mono-syllabic speech, John Turturro is
a superb actor but he goes overboard in demented eccentricity,
muttering to himself and spinning circles in the rain, while Emily
Watson exudes the required propriety and nurturing instincts. Based on
"The Defense" by Vladimir Nabokov, adapted by Peter Berry and directed
with a heavy-hand by Marleen Gorris ("Antonia's Line,"
"Mrs. Dalloway"), it's as slow and ponderous as the game it depicts,
soon the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Luzhin Defense" is a
sedate, simplistic, even dispiriting 5.  If you're intrigued by chess,
I recommend renting "Searching for Bobby Fischer" (1993), a far
superior film.
