Title
Review for Sliding Doors (1998)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Gwyneth Paltrow continues to flaunt her knack for a British accent in this
dual role, under the wings of first time writer/director Peter Howitt, and
an original premise that is likely to have you pondering your future every
time you just happen to miss a bus, train or subway ride.
PLOT:
A woman gets fired from her job and runs off to take the London underground.
At this point, the movie separates into two parallel stories. The first
story shows us the life of said woman were she to have caught the subway,
i.e. she gets home in time to catch her boyfriend shagging another woman.
The second story shows us the consequences, were she to have missed the
subway, i.e. she doesn't catch her boyfriend cheating. The film juggles both
stories over time, and clearly nods its head to fate.
CRITIQUE:
Unique concept and plot execution, this movie offers many good points,
including solid acting, a painfully effective poppy soundtrack, humor,
romance, and many insights into the minds of women and the men who cheat on
them. With a touch of anti-maleness, this film is extremely fine is
presenting the male of the species in all of his immorality, and touching
upon many of the clues that women should look for, were they to suspect
their loved one of mowing another's lawn. Mrs. JoBlo actually felt the need
to stop this film on more than one occasion, in order to carefully dissect
yours truly in respect to feelings felt in relation to some of the slimier
actions perpetrated by the aforementioned men. I passed :). And that's the
kind of thing that makes this movie so different from all your other
romantic ditties. This one will have you thinking about the consequences of
many of the smaller events in your life, the role that fate has to play in
your daily rumblings, and your comparative thoughts versus some of the
actions of the players in this film.
Paltrow is charming in her double role, and finally seems to have passed
over her "pouting for emotion" acting stage. But over and above her, the
scene stealer in this pleasant flick has to be the man who swept many away
as the gay character in another wonderful British romance, called FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL (8/10), John Hannah. He's enchanting in all of his
scenes, and manages to lure you into his character and persona, despite his
obvious lack of physical beauty. His gig alone is reason to check this piece
out. The other guy on the other hand, John Lynch, is so-so in his part, and
makes you wonder why a beauty like Gwyneth would ever even look twice at
him. Jeanne Tripplehorn's character is also laughably one-dimensional, and
seems to be there solely as a necessary evil in the plot. Having said that,
the script is admirably crafted and fun to discover, with a surprise ending,
which ultimately, may not be that much of surprise after all. I did lose a
little track of some past events from one story to the other later on this
film, but all in all, this film managed to win me over with its unique
story-telling, wonderful and charming acting, and entertaining plot points.
Warm up those nachos and get in those PJ's, cause you and your lover are
about to have a fun time!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Word on the street is that Gwyneth Paltrow apparently turned down the Kate
Winslet role in a little flick called TITANIC (7/10), to star in this
British tale.
Writer/Director Peter Howitt also plays the role of the "cheeky man" in this
film. It took him two and a half years to complete the script of this movie.
And not unlike the Gerry character in this film, he also went through some
periods of writer's block, and frustrations, "Certainly there were times
when the laptop would go across the room," he said. "I broke one laptop in
Ipswitch, near Suffolk, in a hotel room. It was really dumb, but I couldn't
get it to work so I threw it against the wall."
Before John Hannah decided on a career as an actor, he was an apprentice
electrician for four years. He gave this up after being accepted by a drama
school in Glasgow.
Actor John Lynch also directed a film in 1998 called NIGHT TRAIN, starring
John Hurt and Brenda Blethyn.
Actress Jeanne Tripplehorn studied drama at Juilliard School of Drama at
Lincoln Center in New York. She was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

Author
Scott Renshaw
SLIDING DOORS
(Miramax/Paramount)
Starring:  Gwyneth Paltrow, John Lynch, John Hannah, Jeanne Tripplehorn.
Screenplay:  Peter Howitt.
Producers:  Sydney Pollack, Philippa Braithwaite and William Horberg.
Director:  Peter Howitt.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A woman, just fired from her job as a London public relations
executive, rushes dejectedly towards the Underground, eager to return to
the comfort of home.  A young girl steps into her path for a moment,
impeding the woman's progress just long enough so that she misses the last
train before a long, system-wide delay.  Or does she?  What if the girl
doesn't get in the woman's way, permitting her to make that last train?
How much does that one, seemingly inconsequential variable change the
woman's life?
     SLIDING DOORS is a gimmick film, the gimmick being that it allows us
to watch both alternate courses determined by that one moment.  When Helen
Quilley (Gwyneth Paltrow) makes the train, she meets a charming fellow
named James (John Hannah), and also gets home in time to catch her
layabout live-in boyfriend Gerry (John Lynch) in the middle of a little
afternoon delight with his ex-girlfriend Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn).  When
she misses the train, she and Gerry continue together, taking Helen down a
radically different career path.
     SLIDING DOORS works on enough different levels that I wonder whether
it succeeds because of its gimmick or in spite of it.  As a
straightforward relationship comedy, it's generally delightful, crafted by
writer/director Peter Howitt with unusually sharp comic dialogue.  The
principal characters are uniformly well-drawn, from the unsteady
confidence of Paltrow's Helen, to the genial wit of Hannah's James, to the
confused and almost sympathetic philandering of Lynch's Gerry.  Even a
minor supporting performance from Douglas McFerran as James' no-nonsense
best friend shines with energy and humor.  Howitt explores familiar modern
romance territory, but does it with enough intelligence and commitment to
the characters that it feels fresh.
     Of course, he's also playing an extended game of "what if", one which
sometimes intrudes on the perfectly enjoyable conventional narrative.
Though rookie director Howitt handles the interplay between the
story-lines with surprising deftness, the shifts from one plot to the
other often deny both plots momentum.  Nowhere is this more evident than
during a pair of climactic confrontations, where Howitt cuts back and
forth to the point of distraction.  He may be intending to build tension,
but instead he builds frustration, using neck-stapping editing to show the
pivotal moments occurring simultaneously while sacrificing dramatic
urgency.  A version of SLIDING DOORS which offered a simple,
smartly-written romantic triangle might have been just as winning without
all the fuss.
     It's also true that something would have been lost.  Though at first
glance SLIDING DOORS seems to flirt with the celebration of fate and
destiny so popular in recent love stories, Howitt offers something a bit
more thought-provoking than that.  By allowing us to get to know the
characters -- and Helen in particular -- as well as he does, he gives us
much more reason to believe that destiny is simply the tendency of people
to act according to their character.  Helen's determination, pride and
sense of self-worth are what make it likely that any course of her life
will have a happy ending, not the capricious opening or closing of a pair
of sliding doors on a train.  The film may be a bit of speculative
gimmickry, but it's also something more -- and less -- than that.  In some
alternate reality, Peter Howitt may have made SLIDING DOORS a romantic
comedy without a gimmick.  Like Helen's life, it's hard to know for sure
which version would have been more engaging and appealing.

Author
Seth Bookey
  Seen on 25 April 1998 with Andrea at the SONY Lincoln Square for $10
  (including teleticket fee).
   *Sliding Doors* takes a look at what would happen if you missed your
   train by a few seconds. Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) goes to work one
   morning, only to find out she's been sacked and then goes to take the
   District Line tube home. (By now you must've figured the film is set
   in London). After missing her train, the camera backs up to the moment
   a young girl got in the way and takes her out of the way, so Helen can
   get on the train. Henceforth, the movie skillfully alternates between
   the tale of Helen coming home to find her boyfriend Gerry (John Lynch)
   in bed with his old girlfriend Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn), and the
   tale of her just having missed that scene.
   So, the stories ensue in similar paths. The outraged Helen
   moves out, dyes her hair blonde (this helps distinguish the two
   storylines), and gets involved with James (John Hannah of *Four
   Weddings and a Funeral*) as she starts her own PR company, and deals
   with Gerry wanting her back.
   In the other storyline, the cuckolded Helen struggles along waiting
   tables and working two jobs while Gerry "writes his novel" and
   continues to cheat on Helen with Lydia, who is pressing for him to
   make a break with Helen.
   A lot of women I know just hate Gwyneth Palthrow (she's "too
   beautiful" or something), but Sliding Doors might change their minds.
   She gives an engaging, fresh performance to both "realities" shown in
   the film. John Hannah (who has a delightful Scottish accent) is
   equally wonderful as James. The supporting roles of Anna (played by
   another Scot, Zara Turner) and Russell (Douglas McFerran) as Helen and
   Gerry's best friends (respectively) also do a wonderful job. McFerran
   is particularly good in his role as Gerry's amused but unsympathetic
   confessor.
   Lynch and Tripplehorn, especially the latter, are a bit over the top
   as the panicky cheat and the bitchy American lover. But they are not
   so over the top that it destroys the romantic comedy mood created by
   first-time director and writer Peter Howitt. It was very surprising to
   discover that he had never directed before. Some of the night scenes
   on the Thames with the lights of a suspension bridge on the Thames are
   among the best ever seen in a romantic comedy.
   *Sliding Doors* features many funny moments as well as touching,
   romantic ones. One of my favorite lines came from Tripplehorn, who
   tells Gerry, "We know what we want, but we don't tell you what we
   want, but we reserve the right to get angry when you don't know.
   That's what makes us so fascinating, and so scary!" In another, as
   Russell laughs at Gerry's plight, he tells him, "If it weren't for you
   I don't know how I'd make it a whole week before the next Seinfeld."
   As ever, I recommend you see it on the big screen, especially for the
   full effect of the night scenes on the Thames.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   One of the things you learn in this richly textured romance
is that size may not be important, but hair is.  When Helen
(Gwyneth Paltrow) cuts her hair to take on a new look after
breaking up with her boyfriend, she loses a principal source of
her charm.  When she allows her abundant locks to fall
straight down her back, she is drop-dead gorgeous.  Couple
the mane with the Queen's English accent which she
successfully adopts and you have a woman who rivets the
attention of the males in her audience just by showing up.  In
fact, given her appeal, the most unbelievable aspect of
"Sliding Doors" is that not only does her boy friend
stray and alienate her affection for him: when he gets the
chance to make up, he botches his good fortune yet again.
   The movie, a joint venture of Miramax Films and Paramount
Pictures, is a rich and imaginative fable which uses the sliding
doors of a tube in London's underground as a metaphor for
opportunities lost and gained.  Directed smartly by Peter
Hate from his own screenplay and edited crisply by John
Smith, "Sliding Doors" is a heartfelt romance of the "what if"
genre, which considers the importance of a single split second
in the life of a publicist for a high-class London firm who
misses a train home by a hair.  The mischance will probably
leave all viewers in the audience thinking about how their own
lives would have been very different if they had not happened
upon a single occurrence which altered their destinies. 
Though the doors close on her just before she can enter, she
retraces her steps in her own imagination, backtracking up the
stairs and then dashing a bit more quickly this time.  She
wriggles through and arrives just in time to catch her
lover, Gerry (John Lynch) in a position with Lydia (Jeanne
Tripplehorn) which is so compromising that Gerry does not
even try to say, "It's not the way it looks."
   A conventional picture could easily extract a couple of
hours of adventure from this flight of fancy, framing the action
by having the dreamer wake up just as things reach a high
point.  Howitt, however, has something else in mind.  Splitting
Helen into two people, one being the realistic person who
misses the train and goes about her life as it really unfolds,
the other the fanciful Helen who immerses herself in a far
more strained enterprise.  Now you see the long-haired Helen
returning to her boy friend only vaguely speculating that
something's amiss (she spots two brandy glasses in a pile of
laundry); now you see the short-haired, fanciful Helen who
catches Gerry in flagrante delicto.
    Obviously the woman of the vision has the more
interesting adventure.  Having walked out on Gerry, she runs
through an affair of the heart with a witty man, James (John
Hannah), whom she has met on the tube.  Finding herself on
the rebound, she keeps the new relationship on the slow track
while staying at the home of her best friend, Anna (Zana
Turner), who advises her and enjoys a vicarious thrill from
listening to her accounts, a narrative that gathers momentum
when Gerry returns to compete with James for Helen's
affection.
   "Sliding Doors" is what some would call a date movie, a
frothy confection whose two Helens avoid confusing the
audience since we know that the short-haired romantic is the
one who has been dumped and who is now leading a far
more interesting life both professionally and romantically.  The
dialogue is smooth, reminding one of the give and take of
Edward Burns's "The Brothers McMullen," and featuring a
surprisingly acerbic role by Jeanne Tripplehorn as Lydia,
Gerry's other girl friend, a manipulative and mean woman who
will stop at little short of murder to divert her man's attentions
from the far more desirable Helen.  The movie displays a
Gwyneth Paltrow who still conveys the culture of a highly
educated and classy woman but who can safely play
contemporary characters as well as she can interpret
Jeffersonian contemporaries.  Though the concluding scenes--
which draw the two halves of Helen together--seem contrived,
the story as a whole is resourceful, amusing, and a delight to
watch.  Rated R.  Running Time: 108 minutes.  (C) 1998
Harvey Karten

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow, John Lynch, John Hannah, Jeanne Tripplehorn,
Douglas McFerran, Zara Turner
Director: Peter Howitt
Producers: Phillipa Braithwaite, Sydney Pollack, William Hocberg
Screenplay: Peter Howitt
SLIDING DOORS, was a promising movie. It carried a high concept idea,
one that could have been quite poignant if done well. The question posed
is - would you life be markedly different, if just say you missed the
train? The movie explores these two different possibilities in the life
of a young woman Helen, played by the lovely Gwyneth Paltrow.
I'll tell you straight out why I didn't like the movie, and it is only
for one reason. It wasn't the plot, it certainly wasn't Gwyneth, it was
the fact that her two love interests are two of the biggest dorks this
side of London. Gerry (John Lynch), an aspiring writer is nothing more
that a conniving, weasly, greasy looking, two timer. He basically plays
Gwyneth's character for a fool, whilst having a hula of a time with the
bitchy Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn). As for James (John Hannah), he's
married (but seperated), talks way, way too much, has a highly obnoxious
laugh and sings Father Abraham songs with his fellow boatsmen.
Throughout the entire movie, I kept asking myself this recurrent
question. What in the world is a woman as intelligent as Helen (Gwyneth
Paltrow), doing with these two boring men ????? I couldn't figure it
out. If only they carried presence, dignity, personality or
intelligence, it could have been so much more interesting.
Unfortunately, I'll have to put this movie to rest and only dream of
what could have been.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow, John Lynch, John Hannah, Jeanne Tripplehorn, 
      Douglas McFerran, Zara Turner
Director: Peter Howitt
Producers: Phillipa Braithwaite, Sydney Pollack, William Hocberg
Screenplay: Peter Howitt
Cinematography: Remi Adefarasin 
Music: David Hirschfelder
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Look back at all the times in your life when there was a fork in 
the path to the future.  Some sort of decision had to be made, and, for 
better or worse, it irrevocably altered the course of your existence.  
>From time-to-time, everyone thinks about the roads not taken, and how 
things might have turned out if the choice had been different.  Perhaps 
even more dizzying to contemplate is how a seemingly minor action -- 
catching the 10 am train, for example -- could have an equally profound, 
yet less obvious, impact.  Maybe that's where you met your significant 
other, and, had you reached the platform just a few seconds later
     Film makers are no less fascinated by issues of destiny than anyone 
else, and that's why there's no shortage of movies about this subject.  
The best of the bunch were probably made by the late Polish director 
Krzysztof Kieslowski, who was obsessed with questions of fate and 
chance.  These themes weave their way through many of his movies, 
including DECALOGUE, THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE, and the triptych of 
BLUE, WHITE, and RED.  However, they are most explicitly examined in a 
1981 film called BLIND CHANCE, where Kieslowski presents the three 
different fates of one man after a minor action (missing or catching a 
train) changes the course of his life.  In his autobiography, KIESLOWSKI 
ON KIESLOWSKI, the director describes his attraction to the concept this 
way:  "[The idea is] rich and interesting that every day we're faced 
with a choice which could end our entire life yet of which we're 
completely unaware."
     While this approach has been the fodder for several notable 
dramatic films (including, in a way, Frank Capra's IT'S A WONDERFUL 
LIFE), SLIDING DOORS is the first romantic comedy to plumb its depths.  
The "road not taken" approach isn't just a plot device, either.  
Writer/director Peter Howitt expands upon both possible fates of a 
character after she just misses/catches a train.  The audience watches, 
with ever-growing fascination, how this one event impacts upon every 
aspect of her life:  her future career, where she lives, whom she loves, 
and whether she has a family.  As her separate destinies diverge and 
then re-converge, she becomes two completely different individuals.
     That woman is Helen, played by Gwyneth Paltrow as a long, dark-
haired Brit.  One day, after losing her job as an advertising executive, 
she decides to return home in the middle of the day.  The scene of the 
pivotal moment is a train platform.  In scenario #1, she just slips 
through the sliding doors before the train pulls out of the station.  On 
board, she meets the cheerful, talkative James (John Hannah), a MONTY 
PYTHON fan who is taken with her beauty.  Minutes later, in her flat, 
she walks in on her lover, Gerry (John Lynch), in bed with another woman 
(Jeanne Tripplehorn).  In scenario #2, she misses the train and, shortly 
thereafter, is the victim of an attempted mugging.  She doesn't meet 
James and fails to make it home in time to discover Gerry's infidelity.  
Juxtaposed one against the other, while sharing many places, cues, and 
characters, the two stories proceed in parallel from there.
     On one level, for viewers who enjoy pondering the workings of fate, 
SLIDING DOORS can be viewed as a deep and wonderful experience.  But, 
for those who just appreciate a romantic comedy characterized by solid 
acting, a script with a few twists, and a great deal of genuinely funny 
material, SLIDING DOORS still fits the bill.  One of its most obvious 
strengths is that it can satisfy many different types of audiences -- 
those who demand something substantial from their motion pictures, and 
those who could care less.
     It shouldn't come as any surprise that the acting, at least from 
three of the four leads, is solid.  Paltrow, who does double duty as two 
Helens who are initially the same, yet gradually become much different, 
is the standout.  She plays both of her roles effectively and believably 
-- the shy, insecure woman who stays with Gerry and the liberated, 
platinum-blond who severs the ties to her old life and embarks on a new 
career with a new man.  John Hannah, known to most American viewers as 
the younger gay character in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, is instantly 
likable.  John Lynch, taking a break from movies about Ireland's 
troubles, does a good job presenting Gerry as a inept, selfish 
philanderer.  Only Jeanne Tripplehorn, who plays an over-the-top vixen, 
seems out of place.  Her attempts at broad comedy are occasionally 
jarring, and it's occasionally difficult to see her Lydia as anything 
more than a plot element.
     One member of the supporting cast deserves special notice.  Douglas 
McFerran, who plays Gerry's best friend, Russell, is an absolute 
delight, stealing every scene that he's in.  Part of this is surely 
because he is given the best lines in the movie.  On one occasion, he 
has a marvelous monologue bemoaning how advances in the 
telecommunications industry have trapped men into a life of monogamy.  
On another occasion, while laughing at Gerry's plight with the women in 
his life, he comments, "Being with you makes the wait for the next 
episode of SEINFELD more bearable."  But it's not all in the dialogue.  
McFerran tears into this part with relish; his performance becomes one 
of the most memorable aspects of a top-notch comedy.
     This is the first feature film for Peter Howitt, and he approaches 
the task with unimpeachable aplomb.  The script is shrewd and inventive, 
combining wit, romance, and intelligent melodrama into a crowd-pleasing 
whole.  SLIDING DOORS grants more than just a good time at the movies, 
however.  For those who are so inclined, its central theme offers an 
opportunity to ponder some of the more philosophical questions about the 
workings of the universe -- all while having a good time.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
James Sanford
SLIDING DOORS
(Miramax)
Directed by Peter Howitt
 Everyone at one time or another has wondered after making a choice, "What
if I'd done it differently?", and that's the central conceit of "Sliding
Doors," a kind of comic-romantic "Twilight Zone" episode,  in which a young
Englishwoman named Helen gets the opportunity to live out two destinies
simultaneously. Her fortunes turn on whether or not she boards a London
subway train, the kind with sliding doors that close quickly and firmly.
 One Helen makes it onboard and gets home in time to catch her novelist
lover Gerry (John Lynch) rumpling the sheets with his shrewish American
paramour (Jeanne Tripplehorn); the other Helen doesn't make it into the car
and never learns about Gerry's afternoon delights. In each existence there's
romance, despair, a career change and a new look  for Helen: Unsurprisingly,
the blonde Helen ends up having considerably more fun than her brunette
counterpart.
 Helen is played by Gwyneth Paltrow, who's currently competing against
herself at the box-office with "Great Expectations" and "Hush." Out of the
three films, "Sliding Doors" is easily the one that showcases Paltrow to
best advantage. There's no showiness in her utilization of an English accent
(unlike her former beau Brad Pitt's "hey, look, I'm acting!" turns as an
Irishman in "The Devil's Own" and an Austrian in "Seven Years in Tibet" last
year) and, better yet, Paltrow actually sounds like she knows what "wanker"
and "bollocks" mean. But the real revelation in her performance is the
charisma that radiates from both her Helens: You may pick up hints of
Audrey Hepburn and of Paltrow's real-life mother Blythe Danner, a gifted
actress who never quite achieved prominence in films. Too often in her past
movies Paltrow has been cast as either an ice princess, a gloomy grump or a
kook, and it's a relief to watch her get a crack at playing someone
down-to-earth.
 Writer-director Peter Howitt has contrived a vehicle for his star that's
often more intriguing than it is truly funny: Despite some clever lines,
"Sliding Doors" never truly hits its comic stride. That's not to say that
the movie doesn't have many assets to offer, including a typically charming
turn by John Hannah ("Four Weddings and a Funeral") as a potential new
boyfriend for Helen, a delightful soundtrack of British hits from such bands
as Olive and Peach Union, and a satisfyingly twisted wrap-up. Howitt has
also managed to track Helen's parallel lives with a minimum of confusion,
making it a pleasure to "mind the gap" (as they say in the London tubes)
between the two diverging stories.

Author
Homer Yen
Clever Storytelling Behind "Sliding Doors"
Did you ever wonder what might have been if you had just made it through
the intersection before the light turned red?  Made it on to a bus just
before it left?  Made it on to the train just before the sliding doors
closed behind you?  How might your destiny change in a moment's time?
For Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow), her future will take on two completely
different paths determined entirely in a split second.  And the audience
gets to see them both.  If she catches the awaiting train, she will go
home to her boyfriend, Gerry (John Lynch) who is a meek bloke and an
uninspired novelist.  She will also catch him in bed with his old
girlfriend, Lydia (Jeanne Triplehorne).  If she misses the train, she'll
wind up hailing a taxi, becoming the victim of a mugging, and returning
home too late to discover Gerry's infidelity.  In essence, what we will
see are two parallel stories, and so the question you have to ask is
whether both of them are interesting.
In Scenario 1 (she catches Gerry and Lydia in bed), Helen will meet up
with charming James (John Hannah), with whom she will eventually fall in
love.  They are a likable couple and their developing bond is engaging.
He inspires her to start her own company and take control of her own
life rather than sacrificing it all for Gerry.  Scenario 2 (she comes
home too late) is a little more convoluted as Gerry goes to great
lengths to hide Lydia's presence despite Helen's growing suspicions.
Comparing the two timelines, the love story is by far more enjoyable and
cute because you could sense the chemistry between Helen and James.
Their story was engaging.  But in the other scenario, I couldn't quite
understand Gerry's fatal attraction to Lydia.  His constant efforts to
hide Lydia's existence from Helen seemed more like comedic foolishness.
For example, when Helen arrives home just after Lydia leaves, a
surprised Gerry leaps onto a pillow to remove Lydia's earring which was
left behind.  Then, he darts over to the dresser to hide one of the
brandy glasses that the two were using.  All the while, he is nervously
trying to deflect any suspicions.  Helen is far too smart for this kind
of defense.
"Sliding Doors" is a cleverly constructed story that is far more
complicated and impressive in structure than in content.  The movie is
edited well, making a smooth transition between the two timelines.   It
is easy to tell which scenario we are watching and despite the constant
switching, we do not lose focus as to what's going on.  Hannah is
charming and Paltrow delivers a very competent performance and carries
the weight of this movie on her shoulders with confidence.  If only the
material was worthy of her efforts...

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Some of the most interesting science fiction films have no special
effects at all.  SLIDING DOORS is a new film much in the mold of the
1971 film QUEST FOR LOVE.  Each tells a pair of love stories in
parallel timelines that have split off from each other.  In SLIDING
DOORS we cut from one story to the other seeing how things progress for
our character in each of the two possible futures.  Some things happen
quite differently, some are mysteriously similar.
     Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) is already not having a good day.  She has
just lost a nice job at a London public relations firm.  She is headed
back to her apartment where, unbeknownst to her, boy friend Gerry (John
Lynch) is two-timing her (no pun intended).  He is shagging with his
old girl friend Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn).  As Helen is heading down
the stairs to the Underground, time mysteriously splits.  From this
point on, we cut back and forth between the two worlds following the
lives of Helen1 in one world and Helen2 in the other.  Helen1 is
delayed ever-so-slightly on the stairs and gets to her platform just in
time to have the train sliding doors slam in her face with her on the
wrong side.  Helen2, who was not delayed on the stairs, gets to the
train a moment sooner, makes the train, and finds a seat next to the
charming James (John Hannah).  Helen1 is forced to look for a cab and
on the way is mugged.  She must spend a few hours in hospital.  Helen2,
not delayed, returns to the flat to find Gerry2 in bed with Lydia2.
Deciding that she needs an entirely new life, Helen2 leaves Gerry2 and
goes to live with her best friend.  Helen1 is released from the
hospital and returns home to find some evidence that Gerry1 is cheating
on her, but is in no mood to chase it down.  Each Helen has to find a
new living now.  Helen1 puts her hair in braids and takes a job as a
waitress.  Helen2 starts wearing her hair blond and short and sets up
her own public relations firm. After two or three chance encounters
with James2, Helen2 decides to start dating him, in spite of not
trusting him after her former relationship.  Gerry2 takes up with
Lydia2 again but wants to win Helen2 back and Lydia2 is just as
determined to stand in the way.  Meanwhile Helen1 becomes more and more
suspicious that Gerry1 is cheating on her.
     This is not an easy concept to get across to the audience.  It
would just not be very subtle to put a placard in front of the audience
saying "time is splitting and we are following two futures for Helen."
At one time it might have been handled, as it was in QUEST FOR LOVE,
with a wise old scientist popping up to explain that time has taken two
paths and Helen is in each world living different lives.  But either
would have been crude and the accent here is not on the science but on
just exploring two possible futures for the same modern woman.  And
unfortunately just when the concept would have been most confusing for
the audience, just after the split has taken place, the two lives are
the most similar.  The viewer probably does not realize there is a
Gerry1 and a Gerry2 and wonders why Gerry1 does not remember the
falling-out that Gerry2 had with Helen2.  However as Helen1's
appearance and life diverges from that of Helen2 it becomes somewhat
clearer
     As everyone is aware, Paltrow is an actress who is pleasant to
look at but who rarely get challenging roles. This is by far her best
acting, as she plays two women growing and changing in different ways
from the same beginning.  Unfortunately, there is not much original
required in either of her roles.  Betrayed lovers have been done all
too frequently on the screen.  John Hannah is likable on the screen,
John Lynch seems a little too befuddled to be leading a double life.
Neither does much extraordinary.  This film offers an interesting idea
but little beyond the novelty of the two parallel paths.  Neither story
by itself is of sufficient interest that anyone would pay to see it in
a theater.  Even if both stories were told consecutively one after the
other they would be two very bland stories.  Only a little obvious
contrivance gives the film a tiny amount of dramatic tension toward the
end of each story.  It is the editing together and simultaneous telling
that give the film its ginger.  That allows the viewer to compare two
futures and is what makes the exercise worth seeing.

Author
Steve Kong
Sliding Doors is an interesting film in one respect: It uses a gimmick to
explore what we all wonder about each and everyday.
What is our fate, and how coincidence can change fate? There is one movie
that I love that tackles these two issues, Red. Now, there is another,
Sliding Doors. In Sliding Doors though we actually get to see what happens
if something happens and if that something doesn't happen.
Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) is an advertising executive in London. One morning
she is fired for no good reason. Feeling down, she goes to take the subway
home. Here's where the movie branches into the two story lines. In story
line "A" Helen is able to barely catch the train, comes home to find her
scummy boyfriend in bed with his mistress, and runs off finding consolation
with her best female friend. In story line "B" Helen misses the train, gets
mugged, and comes home barely missing her scummy boyfriend's mistress. 
In story line A Helen meets a wonderful man, James (John Hannah), starts a
new business, and is almost able to start a new life. In story line B we
get to see Helen bumble around with her tongue-tied excuse-riddled
boyfriend. Sliding Doors alternates between the two story lines and it was
somewhat of a workout trying to keep track of which story line I was
watching. Thank goodness director/writer Peter Howitt changes Paltrow's
hairstyle after the split of the story lines.
Deep inside I liked Sliding Doors, but only half of it. I liked the story
with Helen and James. John Hannah's James is just a likeable fellow. From
the get-go James charms the audience. The story line (A) is a happy
romantic comedy - Hannah's character providing much of the comedy.
The second story (B) is not as well written and I really didn't much care
for it. Helen's boyfriend Gerry (John Lynch) stumbles around trying to keep
up two relationships. The weak link here is Jeanne Tripplehorn, as Gerry's
mistress, who is painful to watch on screen. Atleast John Lynch has his
stumbling around to fall upon - and when he doesn't have that, we have
Gerry's best friend to entertain us. But, next to that, story line B is a
loser story line. It is nothing but the fluff needed to hold up the gimmick
that is the staple of this film.
I'd much rather Howitt drop story line B altogether and flesh out story
line A, where Howitt puts in contrived "tension" with James' "other woman."
As for performances, Paltrow handles the double duty very well. I enjoyed
her performance very much. She is radiant on screen and it's nice to see
her again - the last film I saw of hers was Great Expectations in which she
also gives a good performance. I look forward to see her more on screen,
her next film will be the Andrew Davis film A Perfect Murder with Michael
Douglas and Viggo Mortensen. The other lead performer in Sliding Doors,
John Hannah, steals every scene he's in. The other two major performers,
Lynch and Tripplehorn, don't fair so well.
Worth mentioning is Douglas McFerran as Gerry's best friend Russell.
McFerran is given all the comedic lines in the film and his performance is
one to look for.
Sliding Doors tries to explore the "what if" situations that come from
Paltrow's character catching and missing a train. This exploration into
fate and coincidence is used to hold up the gimmick that tries to sell the
film. The only problem is that one story line is really interesting and the
other is not. And having to try to keep track of both story lines just to
see how they end up in the same place is a lot of work. I'm not sure if was
worth the work just to see how one story line turned out, much more than to
see how the two story lines meet up. Red is a better film exploring the
issues of fate and coincidence.
Had Sliding Doors been a film just about the relationship between Helen and
James (story line A) I would have given this film a Don't Miss nod. As it
stands, as a film reliant on a gimmick that doesn't work too well, I give
it a good hearty recommendation.

Author
Rory Mackay
THE CREDITS: Directed by Peter Howitt; Starring Gwynyth Paltrow, John
Hannah, John Lynch
THE VERDICT: A solid, innovative high-concept story that's well-executed
and quite effective. Not quite a masterpiece, but there's a lot to like
about this film. 
Did you happen to read my review of THE FULL MONTY the other week? If so,
you may recall I described the film as a quiet, rather unassuming character
drama with heart. The same could equally be said of SLIDING DOORS, which is
not at all dissimilar in style or tone. However, there is one big
difference between the two films -- the plot. Frankly, THE FULL MONTY was
extremely lucky to pull of its rather flimsy plot about male strippers,
whereas right from the offset SLIDING DOORS had a no-lose script.
It's an fresh slant on that most eternal of questions -- "what if?". Who
among us can honestly say they never ask themselves "what if I'd only done
such-and-suchwhat if I'd acted differently in situation x"? Well, SLIDING
DOORS actually answers that question, in the case of Helen (Paltrow) who
narrowly misses her train by a half second. But we also see, in a parallel
universe if you like, a Helen "B" who does catch the train, and how doing
so affects her life in so many ways.
The film follows the unfolding lives of both Helens. The Helen who caught
the train arrives home early and finds her husband Gerry (John Lynch) in
bed with another woman. She dumps him, and soon meets the ever-so charming
James (John Hannah) who soon succeeds in winning her heart. At his
suggestion she sets up her own, successful P.R. business. This Helen
becomes a winner in love and business. But the "other" Helen -- the one who
missed that train -- never discovered her husband was having an affair (at
least not until much later on in the film), and is trapped in a menial job,
living with an adulterous husband. 
First of all, you have to give credit to writer Peter Howitt. It's a very
tricky concept to dramatise, and the film could easily have degenerated
into a convoluted, confusing shambles. But it doesn't. Both storylines are
intertwined beautifully, and I, for one, had no difficulty following them
at all (of course it helped that both Helen's had different hairdos!). It's
not until the end of the film that both storylines again converge in a
clever, unpredictable and very satisfying conclusion. I'm sure it wasn't
easy to come up with an ending that would tie up both storylines, and I was
well aware that a lot of the success of this film would depend on its
resolution. I won't give anything away in case you've yet to see the film,
but the conclusion features a poignant but brilliantly conceived twist that
neatly bookends 
the two storylines in an appropriately bittersweet coda.
As I've said, it's a very good film, but there are one or two slight
problems that prevent it from being truly outstanding. As in THE FULL
MONTY, the comedy is underplayed and the character drama maybe a little too
low-key for some tastes. You might also notice that the film tends to focus
on Helen's love life more than anything. That's all good and well -- it's a
romantic comedy, after all -- but it almost gives the impression that the
film is under-ambitious. Heck, I don't mean I expected anything
ridiculously over-the-top like FOREST GUMP (Look! She's a sports star! Now
she's a war hero! A shrimp boat captain! A millionaire!!). But it just all
feels a little too low-brow. Thankfully it's just a minor niggle, and it
doesn't hurt the film that badly at all.
The splendid performances of the cast give the film a remarkable boost, and
more than overcome any minor problems that might otherwise mar this film.
Gwynyth Paltrow is perfectly cast in the lead role. Not only is her London
twang faultless, but she's an engaging, likeable screen presence and she
carries the film magnificently. John Hannah is similarly good as the
charismatic James, though he isn't actually given much to do in the role
other than "be charming"! John Lynch also does a pretty good job as Helen's
two-timing husband, managing to be sleazy but likeable at the same time.
Certainly no problems the acting department, and the directing is equally
competent.
Summing up -- SLIDING DOORS is a well-plotted and thought-provoking
treatment of that ol' "What if?" scenario. Sometimes a little too mellow
for its own good, but an otherwise intriguing, beautifully-performed and
touching character drama that's well worth a look.
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Author
Jon Popick
Sliding doors.  They're what Helen runs into when her life takes a bit
of a strange turn.  She has just been fired from her job and as she
tries to catch the train home, the doors slide closed in her face.  This
activates a kind of fantasy parallel world: one where Helen makes the
train and one where she doesn't.
That's the basic idea of Sliding Doors, the film that recently opened
the 1998 Sundance Film Festival.  It's a fresh story in this world of
Blues Brothers 2000 movie crap that we live in.  Unfortunately, the
story and a glowing performance from Gwyneth Paltrow are all that keep
this movie afloat.
Helen also has a dirty cheating unemployed live-in boyfriend named Gerry
(John Lynch, Some Mother's Son), who sneaks in the evil fuck-bunny Lydia
(Jean Tripplehorn, Waterworld) as soon as Helen leaves for work every
day.  How does a guy on the dole find so much ugly-bumping time?  Helen
thinks he's an aspiring writer and is working on his book while she
toils away at her PR job.
The film opens with Helen rushing to get to work on time while lugging a
bag full of vodka, which she plans to use to replace the ones she took
from the office for a party at her home.  There is no vodka supply where
I work.  Anyway, when she gets to work, she is told that they needed
that vodka to woo a big client and is fired.  On the way out, she bumps
into James (John Hannah, Four Weddings and A Funeral), who picks up
Helen's dropped earring on the elevator as the doors slide closed.
Helen runs to catch the train and is slightly delayed by a small child
she bumps into on the way down the stairs.  As she watches the train
pull away, Helen steps back and watches it, as if her life is riding
away without her.  Then, in an unconventionally strange scene, her life
backs up like someone is rewinding it.  She skips backward up the
stairs, until someone hits the play button.  Only this time, the kids
mother yanks her out of the way as Fantasy-Helen barrels down the stairs
and jumps on the train is it's doors slide closed.
Fantasy-Helen gets home early and catches Gerry and Lydia in bed, and
leaves him.  She cuts and dies her mousy-brown hair and starts her own
successful PR firm.  And she starts to date James, too.
Reality-Helen is mugged while trying to catch a taxi and spends the day
in the hospital.  Because she is late, she doesn't catch Gerry.  She
suspects something is awry with her home life, but doesn't feel
confident enough to do anything about it.  She can't get a job and
reluctantly takes a job as a waitress.  Reality truly does bite.
Peter Howitt, who was nominated for his Art Direction in Ragtime, Who
Framed Roger Rabbit? and Mary, Queen of Scots, ruins his unique story by
spending too much time with the Gerry/Lydia story in his directorial
debut.  Paltrow reportedly turned down the roles of Rose in Titanic and
Ms. Peel in The Avengers to make this low-budget star vehicle.  Yikes
stripes, time to fire the agent!  Or maybe give him a promotion.

Author
Joy Wyse
The day starts off as usual for Helen Quilley, the sole female in a London
Public Relations firm, but the morning meeting suddenly  leaves her
jobless and on her way home.  Unknown to Helen, her live-in lover, Gerry,
is having a  meeting of his own with Lydia, a former girlfriend who has
come back into his life.  
The SLIDING DOORS of the underground train shut before Helen can board. 
Then, the film goes into reverse causing Helen to walk backwards up the
stairs.  Switch to forward and this time, she manages to squeeze through
the SLIDING DOORS before they close, enabling her to arrive home earlier
than expected.
>From this point on there are two story lines that show how her life could
unfold.  To enable the viewer to keep them straight there are obvious
differences such as a bandage, or a different hair color.   In one
scenario Helen discovers Gerry in bed with Lydia.  In the other, she only
has suspicions that Gerry is having an affair.  
While Gerry, Lydia, and their friends remain more or less the same in both
plots, it is Helen herself who displays the greatest differences.  One
Helen becomes a self-sufficient, semi-successful business woman while the
other Helen becomes an object of our pity.  It is a wonderful acting job
by  Miss Paltrow, probably her best to date.
Although Gerry tries to get up nerve to tell Lydia that he wants nothing
more to do with her, he can't bring himself to end the relationship. 
Enter James, a charming, Monty Python quoting suitor who meets Helen and
begins to pursue her.  
The movie is so well written that you find yourself changing back and
forth.  Sometimes you're wanting her to be with James.  Other times you
want her to make up with Gerry.  There are many character traits that you
like and dislike about each Helen from self-sacrifice to self-confidence.
It is definitely a screenplay that makes you think.  What if?  In my case
it particularly hit home.  As luck would have it, I was in London less
than a month ago.  I entered the Underground at the same station, rode the
same moving sidewalk, and boarded a train that looked exactly like the
train that Helen boarded.  I couldn't help but ask myself....  What if?

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Sliding Doors is a film that wants to be deep and profound, and often
it is.  Writer/director Peter Howitt observes the life of a woman named
Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow), and how it simultaneously progresses on two
different paths.  This is, of course, a gimmick, but it's a reasonably
well-developed gimmick in this case.  The premise, however, is stamped
onto the romantic comedy formula, and the result is a film that is
thought-provoking at times and irritatingly coy at others.  Paltrow is
fantastic in the main role, but the very-standard romantic comedy antics
often forced my attention away from the film.  
When the story introduces us to Helen, she has just been fired from her
job.  In the first scenario, she goes home on the subway and finds her
boyfriend Gerry (John Lynch) having athletic sex with his mistress
(Jeanne Tripplehorn).  She walks out on him and essentially starts a new
life, which entails meeting James (John Hannah), and getting a new
haircut.  In the second scenario, she misses the subway, gets mugged,
and then returns home just in time to have missed Gerry's mistress; she
continues on her life and Gerry continues to lie to her.  
Howitt develops both scenarios simultaneously, cutting back and forth
throughout the film.  At first, I thought this was a bad idea, but it
proves useful by the end of the film:  many of the things that happen to
Helen happen to both of her counterparts simultaneously, and it's
interesting to see the way their lives are parallel.  This is where the
interesting aspects of the film come in, for Howitt's ideas of fate and
destiny are executed in such a manner that you might find yourself
adopting some of the theories put forth in the film.  
There have been many other films that deal with destiny and similar
themes.  Krzysztof Kieslowski's Three Colors trilogy all deal
effectively with the ideas, but his The Double Life of Veronique is
devoted entirely to them.  I like that film more than this one because
it's about two women (both played by the luminous Irene Jacob) who live
parallel lives.  Sliding Doors, although it is interesting, is little
more than a thought-provoking fairy tale:  it's not realistic in the
sense that both Helens are actually alive at the same time (though I
imagine someone could make a case that they are).  
I wouldn't mind so much if Howitt's script had lived up to its
premise.  To begin, the characters are adequately interesting, but most
of them are intensely irritating.  Paltrow is wonderful (her British
inflection is absolutely perfect), and has a demanding presence that I
think will keep her in the industry for a long time.  Lynch, on the
other hand, has been saddled with a character so spineless and annoying
that I simply could not stand to watch him.  Hannah is also
frustratingly manic and jittery, but his character calls for it. 
Tripplehorn is attractive and demands attention, but she overacts here
and often times her character is so ridiculously mean that I couldn't
believe it.  
The situations Howitt provides are standard romantic comedy fare.  The
film wants to be realistic, but there are scenes that are laughable and
simply unrealistic:  when Gerry pulls the blinds to find his mistress
standing at the window, he gasps loudly and shuts the blinds.  Helen
turns around to see what he did, and he covers it up with an
unconvincing lie.  And one of the many climaxes features people pouring
out their hearts to one another in the middle of a rain storm at night. 
Sometimes scenes like these work, but all of the ones in this film feel
suspiciously present to evoke emotions that the film doesn't need to
make it's point.  Sliding Doors is certainly watchable, but Howitt
should have realized that a romantic comedy with an interesting gimmick
is still just a romantic comedy.

Author
Pierce Dalton
 Slidings Doors just misses its case and locks-out fast.
 It's a fantasy about Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) who is fired from her job, goes
home early to discover her boyfriend in bed with an American girl (Jeanene
Triplehorne), and changes her life.  She cuts off her long, brown hair and dyes
it blonde.
 But, that's when Sliding Doors takes another course.
 Helen No. 2 continues her life as a blonde, while Helen No. 1 misses her train
home, and doesn't know about the other women.
 An interesting premises that has its moments, but flattens out near the end.  
 Paltrow is great as Helen, and does a great British accent.  But, the film
could have covered so many things about parallel lives instead of featuring a
romantic subplot.
 John Hannah, as Helen No. 1's new beau, ranges from charming, to just
annoying.
 Sliding Doors is a nice time-passer, but, slaps you on the ass on the way out.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Author
Murali Krishnan
Helen's day has been cut short since she has unfortunately been fired.
Something strange happens on her way home. Her reality is separated into two
parallel universes, and the viewer follows her in each of the separate
storylines. In one storyline, she just catches her train and arrives home to
find her boyfriend with another woman. In the other storyline she misses her
train, so by the time she arrives home, the other woman is gone, and she is
none the wiser. The viewer is then presented with the obviously different
consequences of each situation.
The reason for the split into parallel universes is not given, and is not
all that relevant since this is meant to be a romantic film rather than a
science fiction presentation of chaos theory and the butterfly effect. No
meaningful exploration of those issues, or any of the science of the topic,
are in this film. The juggling of the different storylines is handled very
well and the viewer is never confused. However, nothing significant is
presented by having the two "what if" scenarios, and as a result it ends up
as appearing as just a gimmick. Besides the split, this is a standard film.
The protagonists have no flaws and the antagonists have no redeeming values,
and melodrama is routinely injected to keep the story going to its
underwhelming end.
Marginally Recommended. There is nothing exceptional about this film. It
does not take any real chances and does not offer anything new. For those
who like romance films, this will probably be enjoyed.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Jamie Peck
SLIDING DOORS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Great gimmick, mundane movie. Following this sensational intro, both of 
"Sliding Doors"' story tangents settle into the tedious complications 
and contrived crises that hamper so many contemporary romantic comedies; 
in fact, remove the delectable set-up and the fine acting of Paltrow and 
Scotsman John Hannah ("Four Weddings and a Funeral"), as a potential 
paramour for the newly-unattached Helen of Branch A, and this film has 
practically nothing. True to stints in past flicks, Paltrow shines 
brightly, especially here, while playing opposite the equally charming 
Hannah. Too bad the screenplay fails to give her an alter-ego who 
engages on pretty much any level. 
Still, it could be worse - it could be Branch B, which teams the already 
dull Helen with Lynch's scummy squeeze and Tripplehorn's just-as-scummy 
other woman. There's really nothing wrong with either Lynch or 
Tripplehorn's performances, parse - you get the feeling they're doing 
what they've been instructed by writer/director Peter Howitt - but when 
a movie like this doesn't even conjure up truly hissable antagonists, 
trouble can't be far. And as annoying as it is, Lynch's neurotic 
hem-hawing probably resides among the more lively elements of "Sliding 
Doors," if only because it's a near-perfect aping of Woody Allen - were 
Allen British and 30 years younger, of course. 
Let's at least give Howitt credit for keeping his dual tales straight 
and untangled, even as they overlap from one tedious scene to the next. 
His casting of the lovely always Paltrow is a definite asset - and 
permitting her use of the adorable Cockney accent she flexed in "Emma" 
is also a pro - but one wonders if such an interesting premise had to be 
squandered in service of such a uninteresting plot-and-character combo. 
By the time "Sliding Doors" reaches a weird conclusion that attempts to 
tie the two Helens' fates together, audiences will presumably examine 
their own Branch As and Bs, but maybe only in the sense of where the 
past two hours could have taken them.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow, John Lynch, John Hannah, Jeanne Tripplehorn,
Douglas McFerran, Zara Turner
Director: Peter Howitt
Screenplay: Peter Howitt
Australian theatrical release date: July 30 1998
The gimmicky setup of Sliding Doors is exactly that - a gimmick.  The
film followers two different stories, whilst still containing the same
actors, characters and settings (and often, only slightly different
situations).  It stars Gwyneth Paltrow and Gwyneth Paltrow, John Hannah
and John Hannah, John Lynch and John Lynch, and, well, you get the
message.
The film plays on the idea that one split second could change an entire
life. Sure enough, when Helen (Paltrow) just manages to catch a train as
it leaves the station, she returns home to find her boy friend, Gerry
(John Lynch) in bed with another woman.  But of course she also misses
the train, returns home, and is unsuspecting.  Whilst on the train she
meets a charismatic man, James (John Hannah), who always seems to blurt
out the perfect observation whenever given the chance.  When she doesn't
catch the train, she begins to experience relationship problems with
Gerry, who is feeling guilty about cheating on her but continues to do
it anyway.
The cleverest thing about Sliding Doors is that it manages to trick the
viewer into believing that they are watching something better than they
actually are.  One can't help but be intrigued when the film first
splits into two parts, as it rewinds itself for a brief moment, then
changes a small detail to illustrate the seemingly insignificant
separate of plots.  But this intrigue is lost as the two stories
develop, and in no time we not only have one fairly ordinary romance
film, but two.
I'm starting to really enjoy watching Paltrow on the screen, and if it
were not for her elegant, graceful yet sophisticated workin-class-woman
performance, Sliding Doors probably wouldn't have had enough appeal to
last its duration.  She carries the load of the film on her shoulders -
creating a much more demanding role than what we've seen in some of her
other performances.  She showed great skill in Great Expectations and
Se7en, but both probably would have still succeeded without her.  She
gives a remarkable effort in Sliding Doors, but the screenplay limits
her acting stamina, as her character is often reduced to pulp at the
most crucial of all times.
Still, this is ultimately a pleasing flick, which will probably attract
most of its viewers due to its unique method of conveying character and
story.  Sadly, the different scenarios fail to give new dimensions to
the characters, as they appear to have almost identical personalities
even after experiencing "life changing" events.  Many believe that hard
times build character in a person, but the only characters that are ever
built remain the same from start to finish.
As the film draws to a close, it first appears like a dramatic change in
pace has occurred.  Yet a messy and faintly realistic scenario is
avoided, and not surprisingly, it ends up winking at the notion of
destiny rather than fate.
Not a very satisfying piece, but more often than not Sliding Doors is
enjoyable as a romantic comedy with a twist. Would my life have been
drastically changed had I not chosen to see the film?  Probably not, but
I'm still glad I saw it - and for what its worth, the gimmick worked
well enough for me to stop and consider the consequences before I board
the next train.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Matt Williams
Chaos mathematicians have studied a phenomena called "the butterfly
effect", in which a single butterfly flapping its wings can cause
tremendous shifts of weather half a world away.  The unpredictable
effects of a relatively minor change are also explored in Sliding Doors,
which shows how a seemingly insignificant event can have drastic
effects.
Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) is a public relations executive whose life is
starting to fall apart on one fateful day.  She just lost her job, and,
on her way back home, she narrowly misses catching her train in the
London underground...or does she.
At this point, the movie splits in two, alternating back and forth
between two different worlds:  one in which Helen caught the train, and
the other in which she narrowly missed it.  It's one minor difference,
but the effects spiral away in completely different directions.
In the world where she catches the train, she arrives home in time to
catch her boyfriend, Gerry (John Lynch), in the middle of an affair with
another woman (Jeanne Tripplehorn).  Yet, as traumatic as this seems at
first, it makes her a stronger woman, as she pursues a new career, and a
new life with a new love, James (John Hannah).
However, when she missed the train, her life turns out radically
different. Gerry continues his affair with Lydia, unbeknownst to Helen,
who, in the meantime, is forced to work multiple menial jobs to support
the two of them.
Although the parallel storylines might seem somewhat confusing at first,
especially to someone who is unprepared for the premise of the film, the
filmmakers do an admirable job at reducing the inherent confusion. Each
Helen is marked in an identifiable way (first with a bandage, and then
later with differing hairstyles) so the confusion is kept to a happy
minimum.
Once confusion is laid to rest, the biggest problem with running
parallel storylines like this is that one of the storylines might easily
overpower the other.  This is somewhat the case here, but it never
becomes an outright disaster.  The "catches-the-train" Helen has the
more vibrant of the two plots, and though the other Helen might get more
pity, there's no question of which one we'd like to spend the time
with.  The trouble is each storyline gets roughly equal time, which
means you spend half the movie waiting for the other half.
Paltrow manages the double role well, proving that her recent doldrum
has been the result of poor material rather than a lack of talent.  Of
the two male leads, John Lynch actually comes out on top (even though
he's playing the shadier of the two men). John Hannah just doesn't have
that much to work with, playing a Mr. Right.
Sliding Doors deserves points for being original.  However, an
unfortunate side effect of its split perspective is repetition.  One
crucial plot point actually happens four separate times (nearly becoming
an unintentional running gag).  And (magical musical chimes aside)
there's never an explanation for the parallel stories.  Perhaps it's
just a mental exercise for the audience...anyhow, an ending revelation
nearly makes the whole thing pointless.
Still, the movie is enjoyable, and what more do you want from a romantic
comedy?
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SLIDING DOORS takes a what-if look at romance.  What are those tiny
changes that could have had an immense impact on your love life?  Who is
that special someone that you could have met but didn't because you
entered a crowded room a minute too late or too early?  And that tragic
time you found your lover in someone's arms, what if you had come home
just a bit later and missed seeing them together?  This is the promising
premise of SLIDING DOORS.
     When a little girl walks in front of Helen, played fetchingly but
not very convincingly by Gwyneth Paltrow, she just misses her subway
train.  The picture then backs up time so that Helen just manages to
slip through the train's sliding doors.  This plot device sets up two
parallel universes in which all of the story's characters exist.
     In one, Helen walks in on her boyfriend, Gerry, played with his
usual doleful eyes by John Lynch from CAL, who is in bed with his old
girl friend Lydia.  Jeanne Tripplehorn, who was the sexier of the two
female leads in BASIC INSTINCT, plays Lydia.  For those hoping to see
Tripplehorn recreate some of the animal passion she demonstrated in
BASIC INSTINCT, you'll be sorry to know that she doesn't.  Her scenes
are the standard ones, in which she's quickly caught and then promptly
jumps out of bed.  Helen goes on to meet and fall for a married man
named James (John Hannah).  James is as gregariously happy as Gerry is
inertly melancholy.
     In another scenario, Helen comes home just after Lydia has left.
She does, however, begin to get suspicious when certain clues to Gerry's
affair begin to turn up.
     First-time writer and director Peter Howitt uses a bag of old
cliches to tell his story.  A typically cliched scene that rings false
is the one in which Gerry gives his full and complete confession to
Helen.  She manages to fall completely asleep just as his admission of
guilt begins.  In another, set after she becomes pregnant, he hangs up
on her just as she's about to tell him the big news.
     The slowly paced movie switches back and forth between the two
scenarios without managing to make either compelling.  Rarely effective
as a comedy or a romance, the film finally finds its footing towards the
end when it dips into pathos.
     With its light-hearted spirit, SLIDING DOORS would be a hard film
to dislike.  On the other hand, if you want more than Paltrow's
enchanting smile, you would be advised to look elsewhere.
     SLIDING DOORS runs 1:45 but feels longer.  It is rated R for sex
and mild profanity and would be fine for most teenagers.

Author
Richard Scheib
UK/USA. 1998. Director/Screenplay - Peter Howitt, Producers - Philippa 
Braithwaite, William Horberg & Sydney Pollack, Photography - Remi 
Adafarasian, Music - David Hirschfelder, Music Supervisor - Anita 
Camarata, Visual Effects - Cinesite, Production Design - Maria 
Djurkovic. Production Company - Intermedia 
Films/Miramax/Paramount/Mirage Enterprises.
Gwyneth Paltrow (Helen Quilley), John Lynch (Gerry Flanagan), John 
Hannah (James Hammerton), Jeanne Tripplehorn (Lydia), Zara Turner 
(Anna), Douglas McFerran (Russell)
Plot: Helen Quilley is fired from her job with a London PR firm and 
returns home. Depending whether or not she bumps into a child on the 
tubeway steps she misses her train home. If she catches the tube she 
gets home in time to catch her boyfriend with another woman and from 
there walks out, finds and becomes involved with another man and 
successfully sets up her own business. But in an alternate scenario she 
misses the train, never discovers her layabout boyfriend's continuing 
deception and continues on in a low-paying waitressing job.
I was preparing to start this review with something like "`Sliding 
Doors' conducts a unique venture into the concept of alternate 
timelines, the wildly divergent sets of circumstances that may result 
from a different choice made at a crucial point ...". At least I would 
have thought it a more unique film had two weeks earlier, I not seen the 
Hong Kong gangster film `Too Many Ways to Be No. 1'. `Too Many Ways' was 
made a year prior to `Sliding Doors' and both films are remarkably 
similar. Both conduct two different divergent stories dependent on the 
central character making a crucial choice in a trivial matter at the 
start of the story. It is hard not to believe that `Too Many Ways' was 
not an influence over `Sliding Doors', especially considering the timing 
and the sudden emergence of the uniqueness of this theme. Of course both 
films choose to tell the story in very different milieus. `Too Many 
Ways' is almost a parody of the hard-boiled Hong Kong gangster film 
while `Sliding Doors' is a romantic comedy made in the shadow of `Four 
Weddings and a Funeral'. Of the two `Sliding Doors' is certainly the 
more conceptually audacious in that it tells its two stories 
concurrently, interweaving and allowing aspects of one story to mirror 
the other, while `Too Many Ways' settles less challengingly for merely 
telling its two stories consecutively.
But of the two `Sliding Doors' is invariably the lesser. It tries a 
little too hard to be another `Four Weddings' - yet another cosmopolitan 
London romantic comedy and cast with an eye toward international 
box-office (with the beautiful swan-necked Gwyneth Paltrow at least 
conducting a creditable British accent here). Howitt writes some 
occasionally quite amusing one-liners but the characters are 
one-dimensional. The depth they are given seems to come only in terms of 
catchphrase descriptions - Jeanne Tripplehorn is just The Bitch; John 
Hannah is Prince Charming - we never even find out what sort of 
businessman he is; and John Lynch is The Cheating Loser Boyfriend. 
Lynch's character is so one-dimensional and he given so little 
motivation in his cheating and indecision that one cannot help but 
wonder what it is that two women see in him.
It's just that one finds it hard to swallow the basic premise. Howitt 
asks us to believe that not only does whether Paltrow misses the train 
or not make the difference between two paths she leads (fair enough) but 
also the entire difference between whether she leads a successful life 
or not. One could maybe have bought it if the two pathways were not so 
categorically black-and-white - if she makes the train she gets Prince 
Charming, makes a success of herself in business, gets a new sharp 
image; whereas if she doesn't she ends up unhappy, stuck in a low-paid 
job as a waitress and never finds out the truth about her useless, 
unfaithful boyfriend. It even makes the difference, for goodness sake, 
whether she gets pregnant to Prince Charming or to the loser boyfriend. 
Underneath it all the film is really a rather bland Yuppie daydream - 
beneath all its romantic ambitions it buys into the fantasy that success 
in life equates with success in business, a good image and true love; 
and Hell in life is being caught in a dead-end relationship and a 
thankless, low-paying job in the service industry. Sadly the film buys 
into the whole Cinderella Complex - that a woman's success and happiness 
in life is dependent on success and happiness being delivered to her. 
What is says is that success, fulfilment and uncovering the truth about 
the world are things that only really occur by chance happenstance as 
opposed to being dependent upon one's own decisions and 
self-determination, and that happiness is a result of external 
consequence rather than an attitude of mind. Personally I don't buy it.


Author
David Sunga
Starring: Gwyneth Paltrow, John Hannah, John Lynch, Jeanne Tripplehorn
Ingredients: London gal, fate, true love, running joke about Monty
Python's Spanish Inquisition
SLIDING DOORS is a love 'what if' story. The gimmick is that it's really
two stories: the film follows the life of Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) down
two directions. In the beginning, likeable gal 'Helen' (Gwyneth Paltrow)
gets unexpectedly fired from her advertising job. So she goes into the
subway train station meaning to return home early to her apartment and
her sleeping live-in lover Gerry (John Lynch). 
Helen doesn't know it, but she is at a fateful junction in life: 1) If
she enters through the sliding door of a London subway train her life
takes one path with one future 2) If she stays on the platform her life
takes another path with a different future. The film shows what happens
in both paths, switching back and forth between intertwined, parallel
stories.
In story one, Helen meets a charming and talkative Monty Python fan
named James (John Hannah) on the train. Arriving home early, she
discovers that her live-in, Gerry (John Lynch), is having sex with his
former lover Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn). This leads to a life where
Helen moves out. Helen's winsome new friend James helps her recover from
a broken heart, and encourages her to start her own business. 
In story two, Helen experiences a different fate. She misses the train,
never meets James, and doesn't get home early enough to discover Gerry's
infidelity. In this new life, Helen takes up odd menial jobs, and faces
the constant sneaking suspicion that all is not right with her
relationship with Gerry. 
Will the truth of the heart finally work its way through a number of
problems and setbacks in BOTH scenarios?
Opinion:
Rejoice all ye Monty Python fans, Gwyneth Paltrow fans, and watchers of
quirky romance flicks. At last here's proof that there's still
creativity in 1990s filmmaking.
SLIDING DOORS is refreshingly different from anything this year. Not
only is it a well-acted, heartwarming film, but it's also easily Gwyneth
Paltrow's best recent performance. When Helen (Paltrow) screams that her
unfaithful boyfriend is a 'shagging wanker,' (a British phrase better
left untranslated) she sounds like she knows what she's talking about!
Nor does SLIDING DOORS go overboard with formulaic true love or other
stereotypes. Nobody scrambles around in danger, screaming, "I will find
you no matter what, my darling!" When Helen finds herself on a boat in
the starlight with James, she doesn't take the easy way out and leap
into his arms, since she's supposed to be recovering from heartache. And
handsome live-in boyfriend Gerry isn't the stereotypical screen hunk
(either a stud or a snob). Instead he's a nervous and indecisive, almost
helpless hunk. Another example: when one of the protagonists lies
wounded in a hospital, SLIDING DOORS gives us neither the 'hospital
miracle' nor a maudlin tragedy but surprises us with a third variation.
In other words, all of the characters seem non-stereotyped, human, and
local. 
There are minor inconveniences. Since SLIDING DOORS switches back and
forth between two possible fates, it's occasionally difficult to
distinguish between the two. Distinguishing between the two stories
isn't a problem in the scenes containing Paltrow, who sports two
different hairstyles. But in scenes containing only Lydia and Gerry, who
look the same in both stories, it's slightly confusing. Also, quite a
few snappy comebacks referring to American pop culture (Seinfeld, Woody
Allen, etc.) are spoken by the British characters. But these seem
slightly forced, given that the remaining dialogue is predominantly
British slang. Possibly an attempt by the screenwriter to balance the
British so that American audiences can feel more comfortable?
SLIDING DOORS is a charming, quirky, original, happy romance with a
little 'philosophy of fate' thrown in.  MONTY PYTHON AND THE MEANING OF
FATE, anybody? 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com
