Title
Review for Shakes the Clown (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
A review by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton of http://www.stomptokyo.com/ 
Here's a situation we've all been in: You want to rent a movie about
alcoholic clowns. But when it comes to alcoholic clown movies, how can you
tell the good ones from the bad ones? What is the yardstick by which we
judge alcoholic clown movies? Luckily we have an answer for you. According
to the Boston Globe, Shakes the Clown is "the Citizen Kane of alcoholic
clown movies." Well there you go! Rent this movie! What more do you need
to know?
What you need to know is that there's a moment in this film when Stenchy
the Clown slams his head down into the bar and cries, "Who made this
planet?!" Our immediate response was to yell "Goldthwait! Bob Goldthwait!"
in the hopes that Stenchy might then do something amusing, like beat the
hell out of Goldthwait's character, Shakes. He certainly deserves
something of that sort for writing and directing Shakes the Clown.
The movie starts, naturally, with Goldthwait throwing up. Actually, it
starts with a dog eating pizza, but the vomit scene is mere seconds after
that. Funny stuff, huh? Yeah, we thought so too. The general thrust of the
picture is that Shakes is an alcoholic and, despite the fact that he's a
pretty good clown, the booze affects his work. He's passed up for host of
the local kids' tv show, much to the disappointment of his pals Stenchy
(Blake Clark) and Dink (Adam Sandler -- yes, *that* Adam Sandler), both
clowns who expected to be included in the show when Shakes got the job.
The clown who does get the hosting job is Binky (Tom Kenny), a
self-proclaimed jerk who doesn't get much respect from the other clowns.
With his lackeys, Boots and HoHo, Binky not only takes Shakes' job, but
also frames Shakes for the murder of the local clown talent agent, Owen
Cheese (Paul Dooley). So Shakes' job is this: clear his name, kick the
hooch habit, and find true love with Judy (Julie Brown), a waitress at the
clown bar named the Twisted Balloon. Gee, so far this sounds like a
Tolkien novel.
If you're one of those people who is scared of clowns to begin with,
Shakes won't do anything to convince you otherwise. In fact, if you
generally appreciate clowns, this movie may change your mind. The clowns
presented here are some of the scariest people we've seen in a long time.
The comments from the barflies at the Twisted Balloon made us squirm
uncomfortably in our seats. For most of the film, Shakes himself is a
frightening apparition with a beer-soaked wig and drool-stained makeup.
It's not a pretty picture.
One of the only things we liked about Shakes the Clown is its depiction of
the different castes of clown society. Whether these castes exist or not,
we don't know, but they're darn funny to think about. Mimes, of course,
form the lowest class of clown, at least in the eyes of the "party clowns"
like Shakes. Then there are the horrific rodeo clowns, who terrorize the
party clowns and brag of being kicked in the head by bulls. We really wish
Goldthwait had done a little more with this idea than simply mime-bash,
but it did make us smile when he thrust a cardboard container over a
mime's head and said, "Get outta this box!"
If the story and characters are bad, then the acting is reprehensible.
Although Goldthwait is completely believable as Shakes, keep in mind that
he's playing a drunken slob who can't do anything right. It's not exactly
a hard role to play. Julie Brown spends the entire movie talking like
Elmer Fudd, slurring her R's and L's, which is weawwy -- uh, really --
annoying. It makes you want to bweak her widdle neck. Amazingly enough,
the best performance came from Adam Sandler as Dink. Dink was the only
person on screen for whom we felt any affection at all.
At this point you're probably saying, "Well at least no one more
'talented' than Adam Sandler got roped into this outhouse of a movie." Oh,
how wrong you'd be! Robin Williams actually appears in this mess. True,
he's billed in the credits as "Marty Fromage," but he's here, playing a
high-strung mime instructor. He's not just a mime, he's a mime on the
edge! This sounds a lot funnier than it actually is.
Perhaps the most amazing thing about this movie, after all is said and
done, is that Bobcat Goldthwait has been talking about making another
Shakes the Clown movie. What makes him think anyone would want to watch
more of this unamusing and even repulsive schtik?

Author
Lon Ponschock
     SHAKES THE CLOWN is Bobcat Goldthwait's directing and acting debut.
It features many of the performers from stand-up TV programs like "Comic
Strip Live" and shows a twisted view of the life of a clown.  Sort of
like Emmet Kelly meets BARFLY.  These clowns have their own hangout
called the Twisted Balloon at which they have their drinks ... in
costume.  Performers such as Adam (Opera Man) Sandler from "Saturday
Night Live" never appear out of makeup.
     We see three classes of clowns in SHAKES:  Party Clowns, Rodeo
Clowns and Mimes.  Robin Williams makes an appearance as Mime Jerry at a
school for these benighted performers.  Mimes are despised by the clowns
and are physically bashed during the course of the movie.
     SHAKES did not receive good notices when it came out.  I rented it
as home video *because* nobody liked it.  Anything that a lot of people
dislike has probably touched enough nerves to make it worth seeing.
This is the case with SHAKES THE CLOWN.
     If you take Homey from "In Living Color" and ratchet him up about
90 degrees, you'll get a feel for Shakes who is a known alcoholic and
womanizer.
     The film will make more sense if you take the following hint: run
the film down to the end and listen to the song over the credits, then
start the film fresh.  Like the commercial says, "You're a grown up.
You can do anything you want."  SHAKES will make more sense if you do.
     In SHAKES THE CLOWN, there are bad clowns and *worse* clowns.  The
character Binky has landed a hosting job of a children's cartoon show
over Shakes and commits several crimes through the course of the story.
     There is a lot of crude humor in the film and it works.  If you are
open to that sort of thing, you'll have many good yucks.
     Like the underground classic KILLER CLOWNS FROM OUTER SPACE (get it
if you can find it!) SHAKES THE CLOWN is not appropriate for young
viewers.  It *is* appropriate for anyone who was ever frightened of a
clown as child and lifts the mystery from behind the makeup.  But with
all of his drinking and womanizing, Shakes is still a bit super human
and magical in his ability to jump and spin as no ordinary man could do.
     I recommend SHAKES THE CLOWN.  Bobcat Goldthwait has taken a chance
with this film that may make or ultimately break his career as a
director.  That's the fate of people who take chances.
