Title
Review for Among Giants (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Eight years ago I was waiting on line to see "Indecent
Proposal" when I overheard a guy about 24 years old
earnestly ask his date of about 21, "Would you sleep with
Robert Redford for a million dollars?"  "Sure," the sweet
young thing replied, "But you'll have to give me some time to
scrape up the money."  Oh, you heard that one?  The idea
that a woman like Demi Moore could be attracted to an actor
who at the time was 55 years old is absolutely believable. 
But could a 24-year-old get turned on by the 53-year-old Pete
Postlethwaite?  As they say, love is blind, but there's a limit. 
That a woman played by the youthful Rachel Griffiths could
go for Postlethwaite--however wonderful an actor--is as
credible as the idea that Tara Fitzgerald would ignore Ewan
McGregor and set her sights on the craggy ol' guy in
"Brassed Off."
   That's why the producers of "Among Giants" call their
movie an offbeat romance, I suppose.  It's not really meant to
be as plausible and everyday as Robin Wright's discovering
Kevin Costner's message in a bottle.  If you accept the story
as caprice--as though Postlethwaite were having a
midsummer night's wet dream--you could go with the
generally bleak and gritty but sometimes touching story of a
crew of working stiffs painting electricity pylons in England's
Derbyshire Peak District.
   Directed by Sam Miller, who is known on the sceptered isle
for his work at the helm of the TV series "This Life, "Among
Giants" shares with that program's emptiness but breaks with
its glittering and slick image.  Quite unlike screenwriter 
Simon Beaufoy's "The Full Monty," this movie's comic
touches seem forced, its working-class men laughing by
compulsion if at all--as they go through the motions of a no-
future existence as freelance painters working off the books
one hundred feet up, taking pride, perhaps, in the danger
attached to the work.
   Crew foreman Ray (Pete Postlethwaite) accepts a
freelance job under the table from a suit with the provision
that the painting of electricity pylons must be completed
within three months, before the juice is turned on.  With his
rock-climbing chum Steve (James Thornton) he assembles a
team of rugged Yorkshire types who then give a lift to an
Australian backpacker, Gerry (Rachel Griffiths)--who is hired
on the spot by the smitten Ray.  The couple seem
mismatched by age and appearance.  The obvious choice for
Gerry would be the young and handsome Don Juan, Steve
(James Thornton).  As Ray and Gerry make goo-goo eyes at
each other one hundred feet up, they arouse the antipathy of
the envious Steve, the demoralized workers, and finally Ray's
estranged wife.  When Ray and Gerry have a falling out,
Gerry momentarily shifts her attention to Steve, causing
increased friction between Ray and his best friend.  The plot
takes an unusual turn when the frustrated Gerry commits the
self-destructive act of climbing the rocks without a belt.
   The most interesting character is Gerry, who is not your
typical Maupintour traveler.  Off on her own from Australia to
the English hills, she fearlessly hitches rides around
Derbyshire and beyond, admitting to occasional loneliness--
which could explain her bonding with the much older
foreman.  When Ray, who finds it as difficult as the audience
to accept the love that is offered to him, asks her why she
doesn't go for young Steve, she replies, "He's not my type. 
Maybe he's too much my type.  I've had loads of Steves; it
never works out."  
   Nor does the movie.  Though we get a sense of working-
class life among a diverse, adventurous bunch of sentimental
Brits--the Saturday night dance scene a la American West;
the downing of endless ales in the local pub; the camaraderie
that comes from togetherness in the wide open spaces--
nothing really happens to the workers, who seem to exist only
to observe and comment upon the romantic interludes of the
three principals.  The film follows working-class formulas:
workers disgruntled because of overdue paychecks, one
laborer needing an advance because he's one step ahead of
the loansharks, a woman seeking her identity through travel. 
Postlethwaite had far far more to work with in his greatest
piece, "In the Name of the Father," and was more realistically
cast as a band leader in  "Brassed Off," while Rachel Griffiths
was astonishing in "Hilary & Jackie," merely functional in the
current selection.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
When Fox Searchlight Pictures picked up Sam Miller's AMONG GIANTS,
they were probably hoping to once again cash in on the golden touch of
Academy Award nominated British screenwriter Simon Beaufoy, who, with
THE FULL MONTY, gave the small indie company it's first megahit. What
they knew, but didn't care to realize, was that Beaufoy wrote the
AMONG GIANTS script before he wrote THE FULL MONTY.  So instead of a
sequel to the hilarious antics of the latter, we get a weak romance,
held together only by exceptional performances by the two leads, Pete
Postlethwaite and Academy Award nominee Rachel Griffiths, showing that
her vital, restrained work in HILARY AND JACKIE was no fluke.
The 50ish Postlethwaite plays Ray, a divorced man who is currently
painting power lines for money. In the working class town of
Sheffield, the main attraction is mountain climbing, which is how he
meets Gerry(Griffiths), a hitchiker who wants to see if the climbing
is really as good as advertised. The audience never learns a thing
about Gerry's past, which makes her character somewhat
two-dimensional. Anyway, the boyish Gerry ends up joining Ray's
painting crew, and the camera pans back into some beautiful shots of
the crew working on the power lines, high above the rest of the world.
>From then on, there isn't much plot except for the inevitable
accident, and we just have to sit back and let the romance between Ray
and Gerry happen. By just looking at the two, you can already deem the
romance unconventional. But there never is much going on, and
Postlethwaite is always believable no matter what his age, so the
movie basically moves along, though flimsily.
The only thing ironic about AMONG GIANTS is how the film is so weak,
but we cease to notice it because of the simple gestures of the two
lead actors. This is essentially Postlethwaite's film, and he gives a
quietly moving performance as the man who is vulnerable to love, but
Griffiths more than holds her own as the woman who just doesn't want
to commit to anything. It's also quite odd that the man who wrote this
film is the same man who wrote THE FULL MONTY, because I can't find
too many similarities except for some full frontal nudity. AMONG
GIANTS is not a bad film, but good intentions can only get you so far.
review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21 8:05pm EST


Author
Greg King
AMONG GIANTS (M).  
(Fox Searchlight/Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Sam Miller
Stars: Pete Postlethwaite, Rachel Griffiths, James Thornton, Lennie 
James, Andy Serkis, Rob Jarvis, Alan 
Williams, Sharon Bower, Steve Huison
Running time: 94 minutes.
Simon Beaufoy, writer of The Full Monty, knows the depressing
working class areas of northern England quite well, and he returns to
this familiar background for the setting of his latest film.  However,
Among Giants is a decidedly inferior film, lacking the charm, warmth,
gritty honesty, and winning humour that made that modest film a crowd
pleaser.
Actually written before The Full Monty, Among Giants deals
with a team of unemployed painters who land a covert contract to paint
a series of electricity pylons spanning the Yorkshire hills during the
summer.  It's a job of high risks, uncertain payments and plenty of
challenges.  The foreman of this motley group is the hard-as-nails Ray
(Pete Postlethwaite, from The Usual Suspects, etc).  Ray is divorced
and shares a house with his younger work mate Steven (James Thornton).
Their friendship is shaken up by the arrival of Gerry (Rachel
Griffiths), a nomadic Australian who has spent most of her adult life
backpacking around the world.  On a whim, Ray hires the feisty
Australian to work as part of the crew.
Romance slowly develops between Ray and Gerry, much to the
consternation of Steve.  This odd couple romance is the least credible
part of the film, and, despite the solid performances of the two
leads, it never really works or sets the screen on fire.  This
mismatched pair also engage in a bit of gratuitous full frontal nudity
for a scene set in an abandoned water tower that is far from erotic.
Gerry's sudden and uncharacteristic decision to settle down and
establish roots with Ray is also unconvincing, and never totally
works.
Among Giants is a fairly conventional and shallow film that is
at its best when exploring the camaraderie between the work crew as
they undertake the challenge of painting 150 steel towers in a couple
of months.  Beaufoy's script is also at its best as it explores the
humour, mateship and sense of identity that unites the working class
in this bleak post-Thatcher Britain.
Among Giants is not a film for those who suffer from vertigo
as there are many scenes set high above the ground.  At times Witold
Stok's camera whirls with dizzying speed through the countryside.
Director Sam Miller hails from a television background, and he handles
his first feature film in a fairly straight forward and uninspired
fashion.
The solid cast try hard, and bring a bristling energy to the
material.  Postlethwaite in particular seems uncomfortable in the role
of a romantic lead.  Newcomer Thornton delivers a sympathetic
performance as Steven and establishes himself as an actor to watch in
the future.
But, otherwise, this unspectacular and often pedestrian
romantic drama seems little more than a high class, big budget
television movie.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Visually interesting but emotionally vacuous, Sam Miller's Among Giants
stars Pete Postlethwaite as a painter who falls in love with a tomboy
(Rachel Griffiths).  Postlethwaite and Griffiths are both good, but the
love story is too inconsequential to gather any kind of momentum (and
the film is far too short to develop the characters adequately). 
There's also an extended scene in the middle that features gratuitous
frontal nudity of both characters, and it's more likely to elicit laughs
than anything else.  But Among Giants is still very pretty to look at,
thanks to Miller's majestic direction, and the colorful group of
supporting characters is at least marginally interesting.  
