Title
Review for Tomcats (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures/Revolution Studios
 Director: Gregory Poirier
 Writer:  Gregory Poirier
 Cast: Jerry O'Connell, Shannon Elizabeth, Jake Busey,
Horatio Sanz, Jaime Pressly, Travis Fine, Shelby Stockton,
Heather Ankeny, Joseph D. Reitman
  Try to imagine "American Pie" without Eugene Levy and
"Road Trip" with Tom Green and you have some idea of the
quality of humor of "Tomcats."  As appropriately vulgar and
cleavage-filled as the two movies that Gregory Poirier is
trying to imitate, "Tomcats" has its moments of kittenish
humor but given its jagged breakdown into a series of
Saturday-Night-live style skits, each milked for vulgar
amusement, the movie simply does not purr smoothly along. 
Nonetheless, this is not the complete loss that a reasonably
intelligent audience might have thought it would be, but in
fact serves as a decent-enough counterpoint for those looking
for a bottom-feeder break from the magnificent arthouse fare
coming from Iran--although the spring break crowd might just
think that for their taste, "Tomcats" is actually too mild, too
good-natured despite its coarseness.
   If I said that this was too mild, that just goes to show how
far we've come from the bad old days that the Hollywood
code required a man and woman filmed in bed to have at
least one leg each on the floor.  
   Revolution Studios' first production is hardly an insurrection
but yet another feature that takes sophomoric humor from its
"Animal House" roots through the far better "South Park" and
"American Pie" to its present, near-dead end.  The story
revolves around a bet placed seven years earlier by the titled
tomcats, a group of hellraising fraternity types.  Each member
shells out a thousand bucks.  The last one to remain single
takes the kitty.  Invested wisely in high-stakes mutual funds,
according to the stockbroker type in the crowd, the kitty could
easily quadruple before someone wins the cash.  Naturally
the guy who thought he'd be single forever, Steve (Horatio
Sanz), walks (or rather, lumbers) down the aisle first and
shows up from time to time as the fellow who has reason to
suspect that his wife Tricia (Jaime Pressly) is carrying on a
lesbian affair.  The fun continues when just two guys are left
standing (not really standing all that often given the number
of women who fall into their arms regularly) to compete for
the money--which during the Clinton age of prosperity has
now reached into the hundreds of thousands.  When Michael
Delaney (Jerry O'Connell) loses heavily at a casino, he
becomes more determined than ever to win, but Kyle Brenner
(Jake Busey), who sees no reason to take the big step to the
altar, falls big for Michael's girl friend, the adorable Natalie
Parker (Shannon Elizabeth).
   What counts is not so much the principal tale of this mostly
kitty litter, but the attempts by scripter-director Gregory Poirier
(who penned the mostly underrated thriller "Gossip") to keep
upping the ante.  Easily the biggest gross-out occurs when
Kyle, who is diagnosed with cancer, undergoes removal of
the tumored testicle only to lead his pal Michael on a chase
down the hospital aisles to recover the part of his body he
wants to save.  As the renegade piece of equipment,
successfully removed from its scrotum, rolls and falls and is
ping-ponged from wall to wall, it lands in a doctor's bon bon
dessert--forcing Michael to substitute a nut (literally) and pass
this off in a bottle of preservative as the missing link.
   "Tomcats" may serve as a consolation prize for the jocks
who couldn't raise the scratch to go to Cancun during spring
break, but despite its occasional laughs, it doesn't give the
Mexican Tourist Board much to worry about.
Rated R.  Running time: 92 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Gregory Poirier.
Cast: Jerry O'Connell, Shannon Elizabeth, Jake Busey, Horatio Sanz, Jaime 
Pressly, Bill Maher, David Ogden Stiers, Bernie Casey, Garry Marshall.
2001 - 95 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sexuality, brief nudity, and cringe-inducing humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 31, 2001.
At this point in today's mainstream cinema, gross-out humor has become as 
prevalent as the appearance of Friday during each week. Last week's bid for 
yuks (as well as yucks) was "Say It Isn't So," and this week, it's "Tomcats," 
a raunchy-as-all-hell comedy written and directed by first-time filmmaker 
Gregory Poirier. Some of the material is very funny, to be sure, but much of 
it doesn't work because, like "Say It Isn't So," the editing isn't sharp 
enough to do the jokes complete justice. It doesn't help that a complete 
20-minute portion of the movie forgets the premise and is solely devoted to 
the setup and payoff of a joke so gross it makes "Scary Movie" look 
relatively tame in comparison. Another 10-minute section sets up a dominatrix 
sequence involving an elderly woman that also has nothing to do with the 
story. There is a fine line between a movie that just so happens to be crass, 
and one whose only purpose is to turn stomachs.
The "plot" goes something like this: a group of male friends make a pact to 
make annual monetary contributions to a pot that will go to the one who 
remains single the longest, without getting married. By the time they hit 27, 
the pot has hit a cool half-million dollars, and only two of them have yet to 
tie the knot--Michael (Jerry O'Connell) and Kyle (Jake Busey). When Michael 
goes in debt after a bit of failed gambling in Vegas, he tracks down Natalie 
(Shannon Elizabeth), the one woman Kyle has slept with in his life whom he 
had actual feelings for. Having lost her virginity to Kyle seven years 
before, only to be nastily spurned by him and left with only a roll of 
quarters to call a taxi, Natalie decides to help Michael out and give Kyle a 
taste of his own medicine. Their plan entails her managing to steal his heart 
(no easy feat for such a cold-hearted womanizer) and marrying him, only to 
quickly get it annulled and share half of the money Michael will receive. In 
the process, Michael begins to fall in love with Natalie himself.
Sharing certain similarities with 2000's despicable "Whipped," "Tomcats" is a 
step above that picture, but shares the same downfall: none of the characters 
are likable people. Michael may be the protagonist, and therefore the nicest 
guy to be found, but his foregoing conclusion that all women are merely sex 
objects is awfully shallow and distasteful, particularly for a young man in 
his late-twenties. Michael is played by Jerry O'Connell (1999's "Body 
Shots"), a bright-faced veteran actor best known for playing the chubby, 
scaredy-cat Vern in 1986's "Stand by Me." O'Connell runs with the part, and 
goes all out in embarrassing himself in certain scenes, but he can't overcome 
the fact that Michael isn't a particularly interesting or amiable individual.
If there is anyone to care about (and I use such a term loosely), it is 
Natalie, played with an undeniable sweetness by Shannon Elizabeth (2000's 
"Scary Movie"). Natalie is a police officer who also happens to be an 
enormously beautiful woman. She is smart, strong-willed, and doesn't put up 
with being disrespected by anyone, so it comes off as somewhat of a 
contradiction that she would waste her time helping Michael out with 
something so childish. If Natalie is harmed by the confines of the dumb, if 
ambitiously disgusting, screenplay, it is solely thanks to Elizabeth that she 
remains an intelligent girl. 
If the idea of watching a big, hospital-set chase scene for an enlarged, 
cancerous testicle that concludes in a cafeteria sounds potentially funny, 
then "Tomcats" may be worth a look. It most certainly can't be criticized for 
a lack of energy, and is entertaining to a point, but one has to wonder how 
low this crude genre can possibly go before it stops being innocently fun and 
just becomes an example of pointlessly offensive bad taste. "Tomcats," more 
so than most of the other recent films of its ilk, treads dangerously close 
to becoming the latter.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In TOMCATS, writer and first-time director Gregory Poirier, whose 
scripts have ranged from the superb (ROSEWOOD) to the pathetic (GOSSIP), 
sets a raunchy tone from the get-go, trying, as so many have, to turn 
out the next THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY.  In a long-running testicle 
scene, which will have the men in the audience squirming, he gets large 
laughs that do approximate those produced by the now classic zipper 
scene in MARY.  Ah, if all of this hit-and-miss movie were just that 
crudely funny, TOMCATS could have some hit potential.  Of course, 
without name stars like Diaz, Dillon and Stiller, a big success is hard 
to pull off.
The plot concerns some happy bachelors who are reluctantly wedding 
bound.  In order to encourage each of these self-proclaimed tomcats to 
remain single as long as possible, they form a pool, which gets invested 
in a go-go mutual fund.  Apparently the movie was wrapped pre-crash 
since the cash in the account soars to half-a-million dollars.  The last 
man standing unhitched gets to take home the loot.
The possibility of riches becomes essential to Michael Delaney (Jerry 
O'Connell) after he loses it all at the craps table.  A disreputable 
casino owner gives Michael four weeks to come up with what he owes, or 
he will be killed.  Since there is only one other unmarried man among 
his buddies, all he needs to do is convince him to the tie the knot with 
someone.
Kyle Brenner (Jake Busey), a man who once vowed to nail every woman on 
the planet with the exception of his mother and his grandmother, is the 
man that Michael must convince of the joys of marital bliss.  A man with 
an ego and a libido the size of Montana and a brain the size of a 
rabbit's, Kyle gives bad taste a bad name.  Among the bizarre sexual 
pleasures he has discovered is the titillation factor of having sex with 
a barfing woman.
Michael, however, discovers Kyle's weakness.  The one memorable woman in 
Kyle's life is a police officer named Natalie Parker (Shannon 
Elizabeth), although he only had his traditional one-night stand with 
her.  Offering to split the earnings with her, Michael gets Natalie to 
entice Kyle to say "I do."  Kyle's perfect woman is a "cosmetics counter 
girl," since they are subservient and smell good, so Natalie poses as a 
perfume pusher in order to turn Kyle on.  The trouble, of course, is 
that the commitment-phobic Michael falls for Natalie.
Along the way, the jokes come fast and furious.  Most are as lame as the 
old out-of-control water hose gag.  Some, however, are quite funny, 
including one in which all the wives of Michael's old buddies are 
nursing their babies at a restaurant.  This over-the-top lactating scene 
will undoubtedly turn off as many viewers as it will amuse.
Although the uneven TOMCATS isn't quite worth recommending, it does 
produce some nice laughs.  And somehow, the little romance between 
Michael and Natalie does have some surprising charm.  Oh well, at least 
the film's a lot better than last week's crude comedy, SAY IT ISN'T SO, 
although that isn't much of a compliment.
TOMCATS runs 1:32.  It is rated R for strong sexual content including 
dialogue and for language.  It would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Max Messier
The one statement used in defining a film that drives fear and loathing
into my heart is invariably "an outlandish comedy."  They try in vain to
recycle the originality of American Pie, Porky's, Road Trip, or South
Park, attempting to meld a T&A gross-out contest with a love story, and
they always fail miserably.
Tomcats wins, hands-down, the lowest common denominator award so far
this year.  It's a trashy, sexist, crude comedy revolving around the
values of commitment, honesty, and screwing your friends over for half a
million dollars.  In the process, it throws us numerous sex partners,
Bill Maher playing a thug named Carlos, true love, and an escaping
testicle.
Here's the plot. A group of seven buddies individually throw together
$1,000 in a betting pool and the last man unwed gets the prize money. 
Jerry O'Connell, who will forever be the fat kid from Stand by Me, plays
a two-dimensional struggling cartoonist named Michael, who ends up
losing $51,000 in Vegas shooting craps.  Unable to pay the debt, a
quasi-take-no-shit mob boss named Carlos (Bill Maher) gives him 30 days
to come up with the money or else forfeit his life.  Michael concocts a
scheme to win the pot, which has grown to $500,000 through mutual fund
investing, by getting his buddy Kyle (Jake Busey, the man with the
largest incisors in the world) married.  Michael finds Natalie (Shannon
Elizabeth), an old flame of Kyle's, and convinces her to marry him
whereupon they'll split the money.
A few questions raced through my mind during the screening.  Could
Shasta McNasty be creditable as a romantic lead?  How could Bill Maher
play a thug named Carlos?  Could that foreign-exchange chick from
American Pie actually act her way through a movie with all of her
clothes on?  How could the screenwriter of Rosewood write and direct "an
outlandish comedy"?  How many chicks in skimpy outfits would there
ultimately be?
Tomcats is as a light as the edited-for-TV version of Animal House.  The
acting is sub-par, the comedy is nonexistent, the thought of a man
chasing a severed testicle through a hospital is pitiful, and a fat man
falling down in every scene is only funny if it's Chris Farley.  Which
it isn't.  The parody corniness also has to stop.  I never imagined that
John Woo's trademark use of birds, or rose petals falling onto a
semi-naked girl would become instant clichés through overuse.  With
Tomcats, these routines get groans from the audience.
If bad acting, hot chicks in skimpy outfits, a script devoid of humor,
champagne laced with a Viagra-like substance, lesbian threesomes, and
Jerry O'Connell being whipped by an S&M grandmother are your idea of a
hot date, Tomcats is the movie for you.  If not, save your eight bucks
and spend it at your local strip club.
Director: Greg Poirier
Producers: Paul Kurta, Alan Riche, Tony Ludwig
Writer: Greg Poirier
Starring: Jerry O'Connell, Jake Busey, Shannon Elizabeth, Jaime Pressly,
Horatio Sanz, Bill Maher
http://www.mediatrip.com/tomcats/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Gregory Poirier.
Cast: Jerry O'Connell, Shannon Elizabeth, Jake Busey, Horatio Sanz, Jaime 
Pressly, Bill Maher, David Ogden Stiers, Bernie Casey, Garry Marshall.
2001 - 95 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sexuality, brief nudity, and cringe-inducing humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 31, 2001.
At this point in today's mainstream cinema, gross-out humor has become as 
prevalent as the appearance of Friday during each week. Last week's bid for 
yuks (as well as yucks) was "Say It Isn't So," and this week, it's "Tomcats," 
a raunchy-as-all-hell comedy written and directed by first-time filmmaker 
Gregory Poirier. Some of the material is very funny, to be sure, but much of 
it doesn't work because, like "Say It Isn't So," the editing isn't sharp 
enough to do the jokes complete justice. It doesn't help that a complete 
20-minute portion of the movie forgets the premise and is solely devoted to 
the setup and payoff of a joke so gross it makes "Scary Movie" look 
relatively tame in comparison. Another 10-minute section sets up a dominatrix 
sequence involving an elderly woman that also has nothing to do with the 
story. There is a fine line between a movie that just so happens to be crass, 
and one whose only purpose is to turn stomachs.
The "plot" goes something like this: a group of male friends make a pact to 
make annual monetary contributions to a pot that will go to the one who 
remains single the longest, without getting married. By the time they hit 27, 
the pot has hit a cool half-million dollars, and only two of them have yet to 
tie the knot--Michael (Jerry O'Connell) and Kyle (Jake Busey). When Michael 
goes in debt after a bit of failed gambling in Vegas, he tracks down Natalie 
(Shannon Elizabeth), the one woman Kyle has slept with in his life whom he 
had actual feelings for. Having lost her virginity to Kyle seven years 
before, only to be nastily spurned by him and left with only a roll of 
quarters to call a taxi, Natalie decides to help Michael out and give Kyle a 
taste of his own medicine. Their plan entails her managing to steal his heart 
(no easy feat for such a cold-hearted womanizer) and marrying him, only to 
quickly get it annulled and share half of the money Michael will receive. In 
the process, Michael begins to fall in love with Natalie himself.
Sharing certain similarities with 2000's despicable "Whipped," "Tomcats" is a 
step above that picture, but shares the same downfall: none of the characters 
are likable people. Michael may be the protagonist, and therefore the nicest 
guy to be found, but his foregoing conclusion that all women are merely sex 
objects is awfully shallow and distasteful, particularly for a young man in 
his late-twenties. Michael is played by Jerry O'Connell (1999's "Body 
Shots"), a bright-faced veteran actor best known for playing the chubby, 
scaredy-cat Vern in 1986's "Stand by Me." O'Connell runs with the part, and 
goes all out in embarrassing himself in certain scenes, but he can't overcome 
the fact that Michael isn't a particularly interesting or amiable individual.
If there is anyone to care about (and I use such a term loosely), it is 
Natalie, played with an undeniable sweetness by Shannon Elizabeth (2000's 
"Scary Movie"). Natalie is a police officer who also happens to be an 
enormously beautiful woman. She is smart, strong-willed, and doesn't put up 
with being disrespected by anyone, so it comes off as somewhat of a 
contradiction that she would waste her time helping Michael out with 
something so childish. If Natalie is harmed by the confines of the dumb, if 
ambitiously disgusting, screenplay, it is solely thanks to Elizabeth that she 
remains an intelligent girl. 
If the idea of watching a big, hospital-set chase scene for an enlarged, 
cancerous testicle that concludes in a cafeteria sounds potentially funny, 
then "Tomcats" may be worth a look. It most certainly can't be criticized for 
a lack of energy, and is entertaining to a point, but one has to wonder how 
low this crude genre can possibly go before it stops being innocently fun and 
just becomes an example of pointlessly offensive bad taste. "Tomcats," more 
so than most of the other recent films of its ilk, treads dangerously close 
to becoming the latter.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bunch of guys make a bet that would score the last remaining bachelor
among them a pile of money. When one of the buddies falls into a large debt,
he tries to get his last friend married, so that he could win the loot.
Hilarity ensues?
CRITIQUE:
The funniest scene in this movie involves a man chasing a testicle down
hospital hallways...'nuff said! I personally thought that was a funny
sequence, but unfortunately the rest of the film doesn't attain that level
of "high-brow" humor, with flat jokes for the most part, lame sketch pieces
and plot holes the size of my big ass!! Okay, okay, so we don't exactly go
to see these movies for the story lines...that's a given. So what about the
T&A, you might ask? Nada! What the hell's up with teen T&A flicks nowadays,
when the only asses we get to see are those of Jerry O'Connell and not
Shannon Elizabeth?! C'mon people...I get enough teasing in my personal life,
when I go to see these kinds of movies, I wanna git what's coming to me, for
God's sakes!! Alright, alright...I'm gonna calm down now. Harumph, okay back
to the movie. Basically, this film is exactly what you'd expect: stupid,
mindless and at very few times, funny. Unfortunately, most of the film is
lame, with idiotic scenes of guys jerking off in sperm banks, a sweet
librarian turning into a S&M mistress (a scene that went on for waaaay too
long) and unrelated parody scenes of MI2 and AMERICAN BEAUTY.
And don't bother trying to make sense out of the story, since the filmmakers
are more interested in showcasing over-the-top sexual situations which go
nowhere, than filling out the gaping holes in the plot line. I mean, they
actually try and build up Shannon Elizabeth's character at one point, only
to have her disappear for about twenty minutes midway through the film. What
the &*#@? Anyway, I might still recommend this sucker extremely reluctantly,
but only on video, and even then, only if someone else pays for it, and even
then, only if you're drunk! At that point, I think you might enjoy the movie
for what it is. Admittedly, I did dig Garry Marshall's small but funny cameo
appearance, the energetic opening credits and the outtakes during the
credits, which were actually funny for once. And no matter how much I tried,
I couldn't help but see the actual fun that Jerry O'Connell was having in
this role, and I guess that's gotta count for something, right? Uhhhmmm,
then again, it's your money you'd be wasting on this dog, so maybe not. So a
quick recap says that there is no actual T or A in this movie, practically
no big laughs, a lame story line and lotsa cleavage? I don't know, this
movie doesn't try real hard to be much, so I guess maybe I shouldn't try so
hard to dissect it so much.
So let's end it on this note: are you ready to spend your hard-earned cash
on a film whose high point involves a testicle chase? Well, if your response
is a big hearty "yes", then this movie is made for you. If not, skip it and
go jerk off instead...you'll feel a whole better, trust me! BTW, what the
hell was Bill Maher doing in this thing?? Ugh.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Pie (7/10) - The Ladies Man (6/10) - Road Trip (7/10) - Saving
Silverman (5/10) - Say It Isn't So (3/10) - Swingers (10/10) - There's
Something About Mary (7/10) - Very Bad Things (8/10)

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you're wondering how far Hollywood can push the envelope in this
post-There's-Something-About-Mary world, look no further than the first film
from former Disney chief Joe Roth's new Revolution Studios.  All of those
years producing animated family films must have warped old Joe's mind just a
little bit because Tomcats is one raunchy piece of work.  But it's also
pretty funny, assuming you can handle jokes about, among other things,
diseased testicles, bestiality and dominatrix grandmothers.  Tomcats knows
what its target audience is, goes all out to entertain it and, in that
respect, the film should be a success.
The film tries rather hard to alienate everyone who isn't in that target
demographic almost immediately.  Tomcats' opening credits feature a group of
cartoon cats ogling, chasing and pretty much humping a busty bunch of
animated felines while, as if that wasn't already a frat-boy wet dream, a
new Offspring song plays in the background.  You barely notice the cartoon
fade to reality, where, seven years ago, the first member of a group of
pussyhounds called "Tomcats" is about to be married.  One boner joke later,
the unmarried 'Cats decide to kick money into a pot which will be given to
the last group member to get hitched.
Flash to present-day Las Vegas, where fat 'Cat Steve (Horatio Sanz, Saturday
Night Live) is about to marry a girl named Tricia (Jaime Pressly, Poor White
Trash), leaving only Michael (Jerry O'Connell, Mission to Mars) and Kyle
(Jake Busey, Enemy of the State) as the group's remaining bachelors.  When
Michael blows $51,000 playing craps, his life is threatened by a mobster
(played by the truly unthreatening Bill Maher) who gives the lad just 30
days to come up with the money.
Hence the crux of Tomcats story - Michael hatches a plan to make Kyle fall
in love with one of his many former conquests, leaving him the winner of the
kitty, which, thanks to some wise investing, has grown to nearly $500,000
(the movie must have taken place before the NASDAQ "correction").  He
strikes a deal with Natalie (Shannon Elizabeth, Scary Movie), an undercover
vice cop and the only girl Kyle thinks he could ever even think of marrying,
and the two begin to spend time together on recon missions to prepare their
strategy.  In a completely surprising development, Michael and Natalie end
up falling for each other.  Wait, I meant unsurprising.
While the story isn't worth the bar napkin on which it was probably
scribbled, Tomcats is full of some clever and disgusting sight gags, and has
a few decent recurring jokes involving Michael having all his property
repossessed, a possibly gay 'Cat, and Steve trying to catch his wife in bed
with other women.  Parodies of M:I-2 and American Beauty fall pretty flat,
and Elizabeth, Tomcats' sparkplug, isn't even in the first 20 minutes, and
then disappears for 20 right before the denouement.  On the plus side, the
finale includes a very funny performance from Garry Marshall.  O'Connell, a
pretty likeable actor, does a capable job with what seems like a script even
Brendan Fraser would have rejected (he even plays a cartoonist, like
Fraser's Monkeybone character).
Tomcats was written and directed by See Spot Run scribe Gregory Poirier, who
isn't quite in the same league as the brothers Wayans or Farrelly.  But it
looks like everybody had a blast making it (especially judging from the
closing credit outtakes, which were the best non-Jackie Chan clips I've seen
in a while), and that makes it more fun to watch.
1:35 - R for strong sexual content (nudity) including dialogue, and for
language
