Title
Review for Cleopatra (1934)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Much tighter than the 1963 spectacle, the 1934 version
also has high production values and elaborate sets.
While the campy performances make the film closer to
'Melrose Place' than a history lesson, they are also
a guilty pleasure.  Cecil B. DeMille both directed
and produced, and fans of 'The Ten Commandments'
will appreciate the costumes, cinematography and
choreography.  Scenes of a ship battle between the
Romans and Egyptians are particularly impressive,
as is a production number featuring bathing beauties
bearing clams.
"Cleopatra" uses well-known historical facts to form
the story's outline, but the contents are pure Hollywood
fantasy.  Cleopatra (Claudette Colbert), who is of Greek
ancestry, is the Queen of Egypt in first century B.C.
Powerful Rome threatens her kingdom, and to preserve
it she takes first Julius Caesar (Warren William), then
Marc Antony (Henry Wilcoxon) as lovers.  But Octavius
(Ian Keith) is dismissive of her charms, and vows to
take Egypt as Rome's prize possession.
Colbert as the flirtious, scheming, pampered Cleopatra
puts more warmth into the role than Elizabeth Taylor
was capable of.  While not a household name today,
she was one of the most famous and successful actresses
of the 1930s and 1940s, usually playing plucky heroines
in romantic comedies.  1934 was a great year for Colbert,
as she would win the Best Actress Oscar for "It Happened
One Night"
Caesar and especially Antony are cast as stupid, grasping
egotists, giving their characters welcome if unintentional
comic aspects.  The cinematic tendency to depict Roman
rulers as selfish and corrupt is present as well.
"Cleopatra" was nominated for Best Picture, but settled
for Best Cinematography (Victor Milner).  It was also
nominated for Best Assistant Director (Cullen Tate),
Best Editing (Anne Bauchens) and Best Sound
(Franklin Hansen).  Despite the presence of DeMille,
the 1934 version of "Cleopatra" cost one-fiftieth of its
1963 successor, and was a great box office success.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
