Title
Review for Halloween H20: 20 Years Later (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Sanford
        In a summer full of overlong epics like ``Armageddon'' and
``The Mask of Zorro,'' a modest quickie like ``Halloween H20: Twenty
Years Later'' seems refreshingly unpretentious, even though it takes
almost as long to pronounce that unwieldly title as it does to watch
the movie. But here's a case in which brevity is something of a
handicap.
  There are some intriguing issues bubbling just below the
blood-spattered surface of ``H20,'' which brings Jamie Lee Curtis of
the original two ``Halloween'' movies to restore some much-needed
class to the slasher-flick genre, but the film's 85-minute running
time leaves scores of irritating unanswered questions and unresolved
issues.
  All right, no one buying a ticket for ``H20'' is going in
expecting an insightful study of human nature, but much of the movie's
first hour devotes itself to detailing the disturbing, fragile bond
between Curtis' character Laurie Strode and her 17-year-old son John
(Josh Hartnett).
  Still traumatized from her violent brushes with her
psychotic brother Michael Myers, Laurie now lives under the alias of
Keri Tate and oversees Hillcrest, an exclusive prep school. She's
referred to by John as a ``functioning alcoholic,'' which apparently
means she can pound glasses of chardonnay at lunch, down a
triple-vodka at dinner and still have the energy to harangue
Hillcrest's useless security guard (LL Cool J).
  Director Steve Miner, whose previous films include the
clever sleeper ``Warlock,'' manages to sustain a fair level of tension
as Laurie's drink-induced hallucinations of Michael give way to the
all-too-real thing, the chalky-faced killing machine who shows up at
school while the kids are away on a Halloween field trip. While family
counseling might have worked wonders for other siblings in similar
situations, Laurie and Michael prefer to resolve their differences
with big knives, heavy machinery and the always-reliable fireman's ax.
  Curtis is both ``H20' ''s trump card and its biggest
problem, the trouble being that she does such a fine job of
illuminating Laurie's hollow shell of a life that we can't help but
want to know more about her and how she's managed to keep it together
for as long as she has. There's considerably more attention paid to
characterization here than one would expect in a horror film, and that
may cause ``H20'' to seem slightly sluggish to fans raised on the
high-energy, hip wit of the ``Scream'' movies.

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated R: horror violence, gore, language.
Starring: Jamie Lee Curtis, Michelle Williams, Jodie Lynn O'Keefe, LL Cool J, 
Josh Hartnet, Adam Arkin, Janet Leigh.
In 1978 John Carpenter created the most terrifying film ever put on a piece 
of film. It shocked audiences in movie theatres, and was named the next 
'Psycho' by many critics. It became one of the biggest cult films of all time 
and remains my favorite horror film of all time. I am a huge fan of Halloween 
and I try to collect everything I can on it. A sequel followed in 1981 and 
was a great film, as well as a big box office success. A third, fourth, 
fifth, sixth and now seventh film followed, with only two, four and seven 
being truly good. When I heard they were going to make another Halloween film 
with Jamie Lee Curtis I almost peeed in my pants because I was so happy, and 
I must say I was quite impressed on how good this film was being the seventh 
movie in a long running series.
Keri Tate (Jamie Lee Curtis) is a young woman tormented by memories of her 
past, because her name used to be Laurie Strode, who was the sister of 
Michael Myers to whom he came after her 20 years ago. Keri is now living in 
California with her son as the head of a school. She lives with her 17 year 
old son (Josh Hartnett) who is a bit rebelious along with his girlfriend 
(Michelle Williams). Keri or Laurie as I should say has told no one about her 
past and how her brother tried to kill her, and how she faked her death. But 
on one unfaithful night, Halloween 20 Years Later terror never dies because 
Michael Myers has come back once again to stalk Laurie and her son, but this 
time its a fight to the finish, and this time its final.
The movie is well directed by Steve Miner who does a great job with some of 
his death scenes while putting plenty of suspense in them as well. His camera 
shots are chilling, and he puts John Carpenter's classic score in the movie 
very well, and once scene at the end put chills down my back, I realized this 
time Laurie is hunting down Michael, instead of vice versa. Kevin Williamson 
who is known for his "Scream" and "Dawson's Creek" fame writes the screenplay 
surprisingly well, but makes it way too screamish at times, but never out of 
sync with the Halloween atmosphere. 
Jamie Lee Curtis makes a sensational return to the horror genre, and brings 
her character Laurie Strode back to life. After being tortured for years, you 
can still tell Laurie is scarred by what happened those 20 years ago. She 
brings Laurie out to her fullest and constantly I thought of scenes from the 
first movie. She is without a doubt the best thing in the movie. Josh 
Hartnett plays her son and although he is good in the part, you can really 
tell he is acting. He doesn't seem to want to be there at times, which is the 
opposite with his girlfriend played fantastically by Michelle Williams. To 
round out the cast there is more good performances from Jodi Lynn O'Keefe and 
Adam Arkin of the Chicago Hope fame.
The movie has its goods as described above and has many chills and scares in 
it, but its major flaw comes from the fact that it seems too teenish and 
screamish at times, if only John Carpenter and Debra Hill got back together 
and made this film. It's also way too short, and there is too many jump 
scenes.  But even with these flaws "Halloween: H20" is a fantastic sequel to 
my favorite horror film.
