Title
Review for Beach, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
31

Author
Michael Dequina
After the global phenomenon that was _Titanic_, Leonardo DiCaprio truly
was the "King of the World" (sorry, James Cameron), having the newfound
power to choose whatever follow-up project he wanted--and at any price. 
But much like his co-star Kate Winslet, DiCaprio has shunned obvious
blockbuster efforts and instead opted for more uncommercial works--such
as Woody Allen's _Celebrity_ and now _The_Beach_, a stylish and
unconventional drama that certainly won't earn him much favor with his
fanbase of screaming teenage girls.
That demographic may appreciate the fact that _The_Beach_ gives the
twentysomething DiCaprio ample opportunity to show off his shockingly
pre-pubescent physique.  Such flesh-baring may lead one to think that
Danny Boyle's adaptation of Alex Garland's novel is a glamour project,
but it isn't.  In fact, I don't think that young female audience will
otherwise find much interest with the fairly dark story of DiCaprio's
Richard, an American on vacation in Thailand, who sets out to find a
legendary island paradise along with a French couple (Virginie Ledoyen
and Guillaume Canet).  They succeed, only to find a secret society led by
the mysterious Sal (Tilda Swinton), who, after some initial trepidation,
welcomes the newcomers into the exclusive and self-sufficient community,
which is sort of a perpetual beach resort.
The message of _The_Beach_ does not take long to come clear; it is
rather obvious that reality will ultimately creep in and shatter the
delusion of such a utopian lifestyle.  The romantic subplot, involving
Richard and Ledoyen's Françoise, never really catches fire.  That fact is
partly due to the screenplay by longtime Boyle collaborator John Hodge,
which doesn't quite establish strong character foundations on the page,
hence making some of Richard's late character turns feel arbitrary.
However, _The_Beach_ is a less a film about its narrative than its
style, and as he has in the past (excepting his last film, the
disastrous-on-all-levels _A_Life_Less_Ordinary_), Boyle is able to engage
the audience with his style when the script falters.  His forays into
surrealism are especially inspired, such as a strange scene where
Richard's jungle adventures literally turn into a video game.  This scene
was met with much derisive laughter from the audience with whom I saw the
film, but it is actually a rather inventive way to show how immaturely
and lightly he takes such a real and serious situation.  Boyle is ably
supported by cinematographer Darius Khondji, who makes the beach as
impossibly beautiful as it should be.
Adding immeasurably to _The_Beach_'s watchability is, indeed, DiCaprio. 
His teen idol status may be the primary reason he gets so much ink in the
press now, but his talent will keep his name in the memory for years to
come.   _The_Beach_ is certain to fail at the box office (I can see the
headlines now--"Leo's Post-_Titanic_ Bellyflop"), but it further proves
DiCaprio to be an interesting and boldly risk-taking actor--even if the
risks don't always completely pay off.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Christopher Null
     Danny Boyle says he was "keen to distance this movie from LORD OF
THE FLIES, which THE BEACH has been unfairly compared to."  Okay, so THE
BEACH is not LORD OF THE FLIES.  LORD OF THE FLIES has a lot more going
for it.
     Many a confused moviegoer has already asked me what the heck this
film is about, since the trailer makes it out to be something akin to,
er, LORD OF THE FLIES.  The movie, based on the novel by Alex Garland,
traces the Thailand trip of young Richard (DiCaprio), who in Bangkok
encounters a crazy guy named Daffy (Carlyle, who has nary an
understandable line of dialogue in the whole movie).
     Daffy ends up offing himself, but not before teasing Richard with a
map to a remote Thai island, where the perfect beach can be found.  So,
with two French acquaintances (Francoise and Etienne - Ledoyen and
Canet, respectively) from his Bangkok hotel, they manage to trek to the
remote paradise.
     Turns out the beach really is there.  A band of expatriates from
around the world (led by Swinton) live there, in fact, and they have an
uneasy peace with the local pot farmers across the island, who carry
some big guns and a lot of chest-beating anger and paranoia.  The
arrival of the trio turns out to be good and bad -- but mostly bad.
     Writer-director-producer team Hodge-Boyle-Macdonald have put
together two of the best films of the last decade (SHALLOW GRAVE and
TRAINSPOTTING), and the limbo bar for THE BEACH is set incredibly high.
Unfortunately, it doesn't live up to their legacy, for a number of
reasons.
     TITANIC fans expecting their dashing Leo are going to be sorely
disappointed.  In THE BEACH, DiCaprio practically plays a parody of
himself, haughty and aloof, but underneath a coward and a habitual
liar.  The rest of the cast can safely be shrugged off, with
much-vaunted newcomer Virginie Ledoyen leaving virtually no memorable
impression.
     More than ever before, Boyle relies on camera trickery to tell the
story.  The problem is that, unlike in TRAINSPOTTING, where camera
tricks were used to get in the head of a heroin fiend, THE BEACH uses
them to mask defects in the script, which rambles on for 90 minutes
without much direction, before diverging into THE DEER HUNTER territory,
with Leo going inexplicably primal.  Even Boyle's kitschy
life-as-video-game trick has been done before, in Spike Lee's CLOCKERS.
     By film's end, the troubled shrugs of our audience would seem to
agree with me that no one really knows what to make of THE BEACH.  It
will likely appeal to moviegoers more interested in scenery than
substance -- just don't expect BEACH BLANKET BINGO.  This is APOCALYPSE
NOW: The Prequel.
Director: Danny Boyle
Producer: Andrew Macdonald
Writer: John Hodge
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume
Canet, Staffan Kihlbom, Robert Carlyle, Magnus Lindgren, Victoria
Smurfit
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
Normally, I try to avoid pitting novels and their film adaptations against
each other. Side-by-side comparisons are inevitable, of course, but
when i read the book and then go right out to see the movie, whether
each is good or not, I can't help noticing the subtle differences. The
things that were cut, the things that were changed, the things that
now make far less sense because of the other things that were cut and
changed.
I was about 40 pages from the end of Alex Garland's novel THE BEACH
when I saw the big-screen version. Like many adaptations, the
intricacies of the original story were cannibalized, simplified or
straight-up ignored in the movie. The substitute? Vague, steamy sex.
Sex that was only contemplated or not mentioned at all in the book now
becomes necessary because this is a Leonardo DiCaprio vehicle, and
that means the female element will be coming to see it. I guess director
Danny Boyle (Trainspotting) thinks the female element likes its
cinematic sex vague, steamy and seemingly out of left-field.
So, completely gone in the movie version are most of the moments of
human politics and wry humor. The voice of the narrator in this movie
isn't the one from the book -- it's Leo's, obviously, but the words aren't
usually even the same. They're dumbed-down, less clever, mostly
humorless and designed to fit in with the overall lack of subtlety in
DiCaprio's performance. He probably considers the early outbursts of his
character (absent from the book version) to be foreshadowing, but to
me they spoil most elements of nuance or surprise that should come
later on.
You want an example of a movie that perfectly captured the essence of
its source book? Look at the David Fincher-directed Fight Club. It
crackled with the kinetic energy of the book, condensing ideas instead
of simplifying, finding ways to show rather than tell or eliminate. Boyle
buries the narrative by moving from Point A to B to C, and so on. The
reasons why don't make much sense to newcomers. Motivation from
these characters? As far as the movie is concerned, the whimsy and
boredom on their faces are all the motivation that can be explained
within the given running time.
That's not to say THE BEACH is entirely bad; it's a fairly well-botched
adaptation job that manages to bring to life the sequestered, Eden-like
world of the book. I mentioned Fight Club because the opening of The
Beach almost reminded me of it. Leo's character is a world traveler out
on his own -- that's about all the background we get -- who is just now
touching down in Bangkok in search of thrills. While an edgy techno
score plays, Leo throws back a shot of snake blood while the assembled
group of Thais looks on, impressed with his American angst.
At the two-bit hotel he's staying in, walls so thin they don't even reach
the ceiling, Leo overhears the incoherent ramblings of a drunken
Scotsman (Robert Carlyle, who feels no pain and can push himself
longer and harder than any normal man). He's rambling about some
idyllic beach society that's hidden away from the eyes of modern man.
And he even has a map to the place, which he leaves for Leo to find
after he (i.e. the drunken Scot) slashes his wrists in the dead of night.
On a whim, Leo decides to strike out for this beach. On another whim --
a steamy, vague whim -- he asks the neighbors (Guillaume Canet and
Staffan Kihlbom, the French couple he could hear through the walls) to
go with him. And, no questions asked, no deliberation shown, they head
for the island, which is located on designated Marine Park land. That
means they have to swim from the next island over, and after Canet
and Kihlbom play a practical joke on him, we see just how volatile the
movie protagonist can get.
The movie shows us the island in all its tour-book beauty, as well as the
obstacle course travelers have to go through to arrive at THE BEACH. In
particular, the enormous waterfall and field of pot, carefully tended to
by the Thai drug dealers who occupy half the island. (Idyllic hippies and
Thai druglords sharing an island -- sounds like a bad, neo-"Gilligan's
Island" sitcom premise, doesn't it?)
Naturally, the politics of this secret society ("a full-scale community of
travelers not just passing through but actually living here") are toned
way down in the movie version. There's no real exploration of the work
details, no Tet festival, no food poisoning, and the "Jed" character (one
of the book's best) is missing entirely. What we do have are Keaty
(Paterson Joseph), the black Briton the Leo character bonds with, and
Sal (Tilda Swinton), the somewhat volatile unofficial leader of THE BEACH
group. This being DiCaprio country, the absence of plot politics is
compensated with an abundance of vague soap steam, most notably an
underwater, "phosphorescence" love scene.
THE BEACH was called the first mainstream Generation-X novel, but the
movie has been stripped of any such context, save the sampling of
Apocalypse Now moments and surreal Sega-game vision toward the
end. Now it's in Hollywood hands, which means the most profound idea
expressed is the paradox of trying to create an ideal paradise in a
frighteningly unideal world. These travelers want to hop from place to
place, experiencing thrills, but only as long as it comes with the
illusion
of uncharted territory. Too many other travelers there, and the original
people come to resent it. Rifts are created. Problems arise. (Oh, and
there's the Fight Club-familiar notion that ours is a generation raised in
unsatisfying, ungodly technological nightmare, and that there's no sane
way for us to cope.)
The ending is also of the "less complicated, more Hollywood" ideology.
We're denied the (ironically) much more cinematic shock-value ending of
the book, although I'm betting the MPAA wouldn't have been too keen
on that. Anyway, like I was saying, the reason I don't normally read
books before watching and reviewing their movie counterparts is
because of the nitpicky comparisons that result. This time, though, the
differences are enormous and noticeable and really distract from the
experience.
On a superficial level, I enjoyed the cinematography in THE BEACH, and
the virtual unknowns in the cast all hold their own with Leo. (You have
to wonder why DiCaprio is the only person anyone's heard of in The
Beach. Was there only $20 million in the casting budget to begin with?)
Even the cannibalized plot has some merit -- i.e. not all the book's
nuances are missing here -- but overall I'd definitely say this movie has
only the illusion of uncharted territory.
http://students.missouri.edu/~ahicks/movies.html

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Fox on February 11, 2000; certificate 15; 118 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Danny Boyle; produced by Andrew Macdonald.
Written by John Hodge; based on the novel by Alex Garland.
Photographed by Darius Khondji; edited by Masahiro Hirakubo.
Danny Boyle is one of the most hyperactive boors in modern cinema, the film 
director equivalent of someone who'd take your arthritic father to a rave, 
forcibly make him dance to the horrible music and claim to be promoting 
social integration between the generations. He takes gritty works of 
literature, which are filled with reality and truth, and shakes them up into 
shallow feature-length pop videos. Obviously he paid attention in film 
school, where they teach you conventional Hollywood structures and cheap 
tricks that please mass audiences; if only he'd realise you're supposed to 
move on after you graduate.
Boyle first trampled on a great book with "Trainspotting" (1996), a 
grotesquely lively romp based on Irvine Welsh's epic study of drug addiction 
in inner-city Scotland. Now the filmmaker, and his team of writer John Hodge 
and producer Andrew Macdonald, have brought us an adaptation of Alex 
Garland's "The Beach", in which Leonardo DiCaprio plays Richard, an American 
backpacker disillusioned by the tacky Westernisation of foreign culture. He 
walks through the cities of Thailand shaking his head at the hustle and 
bustle of yapping market traders, café bars full of people watching 
television, and vulgar drunken tourists.
In his fleapit hotel, the kid is kept awake by the sounds of a crazed 
Scottish pot-head who goes by the pseudonym of Daffy Duck (Robert Carlyle) 
and raves about a perfect beach which has so far been kept secret from these 
ruinous tourist crowds. He takes a liking to Richard, though, and gives him a 
map to this paradise before killing himself.
Richard and his French travelling companions, Étienne (Guillaume Canet) and 
Françoise (Virginie Ledoyen), do eventually get to the place Daffy promised 
them, and settle into the beautiful locale, which is populated by young folks 
just as sick as they are at the state of traditional holiday destinations. 
Their community is rather sophisticated -- everyone has work assignments, 
there are group meetings, huts have been well-built -- and yet more than 
anywhere else these people have been, their island offers them the 
opportunity to absorb parts of the world that haven't been trodden on. One of 
them describes it as a "beach resort for people who can't stand beach 
resorts".
The dream doesn't last, because inevitably people do find out about the 
place, and try to come. This invokes the violent anger of the dope farmers on 
the other side of the island -- an added devastation to the lives of our 
beach-dwelling friends, who have already begun to destroy their own peace by 
developing hostile paranoia about their privacy.
In his book, Garland found all the right notes to tell this story; he knew 
that the experience of paradise found and lost had to really HAPPEN to the 
reader, so it had some emotional charge and didn't just become a pretentious 
cogitation on man's tendency to ruin the gifts God gave him. His hero was a 
perceptive, down-to-earth Brit we could identify with. The beach society was 
made up of people looking for clean fun, not a bunch of freaks with some 
twisted revolutionary ideology. And their downward spiral emerged gradually, 
tragically, out of reasonable concerns that got out of hand.
Boyle and company, however, plunge enthusiastically into every pitfall 
possible. The middle passages of their film should settle into beach life, 
capture a feeling of tranquillity and make us hope that it can last; instead, 
the happy part of the plot is covered in a short montage where we see 
snippets of activity and hear DiCaprio's narration tell us how everything was 
going fine. Consequently the madness and carnage of the latter passages come 
from nowhere and mean nothing. The condensed structure, the introduction of 
irrelevant romantic subplots and the brief dialogue make "The Beach" a film 
of plot, which is a mistake, since it should be one of journey.
The production design and photography are impeccable, and DiCaprio's intense 
screen presence is always fascinating. Strange, then, how bland and 
superficial the film feels; I think it's because Boyle jumps around instead 
of absorbing atmosphere, and is working from a screenplay without any 
well-defined characters or key moments. The experience of reading "The Beach" 
and then seeing the film resembles the plight of the characters -- they found 
something wonderful, rejoiced in it, and then saw a bunch of careless 
bastards trample it into bloody pulp.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Homer Yen
"The Beach" is a structurally confusing film that I
can only describe has having multiple personality
disorder.  Every forty minutes of this two-hour film
begins with a new theme, virtually discarding what has
been set up in the preceding act.  It starts off
purposefully as a film about an innocent man seeking
new thrills in a dangerous environment.  But then in
the second act, the mood of the film abruptly changes
and it becomes a story about a love triangle on an
idyllic island paradise that evokes visions of "Blue
Lagoon".  Forty minutes later, the mood changes once
more, and it becomes a dumbed down version of "Lord of
the Flies" where an isolated community is discovered,
where their moral code touts maintaining a sense of
bliss at all costs.  By the time it's over, you can
only scratch your head and wonder what this film was
really meant to be about.  
The main character of "The Beach" is angst-ridden
Richard (Leonardo DiCaprio).  He travels to the
Netherworld of Bangkok where back alley merchants push
their wares upon unsuspecting tourists and scantily
clad women brazenly ask if you're looking for a good
time.  Richard's voice-over tells the audience that he
has come to this place because he is bored with his
life and feels that one way to reinvigorate himself is
to let go of the familiar and to enter into a world of
the unknown.
This seedy environment is just what Richard is looking
for.  He checks into a fleabag hotel where he meets
the crazed Daffy (Robert Carlisle).  He seems like a
raving lunatic, obviously high from heavy drug use and
looking as if he is afflicted with some sort of
psychosis.  Though his jagged behavior would distress
most of us, Richard listens to him as he speaks of a
mysterious island that contains the most perfect beach
that anyone has ever seen.  Moreover, the island
itself flourishes with enough hemp plants that can
make a small city high for life.  Captivated by the
idea, he asks two other hotel guests to join him on
his journey. They are worldly Etienne and the alluring
Francoise, who have also come to Thailand for reasons
similar to Richard's.  
Once they finally arrive at this paradise, however,
the mood of the story shifts to Richard's growing
desire for Francoise.  This particular plot point is
weak at best because there is absolutely no question
in my mind that Francoise will wind up with Richard. 
Etienne is about as exciting as fluffy, white sand. 
It's odd that Etienne never sees this coming, but
paradise has a way of hiding potential threats just
out of view.  And once the three stumble across the
hidden community (mood shift imminent), more events
transpire that depict its hidden dangers.  For
example, there are marijuana fields close by patrolled
by armed guards.  And the lagoon in which they swim
invites the occasional shark.
There are several ideas that are introduced in "The
Beach" and each one could merit its own feature-length
film.  There's the man vs. nature angle, the love
triangle angle, and the Utopia-gone-awry angle.  But
the film meanders so tremendously that its entire
purpose becomes blurred.  DiCaprio, as a result, has
an almost impossible time of trying to embody the
different states of mind that he and the film goes
through.  Consequently, the audience has an equally
difficult time trying to keep up.

Author
Greg King
THE BEACH (M).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Danny Boyle
Stars: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume 
Canet, Robert Carlyle, Lars Arentz Hansen, Paterson Joseph
Running time: 118 minutes.
Following the success of Titanic, Leonardo DiCaprio had his
pick of roles.  Instead of opting for something obviously commercial,
he has chosen a more risky and dramatically daring venture by starring
in the latest film from the Scottish trio behind the cult classic
Trainspotting.  Along with collaborators Andrew MacDonald and John
Hodge, Scottish director Danny Boyle stamped himself as a film maker
with a singular and unique vision.  However, their subsequent effort,
A Life Less Ordinary, was something of a disappointing mish mash that
met with a lukewarm response from audiences.  Their latest effort is
also something of an uneven and at times disappointing film that may
struggle to win over audiences.
DiCaprio plays Richard (no surname supplied), a young American
who heads off for the dangerous delights of Thailand, wishing to
experience sensations and sample sights a little off the beaten track.
He learns about a secret island and its fabulous beach from the
paranoid and clearly unhinged Daffy (Robert Carlyle) and decides to
check it out.  Accompanied by fellow tourists Francoise (Virginie
Ledoyen) and Etienne (Guillame Canet), Richard heads off to discover
this rumoured paradise situated away from the gaudy, flashy, tacky
regular tourist traps.
They discover an Eden populated by drop-outs who have
established their own community on this remote island, free of need,
greed and arcane rules and regulations.  They are largely self
sufficient, apart from occasional visits to the mainland for supplies.
Although they have no real structure to their utopian society, the
unofficial leader is Sal (Tilda Swinton, from Orlando, etc), one of
the founding members, who rules with a sense of benevolence.  This
eccentric close knit group share the island with some drug smugglers,
although the two vastly different communities exist together in an
uneasy and fragile truce.  But these outsiders and their malignant
presence unwittingly lay the seeds for the inevitable destruction of
this idyllic paradise.
Adapted from Alex Garland's acclaimed novel, The Beach is a
sort of contemporary parable about paradise lost, mixed with generous
overtones of Lord Of the Flies and Blue Lagoon.  It takes a different
tack regarding the dangers of innocent tourists travelling through
exotic regions of Asia that sets it apart from the more familiar
territory explored in films like the recent Brokedown Palace, etc.
Boyle certainly has a distinctive and exciting visual style,
but it sometimes clashes with the dramatic action of the film and
pushes it into a more surreal direction.  The film seems to lose
direction about half way through, especially when DiCaprio runs around
the island like a younger version of Rambo.
DiCaprio plays a thoroughly selfish and unlikeable character.
But he spends much of the film without a shirt, which will certainly
appeal to female audiences and fans of the actor.  But while his
performance sometimes lacks coherence, there is still plenty here to
suggest that he is capable of delivering impressive performances like
those of This Boy's Life, What's Eating Gilbert Grape? when given
interesting material to work with.
The Beach has been shot in Thailand, and Darius Khondji's
cinematography is certainly gorgeous.  The stunning locations are
complemented by Angelo Badalamenti's evocative music score.
Ultimately though, The Beach is something of a disappointment,
especially given the talent involved.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
If you've seen the trailer for The Beach, you may think that you have a
pretty good idea what the film is about.  Pretty American boy and pretty
French girl find a secluded desert island paradise, then roll around in
the sand and screw their brains out until some really mean guys find the
island and everything gets really scary.  That's what I got out of it,
anyway.
To call the trailer `misleading' would be a bit of an understatement.
Sure, there is still a secluded desert island paradise, and the boy and
girl are still pretty, but everything else happens quite differently.
Does it matter?  Hell, no.  This is, more than anything, a Leonardo
DiCaprio film.  The fact that he is shirtless for the majority of the
film is enough to guarantee that teenage girls throughout the country
will pry their eyes away from Total Request Live long enough to beg
their parents to get them into this R-rated film.
DiCaprio (Titanic) plays Richard, an American vacationing in Bangkok
that decides he's tired of doing the same thing as the other tourists in
Thailand.  Dude, when was the last time an American went to Thailand and
didn't have a harrowing experience?  The only person that ever had a
successful cinematic voyage to this southeast Asian country is Anna
Leonowens.  And she had to sing and hang around a gaggle of kids.  Just
go to the tourist traps, get VD, go home and get a shot.  Or better yet,
vacation only within your own country where, unless your last name
happens to be Griswold, everything is safer.
The Beach begins with a very Se7en-ish opening shot (cinematographer
Darius Khondji also worked on that film) showing Richard arriving in
Bangkok.  Although the city is referred to as `Good Time City,' Richard
explains (through a sometimes annoying voice-over) that he is easily
bored with the scene, which basically consists of spoiled kids looking
for a fresh location to toke up and the natives that try to take
advantage of their fat wallets and perpetual high.
In his one-star hotel, Richard meets the people staying on either side
of him.  There's Étienne (Guillaume Canet, In All Innocence) and
Françoise (Virginie Ledoyen, A Single Girl), the sex-crazed French
couple.  And then there's Daffy (Robert Carlyle, Angela's Ashes), a
deranged Scotsman that tells Richard about a secluded desert island
paradise of crystal-clear water, pure white sand, waterfalls and
never-ending fields of pot, just before offing himself because he can't
get the place out of his head.  There's Sign #2  don't go to the
island, Richard.
Of course, Richard goes to the island with Étienne and Françoise, thanks
to a map that Daffy left for him before he did himself in.  It takes a
while to get there, but when they do, the trio find the island every bit
as beautiful as they imagined, but it's also inhabited by a flock of
gun-toting Thai pot farmers, as well as a commune of hippies on
permanent vacation.  They are welcomed by the members of the beach
community, yet despite the perfect surroundings, Richard still seems
sullen, just because he wants to nail Françoise.
Before you know it, you're over an hour into the film and no clear
protagonist has been established.  Is it the shark that tries to gnaw on
unsuspecting swimmers?  Nope.  Is it the shifty-eyed boyfriend of the
group's leader?  Nope.  It's more of a destruction-from-within/Lord of
the Flies deal.  And that's not the only theme borrowed from other
works.  The Beach is chock full of references to American films about
the Vietnam War, Nintendo games and Looney Tunes characters.  It would
have been easy to imagine Richard turning into Marlon Brando in
Apocalypse Now, even without using clips from that film here.
The Beach is based on Alex Garland's wildly popular novel of the same
name  it's been called the first great book for the Generation X crowd
 and was made by the folks that brought you the wonderful Ewan McGregor
trifecta of Shallow Grave, Trainspotting and A Life Less Ordinary
(director Danny Boyle, screenwriter John Hodge and producer Andrew
Macdonald).  Those of you that read the book might be wondering, among
other things, why Ewan wasn't cast as Richard in the film, since the
character was a Brit in the novel.  Beats me; I'm wondering the same
thing.
>From what I understand, the novel offered a gruesome bloodbath for its
ending, but the closing reel of the film is a bit anti-climatic and
leaves a lot of issues unresolved.  Go figure  when was the last time a
movie didn't do the book justice?  In the filmmakers' defense, they did
not exploit the relationship between Richard and Françoise.  Though they
never `hooked up' in the book, Hodge's script offers a surprisingly
refreshing lack of romance between the nubile youngsters.
DiCaprio is solid as usual, Ledoyen does her job by looking fantastic in
a bikini, and Carlyle does the crazy thing as well as anyone in film
today.  If nothing else, The Beach looks and sounds fantastic.  Khondji
(Evita) and scoremeister Angelo Badalementi (The Straight Story) are
more responsible for effectively setting the tone of the film than the
script or acting.  Filmed on the Thai island Phi Phi Leh, The Beach
might be gorgeous enough to overcome any problems that you may have with
the script.
1:58- R for violence, nudity, strong sexual content, adult language and
drug use

Author
Steve Kong
The Beach is a highly entertaining film that falls prey to Hollywood in the 
end.
Let me start off first by saying that cinematographer Darius Khondji does a 
godlike job at shooting this film. Khondji shoots everything with a sense 
of grandeur and even if you don't enjoy the film, you can still watch The 
Beach for its postcard views.
In The Beach, we follow world traveler, Richard (Leo DiCaprio). Richard is 
on a trip to Bankok, Thailand. He is given a map to a perfect beach by a 
man known own as Daffy Duck (Robert Carlyle). So, being a free soul, 
Richard heads out to find this perfect beach. He asks his two neighbours in 
the hotel if they would like to join him, and they do. So, Richard, 
Françoise (Virginie Ledoyen), and Étienne (Guillaume Canet) set off on a 
journey to find paradise.
What they find is an island that is perfect, but has its own little 
secrets. On one side of the island are a group of men harvesting marijuana 
and on the other a small community that lives peacefully in what could 
easily be called paradise. The community is lead by a magnetic Sal (Tilda 
Swinton) who will do anything to keep the community a secret.
As acting goes, DiCaprio does well in the film. Though, the portion of the 
film where he goes through his madness really taxes our suspension of 
disbelief. But, DiCaprio does prove that he's not just a pretty face on 
screen and that he can actually act. Canet does well with his limited role 
as the Frenchman Étienne who is in the middle of a love triangle with 
Richard. The real surprise is Ledoyen who turns in a wonderful performance.
Direction by Danny Boyle is steady and he gets what he can out of the 
script by John Hodge (adapted from the novel by Alex Garland). This is not 
Boyle's best film.
The Beach has a great premise and explores some good issues  can paradise 
really be on Earth and what would you do to keep it perfect? But, by the 
climax of the film, everything has been put aside to end the film with a 
very Hollywood style ending. I would have liked to see something more 
substantive as an ending. As it stands, The Beach is a highly entertaining 
and beautiful film that is marred only by a shoddy ending.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I think it was director Quentin Tarantino who once related the experience of
watching a movie with an umbilical chord attachment to the screen. You see,
the chord apparently remains attached until "something" in the movie just
cuts it off, after which point, it is all but impossible to re-attach, and
your "relationship" with the film ends. This film had my chord attached till
about 3/4 of the way through but then...snip-snip!
PLOT:
A young American looking for adventure in Bangkok gets a hold of a secret
map to a paradise island and takes a couple of French friends along for the
ride. Once at the island, all is well among the community of folks lucky
enough to have found this utopian garden, that is...until things don't go so
well!
CRITIQUE:
The excellent showing by DiCaprio and the slick soundtrack don't take away
from the fact that this film starts off strong, slows down considerably
during its median and just goes kinda cooky in the end. For DiCaprio, one
can't really blame the kid for choosing this project over all others after
his gigantic TITANIC success. It doesn't pander to his teeny-bopper
followers or exploit his good-looks, it delivers a decent premise and many a
dark undertone, and it even sets him up with the hip director of
TRAINSPOTTING...so what's the problem? Well, it looked to me like the film
just didn't know what it wanted to be. Was it an action-adventure? Hmmmm,
not really. Was it a romance? Well, a little bit, but then not! Was it a
thriller? Not really, but there were a couple of thrilling scenes. It's hard
to say. Of course, none of this would really matter if the film's many
facets worked together to form a cohesive and entertaining whole, but
unfortunately, this film just slips up right under the wire. In fact, the
sudden "twist" near the end of the flick just kinda "lost me", on top of the
lingering pace once they had settled in at the island. Some people might dig
all that, but for me, it just felt a little ackward. Although I did enjoy
the "video game" sequence (you'll understand if you see the film).
Don't get me wrong, I'm into surrealism as much as the next guy, but after
waddling through what seemed like over an hour of "look how happy we all are
to be in paradise!" exposition, I was just expecting a little more out of
this film. But on the positive tip, this movie was packed with gorgeous
shots of places that we all wish we were at right now, moves along a little
smoother under the electro-sounds of the film's groovy soundtrack and
presents us with an actor by the name of Leonardo DiCaprio in top form! It's
good to know that he's still the great actor that he was before that damn
boat sunk his career into a professional abyss. Welcome back, dude. Having
said that, it's actually pretty hard to define the type of moviegoer that
would thoroughly enjoy this film, since it does meche many different styles
into one. Adventure fans might like some of it, romance seekers might enjoy
parts as well, a little drama, a little comedy. Hard to pinpoint. Of course,
most Leo fans should dig it just for his solid presence, but then again,
would those same people appreciate the HEART OF DARKNESS undertones?
Probably not.
All in all, this movie succeeds in style, music and Leo, but ultimately
fails to string along a story good enough to warrant a hearty
recommendation. Entertaining for a while, but faulty overall.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Leonardo DiCaprio's middle name is Wilhelm. That name comes from his German
mother's side, who apparently experienced a sudden kick from her unborn
child while enjoying a DaVinci painting at the Uffizi. Hence his first
name...Leonardo. His father was of Italian heritage, a comic book dealer,
but his parents got divorced only a year after his birth. At the age of
five, Leo was on his favorite kid's TV show, Romper Room, where we was
nearly tossed off for misbehaving. A great professional move on his part
came when he turned down the opportunity to play Robin in the Batman flicks.
Leo received $2.5 Million for his role in TITANIC, and about $20 Million for
his role in this movie.
French actress Virginie Ledoyen has been acting since the age of 11. She was
recently signed on as a L'Oreal celebrity model and nominated as "most
promising young actress" at the 1996 Cesar Awards. This was the first
"english" film in which both she and her French co-star Guillaume Canet had
ever been a part.
Reports of problems with the filming of this movie in Thailand were running
rampant over the past year. Another film which also ran into a multitude of
problems while filming was Coppola's APOCALYPSE NOW, a movie that is
actually featured in a scene in THE BEACH. A respectful homage, I am sure.
This film is based on the novel written by first-time author Alex Garland,
who is only thirty years old.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume
Canet. Directed by Danny Boyle. Rated R.
After a weirdly long two-year hiatus, the Titanic heartthrob is finally
back on screen but with a whimper rather than a bang. He has chosen The
Beach, an unusual film with a woefully confused script, one that
obviously wants to say something but is not sure what. Leonardo
Dicaprio's intense presence brings a visceral quality to the
proceedings but doesn't make the movie any less pretentious.
Someone should explain to Danny Boyle (Trainspotting) why most
directors take a few minutes at the beginning of the movie to let us
get accustomed to the characters, because Boyle forgets. He jumps
abruptly out of the starting gate with a voiceover from our
protagonist, a young tourist named Richard (DiCaprio). Richard is in
Bangkok -- why he is there and where he is from, we are not told. He is
exploring, experimenting with the city's vibrant culture (this, of
course, involves drinking some tasty-looking snake blood), looking for
something bigger than himself. Sitting in his ratty hotel room one
night, he encounters a crazy guy named, not surprisingly, Daffy (Robert
Carlyle) who tells him about an island paradise, an idyllic world of
white sands, clear waters and all the pot you can smoke.
Daffy also gives Richard a map, detailing how to get to the island. He
recruits a French couple next door, Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) and
Etienne (Guillaume Canet) and they are off in search of paradise. After
no small amount of effort, they finally reach their destination only to
be shot at by some mysterious marijuana farmers. They run off to the
other side of the island where they find what they were looking for --
a society of settlers living off the land. They rarely get off the
island and when they do, they are bound by a code of secrecy: the
farmers on the other side agreed to let them stay under the condition
that no other people come. The settlers, led by a mildly obsessed lady
named Cindy (Tilda Swinton) accept Richard, Francoise and the foxy
Etienne into their circle, but Richard realizes that he gave a copy of
the map to a bunch of pot-smoking idiots back on the mainland, possibly
endangering the future of this paradise.
There are, of course, chase scenes, shark attacks and other such
diversions. These are handled quite well by both Boyle and Dicaprio.
Boyle keeps the suspense up and Dicaprio is starting to show a real
screen presence, even if he still isn't the most expensive of actors.
Indeed the visceral level of The Beach has no problems at all, helped
out in a big way by the gorgeous scenery. Filmed in Thailand, the movie
is covered when it comes to sand and water. What it could have used to
supplement the pretty pictures is a clear sense of where it was headed
and what it was trying to say because the version that makes it onto
the screen is hopelessly lost within itself.
About halfway through, the storyline curves sharply. The protagonist
seems to become a modern-day Tarzan, going halfway insane and the movie
becomes annoyingly self-conscious. Its final message -- that there is
no such thing as paradise but the fun moments you have will last
forever -- is outrageous. What fun times? Almost being eaten alive?
Getting shot at? Having to leave a shark-bitten friend in the woods to
die? I have a feeling Boyle is trying to kill too many birds with one
stone here and as a result confuses himself -- and us -- completely.
Still, a lot of people are apt to walk away happy from this. Leo fans
will be delighted, as will fans of suspense genre films. But The Beach
overreaches its aim and when all is said and done, it falls flat on its
face thematically, if not viscerally.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Twentieth Century Fox
 Director: Danny Boyle
 Writer: Alex Garland (Novel), John Hodge
 Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen,
Staffan Kihilbom, Guillaume Canet, Robert Carlyle, Magnus
Lindgren, Victoria Smurfit
   There's a difference between touring and a traveling, just
as there is a distinction between movie reviewing and film
criticism.  One is superficial, the other penetrating.  One
caters to the need for pure entertainment, the other feeds the
hunger for insights.  A sightseer is safely encapsulated in his
tour bus, knowing that he has reservations in a good hotel on
the next stop of his journey and that he can complain and
perhaps get a partial refund if anything goes wrong.  The
traveler shucks this very human desire for security in return
for a chance more deeply to experience new things,
emotionally as well as intellectually.  Predictability for the
traveler is immaterial, for the tourist, indispensable.  In Alex
Garland's eerie novel which has been adapted for the screen
by Danny Boyle ("Trainspotting"), Richard (Leonardo
DiCaprio) is a backpacker with a vengeance.  Most Lonely
Planet types travel in groups, stick together in youth hostels,
maybe smoke some dope, and aside from the poverty of their
surrounding are not that much different from tourists.  Richard
by contrast has made the trip from America alone (there's a
hint that his girl friend had just dumped him and he's out to
leave the past behind), deplanes in Bangkok where he hasn't
the foggiest notion what he will do next, and by both
fortuitous and devastating serendipity meets up with crazy
Scot Daffy (Robert Carlyle) who has taken the room next to
his.
   Gaining possession of a secret map from the appropriately
named Daffy, Richard shares the information with some pals
he meets in the city and then goes off with a sexy French
couple, Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) and Etienne (Guillaume
Canet) to a remote island which you can be sure was never
seen by Aunt Betsy and Uncle Mort on their 30th anniversary
trip to the Far East.  There they discover a utopian
community of fellow pleasure-seekers, no one over the age of
35, led by queen bee Sal (Tilda Swinton)--who is adamant
about keeping the hideaway a secret from the rest of the
world.  This island Shangri-La is shared in much the way
that Haitians and Dominicans divide Hispaniola, except that
the fellows on the nether side of the island are gun-toting
marijuana farmers who strangely enough have allowed the
commune to remain for years.  Considering the attachment
that those surly local thugs have for their hidden expanse, the
most unbelievable aspect of the film is their willingness to
live and let live--provided that no additional Westerners
appear.  The brutality begins when a group of idiotic youth do
indeed approach the hideaway, though throughout Richard's
stay, events conspire to threaten the viability of the quixotic
community.
   John Hodge's screenplay advances a sexual relationship
that does not exist in the book and also converts the principal
character into an American rather than a Brit.  Director Boyle
moves Hodge's plot along smoothly from the pristine clear
waters of the beachfront vistas to the murky seas that snare
a group of pleasure-seeking youth.  The consensus of critics
is that the film is sharp enough during the initial half, as
Richard and his new pals find more pleasure in their trip than
any tourists with an extravagant Cook's booking possibly
could.  They get to jump into the turquoise waters of exotic
Thailand from a cliff higher than Acapulco's La Quebrada. 
Richard has the time of his life catching fish as our prehistoric
ancestors did and later in battling a shark to the death.  He
steals away the lovely Francoise from a young man who
shares her culture and language, and jaunts through
episodes experienced by fellows in other movies from "The
Blue Lagoon" to "Heart of Darkness."  Before some stoners
approach this paradise upsetting the balance of power
between the romantics of various cultures and the native drug
growers, the only problems seem to be what to do with a guy
who has been mauled by a shark (Sal rules that he cannot be
taken to the mainland lest the secret leak out) and how to
deal with the jealousies that inevitably arise in a closed
community where everyone knows his neighbor's every
move.  
   While Darius Khondji's lens takes in the taut DiCaprio body
and maturing face, "The Beach" does not unnecessarily
exploit the unique looks that make the superstar the
heartthrob of teenaged girls from Passaic to Port Moresby. 
DiCaprio holds his own with a fine performance, even
establishing a modicum of chemistry with the largely wasted
Ledoyen.  A surreal portion of the film toward the conclusion
featuring Leo as himself part of a hair-raising video game
recalls the fun of Tom Tykwer's "Run Lola Run" while giving
us in the audience a feeling of relief when we think, "Maybe
we did the right thing after all taking that American Express
tour of Paris."
   The film does give us insight into why so many of these
closely-knit communities ultimately fail: why the Israeli kibbutz
movement attracts only two percent of the population of that
country, why the Oneida Community in the United States
went belly-up, how the many communes founded during the
fun days of the late sixties and early seventies no longer
exist.  We can indeed go home again, and in fact our true
identities may be more in line with sitting at a computer
keyboard sipping latte than with experiencing our "natural
selves" in a shaggy, Club-Med style Garden of Eden.  "The
Beach" never really strays from the commercial track while
exploring its inhabitants' hopes and fears, but considering
that we in the audience can take it in without getting sand on
overheated feet makes the experience a worthy one indeed.
Rated R.  Running Time: 118 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Indra Moeljadi
This movie was full of controversy. The shooting was in a national park in
Thailand. Knowing that a Hollywood cast and crew was shooting their national
park, a bunch of environmentalists showed up to protest the shooting. And
things got worse when they found out that the leading role was Mr. Leonardo
DiCaprio. Hundreds of schoolgirls joined the environmentalist, in hope of to
catch a glimpse of Mr. DiCaprio. But then again, which teenage girl
wouldn't?
Another controversy concerns the leading role itself. Directed by Danny
Boyle, who directed Trainspotting, he has worked with Ewan McGregor on his
three previous films. So this one, being his fourth one, was also written
for Ewan McGregor. But the movie company wanted to make more money, and who
else can bring girls to the cinema just to watch his face over and over and
over again besides Leonardo? "Oooohhh, he's soooo cute." (Actually that is
quoted from the girl sitting next to me at The Beach). So Leonardo's in, and
Ewan can practice to be a better Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Richard (Leonardo DiCaprio) is travelling to Bangkok, Thailand on his own.
There he meets Daffy (Robert Carlyle), who gives him a map to a place, where
the beach is "paradise". Richard ask his two neighbors, Etienne and
Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) to come. So the three of them are set of to an
adventure in the Thailand.
Fast forward a bit (otherwise I'll be spitting the whole story out), and
Richard is left alone in the jungle. First he was lonely, he was afraid, he
was feeling rejected, but then he became Rambo. Rambo in a video game, to be
more precise. Which is funny, because he only has the looks, not the body of
a jungle survivor. But then again, he is Leonardo, and that's enough for
three quarter of the audience.
After the whole adventure then it's back to the real world. A very nice
ending scene, where the director really shows the difference between
paradise and real world. How we communicate using tools, and not using
direct methods.
Think of Trainspotting, but this time they're not high on drugs, but on the
beauty of pure nature.
Indra Moeljadi
is hoping someone will give a map to The Beach, wherever that is

Author
James Sanford
         Given his post-"Titanic" heartthrob status, it's easy to forget
Leonardo DiCaprio has usually been an actor who likes to work close to
the edge. "Titanic" and "The Man in the Iron Mask" seem almost
out-of-character for the man who previously starred in such dark works
as "The Basketball Diaries," "This Boy's Life" and "Total Eclipse."
While "The Beach" returns DiCaprio to the dangerous ground on which he's
given his best performances, the film itself turns out to be much like
its hero Richard: good-looking, slightly cryptic and ultimately more
than a little tiresome.
 The fault lies not with DiCaprio, who does as much as he can to
make Richard intriguing, or with director Danny Boyle, who brings to
"The Beach" a few splashes of the audacity that marked his breakthrough
films "Shallow Grave" and "Trainspotting," as well as his 1997 wash-out
"A Life Less Ordinary." Instead, the problems with the picture stem from
the script by John Hodge, adapted from the Alex Garland novel of the
same name. It's all set-up and no pay-off, a problem that also hobbled
Hodge's "A Life Less Ordinary."
 "The Beach" does, however, offer oodles of magnificent scenery
and, in its first half, a great wish-fulfillment premise. Richard, an
American in Thailand, comes into possession of a crudely drawn map of a
secret island where, supposedly, the pot is plentiful and the people
peaceful. With a couple of French tourists in tow, Richard journeys to
this private paradise and finds it more than lives up to its billing.
Sure, there are a few machine gun-toting farmers and a couple of
bloodthirsty sharks on hand to occasionally harsh everyone's mellow, but
every home has its drawbacks.
 There's also a secretive leader of this bohemian cult named Sal
(Tilda Swinton of "Orlando"), who will eventually cause friction between
Richard and his new love Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen). Sal also gets
what's sure to be one of the most memorable lines of 2000: "Get some
sleep. I may wish to have sex again before we eat breakfast."
 Exactly how the downfall of the beach club comes about is
awkwardly written and getting the plot on track into the third act
requires Richard to do some astounding stupid things which all but
eliminate any interest we have in him. Hodge clearly wants to turn this
daydream into "Apocalypse Now" (Richard even sees a few clips of the
Francis Ford Coppola epic during his stay in Bangkok), with a little bit
of "The Deer Hunter" tossed in for good measure. Unfortunately, the
swing from the movie's daydreamy first two-thirds into its nightmarish
finale doesn't exactly work.
 What most viewers will probably take away from "The Beach" is
memories of all that gorgeous water, in every conceivable shade of blue,
and cinematographer Darius Khondji's striking images of DiCaprio, who is
photographed by candlelight, in the glow of an iMac screen and even
against the eerie radiance of "disturbed plankton shrimp." As in all his
films, Boyle has doused the soundtrack in alluring techno and
electropop, with themes by Underworld and All Saints combining
harmoniously with the surging score by Angelo Badalamenti ("Twin
Peaks"). It's obvious though that Boyle and Hodge intended the audience
to go home with much more on their minds than postcard-pretty scenery
and terrific music. James Sanford

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE BEACH  * (2000) Directed by Danny Boyle;Written by JohnHodge, 
based on the book by Alex Garland. Photography, Darius Khondji. 
Editing, Masahiro Hirakubo. Production design, Andrew McAlpine. 
Music, Angelo Badalamenti. Produced by Andrew MacDonald.  Cast: 
Leonardo DiCaprio (Richard), Virginie Ledoyen (Francoise), Guillaume 
Canet (Etienne), Robert Carlyle (Daffy), Tilda Swinton (Sal), 
Paterson Joseph (Keaty).A  20th Century Fox release. 120 minutes. R 
(drugs, sex)
The long e (ea) as in Beach, is pronounced by many native speakers of 
other languages (even by persons who speak fine English) in such a 
short manner that The Beach becomes the Bitch.
Leonardo DiCaprio could be DiCapriocorn. But he's the darling of 
teens, which fact is reinforced by audiences getting younger and 
younger, as do,  compared to many earlier decades, performers on the 
screen.
Di Caprio is said to have been 20 million for his role.
The movie, made by the Scottish team that gave us "Trainspotting," 
is a kind of perverse Swiss Family Robinson, all the more Swiss given 
the holes in the cheesy script.
Generation Xer Richard (changed from the book to an American) is yet 
another 20-something who's searching for himself, in Thailand. 
Bangkok, the sex-for-sale capital of the world, attracts some 
(otherwise) quite respectable adults, including couples, including 
persons with deep pockets.
It also attracts many among the Young, the Dumb, and the Druggies. 
It's like the 1960s (and some of the 70s). Hippies experimented with 
substances, got together in communes, did all sorts of non-conformist 
things. Except that when millions do  non-conformist thing they ipso 
facto adopt a new conformism.
Bangkok is (as shown or implied here) a dismal center of vices, or 
oddities such as offering tourists to drink snake blood -- which 
Richard does.
Even more dismal is the seedy (that's an euphemism) flea bag hotel 
he's staying in. There he is approached by "Daffy Duck," who seems to 
be vaguely British, is stoned out of his head, befriends Richard. 
Briefly, because he kills himself. But not telling Richard about a 
Forbidden Island not in the tourist guides. The place is Paradise, 
with all its exquisite beaches, Technicolor lagoons and stuff, and 
with enough cannabis growing to last one a lifetime. Returning to his 
so-called room after Daffy's suicide, Richard finds on the door a 
handmade map of Paradise.
He will go there, of course. And he asks Francoise and Etienne a 
French couple next door (he hardly knows them) to come along.
They make the trip. But not before Richard, who is getting dumber and 
dumber, slips a copy of the map under the door of two other 
Generation Xers. (Don't ask).
I'll skip the itinerary. By going to a legal, open-to-the-public 
island neighboring their destination, the Idiot Three manage to swim 
the waters leading to Paradise.
The first thing they see is an immensity of cannabis plants. The 
second is a bunch of sinister, heavily armed locals, whom they evade.
Next stop is a commune of perhaps two dozen non-angels. They live 
--or so they think -- an idyllic life, are sort of self-sufficient 
(but not really), play a lot, do soccer, cricket, smoke dope by the 
ton, tattoo themselves and presumably have mucho sex. But there are 
no scenes of copulation. And rather coyly, hardly any male or female 
naked bodies (where it matters). It 's no topless French Riviera. 
Absent too are: AIDS,  pregnancies, doctors, dentists, condoms, you 
name it.
 From the air (don't ask) the island looks like a lamb chop. I don't 
think this symbolizes anything. Newcomers and resident aliens are all 
constantly dumfounded by the scenic beauty of the place. There is 
even a waterfall whose top comes in handy for a Butch Cassidy 
mega-jump.
They commune-ists have made a deal with local peasants (the heavily 
armed guys) who live off the lucrative sea of grass:  the foreigners 
can stay, but never, never add new people to the commune. Why the 
locals have settled for this arrangement  makes no sense.
The commune is sort of led by a gal called Sal. Not particularly 
pretty,  thirty-something , therefore  older than the other womens, 
she is the top (and sole) authority.
The three new people are accepted. Richard and Francois become a 
twosome, to the detriment of her French lover Etienne. Richard 
becomes a hero for battling and killing a shark. (A kill-joy point 
out it was a mere baby shark). He makes a dumb "philosophical" speech 
about sharks and how to face them. (Do NOT try this at home or 
underwater).  All is hunky-dory, except that Bugs (note the 
cartoonishness of names - pure infantilism). who is Sal's man, does 
not like Richard who in turn mistrusts him.
Lisa takes off for one her periodical trips to the nearest town, 
called something like Kopenyang. I can't remember. She asks for 
Richard to go with her.  The commune people order all sorts of 
things, from vittels to body oil to cigarettes to tampons and more. 
Fact is too that the town is full of sleazy youths of all sexes, from 
the West (or the East, if you think of America) who are carousing, 
dancing, making out, drinking and doping. Richard calls his folks, at 
home. Where does the shopping money come from? Never mind.
Coincidence! It goes without saying that you've been expecting it. 
The two boys for whom Richard left a copy of the famous map are 
there, with two girls. How to prevent them from going to Paradise? 
Never mind.
Richard and somewhat spinsterish-looking Sal have sex .It is 
prudishly shown on a tent's surface like Chinese shadows. Here comes 
the great line of this cinematic masterpiece. Sal, about to go to 
sleep, tells Richard to do the same "Because tomorrow morning I may 
want some more sex."
The island starts becoming Paradise Lost  upon ther return from the 
shopping trip. Francoise smells a sexual rat (R & S), is not pleased. 
Richard lies. Someone has a terrible problem with a tooth. (or 
perhaps that was before the trip?) Two or three men are attacked by 
sharks. A survivor, horribly mauled, disturbs the Happy Family with 
his cries.of agony. So they put him in distant corner of the beach 
and resume their fun and games. In spite of abundant Christian 
symbolism (prayers, crosses, etc.) the men and women are totally 
self-centered. (Richard's compassion will however, illustrate his 
humanity. After all, he is Leonardo). The two couples with the map's 
copy camp across the water. They are a dangerous no-no.
Sal mercilessly orders Richard to guard the beach, keep an eye on the 
potential intruders, keep them away no matter at what cost. Richard, 
alone in his outpost, goes bananas, hallucinates, eat a bug, has 
visions, also goes native a la Kurtz in "Apocalypse Now," a film 
referred to more than once. But he is a sub-Kurtz. The four kids raft 
over. The farmers with automatic weapons take care of them. Oh, the 
horror, the horror.
But worry not. An exodus from Paradise finds Mr.DiCaprio alive and 
well -- well, alive anyway -- and ready for another astronomic 
paycheck.
This movie about post-hippie retards is ludicrous and unpleasant. The 
exotic photography is fine. The music is not. It loads on 
generic-romantic sounds which come up on the least provocation.
It's like the experienced person who gave this advice to a new 
director: "Whenever you don't know what to do, throw in the 
Hallelujah chorus from Handel's "The Messiah.""
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE BEACH" (20th Century-Fox)
 It's a teeny-bopper's fantasy: Utopia with Leonardo
DiCaprio. Let's hope those teenagers who flocked to Titanic are now
old enough to get into this R-rated idyll because they're the target
audience. Leo plays an American backpacker in Thailand, eager to
escape from the touristy, pop culture, digital world of today. Travel,
he says, is the search for experience, the quest for something
different. That's just what he finds when he and a young French couple
(Guillaume Canet, Virginie Ledoyen) follow a map given to him by a
manic, crazed Brit (Robert Carlyle) who commits suicide. To get to
"the perfect beach," they swim across open sea from one island to
another, crawl through cannabis fields past armed guards, and jump
from the top of a 120' waterfall. Exhilarated, they discover a small,
international community of young travelers under the leadership of
ruthless Tilda Swinton, who has vowed to keep their unspoiled hideaway
secret, an exclusive enclave - no matter what the consequences. "In
the perfect beach resort, nothing is allowed to interrupt the pursuit
of pleasure, not even dying," Leo learns.  Filmmaker Danny Boyle
(Trainspotting, A Life Less Ordinary) and cinematographer Darius
Khondji have captured Alex Garland's parable of modern life and
distilled it into a weird, ironic glimpse of paradise, particularly
when the temporarily deranged Leo runs through the jungle as a
character in a video game. Problem is: the characters are too thinly
drawn and much comes across as pretentious poppycock, particularly the
glib, happy, very commercial ending with Leo back in a cyber-cafe,
downloading a photographic memento of his exotic misadventure. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Beach is a cinematically sweeping
5 - the vivid saga of a Club Med gone awry.

Author
Ron Small 
Author: iysmall@aol.com (Ron Small) 
THE BEACH (2000)
Grade: C
Director: Danny Boyle
Screenplay: John Hodge
Starring: Leonardo Di Caprio, Virginie Ledoyen, Tilda Swinton, Guillaume Canet,
Robert Carlyle
 
Remember when authors like Tom Wolfe and Norman Mailer were at the height of
their popularity offering intelligent thought provoking reading to the American
public. Well, I don't. You see I wasn't born. Instead, I came of age in the
90's when authors like Douglas Coupland, and Bret Easton Ellis were lauded as
brilliant, and generation defining. What the hell does that say about my
generation? Coupland's novels are annoyingly "hip" tales in which whiny,
stylishly disenfranchised youths search for themselves. In other words, my
generation. Ellis' contributions to literature have been relegated to novels in
which selfish, vacant twentysomethings act selfish and vacant. In fact that
word "vacant" is probably used about two hundred times (and that's a mild
estimate) in Ellis' epic GLAMORAMA. It would be too easy for me to say it's the
books that are vacant, but it would also be true. With their fashionable
nihilism these novels are nothing more then modish propaganda aimed at an
MTV-culture weaned on excess.
After just two novels, Alex Garland has been described as the next great
author. And yes, generation defining. So, I decided to give his first literary
effort, THE BEACH, a try, and after slogging through fifty pages of bland
pretension I gave up.
Like the book, the movie is a cliff notes gloss on HEART OF DARKNESS, and LORD
OF THE FLIES. The movie, however, ends up looking more like an episode of ROAD
RULES gone horribly awry.
Richard (the often-shirtless Leonardo Di Caprio) is a vacant, vapid, callous
youth travelling solo through Thailand in search of the ultimate rush. He
describes this to us in a detached voiceover (that recalls Edward Norton's
narration in THE FIGHT CLUB) with Di Caprio's apathetic tone presumably masking
deep thoughts. As directed by Danny Boyle the streets of Thailand look
thrilling enough, like a melding of a rave and a flea market.
When Richard retires to his dilapidated hotel room, he catches an eyeful of
another hotel guest, Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen of A SINGLE GIRL) a stunning
(and yes, vacant) French girl travelling with her wimpy boyfriend, Etienne
(Guillaumi Canet). He is immediately awe-struck by Francoise and presumably
goes to bed with a serious case of blue balls. Though sleep proves impossible;
a crazy Scot only identified as Daffy (Robert Carlyle acting exactly like he
did in TRAINSPOTTING) accosts Richard in his own room, blathering incoherently
about some sort of paradise he calls "the beach". The guy shares a joint with
Richard, so Richard lets the schizoid stay. The following day, Daffy leaves his
new best friend a map to the beach, and then commits suicide.
With delusions of utopian grandeur, Richard impulsively invites the French
couple to come along with him in search of the paradise.
Cut to a speedy montage of the three getting to know each other minus dialogue
but accompanied by the redundant techno beats that Boyle places in the
background of nearly every scene. Once they reach the much-lauded island (and
after escaping armed guards and jumping from a waterfall) the trio stumbles
upon a community of attractive travelers, who have turned the island into their
own haven. Richard and his companions are welcomed, and they choose to stay,
indefinitely. Which is completely understandable: The island is sublime,
encompassed by mountainous granulated rock, a tropical blue-tinted ocean,
cretaceous sand, and occupants that look like they've stepped out of a Calvin
Klein catalogue. In fact the entire movie looks like a postmodern Calvin Klein
add. Everything is dazzling to gaze upon, from the flowing waterfalls, to the
bronze sunsets. (If Danny Boyle's career ever hits hard times he'd have no
problem getting work as a travelogue director).
Back to the story: For no discernable reason, Richard woos Francoise away from
Etiene, and they make love underwater amid tiny bubbles made to look like
aquatic fireworks. Etiene discovers the little indiscretion, yells a bit, and
then it's abruptly forgotten. Actually the character of Etiene remains
forgotten for the duration of THE BEACH. He has no reason to exist other than
to get shat on by nearly everyone. It made me wonder why screenwriter John
Hodge simply didn't excise him completely. Then Leo could have an unfettered
romance, and keep all his female fans happy. As it is, when Richard and
Francoise screw over Etiene the way they do, their characters become completely
unlikable for no purpose. But either way, I could care less about both Etiene
and Francoise. They aren't distinct characters, only foil for the plot, and
Etiene isn't even that. The actor, Guillaumi Canet, might as well be a
glorified extra. Leyoden (who was effective in expressive French roles) is so
damn wooden she's actually upstaged by her French accent. Not that she's
required to do anything strenuous; all she has to do is look stunning (and how
much effort does that take) and act seductive. None of the other characters
amount to anything more than half-sentence descriptions; there is the cook who
doesn't like fish, the carpenter who doesn't like Richard, and the stoners who
really like weed. As for Di Caprio, the kid is in virtually every scene yet
he's as much a sketched out character as any one else. In the opening, his
narration drones: "My name is Richard, and that is all you need to know". It
looks like the filmmakers agreed with him.
Alas the story does attempt to get a little heady on us. It turns the tables on
its BLUE LAGOON-like harmony, when a shark attacks two of the island
inhabitants. The self-appointed leader of the community, Sal (a cold Tilda
Swinton) chooses not to send for help. The island is a secret and she will go
to great lengths to keep it that way. This is where the humans-as-savages LORD
OF THE FLIES\HEART OF DARKNESS thing comes in. Further delving into that
territory, Richard becomes one with nature, tying a bandana around his
forehead, and frantically running through the jungle while growling, and
munching on bugs. No, I really mean it.
He begins to hear reverberations in his head, like war flash backs ("Delta
19er!"), but those flashbacks really stem from all the video games and movies
that Richard has consumed (I don't think there's a support group for that).
He's like a Vietnam vet who never even went to Vietnam or a trauma victim with
no damn trauma. The scene had me giggling with joy, and I know that wasn't the
point. But when Di Caprio leaps around looking more like a pissed off
BACKSTREET BOY than Rambo I challenge anyone not to let out a little giggle.
Though I must say God bless him. Leo sure puts his all into this role, but he
might as well be starring in SHE'S ALL THAT 2.
The film tries to reach for nutso nirvana, turning into a Gen-X war fantasy but
it feels more like a desperate attempt at some artistic credibility. Maybe
Boyle and his crew will get it right next time. For now, all I can say about
THE BEACH is that it looks as good as it's star, and maybe that will be enough
for all those fourteen year old girls.
 
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98 (Ron's Movie Reviews)

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE BEACH, directed by Danny Boyle (TRAINSPOTTING), is an entertaining,
but not especially original, adventure yarn.  The film works as a star
vehicle for Leonardo DiCaprio, but the rest of the casting is singularly
uninspired.  The easy to cast role of the alluringly gorgeous French
woman, for example, is given to Virginie Ledoyen, who looks and acts
particularly bland.  Still, as a travelogue from Hell, the picture does
have its charms.
John Hodge's script, based on Alex Garland's popular novel, suffers from
seeming little more than an amalgamation of a dozen other films from THE
LORD OF THE FLIES to AN APOCALYPSE NOW.  Even at its most enjoyable, the
film loses a certain amount of credibility from the sense of déjŕ vu
that it evokes.  If it were better than some of the movies that it
imitates, this might not be a problem, but there isn't a scene which
isn't stronger in the original.
The story can be dichotomized into Paradise Found and Paradise Lost.  In
the first,  Richard (DiCaprio) learns of a mysterious Thai island with a
killer beach.  Told of its existence by a crazed doper, appropriately
named Daffy (Robert Carlyle, TRAINSPOTTING), Richard retrieves Daffy's
map to the place after he discovers him dead in a blood-splattered room.
Lusting after Françoise (Ledoyen), his next-door neighbor in his fleabag
hotel, Richard invites her to join him in his trip to the Utopian beach.
The problem is that he has to take her boyfriend, Étienne (Guillaume
Canet), along.  "We were headed for the great unknown, but, to get
there, you had to follow the regular tourist trail," Richard tells us of
their journey to their idyllic island.
When they get to the island, they find it inhabited by Uzi-carrying
"farmers," who guard their vast fields of marijuana.  Most people would
beat a hasty retreat at this point, but not our hedonists.  Go ahead,
imagine your dream beach.  Would you be willing to risk your life to get
to it?
Well, they do and stumble upon a commune on the other side of the island
in the process.  Run by a tough-as-nails, cultish leader, Sal (Tilda
Swinton), the commune somewhat reluctantly lets them stay.
Now, be honest, don't you think you can guess the rest of the movie?
Well, you can.  Think Françoise will fall for Richard?  Well, duh, he's
played by Leonardo DiCaprio.  Think that the commune's peaceful
coexistence with the dope growers will last?  See, you could have
written the screenplay.
Some of Boyle's staging choices are particularly surprising.  He depicts
a gory land in which everything from sharks to gun-toting men can cause
blood to fly and skin to be ripped open.  On the other hand, he gives us
probably the only ultra-remote beach on the planet in which the women
never go topless.  And the star is French no less.
Richard's rich narration is one of the film's chief allures along with
its gorgeous scenery and dreamy music.  "I found that love, like grief,
tends to fade away and be replaced by something more exciting," he
remarks at the start of his descent into madness.
"In the perfect beach resort, nothing is allowed to interrupt the
pursuit of pleasure, not even dying," Richard tells us.  Sal certainly
doesn't want anything to spoil her clan's fun.  She'll do whatever it
takes to keep the good times rolling.
The movie, which does have its pleasures, could have been so much better
if they hadn't blown their bankroll on DiCaprio.  His performance is
good, but not strong enough to carry the entire picture.
THE BEACH runs 1:58.  It is rated R for strong violence, some strong
sexuality, language and drug content.  It would be acceptable for older
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Leo has been in the spotlight for too long since the release of Titanic on
December 17, 1997. While he was enjoying his fame, the spotlight must have
gotten brighter and blinded him in the eyes and brain making him take bad
career choices. His first post-Titanic role was in 1998 with the Woody Allen
dud Celebrity where he played (what else?) a selfish movie star. He doesn't do
much better here. In interviews DiCaprio says he's interested in expanding his
horizons and getting the more intriguing and challenging roles. He's done a
fine job, too bad he couldn't pull if off. At all.
Richard (Leo! himself) is an American traveling in Thailand and wants to be
anything but a tourist. Seeing as there's no use in staying at a fancy hotel,
he rents a room in the back of a souvenir shop that features some of the slums
of the city. Daffy (Carlyle in a very small role) is a crazed drunk who tells
Richard about a mystical island with the perfect beach through the vent in the
top of his room. The next morning he finds Daffy who has slit his wrists, blood
is spurted all over his guest room, but there is a black map tacked onto his
door. So Richard invites a French couple who he heard having sex the previous
evening to come to the island with him for an adventure. 
After a long swim, and some careful navigation through a field, they find a
tropical paradise. Everyone that lives there is scantily clad, they all have
perfect bodies, and they smoke weed all day. Soon Leo begins a love affair (or
in this movie's idea of love, a sex affair) with Francoise (Ledoyen), the
female of the French couple that have split up. But everyone knows that there
can't be a movie where no trouble lies in paradise. There is one rule for
living on the island, since fields of growing drugs sit on the other half of
the land mass, the farmers there demand that no new people come to live there,
so that the secret doesn't get out. You can never, ever, ever tell anyone about
this place. Before Richard left for the beach, he copied the map Daffy gave him
and gave it to two junkies at his hotel, and when he goes back to the city he
meets them again, and finds out they plan to for a visit. Big mistake.
There are several implausibilites that are in this film. The first has to be
that all members of the island, whether it be the evil Thai druglords or
Francoise, all speak perfect English. Another problem deals with a shark attack
when someone was swimming near the beach, and don't even get me started on the
Leo 64 video game sequence. The movie is filled with countless amounts of
uneeded material and dialog. Only about half of the film's two hour running
time has anything to do with how the film ends, and it's message to the youth
of America (it's obvious audience). This makes it a bore to sit through,
specifically when Leo decends into some type of madness in the second half. Oh,
and did I mention, everyone there has enough clothes to last them their entire
stay.
Even movies with a bad plot and redundant scenes can sometimes be saved by
great acting. There's none of that to be found here though. Richard changes
moods too quickly, one time he's brooding about his life and is depressed, the
next he's a pathological liar who is trying to save himself from danger.
Besides, we don't see Leo do much except for that squint he always uses. The
chemistry between him and Ledoyen is nowhere to be found and the two aren't
very interesting as people, or as lovers, for us to care much about them. In
fact, almost all of the characters are surprisingly dull and the adapted script
by John Hodge doesn't let them reach the potential that they could have been.
The only marginally good performance comes from Robert Carlyle who makes us
sort of like the creepy Daffy, while still being on our edge. But never mind
him, he's only on screen for five minutes, this is Leo's picture. The ending is
also happens to be remarkably snooze worthy and is an uninventive way to end
the film. The only good thing this movie does, is to encourage hardcore Leo
fans to see it again and again. Leo is shirtless for almost the entire duration
of the picture, and it's a great treat, but not if you're a guy like me. The
soundtrack is also kind of cool, but I'd hate to give the movie more credit
than it deserves. Leo, you're a good actor, next time, if you're still around,
please be in a good movie, and keep your shirt on too.

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume
Canet
screenplay by John Hodge, based on the book by Alex Garland
directed by Danny Boyle
When we meet Richard, the U.S.-born narrator-hero of The Beach, he has
succumbed to the idea that finding adventure necessitates getting the
hell out of his homeland... drinking snake's blood and sleeping with
roaches play pleasantly into his romantic notions of danger. As he roams
the steamy streets of Bangkok in search of the next
hedonistic-masochistic delight, Richard appears oblivious to the
American infiltration of Asian culture ("The Simpsons" episodes on TV,
the constant bubblegum music sounding from ghetto blasters, etc.). The
Beach is about how we as earthlings can't escape western civilization,
and the futility of trying.
Richard is kept awake one night in his hotel by the sounds of lovemaking
(his attractive neighbour, with whom he has become infatuated, is
getting some from her boyfriend) and by the Scottish-inflected ravings
of Daffy (Robert Carlyle), a mysterious rabble-rouser who tears away at
the mesh screen of Richard's window to offer the tourist drugs and
chit-chat. Daffy recounts the pleasures of a beach he once inhabited,
part of a sun-bleached mass as yet undefiled by tourists. The following
morning, Richard discovers the suicidal storyteller's corpse along with
a hand-drawn map to the secret isle, and he enlists an eager Etienne
(Canet) and Francoise (Ledoyen), the couple next door, to join him in
retracing Daffy's path to paradise.
Said mass, it turns out, is guarded by gun-toting farmers fiercely
protective of their cannibas crops-so much for smoking pot all day, one
of Richard's loftier ambitions. The ensuing chase climaxes with the
three travelers coming to the edge of a cliff and diving off, into a
blue lagoon-the entrance to the world of their dreams. Out of harm's
way, they discover a group of European expats living in harmony,
officially seduced by the beach's white resplendence. (These villagers
have a deal with the farmers above: no more trespassers, live in peace.)
English Sal (Swinton), the casually appointed matriarch of this
microcosm, is cursorily welcoming of Richard and his friends.
Plainspoken and bossy, she assigns chores and whatnot to her people that
will keep them thriving (Richard proves himself an expert fisherman);
Swinton, who gives the film's most vibrant performance, gets to the
ruthless core of Sal quickly-she could be playing a tiger, lording over
the forest. We get the feeling that The Beach will build to a
confrontation between Richard and Sal, because her eyes are always
surveying, with a mixture of lust and venom, his very American power to
influence.
Downtime, and there is an awful lot of it, is spent by Richard drinking
in the atmosphere (handsomely captured by Seven cinematographer Darius
Khondji) and pining for the taken Francoise. And why wouldn't he? She's
gorgeous-cloning experts would be wise to sample Virginie Ledoyen's DNA
(as well as DiCaprio's, for that matter). Sadly, there's no compelling
reason for them to stay attracted to one another after an inevitable
consummation occurs. They're not very interesting as individuals-Richard
is a stock backpacker and Francoise the adorable French innocent-but as
lovers, they're totally blank pages, stuck with the label of "couple"
because relationships based solely on casual sex don't exist in the
foreground of expensive movies.
The Beach is conventional in other respects; it settles down into
something vaguely formulaic the same way Boyle's biggest hit-to-date,
Trainspotting, does after a few mindbending mock-hallucinations. There
are trippy detours throughout, most memorably when Richard pictures
himself in a cheesy videogame (battling a tiger, natch), but for the
most part, The Beach treads structural ground that was first laid by
"Lord of the Flies" and "The Mosquito Coast". A sequence in which
Richard loses his mind could be snipped without recourse, and its
omission would mean one less encumbering cliché.
Fortunately, the film's ideology is separate from the aforementioned
jungle dramas (and their screen counterparts). Director Danny Boyle,
screenwriter John Hodge (adapting a book by twentysomething Alex
Garland), and producer Andrew MacDonald, recovering nicely from A Life
Less Ordinary, have decided that utopia and the western world need not,
or cannot, be mutually exclusive. It is understood, when Richard and Sal
travel to the mainland for provisions with a grocery list of personal
requests from the islanders (for toothbrushes, dish gloves, Game Boys,
etc.), that we survivors of the twentieth century are too dependent on
stuff, i.e. the comforts of home, to enjoy "paradise" as only nature
intended.
And while it is Richard who throws the beach's societal balance out of
whack, by dumbly holding the door open for dopehead tourists, the
filmmakers don't turn his arrival at Fort Sal into an Ugly American
scenario. Instead, Richard is an invigorating presence to those denizens
in need of reminding why this secluded lifestyle is the cat's meow. (The
character is too inoffensively drawn, but also competently portrayed by
DiCaprio.) The Beach's most insightful moment is a single shot of our
green planet as made up of microchips. United by technology, our globe
is shrinking; the tech revolution may seem suffocating, its
oft-forgotten goal is to liberate the human being from feeling anything
but free.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Leo has been in the spotlight for too long since the release of Titanic on
December 17, 1997. While he was enjoying his fame, the spotlight must have
gotten brighter and blinded him in the eyes and brain making him take bad
career choices. His first post-Titanic role was in 1998 with the Woody Allen
dud Celebrity where he played (what else?) a selfish movie star. He doesn't do
much better here. In interviews DiCaprio says he's interested in expanding his
horizons and getting the more intriguing and challenging roles. He's done a
fine job, too bad he couldn't pull if off. At all.
Richard (Leo! himself) is an American traveling in Thailand and wants to be
anything but a tourist. Seeing as there's no use in staying at a fancy hotel,
he rents a room in the back of a souvenir shop that features some of the slums
of the city. Daffy (Carlyle in a very small role) is a crazed drunk who tells
Richard about a mystical island with the perfect beach through the vent in the
top of his room. The next morning he finds Daffy who has slit his wrists, blood
is spurted all over his guest room, but there is a black map tacked onto his
door. So Richard invites a French couple who he heard having sex the previous
evening to come to the island with him for an adventure. 
After a long swim, and some careful navigation through a field, they find a
tropical paradise. Everyone that lives there is scantily clad, they all have
perfect bodies, and they smoke weed all day. Soon Leo begins a love affair (or
in this movie's idea of love, a sex affair) with Francoise (Ledoyen), the
female of the French couple that have split up. But everyone knows that there
can't be a movie where no trouble lies in paradise. There is one rule for
living on the island, since fields of growing drugs sit on the other half of
the land mass, the farmers there demand that no new people come to live there,
so that the secret doesn't get out. You can never, ever, ever tell anyone about
this place. Before Richard left for the beach, he copied the map Daffy gave him
and gave it to two junkies at his hotel, and when he goes back to the city he
meets them again, and finds out they plan to for a visit. Big mistake.
There are several implausibilites that are in this film. The first has to be
that all members of the island, whether it be the evil Thai druglords or
Francoise, all speak perfect English. Another problem deals with a shark attack
when someone was swimming near the beach, and don't even get me started on the
Leo 64 video game sequence. The movie is filled with countless amounts of
uneeded material and dialog. Only about half of the film's two hour running
time has anything to do with how the film ends, and it's message to the youth
of America (it's obvious audience). This makes it a bore to sit through,
specifically when Leo decends into some type of madness in the second half. Oh,
and did I mention, everyone there has enough clothes to last them their entire
stay.
Even movies with a bad plot and redundant scenes can sometimes be saved by
great acting. There's none of that to be found here though. Richard changes
moods too quickly, one time he's brooding about his life and is depressed, the
next he's a pathological liar who is trying to save himself from danger.
Besides, we don't see Leo do much except for that squint he always uses. The
chemistry between him and Ledoyen is nowhere to be found and the two aren't
very interesting as people, or as lovers, for us to care much about them. In
fact, almost all of the characters are surprisingly dull and the adapted script
by John Hodge doesn't let them reach the potential that they could have been.
The only marginally good performance comes from Robert Carlyle who makes us
sort of like the creepy Daffy, while still being on our edge. But never mind
him, he's only on screen for five minutes, this is Leo's picture. The ending is
also happens to be remarkably snooze worthy and is an uninventive way to end
the film. The only good thing this movie does, is to encourage hardcore Leo
fans to see it again and again. Leo is shirtless for almost the entire duration
of the picture, and it's a great treat, but not if you're a guy like me. The
soundtrack is also kind of cool, but I'd hate to give the movie more credit
than it deserves. Leo, you're a good actor, next time, if you're still around,
please be in a good movie, and keep your shirt on too.

Author
Sean Townsend
STARRING:  Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Keith David, Cole Hauser
DIRECTOR:  David Twohy
WRITTEN BY:  Jim Wheat, Ken Wheat, David Twohy
Remember when you were a kid, and you were afraid of the dark?  Come on,
now, it wasn't that long ago, and don't hand me any of that crapola
about how you never needed a night light or a partially open bedroom
door.  As far as fears go, it's pretty much universal, hard-wired into
the primitive part of our brains that still recalls what times were like
before we figured out the fire thing.  As a result, it's also a handy
emotional trigger, one that fright films have always relied upon as a
cheap and easy way to heighten the emotion of horror.  In the movies,
what we can't see can (and usually does) hurt us, and it almost always
happens in the dark.  Light, in all its forms, means salvation. Pitch
Black takes this tradition and extrapolates it in a way that's so
ridiculously literal it should be awful.  Thanks to Diesel's great
charisma and a few well-handled scenes, though, it's actually quite a
bit of fun.
All you really need to know about the film is that it places a typically
diverse group of interstellar crash-landing survivors on a barren,
sun-soaked planet.  These include a strong-willed female pilot
(Mitchell), a Muslim imam (David) and his youthful followers, a fussy
antiquities dealer, and a sort of galactic cop (Hauser) along with his
prisoner (Diesel), who just happens to have surgically altered
night-vision eyes.  The film goes to great lengths to make it clear that
said prisoner is one bad dude before his obligatory escape, but I doubt
I'll be spoiling anything by saying he plays a key role in the group's
survival.  As the group attempts to find water, they discover a hostile
species that requires darkness for survival.  They also discover that
the planet's three suns are about to be eclipsed for an indeterminate
amount of time, rendering the entire place, well, you know.  The rest is
standard scare-flick stuff as the group's numbers (and light sources)
dwindle as they try to make it back to an escape ship.
In order to enjoy this film, it helps to purposely overlook the
implausible sci-fi trappings and horror-movie obviousness, because there
are elements that work.  The scenes dealing with the actual eclipse are
effective, building suspense as the suns are gradually blocked, then
showing hordes of light sensitive nasties coming out of what look like
huge termite mounds.  As for the creatures themselves, they're a
reasonably threatening bunch, created by Patrick Tatopoulos (also
responsible for the new-look Godzilla).  While comparisons to certain
H.R. Giger-designed Aliens will be inevitable, they reminded me more of
the creatures in Stephen King's novella "The Mist."  They fly, issue
deceptively cute sonar calls, and generally creep around menacingly,
always just outside the dimly lit perimeter of the group's flares and
flashlights.  In one memorable scene, a character is shown only by the
light of a Zippo, until a brief burst of illumination reveals that he's
completely surrounded by the things.  It's good for a shock (unless
you've seen the trailer), but it's better as a quick jolt back to a time
when you were certain that something waited just beyond the night
light's reach.
Diesel (an indie director also seen in Saving Private Ryan and heard in
The Iron Giant) never takes himself too seriously, and it helps.
Physically, he's a striking presence, with a deep, pliable voice to
match.  After the novelty of the creatures wears off (and it happens
pretty quickly), he's by far the most interesting and entertaining thing
about the movie.
While Twohy can't be accused of showing too much of the creatures,
neither does he leave enough to the imagination.  Given the film's
premise, it would have been nice if he had trusted Diesel's ability to
hold an audience and used sound and dialogue clues instead of computer
graphics to bring the beasties to life.  In shedding a bit too much
light on the subject, Twohy restrains the power that makes the imaginary
monsters of childhood so terrifying.

Author
Matt Petras
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume
Canet, Robert Carlyle
Director: Danny Boyle
Producer(s): Andrew Macdonald, Callum McDougall
        Disillusioned and trying to find the spice of life, Richard
(Leonardo DiCaprio) sets off for Thailand. There he a meets crazed man
by the name of Daffy (Robert Carlyle) who gives him a map to a Beach,
a secret utopia, then commits suicide. Richard sets off for this beach
with his neighbors from this hotel, Étienne (Guillaume Canet) and
Françoise (Virginie Ledoyen). Once they get there the three discover a
secret society existing on this beach, there Richard falls for
Françoise. This covers about half to two thirds of the movie and aside
from the romantic element, which is solely a creation of Hollywood,
seems to hold to the original novel.
        The cinematography and general beauty of this part of the
movie is breathtaking. I don't think anyone can argue that this movie
is visually stunning. But that is were many things go wrong, Darius
Khondji has totally outdone himself in doing the cinematography.
Though the script and the interpretation of the novel are quite
lacking. The plot of the movie moves along at a decent pace for about
half of the movie or there abouts. This is where the movie has some
great potential, then the three travelers get the island and there is
a turn for the better, yes folks I said better. Now up to about two
thirds of this movie its actually pretty good, nothing spectacular
aside from the cinematography but it still has promise. This is where
things start to degenerate to something that becomes almost
un-watchable. There is even a 'video game' style sequence that borders
on the disgusting, it doesn't make sense for the movie and just looks
dumb in my opinion (and I am hoping many other peoples). I am hoping
that in my little rant I've made it abundantly clear that the movie is
lacking quite seriously in plot and uneven pacing, so if you go see it
and you don't like it because of this don't blame me. 
The character development was not up to par either; I found the
character of Richard to be nothing more than a spoiled child. Although
there is a feeble attempt to make this whole story profound it fails
and Richard (Leo's character) comes off as a wannabe philosopher. The
character seems to be underdeveloped from the get go and seems to just
do things for no apparent reason, granted some people are like this
(myself included) but I nor anyone I know that is fairly random would
ever do things of the sort this character does. The next point is that
some of the really interesting characters are simply not developed
enough. Richard is obviously obsessed by Françoise at the early stages
of the story, yet there is actually very little development along this
story line. This I am sure contributes to the movie's lack of core
plot and being unfocused.        
Now, I shall move onto something a little better about the movie (for
all you cynics out there the movie did have a few good things about
it). The cast and acting was passable at the very least, and I think
that Leonardo DiCaprio actually did pretty well in the role of
Richard. Mind you I think the rest of the cast that had some which had
reasonably sized roles did equally well if not better. Which begs the
question why is Leonardo paid so much? (I think this is a topic all on
its own so I won't get into it). But I like the fact that there was an
international cast used, had only and American cast been used I can
see this movie being horrible. The international flavor added a more
global feel to the movie that made it that much more bearable. Not to
mention the movie is set in Thailand and a global cast makes more
sense. 
        When all is said and done I liked the movie for the most part
but the gaping inadequacies of the plot are unforgivable. I would not
recommend this movie to anyone, the fact that I liked it has a lot to
do with the cinematography and the sheer beauty of the movie not its
plot or story. As it is the story tries to be much too philosophical
and fails at its attempt. If you do end up going to see this movie be
forewarned about its shortcomings.
February 21, 2000
For any comments I can be reached at bootsector@hotmail.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 BEACH, THE (director: Danny Boyle; screenwriters: from a novel by Alex
 Garland/John Hodge; cinematographer: Darius Khondji; editor: Masahiro
 Hirakubo; cast: Leonardo DiCaprio (Richard), Tilda Swinton (Sal),
 Virginie Ledoyen (Francoise), Guillaume Canet (Etienne), Paterson
 Joseph (Keaty), Robert Carlyle (Daffy), Lars Arentz-Hansen(Bugs),
 PeterYoungblood Hills (Zeph), Jerry Swindall (Sammy); Runtime: 120;
 20th Century-Fox; 2000)
A shallow coming-of-age film about an American tourist named Richard
(DiCaprio), seeking adventure in an non touristy way, who travels to
exotic Thailand to do his thing by finding something tangible to fill
the void in his life. Something that is more real than the computer
games he is hooked on. His adventure begins when he meets a Looney Tunes
character named Daffy (Carlyle) in his second-class hotel and hears the
monstrous looking lunatic rant about the perfect beach that is not found
on the regular map and difficult to get to, as Daffy imparts a few well
chosen words to Richard, who takes it all in, as if trying to show that
he's not the twit that he really is and is open to new experiences. The
next morning Daffy blows his brains out, but leaves the secret map of
this paradise nailed to his door. Not wanting to go there alone and
attracted to the French girl Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) who is staying
next-door with her boyfriend Etienne (Guilluame Canet), he impulsively
entices them to join him in this adventure.
The three backpackers, all in their 20s, reach an island close by their
destination and stopover for the night. For some inexplicable reason,
Richard blabs about this secret island to some fellow American dopers
(Peter Youngblood Hills and Jerry Swindall), telling them his plans and
even leaves them a copy of the map. Then he swims to the off the beaten
path island with the French couple. But Paradise has some immediate
problems in it, as they observe the island's beauty and pass through
fields of marijuana that are guarded by unsavory farmers with AK-47s and
machetes. Sneaking by them, they jump off the mountain side and swim to
their destination -- finding there a passive, pagan-like commune of
pleasure seekers who have lived by the beautiful beach for a few years,
granted permission to stay by the marijuana farmers if they bring no
more people into their commune.
The leader of the island, a British girl named Sal (Tilda Swinton), who
is a true believer in the cause of seeking pleasure at any cost, even if
it means she rules the place like a benevolent tyrant or a well-meaning
mother who administers tough love. She lays down the rules to the
newcomers and they can either accept it or get off her island, which is
home to an international group of idlers.
The film can't seem to be told without the voiceover from Leonardo
DiCaprio, explaining his thought process and what's going on.
There are a bunch of other nondescript yuppie/hippie inhabitants on this
island, but the only other one who stands out, is black Britisher, Keaty
(Paterson Joseph), who is gay and is a sports fanatic. Bugs (Lars
Arentz-Hansen) is the only one on the island whom Richard doesn't like
and he is also the sometimes boyfriend of Sal.
As expected, the French girl falls for Richard and her boyfriend
gracefully bows out. He seemed like a much nicer bloke than
Richard...but such is life! The communal lovers of the beach spend their
time on mandatory fishing assignments, smoking weed, fornicating, and
taking in the sun. When their rice gets contaminated, Richard is chosen
by the leader to go to the mainland with her, where she seduces him and
where she learns that Richard told others about the island. They make a
pact not to tell the others about their sex and about the Americans who
know about their secret place, but Richard fails to tell her that he
also gave them the map.
The beach is the real star of the film, as the cinematography of it is
scintillating. It is as if a real paradise was found off the Thai coast.
The film itself wasn't a bad film, as much as it was an empty one. There
is just very little to digest here. The slight story is a predictable
one, as the drug-dealing farmers mean business, so when Richard's four
unwanted acquaintances arrive, we know what response to expect from the
farmers. When the French girl learns of what Sal and Richard did on the
mainland, we know what her reaction will be. The film winds down with
Richard banished from the commune to live in the jungle and his
assignment is to take the map away from the newcomers, as he takes on
this assignment by going into a VietCong mode, playing it as if it is a
video game on war. It made for some beautiful fantasy shots via computer
graphics, but added nothing to the film's story.
The film concludes as a lesson that there is no such thing as a paradise
on earth, and if there were, it wouldn't remain one for long because
man's desires are far-reaching. So it's back to virtual reality for the
DiCaprio character, after all, the theme of the film seems to imply,
maybe that's not so bad a thing to be doing with your life.
The film was adapted from the 27-year-old Britisher, Alex Garland's very
popular novel. In an interview he gave for cable TV, he said he didn't
mind that this Hollywood film took some liberties with his story to
juice it up sexually so we can see Leonardo romance the beautiful
Virginie Ledoyen and have another affair with Tilda Swinton, additions
that were not part of the novel.
The photography of that underwater kiss with Ledoyen was sensational, as
they were lit up like Christmas trees from the opalescent plant life
that surrounded them. The romance itself had no sparkles in it.
Overrated director, Danny Boyle ("A Life Less Ordinary"/
"Trainspotting"/"Shallow Grave"), is skilled at working his magic on
films that are basically insubstantial by relying on non-narrative
things to do the job, such as the energy from the actors and the beauty
in his visual sets. Here, he is aided by the wonderfully gifted
cinematographer, Darius Khondji, who makes The Beach look like a cross
between the figment of one's psychedelic dream and an ongoing computer
game, something you can't take your eyes off. It was just too bad that
the story didn't have more weight to it, or should I say some weight to
it, because this film played mostly like a travelogue. Don't blame the
actors for what went wrong here, they did their job the best they could.
The fault is all in the script.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Chuck Dowling
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume
Canet, Robert Carlyle, Paterson Joseph, Lars Arentz-Hansen 
Based on the novel by: Alex Garland 
Written by: John Hodge 
Directed by: Danny Boyle 
Running Time: 120 minutes 
Based on the novel by Alex Garland, The Beach stars Leonardo DiCaprio as
Richard, an American looking for some adventure in his life.  He finds
it in Bangkok, when his incredibly strange neighbor (Robert Carlyle, who
once again forced me to turn on my television's captions so I could
understand his dialogue) leaves him a map of a "hidden" island where a
handful of others have found paradise (oh, and copious amounts of weed
too).  But as Richard finds out, whenever humanity is involved, can it
ever be paradise? 
DiCaprio's first starring role since his launch into superstardom with
Titanic is a flawed mishmash of ideas that not surprisingly failed to
set the box office on fire.  While I give Leo credit for taking a role
that goes against what people want to see, I have to criticize him for,
well, taking a role that goes against what people want to see.  It may
do good for yourself as an actor to do something different, but when you
have a huge built in audience and alienate them immediately... how smart
is that?  Maybe if you've been typecast for 3 or 4 films is a row,
sure.  But a pre-emptive strike against typecasting?  This just wasn't
the right choice. 
Also, I'm sorry to say that this movie actually SUFFERS by having
DiCaprio in the lead, as he just isn't the right choice to play the lead
character.  Many times I found myself laughing at his performance, as it
seems he's yet to develop a man's voice.  So when he yells, it produces
that same screeching sound I found incredibly annoying in What's Eating
Gilbert Grape and This Boy's Life. 
Since Richard is such an unlikable character from start to finish, the
only really sympathetic person in the film is Étienne (Guillaume Canet),
whose girlfriend (Virginie Ledoyen) is stolen away by Richard.  However,
Étienne is a very minor character, and after the first hour or so you
barely even see him again. 
While for an hour and fifteen minutes or so The Beach is not that bad,
it unfortunately goes completely astray in the third act, becoming an
odd mix of Apocalypse Now, The Deer Hunter and a video game.  We see
Richard's mental state go from point A to point C, skipping point B
entirely.  Now being the educated fellow that I am I'm able to piece
together exactly what was going on, but the third act is so choppy that
most viewers will lose interest based on their disgust and confusion. 
While the changes in his character are somewhat logical given the
situation he's placed in, they are just not presented credibly to the
audience. 
The Beach is available on DVD from Fox Home Entertainment.  The disc
contains the film in its original theatrical aspect ratio of 2.35:1 and
is enhanced for 16x9 televisions.  The plentiful amount of extras on
this disc include: a full length audio commentary track by director
Danny Boyle, nine deleted scenes (with or without commentary from Boyle
as an option), the All Saints music video for "Pure Shores" along with a
commercial for the film's soundtrack, storyboards, many theatrical
trailers and TV spots, a decent promotional featurette, and the usual
cast and crew bios.  And, as with almost all new Fox releases, there are
some great menu screens on the disc. 
Danny Boyle's commentary track is a delight to listen to, as Boyle
discusses every possible aspect of the film's production.  He's a bright
man with good ideas and a fine sense of humor (so it perplexes me as to
why I've yet to like any of his films).  The deleted scenes, which he
also comments on, could have either stayed or gone and they wouldn't
have had much effect on me either way.  None of them are glaringly bad
or out of place, as you see with many deleted scenes on discs these
days, and Boyle points out that the majority of them were cut simply for
time concerns.  The original ending, while very much a downer, didn't
bother me either (especially since the last third of the film lost my
interest anyway). 
As often the case with DVDs, even if the movie itself isn't the
greatest, it can be saved by extras on the disc.  This is definitely
what happens with The Beach.  The film just misses the mark, but now
that this DVD is available its more than worth my time... and yours. 

Author
Marty Mapes
So with all that going for it, it will probably be well received, if not
by reviewers then at least by the public. It gets my premature
congratulations for its assured success.
But success and quality seem to have little correlation when it comes to
blockbusters, as THE BEACH proves.
The problem with THE BEACH is that there were plot holes and logical
leaps that I just couldn't accept. I generally dismiss negative reviews
where the only complaint is that the writer "didn't buy it," because
that's purely a matter of opinion. And yet, I don't know what else to
say about THE BEACH, so here goes.
Richard (Leonardo DiCaprio) has just landed in Thailand and is looking
for some REAL travel experiences -- not just the usual tourist stuff. He
learns of a secret island paradise from a crazy hotel neighbor named
Daffy (Robert Carlyle), who has a map.
The next day, coming back from the bathroom, a strange maid tells
Richard there's a note on his door. He looks at the note and sees that
it is the map. He turns to ask about the note... but the maid has
mysteriously vanished! He opens his neigbor's door and sees the walls
covered in blood. His crazy neighbor is dead!
With such a contrived, enticing setup, how could Richard NOT follow the
map? The problem is that Richard goes, not because his character seeks
it out, but because the author rolls him up and chucks him in that
direction.
Richard invites another couple -- Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) and
Etienne (Guillaume Canet) -- to join him in search of the perfect
secluded beach on the map. They travel as close as they can to the
island, then swim a kilometer or two across a channel to get to there. 
They land on the far side of the island and start hiking toward
paradise. They make it past a field of marijuana guarded by men with
guns and eventually find their beach.
The encounter with the men with guns is preposterous. First of all,
Richard has proven that he's not afraid of shady characters, but he sees
a sleeping man with a gun and immediately becomes frightened. When the
man is awakened he brings another four armed men to look for the source
of the noise, ready to shoot whatever it was that moved.
But if the island is so remote and there's no way to get to it except by
swimming, why are ALL of these men armed with guns. Who do they think
they're going to shoot? If nobody can get to the island, a single gun in
a lock box ought to be enough.
Anyway, when the three arrive, they are welcomed into a "Gilligan's
Island" community of fellow European travelers who believe they are
living in paradise. The only rules are that you must never leave and you
can't tell anyone about it -- in part because the community wants
privacy, and in part because of a deal struck with the men with guns.
Several things grate at this point. There is some subtle racism. The
community is populated solely by young, attractive Europeans while the
brown-skinned natives on the other side of the island are sinister and
violent. Francoise's character becomes a Hollywood cliché of womanhood.
She sleeps with Richard before dumping Etienne, but when she suspects
Richard has slept with another woman, she becomes insanely jealous.
And then there are unanswered questions, like why are there no children
in this six-year old colony? And why are the next wave of newcomers not
welcomed like Richard and his friends were? And why would the marijuana
farmers want the fellow islanders to leave if they're worried about
secrecy?
I could go on and on. I'm tempted to, so I can explain everything I left
out. But enough is enough. You get the point.
"I'm a filmmaker and that's why I will never make a movie on video tape" 
-- Burt Reynolds, Boogie Nights

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE BEACH
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume
Canet, Robert Carlyle, Paterson Joseph.
Screenplay:  John Hodge, based on the novel by Alex Garland.
Producer:  Andrew MacDonald.
Director:  Danny Boyle.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, violence, nudity, graphic gore,
profanity, drug use)
Running Time:  116 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     When we are introduced to Richard (Leonardo DiCaprio), the young
American protagonist of THE BEACH, he says, "My name is Richard. What else
do you need to know about me?" He tries to convince us that he's a blank
slate, a walking receptor for experiences using his backpacking trip
through Thailand as a way to shake up his life. It's an intriguing start,
except for one small problem: There's a lot more we need to know about
Richard. In fact, there's a lot more we need to know about virtually
everyone and everything in THE BEACH. Director Danny Boyle's
travelogue-cum-human nature treatise proves to be a tremendously
frustrating experience -- it's a lazy film that thinks it's being
profound.
     The titular beach is a hidden cove on a remote island off the Thai
coast, a place that has become a sort of myth among tourists in Thailand. 
Richard learns the truth when Daffy (Robert Carlyle), a crazed former
resident of the island, hands over a map to its location. Accompanied by a
young French couple named Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) and Etienne
(Guillaume Canet), Richard makes the difficult journey to the island,
where they find a community of self-imposed outcasts from civilization. It
all seems to be a paradise on earth, except for the presence of a
pseudo-benevolent pseudo-dictator named Sal (Tilda Swinton) whose paranoia
over keeping the island secret is rivaled only by her libido, and the
unsettling willingness of the residents to leave their dying in the middle
of the jungle. Soon Richard begins suspecting that the threats to the
community from without -- edgy marijuana farmers, more Americans -- may be
less troubling than the threats from within.
     During its first hour, THE BEACH does an effective job of setting
tone, largely through the efforts of superb technical craftsmen. Darius
Khondji works his now-typical magic with darkness, adding a shadow of
creepiness to Richard's cynical vision of tourism in "exotic" lands. The
island locations are spectacular, and Donald McAlpine's production design
of the islanders' camp is a tidy marvel. THE BEACH wants to set up an
initial dichotomy -- the pasteurized pleasures of most tourist
destinations compared to the raw glory of the island -- that eventually
proves to be false. On a visual level, it's hard not to argue that Boyle
and company succeed.
     Unfortunately for Boyle and company -- and for you, John or Jane 
Q. Potential Audience Member -- the characters eventually have to play a
role in the film. When they do, it becomes quite clear that nobody
understands why anybody is doing anything. Richard's vague motivations and
frustrations over sanitized tourist experiences seem provocative as the
film begins, but soon the script begins dropping in details about his past
-- e.g. he's a video game junkie -- without bothering to explain why that
matters except as an excuse for Boyle to include an admittedly creative
fantasy sequence. That complete apathy over exploring motivation spills
over into every other character, as screenwriter John Hodge never bothers
with the tiny matter of what the islanders want their paradise to
represent, or why Sal above all others treats the place as a holy secret. 
The characters -- including DiCaprio, whose performance is about as good
as you can expect in a role so under-written -- generally appear to be
occupying space and serving plot functions, to the ridiculous extreme that
the head marijuana farmer gives a knowing nod after his solution to the
film's climactic problem proves him a worthy successor to Solomon in the
despotic wisdom department.
     Of course, letting the complexities of the characters come to the
surface would have required some actual effort, as opposed to offering up 
the premise as it stands. THE BEACH comes to the staggering conclusion
that a perfect society is not possible when imperfect human beings are
involved (particularly when some of those imperfect human beings happen to
be surly neighboring marijuana farmers). It's ridiculously obvious
thematic material, yet the makers of THE BEACH seem convinced that
presenting that theme is enough to earn them philosophical style points. 
Ultimately, style points are all they earn, though they earn those style
points in impressive quantities. There are several instances when THE
BEACH has the power to grab you viscerally -- the squeamish might want to
turn away after the consequences of a shark attack -- but the concept
clearly wants to grab you intellectually as well. And THE BEACH just can't
do that, not when its creators decide the characters' names are all you
need to know about them.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton,
Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume Canet and Robert Carlyle
Director-Danny Boyle
Canadian Rating-14A
Released by 20th Century Fox - 02/00
When I envision a beach, I think of an undisturbed sandy white plain,
with waves of glaciated water lightly caressing the shoreline in
peaceful transition. Leonardo DiCaprio's latest offering, vaguely titled
`The Beach', is nothing of the sort. It's more like a rocky terrain of
jagged frustration and unneeded obstacles, with the oncoming waves
pounding the shore with such force that the effect should be deafening.
Instead, it's nothing more than a repressed whisper. But enough with the
metaphors.
Unlike a large fragment of the population - namely younger females - I
do not consider myself to be a diehard Leo fanatic. I do concede that
the kid has acting abilities, which were showcased in a certain boat
movie involving an iceberg.... Oh, yes - `Titanic'. Given the incoherent
catastrophe surrounding him, DiCaprio's resolute performance is actually
one of the positive aspects of `The Beach'. Playing Richard, an American
boy wishing to seek refuge from the boring squabble of everyday living,
DiCaprio is believable and compelling. I wasn't concerned about being
properly persuaded by the actor, and he delivers sufficiently. Sadly,
Danny Boyle (whose work includes the maniacally macabre `Shallow Grave'
and `Trainspotting') offers no sign of destination in the director's
chair. After a set-up bubbling with intriguing promise, Boyle reveals
his movie serves no purpose. Perhaps after the first half of shooting
was completed, the director sat back to contemplate the question
`Sooo... where are we going from here?'
The script is weak and meandering, but at least `The Beach' looks
pretty. The story follows Richard, who hooks up with a French couple
(Guillame Canet and Virginie Ledoyen) in a cockroach-infested Thailand
hotel and goes on a mission to reach a secret beach. A map to this
supposed paradise was given to Richard by an eccentric Brit named Daffy
(Robert Carlyle), who commits gory suicide immediately following. Once
the determined trio reach the destination, they find 1) an enormous
marijuana plantation; 2) a band of willful civilians led by the
authoritative Sal (Tilda Swinton); and 3) an enclosed island paradise
unlike anything they've ever seen. This is where the seductive visual
radiance of `The Beach' really proves to be a valuable asset. Aside from
that, DiCaprio and a terrific soundtrack, the film is nothing more than
a pulpy mirage of lost meaning. Even through a series of weird and
supposedly profound events leading up to the denouement, I was unable to
determine the real purpose of `The Beach'. Perhaps I'm just daft, but I
was confused.
Some of Boyle's irregular humor helps matters....like a surreal sequence
that pits Richard, bordering on insanity, into a live-action video game
in the jungle. But unfortunately, all other vital aspects are drowned in
favor of the meaningless plot. The romance between Leo and co-star
Ledoyen is flat and uninviting. For such a fuss to be made over their
romantic connection, more sparks should have definitely been generated.
Tilda Swinton is quite good as ring leader Sal, but she also gets dealt
a character too conventional to be really striking. It all boils down to
the prettiness of `The Beach'. Those nice aerial shots of the lightly
tinted ocean, the glimmer of the sand once they arrive.... all this
photographic style and glamour seems to be in a movie different from the
murky final product.
Also be forewarned of the violence level, which is extreme, particularly
due to some of the grisly after-effects of a shark attack. At any rate,
the plentiful swarm of young ladies dedicated to Leo are going to find
squat to like about `The Beach' (save for Leo himself). It's also not a
film for those who enjoy inner meaning and moralizing with their cinema.
Although it goes to great lengths to achieve a purpose, `The Beach'
simply cannot find a satisfying comfort zone. Those looking for a
rewarding experience are going to be frustrated, so take my advice:
avoid `The Beach'. You'll find the waters too rough.
Your Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Beach (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Virginie
Ledoyen, Guillaume Canet, Tilda Swinton and Robert Carlyle. Directed by
Danny Boyle.
 "The Beach" is an appealing movie. It features lush scenery, plus
attractive young people in skimpy costumes - one of whom is Leonardo
DiCaprio, who just seems drawn to movies that feature water.
 And while "The Beach" may be a treat to the eye, the storyline is
pedestrian.
 Basically it is because the protagonists are self-absorbed,
self-centered and selfish.
DiCaprio plays Richard, a young man at loose ends, who drifts into
Bangkok, Thailand, just looking for kicks. Richard is searching for
something, he's unsure of what it is, but he will know it when he finds
it.
 "The Beach," directed by Danny Boyle, best known for helming
"Trainspotting," yearns to be profound. However, it comes off as merely
pretentious, especially involving sequences in which DiCaprio's Richard
is doing a voice-over narration.
 "The Beach," with a screenplay by John Hodge, based on a novel by Alex
Garland, deals with a group of young expatriates who - dissatisfied with
the world -  gather at a secret island and establish a community of
their own
 But of course the same human frailties these people carried in the
outside world are brought into this self-made Eden.
 It is DiCaprio's performance that saves "The Beach" from being overcome
by its own pomposity. His Richard is a cocky young man who hides his
insecurities behind a facade of coolness and braggadocio.
 DiCaprio always has been a fine actor. He can overcome the limitations
of the most mundane dialogue, i.e. "Titanic," and has a charismatic
screen presence. DiCaprio is one of those actors whom the camera loves.
 Yet he is sometimes undercut by Boyle's affinity for fancy camera
angles and unnecessary long, aerial shots which, I suppose, are there to
remind us of the isolation of the island as well as it's natural beauty.
 Once is enough, but Boyle and cinematographer Darius Khondji use these
types of shots as exclamation points, as if the audience wouldn't get
the message unless they shout it photographically.
 The rest of the cast includes Virginie Ledoyen as Francoise, the young
woman with whom Richard becomes involved; Guillaume Canet as Etienne,
Francoise's companion, who turns out to be the moral center of the
story; Tilda Swinton as Sal, the leader of the unusual community; and,
in basically what amounts to a powerful cameo, Robert Carlyle as Daffy,
the drug-crazed individual who sets the 
plot in motion by giving Richard a secret map to the beach.
 In a compelling way, "The Beach" offers some interesting insights. For
example, the Thai farmers who grow marijuana on the other side of the
island, leave the expatriates alone as long as they keep their locale a
secret.
 When because of Richard's thoughtlessness, a quartet of tourists meet
tragedy, paradise is lost.
 Where "The Beach" goes awry is near the final reels where Richard is
exiled from the community for his transgressions. Here the movie becomes
a overwrought cross between "Lord of the Flies" and "Apocalypse Now."
 "The Beach" is a flawed movie, but it is entertaining. DiCaprio's solid
performance and the beautiful landscapes will be the main draw. Those
seeking more will have to look elsewhere.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Danny Boyle.
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Virginie Ledoyen, Tilda Swinton, Guillaume Canet, 
Robert Carlyle.
2000 - 116 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex, brief nudity, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, February 12, 2000.
If the sole purpose of movies was to offer up gorgeous scenery and 
camerawork, intermixed with astoundingly memorable and quirky music 
(including a score by David Lynch regular Angelo Badalamenti), then "The 
Beach," directed by Danny Boyle (1996's "Trainspotting"), would be an instant 
modern-day classic. It is a shame, then, that viewers usually look for 
something extra when they watch a film. Generally, they search for substance, 
well-written characters, or, at the very least, a fresh story that doesn't 
hold its audience in contempt. Guess what movie would like you to believe it 
has these things, but fails miserably at success on all three accounts?
Leonardo DiCaprio (in his first starring role since the unintentional 1998 
laugh-riot, "The Man in the Iron Mask") stars as Richard, a young man 
traveling through Thailand who, through narration, tells us that his name is 
the only thing we need to know about him. He is in a new country, after all, 
and he's starting over--in other words, he should be looked upon as a tabula 
rasa. Checking into a relatively scuzzy hotel room positioned between a 
French couple, the alluringly beautiful Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) and her 
boyfriend Etienne (Guillaume Canet), and a crazed Scot named Daffy (Robert 
Carlyle), Richard learns from Daffy that there is an island of sheer 
perfection and beauty hidden deep within the Gulf of Thailand. Very few 
people know about it, and even fewer have been able to find and reach it. The 
next day, Richard discovers Daffy has committed suicide in his room, but not 
before leaving him a map to the island.
Richard wastes no time in inviting Francoise and Etienne on his journey to 
the island, and they quickly accept. Before long, they have set off to find 
it with the map in hand, and by the 30-minute-mark, have reached the 
rapturous paradise, where a small community lives and works together in peace 
and harmony, free of the noise and problems of the outside world. Richard, 
Francoise, and Etienne instantly move in with the inhabitants, but it is 
obvious Richard has been pining for Francoise throughout the whole trip. 
Meanwhile, the leader of the island, Sal (Tilda Swinton), has her eye on 
Richard, despite having a boyfriend of her own. 
If "The Beach" wants to partially be a romance, it is one of the most 
uncharismatic love stories possibly ever made. While Richard is an intriguing 
character, we know little about him aside from his aforementioned name, the 
fact that he enjoys smoking pot, and his occasional scaredy-cat mentality. 
Leonardo DiCaprio, despite being a wildly popular mega-star due to 1997's 
"Titanic," really is a fine actor, and he does everything he possibly can to 
bring his character alive and equipped with more dimension than is written on 
the page. Richard can be a highly annoying presence whose mouth you would 
love to tape shut every now and again, but that is an appropriate trait to 
the figure he plays, a basically care-free free spirit enjoying his youth 
while it lasts. 
Francoise, in comparison, is a completely disposable character without any 
sort of charm or personality, and we learn literally nothing about her, 
outside of her physical appearance. It is difficult to say if young French 
actress Virginie Ledoyen, making her American film debut here, has any 
thespian talents, but my suspicions point to a resounding "no." Even if the 
role is severely underwritten, any good actress would be able to turn 
Francoise into someone who, at least, is likable or kind-natured. Ledoyen 
plays her like a mannequin--lifeless and without the ability to show 
emotions.  
Richard and Francoise have zero chemistry together, and it is tough to say 
what Richard sees in someone who might as well be placed in a living room 
around the holidays and have ornaments and lights hung around her body. Their 
relationship is haphazardly written, by John Hodge, and executed, by Boyle, 
and there is no way any audience member could care enough about them to 
invest their emotions into the fate of their romance.
In the other two notable roles are Guillaume Canet, as Etienne, and Tilda 
Swinton (1993's "Orlando"), as Sal. Canet is unextraordinary, and his 
character is surprisingly written to be wimpy in the second half, when he 
does not even care either way that Richard stole Francoise from him. After a 
very brief exchange of words, this possible love triangle evaporates and 
another pseudo one comes to the forefront. On a trip to the mainland to get 
supplies, Richard and Sal engage in sexual activity, and Sal tells him 
afterwards that she already has a boyfriend and is uninterested in beginning 
a relationship; she just wanted the sex. Swinton, an excellent actress who 
isn't used nearly enough, is able to develop a character, to a degree, and 
portrays Sal as a strong-willed, determined woman who only wishes for their 
sacred beach to remain undiscovered.
Approximately fifteen minutes into the film's second hour, "The Beach" makes 
a U-turn and becomes a thriller, as four travelers whom Richard mistakenly 
gave a map to, are seen across the water preparing to cross to the island. 
When Sal finds this out, she demands that he stay in the woods until they 
reach the other side, and then turn them away somehow. Forced into solitude 
and without food or Francoise, Richard gradually begins to lose his mind, 
turning into a prowler of the island's forests. But why? The details into 
Richard's startling transformation are kept under wraps, only, I suppose, for 
the filmmakers to know the answer to.
It is unfortunate that the screenplay lets the cast and plot developments 
down, because "The Beach" is a towering technical achievement. The 
cinematography, by Darius Khondji (who blessed us with the haunting and 
unforgettable look of 1999's "In Dreams"), does not disappoint in capturing a 
beach that is supposedly one of the most pure and beautiful patches of land 
on the Earth. The choice of music (by such bands as New Order, Sugar Ray, All 
Saints, and Moby) is perfectly realized and compliments the pretty pictures 
with a dream-like quality, while the score, by Badalamenti, is resplendent.
"The Beach" is based on a novel by Alex Garland, and like most film 
adaptations, has allegedly taken great liberties in telling the story. How 
the picture might have been if more closely related to the book remains to be 
known (since I have never read it), but something tells me much of it has 
been chopped up due to the studio (20th-Century Fox) seeking a more 
mainstream product for DiCaprio's teenybopper fans to enjoy. They might as 
well have not even attempted it, as the film will leave DiCaprio's younger 
followers in the dark, or away from the theater, based on its rightful 
R-rating. 
Director Boyle would love to think he has made a motion picture with powerful 
pro-ecological undercurrents about the deflowering of a nation and the 
possible purity a hidden world might have the ability to hold, but this 
statement is about as subtle as a neon sign, and about as thought-provoking 
as a piece of grilled chicken. "The Beach" is not at all a bad film--simply a 
misguided one that is ruined by an amateurish screenplay that is missing 
three important elements: a heart, a brain, and the nerve to be courageous in 
its storytelling. Wow, I suddenly feel like I just entered into an alternate 
world of "The Wizard of Oz"--one in which the Emerald City is devoid of any 
sense of magic, wonder, or human compassion.

Author
Ross Anthony
A somewhat snide Leonardo prefaces this "Lord of the Flies" type adventure,
"My name is Richard, so what else do you need to know?" As a matter of fact,
I would have liked to know that Richard wades on the selfish and untrue side
of ordinary. Which could have quickly been established in a brief opening
scene.
But "The Beach" does take care to establish the size of Richard's gonads.
His beach balls are easily dared. Arriving into a bustling exotic Bangkok,
locals promptly challenge Richard into drinking snake blood. Then Robert
Carlyle, delivering a fantastically psycho performance as a former resident
of the famed beach, more than sparks Richard's interest in the splendidly
secret cove three islands off the coast, "I'm not just talking ... 'oh,
that's nice, man' ... this place if f'ing perfect."
In need of some companionship (especially female) Richard recruits a French
couple to journey with him. By the end of the first act, the three, standing
on the second island and staring at the forbidden goal, dare themselves to
swim the void.
Up to here, the film rather closely traces a common tourist route. In fact,
ten years ago, I flew into Bangkok, crashed at a cheap hostel, got the
island paradise speech from a glassy-eyed traveler, hopped the train and
boarded the boat out to the same second island where I met up with an
Israeli couple. So in a strange way, the film may be roughly nostalgic for
those who've made the trip - up to this point anyway. At the time, Koh
Pangon was beauty enough, we didn't need to swim the 2K.
Once the trio reaches the forbidden island, "The Beach" dips into a short
sequence of which the "Blaire Witch Project" would have been envious. An
obsessed leader dragging two innocents into the thicket ... but with a much
larger budget, and experienced cinematographers.
Soon enough they find the cove haven to end all cove havens and a community
of pot-smoking hippies to go with it. "I've got a new vocation: The pursuit
of pleasure." The music plays backward during this scene to greater
intensify the dizzying beauty. Nicely done.
Leonardo plays the role well, especially in his reactions. Early on he
blurts to the violent psycho traveler, "No offense, but you're f'ed in the
head." As we await the consequences, Leonardo's facial expressions fill the
screen with anticipation, daring and a shady sort of naiveté.
But, in a move we'd not been warmed up to, Richard leaves a copy of the map
back on the second island. It is this copy that tempts the major conflict
for the rest of the film. A tempt that any self-respecting major conflict
would have ignored. But not this one.
Dabbling in surrealism, the film drifts into the dark and deathly, when
Richard himself comes to idolize the memory of the aforementioned crazed
traveler. Here, the twisted plot becomes savagely captivating. Unfortunately
soon after, all this set-up falls like a house made of cards; as the
filmmakers opt for a showdown style climax while abandoning what should have
been a personal, man vs. selfishness, culmination. The saga dumps to its
end, manufacturing the lacerated remains of a theme.
Well paced, acted and filmed, always interesting, with only a few sticky
moments; "The Beach" is a small scale, less potent, more commercial "Fight
Club." Both films follow a fringe character, start well, continue well, but
fail to find an ending that works.
A brief note: Though Richard's map shows the island paradise Northwest of
Koh Pangnon; the actual island filmed, Phi Phi Le, is miles away (off of
Phuket Island). Additionally, the producers reshaped the sand dunes somewhat
and filled out the coast with 100 coconut trees that weren't there prior.
The Beach. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Daniel York, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume Canet,
Robert Carlyle, Tilda Swinton.
Directed by Danny Boyle.
Screenplay by John Hodge. Based on the book by Alex Garland.
Produced by Andrew Macdonald at 20th Century Fox/Figment.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Shay Casey
I'm not 14 years old, and I'm not female, but I'm pretty confident in
claiming that in his new movie "The Beach," pretty boy Leonardo DiCaprio is
looking just as dreamy as ever. (And just to deflect any potential pithy
comments, no, I'm not gay either -- not that there's anything wrong with
that.)  There's plenty of stuff here for Leo fanatics to get worked up over.
There's Shirtless Leo, Romantic Leo, and a fair amount of Leo Sex. But such
fans may also be disappointed, because "The Beach" is no airy, ultimately
tragic romance á la "Titanic." It's an edgy, violent, highly-stylized film
that says something about humanity and civilization. At least it thinks it
does. The trouble with "The Beach" is that it's saddled with a clashing of
goals: Leo fans may want a film that offers an opportunity to gaze at their,
like, most favorite movie star ever (and no doubt the studio pushed for
that), but it's clearly coming from source material that has higher purpose
in mind. This film, a thematically confused affair, never reconciles the
conflict.
DiCaprio plays Richard, a bored American looking for adventure by touring
the world. He arrives in Thailand, finding a world just as commercialized as
the one he came from. At his flea-ridden hotel, he meets Daffy (Robert
Carlyle), a crazed Scot who gives him a map detailing the location of a
hidden island, upon which a beach lies, one purported to be paradise on
Earth. After Daffy commits a gruesome suicide, Richard convinces the French
couple living next door, Étienne (Guillaume Canet) and Françoise (Virginie
Ledoyen), to embark with him on a journey to the fabled beach. When the trio
reaches their destination, they find an island half owned by Thai marijuana
farmers, with the other half owned by a group consisting mostly of Europeans
that live on a beautiful beach and have formed their own community. They
work to maintain their paradise, but spend a great deal of their time
partying. To Richard and his pals, it seems like the perfect life, but like
all perfect lives in a movie like this, it can't last. One of the more
ominous figures is Sal (Tilda Swinton), the overbearing community matriarch,
whose stubborn desire to keep her perfect community secret may be its
downfall.
Leo performs reasonably well in this film, and contrary to what many of
those who got sick of the "Titanic" hoopla might think, he's actually a
pretty good actor. Too bad his role in "The Beach" is not a good one for
him; when the script forces him to "go primitive," it's positively silly
(more on that later), and much of the artistic merit has been compromised by
the producers' more commercial desire to get their golden boy into yet
another troublesome love triangle. Consequently, Richard's romance with
Françoise feels painfully tacked-on, especially considering it lasts about
20 minutes before being forgotten altogether. And Étienne is probably the
calmest ex-boyfriend in history: Is he really going to give up a babe like
Françoise that easily? Either he's a wimp or merely the consequence of a
Hollywood script contrivance, one dealing only with the desired end result
and paying little attention to the logic of getting there.
"The Beach" starts off well enough. There's a nice "Apocalypse Now"-inspired
opening sequence, and Robert Carlyle's appearance is delightfully batty,
despite the fact that I could hardly understand a word of it. In fact, most
of the movie's first act is quite entertaining, mainly because it's actually
moving toward a goal: discovery of the island. Had it kept with this
premise -- an adventure-romance in a tropical locale -- the film might have
worked. It wouldn't have been deep, but still fun. Unfortunately, "The
Beach" runs into pretensions of thematic depth in its second hour, and when
this film gets deep, it gets silly. We get muddled messages about humanity's
destruction of nature and the fleeting quality of paradise, and they don't
take hold because it's clear screenwriter John Hodge doesn't know what he
wants to say. He waffles around, first making Richard a disenchanted
antihero, then a romantic lead, and finally an animalistic jungle boy. The
last of these choices is by far the worst, and it's sadly the one Hodge goes
with at the end. The major problem with Richard's transformation into Mr.
Primeval is that the entire episode doesn't make an ounce of sense. Leo's
character goes nuts at the drop of a hat, and then turns back to being
civilized just as abruptly. Nothing is ever explained about his sudden lapse
into insanity, and what's worse, DiCaprio is decidedly not the right actor
for the part. Would you be scared if a shirtless, headband-wearing Leo
growled at you from underneath some bushes? I'd laugh and move on, but the
people in "The Beach" actually take him seriously.
Director Danny Boyle is a great talent, and his use of rapid-fire editing
techniques and creative shot selection is still as proficient as ever, but
he really doesn't know what to do with material that has no real focus. I've
never read the Alex Garland novel upon which "The Beach" is based, but it
seems the point has been lost, and Boyle doesn't know where it is. In an
effort to cover this up, he overloads his film with stylistic flourishes.
This isn't a bad strategy; if nothing else, "The Beach" remains visually
interesting for most of its running time. But I'm not sure if there's ever
been a filmmaker with enough style to entirely cover up for utter failure in
the writing department (well, maybe Tim Burton), and likewise Boyle's
stylistic decisions don't hold up to close scrutiny. There is a scene with
DiCaprio running around the jungle like a character in a video game
(unsubtly set up by early scenes of Richard playing his Game Boy) that is
awfully amusing at first glance, but when I thought about it, I couldn't
come up with any earthly reason why it was included. Nor did I understand
why Richard started having dreams about Daffy taking him into war, and why
everyone welcomes the original trio with open arms but freaks out when four
surfers, accidentally led by Richard, come to the island. There isn't much
internal logic in "The Beach," just a lot of inexplicable things necessary
to move the plot along, which are otherwise known as "contrivances."
Some might find the issues brought up by "The Beach" timely and fascinating,
provided they've never read "Lord of the Flies" or seen "Apocalypse Now,"
but for me, it was an old message delivered in confusing fashion. There are
some redeeming virtues, namely some breathtaking cinematography and a
technofied musical score that adds to many of the scenes nicely. Too bad the
film's story goes from decent to bad to awful: The ending of Garland's novel
apparently involved a violent bloodbath, and while that might not have made
the film much better, it might at least have made a little more sense. The
ending of this version (involving a bunch of iMacs) regretfully destroys
whatever confused messages the film might have been delivering and serves to
turn Leo's character into even more of a brat than he was at the beginning.
Did Richard learn anything from his descent into the heart of darkness?
According to this "Beach," no.
For more reviews, go to
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Land/4252/movies.html
