Title
Review for Posse (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 8.2 out of 10 (B, **1/2 out of ****) 
Starring:  Mario Van Peebles, Stephen Baldwin, Billy Zane, 
           Charles Lane, Big Daddy Kane, Salli Richardson
Director:  Mario Van Peebles
Producers:  Preston Holmes and Jim Steele
Screenplay:  Sy Richardson and Dario Scardapane
Music:  Michel Colombier
Released by Gramercy Pictures
     The posse of Jessie Lee (Mario Van Peebles) is assembled in Cuba
when a small group of dissenters escape from an ambush set by the
sadistic Colonel Graham (Billy Zane).  From Cuba of 1896 to the U.S.,
Lee's posse moves west as he pursues vengeance against the men who
murdered his father.  With Colonel Graham hot on his heels, Lee arrives
in Freemanville (a community of ex-slaves), the culmination of his
father's dreams and a place in danger from a group of corrupt whites
from the next town over.
     In constructing POSSE, Van Peebles has put together something of a
traditional western with a twist: with the exception of Baldwin's
Little J, the members of the group are black.  Some interesting
race-related points are raised, but Van Peebles disappoints by focusing
instead on the standard elements of the picture.  By the film's end,
this has degenerated into little more than a 19th-Century shoot-em-up.
POSSE is a violent movie, but without the grittiness that characterized
Clint Eastwood's Academy Award winning UNFORGIVEN.
     Technically, this film is a mess.  Considering how well NEW JACK
CITY (Van Peebles' previous effort) fared in this arena, that's
something of a surprise.  However, in POSSE, the editing is
sub-par--scenes often come to jarring conclusions.  The music at times
seems better-suited to a contemporary action film than a western, and
the quick changing of camera angles occasionally makes POSSE feel like
something created for MTV.
     Despite numerous problems, POSSE remains an entertaining film.  In
addition to bringing a refreshingly new perspective to the western, it
tells a solid story.  The subplot involving Graham perhaps creates some
unnecessary baggage, but the main conflict between Van Peebles and
Richard Jordan in Freemanville is well-developed.  We are also given a
rare (for movies) glimpse into the interrelationship between Native
Americans and African Americans.
     A comparison to GLORY is worth making.  In many ways, the
intentions of the two films are similar--both attempt to redress the
historical inaccuracies of Hollywood.  However, where GLORY succeeds
brilliantly by wedding the dramatic impact of the black man's role in
the Civil War with its overall tale, POSSE fails to attain the same
level.  With only a few minor script alterations and some re-casting,
this could easily have been an all-white film.  Many of the most
important and intriguing questions about the real roles of blacks in
the Old West are sadly left unexplored.  POSSE serves merely to whet
our appetites.
     Even considering the limited success of the attempt, it's
important that the effort was made, if for no other reason than that to
open a few eyes and make some people aware of the bias of a
white-written American history.  POSSE also has enough entertainment
value to make it worth a look, especially for those who enjoy
westerns.  It certainly isn't a definitive film, but it has its high
points.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Max Hoffmann
IN A NUTSHELL: If you're like me and *hate* westerns, give this one a
chance.  The mostly black cast is makes for a more historically accurate
view of the Old West than the white-bread Hollywood myopia we're
accustomed to (8,000 cowboys, a third of the lot, were black!!)  Strong
direction, a cast that "clicks" and effective use of "post office
mural" style cinematography.  Flawed slightly by overuse of flashbacks,
and heavy leaning on "eye for an eye" justice.  *Very* violent, but
forgivable.  An appealing sex scene with the same level of explicitness
as most Mel Gibson films.
     This film held my interest from start to finish.  Like many who
remember their first westerns in the age of above ground nuclear
testing, I've never been able to take this format seriously.  We never
saw 5 o'clock shadow on our heros, until the arrival of the spaghetti
westerns in the 60's.  But the faces were still white, and Indians were
usually played by well-tanned Italian actors.  Add to the mix the
mandatory love interest, who'd made it across the plains with her
lipstick and virtue intact.
     Van Pebbles sets the record straight, with a more realistic "color
palette." There were lots of blacks in the old west, including about a
third of the original settlers in Los Angeles.  Many were genuine heroes
who couldn't cross the color-line into an honest obituary or a place in
the history books.  Our Anglo-centric view has excluded blacks from most
American history, outside the Civil War.  A few low-budget "race" films
in the 30's portrayed black cowboys, but the runs were short and the
audiences segregated.  Placing this missing ingredient (black cowboys)
in center spot light makes a tired old format interesting for the first
time in recent memory.
     Van Peebles plays "Jesse Lee," a "buffalo soldier," conscripted
from prison for "life time military service."  (He's in prison for
having attempted to avenged the white-hate induced murder of his
father.)  The film opens with him at the center of the Spanish-American
war (where there were two major divisions of brothers, including an
all-black platoon who's heavy casualties made it safe for Teddy
Roosevelt to gallup up San Juan Hill).  Van Peebles lays it on pretty
thick with the totally despicable, pretty-boy racist captain, who
commands Jesse to murder a fellow soldier for his amusement.  (Though
this is no more exaggerated than elements in most westerns.)  Jesse
assembles a "posse" of fellow black (and one white, Baldwin) outlaws
to break free.  A skirmish leaves the villain shy one eye and with
enough motive to follow Jesse nearly to the ends of the earth, and the
utopian community founded by freed slaves that is Jesse's ultimate
destination.
     Though no Mahatma Gandhi, "Little J" (Baldwin) is remarkably
color-blind for his era, (the only color he sees is "green").  Van
Peebles resists the temptation to make Baldwin a white "Sydney
Poitier," and integrates him very well into the dynamics of the group.
Initially, baser motives (like cheating at gambling) are the unifying
force, but as the escape progresses the characters trust and know each
other on a deeper level, and the color issue gradually fades.
     Though much of the imagery deliberately harks to familiar
spaghetti westerns, Van Peebles makes a much more engaging and sexy
leading man than Clint Eastwood.  Jesse isn't  the totally remote,
unknowable stranger.  You get to know almost more than you want to
about him due to the sepia flashbacks that appear with the annoying
regularity of network TV commercials.  "Jesse's" lusty reunion with the
half Cherokee girlfriend he ditched covers the same amount of skin and
positions as THIEF OF HEARTS, but the darker skin tones nearly earned
the film a NC-17 rating.  The white men on the ratings board still
aren't comfortable viewing nude, black male flesh.
     The film *is* intensely violent, (about the same body count as any
Stephen Segal film) but I didn't find it particularly offensive.
(I've always thought of westerns as bowling tournaments with bodies
instead of pins.)  Be prepared for a few closeups of exactly how a
bullet passes through a face and more.  More troubling is Jesse's "eye
for an eye" approach to picking off everybody who ever did him wrong.
(You begin to wonder if there's anyone in that time zone who didn't
taunt him with flaming crosses, etc, due to the heavily populated
flashbacks.)  But westerns are never particularly realistic about cause
and effect (e.g., how many heroes walked into a hail of badly aimed
bullets, unscathed?)
     Van Peebles brings several interesting "new" elements to the
western format: the dynamics of authority and loyalty in the black
township are intriguing.  (E.g., do they kowtow to the white marshall,
or fight back for what is rightfully theirs?  Take a wild guess.)  The
dynamics between blacks and Indians, who found a lot of common ground
in the crumbs the white establishment approved for them.  A hero who
isn't particularly "mysterious" or tongue-tied on what his motives
are.  A cast who can act.  (This could be the vehicle to make Baldwin a
star.)  A mellow, rich palette for the camera.  (Van Peebles revealed in
the director's chat that he used low-arc lighting in most scenes, which
make both white and black skin look attractive.)  Clever use of humorous
anachronisms (e.g., the whiney barber exclaiming, "Can't we just all
get along?" during the Bonny and Clyde-like hail of bullets sprayed
against his shop).
     Van Peebles has just scratched the surface of unsung black history
of the Old West.  There appears to be enough pay dirt to warrant a lot
more films like this.  And who knows, if they make the violence a
little less like an anatomy class, and stretch out the skin scenes, I
just may learn to like westerns after all.
     Prediction: expect much of the establishment press to downplay
this film for (a) an unfair portrayal of unappetizing white characters
(b) too much violence and (c) explicit sex scenes.  None of these
points are true with this film.  If  any critics are uncomfortable with
the content of this film, they should blame our censored history text
books.

Author
Frank Maloney
     POSSE is a film directed by Mario Van Peebles and written by Sy
Richardson and Dario Scardapane.  The cast includes Mario Van Peebles,
Stephen Baldwin, Charles Lane, and Billy Zane.  Rated R for violence,
sex, and nudity.
     POSSE is an MTV film that poses as a major antidote to the
traditional lack of black people in Western movies.  The story of
blacks in the West, the black cowboys, the black homesteaders, the
black soldiers (called buffalo soldiers by the Indians), and the rest,
remains to be told.  Mario Van Peebles has taken an important, and
mostly unknown, story and trivialized it with an overproduced and
underwritten action film.
     For one thing, POSSE's writers might have bothered doing a little
research.  They misuse the word posse by making it mean "gang" instead
of "an armed band with legal authority."  They have the action begin
with the Spanish-American War (1898).  Then the story takes the
so-called posse beyond the frontier.  Piffle! In one of the landmarks
of U.S. historical study, Frederick Jackson Turner in the 1893 address
"The Significance of the Frontier in American History" established that
the frontier had died twenty years before.  Then once the posse have
gone beyond the frontier, they must take a fearsome shortcut through
Indian territory.  Never mind that Wounded Knee, the last major battle
of the Indian Wars, had taken place in 1890 and virtually all the
Indians were settled on reservations.  All this from a film that
purports to lecture its audience from time to time on the history of
blacks in the American west.
     Furthermore, I seriously question that the best vehicle for
presenting an important look at blacks in the West is an action film,
which is by its very nature a fantasy.  Someone in responding to
Bernadelli's review said that what westerns are, shoot-'em-ups.  To
which I again say, piffle.  Yes, a lot of westerns are just that, but
the best ones are not.  They may include scenes of violence, but that
is not their main thrust, their purpose, their excuse for existing.
And certainly, this film is the merest welter of a lot of other
westerns.  Van Peebles looks as much as he can like Clint Eastwood.  He
has also liberally helped himself to scenes from THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN,
UNFORGIVEN, BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID, THE WILD BUNCH,
ONE-EYED JACKS, and the complete oeuvres of John Ford and Sergio
Leone.
     And then there are the narrative and style problems.  Van Peebles
has reduced an important story to a disjointed succession of violent
confrontation between a black character, usually Van Peebles, and one
of two major psychotic white villains or their many, and mostly, white
henchmen.  All this filmed with various, irrelevant "effects" such as a
brown filter that makes it look like he used film stock that was too
old.  Complications in technique and a busy sound track of mostly
inappropriate music cannot disguise, indeed only emphasize, the
unintelligent mess this movie is.
     Despite all this, I have to say I found what enjoyment there was
in some individual actors' performances.  Stephen Baldwin was
interesting as the only white member of the posse.  Billy Zane
obviously was having a lot of fun hamming it up as the psycho colonel.
It was fun seeing Melvin Van Peebles, Mario's dad.  But none of the
actors was able to rise much above the mess of the rest of the film.
     I was also interested in snippets of some silent films with black
cowboys and other western heroes.  I would like to know more about
them.
     I cannot recommend this film to anyone, but if you must go, be
sure you wait for a cheap matinee.
