Title
Review for Big Easy, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Things are happening pretty fast in The Big Easy--that's the town you
and I know as New Orleans.  The Big Easy is called that because things go
pretty slow and easy down there, at least most of the time.  But just now
the police are investigating a gang war that is anything but easy.  Some
hoods--"wise guys," they're called--are getting killed in some pretty nasty
ways.  The police, including Remy McSwain (played by Dennis Quaid), are
investigating.  But the police are themselves being investigated.  The
Assistant District Attorney, Anne Osborne (played by Ellen Barkin), is in
there looking for signs of police corruption.  Now Remy comes from a family
of policeman and they are all good guys, but, like other policemen, they do
take advantage of certain privileges they get for being policemen.  And
that's the kind of thing that Osborne want to know more about.
     THE BIG EASY has three stars: Quaid, Barkin, and New Orleans.  ANGEL
HEART made New Orleans seem a little sinister; THE BIG EASY shows you a
friendlier, happier New Orleans.  With all the slap-happy fun down at the
Police Department, you wonder how anyone ever gets anything done fighting
crime.  Everyone is just a good old boy who loves Cajun music, 'gators, and
Tabasco Sauce.  It is a charming picture whether or not it is true.
     Quiad is likable as McSwain, though his Cajun accent seems a little
forced and varies in intensity from scene to scene.  The odd thing is that
the plot seems fresh and original until the last ten minutes or so.  Then
suddenly things start looking like just about every other police film of the
last five years.  And that is a shame, since that last impression is the one
that stays with you.  THE BIG EASY is good as a travelogue and at least
passable as a police story and as an object lesson in honesty.  Rate the
film a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dragan Antulov
When he compared two of the best dramatists of his age,
Greek philosopher and scholar Aristhoteles said: "Sophocles
shows the people as they should be, and Euripides shows them
as they are." Two and half thousands years later, that
statements still rings true. Flaws of human nature provide
causes for conflict, and without conflicts there wouldn't be
any dramas. Without dramas, whole modern entertainment
industry, at least the one we know it, wouldn't exist. And,
besides, flawed characters are usually fun to watch, while
ideal aren't. That ancient wisdom could be witnessed in THE
BIG EASY, 1987 movie by Jim McBride, one of the more
entertaining examples of the police thriller genre.
The movie is set in New Orleans, colourful American
metropolis known for its exotic looks, mystique and
century-old traditions. One of such traditions seems to be
wide- spread corruption within New Orleans Police
Department. Lieutenant Remy McSwain (Dennis Quaid) doesn't
seem to see anything wrong with it; on the contrary, he is
on the take himself, but still considers himself a good cop.
However, his personal code of ethics is challenged, same as
the peaceful coexistence between police and organised crime.
Someone is killing major drug dealers and Mafia figures in
town, and such events, that could lead to gang war, are
bringing attention of Anne Osborne (Ellen Barkin), special
prosecutor in charge of police corruption. At first
intrigued by the fact that cop-busting attorney shows so
much interest in a simple feud between the bad guys, McSwain
decides to help her. But, as the investigation continues and
more bodies pile up in the streets, McSwain witnesses
growing attraction between the two.
THE BIG EASY presents a challenge to anyone who would like
to put movies into genre folders; it isn't thrilling enough
to be called "thriller", and it isn't funny to be called
"drama" and it isn't funny enough to be "comedy". Yet,
despite its own genre ambiguity, it is probably one of the
most charming films of the previous decade. Plot doesn't
matter in this film - Daniel Petrie Jr. didn't bother too
much with that element of his script; but the real treasure
of the movies are the characters. Remy McSwain is presented
as easy-going fellow, who cracks jokes in the presence of
dead bodies and whose unstoppable charm can wiggle him out
of any situations; Dennis Quaid is in his acting prime, and
the role of Remy is probably one of the best performances in
his career. His partner is equally seductive Ellen Barkin,
but she manages to hide her feminine charm  under the guise
of inquisitorial Dragon Lady that would make even like
Kenneth Starr tame in comparison. However, the real strength
of this movie lies in the combination of those two actors;
their sexual chemistry is unbelievable and as soon as they
meet, the viewer is only left to wonder when, and not if,
should two of them end in bed. When something like that
finally happen, director Jim McBride, who has some
experience with explicit erotica in the movies, shows their
encounter in most realistic, yet equally charming fashion.
Other characters also contribute a lot to the movie's
appeal, mostly by illustrating a colourful and easy-going
nature of New Orleans. The most notable is slimy but
cultivated lawyer Lamar Parmentel, played by stage actor
Charles Ludlam in the cinematic role of his life; Cajun
mystique is also presented by McSwain's tough and protective
mother, played by Grace Zabriskie, actress who usually takes
less appealing roles. Of course, minor roles are also
reserved for capable character and comic actors like Ned
Beatty, John Goodman and Lisa Jane Persky. Even one of the
local celebrities, Louisiana State judge Judge Jim Garrison
(immortalised as the hero of Oliver Stone's controversial
epic JFK), gets an opportunity to play himself in a cameo
role. Apart from characters, another things that could
please the viewers is a clever use of local zydeco music,
whose uplifting tunes make this film cheerful instead of
depressing.
Darker tones, however, do appear in THE BIG EASY, but too
late. The movie makers were simply forced to include the
obligatory elements of conventional thriller in the movie,
but they didn't do a good dramatic transition in that
direction. Our hero suddenly develops a crisis of
conscience, begins changing to moral and upstanding lawman
and finally, together with his new lover and crime-fighting
partner, takes care of the bad guys in a inevitable
showdown. The movie lacks real finale, and one, presented by
the movie, isn't cathartic enough to improve the final
impression. However, despite those shortcomings, THE BIG
EASY is great fun while it lasts.
