Title
Review for Alice et Martin (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 USA Films
 Director: Andre Techine 
 Writer:  Oliver Assayas, Gilles Taurand, Andre Techine
 Cast: Juliette Binoche, Alexis Loret, Mathieu Amalric,
Carmen Maura, Jean-Pierre Lorit, Marthe Villalonga, Pierre
Maguelon, Eric Kreikenmayer, Jeremy Kreikenmayer, Kevin
Goffette, Christiane Ludot, Veronique Rioux, Corinne Hache,
Mauricio Angarita
   Almost every week you hear about a guy who has achieved
material success but who has expressed his feeling about his
circumstances by committing suicide--or worse, by being the
perpetrator of an inexplicable homicide.  In "Alice and Martin,"
filmmaker Andre Techine, whose previous works "Barocco"
and "The Bronte Sisters" hone in on the impact of fear,
anxiety and guilt--dramatizes a tale about one such person
who early in life achieves rapid fame and substance only to
be strangely despondent despite his good fortune. 
Sometimes he is pleased with himself.  For the most part
when he is not simply staring out a window he behaves in
bizarre ways, particularly toward one person to whom he had
declared his love.  While "Alice and Martin" is not a thriller
but rather indulges in the usual Gallic film tradition of
elevating talk to a preeminent status, Techine intends to have
his audience teased by suspense, wondering just why such a
youthful, handsome, and financially successful fellow who is
loved by the object of his affection is so downright miserable.
   As the title indicates, the film is a romance focusing on two
persons, the eponymous woman being a human being who is
herself insecure, if not chronically disheartened.  This movie
can serve as either a love story or a psychological case
study.  Techine has not succeeded in giving the narrative
much dramatic impact, a disappointment particularly if
Philippe Sarde's pulsating opening score has you anticipating
a work of unique intensity.  
   Techine's screenplay, co-written by Gilles Taurand and
Oliver Assayas, posits the not unusual theory that the past is
always with us--sort of like the adage that holds that when
you're in bed with your lover, there are really six people
under the sheets: the man, the woman and their parents. 
The story opens on the ten-year-old Martin (Jeremy
Kreikenmayer) who is inexplicably ordered by his divorced
mother Jeanine Sauvagnac (Carmen Maura) to visit the boy's
father Victor (Pierre Maguelon)--only to find that Victor has
his own brood consisting of his wife Lucie (Marthe Villalonga)
and three half-brothers.  (Victor, by the way, seems way too
old to be the father of this kid.)  As photographer Caroline
Champetier cuts to Martin (Alexis Loret in his debut
performance) a decade or so later, we find the man aimlessly
running through a field, homeless, stealing raw eggs from a
farmer's chicken coop for food and sheltering himself as best
he could from the cold and rain.  Taking refuge with his half
brother Benjamin (Mathieu Amalric), a struggling actor, he
meets Benjamin's roommate, insecure violinist Alice (Juliette
Binoche), secures a fabulous job as a model for commercial
products, and makes a bid for Alice's heart.  The relationship
between Alice--whose masochistic love for the neurotic and
moody Martin--is the crux of Techine's account.
   Though Martine Giordano's editing is often choppy, in one
case flashing back to Martin's youth as though the segment
were continuous with his present life, Techine does succeed
in various fragments to cast an ambient vision on the
production, particularly capturing the routine that tourists go
through when exploring an area like Granada's Alhambra and
engages the imagination particularly in one slow-motion shot
that communicates the vastness of the sea and the
insignificance of the human being when placed in contrast. 
But the story is sloppily organized, the relationship between
Martin and his father underdeveloped where further
explication is needed, and the project consequently lacks the
facility to engross its audience.  
Rated R.  Running time: 123 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ALICE AND MARTIN (France, 1998) ** 1/4 Directed by André Téchiné. 
Written by Techine & Gilles Taurand. Collaborator,  Olivier Assayas. 
Photography, Caroline Champetier. Editing, Martine Giordano. 
Production design, Ze Branco. Music, Philippe Sarde. Produced by 
Alain Sarde. Cast: Juliette Binoche (Alice), Alexis Loret (Martin 
Sauvagnac), Mathieu Amalric (Benjamin Sauvagnac), Carmen Maura 
(Jeanine Sauvagnac), Jean-Pierre Lorit (Frédéric Sauvagnac), Marthe 
Villalonga (Lucie Sauvagnac) Jeremy Kreikenmayer  (Martin as a child) 
and Pierre Maguelon(Victor Sauvagnac), et al. Released by USA Films. 
In French, with subtitles. 123 minutes. R (sexuality, violence)
The very Gallic writer-director Andre Techine has a special niche in 
his country's cinema. It is not easily defined or classifiable. He 
tends to make novelistic movies in which aestheticism and lyricism 
mix with the psychology of the characters. Techine is also an actors' 
director. He has baffled certain critics, been praised by others. 
It's a mixed picture.
Techine's best works have a strong record of awards in festivals such 
as Cannes (a host of nominations and one win as Best Director); at 
the Caesars (French Oscars), with four wins (including French film, 
Director, Screenplay, etc. In the USA his "Wild Reeds" was voted best 
foreign-language movie by the New York, the Los Angeles, and the 
National Societies of Critics.
"Alice and Martin" is his 17th feature (out of 18). The three 
features preceding it were "My Favorite Season," "Wild Reeds," and 
"The Thieves" all major hits. "Alice and Martin" however has had 
reviews that range from positive to ho-hum.
In a small town of Southwest France, hairdresser Jeanine lives with 
her 10-year old son Martin, an illegitimate child. Without 
explanation except "it's time you met your father" she packs off 
Martin to elderly industrialist Victor. The latter has an also 
elderly wife--and three boys with her.
Jump 10 years ahead. Martin, now 20, is seen disheveled, wandering 
about the country side, looking  crazy, stealing chickens and eggs. 
He ends up in a police station where we learn that Victor had an 
accident and died. The police does not connect this death with 
Martin's most bizarre behavior, and does not even hold him for 
raiding chicken coops. It is all extremely vague, in fact confusing 
and unconvincing.  This is the start of a film that will continue 
making the audience wonder about who, when, why, how.
Cut to the strange Martin showing up suddenly in Paris.. (Did  he 
have train-ticket money in his shabby clothes?) He looks up his 
half-brother Benjamin who is gay and an aspiring actor but  currently 
works in a large store, hand scanning people at the exit. (I think 
this is also symbolism but of  what, I cannot tell). At a cafe a 
woman accosts Martin, hands him her business card and leaves. She, it 
turns out later, is in the advertising business.
Benjamin shares a minuscule apartment with Alice, about 35 -- a 
violinist whom the director describes as "repressed."
She hardly survives through a variety of musical gigs. (One of her 
best lines::" Other music wants to heal wounds. Tango keeps them 
open.")
Alice sounds like a good, serious musician, but how good we do not 
know. It is interesting to follow her haphazard professional 
activities in classical and in popular music, but if the subtext 
includes a criticism of talents that go begging, Techine does not 
insist on the artist-in-a-garret theme, one that is true, but alas, 
also banal.
Martin now shares Benjamins-Alice cramped lodgings.   Remember the 
woman with the card? Thanks to it Martin   becomes, overnight it 
would seem (by time is unclear in this film) a hit as a model. He 
makes very good money (is this a satire of the advertising business? 
Unclear)  He can pay the rent. (Ask not how three people and a cat 
can fit in the space).
Now too, for reasons equally foggy, he stalks Alice. What is 
understood however is that the young man has psychological problems. 
Alice too but not uncommon ones.  As the two talk, she relates  a 
rather cock-and-bull story about her young sister who had an 
incredible memory that   suddenly drained out when she had a brain 
tumor. The girl died at age 11. And so on. Such confidences 
apparently make A and M draw closer to each other. They become a 
couple, and couples copulate, of course. Yet, while the act is sudden 
and energetic, it is not particularly sexy. And there is no strong 
evidence of " l'amour fou."
Martin has a photo shoot in Spain. Alice comes along. There she has 
symptoms of pregnancy while Martin  keels over from psychic 
disturbances, is hospitalized, loses his job. The twosome stay in a 
middle-of-nowhere seashore area of Spain. Martin is getting 
antagonistic, wants to stop the affair, swims at night in ominous 
waves. They have no money left.
A flashback to Victor leads us to Martin killing his dad. This 
explains his mental state and feelings of guilt. Throughout. we spend 
our time figuring out things. We become like the film characters who 
grope with people and feelings. There's much more of this  in Spain, 
in small-town France, in Paris and in a mental hospital outside 
Paris. And more yet.
But I will not reveal anything else about the story, the odd 
behaviors and the semi-closures. It seems to me that director Techine 
is really artistic, sincere and a believer in his 
creatures/creations. But the story, people, techniques and, what in 
Techine's mind are subtleties, tend to confuse us -- and must have 
adversely affected him, so that he did not look objectively at what 
he was doing.
There are several portrayals that flesh out the events. And they 
score points. But the overall structure is such that it would take a 
second viewing to "get into" the movie and its virtues.
There is also Juliette Binoche, a major star. She has been in films 
by Godard, Techine, Carax, Malle, Rappeneau, Kurys, and other major 
"auteurs." Even more notably she had the lead role in Kieslowski's 
superb "Three Colors: Blue," for which she won Best Actress at the 
Felix, the Caesar and the Venice Awards. Then came her Oscar for Best 
Supporting Actress (in "The English Patient.")
Juliette Binoche is celebrated for her talent in showing feelings, 
reactions, thoughts and the like through eloquent body and especially 
facial expressions. For "A and M," Techine, who compares her to the 
great Lilian Gish of silent movies' fame, wanted to give Ms. Binoche 
a part that would stress her speaking. He did, by in my opinion, not 
far enough.
Her Alice is Alice in Wonderland, but in the sense that the 
spectators wonder about what's going on.
Alex Loret who plays Martin, makes here his feature debut. The others 
are on the unfamiliar side, with the exception of Spanish actress 
Carmen Maura. She has appeared in almost 70 films since 1969, mostly 
Spanish (several by Pedro Almodovar,) some French. But here her 
character is sketchy and without the fire and agitation of her best 
roles.
French movies can be "la creme de la creme" in showing psyches and 
brains, complex relationships and behaviors, family matters and 
conversations, intimate relations, people and situations as they 
really are. But those characteristics can also go sometimes with 
obscurities, opaqueness, over-intellectualism, bizarre constructions, 
unraveled threads and loose ends.
"Alice and Martin" has beautiful photography but is a tortuous and 
tortured work, with people who can neither make contact among 
themselves or with the audience. It  kept me at arm's distance, 
although it could be that a repeat screening might remedy some of 
that.

Author
Steve Rhodes
André Téchiné's confusing ALICE AND MARTIN (ALICE ET MARTIN) is a 
combination mystery and character study in which the more we learn, the 
less we care.  The poorly drawn characters are so unsympathetic and 
uninteresting that we are happy to let them remain enigmas.  
As the story opens, 10-year-old Martin Sauvagnac (Jeremy Kreikenmayer), 
whose parents are divorced, is abruptly sent off by his working class 
mother to live with his wealthy father on his large manor.  In one of 
many jarring scene transitions, we quickly switch to Martin, played 
lethargically by Alexis Loret, as a 20-year-old.  
When we meet the older Martin, he is running like a mad man out of the 
gate of his father's estate.  Living like an animal in the woods, a 
nearly mute Martin steals eggs and eats them raw before leaving the 
chicken coop.  Out in a field, he pauses to watch buzzards rip the flesh 
off of a dead deer.  The part where he pushes the birds aside for his 
own tastes of the deer appears to have been left on the cutting room 
floor, but his eyes make it clear that that is what he is about to do.  
Finally, for the crime of stealing eggs, the police lead him off in 
chains worthy of those for a vicious serial killer.
The movie feels like a much longer film that was hacked up by a maniacal 
editor who chose random selections of footage.  To be fair, this is more 
likely to be a problem attributable to writers Olivier Assayas, Gilles 
Taurand and André Téchiné than editor Martine Giordano.  Couple this 
bewildering narrative with Caroline Champetier's ugly and dingy 
cinematography, and you get an obtuse mess.     
Martin goes to Paris to live with his brother Benjamin (Mathieu Amalric) 
and his brother's roommate Alice (Juliette Binoche).  Alice, a 
violinist, explains upfront to Martin that her relationship with 
Benjamin is not sexual.  Later, she tells Martin that she never mixes 
sex and friendship.  (We are frequently told that Europeans have a 
healthier attitude about sex than do we Americans.  Would Alice be 
considered an example of what they have in mind?)
Benjamin and Alice have an unusual relationship.  They brag that they 
trade roles being each other's child.  How's that for getting in touch 
with your inner child?
Although Alice initially writes off Martin as being "like a hobo from 
another planet," she -- surprise! -- falls for him.  After being 
discovered at a cafe, Martin is given a job as a model.  As his career 
is taking off, Alice downplays hers to follow him.  Along the way, we 
learn that Martin's father "fell" down the stairs to his death and that 
is what freaked Martin out.  Hmm, could there be more than meets the eye 
here?  Do we care?  No.
ALICE AND MARTIN runs a long 2:00.  The film is in French with English 
subtitles.  It is rated R for a scene of sexuality and language and 
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ALICE ET MARTIN (director: André Téchiné; screenwriters: Olivier
Assayas/Gilles Taurand; cinematographer: Caroline Champetier; editor:
Martine Giordano; cast: Juliette Binoche (Alice), Alexis Loret (Martin
Sauvagnac), Mathieu Amalric (Benjamin Sauvagnac), Carmen Maura (Jeanine
Sauvagnac), Jean-Pierre Lorit (Frédéric Sauvagnac), Jeremy Kreikenmayer
(Martin as a child), Pierre Maguelon (Victor Suavagnac), Marthe
Villalonga (Lucie); Runtime: 123; 1998-France)
André Techiné (Wild Reeds/Ma Saison Préférée) has come up with another
of his art-house films, guaranteed to dazzle the senses, featuring
Caroline Champetier's beautiful camera work of the colorful meadows of
southern France, a stupendously gorgeous and magical shot of a troubled
child opening up the shutters in his room to a dark sky of bubbly
snowflakes, and of the steel blue skies of Paris setting a sober
background mood for those  busy jump-starting their struggling careers
in the bustling city.
This dysfunctional family tale, is told mainly through the eyes of an
emotionally disturbed bastard son, Martin (Loret). He is first seen
after growing up for his first 10 years with his earthy, beautician
mother, Jeanine (Carmen Maura) and then brought to live with his real,
well-off, philandering industrialist father, Victor (Maguelon), his
stolid wife (Marthe Villalonga), and his three half-brothers. He hates
living with his father since he believes his father doesn't want him.
The film will uncover the secrets in his life that causes him to have a
nervous breakdown. It will show the relationship he has with his family
and with his lover, Alice (Binoche), and how tortured with self-hatred
he becomes trying to judge himself and find his soul, tormented about a
guilt that is gnawing at him after his father dies and he runs away from
home.
Love and guilt become the two obstacles in the young man's troubled
life, and the answers he seeks are imponderable but the reasons for his
breakdown seem on the surface like they are out of a Freudian psychology
101 college course. The director is ultimately asking the viewer to be
the judge, as he seems too preoccupied with painting his canvas with a
love that gets stuck somewhere between a lustful sexual romp and one of
pathos. What results in an incomplete ending for a film that can't stand
clarity except in its photography and its affection for the three flawed
main characters (Alice, Martin, and Benjamin). The story seemed jarring
at times, its inexorable rhythms and its lack of dialogue seemed out of
place with the attempt made in tracking each character down in depth.
Yet the film seems to work best when it was in a state of murkiness.
When things started clearing up and the characters become who we think
they were, the big secret doesn't seem that surprising, but how it is
handled seems bizarre though not fully credible, as it is perplexing why
the main character is so concerned with finding out something about
himself that will cause him so much pain when he doesn't have to. Yet
there is something about this film that is more than meets the eye, even
though the film left me unsatisfied, it was still so well-crafted, that
I found myself liking it better than I first thought I did.
The film does not necessarily go in chronological order, thereby the
flashbacks that come without order, are meant to give weight to the
story as presented at the time, and will give this rather conventional
unhappy family story line a feeling of much more mystery than is needed.
The film does succeed in exposing the wounds of jealousy, obsessive
love, and atavistic demands. But it's too melodramatic, the guilt
motivation seems too illogical, and the half-baked psychology fails to
explain its characters for it too fully work as drama. The actors were
all sweating their lines to make it seem as if they had to dig deep to
come up with a gem here and there, but their performances were all
finely tuned and seemed to add to the film's need to have confusion be
its guiding light. What keeps this film going, is the way it keeps the
emotional pot boiling, and just when you are ready to give up on it as
merely sitcom stuff, the film bounces back from its wordless silence and
halting love dramatics to boil over with fits of liberating agony.
The film kicks into high gear when the grown Martin runs out of the
prison-like gates of his tyrannical father's house, as he just pushed
him down the stairs accidently killing him. He then lives for three
weeks on the run as a fugitive in the countryside, where he watches a
dead deer carcass being devoured by carrion, tries unsuccessfully to
drown himself, and gets caught by a farmer stealing his eggs from a
chicken coop, as his father's wife pays his fine to release him from
prison. There was no dialogue to explain why he's a fugitive or what's
on his mind. Martin then heads to the Paris apartment of his homosexual
half-brother Benjamin (Amalric) and his tense violinist roomate Alice.
Here, he becomes inarticulate, still with the wild look of someone who
is being hunted down.
The pretty-boy Martin becomes sexually obsessed with the neurotic Alice,
he even gets caught stalking her, but she sticks to her safe Platonic
relationship with the aspiring actor Benjamin, who is currently
supporting himself by being a store security guard, even though she is
tempted by him sexually, nothing romantically transpires-though she is
flattered by the attention. But when he moves out and becomes a
well-established male model in the fashion world, with pictures of him
on advertising posters all over Paris, things begin to change. He then
gives her the ultimatum that he wants her or else he won't see her
again. She turns down this proposal, but with a look more of sadness
than of love, she goes to him and says, "Take me, I'm yours if you want
me." Martin takes her to bed and the inexperienced lover makes up for
lost time as a virgin.
The trouble they soon experience comes twofold, Benjamin goes into a
jealous snit that he lost what is his and, secondly, when she tells
Martin that he's going to be a daddy, he goes into a coma and when he
comes out of that, the boy checks himself into an asylum, where the
drums beating in his head are what drive men crazy. It seems that the
possibility of him being a father triggered off memories of the guilt he
is living with and can't cope with. Alice decides she loves the guy and
will stand-by him no matter what, and in order to understand him, she
returns to see his two mothers, and tries to find out what is bothering
her man.
You have to stick with this one and not get too perturbed by the
unsatisfying finale to see this one through and then, you might feel its
emotional grip growing on you. It's a pure cinematic vehicle, where the
pictures tell the story better than the story seems to be told. There
was a strangely felt wry humor that underscored the dead serious mood
the film had. Alexis Loret, in his debut film role, gives an interesting
performance of someone who is always out of place no matter where he is.
But, when it comes to the heavy romance, I didn't feel that this romance
was as deep as portrayed. Though the director might have implied it had
more going for it than sexual gratification, I saw no other convincing
reason for the romance. It could be asserted that maternal instincts,
soul searching, and misplaced pathos on Juliette's part were responsible
for the romance, but I couldn't see any other reason but the libido.
Martin was just not a warm enough character to believe he could generate
so much unconditional love.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
