Title
Review for L.I.E. (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lot 47 Films
 Director: Michael Cuesta
 Writer:  Stephen M. Ryder, Michael Cuesta, Gerald Cuesta
 Cast: Brian Cox, Paul Franklin Dano, Billy Kay, Bruce Altman,
James Costa, Tony Michael Donnelly, Walter Masterson, Marcia
DeBonis, Adam LeFevre
   I recently read an article which (believe it or not) contends
that teenagers as a whole in the U.S. are confident, stable, and
by the usual standards, mature.  You'd never know this from the
way movies portray adolescents, but then again you don't want to
see a movie about a teen who is confident, stable and mature, do
you?  Since it's easier to find real life teens who are disturbed
than to unearth situations in which helicopters are shot down and
cars plow into Chinatown vegetable stands, a movie like "L.I.E."
can be touching.  Nowadays so many young people are
emotionally or physically discarded by their parents (like Steven
Spielberg's David) that we can  believe kids--whether products of
crowded cities or capacious suburbs--get screwed up.  Larry
Clark mined this territory with his incisive "Kids," about big city
youth who deflower virgins and otherwise make trouble, picking
up steam in his current offering "Bully," about how a group of
boys and girls treat a tormentor with extreme prejudice rather
than simply try to reason with him.
   Michael Cuesta's "L.I.E.," which enjoyed a debut at the recent
New Directors, New Films festival in New York, probes the mind
of a 15-year-old, Howie Blitzer (Paul Franklin Dano), who has
been physically abandoned by his mother (she died in a car
accident) and both physically and emotionally deserted by his
dad.  Cuesta, using a screenplay he wrote together with Stephen
M. Ryder and Gerald Cuesta, employs as his metaphor the
world's biggest parking lot known as the Long Island
Expressway.  The L.I.E., which takes people east and west and
sometimes "straight to hell" as Howie puts it, is both a connection
to the outside world for the young resident of New York's Suffolk
County and, for the people it killed like his mother, the songwriter
Harry Chapin and film director Alan J. Pakula, a final destination.
   "L.I.E." takes off by showing the 15-year-old chilling out with his
friends, the sorts that only a mother could love, inluding the
spaced out Gary (Billy Kay) who makes a buck supplying sex to
drivers who stop for him just by a sign that says "Welcome to
Long Island."  Under Gary's influence, Howie sneaks with his
pals into homes and steals money, jewelry, and in one case a
pair of valuable antique guns. When the owner of the residence
with antique guns, Big John Harrigan (Brian Cox)--whose license
plate "B.J." carries with it a double-entendre--almost catches
Howie, ripping a piece of his jeans from the boy's leg, John
coasts around the neighborhood look for the kid with the
damaged jeans like a prince searching for Cinderella.  When
John at several points sniffs the blue swatch that he has literally
ripped off as though it were infused with Chanel No. 5, we're
tipped that the man may be a pederast.
   Cuesta shows his two principals as complex characters, a
welcome change from the sort of melodramatic Hollywood fare
that  separates the white hats from the black.  For his part,
John seeks sexual action at his favorite pit stop on the L.I.E.
even as he boards his lad du jour in his messy home.  At
the same time, though, he takes terrific care of his prey.  When
Howie, whose real estate developer dad is busted by the F.B.I.
thereby leaving Howie with an empty house, John takes him in
and lovingly cooks a lavish breakfast which the boy gobbles up
hungrily.  Howie is himself a mixed bag, a housebreaker who is
at the same time a poet--not only spinning out verse of his own
but spouting memorized lines from the works of Walt Whitman as
he does in a particularly tender moment while sitting next to John
and driving the big man's car.
   Though the end provides a dramatic payoff which is not
sincerely earned, Cuesta scores with "L.I.E." thanks to the
work of Brian Cox, a performer who has appeared in
everything from Royal Shakespeare company productions and
feature films like "Braveheart"  to roles in challenging indie fare
like "Rushmore" and "The Boxer."  In Howie's role, Paul
Franklin Dano has stepped off the Broadway stage to turn in a
convincing portrait of a mixed-up kid who learns quite a bit about
himself in his relationship with the kind pederast.  Romeo
Tirone's surreal images of the Long Island Expressway provide
us with the picture's mood, one of frenzied people going east and
west and getting nowhere.
Rated NC-17.  Running time: 97 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Best remembered for his understated performance as Dr. Hannibal Lecter
in Michael Mann's forensics thriller, Manhunter, Scottish character
actor Brian Cox brings something special to every movie he works on. 
Usually playing a bit role in some studio schlock (he dies halfway
through The Long Kiss Goodnight), he's only occasionally given something
meaty and substantial to do.  If you want to see some brilliant acting,
check out his work as a dogged police inspector opposite Frances
McDormand in Ken Loach's Hidden Agenda.
Cox plays the role of Big John Harrigan in the disturbing new indie
flick L.I.E., which Lot 47 picked up at Sundance when other distributors
were scared to budge.  Big John feels the love that dares not speak its
name, but he expresses it through seeking out adolescents and bringing
them back to his pad.  What bothered some audience members was the
presentation of Big John in an oddly empathetic light.  He's an
even-tempered, funny, robust old man who actually listens to the kids'
problems (as opposed to their parents and friends, both caught up in the
high-wire act of their own confused lives.)  He'll have sex-for-pay with
them only after an elaborate courtship, charming them with temptations
from the grown-up world.
L.I.E. stands for Long Island Expressway, which slices through the strip
malls and middle-class homes of suburbia.  Filmmaker Michael Cuesta uses
it as a (pretty transparent) metaphor of dangerous escape for his
15-year old protagonist, Howie (Paul Franklin Dano).  In his opening
voice-over, Howie reveals a morbid preoccupation with death on the road,
citing the L.I.E. highway deaths of filmmaker Alan J. Pakula, songwriter
Harry Chapin, and his own mother on Exit 52.  He's both fascinated and
disturbed by the L.I.E., and those feelings are projected onto Big John
(who follows Howie around in his bright red car, but never makes a move
to force the boy to do something he doesn't want to do.  This makes him
much more complex than the usual child molesters seen in movies -- he's
a beast, but ashamed of it.)
L.I.E. would have worked best as a half-hour short film about Howie's
ill-advised foray into Big John's haven.  There is unnecessary padding
with Howie's miserable dad (Bruce Altman) in the hot seat for a
white-collar crime, degenerate youngsters who get their kicks from
robbing middle-class houses, and some homoerotic shenanigans with
wise-ass Gary Terrio (Billy Kay), a handsome Artful Dodger.  Rather than
add to the themes of suburban ennui (not that we needed another movie on
that subject), these awkward subplots pad out the running time to
adequate feature length.
Concurrently, the relationship between Howie and Big John is evenly
paced and exceptionally well acted.  Cox, sporting a baseball cap and a
faded marine tattoo, is all bluff and bluster.  Dano is quiet and at
first glance seems so withdrawn as to be transparent.  We're so used to
child actors whose dramatic choices are broad and obvious (calling Haley
Joel!), it's surprising to see one who actually listens throughout any
given scene.  The restraint is admirable.
But L.I.E.'s screenplay doesn't always give them the best material. 
When Howie reads Big John a Walt Whitman poem, the moment feels a bit
too precious.  Director Michael Cuesta lingers on an ecstatic reaction
shot of Big John, who may as well be hearing Glenn Gould performing
Bach's Goldberg Variations.  It's too much.  There are also some obvious
dramatic contrivances involving Big John's other boy toy (Walter
Masterson), jealous over the newbie.  This plot thread predictably leads
to violence.
Not content to be a haunting, observational portrait of teen alienation
in a royally screwed up world (like Terry Zwigoff's superb Ghost World),
Cuesta lacks the confidence in his own work to end on an ambivalent
note.  It's typical of unimaginative cinema to wrap things up with a
bullet, sparing the writers from actually having to come up with a
complex, philosophical note.  In this regard, L.I.E. (and countless
other indie films) share something in common with blockbuster action
films: problems are solved when the obstacle is removed.  How often does
real life work this way?  To extend the question: If a movie is striving
for realism, do dramatic contrivances destroy the illusion?
Director: Michael Cuesta
Producer: Rene Bastian, Linda Moran, Michael Cuesta
Writer: Stephen M. Ryder, Michael Cuesta, Gerald Cuesta
Starring: Brian Cox, Paul Franklin Dano, Billy Kay, Bruce Altman
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"You got lanes going east," 15-year-old Howie Blitzer (Paul Franklin Dano) says
of the L.I.E. (Long Island Expressway) as he cheats death by balancing
precariously on an overpass guardrail over the L.I.E.  "You got lanes going
west.  You also got lanes going straight to hell."  Having recently lost his
mother in a car accident on the L.I.E., he sees the freeway as a metaphor for
his disastrous life.
The movie L.I.E., by commercial director Michael Cuesta and co-writers Stephen
Ryder, Michael Cuesta and Gerald Cuesta, is about a lot of things.  It's a
tragic coming of age story.  It's a story about restless youth.  It's about a
relationship between a boy and his parents.  But what you're most likely to hear
is that it is about pedophilia.  The movie tries hard not to sensationalize this
latter subject, but it doesn't back away from it either.
One thing is certain.  Cuesta is an impressive visual stylist.  He mixes
intriguing long shots, as when he shoots Howie squirming uncomfortably on a
wooden bench at a police station, with close-ups, as when he films Howie and his
best bud, Gary Terrio (Billy Kay), chatting in silhouette next to a roaring
bonfire.
Howie, Gary and a few of his friends have been robbing the upper middle class
houses of their Long Island neighbors.  They don't need the money really.  They
just like the momentary thrill of almost being caught.  It provides them a
drug-like rush that numbs the pain of their self-inflicted boredom.
Howie, a kid with a confused sexuality, is embarrassed to have never had sex
with a girl.  One telling day, he sneaks into his mom's makeup kit and puts her
lipstick on his babyish lips, which house a mouth of metal braces.  Thanks to
Gary, who makes money by selling his body to other guys, Howie comes to know Big
John Harrigan, a Vietnam vet who drives a sexy red 442 and who might have been a
spy.  Big John likes befriending young guys, which is certainly no crime.  He
also likes having sex with them, which wouldn't be illegal either, except that
he is way too flexible on such matters as the age of consent.  As Big John,
Brian Cox, a veteran actor, would be up for Oscar consideration for his acting
in this role, except there is probably zero chance of the Academy nominating an
actor playing a pedophile.  You can just imagine what hay an ambitious Senator
could make with that nomination.
Exploring issues from sexuality to crime -- including that of Howie's father
(Bruce Altman) who has his own run-in with the law over some shady business
practices -- the movie is complex and engrossing.  The film's only downfall is a
needlessly pat ending that makes you wish that they would have made one more
pass over the script before they started filming.
L.I.E. runs 1:48.  It is rated NC-17 for "some explicit sexual content," and
would be acceptable for college students.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, September 21, 2001. 
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If movies have taught us one thing over the last few years, it's that the
suburbs are a very dark, very screwed-up place.  L.I.E. confirms this
semi-revelation by taking the gritty subject matter of Kids and moving it
about 35 miles east to Dix Hills in Long Island's Suffolk County.  The title
refers to the Long Island Expressway in a not-so-subtle metaphor for the
fate of L.I.E.'s main character, who explains that some of the freeway's
lanes go straight to hell, having claimed the lives of such notables as
singer/songwriter Harry Chapin and director Alan J. Pakula, as well as his
own mother, who bought it on Exit 52.
His name is Howie Blitzer (Paul Franklin Dano) and he's a scrawny
15-year-old with braces and a talent for poetry.  Howie is a good kid who
has fallen in with a bad crowd, no doubt thanks to his mother's death and
his father Marty's (Bruce Altman, Girl Interrupted) refusal to get involved
in his son's life.  The two are clearly haunted by the death of their mother
and wife, with Marty turning to 80-hour workweeks and a live-in bimbo for
comfort, while Howie occasionally pulls a shoebox of his mother's bathroom
effects down from a shelf just so he can smell her perfume.
Part of the aforementioned "wrong crowd" includes Gary Terrio (Billy Kay,
The Guiding Light), a pierced, tattooed young man who gets Howie and two
others involved in a series of home break-ins that usually consist of
raiding the refrigerator (they're just bored, misguided kids, you see).
Gary, who holds somewhat of a sexual spell over Howie, is also a rent boy
who leads Howie to commit a basement burglary of a john upon whom he'd like
to exact a bit of revenge.
Howie knows nothing about Gary's extracurricular activities or that he's
being led into the den of one of the area's biggest pedophiles, "Big John"
Harrigan (Brian Cox, Rushmore), who hears the boys' attempt to rob him,
gives chase and manages to tear the pocket off of Howie's jeans.  The
ex-Marine (his license plate reads "BJ," which refers to both his nickname
and something he claims he can do better than anybody in the western
hemisphere) and pillar of the local community sniffs the pocket like an
animal, which is probably the most disturbing screen inhaling since Dennis
Hopper in Blue Velvet.  Like Velvet, it's a sign of bad things to come...or
so you might think.
A typical film about a child abuser would portray Big John as pure,
unadulterated evil, but here, he's kind and almost loving.  He listens to
Howie, which is something his own father never does.  The relationship
forged between Howie and the 60-something would-be monster is far from
predictable, and the film never judges any of its characters, whether they
diddle young boys or ignore their kids.  With an odd twist on that famous
scene from The Graduate, the film succeeds at getting the audience to
empathize with a pedophile, and for that, L.I.E. is somewhat groundbreaking.
L.I.E. is the debut of writer/director Michael Cuesta, who co-penned the
script with Stephen M. Ryder and Gerald Cuesta.  While the story sometimes
loses its way, the trio does a wonderful job at developing each of these
characters.  The film looks great, too, and is highlighted by a scene in
which Howie and Gary break into each other's homes and ransack each other's
rooms.
Those of you brave and lucky enough to see L.I.E. will be treated to Cox's
terrific performance that - and I can pretty safely guarantee this - nobody
will be talking about at the office water cooler.  No one would blame you
for being scared away by the film's content and its unfair NC-17 rating,
which was affixed by a clearly clueless MPAA.  L.I.E. contains absolutely no
nudity and only implied sexual content.  If anything, it's something parents
should want their kids to see, just so they can understand evil sometimes
comes in surprising disguises.
1:40 - NC-17 for language, graphic sexual dialogue and violence
