Title
Review for Jana Aranya (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
(Dialog in Bengali, English subtitles)
This film is also known by the English title "The Middleman".
The business world can be harsh and corrupt. This subculture is
unraveled in this story, which shows a young man's difficult
initiation into the life of a middleman. Somnath (Pradip Mukherjee)
is a recent college graduate who becomes a victim of fate when his
paper is improperly evaluated, simply because the grader did not
having the proper glasses. The result is that Somnath receives
passing marks, but does not achieve the honors level he should have
earned. This is no trifling error, because the job market is lean,
and Somnath's prospects are grim without an exceptional academic
record. This setup shows a harsh world, where opportunities are
scarce and people must often do whatever they can to survive.
Desperation breeds corruption, and nice guys finish last.
Somnath fights an uphill battle trying to enter the corporate world.
He mails off a multitude of job applications and receives very few,
unsuccessful interviews. The absurdity in some of the interview
questions (like "what is the weight of the moon?") reflect the
futility of his struggle. Each day he fights this impossible battle
and returns home to face his morose father (Satya Bandyopadhyay)
and cynical elder brother. Only his sister-in-law Kamala (Lily
Chakravarty) keeps a positive attitude about Somnath's ability to
eventually establish himself.
One day as Somnath is out in his hopeless job search, he runs into
Bhombol (Dipankar Dey) who tells him about an alternative to landing
a job -- joining the business world. Somnath has misgivings, but out
of alternatives, decides to give it a try. Bhombol gets Somnath
started on how to operate as a dalal, or middleman. The basics are
to buy one man's surplus on the cheap and sell to another man's need,
and to ply favors. Somnath gets set up with a desk and support staff,
and with some tips, he sets off into the business world. He initially
makes a successful transaction but learns a lesson about playing his
cards close.
Somnath has some successes and failures along the way, but he is
able to work some connections with his friends to set up a potential
sale to a chemical company. If the deal goes through, he stands to
make a handsome profit, but more than that, he needs it to establish
himself, otherwise he might not last much longer in the business
world. Somnath enlists the help of an associate, Mr. Mitter (Robi
Ghosh), who is a "public relations" expert. Somnath learns of the
incredible depth of corruption that must be indulged, and the
seediness of the business world. He also understands the other
meaning of dalal, pimp.
The world as represented in this story is extreme and bleak, but
Satyajit Ray has crafted a film that remains believable because
it is based in reality. The depiction of corruption in this story
is so pervasive that at times it feels exaggerated. However, all
of the events still appear plausible. Somnath is presented as an
innocent thrust into a foreign world of difficult choices. The
decisions he makes are a mixture of his own nature and the influence
of the forces around him.
He is obviously a man of principle, but he cannot ignore the
desperation of his situation. The opening scene of the film showed
a classroom of students writing their final college exam, and the
majority are cheating in one way or another, but not Somnath.
Somnath sees that he has never been rewarded for adhering to
principle, but his nature makes it difficult to do otherwise. Somnath
sees that his classmate Sukumar remains principled, but without
opportunities, Sukumar and his family live a life of poverty and
misery.
The acting performances are all outstanding. Mukherjee effectively
conveys all the emotions that Somnath experiences. He expresses
Somnath's anguish through expression and body language as well as
manner of speech. Ghosh is exceptional as the sleazy Mr. Mitter,
striking a balance between comic absurdity, and the distasteful
pragmatism in being part of a corrupt system.
The story is perfectly paced as it slowly builds to a wrenching
climax. Although it is apparent early that Somnath will be descending
into a world without morals, his progression is so moderated and
gradual that it is gripping. Somnath begins as a naive young man, and
when his journey culminates, he stands staring at his reflection in
a man he despises. He sees that Mr. Mitter lives at peace with who he
is. In Mitter's personal life he is an ordinary family man, while his
professional life necessitates swimming in sleaze. Somnath cannot detach
himself so easily. The fact that his is a principled person in a world
without scruples causes him agony, but is it worse than an uncertain
future for both him and his family? It is easy to talk about the
shallowness of the pursuit of money when one has it, but a life without
means can be truly horrible. Somnath has a exceptionally difficult
decision to make.
Highly recommended. The film does feel extreme in its portrayal of
underbelly of the business world, but everything it depicts also has a
believable foundation. It is a gripping story about the way in which
desperation can breed corruption.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
