Title
Review for Rounders (1998)
Number of Reviews
32

Author
Luke Buckmaster
ROUNDERS
Cast: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau, John
Malkovich, John Turturro, Famke Janssen, Vernon E. Jordan Jr., Melina
Kanakaredes, Michael Rispoli
Director: John Dahl
Screenplay: David Levien & Brian Koppelman
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 stars
When gambling isn't used to illustrate amazing streaks of luck, it is
often used in association with society's criminals and lowlifes.    Well
there are plenty of criminals and lowlifes in Rounders, a film that is
careful to keep its priorities in the right order.  Card games and risky
bets take the spotlight, but the harsh game of surviving in a world full
of crooks always seems significantly more important.  When players take
to the table in the desperate hope of winning some serious dough,
Rounders provides great entertainment.  Away from the table, however, a
compelling dramatic core is missing.
Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) learns the valuable lessons of playing
high-stake card games the hard way.  One night he plays against Russian
card shark KGB (John Malkovich, in a role that seems a little too easy
for him) and loses a cool thirty grand.  So from then on, Mike works
hard in legitimate jobs, swearing that he will never return to the
gambling table again.  But when his loser best friend Worm (Edward
Norton) is released from jail, Mike is dragged into the game once again
in order to help Worm repay his debts.
One refreshing aspect of Rounders is that it treats its subject matter
with respect.  Not endorsing gambling yet not discouraging it either,
the film chronicles a realistic (though somewhat sensational) account of
two men's triumphs and misfortunes.  It not only examines gambling as a
hobby and a sport, but as a way of life - as a source for putting bread
on the table.  John Turturro is given the difficult task of portraying
the only sensible gambler, a man who "grinds" the game by playing smart
and playing safe.  Turturro has a knack for taking simple characters and
giving them complexity (Exhibit A, Barton Fink, Exhibit B, Quiz Show),
and serves as an integral (although small) part in Rounders.  As Mike
and Worm welcome the chaos that eventually engulfs them, Turturro's
character stands strong and tall, silently knowing that although he has
taken a smaller spotlight, he has outplayed both of them.
Matt Damon is solid in the lead role but is overshadowed by some
terrific performances from the supporting cast.  Norton plays Worm with
sleaziness and extravagance, but also brings an eerie sense of
repression and sadness.  Malkovich and Turturro are excellent, and
Gretchen Mole (playing Mike's girlfriend Jo) is also fine, although
debut scriptwriters David Levien and Brian Koppelman have written her
part predictably and blandly.
Director John Dahl has an obvious fascination with professional
gambling.  On numerous occasions Rounders feels like a fun documentary
on the sport, with human diversions along the way. It is then
disappointing that Dahl rarely gives his gambling scenes more than just
visual interest.  As Matt Damon says during the film, the game is not
about playing the cards, its about playing the people. Dahl shoots card
scenes much better than he examines characters.
The success of the drama between Mike and Worm is off and on, whilst
Mike's relationship with Jo is purely a tool to get a female actor into
the picture.   The writing and direction of Rounders is impressive, but
the sports side of the picture is so much better than its dramatic side
that the film becomes unbalanced in the quality of its scenes.  Whilst
Rounders occasionally touches on themes with meaning and relevance, this
is ultimately just a good and enjoyable sports film.  Had it focused a
little more on the players, it may have been great one.


Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "ROUNDERS" (Miramax Films)
 In "Good Will Hunting," Matt Damon played a young genius who
secretly wanted to get off the streets and get an education. This
time, he plays hustler, or "rounder," who secretly wants to get out of
law school and back into the viciously competitive world of
high-stakes poker. John Dahl, who directed "Red Rock West" and "The
Last Seduction," quickly makes us familiar with the dark caves where
fortunes change hands as fast as the time it takes you to say "card
shark."
Damon plays a hotshot who was paying for his New York law
school education by playing poker until, one night, he lost his entire
savings - $33,000 - on one hand to John Malkovich as an Oreo
cookie-chomping Russian mobster named KGB. After that stunning defeat,
he promises his live-in law-school girl-friend, Gretchen Mol
(cover-girl, Sept. issue of "Vanity Fair"), to give up cards. But,
once his old friend, Edward Norton, aptly called "Worm," is paroled
from prison after serving a sentence for a scam they pulled together,
you know the deck is stacked for him to return to his passion - the
gaming tables. And he does - with a vengeance, as Martin Landau scores
as a rabbi-like professor and John Turturro as a shrewd gambler. The
problem is: poker is not much of a spectator sport. While it's
fascinating to see how the players calculate who holds what cards and
who can play malevolent mind-games best, the pumped-up testosterone of
David Levien and Brian Koppelman's script affects the participants far
more than the observers. It's John Dahl's brilliant direction and
clever casting that propels "Rounders" into a bet-it-all "Rocky"
showdown. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rounders" is a
seductively savvy, suspense-filled 7, proving what Landau says: "We
can't run from who we are. Our destiny chooses us."

Author
Curtis Edmonds
To understand Rounders, you have to understand the work of Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi.  Csikszentmihalyi is not a great filmmaker or novelist,
but a professor at the University of Chicago who studies creativity.  He's
best known for his 1990 book, Flow:  The Psychology of Optimal Experience.
Professor Csikszentmihalyi's work focuses on what he terms "flow", that
state where people reach their peak experience.  Flow occurs when our
skills are challenged by demands such that we immerse ourselves in whatever
activity we undertake.  To quote the professor, "Because of the total
demand on psychic energy, a person in flow is completely focused. There is
no space in consciousness for distracting thoughts, irrelevant feelings.
Self-consciousness disappears.  When a person's entire being is stretched
in the full functioning of body and mind, whatever one does becomes worth
doing for its own sake; living becomes its own justification."
For example:  When I was in law school, I wrote two lengthy papers to write
-- fifty-page monsters with hundreds of footnotes, placed just so.  I'd sit
down at my desk and write, and next thing you know, it would be four in the
morning.  I had blocked out everything.  The world had narrowed itself to
me and my notecards and my word processor.
However, I can't claim that I "flowed" my way though law school (sometimes,
I feel like I "slept" my way through law school).  Law school can be an
ugly, depressing, soul-killing time, as Matt Damon finds out in Rounders.
(You knew there was a segue in there somewhere, didn't you?)  Damon plays a
"rounder", a young poker player who prowls the mean streets of New York and
the casinos of Atlantic city like a cat, looking to pounce on unsuspecting
pigeons with more money than ability.  After losing his stake to a Russian
cardsharp named Teddy KGB (John Malkovich), Damon decamps and goes to law
school, working his way through driving a pastry delivery truck.
Damon lands on his feet in law school, finding a cute girlfriend (Gretchen
Mol) and a possible internship with a judge.  But we get the sense from him
that he's not happy, he's not using his skills to the finest.  When his
best friend Worm (Edward Norton) gets out of prison, the lure of easy money
and fast times seduce Damon back into the world of high-stakes poker.  (A
dark, seedy, atmospheric world that's lovingly rendered and presented by
director John Dahl.)
The conflict in the movie is whether Damon will choose Mol and an education
and a career or choose to pursue his talents as a gambler.  What makes
Rounders so compelling is how it makes the latter choice seem more
appealing than it otherwise might be.  There are many factors involved in
Damon's choice -- his loyalty to his friend, his (apparent) struggles in
law school -- but the most important factor is that playing poker puts
Damon in the "flow".  He's able to lose himself in the game and test his
skills against others.  Damon is not playing poker because he's under a
compulsion or an addiction, he's playing because he's good at it and can
take pleasure in stretching his skills.
Rounders is more than just a great illustration of an important
psychological concept, of course.  It features fine performances from Damon
and Norton, who is fantastic as the sleazy gambler Worm.  Norton seems to
have the idea of flow down pat as well, losing his identity and slipping
neatly into the skin of whatever character he's playing.  Malkovich, on the
other hand, delivers a cartoonish performance as Damon's nemesis, who
proves that it's a bad idea to play with your food.
Rounders is a sharp, classy, intellectual picture, buoyed by an intelligent
script, sharp directing, and first-rate performances.  Well, that about
sums it up for this review.  Hey!  It's almost midnight!  Where did the
time go?
MovieNation:  Movie Reviews in Black and White
http://members.xoom.com/movienation
movienation@xoommail.com
"No children have ever meddled with the Republican Party
and lived to tell about it."  -- Sideshow Bob

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, John Turturro and John =
Malkovich
Written by David Levient and Brian Koppelman
"If you can't spot the sucker at the table in the first half hour, 
then you are the sucker," intones Mike McDermott (Matt Damon), the 
tough-yet-sensitive card shark who narrates his own tale of greed and 
gambling in John Dahl's ROUNDERS. Good advice, considering I've 
never spotted the sucker in a poker game myself, and typical of the 
nuggets of wisdom the screenplay sprinkles along the way. ROUNDERS tries 
hard to draw you into its world of illicit big-money poker games held in 
the back alleys and dank basements of New York City. It tries to dazzle 
you with the torrent of poker slang flowing from the lips of sweaty card 
players who study one another's facial ticks through a haze of murky 
cigar smoke. It wants you to succumb to the allure of high-stakes poker, 
to feel the naked adrenaline rush of letting your bankroll ride on the 
promise of a full boat. The film tries so hard that you can't help but 
root for it. But I'm here to tell you that it just didn't happen for 
me. For all its finely honed performances and the dizzying energy of its 
dialogue, ROUNDERS is ultimately a con job- smoke and mirrors hiding 
weak characters and a derivative, predictable story.
Mike is a law student working his way through school as a truck driver 
after losing a giant wad of cash in a single hand to a seedy Russian 
gangster named Teddy KGB (John Malkovich). As the story opens, He seems 
to have life well in hand- he has a kindly judge for a mentor (Martin 
Landau), and a live-in girlfriend (Gretchen Mol) who is so beautiful and 
intelligent that she's not only out of your league, she's also out 
of the leagues of everyone you know.
But the good times never last. Out of prison steps Worm (Edward Norton), 
Mike's best friend from his rounding days. Worm, the proverbial loose 
cannon, leaves lockup under a mountain of gambling debt and is eager to 
get back to the business of playing cards. Mike makes the mistake of 
vouching for Worm at the local tables. Before he knows what hits him, he 
learns that Worm has racked up 25 G's in debt to Teddy KGB- and the 
juice is running every day. There is nothing for it but for Mike to 
assume Worm's debt and re-enter the life. He must win large, win 
clean, and try to forget the fatal hand against Teddy KGB that sent him 
skulking home with his tail between his legs.
Much is made of the core relationship between Mike and Worm. To Mike, 
gambling is an art. He has spent a lifetime honing his craft, and dreams 
of one day facing off against the best in the World Series of Poker in 
Las Vegas. Worm, on the other hand, is a grifter who never passes on a 
chance to fleece a sucker, and takes chances that could get him killed. 
Will Mike's blind loyalty to his reckless friend finally put his own 
life at risk? You betcha. Damon and Norton, gifted actors both, sell 
this relationship for all it's worth. The problem is that we've seen 
these two guys before, in other films. There's Denzel Washington and 
Spike Lee in MO' BETTER BLUES; Ray Liotta and Joe Pesci in GOODFELLAS; 
Jon Voight and Dustin Hoffman in MIDNIGHT COWBOY. The good-hearted 
anti-hero and his self-destructive alter-ego are classic cinema 
archetypes, and any film that dares trot them out had better dress them 
up in some new clothes. Gritty realism and gambling nomenclature 
notwithstanding, Mike and Worm tell a well-worn tale.
The rest of the film is a hit-or-miss affair. Gretchen Mol is saddled 
with playing a cardboard girlfriend who suffers from the laughable 
delusion that the Law is somehow a more noble pursuit than professional 
gambling. John Turturro has a memorable cameo as a "grinder", poker 
slang for a player who ekes out a living by folding repeatedly until a 
winning hand turns up. And what can I say about Jon Malkovich? His 
performance is either brilliant or astoundingly bad- I can't decide 
which. He affects a nearly incomprehensible Russian accent which makes 
him sound like Boris Badinoff on Nitrous Oxide. Toning it down a bit 
would have been a wise move, but Dahl lets him roll. I did, however, 
enjoy Teddy's Oreo Cookie habit. Before placing his bet, he holds an 
Oreo up to his ear and twists it apart- because he likes the sound it 
makes. Everybody has a secret quirk like that, and it was nice to see 
one on screen.
ROUNDERS is worth a look if you're a fan of Damon or Norton- in the 
Damon-Norton-Affleck-DiCaprio career longevity race, my money is on 
them. But there is simply not enough original material here to warrant 
devoting much of your time to it. High stakes poker would seem to offer 
choice suspense- but there was never any moment when I really felt the 
outcome was in doubt. Part of the problem is in the script and its 
reliance on mossy cliches. But the direction, too, is a little flat. 
Dahl has a good resume; both RED ROCK WEST and THE LAST SEDUCTION were 
tantalizing noir puzzles that kept you guessing until the end. While 
those films were mostly intellectual challenges, in ROUNDERS Dahl was 
asked to create real characters who inhabit a real world, and he 
wasn't quite equal to the task. It doesn't help that he resorts to 
stream-shrouded street shots and other techniques that Scorsese 
discarded twenty years ago. If you really want to experience the 
atmosphere for which this film strives, hit the video store, rent THE 
HUSTLER, and watch Paul Newman square off once more against Jackie 
Gleason's Minnesota Fats. Why settle for a couple of Jacks when a pair 
of Kings is well within reach?
Please visit the FILMGEEK WEB SITE at http://www.filmgeek.com
"The best reviews you'll read online and off!" -- The LOS ANGELES TIMES20

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: September 11, 1998
Starring: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau, John
Malkovich, John Turturro
Directed by: John Dahl
Distributed by: Miramax Films
MPAA Rating: R (pervasive strong language, some sexuality, brief drug
use)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/rounders.htm 
There's something about "making it" - raking in hundreds upon thousands
of dollars all at once - that will drive people to play incredible odds.
Average people will visit casinos, buy lottery tickets and scratch
games, enter drawings, and bet on sports teams all to make "easy" money.
That's precisely the bet that Director John Dahl (THE LAST SEDUCTION) is
counting on to pay off in his new poker drama, ROUNDERS. And, for the
most part, it does. Minus a few temporary flaws, ROUNDERS is an
enjoyable and occasionally witty look at card-playing, life, and man's
obsession with money. 
Our star and hero - if he can be called that - is Mike McDermott (Matt
Damon). Mike's a good kid who's going to law school on a tuition that's
paid by his fantastic ability to win money at poker. He tells us early
on that he's a 'rounder': someone who doesn't always go for the big
money but grinds it out, one small bet at a time. Seemingly against his
own advice, however, he loses all his money in one shot to a ruthless
Russian gambler and hustler named Tony KGB (John Malkovich). Mike gives
up poker, but it's not long before the devil's advocate walks in. In
this case, it's Mike's friend Worm (Edward Norton), who's just out of
jail and fifteen large in the red. 
Mike decides to take up poker again to help Worm earn back his debt, but
Worm's a pathological card sharp who can't hold on to money long enough.
Both of the characters here are well-written and well-acted from the
start, which makes their story all the more believable. Damon's brought
charm and impressiveness to every feature he's been in since last year's
THE RAINMAKER, and although he doesn't top his Academy Award-nominated
performance in GOOD WILL HUNTING, he's still fun to watch here. He's
clearly a good guy, and the audience is cheering for him all the way.
Norton, as Worm, adds a lot of nuance to the character that encourages
hate and like at the same time. His wit is over the top, and
convincingly so. 
There's no mistaking one fact, however: ROUNDERS is a poker movie, and
Dahl decides to keep it almost exclusively so. Money is the real
motivator, but poker is used as a concrete front for it. Five cards and
chin-high stacks of colored chips are the only reason anyone does
anything in this movie. The script attempts to have Damon do some
voice-overs that explain some of the various poker games, but the action
is so vivid onscreen that anyone without prior understanding of the game
won't gain any knowledge. Some of the supporting roles were also written
in with an unfitting lack of gusto - such as Mike's girlfriend Jo
(Gretchen Mol); she's got no depth and we have no idea why Mike keeps
coming back to her. Martin Landau's law professor also provides some of
the movie's slower moments, but his screen time is minimal. For the
majority of its running time, ROUNDERS is an exciting and worthwhile
feature to watch, and against the competition in a paltry post-summer
season, it comes up all aces.
FINAL AWARD FOR "ROUNDERS": 3.0 stars - a good movie

Author
Brian Takeshita
Ever wonder what happened to Gabe Kaplan?  You remember, he was the
title character in that 70's sitcom, "Welcome Back Kotter."  Always
trying to help out the Sweathogs, frequently trying to dodge Mr.
Woodman, ever wary of his wife's tuna casserole.  "So," you ask,
"where is he now?"  Mr. Kaplan actually spends much of his time these
days playing professional high-stakes poker.  That's right.  I'm not
sure if it's his main source of income, but from what I've heard, the
guy occasionally comes away with $20,000 at a time.  And there you
were, thinking I was going to tell you he was doing off-Broadway
theater.  You silly goose.
Well, Gabe Kaplan isn't in the movie ROUNDERS, nor is the film about
the actor come gambler's life.  But ROUNDERS is about poker, and Gabe
plays poker, and I thought that was kind of a neat connection.  Sorry
about the segue, or lack thereof.
Matt Damon plays Mike McDermott, a law student who also has a singular
talent for the game of poker.  He's been playing for a while, and more
than being proficient, he has caught the bug.  He goes to all the
underground games in New York City, knows the regulars, and knows how
to win.  In the beginning of the film, he's built up a nice thirty
grand nest egg, which he takes to the speakeasy-type gaming parlor
where the big boys play.   Mike is there to make his bid into the
upper echelon by staking it all against Teddy KGB (John Malkovich), an
Oreo-munching cardshark with ties to the Russian Mafia.  Mike has the
potential to take a large pot and go to Vegas and buy into the World
Series of Poker, but instead he loses it all in a single hand.  Months
later, he's paying his way through law school by driving a delivery
truck.
When Mike's best friend and poker buddy Worm (Edward Norton) finishes
his jail term for hustling some students, he wants to pick up right
were they left off, working as a team to part others with their
betting cash.  Although Mike has stopped playing cards as a promise to
his girlfriend and fellow law student, Jo (Gretchen Mol), Worm
connives Mike into playing once more, and Mike, bitten again by the
bug, slides down that slippery slope, risking his relationship,
education, and reputation as playing poker again becomes the focus of
his life.
To make a film about gambling, a filmmaker will usually have to play
up the glamorous side to get the audience behind the characters.  This
is because few moviegoers will care a whole lot about some guy in a
leisure suit or terry cloth shirt sitting at a folding card table with
a stogie in his mouth.  ROUNDERS, however, seems to go more for the
latter than the former.  The card clubs Mike and Worm frequent aren't
very glamorous at all.  There's a basement, a lodge with elk heads on
the wall, a goulash joint - these are the kinds of locales in which
director John Dahl sets his shots.  Except for one brief instance when
the two players visit Atlantic City, the film is bereft of the
flashing lights of the casinos or the pleasant color of the green felt
table.  The reason ROUNDERS still captures our attention is because it
is less about the game of poker than it is about the personalities
which enjoy and are slaves to it.
We're given a nice set of interesting characters with clear
motivations, and good actors to play them.  Matt Damon is very natural
as Mike, who struggles between his desire to play the straight and
narrow by finishing law school, and answering what may be his true
calling, playing professional poker.  Ed Norton's Worm is truly a
worm, always looking for the angle and playing everyone for what
they're worth.  John Turturro, who amazes me with his acting range,
tones it down in this film by playing Joey Knish, a virtual poker
prodigy in his time who now plays the underground games to make rent
and child support payments.  He's both a friend and mentor to Mike,
and Turturro's low-key performance is totally convincing, just as John
Malkovich's heavily-accented Teddy KGB is imposing as an adversarial
dragon Mike must slay to prove himself.
Martin Landau is also thrown into the mix as one of Mike's law
professors, Abe Petrovsky.  While Landau slips well into the role, his
character, spitting out personal anecdotes about staying true to one's
self, facilitates the channeling of the storyline toward a predictable
ending.  Perhaps the weak link in the otherwise formidable line-up of
acting talent, however, is Gretchen Mol who just didn't seem to have
much presence on screen.  She's a genuine peach to look at, kind of a
cross between actress Renee Zellweger and singer Jewel (and I wouldn't
be surprised if the three of them formed some kind of blond-haired
triumvirate and attempted to take over the world), but her delivered
lines seemed very flat, and I found myself looking for Matt Damon's
reactions instead.
A good thing about ROUNDERS is that it doesn't get bogged down in the
character development and statement making so much that it can't find
time for humor.  The film is peppered nicely with scenes that both
make you laugh and keep the pacing going, such as a sequence where
Mike and Worm move rapidly around New York from one game to the next,
in widely different locales.  One game in a cigar club had me in
stitches.  "I LOVE the sweetness of this dark maduro wrapper," says
one of the players, clearly more interested in displaying his
pretentiousness over the cigar in one hand than in the cards in his
other.  I was hoping Mike and Worm would really take these guys.
With all the poker being played, ROUNDERS had the potential to be very
confusing.  You might think you know a lot about poker, but think
again.  Luckily, we're given a narration by Damon during the more
intricate moments to explain what's going on.  The narrations are more
informative than intrusive, and apprise us of what the stakes are and
why certain players want to do the things they do.  It's nice that as
the characters develop, so does our comprehension of their world.
As a film about success and survival in the realm of underground
poker, ROUNDERS delivers in spades.  Wait!  As a film about the
culture of cards, ROUNDERS is an ace.  Hang on!  Packed with great
acting and great characters, ROUNDERS is a full house.  Okay, I guess
that's enough.
Oh, by the way, if you ever want to get into a game with ol' Gabe
Kaplan, be sure to bring a note from Epstein's mother.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Dahl
Writers: David Levien and Brian Koppelman
Starring: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, John Turturro, Famke
Janssen, John Malkovich, Martin Landau
"Rounders" spends a lot of time in the cellars and card clubs of Manhattan
and elsewhere to prove one thing to itself: it has no problem with diving
full head into its subject.  This is not a film where the hero learns a
lesson about gambling and the dangers thereof over the course of the film. 
He doesn't win one last card game in the end to prove to himself that he
can in fact beat the best card player in the world so that he never has to
play again.  He doesn't even get the girl in the end.
The fact that it doesn't bullshit itself about gambling is one of the few
reasons "Rounders" works at all.  This film is never more exciting and
engrossing when characters are engaging in a tough game of poker, with the
stakes reaching as high as they can possibly go, smoke teeming from
everywhere, and cool jazz music underscoring everything.  And it's never
more boring than when it's dealing with the melodrama of the plot or the
lives of the characters.  If this film had just been two hours of guys
playing poker games, with a very skimpy plot, I'd actually be more pleased.
But screenwriters David Levien and Brian Koppelman don't have the guts to
do that.  I imagine that the first draft of this film really took us into
the lives of Rounders, the guys who play poker for a living.  Imagine a
stylistic masterpiece that introduced us to the lives of these people, and
showed many games and the methods they use.  Films are never more
engrossing when the characters are the spotlight and plot elements are just
the reaons we watch them, especially when they have such an interesting
subject.
As such, "Rounders" is merely adequate, with signs of brilliance underneath
that go pretty much unchecked.  The film opens nicely, with an intense game
of poker between the film's protagonist, one Mike McDermott (Matt Damon), a
young law student who is a kick-ass poker player, and Teddy, a.k.a. KGB
(John Malkovich), a Russian mobster who is a more kick-ass poker player. 
Mike typically loses, but the film really works because it's not really
about the outcome.  It cherishes the process of playing poker, and the
narration by Mike is so good and fascinating that it sets the film up
unfairly, in a sense.
Mike decides that he's not going to play poker, as a promise to his
beautiful girlfriend, Jo (Gretchen Mol), who comes off not so much as a
nice girlfriend who's really cared about him but more as a painful maternal
annoyance.  Mike's life changes when his old best friend, nicknamed Worm
(Edward Norton), gets out of jail for a gambling rap and needs to make a
ton of money to pay off some outstanding debts to some very bad people.  So
for the first hour, Mike has the dilmena of whether he should help out a
friend and gamble...or fuck him over and obey his girlfriend instead.
By the second hour, though, Mike has given over to the gambling side, and
when Mike and Worm are playing numerous tables, trying to make his money
back, which Mike has agreed to share with him, the film really takes off. 
A worthy subplot is introduced towards the beginning, showing that Worm
likes to cheat, which not only gets him in trouble, but conflicts with
Mike's code of gambling ethics.  It works because there's a real tension
between these two as a result, something we actually care about.  If the
screenwriters could have leveled the male-male bonding with the male-female
bonding in this film, they'd really have something.
The result of all this?  A silly script with some cool scenes, and very
good acting.  Damon, whether we like it or not, is a good actor, and is
very likable in the lead role, although it's dangerously close to his
previous role, Mr. Hunting.  Norton is wonderfully sleazy, showing that
he's becoming one of the most reliable actors around, and only after a mere
four screen performances.  In supporting roles, John Turturro is
wonderfully controlled as a long-time gambler who's made a career out of
being totally careful with his card playing; Martin Landau is really good
in a brief role as a judge from Mike's school who helps him get his life
straightened out with one speech (although his reasoning in one scene
towards the end is weak); and Famke Janssen's sorta just there, although
semi-interestingly so, as a woman who works in one of the house of games. 
Malkovich nicely overacts a bit, with an off-the-wall Russian accent
(agressive = ag-ra-i-seeeev) which makes his character all the more
intense.
But "Rounders" big weakness seems to be the lack of real atmosphere and
devilishness, a big shock since the film is directed by John Dahl, the guy
who directed the devilishly entertaining "The Last Seduction," which
featured a femme fatale who was never forced to pull her punch.  Although
the script pulls its punch in the beginning and works its way back again,
there's nothing truly fascinating about what goes on when poker is not
being played.  The melodrama and character development seems more like
filler than real character development.  The characters, like that of
Turturro's and Janssen's, are there to represent some of the elements of
poker playing, but are sadly underdeveloped (at least Turturro can act well
enough to slighly cover it all up).  And the film just never truly
convinced me that it was a totally important story to tell in the first
place.
However, I did enjoy this film.  It worked for me, mainly because there is
poker that is played, and it works every now and then as an introduction to
that world.  There's a scene where all the big rounders are sitting a table
in an Atlantic City casino, and Mike's narration tells us all about the
suckers who sit down and try to play with the big players.  Scenes like
this are when "Rounders" truly works, and since this is what pretty much
populates the second half of the film, it's almost impossible to not really
like this flick.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jamie Peck
ROUNDERS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Matt Damon, fresh off his "Good Will Hunting" hot streak, is perfect for 
the role of Mike McDermott, a young law student with a tremendous gift 
for gambling. But after losing all of his tuition money in a killer 
high-stakes match with Russian poker aficionado Teddy KGB (John 
Malkovich, deliciously hammy), he shifts his focus to scholarly matters, 
leaving his true area of expertise far, far behind. Things change, 
however, when Mike's old buddy Worm (Edward Norton) re-enters his life - 
it seems Worm, just out of jail, owes a hefty sum to nasty thugs, and is 
counting on his friend's superlative skills to help him pay off the 
debt. 
That "Rounders"' story quickly molds itself into a conventional, 
predictable tale of redemption doesn't hinder its potency. Director John 
Dahl, infamous for his neo-noirs "Red Rock West" and "The Last 
Seduction," gets extremely convincing mileage out of the been-there, 
done-that plot mechanics by trumping up the relationship between Mike 
and Worm. Damon and Norton bring so much to their roles that they'd be 
worth catching even if "Rounders" ultimately folded, but the movie ups 
its fascinating ante by contrasting their wildly different ways of 
winning. Any sequence where the two men sit at the table together is an 
unarguable highlight. 
If only the other character interaction was as successful, "Rounders" 
might merit consideration when it comes time to number the year's best 
films. Current "It Girl" Gretchen Mol is sweetly appealing as Mike's 
girlfriend Jo, aware and weary of his seedy past, but her scenes with 
Damon number too few to be very effective. John Turturro's aging mentor 
and Famke Janssen's tempting siren, both interesting sketches, are 
hampered by the same limited screen time. And as a wizened judge, the 
great Martin Landau makes memorable a role that's mostly a plot device - 
he's on hand mostly to sort-of save the day and provide a voice for 
"Rounders"' moral. 
That moral, by the way, is "Our destiny chooses us," and it's something 
of a surprise when "Rounders" supports this solemn proverb by eschewing 
the conclusion you might expect; Mike does learn from his mistake, but 
neither the mistake nor the way he learns from it is what it initially 
appears to be. In the end, "Rounders" sees gambling as less a mere 
addiction than a potential art form, but the poker itself is only a 
metaphor for a much larger picture. The road to true fulfillment lies 
within the realization and exercising of your natural passions, the 
movie espouses, no matter what they might be. Here, low-rent lowlifes 
like Worm just aren't cut out for the cards. 
Screenwriters David Levien and Brian Koppelman entertain and educate in 
their quest to vividly render a culture that's often generalized by 
movies; even complete poker neophytes should cross the line from 
observers to participants when the movie gets to its concluding game 
scene. Inside every adventurous filmgoer, there is a desire to be taken 
someplace new and exciting, and that's the precise allure of "Rounders." 
It ultimately matters not that a few of our tour guides feel 
partially-realized or that the journey itself is cluttered with sites 
we've seen before, because the final destination is a satisfying one. In 
the end, "Rounders" holds a winning hand.

Author
Matt Williams
Rounders introduces us to the world of high-stakes poker. With an
electric cast, and some apt direction, it transforms a run-of-the-mill
storyline into a fascinating movie.
Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) is a master poker player.  He claims that
poker is not a game of chance...it's a game of skill, and he can rank
with the best.  But when a bad stroke of luck proves him wrong, he
swears off the game and concentrates on a law career, much to the
delight of his girlfriend,Jo (Gretchen Mol).
However, things are about to change.  Mike's longtime best friend, Worm
(Edward Norton), has just gotten out of jail.  Needless to say, Worm is
a bad influence upon Mike, and sooner than you can shuffle a deck, Mike
is being drawn back into the world of high-stakes poker.
The story is a familiar one, but told with a surprising amount of
freshness and energy.  Matt Damon provides narration throughout the
movie, and this is actually one of the few examples of where narration
actually works.  The narrative doesn't preclude action on the screen,
rather, it is a counterpoint.  Damon provides an insight into the mind
and strategy of a genius at work.
The games of poker themselves are fun to watch, but you don't have to be
an aficionado  to enjoy them.  John Dahl's insightful direction
highlights the moods and strategies of the game, rather than the mundane
details.  The fact of the matter is, it doesn't really matter that they
are playing poker here.  The game of choice could be chess, bowling, or
hopscotch...it merely serves as the vehicle from which the characters
are introduced.
And what an assortment of characters!  Damon's congeniality works well
in the central role.  He's a character you instinctively want to root
for.  Norton, on the other hand, sort of creeps up on you.  He's an odd
mix of treachery and charm. Even though he keeps on doing the wrong
thing, you can't help but like the guy.
The supporting cast boasts the likes of John Malkovich, John Turturro
and Martin Landau.  Malkovich is the slimy Teddy KGB, a master poker
player with ties into the Russian mafia.  His mannerisms border at times
at being over the top, but because his character is played with such
relish, it's a forgivable sin. Turturro is Joey Knish, a "grinder", who
makes a living on the poker circuit.  He admires Mike's skill, but is
also wary of a dangerous streak, and often tries to give him advice.
Landau is a sympathetic judge who is teaching Mike in law school.
Of the supporting cast, only the women (both Gretchen Mol and Famke
Janssen as Mike's former poker-playing flame) don't get any meat.
They're stuck playing questionable roles that seem to exist merely to
keep this from being an all-male cast.
Just like Mike can sum up the status of a poker game with a few careful
glances, after a few scenes, you know pretty well where the movie is
going.  However, it's a fun game, and at times worth it just to watch
the masters at play.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
'Rounders' has several things going for it.  It's star, Matt Damon is an
Oscar winning screenwriter for his efforts last year on 'Good Will
Hunting' with Ben Affleck.  Reports have it that the two of them are out
to prove that they aren't just one hit wonders as they have just put the
finishing touches on a new draft of another screenplay.  Damon's co-star
in 'Rounders' is Edward Norton, the incredibly diverse new comer who
thrilled audiences is 1996's 'Primal Fear' as the two-faced killer who
wasn't truly revealed until the end of the film and for which Norton
received an Oscar nomination as Best Supporting Actor for which he
should have won.  Norton also appeared as the attorney for Larry Flynt
is 'The People vs. Larry Flynt' and was seen in Woody Allen's 'Everyone
Says I Love You'.  Martin Landau (Best Supporting Actor in 1994's 'Ed
Wood') also appears in 'Rounders' as a fairly pivotal supporting player.
Movies about gambling have always made for good character studies.  Up
there with alcoholism and drug abuse, most films of this nature usually
manage to tell a good human story.  My favourite film about gambling is
still James Caan's 1974 performance in 'The Gambler' (no, not the one
with Kenny Rogers) and a close second is Robert Altman's 'California
Split', ironically made the same year.
'In 'Rounders', Matt Damon plays a law student who is working his
internship and goes to greet an old friend and a never do well played by
Edward Norton who has just been released from prison.  Both men are
compulsive card players at various styles of poker.  Damon teeters on
returning to the seductive world of easy money but resists at the
request of his live in girlfriend (Gretchen Mol).  Damon once gambled
and lost to the leader of a Russian underworld organization in New York
City played by John Malkovich who probably has a Russian accent down
better than any other American actor I've seen.  Damon lost $30,000 of
his money, which was his working money and was also going to pay for his
tuition.
Damon eventually returns to the gambling circuit and he and Norton get
into debt above their heads and their lives are placed in jeopardy.
Before Norton went up the river, he had a number of outstanding debts
and after his release from prison, hustles his way as a wannabe street
smart player who is a born loser.
There are a number of interesting other characters in the film who don't
get a lot of exposure but there is a peculiar strength and well
developed aspect in each of their personalities that director John Dahl
has touched on well.  Famke Janssen ('GoldenEye'), plays an illegal
gambling club attendant and John Turturro plays a trusted friend of
Damon's who has to turn his back on Damon in the final run to teach
Damon a lesson.  This is probably the best thing he could do for him as
their friendship is put to the test.  Damon and Norton are very good in
their roles and they each hold their own against one another.
Martin Landau plays a judge and a sort of fatherly figure to Damon who
helps Damon when he is cornered in debt.
Director John Dahl ('Red Rock West' and 'The Last Seduction') is one of
those directors who like John Sayles and Peter Hyams, has made some good
films but who is unlikely to rise to the occasion of a high calibre
director's status.  Screenwriters David Levien and Brian Koppelman avoid
clichés and drum up a solid and hard boiled screenplay that doesn't try
and be too smart for its own good.  It just stays effective enough and
lets the actors breath life into the words on the pages in a smooth and
highly dramatic style.  One of the saving graces of the film is its
success in being almost humourless.  It knows that no comic relief is
needed in a film like this.
'Rounders' offers no powerful insight into the world of gambling.  It
primarily wants to be a low key but effective and moody look at low
lifes and people just above the gutter who have the capability of
falling in at a moment's notice.  The camera work is well laid out in a
lot of smoke filled and dimly lit rooms that capture the underworld
perfectly.  The film is an adult lesson in morals that unfortunately has
a predictable ending that makes one breath a sigh of relief but its even
pace and shortage of slow spots combined with its message of hypocrisy
about society's tolerance of the intolerable make it real and
effectively memorable.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
(this address will change in October 1998...details to follow)

Author
Jerry Saravia
Back in 1998, I had thought that maybe Matt Damon was getting to a point where
he was just repeating himself - the same path that early Tom Cruise went before
proving what a fine, charismatic actor he really was. "The Talented Mr. Ripley"
has proven to be a major exception. In "Rounders," Damon combines his "Good
Will Hunting's" lead genius character with a cross of the lawyer theatrics in
"The Rainmaker." In other words, you got it, Damon is playing a genius poker
player (not a mathematician but close) who happens to be a law student. Okay,
that's not a fair criticism to make. The question is: is the movie any good?
Yes, but Damon is too good to be true in his first lead role since "Good Will
Hunting." 
"Rounders" stars Damon as Mike McDermott, a clean-cut, high-stakes poker
gambler, who calls it quits after losing $30,000 to a Russian gangster named
Teddy KGB (John Malkovich). Mike chooses to stick to his law books and cavort
with his live-in girlfriend, Jo (Gretchen Mol). No sooner can you predict that
he'll revert to his gambling instincts when his troubled best friend, Worm
(Edward Norton), is released from prison and goes back to gambling with
Russians and other card players. Unsurprisingly, Worm brings the juice back
into Mike's soul to gamble - Mike resists but can't help it and lies to Jo
about his habit. The trouble is that Worm owes money to Teddy KGB and Mike
vouches for Worm's activities - ouch! We're talking the noirish landscape of
"Mean Streets," without the grit. 
Most of "Rounders" is conventionally told, but the difference is in the amount
of attention paid to the details of poker playing. Director John Dahl and
writers David Levien and Brian Koppelman render all the little secrets and
nuances that all poker players adhere to. Since the film is narrated by Mike,
we listen and watch how he studies players, and how he determines an opponent's
cards because of the "tell." In other words, the opponent is telling the player
what cards they are holding through gestures and specific tics. Teddy KGB's
tell is the way he fondles an Oreo cookie. If he splits the cookie in front of
his face, he's cheating. If he splits it by his ear, he's ahead and may be the
winner. 
Several scenes are structured around such moments. For example, there's an
early scene where Mike enters a room where a judge and his cohorts are playing
poker, and he pinpoints each hand the player is holding. It's an absorbing
"movie" scene but unbelievable in context - how the hell can you tell what
cards the players are holding if you just walked in out of nowhere but, then
again, what do I know about poker? The movie's best, tense sequence is when
Mike and Worm are roughed up by some cops after trying to swindle them - the
scene has a noir element since it shows their desperation at trying to win
money so they can pay back the gangsters. 
The problem with "Rounders" is that it is too soft around the edges. It wants
be a noirish Mamet-like parable about gambling and it has the right atmosphere
for it, but the wrong attitude. Matt Damon is too squeaky clean and youthful to
be a professional gambler - he's like the Superboy of poker. He wins at every
hand he plays, but the main thrust of the story should be how you can lose
everything, even your life, when the gambling becomes an addiction. The irony
of its conclusion is that it resorts to a "Rocky" climax, and then it tells you
that gambling is the only solution to life's problems. You can't escape who you
are or what you are. 
"Rounders" does benefit from colorful supporting performances. I loved Martin
Landau's sad-eyed Judge Petrovsky whose sole advice to Mike is that destiny
chooses who we are - a platitude that is not applicable to Mike's situation.
John Turturro is quite restrained, for a change, as Joey Knish, a gambler who
doesn't take risks and plays just to make a living. John Malkovich is
especially good as the thick-Russian-accented Teddy KGB who loves to fondle
Oreo cookies. Also worth noting is the undernourished role of Jo, fetchingly
played by Gretchen Mol, and she is the only reasonable person in the entire
movie! 
Accolades must go to Edward Norton playing the weasel-like loser, appropriately
named Worm, who takes far too many risks. It also seems as if he's not much of
a poker player since Mike comes to his aid and plays at very club and function
to win the money they owe. Norton brings an authenticity to the role - he
appears as a real-life character with flaws. 
"Rounders" is generally well-acted, well-directed and well-shot. The movie is
full of whispers, jazz music, smoky corridors, and pious platitudes about
gambling and poker courtesy of Mike's voice-overs. Still, the movie takes the
easy way out, and lets Mike off the hook. Several poker-playing scenes and
Mike's grand exit at the end reminded me too much of "Good Will Hunting." It
would been a more winning hand if the film was only about Worm. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Rounders (1998)
Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau, John Malkovich, 
John Turturro, Michael Rispoli, Famke Janssen. Screenplay by David Levien 
and Brian Koppelman. Directed by John Dahl. 120 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
"Rounders" offers an interesting look into the world of high-stakes poker,
 as well as some very good acting from Matt Damon, Edward Norton and 
Martin Landau. Unfortunately, the film lacks a compelling story arc, 
credible interpersonal relationships and characters that grow or change. 
As a result it feels incomplete, as if we're watching a filmed version of 
the first or second draft of a story rather than the finished product.
Establishing a conspiratorial tone with low-key voice-over narration, 
professional card player Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) ushers us into the 
smoky netherland of illicit poker that flourishes in musty back rooms of 
old buildings, protected by thick doors and beefy security guards. 
According to Mike, success as a rounder comes as much from reading the 
body language of an opponent as it does from the cards he holds.
After losing a whopping $30,000 during one bad night, Mike swears off the 
game and focuses on his legal studies, to the great relief of his 
girlfriend Jo (Gretchen Mol). The future looks bright until nine months 
later, when Mike's best friend Worm (Edward Norton) emerges from prison 
with a rakish smile on his face and a heavy gambling debt on his back. 
Within a short period of time, Mike is in the game again, with his 
relationship and studies in shambles and a major portion of Worm's debt 
on his own shoulders. To save their collective asses and assets, Mike 
must play the game like he has never played before.
Matt Damon anchors "Rounders" with another rock solid performance. He 
possesses something magical that goes beyond his good looks and 
exceptional acting skills. When you study Damon's face you can instantly 
picture what he looked like as a child and what he will look like as an 
old man. There's an air of familiarity about him that's comforting; 
watching him onscreen is like visiting an old friend. The film's 
exploration of the gritty, exotic gaming underworld is even more 
engrossing with Damon as our tour guide.
The chameleon-like Edward Norton creates another riveting 
characterization in the jittery, impulsive Worm, who comes off like a 
younger version of "Midnight Cowboy's" Ratso Rizzo. But, as presented in 
this screenplay, Worm's relationship with Mike just doesn't ring true. 
We're told that they have been best friends since childhood, but together 
they're like oil and water. Worm isn't just reckless and compulsive; he 
is completely self-destructive and shows no hesitation in pulling Mike 
down with him. Surely his behavior would have destroyed their friendship 
long before the men reached their mid 20's. 
To be sure, the incredible loyalty Mike displays for Worm doesn't extend 
to his girlfriend. He appears to have little problem breaking his 
promises to Jo, a stable woman who stuck with him even after he blew $30 
grand, choosing instead to head out for a night of rounding with Worm. 
The relationships between all three characters are unconvincing, playing 
simply as contrivances of the screenwriters to get all the cast members 
into their proper positions for the card games.
Pity poor Gretchen Mol, stuck with an utterly thankless role. Her job is 
merely to simmer, cluck at her wayward boyfriend and look wounded. 
Although the acting credit will be nice for her résumé, the film would 
have played more honestly had it omitted the role completely and just cut 
to the chase.
As for the other supporting characters, Martin Landau gives a luminous 
performance as Mike's law professor and ersatz father figure. Projecting 
strength, grace and warmth beneath his frail, bird-like appearance, 
Landau is a wonder who gets better and better with each new film. John 
Turturro does solid work as a man who plays not for sport, but to support 
his family. And John Malkovich is fun as Mike's nemesis, employing a 
thick Russian accent in a hammy, but engaging performance. 
Ultimately, "Rounders" is a minor pleasure. The glimpse into an exotic, 
edgy world is absorbing and the performances of Damon, Norton and Landau 
are rewarding, despite the shaky credibility of their characters' 
relationships. But "Rounders" is frustrating because it could have been 
so much more, had the writers only devoted more attention to the script. 
Oh well, I suppose with a film like this, you just have to play the cards 
you're dealt.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        "Rounders," the new film from John Dahl, tells the complex story
of two young men enslaved by the lure of professional gambling.  Mike
McDermott (Matt Damon) is an ambitious young law student who swears off
high-stakes wagering after he loses a semester's tuition on a single hand
of poker.  But when his aptly-named friend Worm (Edward Norton), a
recently paroled convict, finds himself in serious financial trouble, the
loyal Mike agrees to come out of retirement and help him earn the $15,000
he desperately needs to pay off his bad debts.  With Mike acting as the
yin to Worm's slimy yang, the two card wizards set off to conquer the
poker tables of Atlantic City.  They know all the tricks, and though Mike
prefers to play "straight" poker (ie, no cheating), Worm is not above
stacking the deck or dealing from the bottom.  That's one of their major
differences: Mike approaches poker as an art form, while Worm's point of
view is much less noble.
        Matt Damon's performance radiates warmth and sunshine, loyalty
and charismatic charm.  His character is obviously intelligent and kind-
hearted: the only reason he returns to gambling is to assist a friend in
need.  He seems genuinely interested in his law studies when we meet him,
and positively worships his girlfriend Jo (Gretchen Mol).  What most
astounded me was how a sweet guy like this could surround himself with
such monsters.  It's so painfully obvious that Worm is a user, with no
interest in anything but Mike's card-playing abilities, that we wonder
why such a smart young man can't see this for himself.  The smarmy Jo,
meanwhile, is constantly whining or striding away from Mike with her nose
upturned, as though she believes she's far too good for him; never once
does she demonstrate any degree of kindness or affection.  When she
leaves midway through the movie, I rejoiced... and was quite surprised to
learn that Mike (and the film) considered her departure a bad thing.
        "Rounders" is a disappointing tale, more concerned with creating
individual moments rather than a consistent tone.  The story's pulse is
only discernible during the card-playing scenes, which are fascinating and
masterfully constructed; the rest of the film tries to involve us in plot
details which are not only irrevelant but actually boring.  These include
Mike and Jo's tepid romance, Mike's steadily declining interest in his
school work, Worm repeatedly getting himself in trouble and asking Mike
for help, etc.
        The movie also makes poor use of its first-rate cast, apart from
Damon.  What's Martin Landau, one of America's greatest living actors,
doing in this film?  The answer: not much.  Landau, who won as Oscar for
his portrayl of Bela Lugosi in Tim Burton's "Ed Wood," plays a kindly old
mentor, the type always present in movies like this.  Although his
performance is fine, he doesn't really do anything except give Damon some
money.  John Malkovich, another fine actor, portrays a Russian cardshark
named KGB in the film's opening and closing scenes; unfortunately, the
performance is so paper-thin and insubstantial that Damon could've
defeated him merely by blowing hard.  In addition, Malkovich's Russian
accent is laughable: I kept expecting him to announce, "Time to look for
Moose and Squirrel, Natasha!"
        The end of the film is supposed to leave us feeling cheerful and
uplifted, but a true happy ending would depict Mike and Worm checking
themselves into "Gamblers Anonymous."  The film's glorification of its
subject matter, coupled with the fact that Jo and Mike appear to reconcile
at the end of the story, caused me to bury my head in my hands and weep
silently until the end credits began to roll.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.

Author
Michael Redman
"We cannot run away from who we are. Our destiny chooses us," explains
Professor Petrovsky to law student Mike McDermott.
If I were a betting man, I'd put my money on half the people reading that
statement thinking "Great, bring it on!" And the other half saying "Oh God,
no! Anything but this!"
The notion that fundamentally we are who we are and nothing we can do will
change that is both comforting and frightening. How dismaying it is that we
might be fated for a role in life and yet how inviting it would be just settle
into who we are and quit fighting it.
McDermott (Matt Damon) is a poker player. No matter how much he wants to be
something else, he is a genius at the game. When he loses his $30,000 life
savings in one hand to KGB Teddy (John Malkovich), he begins to doubt his
chosen profession.
A few months later, we catch up with Mike who has hung up his deck of cards
and is driving a delivery truck to put himself through law school. He's doing
well although his live-in girlfriend Jo (Gretchen Mol) is constantly
suspicious that he'll return to his addiction. Mike is living the straight and
narrow until his childhood buddy Worm (Edward Norton) gets out of prison and
guilts him into returning to The Game.
Although Worm was a stand-up guy while they were growing up and didn't rat out
Mike when they got into big trouble, he's a something of a sleezoid. Where
Mike is a master at the psychological game, Worm is a "mechanic", manipulating
the cards and dealing off the bottom. In short order, he's racked up a $7,000
debt in Mike's name, gotten him into danger from violent gangster Grama
(Michael Rispoli) and beat up by dozens of state cops.
Focusing on immediate problems, Mike screws up his potential law career
showing up for moot court completely unprepared. Jo is disgusted that he's
gone back to gambling and moves out. Unless he comes up with a huge wad of
cash in a couple of days, Grama and KGB Teddy are going to kill him.
The inside look at high-stakes poker is fascinating. From the posh Las Vegas
World Series Of Poker to the paint pealing walls of New York game rooms hidden
behind locked metal doors, we get a glimpse of a world that most of the
audience have never seen. Director John Dahl ("The Last Seduction") has wisely
chosen not to dumb-down the scenes for those of us who are only acquainted
with the penny-ante version of the pasteboards. Often voice-over narration
only tells us what we already know, but in this case Damon's explanations work
well as a map to a foreign world.
Mike maintains that poker is a game of skill rather than luck. He plays the
man, not the cards. An expert at picking up the little physical "tells" that
reveal what a player has and knowing when to hold 'em and when to fold 'em, he
fleeces the flock faster than most people could deal a hand of five-card stud.
But the gambler has an ego problem. After a big game when he has all the money
he needs to re-pay Worm's debts and then some, he can't resist one more round
for everything. Gambler's Anonymous is going to have a problem with this film.
The movie is jammed with first-rate actors and the film's defects are salvaged
by their performances. Damon is as easy to like as he was in "Good Will
Hunting", partially because he plays essentially the same character having to
choose between school and the seamier side of life. Norton's quirky and
nervous Worm is a Sean Penn role and he plays it as well as Penn ever could.
Malkovich is hilarious as the Russian mob-connected poker player with one of
the thickest accents around. Martin Landau has a small but pivotal role as
Mike's professor and is a pleasure to watch.
Under-used is John Turturro as Joey Knish. Knish is the opposite of Mike. He
plays poker to pay his alimony and child support rather than for the thrill of
victory. Turturro is wonderful and I kept wishing for more screen time.
This is definitely a film about men. The women seem tossed in as an after
thought and are as well fleshed-out as Barbie dolls. Mol's Jo is little more
than a nag from the beginning. Famke Janssen as Petra, operator of a poker
room, has potential but a very minor role.
When the camera leaves the poker table, the film has some problems. Everyone
is telling everyone else how to live their lives. Jo demands that Mike not
gamble. Mike insists that Worm do things his way. Knish advises Mike on the
true path. Petrovsky informs Mike on the way things work. Grama lays out the rules.
As believable as the interaction between the characters is, their
relationships are lacking. Mike and Jo are never shown doing anything but
bickering. Their relationship exists only to provide the obligatory love
interest. He seems as unaffected by their break-up as he is by his academic
problems. Mike and Worm are pals, but their friendship is never really resolved.
Although the movie is flawed, I'll lay you ten-to-one that the atmospheric
subculture of high-stakes gambling will be as enticing to you as it is to me.
I'm ready to pack up my $34 life savings and head to the tables.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and he just found
two more dollars to play poker with but he still can't remember if a flush
beats a straight. Email the answer to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 9/17/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Christopher Null
     Eighty bucks.  That's about how much money I've lost playing poker
since I saw ROUNDERS.  Not that this statistic is an inherently bad sign for
the movie or anything.  In fact, the fact that I was so motivated by the
movie to put all that money on the table speaks positively of the picture.
     ROUNDERS (the name is short-hand for people who make their living
playing poker) stars Matt Damon and Edward Norton as poker playing buddies
going in different directions.  Damon, after losing a VERY big money hand,
has given up his cardsharping ways for law school and a career as a lawyer. 
Norton, on the other hand, just out of prison, is eager to build a new
bankroll at the tables.  As you might expect, for a number of reasons, Damon
cannot stay away from the table forever, and consequently his budding law
career and relationship with newcomer Gretchen Mol are both put in peril. 
The trouble Norton's character (not so subtly nicknamed Worm) gets into does
nothing to make Damon's life easier.
     Director John Dahl (THE LAST SEDUCTION) and the film's writers
glamorize the world of professional poker playing from the outset, so be
wqrned.  If you don't feel that you can sympathize with trials and
tribulations of professional gamblers, this film is probably not for you. 
If on the other hand, you are like me, and not only revere the strategy,
psychology and probability of gambling, but also dabble in it from time to
time, you will probably be drawn in and (hopefully not) inspired by this
film.  (You'll still probably need to reference the poker glossary on the
film site's webpage.)  Just don't let it make you think you are a better
poker player for having seen the film.  Trust me, you're not.
Director: John Dahl
Producers: Ted Demme, Joel Stillerman
Writers: David Levien, Brian Koppelman
Starring: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, John Turturro, John
Malcovich, Martin Landau, Famke Janssen
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Chris Webb
Cast: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, John Malkovich, Martin Landau, Gretchen
Mol.  directed by John Dahl.
Before Matt Damon became "Ooh, Matt Damon!" he was a young actor
just looking for work.  It wasn't until "Courage Under Fire" that he
really gained notice for his acting ability.  His performance in a small, 
though pivotal role, caught the eye of Steven Spielberg, who gave him the
title role in this summer's "Saving Private Ryan."  At the same time,
"Good Will Hunting" turned Damon into a superstar, sex symbol, and double
Oscar nominee.
Going to "Rounders," I wanted to see if we would get Matt Damon the actor,
or Matt Damon the super-glossy star.  And what we find is a little bit of
both.  Matt Damon the star is on screen as Matt Damon the actor tries to
portray Mike McDermott, a high stakes poker player and law student.  This
is slightly distracting when watching the film, but a good mix for
attracting audiences.
McDermott is conveniently at a crossroads in every aspect of his life from
the start of the film.  He loses thirty grand in one hand against Teddy
KGB (John Malkovich), an underground poker club owner with connections to
the Russian mafia.  This throws McDermott into a tailspin and he decides
to become legitimate, which suits live-in law school girlfriend Jo
(relative unknown Gretchen Mol).
Around the same time, McDermott's best friend from childhood, Worm (Edward
Norton), is coming out of jail.  Worm hustles and cheats his way through
poker, the antithesis to Mike's considerable skill.  This singleminded
movie focuses on Worm's bringing Mike back into underground poker and the
deterioration of his non-gambling life.
First-time feature writers David Levien and Brian Koppelman have come up
with a witty script.  But the inside world of poker and the one-track
storyline make for a pretty slow two hours.  Mike's relationship with Jo
is an underdeveloped afterthought.  Jo's protests about Mike's gambling
come off as whiny and do not ring with the impending heartbreak that one
might expect from a couple breaking up.  Once Jo leaves the apartment, she
almost vanishes from the film.  Its not the point of Rounders anyway to go
deeply into this relationship - rather Mike's struggle between his two
senses of self takes center stage.
Martin Landau, playing not-so-coincidentally a professor who also
struggled between becoming a rabbi or following his true calling to teach
law, arrives just in time to assist Mike in his choice.  Wondering what
path he chooses?  Well, I'll just tell you this is not a John Grisham
movie.
By this point, Worm has dragged him so far down back into the poker world
that Mike has to take on Worm's debts.  They need to raise fifteen
thousand bucks in five days.  Worm, of course, sabotages the plan with his
hustling resulting in a showdown between Mike and Teddy KGB in a
winner-take-all game.  
Rounders has the feel of 1940s and 50s crime films with Matt Damon
voicing-over a narration throughout.  Director John Dahl (Unforgettable)
never lets us forget the stark dreariness of the underground with cold
blues and blacks dominating his palate.  All in all, it's a pretty well
acted movie, as well.
Many movies that are full of Academy Award nominees and winners (like
1996's Marvin's Room) tend not to live up to the hype.   With Malkovich,
Norton, Landau, and Damon, Rounders has quite the pedigree.  Malkovich (In
the Line of Fire) commands respect on screen as his very presence should
strike fear in those dealing with him.  His role is small, but his
convincing Russian accent keeps him interesting.  Norton (Primal Fear) is
his twitchy self, while Landau (Ed Wood) deserves more time than his three
to four conversations.
The treasure of Rounders is found in John Turturro, who can play quirky in
Coen brothers' films or straight in such fare as Quiz Show.  Turturro
plays Kinish, Mike's mentor if Mike will ever listen.  Kinish has the
skill to play with the best, but does not look for the glory of victory.
He earns his living legitimately driving a truck.  His winnings pay
alimony and child support.  
It is difficult to decide whether Mike is a gambling addict who needs help
or a skilled player hungry for his dream to play in the World Series of
Poker on ESPN.  He wins without cheating, can tell everyone's hand after
just entering a room (playing blind, as they say), and uses his biggest
challenges for bluffing practice.  In the process, though, he loses his
girlfriend, quits law school, gets beaten up severely, and plays
compulsively.  His addiction fuels the pursuit of the dream.  Mike plays
for the glory, the excessive amounts of money are necessary for him to be
able to play.  It's a tightrope Mike walks throughout Rounders, and quite
shakily at that.
Matt Damon walks the same tightrope in his first major role since "Good
Will Hunting."  It will be interesting to see if his
considerable acting abilities will ever again be able to outshine the star
status the world has placed on him. 

Author
Chad Polenz
1998, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
Starring: Matt Damon (Mike McDermott); Edward Norton (Worm); John Turturro
(Kanish); John Malkovich (Teddy KGB); written by David Levien, Brian
Koppelman; produced by Ted Demme, Joel Stillerman; directed by John Dahl.
Seen September 13, 1998 at 4 p.m at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinema 6, theater
#2, with Chris Wessell for free using my Sony/Loews critic's pass. [theater
rating: **1/2: good seats, average sound, picture unstable]
        "Rounders" is exactly the kind of movie parents don't want their kids to see.
It's not that it's a drunken orgy of sex and violence, but because it's a film
that flat-out says you can make a career out of gambling. And to take make
things "worse" it proves this through its original, fascinating story.
        There have been countless crime films both past and present that evoke the
"noir" mood, that is, the dark, shady atmosphere where the vices of the world
become more fascinating on screen than they would in real life. This film
starts off in the tradiational noir style, introducing us to the underworld of
modern gambling where the stakes are high and so is the price for losing. Matt
Damon stars as Mike McDermott, a 20-something law student in present-day New
York City who tells us how the game of poker is REALLY played. Damon narrates
throughout the film, but the entire opening scene is voiced-over so perfectly
to completely and totally define the setting.
        Mike's about to go up against Teddy KGB (Malkovich), a Russian gangster who
looks like a serial killer. But then again, he practically is one and the film
does everything to convey that sense - the look in his eyes, his slow
movements, his intricate mannerisms - all combined with the classic noir
cinematography of isolated brightness within the darkness of the underworld
(literally). Damon in the flesh might seem a little out of place with his
expensive clothes and perfectly-groomed features, but his narration is what
brings it all together. He never sounds like he's reading from a script, nor
that he's trying to embellish anything, it just comes natural to him. The
screenwriters use the right words and phrases to describe the mood, from the
smell of the air, to the logic involved in reading the other guys' faces and
cards, and all without sounding remotely trite. 
        Immediately we get the sense that poker isn't for gamblers, but for near-
geniuses with nerves of steel. The game is a quiet war, with strategies just
as complex and the same sense of honor among the soldiers. The gangsters Mike
plays against are the same ones that might kill someone for scratching their
car, but when it comes to the game of poker, all respect is due to the winner
because he is truly the better man.
        The film does an excellent job in establishing its atmosphere during the
first act. It concentrates so much in this aspect that the background and the
progression of the story stumble a bit. We learn only a little about Mike,
both past and present. Presently we know he has a girlfriend named Jo
(Gretchen Mol) who he constantly argues with over his gambling. They go
through a few break-up/make-up cycles until Mike's childhood pal and fellow
rounder "Worm" (Norton) is released from prison.
        It's not at all surprising Worm owes thousand of dollars to the mob, but what
is surprising is how the film is able to take such a predictable element and
execute it the way it does. Technically, the plot isn't unlike many children's
sitcoms in which the "good" kid's "bad" friend gets the good kid in trouble
and yet the good kid remains friends with the bad kid. What this film does is
use a different medium to tell that story. Mike and Worm have been in over
their heads their entire lives, but both share a passion for out-thinking the
other player who is trying to do the same to them. Where as Worm prefers to go
the sleazy route of cheating (hence his jail time), Mike always takes the
cards he's dealt and works with them. Sometimes they pay off (i.e. his ability
to pay his way through law school on his gambling money), but other times they
don't (i.e. the fact he takes himself out of the game and works a steady job
after dropping $30,000 on a single hand).
        Once things start happening the film is able to expand and develop its plot
into an intricate web of detail and mood. Mike and Worm bob and weave through
all kinds of games at all kinds of places, from socialites' mansions, to
taking the tourists at Atlantic City, to outwitting the gangsters that control
it all. 
        Everything they come into contact with is a big poker game in that
everything's a battle against the cards destiny deals. One scene demonstrates
this perfectly in which Mike is told by a judge (Martin Landou, in a perfectly
cast and performed role) that destiny is everything and yet nothing at the
same time. Matt's good at gambling but he's also got potential to be a great
lawyer. He could go professional as either, but with one he could lose
everything or win big, but with the other there's stability but not much risk
involved. Can someone who's gambled his entire life really cash in his chips
and leave?
        If the film had been just a subtle lesson in poker-playing, then the ending
is our test. Everything is told from Mike's perspective, but we're finally
able to recognize some things on our own. This makes the final, against-all-
odds showdown seem like just that. It works just like the game it revolves
around - showing us some of the cards, but still evokes the element of the
unknown, and the consequences thereof.
        What separates "Rounders" from most other films about games is the fact the
challenge and the skills are more important than winning in the end.


Author
Bob Bloom

 Rounders (1998) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Matt Damon, Edward Norton, John
Malkovich and Gretchen Mol. Directed by John Dahl.
 Rounders is like a high-stakes poker game. Sometimes it shows its hand too
early, sometimes it holds back some of its cards, but a lot of the time it
merely bluffs.
 Director John Dahl's drama centers on a law student (Matt Damon) who has a
secret night life as a player in high-stakes underground poker games.
 After losing it all in a big-stakes game, Mike McDermott (Damon) swears
off the cards to concentrate on his legitimate life as well as his
girlfriend, Jo (Gretchen Mol).
 But an old friend, Worm (Edward Norton), newly released from prison,
forces Mike back into the life to help Worm make good on his old gambling
debts.
 Worm is a complete screw-up. Whereas Mike plays poker for the thrill, to
Worm it's all a con to make money. Worm cheats, and in doing so, not only
gets Mike deeper in debt but gets him beaten.
 Dahl (Red Rock West, The Last Seduction) does what he can with the
material. But writers David Levien and Brian Koppelman hedge their bets.
They create a part Cincinnati Kid, part good buddy-bad buddy film with a
bit of love story thrown in.
 The movie, at a bit over two hours, drags in many spots and spends too
much time focusing on Mike's determination to stay away from the gambling
tables when it is obvious that he really yearns for the game.
 And when he is playing, the suspense is diluted by Mike's voice-over
narration, explaining the intricacies of the game and how to spot a mark so
you can win his money.
 Actually, Mike's narration is the most interesting part of the film, as he
gives an insider's look at the high-ante games and what is needed to win.
 Damon is appealing as Mike. He has that clean-cut, fresh look that makes
his double life believable. He has that charming smile that he utilizes to
escape from tough situations.
 What is hard to understand is his determination to stick with Worm even
beyond the point of common sense.
 Norton is all posing and vulgarity as the cheating card shark. He is a
seedy liar totally lacking in charm. He is a boorish trickster, and it's
amazing that a low-life such as him can even find someone to sit at a table
with him.
 Mol has little to do except berate Mike for his return to his old ways.
 John Malkovich, as the gambling kingpin, talks with a thick Russian accent
that sounds almost like something from an old vaudeville routine.
 John Turturro, as a professional gambler who tries to help Mike, is cool
and cerebral, explaining that the game must be looked at as a business or a
profession.
 Overall, Rounders, though a bit too long, is interesting but uneven. It's
more intriguing than a game of rummy, but it fails to reach the high stakes
at which it aims.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Luke Buckmaster
ROUNDERS
Cast: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau, John Malkovich,
John Turturro, Famke Janssen, Vernon E. Jordan Jr., Melina Kanakaredes,
Michael Rispoli
Director: John Dahl
Screenplay: David Levien & Brian Koppelman
Australian theatrical release: January 28, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 
3 stars
When gambling isn't used to illustrate amazing streaks of luck, it is often
used in association with society's criminals and lowlifes.    Well there are
plenty of criminals and lowlifes in Rounders, a film that is careful to keep
its priorities in the right order.  Card games and risky bets take the
spotlight, but the harsh game of surviving in a world full of crooks always
seems significantly more important.  When players take to the table in the
desperate hope of winning some serious dough, Rounders provides great
entertainment.  Away from the table, however, a compelling dramatic core is
missing.
Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) learns the valuable lessons of playing high-stake
card games the hard way.  One night he plays against Russian card shark KGB
(John Malkovich, in a role that seems a little too easy for him) and loses a
cool thirty grand.  So from then on, Mike works hard in legitimate jobs,
swearing that he will never return to the gambling table again.  But when his
loser best friend Worm (Edward Norton) is released from jail, Mike is dragged
into the game once again in order to help Worm repay his debts.  
One refreshing aspect of Rounders is that it treats its subject matter with
respect.  Not endorsing gambling yet not discouraging it either, the film
chronicles a realistic (though somewhat sensational) account of two men's
triumphs and misfortunes.  It not only examines gambling as a hobby and a
sport, but as a way of life - as a source for putting bread on the table.
John Turturro is given the difficult task of portraying the only sensible
gambler, a man who "grinds" the game by playing smart and playing safe.
Turturro has a knack for taking simple characters and giving them complexity
(Exhibit A, Barton Fink, Exhibit B, Quiz Show), and serves as an integral
(although small) part in Rounders.  As Mike and Worm welcome the chaos that
eventually engulfs them, Turturro's character stands strong and tall, silently
knowing that although he has taken a smaller spotlight, he has outplayed both
of them.
Matt Damon is solid in the lead role but is overshadowed by some terrific
performances from the supporting cast.  Norton plays Worm with sleaziness and
extravagance, but also brings an eerie sense of repression and sadness.
Malkovich and Turturro are excellent, and Gretchen Mole (playing Mike's
girlfriend Jo) is also fine, although debut scriptwriters David Levien and
Brian Koppelman have written her part predictably and blandly.
Director John Dahl has an obvious fascination with professional gambling.  On
numerous occasions Rounders feels like a fun documentary on the sport, with
human diversions along the way. It is then disappointing that Dahl rarely
gives his gambling scenes more than just visual interest.  As Matt Damon says
during the film, the game is not about playing the cards, its about playing
the people. Dahl shoots card scenes much better than he examines characters.
The success of the drama between Mike and Worm is off and on, whilst Mike's
relationship with Jo is purely a tool to get a female actor into the picture.
The writing and direction of Rounders is impressive, but the sports side of
the picture is so much better than its dramatic side that the film becomes
unbalanced in the quality of its scenes.  Whilst Rounders occasionally touches
on themes with meaning and relevance, this is ultimately just a good and
enjoyable sports film.  Had it focused a little more on the players, it may
have been great one.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director:  John Dahl
 Writer: David Koppelman & David Levien
 Cast: Matt Damon, Gretchen Mol, Edward Norton, Famke
Janssen, Vernon E. Jordan Jr., Melina Kanakaredes, Martin
Landau, John Malkovich, Gretchen Moi, John Turturro
   "Rounders" is to poker what "Without Limits" is to track. 
Both deal with sports and particularly with the passion of
those who revel in their practice.  You can lose weight with
running, your shirt and then some with the card game.  While
Steve Prefontaine's competitions take place outdoors, its
sportsmen seeking the inside track, car sharp Mike
McDermott's (Matt Damon) are indoors, its players tracking a
sporting chance.  "Rounders," which is directed by John Dahl
("Red Rock West," "The Last Seduction"), is photographed
largely in red giving it the same noir ambiance of Dahl's other
films.  The story has a fairly pronounced narration throughout
by its principal character, who relates the nature of the game
in the flat, matter-of-fact tones of the genre, a deep contrast
with the excitable timbre common to announcers of outside
sports. 
   As the film gets under way, you being to think, What is this
really about?  Is it about friendship?  It is, to an extent.  Is it
about passion?  That it is, decidedly so--you're convinced of
that when you hear law professor Petrovsky (Martin Landau)
mentor his poker-playing student: "We cannot run away from
who we are...Our destiny chooses us."  Mike is attending law
school, but barely takes time to prepare his mock cases.  His
destiny is written in the cards, not in pursuing the legal
profession.  But even more, the movie is not about these Big
Issues but is rather an intensely focussed meditation on the
game of poker written by two men (David Koppelman and
David Levien) who either have an obsession with the game
or, having investigated some of the underground and above-
board sites, found the subject a worthwhile one to pursue. 
Although a sizable chunk of the movie is taken up with
shuffling and dealing, conning and stinging, you don't really
have to know the rules or even have an enthusiasm for
gambling.  Not that it's suspenseful.  The conclusion is as
predictable as the final victory of a champ in any movie about
competing.  Instead, "Rounders" provides the evidence that
poker is NOT a game of luck but almost totally a contest of
skill.  What more proof do we need than to witness the same
players returning to the world series of card playing year after
year?
   The story opens in New York on Mike McDermott, attending
law school together with his live-in girl friend Jo (Gretchen
Mol).  Hearing that his bosom buddy and scam artist Worm
(Edward Norton) is to be released from jail, he picks him up
and resists Worm's pleas to return to playing high-stakes
poker.  Refusing at first, as he had lost his tuition money to
Russian mafia kingpin Teddy KGB (John Malkovich), he
succumbs against the strong counsel of his girl friend and of
his mentor Joey Knish (John Turturro), enters into a shady
partnership with his pal to skin the tourists in places like
Atlantic City's Taj Mahal, and being the good buddy he is,
vouches for a large loan which the gangsters make to Worm. 
The greater part of the film deals not with his deteriorating
relationship with the lovely Jo or with his involvement in law
school where he appears to do not homework or attend any
classes. Rather it delves deeply into the subculture of poker.
   Audience members without a scorecard may find
themselves begging for subtitles, as the dialogue includes a
rich vocabulary of jargon.  Everyone knows that a full house is
also called a boat, and that fold means that you are
surrendering your hand.  But how many viewers will
understand terms like checks, blinds, base deals, road shows,
Fourth Street, Greek dealer, Grinder, It, Kansas City and
Maniac?  There must be more esoteric terms in poker than
Gray had to describe the bones and muscles of the body in
his "Anatomy," but never mind.  You'll enjoy the superlative
acting of Matt Damon, whose dimensions are tested and
found in abundance here far more than they appear in his
smaller role in "Saving Private Ryan."  
   "Rounders" (the term means "hustlers" but refers here to
wholly committed poker players) is a small movie with small
pleasures whose principal rewards are the an increased
respect for the skill involved in its sport and its shady,
sometimes droll depiction of the milieu of its gamblers.  The
world champion poker player appears in a cameo in a movie
which, despite its portrayal of passion is diverting rather than
uplifting and one which does not look with a patronizing air at
a guy who seems to be self-destructing with his passion for
the deal.

Author
Scott Renshaw
ROUNDERS
(Miramax)
Starring:  Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau, John
Malkovich, John Turturro, Michael Rispoli, Famke Janssen.
Screenplay:  David Levien and Brian Koppelman.
Producers:  Ted Demme and Joel Stillerman.
Director:  John Dahl.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  119 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In the ongoing tastes-great-less-filling verbal war of attrition
between John Q. Critic and Joe B. Average Movie-Goer, a crucial
common ground often gets overlooked.  On the same fundamental level, every
one of us loves to be taken somewhere we've never been before, to be told
a story in a way it's never been told before.  Movies are our eyes to 
previously unseen worlds, whether that new world is the surface of an
asteroid, the deck of the Titanic, or behind the lines with World War II
soldiers.  At their most engrossing, movies offer the giddy thrill of the
utterly new.
     At its most engrossing, that's exactly what ROUNDERS offers:  a
fascinating glimpse inside the world of high-stakes poker.  Our tour guide
is Mike McDermott (Matt Damon), a brilliant young rounder (i.e., a
professional who makes the rounds at local poker games) who loses a
$30,000 bankroll on one bad night.  Nine months later, Mike is walking the
straight-and-narrow, having sworn off the game at the insistence of his
girlfriend Jo (Gretchen Mol) and devoted himself to his legal studies.
But trouble is just around the corner in the person of Mike's old pal Worm
(Edward Norton), just out of prison with an ever-accumulating gambling
debt hanging around his neck.  In order to save that neck -- and his own
when he makes the mistake of vouching for Worm -- Mike has to get back
into the game and use every trick he ever learned to win the biggest games
of his life.
     And oh, how much we learn while he does so.  Writers David Levien and 
Brian Koppelman use Damon's narration much the same way Ray Liotta's
narration was used in GOODFELLAS -- as a sociology lesson.  We learn why
Texas hold-'em is the high stakes game of choice, how real players lure
the amateurs into big pots, and how Mike spots the "tells" of his
opponents to help make his playing decisions.  It's utterly fascinating, 
whether the setting is a back alley card room or a gaudy Atlantic City
casino.  Damon anchors the story in a solid performance as a man beginning
to understand that he has a gift, not a problem.  Though hooked on the
thrill of winning, he's no different than a performer hooked on the thrill
of an audience's reaction.  Through his eyes we see poker as an art, not
an addiction.
     ROUNDERS has such a solid hook that it's disappointing to watch it
drift into a handful of distracting sub-plots.  The relationship between
Mike and Jo is too vaguely defined for their fate to matter, yet director
John Dahl (THE LAST SEDUCTION) lingers on their confrontations as though
the obligatory love story were dramatically potent.  John Turturro's role
as the small-time gambler who acts as Mike's mentor is also 
under-developed, as is the potentially compelling interaction between Mike
and an understanding law professor (a very good Martin Landau).  Even the
old-school chemistry between Damon and Norton -- full of almost-charming,
can't-help-myself sleaze as the compulsively crooked Worm -- feels less
genuine than it should.
     If anything positive comes out of these half-formed relationships,
it's the sense that Mike's best friend is really the game.  Damon's
charisma is never more potent than in the climactic showdown with the
Russian gangster who beat him in the game that broke him (John Malkovich,
employing his dead eyes to perfect effect and a Boris Badinov accent with
considerably less success).  It's a confrontation where Mike's life is on
the line, but the drama is always in the game, not the potential outcome.
For that confrontation, the narration grows conspicuously silent at key
points, trusting you to grasp the game to which you have been introduced.
Viewers who used to think of poker simply as gambling may have to re-think
their position after sitting through ROUNDERS.  This tale shows us a
different world entirely -- the world of card-player as tortured artist.

Author
John Smythe
(c) The Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/rounders.htm
After law student Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) loses all of his money in 
a poker game to a violent Russian loanshark Teddy KGB (John Malkovich), 
he promises his girlfriend Jo (Gretchen Mol) that he has given up 
gambling for good. This pledge is put to the test nine months later when 
a childhood friend (and fellow cardsharp) Lester "Worm" Murphy (Edward 
Norton) is released from prison. Lester is heavily indebted to 
loansharks and is anxious to win enough money to pay them back. However, 
while Mike relies on his skill to read body language and keep track of 
which cards have already been played, Lester prefers to cheat.
John Dahl's examination of card players seems like two movies grafted 
clumsily together. The first is a low-budget tale of people on the 
margins - desperately hoping for the big score which they think will 
transform their lives without realising that their obsession can only 
consume them rather than save them. The other movie is a star vehicle 
for rising stars Damon and Norton, with heavy-duty cameos from 
Malkovich, John Turturro and Martin Landau. Unfortunately, the synergy
does not add to the entertainment.
Dahl evokes the seedy surroundings of seedy back-street gambling dens 
most effectively and populates this environment with realistic 
characters. Turturro plays a professional poker player, Joey Knish, who 
'has never worked a day in his life' since he earns a solid if 
unremarkable income from his card games. McDermott (who is close to him) 
is vaguely contemptuous of Knish because he never risks everything just 
to bluff an opponent (which is how McDermott lost all his money to begin 
with). There's nothing glamorous about Knish and the other players - 
since the all know the tricks of the trade, they don't win much money 
off each other. Occasionally, they all head out to Atlantic City and 
separate some unsuspecting tourists from their cash.
Since gambling involves losing money, loansharks feature heavily on the 
scene, and the collection of a particular debt provides the dynamic 
which drives the film. On his release, Worm tempts Mike back into an 
all-night game with some wealthy students. Since the students don't know 
that the two are working together, Worm pretends to lose everything 
while Mike makes a killing. However, Mike doesn't realise the extent of 
Worm's debt and that Worm has been using Mike's name to gain credit and 
to run up more debt.
As Worm's luck turns bad, and his debt increases, he find out that his 
debt belongs to Teddy KGB, who will resort to very extreme methods to 
retrieve his money. His only hope is to raise enough money by going on a 
non-stop gambling spree in a week. Since Mike is a better player, Worm 
needs to his help or his doomed. This poses a dilemma for Mike, since he 
knows that he will lose his girlfriend and probably his law-degree if he 
agrees to help Worm.
John Dahl's previous movies (such as Red Rock West and The Last 
Seduction) have centred around deception and are usually inhabited by 
people with a very healthy distrust of each other. One would think that 
a film about poker-players, given that deception is an integral part of 
the game, that enable Dahl bring the same darkly gleeful interplay 
between the main protagonists. This doesn't happen, simply because the 
plot is too pedestrian to provide any diversions from the well-trodden 
path of predictability.
There are certain conventions which are always followed in film-making. 
For example, in a western, we all know that at the end of the movie, the 
hero (unless it's a horse) will strap on a gun, walk down a dusty street 
and shoot it out with the bad guy. Similarly, in a movie that features 
games such as pool or cards, there will have to be a climactic 
winner-takes-all match at the end, between the underdog, no-hope hero 
and the reigning champion whom nobody has ever beaten. Dahl doesn't 
stray from this convention and his intentions are clearly signalled from 
the outset of the movie. It is a bit surprising, considering the offbeat 
and original treatment he afforded to the genre of the heist movie in 
his previous work.
The weakest element, by a mile, is Matt Damon. He is not the least bit 
convincing as some-one so obsessed with gambling that he will sacrifice 
his career and relationship for gambling. His fresh-faced, clean-cut 
looks contrast sharply with the worn, faded appearance of the other 
card-playing characters, and it simply not credible that he could 
inhabit, with ease, the same world as Teddy KGB and Turturro (excellent 
as the world-weary Knish). His miscasting is highlighted by the 
narration (delivered by Damon) which is wise beyond his years - the 
voice simply doesn't fit the story it is telling. Damon seems to have 
taken the concept of a "poker face" too seriously, since he reserves the 
same half-smirk to express every emotion. I'm an admirer of Damon as an 
actor, but I did not think that this was a good performance. 
Edward Norton fares better as Worm, though his role is less substantial. 
His character is simply present to act as a foil for Mike and to test 
his resolve, and is subsequently less well developed. Though the 
supposed bond between Mike and Worm is crucial to the film, it is 
entirely unconvincing, and as Worm gets himself into more trouble, there 
is no clear reason why Mike should stick with him. The conflict between 
Mike's gambling and his duties as a law student are glossed over, except 
to provide some perfunctory conflict between him and his girlfriend 
(also a law student). The prospect and consequence of giving up law 
school is hardly considered. Gretchen Mol looks as beautiful and 
delicate as porcelain, but she and Damon might as well be brother and 
sister in the film as lovers, such is the lack of passion between them. 
However, this is a fault of the script rather than the actors, since 
they have very little time together onscreen. 
The supporting cast are far stronger, though Malkovich's Russian accent 
is more likely to provoke laughs than evince menace. Despite Dahl's 
attention to detail early in the movie, the film resorts to some 
standard Hollywood tricks later in the movie. Both Worm and Lester seem 
to be able to do without sleep for days at a time without feeling (or 
looking) any the worst for wear. They are both the recipients of a 
Rodney King-style beating , but are back on their feet with just a few 
scratches in the next scene. And Norton's character seems to do some 
particularly stupid things just to propel the plot to the next scene.
Rounders is a bit like The Cincinnati Kid or even The Color of Money 
when it should have been like The Hustler - solid without being 
unexceptional. Given the cast and the director, I would have expected 
far more.


Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  John Dahl
Cast:  Matt Damon, Edward Norton, John Turturro, Gretchen Mol, Famke
Janssen, John Malkovich, Martin Landau, Michael Rispoli
Screenplay:  David Levien, Brian Koppelman
Producers:  Ted Demme, Joel Stillerman
Runtime:  115
US Distribution:  Miramax
Rated R:  language, sex, drug use
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Rounders, if you haven't heard, is a film about people who play poker
for a living.  It involves a lot of illegal gambling, and much of it
takes place in casinos.  As we were driving out of the theater, my
friend noted that it was impressive that director John Dahl managed to
make a film about gambling interesting to people who live in a gambling
town.  I've lived in Reno my entire life, and one of the misconceptions
most people have is that casinos are everywhere, and that locals know
everything there is to know about gambling.  Apparently, my friend has
this opinion as well.
The fact is, most locals I know spend less than two dollars per year
gambling.  I, myself, have spent 55 cents over the course of my entire
life.  Nobody knows anything about gambling.  It's a mystery unless you
*work* in a casino.  That's why gambling is so fascinating to everyone,
including Renoites.  Sure, we ignore it for the most part, but that
doesn't mean we don't find it interesting.  As I understand it, most
people find gambling immensely interesting.  That's probably why
Rounders is likely to be a big hit -- it successfully delves into things
that most of us have never seen.  It also makes gambling seem hugely
appealing, a trait no gambling film I've ever watched has had.
Of course, it's more specific than "gambling" -- it takes us deep into
the world of professional poker, where people bet their entire life
savings on one hand.  It tells the story of true card sharks -- the
poker professionals who don't rely on luck, but on skill -- knowing what
cards everyone has, and knowing how to read body language.  The film
stars the ultra-popular Matt Damon as Mike McDermott, a law school
student who, at the beginning of the film, loses everything he has in
one poker game; his opponent is a crazy Russian known as KGB (John
Malkovitch).
He vows never to go back to the game.  He gets a "real" job driving a
truck, and moves in with his girlfriend, Jo (Gretchen Mol).  Everything
is going great until Mike's best friend, Worm (Edward Norton), is
released from jail.  Worm is, of course, a pro poker player, not to
mention an incredibly pushy guy:  he drags Mike back into the poker
underworld, and soon Mike has dropped everything, including school and
his girlfriend.  Then, predictably, Mike is put into a position in which
he must vouch for Worm -- it's then up to him to pay for all of Worm's
debts.
Okay, so a lot of this sounds pretty familiar.  Rounders is a smooth,
likable movie, but it is dreadfully predictable (and often strangely
contrived).  Of course Mike is going to get back into poker.  Of course
Worm is going to get himself into trouble.  Of course Mike's going to
end up "vouching for the wrong guy" (who, incidentally, is his best
friend).  And, of course, there is going to be one final showdown with
KGB.  I could see the gears turning in David Levien's and Brian
Koppelman's script as they force the events to end up just as they
began.  Interestingly, the predictability didn't bother me as I watched
the film.  Dahl (The Last Seduction, Unforgettable) does such a sharp
job directing that I can't imagine not falling prey to its charming
qualities.
It's probably the way he films the scenes, and the way he uses his
actors.  Dahl doesn't use a lot of camera tricks, but his camera is
always moving, panning and circling around the numerous poker tables. 
The film is ridiculously entertaining, and many of the scenes provide
solid belly laughs:  my favorite scene has all of the film's main
characters (all of whom are poker pros) sitting at a table in the Taj
Mahal, waiting for tourists to come up and waste their money.  It's such
a well-done scene; the reactions of the numerous neophytes losing their
cash is particularly good.
The screenplay is good in its details, and provides a lot of strong
characters for a magical cast.  Damon, unlike many of his peers, is
actually a gifted actor -- he handles the emotional ups and downs with
ease.  (My only concern is that after this film and his last two, Good
Will Hunting and The Rainmaker, he's going to be typecast as the
know-it-all with an attitude.)  Norton, on the other hand, turns in a
performance vastly different from all of his previous (does this guy
have range or what?).  He's a strong screen presence, and great fun to
watch.  John Malkovitch has a lot of fun with his role, and though his
Russian accent isn't perfect, it's interesting to see Malkovitch without
that strange voice of his.  Supporting performances from Famke Janssen,
John Turturro, and particularly Martin Landau (as Mike's professor) are
all very good.
I didn't much like the film's end, because none of the subplots end
with satisfaction.  The girlfriend subplot whimpers to a close, and the
relationship between Mike and Worm -- which is the film's central
conflict -- also concludes anticlimactically.  Overall, though, I didn't
mind the flaws:  Rounders is an absorbing and amusing picture to sit
through.  And, as my friend pointed out, it will even interest the 1
million people who live in cities with gambling.  John Dahl and his
array of actors have managed to take us all somewhere that we haven't
been before by explaining the way poker really works.  It just makes me
want to go out and blow thirty thousand dollars.

Author
James Salisbury
Cast: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, John Malkovich, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau,
John Turturro
Previews: Pleasantville, Rush Hour
I can tell that fall has come.  It's not because of the cooler temperatures,
changing colors, the sound of the pigskin, or the stowing away of BBQ grills
and swimsuits, which made me think that way.  .  The thought has returned to
movieland, and the stakes of summers cinematic ante have been raised, and will
continue to be, as we close into the winter Oscar hopeful deluge.
What a perfect way to start this, then with a movie strong on performances,
mood, brains and logic, but a bit short on pacing and plot.  John Dahl's first
movie in 2 years (since 1996's  Unforgettable (which was for some critics, but
quite a joy for me), the card hustling/life lesson filled Rounders, shows us,
throughout, that life is indeed a poker game, and that poker isn't really a
game at all, but an art form.  Mike McDermott (Damon) has mastered this art
form, but one bad turn, turns him away, and towards a career in law.   But the
release of a seemingly true friend from prison, brings Damon back to the game,
after a sabbatical, and, as one character puts it "..we can't control who we
are, destiny, chooses us" so he's pulled back into things.  Without spoiling
too much of the plot, money is lost, found, and owed, to some not so nice
characters, who are (in another of the movies wonderful analogies) "..piranha,
who will not fight each other, but team up on fresh meat"
The story serves more as a series of life events. The effects of the choices
that we make, on others, and ourselves and how things around us are indeed a
gamble, and can turn on "a deal of the cards". Dahl's movies have been mostly
hits with me (save the Val Kilmer snoozer Kill Me Again) because he is indeed
a master at weaving a moral into a story, making the people and characters
real, but dark, like people you know exist, but really aren't sure if you'd
want to ever meet. The performances, for the most part, are solid. Norton, as
the aptly named Worm, is a shifty, shady, yet mysteriously deep and elusive
character study. He continues to amaze, showing flashes of brilliance again
here, and an amazing versatility, he's going to have a golden visitor
sometime in his acting future. Mol, as the patient, yet independent
girlfriend, Turturro, as the almost-mentorish worldly wise "friend in a world
where you don't have many" and Landau, carrying his darkishly creepy, yet
powerfully paternal side, last seen in X-Files, genescized from Ed Wood, are
strong in their supporting roles. Only the usually reliable Malkovich falters
here. He was the sole reason that I saw Con-Air, and about the only thing I
enjoyed. Here, he just looks silly, as the Oreo munching Russian poker heavy
with connections. He seems to be possessed by the soul of Boris Badenov, and
even his dramatic, power moments seem cartoonish and silly. But the true star
of this movie is Damon. He shows here, more than ever before, that he is a
leading man to be contended with, and that he can carry a movie. His strong,
emotional, real performance, helps you feel what he lives, his ups, and
downs, his desperations, elations, yet pull towards a predestined force
inside him
Rounders hits, more than it misses. It is heavy on techniques and lingo, more
familiar to those who watch televised poker, or frequent the smokey rooms of
Vegas or Atlantic City.  The darkside of those rooms is unwrapped effectively
here.  Dahl is an exquisite filmmaker and intense storyteller. He makes you
feel and see sides of the world, that some of us would rather not. The movie
is slow in pace, but then again, so is life itself. In the beginning, I
thought I was going to see Good Will Hunting goes to Vegas (as witnessed by a
nice scene at a poker game), but the movie ups the ante by going into the
abuse of a talent, and the repercussions of the actions. Like only a few
other filmmakers can, he lets you know the people here, and makes you care,
and makes you leave the theater reevaluating your own life, and the chances
you take. See a matinee of this one, if you are patient, or have a strong
knowledge of cards.($$$1/2)
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Homer Yen
Poker players are a strange breed indeed.  If they can't find their way
to the poker rooms of the Taj Mahal in Atlantic City or to the fabled
Mirage in Las Vegas where the best players in the world sit down,
they'll still find a game somewhere.  Maybe it'll be in the back room of
some bar, or in the basement of some rundown building.  And never mind
the heavy smoke or cramped quarters or dank surroundings.  These people
are known as 'rounders.'  Poker to them is a delirious mix of
on-the-edge living and all-out warfare.  For these people, the rippling
of the cards is a call to arms, outplaying your opponents is the goal,
and stacks of chips become their ammunition.
"Rounders" offers a fairly accurate exploration of this hidden world
where fortunes are won and lost overnight and your only friends are the
cards in your hands.  Here, we meet up with Mike McDermott (Matt Damon).
He is a card-playing whiz who has been financing his law school tuition
through poker.  But one bad hand costs him everything, and he vows to
retire from the game.  Worm (Ed Norton) is his friend who was just
recently released from prison.  He also plays cards but wins his
fortunes through cheating.  He owes a lot of money to some disreputable
people, and Mike decides to continue to play in order to help him out.
The strength of this movie, however, does not lie within the story
between Mike and Worm.  For me, I was more intrigued with how it focused
on the shady, almost-invisible environment and how it highlighted the
many nuances that you have to master in order to play poker well.
Being a mediocre poker player who periodically plays the 10-20 Hold 'em
games at the Taj and one who can be labeled, to a certain degree, a
'rounder', the movie hits the mark in several areas.  We see various
types of players such as Kinish (John Torturro) who looks to win one or
two hands an hour in order to grind out a living and David KGB (John
Malkovich) who runs one of these poker rooms and whose weakness lies in
the way he eats Oreos.  The movie also accurately presents, through
narratives, the psychology required to win.  And it shows how playing
can suck you into a vacuum as you forget about everything else around
you.
I recall watching Maverick where the final few people played their last
hands.  One player held 4-of-a-kind; the villain held a 7-high straight
flush and the winner miraculously won with a Royal Flush.  Entertaining
- yes; realistic no.  This film could be considered the flip side of
that movie.  Authentic - yes; original - no.  "Rounders" is more
interesting than entertaining, but certainly one of the best movies
whose subject matter is poker.
Grade: (B-) if you don't play poker; (B) if you do.

Author
David E. Smith
Rounders (1998) - Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau,
John Malkovich
   Everyone has their little problems. Matt Damon's character in
   "Rounders" has a big problem - a gambling problem that threatens to
   ruin his life more than once. "Rounders" flirts with being a great
   story about Mike McDermott (Damon) and his difficult path to a Pyrrhic
   victory, coming close, but never really making it.
   Despite having never joined a 12-step program, it's clear that Mike
   doesn't have all the cards in his deck. In the opening scenes of the
   movie, he loses his life savings, including the money he was using to
   pay his law school tuition. With some difficulty, he takes up
   low-paying night jobs and settles down with his girlfriend Jo
   (Gretchen Mol).
   Nine months later, an old card buddy with the appropriate nickname of
   Worm (Edward Norton) gets out of prison and promptly gets beat up for
   skipping out on his old gambling debts. Mike reluctantly returns to
   the shady world of illegal high-stakes poker to help Worm pay his
   debts, remembering why the game is so irresistible and watching the
   rest of his life collapse.
   Damon and Norton are both excellent actors, and it shows. The audience
   is given remarkable insight into Damon's character, from narrative
   voice-overs to the slightest facial expressions. Norton's "Worm" is,
   well, a bit of a worm - stacking decks with the best of them, Norton
   projects just the right blend of good intentions and bad habits.
   For the most part, the supporting cast - with character names like
   Petra, Kinish and Grandma - is also excellent. Martin Landau has a
   small but significant part as a law professor and McDermott's
   enigmatic mentor. John Malkovich, as the card shark, "KGB," is
   suitably devious and insane; his Oreo-munching performance alone is
   cause to see this movie.
   But "Rounders" fails to sell the story convincingly on two fronts. One
   is the premise - not everyone is familiar with poker, so a lot of the
   jargon may go right over some viewers' heads.
   The other is Mol. A key part of McDermott's fall from grace is the
   collapse of his romance with Jo, but it simply isn't plausible. Mol's
   emotional gauge is stuck on over-perky ex-cheerleader. There simply
   isn't any chemistry between her and Damon, and it's hard to care about
   their alleged relationship.
   "Rounders" - the term refers to a poker player who makes the rounds of
   local games - has so much potential. It could have been the next
   "The Color of Money," but merely deals us a pair instead of a straight
   flush.

Author
Mac VerStandig
What is a movie that has no apparent morals, encourages illegal 
practices, and features it toughest character in a one-piece jump suit? 
Is it a testimony to a great plot, or a circus sideshow gone horribly 
astray? When Rounders starts it's 2-hour duration it is clearly leaning 
toward the latter of the 2 options. And yet, when the last reel is over 
and all is said done, the film is so much more than a testimony to the 
great plot it is made of. In-between the beginning and end there is a 
line that is treaded by this unique film that often resembles a line 
between genius and insanity. And those elements are no less diverse as 
both the positive and negative of this film. But, as it is nice to see 
once in a while, the positive elements prevail here.
Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) is a small time poker player in New York 
City. He sits with the best in the world, everyone from "grinders," 
those who make a living at the poker table, to Russian mobsters that are 
connected all the way up. His best friend, and long time partner, is 
incarcerated for credit card fraud. His social life has been steady 
lately, as he lives with his girlfriend outside of the law school campus 
that he attends. His main focus is his studies, and he has the ability 
to be one of the best lawyers in his class.
Everything in Mike McDermott's life is a constant, stable, chain link. 
Even his gambling at the poker table is a calculated risk. So what 
happens when he has a hand of poker that goes wrong? He quits the game, 
hoping not to throw off the balance of his life. But everything in his 
life will change when his best friend, Lester "Worm" Murphy (Edward 
Norton) is released from prison, and finds himself $25,000 in debt to 
the Russian mob. Choices are limited, and being a lifelong friend, Mike 
takes the game back, in an attempt to come up with the cash to bail his 
best pal out. The catch: A chain link fence is only as strong as the 
weakest link.
Rounders is not just a movie about the glories of poker, it is about a 
person finding himself, and what he really is. It is not a collection of 
explanations of rules, or wagering policies, but rather a complex 
character study. The unique thread of this study is that McDermott is 
the only vulnerable character in the film, in the sense that everyone 
else has already achieved a rhythm in their life and discovered who they 
really are.
It is very rare that a group of actors with as much recognition as this 
cast will assemble for a film, and all turn out four star performances. 
However, that does occur here. Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Martin Landau, 
John Turturro and Gretchen Mole are all excellent in their parts. The 
chemistry seems to work so well since they all portray vastly different 
characters, one of the advantages that the vastly rich script provides 
for.
And yet this wonderful film comes with one major caveat that adds a 
negative side to this work that is nearly equivalent to the positive, 
but thankfully not entirely. If you do not know how to play several 
types of poker or at least understand the rules of the games, you will 
be utterly bored for 120 minutes. Despite the successful attempt to lure 
the film away from cards to character development, there is still a 
heavy emphasis put on cards and the assumption that all viewers already 
know the rules of the games.
The bottom line when you look at Rounders is that when all has been said 
and done, a lot more ends up said then done. Does this takeaway from a 
potentially great film? Somewhat. Is the aforementioned caveat to the 
film's incredible entertainment value a major loss? Well, not 
necessarily. For some viewers, especially those experienced in the field 
of card games, it only adds to the most enjoyable experience. And yet, 
for those who are not as knowledgeable, this film can seem like an 
eternity at times, and that costs it most of, if not all of it's 
value. So, I am going to compromise

Author
Michael Dequina
Rounder:  1. A dissolute or rakish person, according to Webster's
Dictionary.  2. A hustler, according to World Champion poker player Johnny
Chan.
_Rounders_: John Dahl's engrossing drama, a never-less-than fascinating
cinematic window peeking into the world of high-stakes poker lurking in New
York's underground.
David Levien and Brian Koppelman's central story does a more than
adequate, if mechanical, job of taking the audience into its seedy milieu.
After losing a hard-won $31,000 in a single game, expert card player and
law student Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) swears off poker at the behest of
his classmate and live-in girlfriend Jo (Gretchen Mol).  But, to paraphrase
_The_Godfather_Part_III_, just when Mike thought he was out, Worm pulls him
back in--Worm being Mike's old friend (Edward Norton), who, soon after his
release from prison, lures Mike back into being a "rounder."
I had two key quibbles with Levien and Koppelman's script, one being the
contrived dynamics of Mike-Worm relationship.  Worm is clearly no good,
getting Mike into all sorts of trouble, yet Mike continues to stand by and
cover for him.  Perhaps Mike is simply loyal to his friends, but if Mike
truly is as smart as he's made out to be, he would see Worm for the
complete loser that he is.  Nonetheless, Damon and Norton's strong rapport
make it somewhat easier to believe.  No such rapport is present to solve my
second problem, which is the unnecessary love story between Mike and Jo,
vapidly played by current Hollywood "It Girl" Mol.  There is not one scene
that establishes their relationship prior to the inevitable strain cause by
his return to poker.  Their first scene together has her asleep in bed
while he heads out, and not too long after that she's arguing with him
about his poker outings.  How is it possible to have an emotional
investment in their romance?
What makes a ticket to _Rounders_ a wise monetary investment for
moviegoers is its fascinating look at the underground poker world.  While
they falter in the aforementioned dramatic areas, Levien and Koppelman make
up for it with their attention to detail.  They have an acute understanding
of the game and this world, making extensive use of insider vernacular,
which lends the film an air of authenticity.  In fact, so heavy is its use
that the press notes include a nearly four-page glossary of poker terms.
This is not to say, however, that those without press notes will be
scratching their heads.  The writers' great accomplishment is making the
language accessible to poker neophytes, who will be able to easily
understand the insider dialogue through context.  A big help is Mike's
efficient voiceover narration, which delivers crucial exposition on the
game of poker quickly and clearly.
The card game subject matter may seem to be a bit of a stretch for
director Dahl, who has made his name with neo-noirs (_Red_Rock_West_ ,
_The_Last_Seduction_).  But his noir-bred gift for creating an atmosphere
of mystery and suspense makes for some tense and exciting poker matches.
The air of mystery also comes through in a few memorable characters, such
as Joey Knish (John Turturro), a seasoned poker player who sometimes
advises Mike; Petra (Famke Janssen), the sultry head of the Chesterfields
poker club; and, most notably, Russian poker master Teddy KGB (an
effectively hammy John Malkovich), to whom Mike loses his $31,000 in the
film's opening.
After watching large sums of money being won and (mostly) lost in
_Rounders_, it is doubtful that any moviegoer will be eager to gain entry
into some high-stakes card games; as Mike says in the film, poker is not a
game of luck, but of skill.  Similarly, neither is filmmaking, and it is
the filmmakers' skill that makes _Rounders_ a worthwhile entertainment.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Mike used to hide wads of cash all over the apartment he shares 
with his disapproving girlfriend (Gretchen Mol).  Like an alcoholic who 
has to have his hidden bottles to quench his drinking habit, he needed 
the greenbacks to support his gambling obsession.  As a guy who watches 
tapes again and again of the 1988 World Series of Poker, he sees himself 
as skillful rather than lucky.  He thinks he's invincible, but he's 
retired from poker.
     Now driving a delivery truck to pay for his law school tuition, he 
no longer frequents the tables with his fellow "rounders," i.e., people 
who gamble with those round chips.
     But like most alcoholics, his abstinence doesn't last long.
     GOOD WILL HUNTING's Academy Award nominee Matt Damon plays Mike as 
a smart guy who is convinced he has learned enough to join the 
poker-playing elite.  Mike is a pensive guy who can read a player's hand 
in a heartbeat by observing every nuance of the other player's 
expressions.
     In complete contrast, his buddy from high school, Worm, has just 
gotten out of prison - he was incarcerated for "distributing" credit 
cards.  Worm is a great "mechanic" at cards, but his judgement isn't as 
well developed as his cheating skills, which gets him into no end of 
trouble.  Played as a time bomb on a short fuse by PRIMAL FEAR's Academy 
Award nominee Edward Norton, he is as boisterous and unpredictable as 
Mike is silently calculating.
     John Dahl, director of the brilliant THE LAST SEDUCTION, takes a 
parsimonious and precise approach to his direction of ROUNDERS.  Scenes 
are staged for dramatic impact without requiring the actors to push the 
emotional envelope.
     The script by first-time screenwriters David Levien and Brian 
Koppelman takes a formula story and turns many of the rules upside down.  
The audience suspects that the movie may end in a big game, but the 
movie seems to be in no rush getting to it.  What the film becomes is an 
atmospheric character study of the world of gambling.  The script's 
sporadic humor bursts out periodically to shatter the story's more 
somber rhythms.  Mike speaks in frequent, rich narration to provide just 
enough explanation about the game to clear up some of its mysteries and 
to explain his character's motivations.  "You don't hear much about guys 
who take their shot and miss," he reflects in his most introspective 
moment.
     The ensemble cast is well chosen and developed to maximum 
advantage.  John Turturro plays a hardworking gambling professional who 
has alimony and child support to pay so he doesn't take chances.  He's 
more interested in paying living expenses than making the big score or 
becoming famous, which is a polar opposite to Mike's approach.  As 
Mike's supportive professor, Martin Landau provides Mike some key 
insights on life.  The professor, descended from a long line of rabbis, 
confides that he chose the law when he realized that he didn't believe 
in God.  In the best supporting role, a tackily dressed John Malkovich 
in his best performance in years, is the king of New York's card players 
and an ex-KGB agent.  Malkovich has an over-the-top accent that is 
nothing short of hilarious.
     ROUNDERS has a well-chosen name for more reasons than one.  An 
extremely well rounded film, it works as well in the small moments as 
well as the big ones.  Although the conclusion is satisfying and well 
developed, the journey itself is the reward.
     ROUNDERS runs 1:58.  It is rated R for some sex, nudity, profanity, 
and drug usage and would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Brundage
Rounders has a good poker face, but a light two pair behind it.
A review of Rounders by James Brundage
Clichés. They exist in our everyday lives in the form of platitudes and in
our everyday situations in the form of idiosyncratic events. In movies,
clichés exist simply as cliches. The single word covers whatever we've seen
before, or rather seen before so many times its trite. I guess my definition
of cliché, however, is warped by how many movies I've seen.
To any normal viewer walking into Rounders, they'll come out with a smile on
their face. They may come out knowing more about poker, too. They also will
come out with a slightly funny look on their face because of the highly
technical talk and barrage of New York City slang. A good example is the
title, which, for all people who are probably wondering what on earth it
means, a rounder is street slang for a card shark good enough to make it his
or her living.
But then comes the movie buff. The movie buff, he'll look at the film and
he'll see right through it like an actual Rounder reading a player's hand
without looking at it. He'll see what lurks behind the sharp, well-acting
eyes of such stars as Matt Damon, (Good Will Hunting, Saving Private Ryan)
Edward Nortan (The People vs. Larry Flynt), John Malkovich (In the Line of
Fire) , who, don't get me wrong, did great jobs in their part. He'll hear
the lines that seem so average. He'll spend his two odd hours enjoying the
movie for the poker, but not for the film itself.
It's not that the film is bad. It's a two pair. But, problem is, it had to
go down charted waters to go into the uncharted ones. It's enjoyable. It's
fun. You may come out feeling like you won, you may come out feeling like
you lost. I guess the point is this : seeing Rounders is like playing poker.
If you only play part of the time, you'll have fun. If you're a pro, it's
simply taking care of business.

Author
Steve Kong
If Martha Stewart were to make Rounders, here's how she would do it. She
would take one serving of the movie Rocky. From that she'd take out
Sylvester Stalone, not cute enough for her. She'd also take out the boxing,
too violent for her. Then she'd add Matt Damon in place of Sylvester
Stalone, cute to her. Also she'd change boxing to poker. To make the film a
bit more attractive, we add some sugar and spice, Famke Janssen (GoldenEye)
and newcomer Gretchen Mol. Stir until there are no lumps, bake for two
hours, take out of the oven and let cool for another ten minutes.
Rounders, though it doesn't seem like it at first, is a typical sports
film. The protagonist, Mike McDermott (Damon), opens the film losing
everything he has to a master poker player, Teddy KGB (John Malkovich). He
then falls into a state of acceptance that what he'd done was all wrong.
That is, until some external force, this time a character named Worm
(Edward Norton), brings the protagonist back into the fringes of the sport.
In Rounders, it's poker, where he must go through an uphill battle to try
to regain his confidence in the sport. And in a typical sports film, in
order for the protagonist to regain his confidence he needs to face the
person he lost it all to in the beginning of the film.
Rounders shows us where real poker is played. Real poker is not played in
the glitzy casinos. No, real poker is played in smoky black rooms. Real
poker players can figure out what the other players's hands are doing just
by watching their reaction as they get their cards. Real poker is a game
where you can lose everything you have in a hand.
As formulaic as Rounders sounds, it's quite a good character study of the
two main characters, McDermott and Worm. McDermott is the guy who thinks
that he's escaped the draw and glitter of poker but really hasn't. Worm is
the risk-taking self-destructive character who could win it all straight,
but still cheats to win just for the thrill.
Damon, who seems almost typecast as the "smart normal guy" plays McDermott
not too differently than he did with Will Hunting (Good Will Hunting).
Which is not a bad thing, especially for Rounders. We feel for McDermott as
he gets dragged deeper and deeper into the underground poker rooms.
Norton, who was brilliant in Primal Fear, turns up another great
performance in Rounders. He plays his character Worm as an unpredictable,
self-loving, and self-destructive person who will risk even his life for a
thrill.
Newcomer Gretchen Mol isn't given much to do. She gets relegated to the
role of the whiny girlfriend who lives in a boring - and unneeded -
melodramatic subplot. Also the beautiful Famke Janssen is also given
nothing to do but to smile and walk around in alluring dresses.
Worth mentioning is John Malkovich as Teddy KGB. Malkovich is just fun to
watch. His Teddy KGB likes to eat Oreo cookies, slowly chewing on them and
enjoying the cookies. Malkovich, like his Teddy KGB, likes to use his
Russian accent. He takes his Russian accent and slowly chews on it and
enjoys it. Malkovich steals the screen.
Director John Dahl keeps Rounders from sliding into boring seriousness by
slipping in some funny moments throughout the film. The humor keeps the
film moving. I loved how the poker players hit the casinos and play against
unsuspecting tourists. At the casinos, none of them are playing as allies,
but they still end up taking money from the tourists like candy from a baby.
The ending to Rounders is not hard to guess, especially given what kind of
film Rounders is. And it is the predictability of the film that makes it a
bit hard to sit through its running time. I wish the writers and film
makers would have taken a chance, a risk, like the poker players, and put
in a ending worthy of the film. I recommend Rounders if you have a spare
two hours to spend.

Author
Berge Garabedian
More reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
John Dahl crafts a poker tale based on a script by first time writers
David Levien and Brian Kopelman. Dahl has previously managed to create
three moody mystery films, including one of my all-time favourites, RED
ROCK WEST (8/10), along with THE LAST SEDUCTION (7.5/10) and
UNFORGETTABLE (7/10).
PLOT:
Poker junkie Mike (Damon) finally goes straight after losing $30,000 in
a life-changing poker match. Soon thereafter, he concentrates on law
school with his straight-as-an-arrow girlfriend, and tries to avoid all
card-game temptations. That is, until his good friend Worm (Norton)
gets out of prison, runs into some major gambling debts, and morally
challenges Mike into returning to his good old days of "rounding".
CRITIQUE:
Entertaining, believable, if slightly repetitive, behind the scenes
look at the high-stakes game of New York underground poker through the
eyes of one fresh-faced kid with a dream (surprise, it's Matt Damon!),
and his brother-like friend, Worm, whose integrity for the game is
essentially non-existent. This movie was never boring for me, was
filmed in just the right amount of time, and did maintain an extreme
air of authenticity throughout. Then again, I'm no card shark, so I
would have no idea if even half the jargon used in the film was real
anyway ("We might have to raise the juice on those rounders". Huh?)
The acting was uneven with Norton delivering another great performance
with his sleazy rendition of the morally-bankrupt Worm, while Damon,
well, played Matt Damon pretty well. John Turtorro's character seemed
highly underdeveloped (seems like some scenes with him might've been
cut out), as well as Gretchen Mol's standard girlfriend repartee (no
"Standing by your man" for this woman!), which didn't add much to the
story. John Malkovich also went over the top and came back, with his
highly carucaturized rendition of a Russian card player. The mood and
soundtrack of the film was nicely set by Dahl, while the obligatory
girlfriend sub-plot line just reminded me of the sour romance plot-line
in DONNIE BRASCO (8/10) from 1997 (in which Gretchen Mol also appeared
as Sonny's (Michael Madsen) girlfriend.)
Having said that, the film did manage to show us everything you ever
wanted to know about the game of poker and more (I don't remember
seeing a better poker movie in my life, but then again, I don't
remember seeing many poker movies in my life.), and a greater insight
into the mind of an addict (Any type of addict, if you really think
about it.) and the price one could pay for extreme loyalty. I would
recommend this film to all those who love the game of poker, and are
interested in exploring the life themes of addiction and loyalty. Other
than that, the film offers little else in the romance and/or suspense
factors, so if that's what you're interested in, forget this puppy and
go rent yourself another great Dahl movie: THE LAST SEDUCTION with an
Oscar-worthy performance by Linda Fiorentino as the cold, manipulative
sex-pot with a plan. Either way, you're going to have an interesting
evening.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Matt Damon's full name is Matthew Paige Damon. Matt's first film role
was a one-line part in 1988's MYSTIC PIZZA. Matt co-wrote the
screenplay for 1997's GOOD WILL HUNTING (7.5/10) with best friend,
buddy-boy Ben Affleck, for which the duo received an Academy Award for
Best Original Screenplay. Matt dropped 40 pounds for his role in
COURAGE UNDER FIRE, and received the sum of US$600,000 for his role in
ROUNDERS.
Screenwriter Koppelman came up with the idea for the script when he
heard about a friend of a friend who made more money as a "rounder" - a
poker hustler - than from his day job on Wall Street. He met the guy on
a street corner in Manhattan, they went down to one of the clubs, where
Koppelman, a former artist-and-repertoire scout for a record company,
was immediately hooked by the exotic environment. When he got home at
2:30 in the morning, he called old friend Levien and told him about
this great movie idea. Hence, the screenplay to ROUNDERS.
Both stars Damon and Norton are born in the state of Massachusetts, and
attended Ivy League colleges (Harvard for Damon, Yale for Norton.)
Director John Dahl co-wrote the screenplay to RED ROCK WEST with his
brother Rick Dahl. 
