Title
Review for Dead Pool, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
[also a couple of corrections/additions to the SIFF reviews at the end.
-Moderator]
     Before seeing THE DEAD POOL yesterday, I watched the original DIRTY HARRY
on CBS last Friday.  I enjoy that film a good deal (and also MAGNUM FORCE);
while it's not exactly an even-handed crime drama, it sets the standards for a
character who's gone on for a hell of a long, popular run.  In the early Dirty
Harry films, San Francisco was always portrayed as a place to stay the hell
away from because of those long-haired crazies, some of whom were homicidal
maniacs -- you can always tell these guys because a) they giggle hysterically
all the time and b) Harry says something pithy before slamming a bullet into
their forehead.  And Harry's always portrayed as one of the last few bastions
between Decent Folk and The Crazies, and it's a thankless job....  I believe
that some of my older relatives in Iowa got their ideas of San Francisco (and
California in general) from Clint Eastwood movies.
     The last couple of "Harry" films, however, have spent a lot of time
parodying that image (apparently not well enough, though, since Eastwood got
elected in the Carmel mayoral race -- watching John Vernon ask him for advice
in DIRTY HARRY becomes all the more funny).  Having his dog get blown away in
the last film was taking the "dead partner" bit about as far as it would
stretch, and you felt as if the formula had gotten so re-used that they were
playing part of it for laughs.  Funny, but I missed some of the character and
eccentricities that made Harry such an interesting cop in the first movie -- all
I can remember about the film preceding THE DEAD POOL is that Harry's tag line
is "Make my day."  It's outlasted almost all remembrances of the film itself.
     THE DEAD POOL starts out with several efforts to get out of the rut, and
most of them work pretty well.  Harry has just put a big-time gangster in San
Quentin, and two things have come of it.  One are numerous attempts on Harry's
life by the gangster's associates, which of course he's used to.  What he's NOT
used to is being in the good graces of the department and the public due to his
work, and he has something to say about attempts by the police PR man to make
him a celebrity.  We also have a series of murders going on among San Francisco
movie people, which continues to twist in the film's general "news and hype"
theme.  This is all done pretty well.
     About halfway through the film, though, things begin to return to the
self-spoofing stage, though THE DEAD POOL is more subtle about it than the
previous Harry films.  Also, the city is portrayed in a less gritty manner than
in some of the early films.  Except for kids robbing Chinese restaurants, it
looks like a paradise to me.  The ending is straight formula Harry, and for
that it was enjoyable, but I could have asked for watching the character go
somewhere.
     MISC: There's a great spoof of San Francisco chase scenes towards the end.
Harry's methods are still not very legal, though some of them are
understandable (strikes me that if a guy unloads a machine gun into your car
(with you in it), you can't be faulted too much to shooting him in the back as
he runs away).  The romantic interest in THE DEAD POOL looks like a more
elegant version of Sondra Locke.  I liked his new partner, who can out-one-line
Eastwood at times.
     Basically, worth $4.50 or $5 if you like Harry, or limited crime dramas in
general.  If you an informal Harry-watcher, wait for it to hit the discount
houses.  
Several people have pointed out two mistakes I made in the Seattle
International Film Festivals I wrote: 
     First, that was Kristy McNicol in TWO MOON JUNCTION, not Jodie Foster.
Sorry, it wasn't in the credits of the SIFF program, and I got mixed up and put
Foster's name down.  Lord knows why I would get the two mixed up....  Anyway,
it's a stupid movie, you *still* don't want to see it....
     Secondly, in the Hollywood and the Code retrospective of BORN TO BE BAD, I
mistakenly put down Henry Travers as the obnoxious child actor who played
Loretta Young's kid.  Several people pointed out that Travers was a older,
pleasant character actor who was a Hollywood staple; these days, he's best
known as Clarence the Angel in IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE.  I got the name mixed up
-- I forgot that in the thirties, child actors got much lower billing than they
do nowadays (unless their name was Shirley Temple), and since Travers was
listed below Grant's name, I expected that was the kid's name (he's on-screen a
lot).  Travers plays a kindly old bookstore owner who is always trying to keep
Loretta Young on the path of virtue.  Good luck!
     One last addendum to the festival: The Market Theater, which closed down a
few weeks ago, has been picked up by the Cineplex Odeon chain of theaters, and
is currently showing DOMINICK AND EUGENE.  I can only hope that, since DOMINICK
AND EUGENE is the kind of film the Market always enjoyed showing, that Ann
Browder and company are still in charge; and maybe -- just maybe -- they can
wangle Cineplex Odeon into using the Market for next year's festival.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  There is a slightly lighter touch to
     the new "Dirty Harry" film, but otherwise it is the strict
     "Dirty Harry" formula, including lots of action and
     impossible escapes.  Eastwood takes potshots at the bad guys,
     TV news, and horror movies.  Rating: +1.
     Dirty Harry is back in THE DEAD POOL.  I don't have to tell you what
kind of film it is.  There just isn't a whole lot of variation from one
"Dirty Harry" film to the next.  There are car chases, there are explosions,
there is a violent murderer, there are machine gunnings.  (Hey, an aside
here.  At one point thugs go after Harry with machine guns.  When the
machine guns hit a car door they make a nice regular perforation; when they
hit a windshield they make holes in a random pattern as if from single-shot
guns, and even with a machine gun, the thugs can't seem to hit Harry.  They
swiss-cheese his car and Harry steps out without a scratch.  I guess that
too is a hallmark of a "Dirty Harry" film.)  In fact, the only thing really
new is the jokes.  And one of the best of these is borrowed from from
GARDENS OF STONE.
     This time around the plot involves a convicted Mafioso who has it in
for Harry, an attractive TV news reporter, and the murder of a rock star on
the set of the new ripoff film of a cult horror film director (uh, he calls
it an "homage"), Before it is over the film will take pot shots at the
invulnerability of Mafiosi and the standards of TV news reporting, but it
will save its biggest salvo for how nasty and violent horror films are.  (I
am sure that Mr. Eastwood, sensitive soul that he is, would never allow
violence to creep into one of his films.)  We also see three people blown up
in explosions, two people carved with knives, and one extremely hypocritical
actor playing the lead.
     It is good to see Evan C. Kim getting a major role as Harry's new
partner.  Kim did a hilarious imitation of Bruce Lee in KENTUCKY FRIED MOVIE
and in the interim I remember him only in HOLLYWOOD VICE SQUAD.  Beyond that
there is some creativity in THE DEAD POOL, including the only car chase I
have really enjoyed since FOUL PLAY (in spite of the fact that it makes
little sense), some wildly improbable escapes for Harry and a new "mean
line" to replace "Make my day."  All in all, it is a "new 'Dirty Harry'
film," even if that is an oxymoron.  Rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
