Title
Review for General, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Shane Burridge
John Boorman deservedly won the Best Director at Cannes in 1998 for this 
biopic of Irish criminal Martin Cahill (who was assassinated by the IRA four 
years previously).  It is one of his finest works, a film that manages to 
look both as the opus of a mature film-maker and the early work of a 
talented new arrival.  THE GENERAL is wonderfully assured and without the 
unevenness of earlier Boorman works, yet also appears an apotheosis of all 
that went before it:  we can see the black-and-white spirited 60s of CATCH 
US IF YOU CAN, another great performance from Jon Voight (DELIVERANCE), the 
criminal underworld of POINT BLANK, the nostalgia of HOPE AND GLORY, and the 
man-as-myth themes of EXCALIBUR and ZARDOZ.  Throw in a few giant locusts 
and you'd be able to pull EXORCIST II out of the hat as well (Boorman does 
make at least one in-joke by including a brief shot of a 'Squeal like a Pig' 
t-shirt that cites the most famous line from DELIVERANCE).
THE GENERAL scores on many levels - the acting is terrific (Brendan Gleeson 
makes the role entirely his own, and Voight's accent is faultless), the 
story engaging, and the viewpoint always open.  Boorman doesn't judge 
Cahill, although he does get us to admire his resourcefulness.  It's hard 
not to like him - unlike most other crime lords he does not create a 
dangerous heirarchy that places him significantly at the top.  True, he is 
the brains of his operation, but his shambolic, hangdog manner keep him in 
at grass roots level with the rest of his boys.  Even when resorting to 
thuggery (when one of the gang appears to have cheated the others), his 
organization doesn't appear as sadistic as others we have seen on screen.  
Really, Cahill is the antithesis of the gangster image popularised by films 
such as GODFATHER and CASINO.  Rather than grandstand in the manner of a 
mafia Don, Cahill shuffles about obscured by rainwear; he avoids eye contact 
and speaks quietly; his hand is always fluttering near his face, trying to 
hide it.  His rogueishness could almost win us over entirely if we were not 
reminded (by Voight's character) that his antics have lost several honest 
people their jobs and have terrified people inside their homes.  Cahill 
lives an extraordinary life but is determined to keep his lifestyle as 
'normal' as possible - all he wants is a nice house in a nice area for his 
family (in the meantime, he carries on what is seen as just a 'normal' 
affair with his sister-in-law!).  We hardly notice the conflict because the 
rest of the country is in turmoil anyway - by the time Cahill, the police, 
and the IRA are all on opposing sides, we've lost hope for anything ever 
attaining normality.  Maybe that's why one of the more memorable moments in 
THE GENERAL is an understated housebreaking scene, in which Cahill moves 
from room to room while a Van Morrison song plays quietly and magically on 
the soundtrack.  It's a sweet, distinctive cinema moment; we can only hope 
that Boorman will be bringing us more.


Author
Steve Rhodes
"Robin Hood is it, you scumbag?" Inspector Ned Kenny asks sarcastically
of his prisoner, Martin Cahill, a real-life Irish criminal known by the
sobriquet of "the General."  The General was a modern day folk hero to
Dubliners in the 1980s and early 1990s.  He robbed from the rich, and,
although he didn't give to the poor, he did improve the economic status
of his own large family -- he had two live-in girlfriends, who were
sisters, and had children by both.
THE GENERAL's writer and director John Boorman, Oscar nominee for
DELIVERANCE, creates an astonishing and captivating portrait of an
iconoclastic criminal.  Brendan Gleeson from Braveheart gives a
marvelous and revealing performance as the General.
With thin, stringy hair, a ruddy complexion and a belly that looks like
it never met a pub it didn't love, the General doesn't look like
anybody's idea of a hero.  Fond of wearing self-mocking T-shirts
embossed with pigs and self-effacing slogans, he doesn't appear to take
his fame seriously.  With his girth, he's the least likely guy to sneak
around occupied houses as a cat burglar, but that's exactly what he does
until he eventually moves upscale, robbing expensive jewelry stores.
(One job alone causes 100 working-class stiffs to lose their jobs when
the, presumably uninsured, company goes under.  The morally-challenged
General expresses no remorse.)
The story opens with Martin's murder by the IRA and then cuts back to
the beginning of his life of crime.  Eamonn Owens from THE BUTCHER BOY
has the small part of Martin as a child.
Gleeson's mannerisms for Martin capture perfectly the character's futile
attempts to hide his identity.  Using his meaty hands, Martin spends
most of his time outdoors trying to cover his face, even though his
easily recognizable physique belies this crude cover-up.  Even during
interrogations, he hides his face, letting only his eyes peak out.
Looking like a country bumpkin, Martin, a criminal mastermind,
constantly surprises with intelligent and ingenious ideas for his
larcenous schemes.  When the police finally bring him to trial, his
shenanigans to disrupt and destroy the trial are both simple and clever.
He is the type of crook who is always several steps ahead of the law
with a specialty for devising foolproof alibis.
The supporting cast, including Adrian Dunbar as Martin's right-hand man,
Noel Curley, and Jon Voight as Inspector Kenny, are all well chosen, but
the movie excels on the strength of Boorman's crisp direction and the
complex and likable acting by Gleeson.  That the General was a rogue is
never left to question, but the movie makes it easy to understand how
such people can, nevertheless, earn the public's adulation.  With
several police officers following him in full view wherever he went, the
General still managed to earn a handsome living by stealing other
people's treasures.
Understanding what the director was trying to accomplish can perhaps
best be seen in the medium of the presentation.  Boorman chose to shoot
the movie in black and white.  Why?  Because, according to the press
kit, he felt that color prettifies and romanticizes.  He wanted none of
that.  The result is a fascinating and revealing portrait of a real and
complex character, one whom you'll love even though you know you
shouldn't.  And in the process you get a better appreciation for what
makes people admire the unadmirable.
THE GENERAL runs 2:09.  It is rated R for some violence and profanity
and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom
 The General (1998) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Brendan Gleeson and Jon
Voight. Directed by John Boorman
 John Boorman's The General is an interesting, yet frustrating, look at the
life of Martin Cahill, a notorious Dublin criminal.
 Shot almost documentary-style in black and white, Boorman's film is a
fascinating look at a man who held the basic institutions of society  the
law, the church  in contempt, and used his cunning and ferocity to live
life on his own savage terms.
 Cahill, nicknamed "The General," was a legend in Ireland during his brutal
life, yet very few people could identify him. Cahill developed a habit of
continually obscuring his face, thus making it difficult for anyone to get
a clear picture of him.
And it seems, in a sense, Boorman was confronted with that same problem.
For while he shows the brazen and clever ways Cahill planned and committed
his various crimes, the director seems unable to get under his subject's
skin.
 Boorman masterfully displays Cahill's rage and contempt, his bravado and
cleverness, but he falls short in showing what sparked it.
 True, we get early scenes of a young Cahill in a boy's detention home,
where he fights off the sexual advances of a priest, and we learn he spent
most of his early life in prison.
 Yet while this may be a simplistic approach to explaining his contempt for
authority and society, it does not answer the big question: How and where
did Cahill develop the wiliness to plan such perfect crimes as well as
outwit the police for nearly two decades?
 As you watch The General, you get the sense that Boorman is valiantly
attempting to paint a complete picture of Cahill, yet his brush continually
misses strokes.
 For example, for years Cahill lived in a menage a trois with his wife and
her sister, and had several children by both. No explanation for this odd
arrangement is offered.
 As Cahill, Brendan Gleeson (best known to American audiences as Mel
Gibson's friend, Hamish, in the actor's Oscar-winning Braveheart) gives a
compelling performance.
 He creates a man of contradictions  a loving husband and father at his
homes, but a brutal, conniving, merciless thug on the outside.
 Gleeson's Cahill is a deadly charmer.
 Jon Voight seems wasted as the police inspector who's obsessed with
bringing Cahill to justice. There is nothing particularly memorable about
his performance.
 At a bit over two hours, The General seems to lapse during some sequences.
Also, the Irish accents are a bit hard to understand, and Cahill's habit of
covering his face and talking through his hands makes comprehending what he
is saying even more difficult at times.
 Despite these obstacles, The General is an interesting look at a unusual
individual. It's a movie Boorman fans  used to his artistic visions in such
films as Excalibur and The Emerald Forest  may not find totally satisfying.
But the force of Cahill's personality draws you to the screen and rivets
your attention.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Greg King
In recent years, director John Boorman's career has not
achieved the dizzy heights of either Point Blank or Deliverance.
However, his latest film is a well researched if slightly quirky
biopic of colourful Irish thief Martin Cahill, and heralds something
of a return to form for Boorman.  His assured and stylish direction
earned him the top prize at last year's Cannes Film Festival.
According to the production notes, the real Cahill once broke
into Boorman's home and stole, among other items, the gold record he
had been awarded for Duelling Banjo's, the theme from Deliverance.
Despite this, Boorman obviously has a lot of sympathy for Cahill.  He
paints him as something of a loveable larrikin, a kind of modern day
Irish Robin Hood, despite some of the more vicious acts he commits
along the way (crucifying one of his gang members on a billiard table,
for example).  The General is something of a labour of love for
Boorman, who has obviously spent plenty of time researching the life
and times of this colourful gangster.
This fascinating and unusually entertaining biopic traces
Cahill's life, from his early beginnings as a teenage thief in the
back streets of Hollyfield, a slum outside Dublin, through to his
assassination by the IRA in 1994.  Cahill earned the sobriquet of the
general for the way he commanded the loyalty of his small band of
thieves, and for the way in which he continually thumbed his nose at
the authorities.  Even though the police had him under blanket
surveillance, Cahill was often able to give them the slip and carry
out his cheeky crimes.  Cahill also had a cosy but unconventional
domestic arrangement in which he lived with his wife and her sister,
and even fathered children by both women.  Cahill had little time for
the divisive and violent politics of Ireland.  He was basically a
crook who robbed from the rich, but it was an art robbery that
ultimately proved his undoing.
Brendan Gleeson (from the recent I Went Down, etc) apparently
bears a resemblance to the real Cahill, and he gives a wonderfully
boisterous and enjoyable performance, and makes the most of his
biggest and best role yet.  He beautifully catches the inherent
contradictions in Cahill's character, lending an outrageous air of
irreverence to this off beat and at times acerbic portrait.  Jon
Voight also has many fine moments here as the weary police inspector
Kenny, increasingly frustrated at his impotence in bringing Cahill to
justice.
Seamus Deasy's cool black and white cinematography gives the
film something of a documentary feel, and also captures the look and
feel of those gritty British crime dramas of the '60's.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Whenever I see a movie like "The Godfather," brimming
with bad guys and bustling with rackets, I think: "These fellas
are making big bucks, but they're also taking big risks.  They
get executed by their own kind, shot up by the cops, and sent
up the river for life without parole. If they manage to survive to
the age of 70, what have their done with their millions of ill-
gotten lucre?  They don't travel, they don't eat out much, their
houses are ordinary (though they may have thousand-dollar
suits), their cars are affordable by ordinary Joes, and what's
more they have to pay a good part of their earnings to
bodyguards and alarm systems and police payoffs."  Then I
realize. These characters are not in it for the money but for
the thrills, the discharge of power, the fun of thumbing their
nose at society's rules, and most of all for the high they get
for stepping back into the past and acting like tribal chieftans. 
So it was with Martin Cahill, the most infamous Irish criminal
of the 1980s.  Sit engrossed through John Boorman's new
movie, "The General," and you get the impression that Cahill
robbed, severely disciplined his band of punks, and lived
happily with two "wives," to display his contempt, his disgust,
his feral hatred of society's institutions.  In Boorman's two
hour and nine-minute work, filmed in black-and-white to
cement the mythic, atavistic nature of the story, Cahill
(Brendan Gleason) is nothing if not inflamed by the Dublin
establishment: the Church, the police, the pols.  He hates
institutions so much that he has contempt even for the fellow
Catholics in the IRA which he looks upon--for its radicalism--
as nothing less than another rigid organization.  Never mind
that he ran an association himself, a group of eight or ten
cohorts whose passion is provoked more for the punts than
the veneration.  In splashing the story of this slippery
individual--who relied on clever counselors and counterfeit
alibis to avoid being on the run--Boorman instinctively
conveys a portrait of a cross-section of Irish society which
looked upon Cahill as a modern Robin Hood.  
  "The General"--which netted writer-director Boorman the
well-earned best-director's prize at the '98 Cannes Festival
before it took to rest of the film-festival circuit--begins with the
title character's execution at the hands of a lone member of
the IRA.  A flashback takes us to Cahill's boyhood (played by
"Butcher Boy" Eamon Owens) in a Dublin slum where he
helps support his family by stealing food, in one instance a
whole pig, to the cheers of his neighbors--who find time to
pelt the pursuing police with assorted missiles.  Apprehended
and sent to a Church-run reformatory, he succeeds in fending
off the sexual advances of a priest, and so appends the pious
to his inventory of hateful institutions.  When he is
thrown out of his housing by well-meaning urban renewal
people, though not after camping out in a desperate attempt
to stop the demolition, he acquires a distaste for the
government.  Thumbing his nose even at the institution of
marriage, he sets up a conjugal arrangement with Frances
(Maria Doyle Kennedy) and Frances' younger sister Tina
(Angeline Ball), whom he impregnates without acquiring a
scintilla of Frances' covetousness.  After a series of break-ins
to acquire gifts of trains and the like for his family, me moves
to the big time, he and his gang of amiable ruffians robbing
O'Connors carefully-guarded jewelry outlet of millions in
jewels and gold bars, then proceeding to carry away a
Vermeer worth twenty million punts.  ("I don't know much
about art," he muses, "but I know what I like.")  Though
awash in capital, he continues to live frugally, getting his kicks
from breaking into a home to threaten a woman about to
testify against him in court.
   If Boorman has a central focus it is with the series of
confrontations between Cahill and a police inspector
determined to bring him down, Ned Kenny (Jon Voight).  With
Kenny as Javert to Cahill's Jean Valjean, Boorman furthers
the criminal's reputation by tallying his ability to bring the tight-
lipped, socially-conscious policeman to Cahill's base level. 
While at an earlier time Kenny gives Cahill some avuncular
advice about getting a respectable job and moving out of his
"sewer" of a neigbhborhood, he ends by lashing out physically
against the man he has grown to despise utterly and
becomes tainted with the suspicion that he set Cahill up for
an IRA hit.
   While there is one spot of unequivocal violence in the
picture, when Cahill virtually crucifies a member of his gang
for allegedly stealing from the booty, Boorman fixes on Cahill
the man.  Not previously known for much depth of
psychological insight (his best-known film "Deliverance," also
featuring Jon Voight, stresses pure terror over cerebral
depths), Boorman has succeeded splendidly in interpreting a
criminal's disposition: Cahill's sense of humor which serves
him well in evading a police surveillance team, and
particularly his habit of covering his face with his hands when
surrounded by photographers, who seem never to get a clear
shot of him for their papers.
   Brendan Gleeson, who plays the arch-criminal, is well-
known in Ireland, less celebrated in the U.S.  He is not the
sort of actor that American studios would select for the role,
preferring glitzier figures like Antonio Banderas, Al Pacino and
Robert De Niro.  After all, Gleeson is short, plump and
baldish, a fellow who can be designated "the Irish Gerard
Depardieu," and perhaps because of this humanity is able to
enlist our sympathies.  Jon Voight, then, becomes the ideal
choice for his nemesis, his antithesis: a bourgeois police
officer intent on keeping his district neat, clean, orderly and
yes, bland.  "The General" is an original take on the crime
genre, photographed in black and white and cleverly edited to
underscore its title character's status as a legend in his time,
a man who pays homage to his country's roots as a land
governed not by impersonal, central forces but by the vigor of
Celtic tribes.

Author
Bill Chambers
After a screening of The General, I was approached by a journalist from
Ireland who told me how much his people loathed professional thief
Martin Cahill. Boorman's take on Cahill's life is sympathetic, but it
hardly glorifies the crook's existence. (The more powerful Cahill
becomes, the more he acts like a shut-in.) According to said journalist,
it might upset certain moviegoers in his homeland for its humane
treatment of Cahill, but after considering the film carefully, they'll
conclude the same thing he did: there just isn't any other way to tell
the story.
The picture opens with an innovative flashback technique: Cahill
(Gleeson) gets up in the morning, goes to his car, and before he can
pull out into the street, he is shot by a stranger-at which point the
images literally start moving in reverse; the bullet is ushered back
into the barrel of the gun, and we are transported to a time when Cahill
was a young lad (here portrayed ably The Butcher Boy's Eamonn Owens-talk
about type-casting) who robbed local markets to feed his hungry family.
Later, in a reformatory, a priest attempts to molest him-adolescent
Cahill defends himself, and is punished with slaps from the pious
pedophile. (For the rest of the film, whenever confronting figures of
authority, Cahill shields his face with his hands, skulking into a fetal
position as if trying to slide right out of his skin.)
Despite the constant threat of imprisonment from Police Inspector Ned
Kenny (Voight), Cahill does little to correct his rebellious ways. He is
married to the loving Francis (Kennedy) but openly carries on an affair
with her sister, Tina (Angeline Ball)-he even fathers a boy with her.
Meanwhile, he and his gang of affable hoods move from petty larceny to a
jewelry store heist and the theft of a priceless Vermeer painting. (His
innocent appreciation of art would disturb collectors, as he treats said
piece like a carnival poster.) Throughout, Cahill's disposition remains
the same: non-chalant, sometimes arrogant, but he never forgets his
roots. (A T-shirt adorned with cartoon pigs remains his preferred attire
even with millions in gold bricks at his disposal.)
The General was shot in black and white, and it's unforgiving in its
physical observation of these characters' craggy, lived-in faces. Seamus
Deasy's cinematography glamourizes Cahill and co. no more than Boorman's
script. Cahill was not Pretty Boy Floyd, after all; the possible key to
his adult behaviour is revealed when the townspeople applaud young
Martin's antics: here's a man who just wants to feel like a hero to a
community, no matter how small that community becomes. He fancies
himself a modern day Robin Hood-stealing from the rich but for the sake
of theatrics and not any sort of noble cause. Father to one, husband to
two, gang leader, and number one threat to Kenny's ego, Cahill was
ultimately just a son of a bitch who got carried away-few people had the
guts to rein him in. I grew to like Cahill the movie character as I
suspect I would grow to like many an outlaw in real life, because of his
conviction. Gleeson's performance is a marvel, the sort of seamless,
un-showy turn that goes largely unrewarded by the populace. By all
accounts, his impersonation of Cahill's ticks and mannerisms are
pinpoint accurate.
Deliverance aside, Boorman had until now not made a truly complete and
humane film. (Is it any coincidence that he and Voight, the star of
Deliverance, reunited for what might prove to be Boorman's best work?)
Perhaps all those years of editing Britain's "Projections" anthologies
have made him a more thoughtful filmmaker. Towards the end of the film,
Cahill and his son have the kind of moment many a Hollywood crime drama
wouldn't think to include-The General is like a pastiche of those bits
between killings that all too often hit the cutting room floor.

Author
James Sanford
 If Martin Scorsese had hailed from Ireland instead of New York, he
might have made a picture like "The General," a dazzling, frequently
hilarious crime story about Martin Cahill, a legendary figure in the
Irish underworld. Cahill, marvelously played by Brendan Gleeson, saw
himself as a modern-day Robin Hood who spirited away the valuables of
the wealthy and shared part of his take with his less-fortunate
neighbors. "My way of paying taxes, y'know?" he explains to one of his
cronies.
 But his busy schedule of thieving didn't get in the way of his family
life. He fathered children by both his wife Frances (Maria Doyle
Kennedy) and her sister Tina (Angeline Ball), an arrangement neither
woman had a problem with, according to the film. There are echoes of
HBO's superb series about gangsters in the suburbs, "The Sopranos," in
the way Martin manages to come home from his unsavory career and still
have the energy to throw a backyard birthday party or shop for racing
pigeons, another of his passions. Buying larger ticket items is a bit
more complex, however. When he decides to purchase a new house, Frances
has to remind him that realtors aren't likely to accept 80,000 pounds in
cash.
 Cahill's nemesis is police inspector Ned Kenny (Jon Voight), with whom
he maintains a prickly relationship that has undercurrents of grudging
mutual admiration. Voight, whose recent performances have ranged from
the flat-out bizarre ("Anaconda," "U-Turn") to underplayed ("Rosewood"),
finds the perfect key for Kenny, a beleaguered cop who calls Cahill a
"scooombug," yet seems on some level to enjoy the mind games the men
throw out at each other.
 "The General" was directed by John Boorman, whose films such as
"Deliverance" and "The Emerald Forest" are red-blooded examples of macho
cinema at its most virile. But though this is one of Boorman's lighter
works, it still has plenty of violence, colorful language and raging
testosterone. At one point, Cahill, suspecting an associate of
treachery, nails the man's hand to a snooker table, hoping to get a
confession. When the terrified guy still pleads his innocence, Cahill
relents, apologizes and even drives him to the emergency room.
 Not enough can be said about Gleeson's amazing characterization of
Cahill; did the Academy Award voters who handed the Best Actor Oscar to
Roberto Benigni's soppy Jerry Lewis impersonation bother to take a look
at this work? It's tremendous, full of witty little touches, such as the
way Cahill is constantly wandering through the streets with his face
hidden behind his hands, like a movie star caught by the paparazzi in an
indiscretion. Much of what Cahill does is morally reprehensible and even
shocking, and Boorman and Gleeson don't attempt to make him admirable.
By the same token, it's obvious they were fascinated with him and in
this vivid black comedy they manage to rope us into sharing their
obsession.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GENERAL, THE (director: John Boorman; cast:Brendan Gleeson (Martin
Cahill), Adrian Dunbar  (Noel Curley), Maria Doyle Kennedy (Frances
Cahill),Sean McGinley (Gary), Angeline Ball (Tina), Jon Voight (Ned
Kenny), Eanna MacLiam (Jimmy), Eamonn Owens (Cahill as a kid),
1998-Ireland)
This B/W film is based on the real-life criminal known affectionately by
his cohorts as, "The General," Martin Cahill (Brendan Gleeson). It
begins by him getting executed in front of his swanky house, by a lone
IRA member. The film immediately flashes back to his squalid birthplace,
showing him as a kid, played by The Butcher Boy's Eamonn Owens, as he
was growing up to be a criminal, sent to reform school and almost
molested and then beaten by a priest. It seems it was in his blood to be
bad. He grows up to despise anyone who isn't from his old neighborhood
or part of his gang. Priests are assigned the role of being pederasts,
which leaves Cahill with a bitter opinion of religion and any authority
figure for the rest of his life. The IRA and the Protestant Loyalists
are lumped together with all politicians as assholes. The police are
simply pigs. Voight plays the neighborhood cop who tried to befriend the
youngster, but was spurned by him. He is pictured as a straight but not
too swift cop; early on in Voight's career, he is doing his sworn duty
to kick the poor out of their homes, and as his career is shown moving
parallel to Cahill's, we see how he rises up the bureacratic ladder of
the police to become an inspector, until he is thought of by Cahill, to
be just as dirty as he is, a sort of alter-ego.
Cahill finds romance with Frances (Kennedy) and Tina (Ball), who happen
to be sisters, as he lives happily with both of them, raising kids and
supporting them with the loot he steals on his capers. He is a devilish
little fatty, certainly not looking the part of a big time hood, as he
loves to wear self-deprecating T- shirts with pigs and slogans on them,
he also makes a habit of trying to hide his face wherever he goes in
public or when the police interrogate him. I guess these character
quirks are supposed to make him somewhat appealing, or show that he has
some kind of psychological failings.
When we talk about Cahill, we are not talking about a Robin Hood, even
if that's what he fancies himself as; as he steals from the rich only,
but that is only to line his own pockets, and once in a while, he helps
out those from his old neighborhood. He does that mostly to gain favor
with his people, so that they don't rat him out. He is also shown as
being brutal, threatening court witnesses, and finding loopholes in the
law to get him off, anyway he can, no matter who he hurts. The film, to
its credit, did not make him out to be a good guy. But the story is
skewed in his favor, making everyone else who opposes him look like
suckers.
I think if you look objectively at this rogue, he is rotten to the core,
or as Voight more appropriately says, he's a scumbag. He shows no
feelings when he learns that 100 honest working stiffs are layed off
their job when the Jewelers he robs goes out of business because of the
robbery. He shows no feelings robbing houses and living off what he
steals. I wonder how many critics who raved about this film because of
Cahill's winsome mannerisms, would still like this character if he
robbed them. And that is the point of this slickly done, methodical
film, that makes it impossible for me to fall for the story, I just
don't care what happens to him. His life story bored me. I thought of
him robbing houses in a miner's helmet, being a smooth cat burglar, as
merely clever filmmaking, capturing what is sort of odd to watch, as
this fat guy bounces around and is so agile. It was great casting,
making Gleeson the lead. But I still find nothing in his story that
appeals to me about him. I was not impressed with his remorse after he
nailed one of his gang member's hands to a pool table, after he thought
that he was stealing from him. Cahill is just a scumbag, and Voight was
right. In fact, the film could have been more interesting if it was
about Voight. I found him to be the more fascinating character in the
story. Sometimes just being ordinary, hides so much more about a person,
and Voight seemed to have heavy things on his mind, that might have been
more interesting than following this dead-end, obvious tale.
The robberies he pulls off we have seen done countless times before on
film. So all the precision planning that goes into robbing the museum of
all its valuable paintings, and the chase scenes via car or scooter,
were all well done, but so what! This film's theme has been done too
many times for me to be carried away by such direction. I wanted
something else from this film, but I didn't get it. What I got was a
masterful performance, that I can't deny, from Gleeson, and a director
who can be magnificent in setting a playful confrontational tone with
what he had to work with and letting the camera do its job... If I
wasn't revolted by Cahill as a criminal, I would be inclined to rate
this film much higher.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE GENERAL (UK, 1998) *** 1/2  Written, directed and produced by John
Boorman. Photography, Seamus Deasy. Editing, Ron Davis. Production design,
Derek Wallace. Music, Richie Buckley. Cast: Brendan Gleeson (Martin
Cahill), Maria Doyle Kennedy (Frances), Angeline Ball (Tina), Eamon Owens
(young Cahill), Jon Voight (Inspector Ned Kenny), et al. A Sony Classics
release. 125 minutes.Not rated.
The Monday morning post-mortems about why, in the 1999 Oscars, Best Picture
went to Shakespeare in Love and not to Saving Private Ryan, produced some
good guesses.Among them, that the many academy voters who saw Ryan on home
video were not watching the real thing, since Ryan absolutely requires a
large screen.
This also applies to many a movie. So please see The General now, in a
theater.
Made by London-born Englishman John Boorman in his beloved Ireland,where he
lived for some 25 years, The General ranks with his best:  Point Blank ,
Deliverance,  Excalibur, The Emerald Forest, Hope and Glory, Beyond Rangoon.
It is about a major malefactor and his life. Martin Cahill really did exist
in Dublin. His c.v. runs like a catalogue of crime.He was a thief, a
suspected killer, a libertine, a bigamist, a weird art-loving collector who
stole paintings, a perpetrator of much else, all of it illegal.
His disdain for authority was monumental. It included the law, the
authorities, the English, even the Church (which for an Irishman is
anomalous). Hubristically, he defied the power of the police and, better
yet (or as turns out, worse for him), he challenged the might of the IRA.
The film takes Cahill from his assasination to his assassination, as this
event frames the movie. It  segues with just parts of his life story,
starting with the childhood of a preternaturally gifted, audacious and
self-controlled young thief. Cahill the adult is played by Brendan Gleeson
who is said to look uncannily like his model.
Gleeson-Cahill has a potato face and a potato-sack body, which ought not to
be derogatory terms in spud-loving Ireland. As conceived and performed he
makes us sidestep both our potentially romantic views and our indignation.
The picture lets us have our ups and downs in evaluating Martin, who could
be a vulgar but friendly teddy bear one moment, a crass torturer the next.
He became a celebrity in Ireland.The myth around him was often that of a
modern Robin Hood, which he decidedly was not. He may have given some money
way, but not on any large scale. But he certainly was a robbin' hood.
Boorman falls neither for the cliches nor for the conventions of the
gangster film genre. The General is a Thoroughly Modern Movie in every
aspect: conception, construction, editing, camera-work and all. But not of
the kind that shouts "modernism!" and tries to impress you with its
techniques. The techniques are there, but unshowy and clearly harking back
to Boorman's early period as a first-rate director of fifty-plus
documentaries for the BBC.
As an individual, and especially as the leader and brains of a gang, Cahill
was -- and remains on celluloid-- an amazing tactician. He plans and plots
cleverly and minutely, he thinks on his feet, improvises, makes instant
decisions, never loses his cool. He is so brazen that the word could have
been invented for him.  His brazenness may well have been his best weapon.
Scorning all that's scornable, the only thing he did not do was to thumb
his nose, literally, in courts or police stations. This, because in his
public appearances, he favored wearing hooded coats and spreading his hands
over his face, as though this would make him The Invisible Thug. Those
peculiarities add a kind of childish naivete to the man, although my better
guess is that they were his ways to avoid showing his true reactions, those
facial expressions that might have worsened his case.
Brendan Gleeson is the sort of  superbly skilled realistic actor that you
do not watch him as a thespian but as the character he lives, lives in, and
portrays. John Voight, Boorman's old friend from Deliverance, sports an
Irish accent that sounds genuine -- at least to American ears-- as he plays
(very well)  police inspector Ned Kenny whose Holy Grail was to get Cahill.
Somewhere, someone compared Kenny to the French Inspector Javert who
hounded Jean Valjean in Les Miserables. Not so.There is no cruelty, no
villainy about Kenny, and no innocence about Cahill.
The film is elliptical. Not to the point of confusing you but to the point
of asking for concentration. This task is sometimes arduous given the often
undecipherable accents. At  the Cannes Festival where I first saw the
picture, American critics who could not read the French subtitles were
often puzzled by the dialogue. For example, some people were confused by
Cahill's marital status: he has a lovely wife who has a lovely younger
sister with whom he also sleeps -- with the wife's blessing. A menage a
trois that even raised the eyebrows of some tolerant French spectators. In
addition we see our non-Robin stealthily stealing a child's toy while some
neighbors sleep. Its destination is the child he has had with his
sister-in-law.
Boorman decided to film in black and white. Says he: " Color films are too
saturated. They prettify. They vulgarize. And particuarly, they romanticize
poverty.[...] B &W abstracts while color distracts [...] But there are
deeper reasons. Most of us dream in B & W [...] a B & W film approaches the
condition of a dream, of memory, reaches out into the audience's
subconscious. There was often a mythic dimension to B & W movies. They
presented a familiar yet alien world, a contiguous reality."
The movie used color stock which was printed in B & W, a system that can
enhance shadings. And they shot in CinemaScope format which, used
intelligently, allows the screen's expansion to places that need to be
included. The B & W use of Scope reminds me somewhat of Francois Truffaut
's creative photography in Jules and Jim.
Not that friendship is celebrated as in Truffaut's movie. What's generated
is minute, complicated team-planning which is executed with brash
clockwork. There is strong suspense in the carrying out of holdups and
burglaries. The step-by-step preparations and crimes are not as detailed as
in Kubrick's race-track heist-movie The Killers, or Rififi's jewel robbery
that was made in France by American self-exile Jules Dassin. What I do
sense in the Cahill gang is a new element, the amazing luck that
accompanies the General's strategies. And all this has a constant
accompaniment of humor and amusing bits, even while you are aware that
Martin, his men and their actions are far from funny.
The movie's Irishness is beautifully observed, with no sentimentality, no
stress on poverty, no blarney, no unnecessary colorfulness. What there is
instead is Boorman's fascination with Cahill. The bottom line is that
Martin comes through as extraordinarily clever and innovative in his
avocation, but most likely a hollow man with no real interests --except for
his family and his bourgeois menage a trois--outside his profession. He
lived comfortably from his often spectacularly profitable hauls;  he took,
democratically, only one standard share; he did not drink or do drugs; his
home was nfancy middle-class;   and in general his kind of life that a 9 to
5 mid-rank employee might live. Cahill remains a mystery. Were his actions
motivated by a compulsion? As in Robert Bresson's "Pickpocket" but on a
gigantic scale?
Just as fascinating as the film is John Boorman's "A personal  account of
the making of The General" which runs nine tightly packed pages. It is both
an Odyssey and an Iliad  of the endless, complicated steps, search for a
producer and for funds, problems, troubles, financial deals, legal battles,
disappointments, searches, stumbling blocks, etc. from conception to
fruition. The shoot lasted eleven weeks; the preliminaries took years.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel
