Title
Review for American President, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is not likely that many people imagine an American President's
life is easy.  Director Rob Reiner has made a most delightful film
about what goes on behind the scenes in running the country, and still
made it a most entertaining movie.  The film not only has humor but it
packs a powerful punch at our Right Wing (with the dastardly Senator
Rumson played by Richard Dreyfuss.)  It also takes on the NRA and those
who would destroy our environment, comes out convincingly in favor of
the ACLU and why free speech is so important. Even media harassment is
covered.  Terrific.
     President Andrew Shepherd (Michael Douglas) is a widower with a
young teenage daughter.   Sydney Ellen Wade (Annette Bening) works for
an environmental group where she is in the forefront of trying to get
their agenda voted on and passed by Congress.  When the President and
accidentally meet, at the White House, Sydney meet, he is, to use an
old but charming word, smitten.  He has got it bad.
     After a series of humorous incidents where she does not believe
the phone calls to her sister's home where she is staying, are really
coming from the White House, they finally get together.  When the
President invites her to a State dinner, the right wing goes into
action to smear him and to find out what they can about her past life.
And when you look, you find.
     As part of the President's staff are Martin Sheen, Michael J Fox,
Anna Deveare Smith, Samantha Mathis, Shawna Waldron and David Paymer.
Great cast, great story, great entertainment.  Oscar, here we come.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG-13, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
[romantic comedy]
starring: Michael Douglas (President Andrew Sheperd), Annette Bening (Sydney
Ellen Wade), Martin Sheen (A.J. MacInerey), Michael J. Fox (Lewis
Rothschild), written by Aaron Sorkin, produced and directed by Rob Reiner.
        They say royalty doesn't exist in the United States, but "The American
President" proves it does. This is a really enjoyable film that wonders what
would happen if the president was single. And the answer is a funny,
romantic, and sentimental story that really touches your heart and makes you
feel good for many reasons.
        Michael Douglas stars as President Andrew Sheperd, a democrat who was
elected as a widower. A lot of good characterization is portrayed by
Douglas's character due mostly to the fact he is the president but also a
single father. We see the relationship between him and his daughter who is a
nice and caring girl who loves her dad and understands his job.When he meets
a woman, she is not jealous, she is very supportive and tries to give him
hints on how to impress her. This is just one example of the film's charming
creativity.
        Annette Bening co-stars as Sydney Ellen Wade, a single, 30-something woman
who is one of the top executives of an environmental lobbying group. When she
visits the White House she tells the President's aides his environmental
policy "sucks" and bashes him, not knowing he was standing behind her the
entire time. That's a typical joke-making device, but nevertheless, it works
really well here and thus our two main characters finally meet. 
        One of the best scenes takes place soon thereafter, as Sheperd and his
friend, Chief-of-Staff A.J. MacInerey (Sheen), are playing pool and discuss
whether or not they think Sydney likes him. It sounds like something kids in
high school would say. Sheperd: "She didn't say anything about me?"
MacInerey: "Well, I'll pass her a note in study hall."
        The president gets Sydney's phone number and calls her, at first she thinks
it's a prank call, but finally realizes it is him and he asks her out. Sydney
and her sister act like real people and not movie characters - they discuss
what to wear and all the little idiosyncrasies of dating and whether or not
he's cute. It's everyday girl talk, the guy just happens to be the president.
        The chemistry between Douglas and Bening is excellent, and they make one of
the cutest couples. The original screenplay drives this film, but Reiner's
direction and the acting make it even better.
        Both Sheperd and Sydney are trying to get bills passed, and they make a
"deal" to help each other out. Most of the movie is spent showing the
relationship between the two and their independent efforts to pass their
bills. What it all comes down to is the fact the president's relationship is
affecting his status and if he passes the crime bill without passing the
environmental bill first he will regain some of his popularity but will also
cross Sydney. Which is more important - his job or his love life? It's a tough
 decision and he ultimately makes the right one for him, but he can't forgive
himself.
        I really liked this film. It was creative, witty, funny, and romantic. It
shows no matter how high up on a pedestal we put people, they are still human
and still have the same problems as everyone else. (3/10/96) (2/11/97)
(5/21/97) [also by Reiner: "Stand By Me"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     A widowed Chief Executive starts dating again.  That's the
deceptively straight-forward set-up of this crowd-pleasing romantic
comedy from director Rob Reiner (WHEN HARRY MET SALLY).  The new
girlfriend is Sydney Ellen Wade (Annette Bening), an environmental
lobbyist who finds herself flustered, and later charmed by Democratic
President Andrew Sheperd (Michael Douglas).  Together, they fumble
through the implications of White House dating, which includes an
upcoming election year and a series of ugly character attacks from
Senate Minority Leader Robert Rumson (Richard Dreyfuss).
     As written by Aaron Sorkin, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT is less about
politics than about two people falling in love under extraordinary
circumstances.  The story does, however, provide a fascinating,
behind-the-scenes glimpse into the daily activities of the Chief
Executive.  He's a very busy man, to say the least, and Sorkin has
characterized the "Clintonesque" President as a bit disconnected from
his personal life.  (His pampered lifestyle and constant dashing away
to a crisis reminds of a better-written Bruce Wayne.  I wonder how he
would look in a rubber suit?)
     The political issues are the least successful.(**)  A couple of
plot points are downright confusing, the character of Bob Rumson is
never fully developed, and the big, Frank Capra finale falls a bit
flat.  No problem.  Reiner knows exactly what his assets are, and so he
places the greater weight on romance and comedy.  And what comedy!
Sorkin has written some great lines, here.  A wicked reference to the
Carolinas is a howl.  As is the President's "none of your damn
business" phone call.  The closing line, though, which I won't reveal
here, is by far the best.  (All good movies should end with such great
lines.)
Sure, the story could be longer, with more substance to balance the
weaker political segments, but with both Douglas and Bening virtually
*glowing* in their roles, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT delivers the kind of
old-fashioned, cornball romance that makes stepping into these movies so
very much fun.  Perfect chemistry between the leads, as well as a crack
supporting cast that includes Martin Sheen and Michael J. Fox, more than
compensates for any deficit spending in the political arena.  Watch out
at Oscar time.
**- As are the morality issues.  The script makes quite a fuss about
"character" and "family values" and, yet, these two lovebirds jump so
quickly into the sack that you have wonder exactly *where* Hollywood's
logic center is residing, these days.  Sigh.  I guess even the most
old-fashioned of films can't be entirely old-fashioned.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Douglas, Annette Bening, Martin Sheen, Michael J. Fox,
      Richard Dreyfuss, John Mahoney, Samantha Mathis, David Paymer,
      Anna Deavere Smith, Shawna Waldron
Director: Rob Reiner
Producer: Rob Reiner
Screenplay: Aaron Sorkin
Cinematography: John Seale
Music: Marc Shaiman
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Films
     It's hard to believe that THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT was made by the
same man responsible for the no-holds-barred satire of THIS IS SPINAL
TAP.  Is there any element of American culture more ripe for the
humorist's razor-sharp wit than presidential politics?  Yet, heedless of
what it might have been, this film is content to hunker down in the
valley of feel-good entertainment, sacrificing intelligent plotting for
mass appeal.  While neither bad nor unwatchable, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT
is nevertheless the second straight disappointment from director Rob
Reiner (his previous effort being NORTH).
     Attempting to mix behind-the-scenes Washington machinations,
political rhetoric, and a love story, Aaron Sorkin's script ends up
shortchanging all of its elements.  It comes across as painfully
politically correct, offering trite sermons on various "hot-button"
issues (gun control and the greenhouse effect).  The narrative follows
an unwavering by-the-numbers strategy with an ending that echoes the
"cornball" of Al Pacino's climactic SCENT OF A WOMAN speech.
     The setting is contemporary Washington DC.  It's an election year,
and the incumbent Democratic President, Andrew Shepherd (Michael
Douglas), is counting on his much-ballyhooed crime bill to cinch the
result of the upcoming political struggle.  His approval rating is
already astronomically high (63%), and his "family values" opponent,
Senate Minority Leader Robert Rumson (Richard Dreyfuss), is floundering.
He can't bring up the so-called "character issue", because Shepherd is a
widower with a young daughter, and political experts say that personal
attacks will have a disastrous backlash.  So Rumson bides his time,
waiting for the President to make a mistake.  Which, of course, he does.
     That mistake comes in the person of Sydney Ellen Wade (Annette
Bening), who represents the Global Defense Council.  Not only does she
attract Shepherd's support for a pro-environment bill, but she catches
his eye as well.  He asks her to accompany him to an official State
dinner, and the next morning all the papers are calling her the
"President's girlfriend".  What follows is a variation on the tried-but-
true story of boy gets girl, boy loses girl, boy tries to get girl back
again.  The only real difference here is that the romance takes place in
and around the White House.
     Sorkin, who wrote A FEW GOOD MEN (which Reiner also directed), has
sprinkled the screenplay with understated humor and sparkling dialogue,
but the clever lines and amusing vignettes can't fully overcome the
plot's essential mediocrity.  The set design is very good--attention
to detail is such that it's easy to accept that all the action takes
place within the most securely-guarded residence in the United States.
     The cast is solid, with Michael Douglas doing a credible job as the
Commander-in-Chief, Annette Bening being alternately winsome and tough,
and Martin Sheen offering hard advice as the Chief of Staff.  Michael J.
Fox does a believable George Stephanopoulos-type and Shawna Waldron is
appealing as the President's daughter.  Only Richard Dreyfuss, whose
one-note bad guy grates, doesn't do much with his character.
     THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT wants to be a fantasy--Shepherd is far too
good to be true--yet it keeps trying to ground itself in a
"Clintonesque" faux reality, creating a noticeable conflict in tone.
And, unlike DAVE, this film doesn't offer anything really biting.  Sure,
it's likable (which DAVE was, as well), but it's also bland.  All things
considered, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT is probably going to find it
difficult campaigning against the likes of GOLDENEYE and CASINO.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     Had General Colin Powell seen this film, his decision not to run
for the Presidency might have come earlier.  Who, in his or her sane
mind, wants to be President? Look at the beginning of the film.  It
shows the start of President Andrew Shepherd's (Michael Douglas) day.
It's a talk-as-you-walk clipetty clop sequence of the President rushing
through the corridors of power to his office, with a busy, busy staff
briefing him, asking him to make decisions, fast, fast, and whispering
in his ear the names of persons who greet him.
     Soon President Andy starts remind you of President Bill.  The main
difference is that this President lost his wife to cancer three years
ago.  She was his one and only love.  Now, with high approval ratings,
he has his eye on re-election.
     Otherwise, he has a teen-age daughter, shows liberal tendencies
("liberal" here meaning a positive seven-letter word, not a four-letter
insult), cares for the Nation in general and for good causes in
particular, such as the environment and gun control.  He is a Good
Man--and lonely. (Not enough is made of his solitude).
     Perhaps we shouldn't pity him too much when we see what a
dazzlingly efficient and devoted staff he has, all good people, some
with great symbolic names.  President Shepherd's own is pastoral and
paternal.  His Chief of Staff and best friend (Martin Sheen) is
A. J. MacInerney.  (Godard, I bet, would have preferred
I. B. M. Macintosh).  His pollster is Leon Kodak.  His outspoken
advisor (Michael J. Fox), obviously patterned after George
Stephanopoulos, is Lewis Rothschild--one minority name cannily
replacing another.
     The film rapidly introduces the sinuosities of Washington, their
grandeur, pettiness, and in the President's case, some examples of a
decent person practicing "Real Politik."  Soon the President and Sydney
Wade (Annette Bening), a hot shot environmental lawyer-lobbyist, meet
cute, roughly in the Tracy-Hepburn tradition of initial antagonism.
     For non-philanderer Andy, it's love at first sight, so quick that
you have to wonder.  Still, Sydney is charming, has personality and is
no bimbo.  Andy makes overtures, calls to invite the disbelieving
Sydney (she thinks it's a hoax) to be his date at a State dinner.
     The function is in honor of the new President of France and his
wife.  They are bored because, I suppose, of the well-known lack of
social graces in America.  Because, too, the American President is too
wrapped up in Sydney.  Also because he speaks no French.
     Sydney does, with an atrocious accent, and saves the day.  The
whole sequence (as weak as any, especially in the un-etiquettish way
Shepherd flaunts Sydney) would have been bad enough without adding
linguistic insult to plot injury.  The French President responds in his
native language, which is so incredibly, lousily un-French that I can
predict riotous laughter when this movie gets to Paris.
     Now, one of the better aspects of this film is its impressive
studio reconstruction (with liberties) of the White House.  But if you
can't trust Hollywood to find just one Frenchman for the microscopic
part of Monsieur le President, what can you trust it for?  It is
appalling.
     Research on who played the French Presidential couple has a
funnier pay-off than anything in the film: the thespians are called
Clement Von Franckenstein and Efrat La Vie.
     Sydney rapidly responds to the President's advances, with royal
disregard for safe sex.  What we have here is really a return to
Ruritanian romances between royalty and commoners.  In the early stages
of this love affair, Douglas is more amusing than Bening.  Like the
insulated George Bush who was amazed by supermarket uses of check-out
scanners, Mr.  Shepherd does not know how to order flowers, pay for
things or even get an outside phone line.
     The satire is pleasant.  On the other hand, Bening who normally
overwhelms all around her, is herself so overwhelmed by the
Presidential advances that her reactions are of the "Oh, my God, the
Most Powerful Man in the World has asked me out!...  Is in love with
me...  Has slept with me!."  This excessive kowtowing and shuffling of
feet makes one wonder if Bening's love for Douglas is not initially a
form of Presidentolatry and Groupieism.
     Mercifully, as the relation progresses, the couple become more of
a man and a woman in love.  The film acquires more convinction.  The
protagonists get more likable.  What also helps is the old Heroes-in-
Adversity ploy.  The opposition, led by Richard Dreyfuss as the
unpleasant Minority Leader, Republican Presidential candidate and
Senator from Kansas Bob Rumson (you get the gag), adopts smear tactics
vis-a-vis the President and his lady.  Those ridiculous charges will
lead to the Mr.  Shepherd showing his mettle, doing the right thing by
his conscience, his party, his country, the ACLU and his woman, and
closing the movie with one of those cornily warm and eloquent "Wow!"
speeches that were the domain of Frank Capra's heroes.
     There's not a single scene in THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT that breaks
new filmic ground.  The movie does not hold water.  It is not really
interesting, yet, paradoxically, it does hold your interest.
     The actors are all very good, in a "deja played" sort of way.
Douglas, as a rule likable only when playing bad guys, is here a
simpatico, straight arrow  (for a politico) good guy.  The movie is
sweet and idealistic.  Hollywoodisms, silliness and all, it contains a
certain amount of Beltway truth.  And it moves at a fast, un-boring
clip.  It may also be that today we need the reassurances of Capracorn
just as much as in the days of Mr. Deeds, Mr. Smith and John Doe.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT is as topical as today's headlines.  What
subjects are more in the news than President Clinton's reelection and
single parents?  Well, in this comedy we get both.  The names have been
changed to protect the innocent as they say, but the movie leaves no
doubt that this is a movie that asks the question, what would it be
like if today the president was single because his wife had died of
cancer during the 1992 campaign?
     In director Rob Reiner's THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT it is the third
year of the first term of 49 year old Democratic president Andrew
Shepherd (Michael Douglas).  Just like William (Bill) Clinton, he goes
by a nickname, Andy.  His opponent in the campaign is the conservative
Republican and Senate majority leader, Bob Rumson (Richard Dreyfuss).
Not only is Dreyfuss made to resemble Bob Dole, he even represents
Kansas as well.  Playing the Chelsea role is another 12 year old girl,
Lucy Shepherd (Shawna Waldron).  As senior policy advisor George
Stephanopoulos, we have a short actor with a lot of hair and a temper
just like him, Lewis Rothschild (Michael J. Fox).  See the documentary
THE WAR ROOM if you want to see the real Stephanopoulos in action.
     The parallels go on and on.  Here the president is not sure what
he is for other than getting good poll numbers and being reelected.
The moral of the show, of course, is that he discovers his values and
finds his missing backbone, much as a paleontologist might discover a
new dinosaur.  The Republicans in the movie are only interested in
slinging mud, they met in smoke filled paneled rooms where they smoke
big cigars, and they talk like devils.  The Democrats, on the other
hand, have a handsome and charismatic leader, and they are out to save
the planet with bills on global warming.  Were life so clear, we could
give up on elections and turn the government over to the Democrats in
perpetuity.  It is this part of the show that I found very tiring.
They could have made a show about a single president trying to get
reelected, without the Clinton family and his advisor look-alikes, and
it would have been better.
     When I was able to ignore the pedantic political messages, I found
a movie that was hilarious.  It has been a long time since I laughed so
much.  The script by Aaron Sorkin has one great line after another.
When environmental lobbyist Sydney Ellen Wade (Annette Bening) first
meets the president, he overhears her describing him as thinking he is
"the chief executive of Fantasyland."  Rather than hating her, he falls
in love with love.  When he calls her on the phone for a date to a
state dinner, she hangs up on him not believing he is the president.
This is one of many scenes that had me rolling in the aisles with
laughter.  When he calls her back, she does not know what to say, and
he complains to her that, "Congress doesn't take this long to decide."
     Douglas and Bening are both wonderful in the movie.  Andy is every
woman's dream date, an extremely handsome man who is the most powerful
man in the world and who is tender and charismatic at the same time.
While wooing her, he tells her that "The White House is the single
greatest home court advantage in the modern world."  Sydney is
beautiful, charming, bright, and even allows as how she makes more
money than he does, hence she represents every man's dream date.  The
chemistry between them is strong and believable in every scene.  At
their first date, he asks her, "how am I doing so far?"  As the
flashbulbs go off in the state dinner procession, she answers, "just
your typical first date."  I do hope the writer gets an the Academy
Award nomination.
     There is a great series of scenes where the president attempts to
order flowers himself.  His finds his credit cards are locked in
storage in Wisconsin, and no one on the phone will believe he is the
president anyway.  In my favorite scene in the show, the president's
long motorcade, stops in front of Carmen's Florist Shop where he pops
in to buy flowers causing the woman cashier inside to faint.  This is a
sight gag that really works.  The length of that motorcade and the
image of it stopping in the snow for the president to buy flowers for
his girlfriend is extremely funny.  The excellent cinematography by
John Seale has this scene in steel blues and shadows rather than the
rich, rosy, and almost regal colors of the rest of the movie.
     The lush music by Marc Shaiman is extremely dramatic and romantic.
While the president is walking along making small talk, the music
reinforces his power reminding the audience that everything the
president does is important.  The sets by Lilly Kilvert show the
majesty of the presidency while still giving it many human touches.
The costumes by Gloria Gresham again reinforce this duality.
     His pollsters and advisors want to know how he is going to deal
with the "Sydney issue."  The media keeps a count and has news stories
like "day 15 of the Sydney watch."  Meanwhile, Sydney gets to go on
some terrific dates at places like Camp David where she channel surfs
with the president looking for the basketball scores.
     The movie is full of great minor characters like Sydney's bottom
line boss, Leo Solomon (John Mahoney).  One of my favorite minor roles
is Martin Sheen as A. J. MacInerney, the president's chief of staff.
He is as hard as nails and super loyal.  He does not care what the
president stands or does just so long as he gets reelected.  He wants
to rent some women surreptitiously for the president so that Andy can
drop Sydney and boost his sinking poll numbers.
     The first assistant director of the movie is Frank Capra III.
There is a reference to the movies of his grandfather.  Clearly Reiner
intends the movie as sort of a homage to Capra, and the parallels are
strong.
     Finally, in a scene that shows how out of touch people in the
White House can be, the president's pollster, Leon Kodak (David
Paymer), at a Christmas party says "It's Christmas" to Lewis.
Dumbfounded, Lewis asks, "It's Christmas?".  Leon retorts, "You didn't
get the memo?"
     THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT runs a fast 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for a
tiny bit of bad language and for references to sex.  There is no nudity
or violence.  I would have rated it PG, and it would be fine for any
kid older than say eight.  Other than the heavy one sided political
messages, I loved the show and recommend it to everyone looking for a
good time at the movies.  It gets *** in my book and without the
unnecessary political indoctrination, I could have given it another
half star.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     A wonderful Rob Reiner film that expertly combines comedy, drama,
romance and even some sociopolitical commentary, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT
chronicles the newfound romance of a lonely widower (Michael Douglas)
who just happens to be leader of the free world.  And having a
sexually-frustrated president who exercises the pocket veto in the
absence of female companionship can never be a good thing.  So when
Douglas finds himself actually about to make a pass at Janet Reno, he
decides it might be time to find a first lady.
     In walks Annette Bening, an environmental lobbyist who's trying to
make sure Douglas will support a fossil-fuel bill to be sent to
Congress.  And something about the 97-octane perfume she wears gets to
Douglas, so he asks her to a state dinner, your average first date.  One
thing leads to another and soon he's emancipating her in the Lincoln
bedroom.  Interestingly enough, five minutes into the act, a tour guide
leads a group of tourists into the bedroom... "And this is the Lincoln
bedr--OH MY GOD!"
     As it has a propensity to do, the press soon finds out about the
fling.  The cabinet, which includes Michael J. Fox (who I suspect got
down on his knees and begged Reiner to put him in the movie) and
talented character actor David Paymer (of QUIZ SHOW and MR. SATURDAY
NIGHT, among others), is appalled, knowing Douglas' main opposition, an
evil Republican senator (Richard Dreyfuss) will have a field day
smearing Douglas with peanut butter... no, with the affair.  Of course,
in Hollywood, the phrase "evil Republican" is all but redundant.  One
of the few faults of THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT is its portrayal of the
right wing as heartless and incompetent and liberals as the world's
humble messiahs, while completely ignoring indisputable facts about the
Republican party--that Rush Limbaugh always tells the truth, Ronald
Reagan never forgets and Newt Gingrich in no way resembles Doc from
Snow White and the Seven Dwarves.
     THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT features first-rate writing, directing and
acting.  Surprisingly, even Michael J. Fox has graduated from the
superficialities of insulting Mallory and Jennifer and traveling
through time in a Delorean to the world of dramatic acting.  And as
usual, Bening, Dreyfuss and Paymer all give good performances.  Douglas
shines in what is the second Hollywood version of Bill Clinton
(remember Kevin Kline in DAVE?).  Douglas even looks like Clinton
(Michael, if you're reading this, no offense man.) and seems to have
mastered Clinton's mannersims, even down to the exact manner in which
he signs bills, downs a box of super-size fries in one gulp and
unhooks the bras of Washington women with the greatest of ease.
     This is definitely a terrific romance comedy that is believable,
intelligent and touching, even if it does have political correctness
coming out its ... lower posterior region.  I would have used that three
letter word with the one A and two S's but I too have been stricken
with the P.C. virus of late.  Well, except for the jokes about having
sex in the Lincoln bedroom, Reagan's Alzheimer's and Clinton's
reputation for promiscuity.

Author
Christopher Null
     Rob Reiner seems to have found his calling.  This time out, Rob has
directed THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT, a warm comedy about the difficulties of
romance in today's complex society, something of a follow-up to WHEN HARRY
MET SALLY..., a warm comedy about the difficulties of romance in today's
complex society.
     While it ultimately packs nowhere near the punch that WHEN HARRY MET
SALLY... did, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT puts a nice spin on the romantic
fable and is a pleasant moviegoing experience.  Michael Douglas plays
President Andrew Shepherd, a widower and single father who finds himself
caught up in a dalliance with environmental lobbyist Sydney Ellen Wade
(Annette Bening).  What we get to see is a rare treat:  watching "the most
powerful man in the world" act totally awkward in his pursual of Sydney,
and seeing ultra-classy Bening become flustered at the President's
advances.  Proving himself just an average guy, Andrew flubs his lines on
the phone as if he was asking a girl to Homecoming.
     The result is an excruciatingly realistic romance, but set in the
most absurd of plotlines.  You see, Sydney is lobbying for a bill to go to
the House, and the President has made a deal with her:  if she can get 24
votes he'll send it to the floor.  Unfortunately, it soon becomes clear
that those votes will come at the expense of votes for the President's
golden child, a wishy-washy crime bill.  So Andrew has to choose what's
more important:  the country, or Sydney.  Hell, I'd choose Sydney, too.
     Okay, it isn't that simple, but it might as well have been.  The
political drama here is totally corny and makes no statement about
anything (except crime is bad and the environment is good), but the
sweetness of the love affair ultimately outweighs the plot's defects. 
We're also given a sober wake-up call about how a gossip-hungry America
looks at the personal lives of its leaders.
     The supporting cast of Michael J. Fox, Martin Sheen, and Samantha
Mathis as the President's advisors is dead-on.  Gorgeous sets (with the
notable exception of a Camp David that looks straight out of a sitcom)
make us feel like we're in the action.  All-in-all, a nice date movie,
perfect for the holidays.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Just in case you did not notice this film was "Capra-esque,"
scriptwriter Aaron Sorkin works the term into the dialogue.  But even
if he had not, there would have been inevitable comparisons to Frank
Capra's techniques of pulling the viewer in with one story and then
introducing a much more relevant plotline.  And this film is in a class
with MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON and MEET JOHN DOE.  THE AMERICAN
PRESIDENT is a bright, witty romantic comedy with really good dialogue,
but at the same time it is a statement about politics, and about
politicians, some who are idealists and some who are opportunists.
This is a film that purrs and a film that has claws--not big ones, but
claws nonetheless.
     President Andrew Shepherd (played by Michael Douglas) is an
idealist and a Democrat with a high approval rating from the American
public.  Shepherd is a widower with a teenage daughter.  He gets along
tolerably well with Republicans and with the environmental lobby,
treading a path somewhere in between.  When he overhears a new
environmental lobbyist, Sydney Ellen Wade (Annette Bening), making
insulting comments about him he is intrigued by her and invites the
flustered woman to be his date for a state dinner.  Eventually they are
seeing more of each other in spite of warnings from his staff that
dating a woman will hurt his approval rating.  It soon becomes clear
that they are right, as an opponent, Senator Bob Rumson (Richard
Dreyfuss) who is adept at political hardball, begins mounting a smear
campaign suggesting that Wade is a flag-burner and that she is using
sex to sway the President's opinions.  The President's interest in Wade
is exaggerated into an all-out attack on family values.  The
President's sagging approval rating forces some hard decisions.
     Sorkin's dialogue with Rob Reiner's direction is witty, sharp, and
a lot of fun.  While the entire course of the President's relationship
with Wade is easily predictable, there are some very funny situations
built around what would happen if a modern President did decide to
date.  Reiner's film has the undeniable charm in portraying the
President trying to do what seem like simple tasks like ordering
flowers and dating.  There is a charm in seeing a lobbyist awed and
flustered by the attentions of the President.  And for a while the film
rides on all that charm.  But the film does a lot more than that.  The
film is something of an education in how modern politics works.  We see
something of the complex deals and strategies which anyone in high
political office must contend.
     The cast is a bit overpowered with familiar faces in almost every
reasonable role.  Martin Sheen, Michael J. Fox, and David Paymer are
advisors to the President.  I was pleased to see Anna Deavere Smith in
an important role as the President's press secretary.  Smith proved
herself to be a first rank character actor with an incredible acting
range in her one-woman show "Fires in the Mirror," filmed for PBS.
Other familiar faces include Samantha Mathis, John Mahoney, and Nina
Siemaszko.  Marc Shaiman's score is dignified and sounds Presidential.
The photography looks convincingly like it was filmed in the White
House, no doubt due in large part to contributions by Industrial Light
and Magic.
     Like many of the films of Frank Capra, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT can
be seen as a light entertainment and at the same time a somewhat deeper
look at the problems in American politics.  To balance both as adroitly
as it does, I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
