Title
Review for Phantom Tollbooth, The (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
After making over two hundred animated shorts, Chuck Jones finally got 
to the chance to direct a feature with this adaptation of Norton 
Juster's children's book. It's a colorful effort, but patchy.  Children 
will be hooked by the film's live-action opening: a listless boy by the 
name of Milo is suprised to find a miniature tollbooth
and car in his bedroom.  The scene is set for some great adventure, but 
the switch to animation may lose the connection kids will have with the 
protagonist's real-life counterpart.  Story is a blend of ‘Alice in 
Wonderland' and ‘Pilgrim's Progress', relating Milo's adventures in the 
lands of Dictionopolis and Digitopolis.  It's one of
the few films of its type that doesn't have a presiding villain.  
Indeed, the point of it is that wasted time (through laziness, 
disinterest, ignorance) is the only real enemy of childhood.  As 
Juster's episodic book has been judiciously compressed, this
revelation (as it occurs to Milo at the film's end) isn't too 
convincing.  Film also has other flaws: there's too many songs in the 
first twenty minutes; character voices sound too much like Bugs Bunny, 
Daffy Duck, Augie Doggie, and others; and the most memorable character 
from the book, the Watchdog, is badly conceived (he looks just like a 
regular dog, and his fatherly voice doesn't jibe with his dewy eyes).
Film is recognizably a product of the Warners studio, although Milo is 
drawn noticeably in the Disney mold of child heroes.  It may be of more 
interest to fans of Jones than those of the book, although it doesn't 
reach the heights of his short subjects.  There's certainly less humor 
than you'd expect, and Jones makes almost no attempt at slapstick, 
sticking instead to the wit and wordplay prevalent
throughout the book.  To be fair, the book's abstract concepts would be 
difficult to adapt successfully to the screen.  Film is uneven but is 
interesting as an alternative to the dominant Disney features of the 
time - you have to wonder about Warners' timing, considering Disney had 
died shortly beforehand.  And it does improve as it
goes on.  It's no YELLOW SUBMARINE but you can see influences of 
psychedelia in the vivid colors and geometric patterns - it makes you 
wish that it would really cut loose with a couple of sequences more 
reminiscent of the zany cartoons the studio is famous for.     

