Title
Review for Night at the Opera, A (1935)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"A Night at the Opera" was the sixth movie starring the
Marx Brothers, and the first without straight man
Zeppo Marx.  Groucho delivers many hilarious one-liners,
and the Marx Brothers create great chaos, but the film
is hampered somewhat by a love interest subplot and
unnecessary musical numbers.
Groucho is the agent of wealthy socialite and comic foil
Margaret Dumont.  Dumont becomes a patron of an opera
house managed by pompous Herman Gottlieb (Sig Rumon).
Gottlieb is eager to have famed tenor Lassparri (Walter
Woolf King) perform at his opera house.  Meanwhile,
the conceited Lassparri chases soprano Kitty Carlisle,
who is love with obscure tenor Baroni (Allan Jones).
The Marx Brothers prove willing to sabotage Lassparri's
opening night performance to promote Baroni's career
and romance.
Like other Marx Brothers movies, "A Night at the Opera"
is inconsistent, with some comic scenes working much
better than others.  Certainly the best (and most famous)
skit has the Marx Brothers and numerous strangers crowding
in a small room.  The skit combines the two best components
of their comedy, Groucho's clever and sarcastic one-liners,
and the Marx Brothers propensity for causing chaos.
Nearly as good is a scene with determined Detective
Henderson (Robert Emmett O'Connor) chasing the Marx Brothers
and their beds from room to room.
Groucho is the major talent of the Marx Brothers.  Harpo
is a good mime, with a gift for facial expressions.  Chico
is competent, but has-a fake-a accent.  Both Harpo and
Chico can play the piano, but that doesn't mean they're
funny at the same time.  Harpo should never have learned
to play the harp.
Kitty Carlisle and Allan Jones make a nice couple and
they can sing.  Still, they're not funny, and can be
detracting, such as their farewell as the ship is departing.
They provide a motive for the Marx Brother's madness,
but perhaps a better (and more funny) plot device could
have been found.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Jude Wanniski
Memo To Website browsers, fans & clients
>From Jude Wanniski http://www.polyconomics.com
Re #7 "A Night at the Opera"
Continuing with the "movie list," here is number seven of the 
ten films that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite
films. They are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest 
influence on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are 
favorites that I enjoy watching over and over again, which you 
can tell as you read each entry. Try to think of your own 
experiences with films and how they influenced the course of 
your life. It makes life more interesting to be aware, as you 
live it, to know how things such as books and films and magazine 
articles alter your path in significant ways. Sometime last year 
the Sunday NYTimes "Arts and Leisure" section had a piece on how 
difficult it is to think of a movie that may have changed 
history. The only movie they could think of was a silent film by 
D.W. Griffith, Birth of a Nation, which had a scene about the 
KuKluxKlan that the author believes changed national thinking 
about the KKK. How silly. Each of the ten films listed here 
changed my history, and if I had not seen them, I would not 
have helped change history in the ways that I have. Films don't 
move masses. They move individuals who move masses.
7. "A Night at the Opera" (1935) This Marx Brothers picture was 
made the year before I was born, but I discovered it via my 
Uncle Vince, my mother's younger brother, the same fellow who 
introduced me to baseball, chess, classical music and a lot to 
do with politics. He was a left-winger who never quite forgave 
me for becoming a Republican. In my teenage years, the humor of
the Marx Brothers absolutely convulsed me. I could not get 
enough of it after seeing this first of several the boys 
produced. My closest friend, Leslie Nathanson, and I would get 
the NYTimes to see where in the city a theater was playing a 
Marx Brothers film. I remember trekking from Borough Park in 
Brooklyn to 96th Street in Manhattan one Saturday, and literally 
rolling in the aisle with laughter. I've seen all the films a 
dozen times, but the "Night at the Opera" -- with Harpo suddenly 
selling peanuts and popcorn down the aisle of the Met, while the 
orchestra broke out into "Take Me Out to the Ballgame" -- was 
the craziest of all. Bob Bartley, editor of The Wall Street 
Journal, once told me I had taught him "the art of the 
outrageous" in presenting editorials traditionally written with
lofty pomposity. It was Groucho, Chico and Harpo who taught me.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
