Title
Review for Veuve de Saint-Pierre, La (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Robin Clifford
One night, on the remote French-owned island of St. Pierre, a senseless
murder takes place during a drunken quarrel. The repentant killer, Neel
Auguste (Emir Kusturica), is sentenced to death - but there is no
guillotine on the island needed to carry out the execution. During the
months that follow, the island's intelligent military commandant (Daniel
Auteuil) treats his prisoner with dignity. The captain's wife, Madame Lo
(Juliette Binoche), questions the justice of the death penalty and is
convinced that Neel will be redeemed by his good deeds in "The Widow of St.
Pierre."
Master French filmmaker Patrice Leconte tackles the based-on-a-true-story
period tale about a murderer who, through the kind attentions of the
beautiful wife of the island's commandant, is not only fully rehabilitated,
he becomes a local hero. There is mystery, though, in this tale of
redemption as Madame Lo takes on an obsessive zeal as she first convinces
her husband, the Captain, to allow Neel to build her a greenhouse in cold,
windswept St. Pierre. As the prisoner gets over the drinking that was at
the bottom of his crime, he becomes a stolid member of the community. But,
the threat from Madame Guillotine never leaves as the island's
administrators plead with the French government to provide the deadly
machine.
"The Widow of St. Pierre" is a narrative story, taking a definite
anti-death penalty stance, with complex character studies provided by the
principals. The lead subjects are symbolic, but, with a great cast giving
solid performances, these symbols are three-dimensional and complete, if
almost unbelievably noble, people.
The story, by Claude Faraldo, begins in a brutal fashion with the drunken
murder of a local man by Neel and a crony. The friend gets life in prison
and Auguste gets an appointment with death. But, there is no requisite
guillotine on the island and long distance negotiations begin with the
leaders of the strife torn French Republic. Since the process will likely
take months, the island military commander allows his ward the freedom of
St. Pierre at Madame Lo's behest. The Captain's wife shows an inordinate,
though chaste, concern for the health and well being of Neel and curiosity
is piqued by the mystery.
As the months drag on without word from the home government, life grows
complacent on the island and Neel becomes part of the fabric of life on St.
Pierre, even marrying a local widow. He also becomes invaluable to the
community at large and, at one point, saves a young woman from certain
death during a house moving. The man's obvious rehabilitation should save
him, but time is his enemy and even the fouled up French government
eventually sends a guillotine. The problem then becomes finding an
executioner, a job that no islander will take. But, the elders resolve the
final stumbling block when a hapless immigrant is coerced into taking the
deadly job.
Patrice Lucent has been making films in France for decades. Unfortunately
for us in the US, only a few of this master's work has shown on these
shores. Most exemplary (and my favorite Leconte film to date) is his
black-and-white masterpiece, "Girl on the Bridge." That work was an
extraordinary, stylish work that showcased its stars, Daniel Auteuil and
Vanessa Paradis. The film was an intense character study that had a love
story beneath the surface. With "The Widow of St. Pierre," Leconte moves
into a period piece depicting the harsh life on the remote French colony
while making a strong statement against the death penalty. With the likes
of Auteuil and Binoche in the leads, he also can't help having rich
characterizations, too. Then, too, there's the striking looks and strong,
quiet character provided by director Emir Kusturica as Neel Auguste.
Leconte uses his tried and trusted behind-the-camera crew to put, once
again, a striking image on the screen. His long-time cinematographer
Eduardo Serra captures the cold desolation of St. Pierre while giving it a
stark, photo-quality beauty. This complements both set design, by Ivan
Maussion, and the fine costumes, by Christian Gasc, that firmly place the
viewer right on that cold, cruel island in the mid 1800's.
"The Widow of St. Pierre" is another example of quality filmmaking by a
master. Leconte is an expert at his craft and, with his fine cast and crew,
continues to please. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 WIDOW OF SAINT-PIERRE, THE (VEUVE DE SAINT-PIERRE, LA) (director:
 Patrice Leconte; screenwriter: Claude Faraldo; cinematographer:
 Eduardo Sarra; editor: Joëlle Hache; cast: Juliette Binoche (Mme. La),
 Daniel Auteuil (the Captain), Emir Kusturica (Neel Auguste), Philippe
 Magnan (Judge Venot), Michel Duchaussoy (the Governor), Reynald
 Bouchard (Louis Ollivier), Ghyslain Tremblay (Monsieur Chevassus),
 Catherine Lascault (Jeanne-Marie Malvilain), Maurice Chevit (The
 Governor's Father), Dominique Quesnel (Saloon Owner); Runtime: 108;
 Lions Gate Films; 2000-France)
This is a ridiculous film. If you think about it, it just doesn't make
sense. It's a tale about wishy-washy "humanitarianism." It claims that a
brutal murderer if given the opportunity to change, will become
rehabilitated if his captors treat him in a loving way. That is
something I just find hard to believe always happens (opinions often
change, but people (principles) do not). It's a manipulative film and if
you go with the flow of the story and accept the logic presented, then
everything is manufactured to make you eschew reason and be persuaded by
your blind emotional responses.
This is a middle-brow art film and even though it pretends to offer
more, it doesn't. It should only serve those who go to films to be
entertained in the way a vacuous Hollywood film does, where the viewer
is expected not to care how ridiculous the story is. What this film is
best at doing, is having its star actors look good and have a
cinematographer, like Eduardo Sarra (Leconte himself did a lot of the
filming), make a static film look stimulating by beautifully
photographing it. These are diversionary tactics that can easily lull
one into just going into a slumber and accepting this contrived film at
face value without giving it a further thought.
Patrice Leconte ("Ridicule") latest film "The Widow of St. Pierre" is
particularly annoying because it is so smug. It is a film that stacks
the deck in the murderer's favor and could care less about the murder
victim. If the film's aim is to make a case against capital punishment,
it succeeds only in making a case for phony compassion. It shows an
elitist couple who are isolated from the common people they pretend to
love and who act prickly with the people of their own class; they sneer
at them but share the same luxurious lifestyle. I'm afraid the
filmmaker's aims are just to make a movie pushing its star cast into
appealing fantasy roles and sucking the viewer into believing the film
is serious in tackling tough issues because the stars are taking their
roles in a serious manner. Its moral high ground against capital
punishment was not only unconvincing, but it leaves a bitter feeling in
the air. Do-gooders generally manage to do more harm than good, and that
will prove itself in this film as well. The captain is so devoted and
enslaved by the love he has for his wife, that he becomes remiss in his
duties and in the end is executed in France for sedition. The widow of
Saint-Pierre is Juliette Binoche (In my book, she's the Julia Roberts of
French movies, matching the American in superficial acting techniques).
The story, which is partially based on court records, takes place in
1849 and is set during the French Second Republic on Saint Pierre, a
poor fisherman's French island off the coast of Newfoundland. A
senseless murder takes place when two fisherman are drunk and go to the
cabin of their former captain. They stand outside and argue if he is big
or fat. When he comes outside with a knife to investigate, Neel Auguste
(Emir Kusturica-Sarajevan film director) knocks the knife out of his
hand while Louis Ollivier (Bouchard) holds him. We don't see what
happens, as the filmmaker cleverly shifts to a horse being unloaded,
from a boat, for the army captain (Daniel Auteuil) who is in charge of
the garrison on the island. In the court trial, we hear Neel tell how he
picked up the knife and stabbed his victim to death while Louis
continued to hold him. Neel is sentenced to be guillotined on the island
and Louis is given a long sentence of hard labor in a French prison.
It might be of interest to note, that Guillotine is a slang word for
"widow" in French.
The local reaction to the murderers is at first harsh, as Louis will die
accidently when being transported to prison. The locals chuck rocks at
him as he passes them in the street, causing the horses to rear up and
throw him off the wagon and onto a rock.
The island has no guillotine and no one willing to be an executioner, so
the prisoner rots away in his darkened cell. The captain's do-gooder
wife Madame La (Binoche), gets her husband to allow her to have the
prisoner build a greenhouse. He turns out to be a nice man when not
drunk and willingly obeys all Madame La's wishes. She soon has him
helping other villagers and doing chores under no supervision. Her
husband is so much in love with her, that he allows her to do whatever
she wishes. Her reason for helping the prisoner is because she says
people change. The men who politically administer the island do not
approve of the way he's treating the prisoner and making them look
powerless in the eyes of the island inhabitants, but the captain ignores
their malicious gossip and treats them with self-righteous contempt;
and, he tells them to mind their own business. The prisoner will meet a
widow on Dog Island (Lascault) and have a sexual relationship with her
and when she becomes pregnant, he will marry her. In one of the most
contrived scenes in the film, the prisoner will rescue the owner of the
town's only saloon as she is rolling down a hill in a wagon transporting
her saloon. His popularity on the island will grow and by the time
France sends the guillotine over a year has passed, and now none of the
locals want the popular prisoner executed. But the governor and the
judge insist on the execution, believing it will make them look bad in
Paris if they don't carry out the orders.
Basically, this is a bourgeois story about the self-righteous couple
wallowing in their comfort and materialism and self-aggrandizing powers.
The prisoner is made into a one-dimensional martyr who doesn't question
anything about his situation. His blank look at his situation is
probably what the director expects from his ideal movie viewer. This is
a visually pleasing film; it has nothing more to offer than a make
believe tale about real issues and concerns that the film can't get to
because of its own arrogance in filmmaking.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When Texas Governor George W. Bush and his Pardons
Board refused to reconsider the death sentence against Karla
Faye Tucker, a national debate ensued and continued for, oh,
about a couple of days after her execution.  Though Tucker
committed an atrocious axe-murder in her youth while high as
a kite, she became a model prisoner, counseling others and
proving among other things that she would be no threat to
society even if released.  Patrice Leconte explores this theme
of murder and redemption, particularly society's ways of
dealing with one particular killer who, like Karla Faye Tucker
was out of his mind (on liquor) when he committed a
senseless crime.  His "The Widow of St. Pierre," following on
the heels of the director's "The Girl on the Bridge," "Ridicule,"
"Monsieur Hire" and other works shown in American art
houses during the past dozen years, joins two of France's
greatest performers for the first time.  Daniel Auteuil ("The
Girl on the Bridge," "Lucie Aubrac") performs in the role of a
captain in charge of the jail of St. Pierre, a godforsaken dot
on the map off the coast of Nova Scotia and belonging to
France in 1850, the scene of the action.  His idiosyncratic
wife, known simply as Madame La (an appellation used to
avoid calling her Madame La Capitaine), is played by Juliette
Binoche ("Alice et Martin," "The English Patient").  The
deadliest character is not the murderer but the eponymous
widow, French slang for the guillotine.
   The story begins when a drunken, illiterate, essentially
stupid and naive fisherman, Neel (the Bosnian director of
"Black Cat, White Cat," Emir Kusturica), senselessly stabs a
local resident to death during a drunken brawl "to find out
whether he was big or whether he was fat."  Condemned to
death by a court led by a judge appointed by Paris, Neel is
taken under the wing of the captain and particularly of the
wife whom the official loves very much.  While the residents
of the island wait for months for France to ship a guillotine
over to St. Pierre by way of Martinique, Madame La refuses
to allow the condemned to rot in jail but instead uses him to
cultivate her greenhouse, later lending him out to neighbors
for odd jobs.  After one heroic deed, Neel becomes the most
popular guy in St. Pierre, so much so that only the French-
appointed governor (Michel Duchaussoy) and a couple of his
cronies want to carry out the sentence required by law.
   While examining the theme of redemption and the effects
of kind treatment of unfortunate fellows as splendidly as did
only one other movie this year--"Quills", which illustrated the
marvelous effects of an Abbe's kindness on the prisoners at a
French asylum for the insane--Leconte uses gestures as
much as words to survey the nature of a government in
crisis, the boredom of life on a barren stretch of land, the
ways that the powers that be can corrupt a person with
money, and the courses of action that people can take when
in love or, conversely, deprived of devotion.  Leconte's
photographer, Eduardo Serra, depicts the tough lives led by
the people of St. Pierre by contrasting the dull, foggy air of
the town with the power of the ocean as it rages against the
jagged rocks.  
   Unlike so many French movies, the dialogue from Claude
Faraldo's script is relatively sparse, giving all the more
power to the expressions on the faces of the craggy men and
their bored wives, for whom this murderer provides the
excitement they crave.  Auteuil shows us a character whose
love for his horse is more powerful than his fear of the
French government, Binoche how passion for a husband can
pilot her toward good deeds for others, and Kusturica how a
a simple man, loyal to a fault toward his benefactors, can be
a prince among men.  "The Widow of St. Pierre" is as razor-
sharp as its eponymous widow is dull and rusty, an
examination of some of life's major themes explored through
the lens of some master story tellers.
Not Rated.  Running time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
What does a little town do if they condemn a murderer to death and they 
have neither the means nor the man to carry out the sentence?  Based on 
a true story, the movie is set in 1849 on the remote French island of 
Saint-Pierre, off the coast of Newfoundland.  Without a guillotine or an 
executioner, the town is forced to wait.
THE WIDOW OF SAINT-PIERRE (LA VEUVE DE SAINT-PIERRE) reunites the male 
lead (Daniel Auteuil), writer (Claude Faraldo) and director (Patrice 
Leconte) of last year's art house hit, THE GIRL ON THE BRIDGE, about the 
sexy art of knife throwing.  Like THE GIRL ON THE BRIDGE, the script is 
again a bit thin, but the acting is quite good, and Eduardo Serra's 
cinematography is chillingly evocative.  You've seen Serra's stunning 
work most recently in UNBREAKABLE and most spectacularly in WHAT DREAMS 
MAY COME.
After being promptly tried and convicted of murder, Neel Auguste (Emir 
Kusturica) is sent to wait indefinitely in a cell in the island's 
military compound.  Luckily for him, the wife of the captain in charge 
turns out to a woman with extremely liberal ideas when it comes to 
prisoner's rights.  "Men are bad one day and good the next.  I'm sure of 
that," she says.   Known as Madame La, a shortened version of Madame La 
Capitaine, she is played warmly by Juliette Binoche, the recent Oscar 
nominee for CHOCOLAT, an honor that she didn't really deserve.  She is 
good here as she is in CHOCOLAT, but neither performance is worthy of an 
Academy Award.  There is an important difference between good and great.
Living on the second floor of the compound, the captain (Auteuil) and 
his wife begin treating the convict with the graciousness that one would 
accord a guest.  With an unlocked cell, Neel is free to come and go at 
will.  A sweet and gentle man who made one hideous mistake in his life, 
Neel would no sooner bolt for his freedom than your kids would leave 
forever if you didn't lock the door.
The relationship among this unusual threesome, the career soldier, the 
soldier's wife and the criminal, evolves in ways both predictable and 
quite unpredictable.  The prisoner goes from being scorned by the 
townsfolk to being a local hero.  The civilian authorities, however, 
view him as nothing more than an embarrassment and a big thorn in their 
sides.
When it begins to look like Neel's execution may be carried out, the 
working class members of the island start to revolt.  A never 
satisfactorily explored subtheme involves the political undercurrents of 
that period of French history.  "Uprising strengthen regimes that they 
don't overthrow," the head of the island government, quoting Victor 
Hugo, says of the potential for revolutionary acts among the local 
peasants.  It is a cocky attitude, but that was a time when the ruling 
class had a much better chance of keeping their heads than did those of 
lesser means.  Or did they?  THE WIDOW OF SAINT-PIERRE makes you want to 
crack open your history books and learn more.   It's an intriguing tale.
THE WIDOW OF SAINT-PIERRE runs 1:47.  The film is in French with English 
subtitles.  It is rated R for a scene of sexuality and brief violence 
and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
THE WIDOW OF SAINT-PIERRE (LA VEUVE DE SAINT-PIERRE)
In 1850, a ship captain is brutally murdered by Neel Auguste (director Emir 
Kusturica) and Louis Ollivier (Reynald Bouchard) in the remote outpost of 
Saint-Pierre, a French owned island off the coast of Newfoundland.  Neel is 
sentenced to death while Louis gets a life term, yet ironically Louis is 
killed in an accident on the way to the prison.  Taking pity on Auguste is 
Madame La (Juliette Binoche, "Chocolat"), the unconventional wife of the 
captain (Daniel Auteuil, "Girl on the Bridge") responsible for carrying out the
execution.  As Saint-Pierre awaits the arrival of a guillotine, August becomes
popular with the townspeople in "The Widow of Saint-Pierre."
Written by Claude Faraldo from the original court records, "The Widow of
Saint-Pierre" is a tragic period piece.  While the outcome of the story may
be telegraphed, director Patrice Leconte ("Girl on the Bridge") shrouds his
film in many layers of mystery.
The Captain is a good and moral soldier, elegant horseman and husband madly 
in love with his wife.  While respected by the island's governors, he's seen 
as odd.  We're told that Madame La has given up a prestigious name to marry
the Captain, yet do not know why they've been banished to such a barren and
remote post.  Was their passion a scandal back home?  In turn, Madame La's
request to have Neel assist her with a garden is equally odd.  While her
instincts about the man prove to be right, her extreme nervousness upon meeting
him make us question her motives, even more so when it's clear that Neel 
comes to adore her and gossip develops as the twosome traipse about the island
performing good deeds.  (Neel also impregnates a widow on one of these jaunts, 
whom he is later allowed to marry.)
As Neel's popularity grows (he's made an honorary member of the Cafe du Nord
for 'the rest of your long life' by it's owner after saving the building)
and the guillotine makes its way from the island of Martinique,
tension mounts between the Captain and his wife and the island's governors,
who insist upon carrying out the execution in order to save face with France.
Their lack of an executioner, or anyone willing to become one, remains the
Captain's trump card - for a time.  As the Captain supports his wife's 
statements and actions almost to the point of insubordination, he gains the 
admiration of the wives of his superiors, further infuriating them.
Auteuil, so marvelous in Leconte's last film, is a completely different 
character here.  While still a romantic, he's believable as a military man,
cutting a dashing figure on his black stallion Salt Cod.  Auteuil creates
a totally sympathetic man whose honor is unquestioned even though all we 
really know about him is that he truly loves his wife (and his horse).
Binoche as the absurdly pretty gentlewoman projects kindness, but her
mysteries are a bit more frustrating as we're never really clear on her
feelings for Auguste.  The odd casting of director Emir Kusturica ("When
Father Was Away on Business") as Auguste works - he's a burly bear of a man
of few words, a St. Bernard trotting at Madame La's heels.
Leconte's cinematographer Eduardo Serra captures beautiful images, such
as Auguste pulling Madame La along in a sled upon an endless expanse of snow.
The movie was filmed on locations in Nova Scotia and Quebec with careful
attention to period details.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Juliette Binoche, perhaps the most unlikely (and most undeserving) Best
Actress nominee in recent memory, does a full 180° with her latest film, The
Widow of Saint-Pierre.  In the dazzlingly overrated Chocolat, Binoche played
Vianne, a woman with some serious man issues.  She was always either running
away from the opposite sex, or helping other women to do the same. But in
Widow, her character is a firm believer than even the most vile man can
change under the right circumstances.
Binoche plays Pauline, a resident of tiny Dog Island off the coast of
Newfoundland, which was a French territory at the time the film is set
(1849).  She's married to a Parisian man named Jean (Daniel Auteuil, Girl on
the Bridge), who is referred to simply as The Captain by the rest of the
island's crusty inhabitants.  Note: In case you're unfamiliar with French
cinema, the presence of Binoche and Auteuil in the same film is a little
like seeing Brad and Julia in The Mexican.
One morning, the residents of Dog Island awake to a grisly scene.  It seems
the evening before, two fishermen cut up their boss to settle a drunken
argument (one thought the man was fat, and the other merely big).  The town,
of course, is outraged, the men are quickly tried, and the Powers That Be
declare the man who did the cutting should lose his head, while his cohort
is sentenced to a life of hard labor (he dies shortly after transport).
The problem is that Dog Island has neither an executioner nor the means to
perform an execution.  They order a guillotine from Paris, but it won't
arrive until the following spring.  In the meantime, Pauline decides the
surviving prisoner, Ariel Neel Auguste (played by the great Yugoslavian
filmmaker Emir Kusturica), should be rehabilitated.  She excuses his drunken
actions, letting Auguste live in her house and help her with her greenhouse.
Pauline even gives him intimate reading lessons, and none of it seems to
bother Jean, who seems to like his horse even more than his wife.  Does
Pauline have tingly feelings for Auguste, or is she just another left-wing
crybaby?
When spring finally rolls around and the guillotine arrives, Dog Island has
become quite attached to their wonderful prisoner, at which point Widow
becomes kind of a preachy, anti-death-penalty film.  If somebody wanted to
watch one of those, they'd rent The Chamber (and judging from its box office
take, nobody does).  Claude Faraldo's script just isn't that interesting,
especially compared to director Patrice Leconte's last film, the wonderfully
original Girl on the Bridge (Leconte is becoming the John Sayles of France,
picking drastically different projects each time around). The highlight here
is the lovely photography from Eduardo Serra (Unbreakable).
Binoche is nearly good enough to make you forget how ridiculous Chocolat
was, and Auteuil clocks in with another typically strong and stoic
performance.  Kusturica does well, especially for a first-time actor (he
recently directed the arthouse hit Black Cat, White Cat).  As an aside,
Widow is the first of two imports we'll see this year that show prisoners
being rehabilitated through gardening.  The other, due this summer, is
called Greenfingers and stars Croupier's Clive Owen as a convict with a
green thumb.
1:52 - R for a scene of sexuality and brief violence

Author
Louis Proyect
Late one night in 1849 a drunken sailor murders his former captain on the
forlorn, windswept island of St. Pierre in maritime Canada. As French
subjects, the local magistrates must comply with the law of the republic
and have him guillotined. Since the island lacks such a device, a
requisition order goes out to fetch both a guillotine and an executioner.
Until they arrive from St. Martinique, the prisoner will be kept under the
custody of the captain of the local jail, who is married to "Madame La," as
the local denizens refer to the wife of La Capitain. With these spare
elements of a tale based on true events, director Patrice LeConte
("Ridicule" was his credit) delivers a powerful dramatic message in "The
Widow of St. Pierre" against capital punishment and for the redemptive
power of love and compassion.
Soon after being jailed, the prisoner Neel Auguste (played by Emir
Kusturica, the Yugoslav director of "Underground") is summoned to the
apartment of the captain whose wife has taken pity on him. Since it might
take months for the guillotine to arrive, there is no reason not to make
him comfortable until that moment arrives. Played by Juliette Binoche,
Madame La is innocent of suspicion or fear. Under her supervision, Neel
builds a greenhouse in the jail's courtyard. Holding up a flower, she tells
him that the goal is to bring life and beauty into a hostile environment.
With her eyes on the hulking, withdrawn prisoner, it is clear that she
seeks to reap life and beauty from him as well. After the greenhouse is
finished, she takes him with her everywhere in the village to find other
chores to keep him busy, from repairing roofs to saving the life of a woman
on a runaway wagon.
While the captain (Daniel Auteuil) is deeply in love with his wife and
anxious to assist her in this reclamation project, he is by no means a
typical jailer. Of an aristocratic bearing, he seems to prefer riding his
horse "Salt Cod" on the rocky cliffs of St. Pierre to the mundane details
of jail-keeping. Even before Madame La ever takes an interest in the
prisoner, he decides to leave the cell door open. After all, on this remote
island there is virtually no escape.
Alongside the human drama of "The Widow of St. Pierre," the landscape and
population of the island help to shape the narrative of the film and lend
it a particularly somber tone, especially during the winter months which
anticipate the arrival of the guillotine. In their black oilskin parkas,
the local sailors and dockhands stand out vividly against the drifting snow
like hunched-over figures in a Breughel landscape. And it is these humble,
faceless and nameless men and women of St. Pierre who eventually rally to
Neel. When the local magistrates put up posters advertising for an
executioner, they tear them down one by one.
The captain and his wife are not ideologues. The only time they seem to
take notice of politics is when he sits by the fireside in their living
room reading a Paris newspaper. He mentions to Madame La that there is
strife and bloodshed in the streets, but does not connect it to the more
immediate drama facing them and the prisoner. Of course only one year
earlier all of Europe was being swept by revolution against the old order.
France, which was once in the vanguard, had now become a bastion of
reaction all in the name of the values of "the republic". The captain and
his wife seem to adhere to an earlier notion of civic duty that has not
been tainted by the guillotine or the Thermidor republic.
Essentially "Widow of St. Pierre" is not a political film, although it
speaks to a question addressing all progressives, namely how to live by a
set of principles. It is this higher calling that the main characters of
the film respond to, in the face of the callousness and brutality of the
existing order. This is also the theme of "Ridicule," LeConte's last film
which dramatized the struggle of an aristocrat in pre-1789 France to rid
his ancestral lands of the malarial swamp that is killing his subjects. To
gain an audience with the King, he discovers that he must master the art of
"ridicule", the verbal art of one-upsmanship that provides a cruel
entertainment for the court's inner circle.
Although not remarked on by the film critics, "Widow of St. Pierre" evokes
another 19th century tale of capital punishment. While Herman Melville's
"Billy Budd" also draws together an aristocratic officer and a commoner
facing execution, the decision here is to obey the law rather than a higher
justice. The captain of a British warship decides to proceed with an
execution despite all the evidence pointing to an accidental death provoked
by extreme cruelty from another officer whom the ship's crew hates and
fears. Budd, like Neel, is beloved by the commoners.
Unlike St. Pierre's captain, the captain in Melville's tale opts for
following the letter of the law. While this tale has been analyzed and
deconstructed by modern literary scholars as having to do with anything
from homosexuality to theology, it is essentially a story like most of
Melville's, one deeply entwined with the struggle of ordinary working
people against a cruel, class-divided society. For an analysis from this
perspective, see the article titled "Billy Budd and Capital Punishment" at
http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~hbf/bbcap.htm by H. Bruce Franklin, one of
the USA's most distinguished Melville scholars and a long-time socialist.
"Widow of St. Pierre" is currently being shown at the Paris Theater in NYC
and can probably be seen at art-houses in major cities around the United
States.
