Title
Review for Hoop Dreams (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     First, let me confess that I have been bored by sports for the
past twenty years--name any sports star, and I've never heard of him or
her.  Second, I love documentaries above all movies.  Third, like the
people in this movie, I was once on a sports team in a quest for the
big state championship--in my case I was on a team (Garland) that won
the Texas state high school football championship 2 years in a row
(1963 and 1964), and we even played one of our playoffs in the Cotton
Bowl.  Finally, I came from a poor but stable family.  All of this
affects my extreme and strongly positive reactions to this incredible
movie.
     To set the stage for HOOP DREAMS, let me pose a few questions to
you.  Are you aware that public and private high schools today have
scouts that recruit potential star athletes while they are in GRADE
SCHOOL?   Are you aware that grade schoolers are offered scholarships
to private high school with all of the tuition paid plus jobs in the
summer if they are and stay athletic stars?   Do you know what happens
if their grades fall down or if they turn out to be mere mortals and
not athletic gods?
     To state the same facts in a different light, are you aware that
there are schools so nice that they will give ghetto kids the ability
to leave an awful environment where they could be killed and where
there are almost no job opportunities?   Are you aware of the
incredible expense the schools will go through to keep their stars in
top physical shape and how generous they are with money to treat
injuries?
     HOOP DREAMS is a documentary of over five years of the lives of
two boys, their families, coaches, friends, and recruiters.  At the
first of the movie we see the boys being recruited by St. Joseph's
which is 1-1/2 hours one way from their home.  They both start there on
scholarships and commute every day by train.  From there the movie
takes many turns.  They are all fascinating, but you will have to see
the movie, I will not spoil it.
     In the movie you get to know very well, not only the two kids
(William Gates and Arthur Agee), but both sets of parents, and the St.
Joseph's coach.  You begin to feel how hard it is to make it in the
ghetto.  I was poor when growing up, but nothing compared to this level
of poverty plus these kids came from unstable homes whereas I had the
blessing of a stable one.  Nevertheless, I found myself really
empathizing with these boys.  I wanted them to make it SO much.  Their
triumphs thrilled me, and when they would not apply themselves, I
wanted to shake them and say wake up you have some great opportunities
here--don't blow it.
     Both Daddies were NBA wannabees.  They each thought they could
have made it if they had just done this or that.  The moms were also
quite interesting, and you really felt their daily struggles to make
ends meet.  The St.  Joseph's coach was easy to dislike, yet there was
something ultimately redeeming about him as well.
     As a documentary maker, Steve James, is one of the best based on
this movie.  Imagine investing over five years of your life just in the
filming.  The camerawork, especially toward the end, is more evocative
of a bigger budget movie than the usual home movie flavor you normally
get in a documentary.  The marvelous editing by Bill Haugse, Steve
James, and Frederick Marx has a lot of energy and although you are
sitting in your seat for a long time, you never get tired because the
subject matter is so interesting, and it is so well done.
     Sports movie are especially tricky.  You can show a lot of sports
action and do little story development, or you can mainly talk about
sports with some shots to illustrate your points.  This movie hits just
the right compromise--again, great editing.  You see a lot of
basketball, but mainly it dwells on the kids and their families.  If
there is a villain in the show, it is probably the recruiters.  After
seeing this, you may rank recruiters as a class below politicians you
don't like, aluminum siding salesmen, and contingency fee lawyers.
     The movie runs 2:49, and I would not want a second of it edited
out.  It is rated barely PG-13 for a smaller than expected amount of
profanity.  I recommend it to everyone.  Any kid older than 12 could
and should see it.  Any kids thinking about sports as a career or as a
way to get a scholarship, should consider this movie required viewing.
Got a budding athlete?   Take him or her to see this film tonight!
HOOP DREAMS is film making at its absolute best, and I award ****.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 26, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Featuring:  William Gates, Arthur Agee.
A documentary by Steve James, Peter Gilbert and Fred Marx.
     It's pretty rare when a documentary gets a theatrical release.
It's even more rare, about as frequent as Sonny and Cher reunions, when
documentaries end up playing in multiplexes.  But sure enough, I
checked my local theater listings to discover that HOOP DREAMS was
playing not at one of the local "art houses," but at the sixteen screen
multiplex.  If it means that more people will see this exceptional
film, I'm all for it.  HOOP DREAMS is not just a film about basketball;
it is about as insightful a film about the American inner city
experience as you will find, with more drama than a dozen fiction
films.
     HOOP DREAMS opens in 1987, introducing us to two 14-year-old
basketball prospects from the schoolyards of Chicago, William Gates and
Arthur Agee.  Both are being recruited to play for St. Joseph's, a
private Catholic prep school far from their homes in the inner city, by
coach Gene Pingatore, and both decide to attend.  William, the more
talented of the two, plays immediately for the varsity, while Arthur
struggles on the freshman team.  When a tuition increase the next year
threatens both boys' ability to attend St.  Joseph's, William receives
a scholarship from a school booster, while Arthur is forced to leave
St. Joseph's and enroll in a public school.  The film then follows
William and Arthur through their senior years, examining their fortunes
on and off the court as they pursue their dream of making it to the
NBA.
     Part of the tremendous appeal of HOOP DREAMS comes from the
fascinating cast of characters to which we are introduced.  There is
Coach Pingatore, an intense disciplinarian who reduces his players to
cogs in a machine with his comment that "another one walks out the
door, another one walks in the door; that's what it's all about." There
is William's older brother Curtis, himself a former high school
basketball star who didn't make it, and who has transferred all his
dreams to William.  And there is Bo Agee, Arthur's troubled father, who
battles a drug addiction and his tendency towards violence.  Along with
William and Arthur, we follow these individuals for nearly five years,
and develop an intense interest in their lives.
     But for all its impressive scope, HOOP DREAMS would not have
worked had it only been about kids playing basketball.  In a broader
sense, HOOP DREAMS is really about a world in which young black males
believe that their only chance to get out is to succeed in athletics.
A key figure in this theme appears only briefly in person:  Isiah
Thomas, a former star at St. Joseph's who has gone on to NBA stardom.
Thomas is omnipresent, in his retired high school jersey, in press
clippings, in the comparisons made between him and William Gates.  He
becomes the idol for these two boys, but the result of their obsession
with basketball is academic troubles for both.  It is the same
obsession behind Curtis' intense desire to see William succeed as a
proxy for him, and similarly for Bo's desire to see Arthur succeed.  In
one telling scene, William tries to tell his girlfriend that his only
chance to go to college is basketball; she responds that she is going
to college herself, without any help from basketball, and raising a
daughter.  But the boys don't seem convinced that academics can be a
way out, and so they find themselves part of a money game played by
college and high school coaches alike.
     HOOP DREAMS is thought-provoking, but it is also entertaining.
There are several tense game sequences, and a run towards a possible
state championship by one of the boys in his senior year; there is the
drama of watching William attempt to recover from a potentially
career-threatening knee injury.  In one extremely satisfying scene late
in the film, a graduating William tells Coach Pingatore that he wants
to study communication "so that when someone asks me for money, I'll
know the right way to tell them no."  And there are wrenching moments
like Arthur's mother decorating his 18th birthday cake while explaining
that it's reason to celebrate because "he made it to 18, and he's
alive."
     The Academy Awards have been notorious for overlooking
documentaries which garner tremendous public acclaim.  Overlooking HOOP
DREAMS would be criminal.  It is not simply a great documentary; it is
one of the best films of any kind you will see this year.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Surprisingly engaging documentary
     that follows two promising inner-city basketball players
     from high school recruiting to freshman year at college.
     The story is surprising both in its completeness and the
     dramatic power it has, considering it is not a script
     that could be planned in advance.  Rating: +2 (-4 to
     +4).
     How does a documentary film like this get made?  If a director
has a script in front of him, he can be fairly certain that there will
be some measure of drama coming out of the film he is shooting.  A
documentary about the Third Reich has got to give its director the
relative security of being able to scan all the materials and assure
himself that there is a story worth telling.  But how did producers
Fred Marx, Steve James, and Peter Gilbert know that if they started
filming two promising junior-high-school level basketball players for
four or five years that at the end of the time they would have a film
with the dramatic impact of HOOP DREAMS?  This is a documentary that
sustains interest for its entire 174-minute length.
     The film follows the high school careers of William Gates and
Arthur Agee, two black Chicago boys, promising hoopsters, drafted by
St.  Joseph's, a suburban Catholic high school that has a strong
emphasis on basketball.  They are in the same program that developed
star player Isiah Thomas.  Both boys have learned to spell success
"NBA."  William comes to St. Joseph's on full scholarship, paid by a
patron who holds a high position at the Encyclopedia Britannica.
Arthur is not so lucky; he is on half scholarship with his family
paying the balance.  This difference will prove to have far-reaching
effects on Arthur's high school basketball.  Arthur's father becomes a
crack addict, turns to crime, and is sent to prison. The Agees are
unable to pay the school's tuition and Arthur is thrown out and must go
instead to Marshall, a local all-black school.  Despondent over family
problems, Arthur has a very poor sophomore year while William prospers
only to be brought low by a knee injury.  The camera follows the story
of the two players and the pressures to win that they face.  Without a
word of commentary the film stingingly indicts high schools and
colleges that treat athletes like commodities.  High schools programs
treat athletes as if winning were everything; colleges treat them as if
money is everything and winning is the way to get it.
     250 hours of film were shot to provide the filmmakers with enough
material to tell a complete and detailed story. Even so, one is often
surprised that the camera was present and filming at what are often
very personal moments.  We get a good deal more of both the Agee and
Gates families than one would ever expect they would agree to.  There
are surprisinglyly unflattering portraits of people like Gene
Pingatore, the St. Joseph's basketball coach, and recruiters from
schools like Marquette.
     You do not have to be a basketball fan to find this a remarkable
documentary about much more in American life than basketball.  I myself
have no interest in the game and I give the film a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Most of the movie-going public shies away from seeing
documentaries ... and almost three hours?   They want nice,
fictionalized stories.  Those are going to miss out if they do not go
see the very exciting, thrilling, at times heartbreaking, story of two
real inner-city Chicago junior high school athletes whose dream was to
make it one day into the NBA.
     What makes the film so wonderful is that three filmmakers, Steve
James, Frederick Marx and Peter Gilbert, followed and filmed the two
young men, William Gates and Arthur Agee, for almost five years.  While
ostensibly about basketball ... and there is lots of footage showing
practice and games ... the story is really of the hope that motivated
William and Arthur, and about their fathers and mothers and what
happened to each during all the years it took to make the movie.
     More gripping than the basketball scenes are the relations with
the coaches, (one of whom is suing for having been pictured as a kind
of monster), and the personal lives of the young men and their
families.  Fortunately for the filmmakers, if not for the people in
the movie, much takes place that they could not have foreseen but which
enhanced the film with even more drama.
     This is one documentary you do not want to miss even if you do not
know a basketball from a ping-pong ball.

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring: William Gates, Arthur Agee, Sheila Agee, Emma Gates, 
           Curtis Gates, Earl Smith, and Gene Pingatore 
Narrated by Steve James 
Director: Steve James 
Producers: Steve James, Frederick Marx, and Peter Gilbert and 
           Kartemquin Films, Chicago 
Cinematography: Peter Gilbert 
Released by Fine Line Features 
     The wonderful thing about dreams, like hope, is that everyone can
nurture their own, and there's no cost.  It's taking the next
step--transforming those wispy ideals and half-realized wishes into
reality--that demands a price, and sometimes a high one at that.
HOOP DREAMS, the tale of two high school basketball players, is less a
story about the sport than it is a chronicle of life in the inner city
and of following Aldous Huxley's advice that "a man's reach should
exceed his grasp."
     Traditionally, documentarians know the endings of their films
before they start shooting.  This is not always the case, however; HOOP
DREAMS is an excellent counterexample.  Like other features filmed as
the events take place (such as Michael Apted's excellent SEVEN UP
series and 1992's BROTHER'S KEEPER), this picture has a legitimate
dramatic structure that is equally as compelling as a scripted slice of
fiction.
     HOOP DREAMS follows two Chicago youths, William Gates and Arthur
Agee, from their Freshman year of high school to their first year of
college.  In addition to documenting the inevitable on-court maturation
process, the movie illustrates the difficulties of balancing sports
with scholastic and family pressures.  Neither William nor Arthur are
advanced academically, and both suffer through a variety of
away-from-school crises.
     At the start of HOOP DREAMS, when William and Arthur are 14, each
appears to be a solid prospect for recruiting by "white" suburban
basketball powerhouse St. Joseph High School and its legendary coach,
Gene Pingatore.  Arthur has the quickest step one talent scout has seen
in five years, and William looks like the "next Isiah Thomas."  One
point explored by this film is that no matter how "can't miss" a
prospect is, and regardless of their level of talent and enthusiasm,
most of them, in fact, fail.  Being the star of a high school team does
not guarantee a trip to the NBA, and realizing this represents a rude
awakening for William and Arthur.
     While William quickly becomes Coach Pingatore's "go-to guy" on the
varsity squad, Arthur's slow development as a player allows him to be
dropped from the Freshman team.  When his parents can no longer afford
St. Joseph's tuition, Arthur is cut loose and sent back to public
school.  His home life is further disrupted by financial struggles and
the departure of his father.  William, on the other hand, suffers a
series of knee injuries that erode his confidence, and the unexpected
arrival of a baby daughter throws his personal life into further
turmoil.  (Oddly, the film makers don't inform us that William has a
girlfriend until Alicia is born.)
     The rich texture of HOOP DREAMS' drama is its greatest asset.
This is a film that goes beyond the verisimilitude of something to come
from the pen of Spike Lee or John Singleton, into the realm of real
life.  The shattered illusions of William and Arthur are all the more
poignant because these are not the dividends of a screenwriter's
fertile imagination.  And the drug deals depicted are chilling for
exactly the same reason.
     HOOP DREAMS is not without flaws, some of which--like the
irregular transitions and erratic pacing--are understandable results
of the manner in which the film was put together.  Film makers Steve
James, Frederick Marx, and Peter Gilbert amassed 250 hours of
interviews, clips, and game footage, then edited it all down to
one-hundred seventy-one minutes.  Arguably, more could have been cut
without undermining the story or its themes.  There are times when HOOP
DREAMS threatens to drag.
     Most movies about sports lack anything but the most rudimentary
tension.  After all, in pictures like HOOSIERS and THE NATURAL, we know
which team is going to win--regardless of how unlikely the manner of
the victory is.  Not so for HOOP DREAMS, which presents a number of
condensed real games where the outcome is as much in question as in any
genuine sporting event.  Even viewers without an appreciation of
basketball will find that they have a rooting interest.
     Ultimately, however, HOOP DREAMS is about life and its challenges,
both on and off the basketball court, and that's the reason you don't
have to be a sports fan for this film to work.  If any single line sums
up the lessons learned by the two protagonists, it comes late in the
movie, and is spoken by William in his Marquette University dorm room:
"People always say to me, 'When you get to the NBA, don't forget me.'
Well, if I don't get to the NBA, you don't forget about me."
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     The lives of real people can sometimes be far more interesting
than anything that a screenwriter can imagine.  Because of this, it is
completely possible for a good documentary to be as dramatic and
engrossing as any fiction film. HOOP DREAMS is a strong example of what
can be accomplished with the documentary form.
     HOOP DREAMS follows two Chicago inner-city youth through their
high school years.  At the beginning of the film, we meet William Gates
and Arthur Agee, two fourteen-year-old kids getting ready to begin high
school.  Both are extremely talented basketball players that are
recruited by St. Joseph High School, a small private school that
includes NBA-star Isiah Thomas among its alumni.  Both Gates and Agee
are recruited from inner-city playground basketball courts and are
given scholarships to help them attend the expensive private school.
The film follows them through their high school graduation, ending as
both are leaving for college.
     Filmmakers Steve James, Fredrick Marx and Peter Gilbert originally
conceived this project as a short subject for PBS (it is partially
financed by KTCA-TV out of Minneapolis with additional financial
support from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting). Over time, it
became obvious that they had a much bigger story here.  The result is a
fascinating 3-hour-and-45-minute examination of the lives of Gates and
Agee.  Over the course of the film, we truly feel that we come to know
these kids and their families.  It left me wanting to know more about
what happens to these people.
     The makers of this film were very fortunate to have chosen Gates
and Agee as their subjects.  There are some parallels to their lives,
but for the most part, they go in widely different directions.  The
different lives of the two boys allow the filmmakers to show a wide
variety of experiences.  The film is extremely well edited, smoothly
cutting from one boy to the other.  Often, the film is deftly edited to
compare and contrast their experiences.
     As we first meet them, Agee and Gates seem to be starting from the
same point.  The film makes it completely clear that the St. Joseph
administration invited both boys to attend based on their potential on
the basketball court.  Gates quickly lives up the school's expectations
and the school bends over backwards to provide him the financial help
needed to continue attending.  The St. Joseph coach frequently points
out a similarity between Gates and Isiah Thomas, leading him to believe
that Gates is another chance for the school to generate a star.
     Agee, on the other hand, does *not* initially prove to be a
basketball star. Because of this, the school essentially abandons him.
Shortly into his sophomore year, he is forced to drop out of St.
Joseph when his family can no longer afford tuition.  As shown in the
film, it looks very much like both boys were "hired" to play for St.
Joseph.  When Agee's playing didn't live up to the school's lofty
expectations, they essentially "fired" him.  The rest of the movie
follows Agee's experiences at Marshall High School, an inner-city
public school.  At Marshall, Agee eventually comes into his own as a
basketball star.
     Basketball plays a key role in this film, but the film isn't
really about the sport itself.  Instead, the sport represents
opportunity for both Gates and Agee.  They see it as their ticket to a
better life.  As the film explores the other people in their life, we
also see that some people see the chance to live vicariously through
the boys.  In particular, Agee's father and Gates' brother both are
looking to the boys for a "second chance" to fulfill their own dreams
of a basketball career.
     Isiah Thomas is frequently mentioned in the film as the ultimate
example of someone who escaped from inner-city life to NBA stardom.
Both families and the St. Joseph coach frequently express a desire for
Agee and/or Gates to become the next Thomas.  The film subtlely
suggests that both boys might have been better off if they had been
pushed to be *themselves* instead of trying to get them to emulate
Thomas' success.
     For the most part, director Steve James stays in the background
allowing his subjects to tell their own stories.  Where necessary,
James does provide some understated narration, but he also knows when
elaboration is not necessary.  The narration never overshadows the
events being shown or the words of the people being interviewed.
     The film also benefits a great deal from the adept camerawork.
The filmmakers have a good instinct about what to photograph, resulting
in them showing some very key moments in the kids' lives.  Of course,
persistence is also a big contributor to this success. The filmmakers
reportly shot well over 100 hours of footage allowing them to choose
from a wide variety of material.  The ambition of the project
definitely pays off in the finished film.
     The fact that the film is showing the lives of real people
provides HOOP DREAMS with a very refreshing unpredictability.  Real
life doesn't have standard formulas like most fiction films.  There are
numerous surprises in the film thanks to the fact that we are being
shown real events as they actually happened.  This unpredictability is
most evident during the basketball scenes.  In most fictional movie
sporting events, it is easy to predict whether or not the heroes will
win the big game.  In this movie, the sporting events are all real with
an equal likelihood of winning or losing.
     As good as this film is, it isn't perfect.  At times, the
filmmakers seemed a little too interested in the basketball games. It
certainly was necessary to show a lot of footage of the boys' playing,
but the filmmakers often feel that the games speak for themselves.  It
eventually begins to seem repetitive.  The later basketball sequences
were the only times that I found myself noticing the film's length.
The movie really needed to elaborate on what these games *meant* to the
people involved.  I would have liked to have heard Gates, Agee, and
their family *commenting* during some of the game sequences.  Instead,
we get nothing but James providing dry, purely descriptive commentary
on what is happening.
     Another problem is probably inherent to the documentary form.  The
subjects are clearly aware of the presense of the camera and are
understandably unwilling to show some of their more unhappy
experiences.  There are hints of certain key events that clearly didn't
happen while the camera was present.  In particular, we are given some
sketchy details about problems with Agee's father.  We are told that he
has a drug problem and that he left the family a couple times, but
there is a definite feeling that many of the details were kept from the
cameras.  We learn a lot about these people, but it is hard not to feel
that there was a lot going on that we *don't* learn.
     The film's origin as a TV project causes a major technical problem
when seeing it in a movie theater.  Most of the footage was shot on
videotape which does not transfer extremely well to 35mm film.  The
whole film is visibly blurred, making it a bit difficult to watch.  The
blurring particularly made it difficult to follow many of the
basketball sequences.  The cathartic effects of seeing this film with a
crowd makes it worth seeing in a theater, but this is a very rare case
of a film that will *look* considerably better on video.
     In the long run, these flaws do not take much away from the power
of this film.  HOOP DREAMS provides a fascinating look at some pivotal
events in some very real lives.  This is a very special film that
allows the viewer to meet some very special people.  It is an absolute
must-see film.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1994, PG-13, 176 minutes [2 hours, 56 minutes]
Produced by Frederick Marx, Steve James, Peter Gilbert, directed by Steve
James.
"Hoop Dreams" is a moving documentary about two poor black teenagers and
their struggles to succeed despite how troublesome and oppressive their lives
may be. It proves that sometimes reality can be even stranger and more brutal
than fiction. 
As the film opens, we meet two black teens living in the housing projects of
Chicago. Arthur Agee and William Gates have just been given partial and full
scholarships (respectively) to St. Joseph's High School, a private Catholic
school way out in the suburbs. The immediate atmosphere plays like so many
fictional dramatic films about life in the ghettos ("Menace II Society,"
"Juice"), but this is much more powerful in a shorter amount of time because
it is real. 
The families of the boys are portrayed in just the right manner; it is
obvious they are poor but the film does not wallow in depravity. We're not
meant to (or really allowed to) feel sorry for them, just the opposite in
fact. We know Arthur and William each have a special talent that can and will
take them places.
Freshman year at St. Joe's proves to be difficult for Arthur who only makes
the Junior Varsity team, while William dominates the Varsity squad. We meet
Coach Pingatore who would be straight out of the cliche book if this was a
fictional movie; he's middle-aged, white, has a short temper and pushes his
players to their breaking point. It is this element of internal drive that
becomes the real focal point of the film. 
Arthur and William both love the game, but since they have suddenly been
upgraded to a higher education, they find the academic work difficult. They
both seek help, but only William is able to pass and Arthur must withdraw
from St. Joe's because his tuition assistance has been cut due to his grades.
He then enrolls in the poor local public school and we see just how bad
living conditions in his environment can be.
If the same story had been told in the form of a drama I'm not sure it would
be believable. Arthur's father, who seems like a caring person, suddenly
leaves the family after 20 years and is arrested on drug charges. Meanwhile,
William injures his knee and cannot play basketball for a long time. Elements
like these would be melodramatic anywhere else, but since this is real and
these people now seem like old friends, it is suspenseful because we really
care for them.
The game of basketball itself makes the film powerful. How many times in
mainstream sports films have we seen underdog teams and/or athletes come from
behind and beat the juggernauts? The title of the film is "Hoop Dreams" not
"Hoop Reality," because they don't always win, but it is the boys' dreams
that control their lives. The filmmakers carefully incorporate games and
crucial moments, causing for suspense and excitement that works on a
metaphysical level.
What makes the film so uplifting is the fact the boys never give up hope no
matter how many bad things happen to them. Even though he does not do well
academically, Arthur is content with his situation. William is offered full
scholarships to top-ranked colleges, but if he does not get at least 18 on
the ACT, he won't be able to attend any of them.
We do get to see what happens to them after they graduate from high school,
but I'm not sure if it's relevant. On one hand, it is crucial to the ultimate
outcomes of their lives and their dreams to make it to the NBA. But on the
other hand, the film works as a powerful depiction without "resolving"
anything.
"Hoop Dreams" is probably one of the most inspirational films I've ever
seen. Just like the lives of its subjects, it debunks stereotypes and
predictability, and proves the American Dream is still alive... even where
you'd least expect to find it. 

