Title
Review for Cool World (1992)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., PG-13, Animated/Comedy, 1992
Director: Ralph Bakshi
Cast: Kim Basinger, Gabriel Byrne, Brad Pitt
     Brad Pitt is on a motorcycle with his mom when a drunk driver hits
the bike.  Pitt's mother is killed but Pitt survives.   A cartoon
scientist brings Pitt to Cool World, a world of cartoons (where cartoons
are called Doodles and humans are called Noids).  Several years later
Doodle Holli Would (Kim Basinger) wants to get to the Real World
(Earth).  She brings cartoonist Gabriel Byrne to Cool World to get him
to make love to her.  If Byrne makes love to her, she will be able to go
to the Real World.  Pitt, now a Cool World police officer, tries to make
sure that Byrne doesn't make love to Basinger.
     I found COOL WORLD to be an excellent cartoon and much better than
any of the other films by Ralph Bakshi that I have seen (HEY GOOD
LOOKIN', STREETFIGHT (originally titled COONSKIN), and I think LORD OF
THE RINGS).  I fully recommend this film to anybody who has a bizarre or
twisted taste in films.  This film is, like actor Brad Pitt described it
in an interview, "Roger Rabbit on acid."  I give COOL WORLD a five on a
scale of zero to five.  COOL WORLD is rated PG-13 for adult situations,
adult humor, and explicit language.  No, this is not a nice little
animated film to bring your small children to.   Because of some of the
scenes, this film is also not one to go to if you are easily grossed
out.  I will not go into details but some of them are really funny (esp.
in the cop chase).
     The animation in this film is in the traditional Bakshi style,
crude but good, which is part of the reason that I tend to enjoy his
films.  His animation has a style of its own, which some people don't
seem to like.  Cool World is interestingly designed with its twisting
buildings that go up above the clouds and twisting roads that go all
over the place.  I feel that Cool World was well designed as a cartoon
world, especially with all the cartoons on the streets bringing sadistic
harm to other cartoons.  Maybe one cartoon is chasing another with an
axe or a safe falls on a doodle, etc.  This is an obvious jab at modern
cartoons that are aired on the television.
     The way that the sets for the live action were designed were
creative.  The sets, in Cool World only, were made to look like a
cartoon, with only two dimensions.  When the camera went sideways on a
set, it looked like a piece of paper, flat.  I also enjoyed how the live
characters interacted with the cartoons, yes I know it has been done
many times before but I still enjoy it.
     Unfortunately I have to agree with Rick J. Rauser (r.a.m.r. #01431)
that COOL WORLD will have a short stay in the theaters.  I don't think
that for the most part people are still enjoying films like this.  Most
people, I feel would rather go and see a film like BATMAN RETURNS.  I
recommend that if you are planning to see this film that you see it soon
before it leaves the theaters because it really is worth seeing.  I
recommend seeing this film in a theater because there is always so much
going on on the screen that some of the movie will be lost on a
television screen.
     The actors do a great job with their roles.  Kim Basinger does a
great job as Holli Would, a sultry but egocentric person (Jessica Rabbit
comes to mind).  She just has a way of making the character come to
life.  Brad Pitt is good as the cop who really wants to be a Doodle.
Gabriel Byrne also puts in a good performance as the cartoonist who
becomes obsessed with making love to his creation, Holli Would.  The
wide number of Doodles are great, some nice, some evil; most with a
comic twist to them that enlivens them.  I also love the sentence on the
top of the posters for the film "Holli Would if she could."

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Wretched, supposedly fanciful combination of animation and live
action that puts a fat nail in Ralph Bakshi's career coffin.
COOL WORLD was stalled and then re-started when ROGER RABBIT took theaters by
storm. Based on what's on screen, it should have remained stalled. It's a
haphazardly-assembled movie that nobody thought very much about,
except in how it would look. And even there they didn't do much thinking.
Brad Pitt (called Frank Harris) opens the movie, shortly after "the war".
After coming home, he rides on a motorcycle with his mother, gets into an
accident, and somehow manages to breach a path into a parallel dimension
called, none too surprisingly, Cool World. The inhabitants are cartoons,
called Doodles -- although based on the mouth/dialog mismatch, I suspect they
were originally called Toons before the ADR people decided to avoid trouble.
Flash-forward. Jack Deebs (Gabriel Byrne) is a comic-book creator who's about
to get out of prison. We learn though various incompetently-placed bits and
pieces of exposition that he landed there when he murdered the guy who was
duking his wife, although like a lot of things in this movie, that kind of
behavior is not shown to really be a part of his personality. It's just sort
of dropped in. But Deebs has bigger problems: he keep sliding back and forth
between reality and the world of his comics, which is, of course, Cool World.
And then one day he lands there for keeps, and is instantly hit upon by
sexbomb Doodle Holli Would ("realized" by Kim Basinger, who has gone on to
prove that she is, in fact, a very capable actress).
COOL WORLD tries to set up the "rules" about its universe and falls flat on
its face. For instance, Doodles and humans are never supposed to have sex, for
reasons that are never made clear. Worse, the consequences of such intercourse
are depicted later in the movie, but they're so confusing and nonsensical that
we don't even care.
The movie's look is frantic and inconsistent. Bakshi's animation has never
been long on clarity, and COOL WORLD looks like a hashish-crazed version of
those Jack Davis cartoons in MAD, where grotty-looking maniacs all chase each
other around the room. The art direction, staging, 'tweening, and everything
else are pitched so hard and so far over the top that it's impossible to FOCUS
on anything. There is less imagination at work here than
anthologizing. Everything looks bizarre for the sake of being bizarre, and the
"ironic" contrasts (the little fluffy bunnies, etc.) are just witless.
The live-action backdrops also don't look credible. Bakshi, in an interview,
lovingly described how the sets were created by simply projecting cels of
animation onto them and then having the builders paint using the projections
as guidelines. The results aren't like a cartoon come to life; they look like
a very bad set for a school play. One of the walls vibrates disturbingly when
Pitt throws Byrne against it.
The story shows the signs of a script, and a movie, that were hacked to shreds
and then pieced back together on the editing table. An interesting way to find
out about tampering is to read the comic-book tie-ins or novelizations of
movies: you frequently see a lot of material that existed in the shooting
script, provided to the artists or writers of the tie-ins, but never made it
to the screen. COOL WORLD's tie-ins not only have a totally different ending,
but show the fingerprints of meddling all the way through. At no point, I
guess, did anyone take a look at his story and decide it simply wasn't enough
-- that there needed to be a clear line of logic from beginning to end, that
the characters had to be motivated by other things than passing whims, and
that we get more out of the movie than a juicy headache.
Ralph Bakshi seems to have been an artifact of a very particular time. His
earlier movies, like HEAVY TRAFFIC and STREET FIGHT, were inconsistent, but
also funny and nasty in hallucinatory ways. Then he tried to create more
upscale work, like the spastic WIZARDS and the over-touted LORD OF THE RINGS
productions. Now this. He hasn't done anything since, has he?
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Author
Richard John Rauser
      Yup, I'm back in the reviewing game.  To all of you on
rec.arts.movies who (for some reason known only to God himself) got
upset that I changed my opinion about BATMAN RETURNS, go to heck.  I'm
too nice to say "hell".  :-)
      I saw COOL WORLD after reading David Brin's article in which he
urges people to avoid this film because, like all of Bakshi's other
films (in Brin's opinion) it is a work of pure, unmitigated evil.  Of
course, Brin hadn't even seen COOL WORLD at the time but that was beside
the point... (sigh).
      Let me say two things about COOL WORLD right off the bat: (1) I
don't think it will do very well at the box office, and (2) I loved it.
Why do I think it will (more than likely) be a financial flop?  To put
it simply,  COOL WORLD has very limited appeal.  It is a fast-paced
flick with little attention to plot and characterization that operates
on an entirely surreal level.  It is a dream, a fantasy, a look inside
the psyche.  There are plot holes and overall the movie doesn't make a
lot of sense.  People who go to COOL WORLD expecting a fun cartoon for
the kiddies will probably walk out the instant they see Holli swinging
her hips, and people who go to this film expecting a consistent,
well-thought out plot will be screaming and whining five minutes after
the first plot hole.
      So why did I love it?  Simple... I knew what to expect.  Call it a
hunch, but I was expecting a fast-paced fantasy that appealed more to
the emotions than the intellect and I got what I expected.  COOL WORLD
is energy.  COOL WORLD is humour.  COOL WORLD is action.  COOL WORLD is
fantasy.  Complaining that there are some plot holes is like complaining
that a porno has too much sex.  Plot holes aren't relevant in COOL WORLD
because the film isn't about plot.  Oh sure, there *is* some semblance
of a plot and the movie does roll along towards its fulfillment, but
Bakshi is more interested in appealing to our senses, our emotions, and
with subverting our traditional ideas about heroism, stereotyping, and
what constitutes reality.  The exercise isn't intellectual so much as
it is allegorical and metaphysical.  You have to let yourself go to
enjoy COOL WORLD.  You can't sit there and try to make sense of the
universe.  COOL WORLD is a film about the senses, not sense.
      That's another big reason I think this film will have limited
appeal.  (Heck, I *know* it has limited appeal :-).  Most movie goers
are too wrapped up in trying to poke holes in the plot and trying to
understand the world presented to them in logical terms to be able to
enjoy a metaphysical and emotional experience like COOL WORLD.  Someone
pointed out to me that a character at the film's end is too corny and
silly to be taken seriously.  I replied by saying, "That was the entire
*point* behind that character!"  This person missed the emotion and the
allegory because he was too busy trying to fit the film into logical
pigeon holes.  He couldn't see the forest for the trees.
      So be warned: COOL WORLD is one wild ride.  The music is
fantastic, the film is non-stop energy, and the humour is very clever
and very consistent.  Bakshi is poking fun at many things on many levels
and if you watch the film with a careful eye you'll see what it's trying
to say.  But COOL WORLD is not a film for people who love Sherlock
Holmes style plot, and it's not a film for the people on
rec.arts.sf.movies who spent endless hours discussing TERMINATOR 2 plot
holes.
       COOL WORLD is a film for people who want to get blown out of
their seats for two hours and then figure out after what it all meant.
It does mean something... quite a lot, really.  COOL WORLD rocks.  
       But you have to let it rock, and not everyone can do that.  On a
scale of one to ten, I give COOL WORLD 9/10.  It's that good.  But you
have to be able to appreciate it, and COOL WORLD appeals to limited
tastes.

Author
Craig Good
     COOL WORLD is the latest effort from Ralph Bakshi, the man who
directed such seminal works as FRITZ THE CAT, WIZARDS, and THE LORD OF
THE RINGS.  One thing you can say for Ralph is that his directorial
style reflects his own personality.  Trying to hold a conversation with
Bakshi has been likened to listening to someone spin the tuning dial on
a radio.
     This movie has all the continuity of a fever dream.  It's a
confused mish-mash of random, poorly-animated mayhem and wholesale
rotoscope over occasionally stunning background paintings.  The primary
appeal this film would seem to have is to the kind of desperate,
hormone-ravaged teens who are sorry that Jessica Rabbit never appeared
nude in PLAYBOY.  While the over-rendered Holli Would never doffs her
skimpies, Ralph compensates by peppering the film with plenty of
scatological references.  "Subtle" is not in this man's vocabulary.
     Just because the movie is dreadful doesn't mean there aren't a few
good moments.  Some of the animation, especially at the end of the film,
is quite good -- maybe about two minutes total -- and the large
background paintings in Cool World are way cool.  A pleasant surprise
was that Kim Basinger actually makes a very professional voice actress
(well, given the limitations of the character).
     The trouble is that none of the actors are given anything to work
with.  There is nothing to explain what any of them are doing.  There
are no consistent rules governing the interaction between the 'Noids of
the real world and the Doodles of the "cool world."  Isolated bits of
dialogue float in and out of focus while completely random acts of
cartoon violence fill the foreground.  COOL WORLD is one non-sequitur
after another.  The endless references to classic animated films,
especially FANTASIA, only succeed in making you wonder why you paid real
money to sit in the theatre.
     If you insist on seeing this movie, you probably will laugh several
times.  Some of those times may even be when Ralph wanted you to (there
is a hilarious scene with a cute bunny shooting craps).  But, if any of
COOL WORLD survives in your memory, it'll likely leave a taste in your
mouth to remind you of the last time you ate a whole jumbo bag of pork
rinds.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
   - The title has *got* to be a joke.  This is the ugliest and most uncool
     world I can imagine.  Gabriel Byrne must be mis-cast since he just does
     not seem freak-o enough to have imagined this world.  The parallel
     world would have anyone screaming to get out after fifteen minutes.
   - The idea that comic artists are really seeing a parallel universe is an
     old one.  I seem to remember in the 1960s they claimed that the current
     Flash lived in the same universe as the artists who drew the old Flash
     (the one with the Mercury helmet).  but the old Flash was really in a
     parallel universe.  And I'm pretty sure the idea goes at least as far
     back as 1930s fantasy.
   - Cardboard scenery seems out of place.  Cool World should be made of
     pure animation and live action.  The cardboard scenery makes no sense.
   - There are a few clever little satires on other animated films and
     perhaps a good line or two, but the incoherent story just is not very
     interesting.  It's a pity, since at least initially the concept seemed
     more complex and interesting than that of WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT.
   - Harris in 1945 is seeing a world that is in a cartoon style that would
     not be invented for another twenty years.  He would be used to
     animation of the Fleischer and Disney schools.  That should make the
     Cool World seem even more alien to him.

Author
Narciso Jaramillo
     Ralph Bakshi (FRITZ THE CAT, BASKETBALL JONES, LORD OF THE RINGS)
is generally known for two things: raw humor, and running out of money.
This time he's hooked up with Frank Mancuso (FRIDAY THE 13TH), so the
budget problems aren't there, but the humor is as raw as ever.  The
result is a guilty pleasure for animation fans, a flawed, possibly
offensive, but nevertheless amusing movie.
     Holli Would (voice by Kim Basinger) is a shapely, seductive cartoon
character (a "Doodle").  Although Doodles are sentient beings, they have
no sense of touch--they can't physically feel anything.  So Holli wants
to become a real human (a "Noid"), and cross over from the world of the
Doodles, the Cool World, into the real world.  To this end she seduces
comic-book artist Jack Deebs (Gabriel Byrne), who has some sort of
subconscious link to the Cool World and has drawn a successful series of
comic books based on his visions.  Unfortunately, her "reification," as
it were, has consequences for The Universe As We Know It, and detective
Frank Harris (Brad Pitt) has to clean up.
     The obvious genre comparison to make would be to WHO FRAMED ROGER
RABBIT, the huge Disney extravaganza that also combined live action with
exquisitely rendered animations.  COOL WORLD would certainly suffer by
the comparison in many ways.  Live action and animation are not combined
as often, the animations are not nearly as impressive, the acting is
weak, and the plot and continuity have gaping holes.
     Yet for all this, the vision of Doodle reality in COOL WORLD makes
more sense than the sanitized Toontown of ROGER RABBIT.  The Cool World
is cartoon humor taken to a logical extreme: if cartoon characters can't
really be killed or hurt, only embarrassed, and the entire purpose for
their existence is to provide entertainment through physical humor, then
why wouldn't they fill their entire life with completely random, utterly
meaningless acts of violence?  And so practically every scene is filled
with distracting Doodles beating on each other in a myriad ways.  Even
Harris, a Noid, has lived in the Cool World so long that he shoves
everyone around, Doodles and Noids alike.  He doesn't interact like a
normal human being anymore.
     The quality of the animation ranges from passable to excellent,
with much rotoscopish attention paid to Holli's figure, as expected.
Both the drawn backgrounds and live-action sets in the Cool World are
beautifully dark and twisted.  
     While there were enough good jokes (and some really funny gags) to
keep me amused, the film's weakest point is the sheer immaturity of most
of its humor--the humor of gonads and anvils.  But for all its sexism,
scatology, and gratuitous violence, we understand at the end that Bakshi
knows exactly what he's doing--glorifying an animator's wet dream--and
that he just doesn't care.  COOL WORLD is not about comic-book
characters, but about the artists who draw them and the people who read
them.  It is a glimpse into what they really fantasize about--and in the
end, the artist gets exactly what he wants.
     Unfortunately, this self-indulgence, amusing as it may be for us
comic fans, is precisely the film's downfall.  Overall, I give the film
a 4/10 for non-animation fans, and a 6/10 for animation fans.  For the
latter, I suggest waiting for it on video, so you can put it on pause or
slo-mo and look at all the little foreground sight gags.

Author
Paul Kearns
     COOL WORLD; Paramount Pictures, 1992; Produced by Frank Mancuso,
Jr. and directed by Ralph Bashki.  Stars Kim Basinger, Brad Pitt, and
Gabriel Byrne, plus a host of animated characters.  Rated PG-13 for
adult humor and innuendo.
     COOL WORLD is the story about two parallel realities, the one we
are used to (the "Real World") whose inhabitants are referred to as
"noids," and one filled with animated characters, or "doodles" ("Cool
World").  Actually, most of the scenes are in Cool World, since this is
the focus of the film.
     The main plot of COOL WORLD involves a character named Holli Would
("if she could"), and her attempts to cross over to the "Real World."
Holli, who is most easily described as an animated Marilyn Monroe (at
one point, Holli is imitating Ms. Monroe in LET'S MAKE LOVE), will stop
at nothing in her efforts.
     Jack Deebs (played by Gabriel Byrne), imprisoned for 10 years, has
visions of Cool World which he then draws -- making him popular in comic
book stores.  However, as Detective Frank Harris (played by Brad Pitt)
states, "[Cool World] exists with or without you [Deebs]."
     Holli Would (the "noid" version played by Kim Basinger) tries to
seduce Deebs into (and out of) Cool World by breaking the "oldest" and
apparently *only* law, "noids don't have sex with doodles."  Det. Harris'
job is to make sure no one breaks this law, including Holli, Deebs, and
himself.
     COOL WORLD is busy, madcap, and often loud; it's very much like
being at a party or dance club.  At any given time, the main scene takes
place behind two or more doodles chasing each other, or just running
past.  Especially in scenes with Det. Harris, things move between
"noid" and "doodle" (Harris stepping out of a car which is then seen
two-dimensional, etc).
     Between scene changes there's often a short cartoon having nothing
to do with the story line; falling safes and falling cows (yup) are
everyday occurrences in Cool World.  If these sort of distractions bother
you, you might not like COOL WORLD.
     COOL WORLD is (partly) a cartoon, but it is certainly not aimed at
children.  While there is nothing explicit, Holli Would (both as a
doodle and a noid) is extraordinarily seductive.  There are scenes which
might be considered violent (though not graphic) and most of the humor
is decidedly adult.
     It *is*, however, quite humorous in places.  During the final
scene, reminiscent of GHOSTBUSTERS, the "hero" character is especially
funny.   You should be able to get a good laugh out of it at least once
during the movie.
     Brad Pitt (the "hunk" boyfriend in THELMA AND LOUISE) puts in an
excellent performance.  He plays the "tough cop upholding the law even
if it goes against his wishes" well, and gives Frank Harris depth (not
bad for a character in a two-dimensional world, ha ha).
     Kim Basinger plays Holli Would well.  Kim portrays Holli's short
sighted determination as if it were her own.  Gabriel Byrne does a good
job as Jack Deebs, although Deebs' role is mostly reactive and Byrne
simply does what you would expect.
     Of course, it's hard to ignore the animated characters, too.  You
have to admit, they take stage direction better than any actor.  It's
these characters that make Cool World (the place) and COOL WORLD (the
movie) what it is.
     The plot has a few holes, and the constant activity can sometimes
make it discontinuous.  And I'm sure I don't have to tell you that it's
not the most realistic of movies.  However, it's naturally
unpredictable, entertaining, and always keeps you captivated (if only
because you don't want to fall behind).
     COOL WORLD is not for everyone.  A lot of what goes on may be above
children, and many people may be confused by the busy-ness of the whole
affair.  Animation buffs should love it, and Holli (doodle AND noid) has
an appeal that's hard to resist.
     Basically, if it looks interesting to you, you will probably like
it.  If it looks weird, you probably won't.  I'd recommend this movie,
provided you had half a mind to see it anyway.  If you're unsure, check
out a matinee.   Personally, I've seen it twice so far and enjoyed it
both times.

Author
Lon Ponschock
     So I ask my companion why she fell asleep during COOL WORLD and she
says, "Well, when the animator and the cartoon character of Holli Would
first meet I was wondering when she was going to say 'Draw me a vagina.'"
Yeah, I guess we all were.
     Ralph Bakshi is known for outrageous animation, and COOL WORLD with
its PG-13 rating goes some way in extending the boundaries of what can
be done with it.
     Animated characters such as Holli Would and Jessica Rabbit are a
part of a collective fantasy based on a variety of sources.  In the
original novel by Gary K. Wolf, Jessica has just recently come up from
pornographic comics: the crudely drawn kind such as the Naughty Nurse we
find Lucas Haas reading under the sheets in RAMBLING ROSE.
    (Fans of this style should pick up on the original WHO CENSORED
ROGER RABBIT? by Gary K. Wolf.  The sense of the novel is completely
different from the film in that the characters from toontown are real:
The cartoon panels that you see in the newspaper are merely photographs
or 'shoots' of real life in toontown.  And when a talking bubble above
their heads completes a phrase, it falls to earth in powder form so that
people think all toons have dandruff.  There's more, but go read the
book.)
     The Japanese style of anime illustration is now readily available
at your video store and is hugely popular here on the Usenet forum.
COOL WORLD shows that American animators can explore just as much
sexuality as their anime counterparts, but not much more either.
     COOL WORLD, unlike Toon Town, is a separate dimension.  It is at
once an invention of an illustrator who has recently been released from
prison for killing his wife and an independent reality.
     The plot element of Jack Deebs killing his wife is curiously
missing from any discussion of COOL WORLD that I have seen.  Has the
illustrator merely been the hand in detailing the characters of COOL
WORLD or has he actually created the reality of it?
     COOL WORLD was up and running fifty years ago.  But the apparent
age of Gabriel Byrne who plays Jack Deebs, the illustrator is early
30's.
     Brad Pitt, another human, had been transferred through the use of
an invention by one Dr. Whiskers at a moment of crisis in his life in
1945.  He has been living in COOL WORLD ever since World War II.  The
COOL WORLD life forms are called doodles.  Brad's character, Frank, has
had a doodle girlfriend (apparently) for the last fifty years.  But one of
the rules of Cool World is that humanoids and doodles don't have sex.
They can touch, feel and eat though.  There are only two female
characters of humanoid type.  Were they drawn or did they have parents?
What is their history?
     Animation allows the director to give full rein to his imagination
and to have full control over the end result.  In COOL WORLD there is
never an idle moment.  Cartoon cliches cavort all over the screen for
the full 1 hour 45 mins. of the production.  There is a lot in COOL
WORLD.
     The kids that were in the matinee performance which we attended had
a great time with the "primitives" hitting each other over the head with
mallets ala the "primitive" style cartoons within cartoons: Itchy and
Scratchy on THE SIMPSONS.  What the kids are supposed to make of the
more mature elements of the show I cannot answer.  I don't even know
what they "see" when humans are falling into the holes of a cartoon
dimension.
     My companion tells me the story of how Bob Hoskins, while he was
making ROGER RABBIT, found his son scowling at him when he was done at
the studio for the day.  Hoskins didn't know why the child was upset
with him.  Upon asking his son what the matter was, the child said,
"You've been working with cartoons, and you never brought any of them
home with you."
     Parents with younger children should be cautioned of the adult
themes contained in the film.
     The best moment in the film for me was near the end during the
climax of the picture in which Cool World and the real world intersect
in Las Vegas (well, maybe it probably isn't that much of a stretch).
Momentarily the humans at the various gaming tables get cartoon
identities.  This worked so well for me that after we left the theatre,
I saw people as what they might look like as cartoons for a time.  The
picture is worth seeing for this sequence alone.
     My conclusion?  In the area of animated sensuality *any* progress
is *some* progress.  So COOL WORLD did not bore me.  How could it?
Bakshi learned his lesson after WIZARDS: don't let the audience get
bored at a cartoon show no matter what!  I am contributing to this
discussion because I think that there is more in COOL WORLD, more
questions to ask than I have seen thus far on the Net or elsewhere.
     Maybe in video and with multiple viewings COOL WORLD will gain a
cult following similar to DETOUR which is currently in remake.  And
while we're at it, how about giving Tim Burton lots of money to do a new
version of THE FIVE THOUSAND FINGERS OF DR. T?
