Title
Review for Slaughter of the Innocents (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Scott Glen belongs to that broad category of great actors
whose reputation is sometimes marred simply by appearing in
unwatchable cinematic stinkers. In case of Scott Glen such
stinker was SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS, 1994 film by James
Glickenhaus, just one of the many thrillers that exploit the
public's obsession with the serial killers. In SILENCE OF
THE LAMBS, "Oscar"-awarded film that inspired the entire
trend, Scott Glen played FBI agent specialised for serial
killers. In this film Glen, in a way, repeats the role by
playing Agent Stephen Broderick, one of the Bureau's best
when it comes to dealing with homicidal monsters. However,
this time the maniac in question seems to be too much even
for Broderick. Luckily, his 15-year old son Jesse (played by
Jesse Cameron-Glickenhaus) is a wunderkind determined to
help his father, even if it means that he would have to run
away from house and chase the dangerous maniac by himself.
I must say that I was, in a way, both surprised and not so
surprised when I realised how despised SLAUGHTER OF THE
INNOCENTS is among net.critics. This movie was hardly
masterpiece, but it is still better than its reputation.
Glickenhaus' screenplay is a mess, the movie is sometimes
too preachy, unbelievable or boring (totally pointless scene
involving shootout between FBI and lone Neonazi), but Glen
and others at least play their parts professionally, and
Glickenhaus does provide some suspensful scenes, including
quite spectacular finale. Most probable reason why people
hate this film is the fact that Jesse Cameron-Glickenhaus,
rather talented brat (who also wrote some of the songs in
the film) happens to be director's son and that his
character actually steals the film from Scott Glen. Although
some of the viewers might feel cheated, and although some
may have problems swalloving the concept of underage boy
battling serial killers, the movie is rather watchable, but
hardly anything above it.
