Title
Review for She's So Lovely (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Michael Redman
Occasionally I will use a film as self-administered mood altering therapy.
When I feel uncomfortable with my current emotions sometimes a movie will
allow me to jump into another world and when I return to the mundane, will
arrive changed.
Perhaps Graham Greene said it best in an episode of "Northern Exposure" when
his Inuit shaman character called cinema the "white man's healing stories." It
often works for me.
Such was the situation a few days ago when, feeling ungrounded and
disconnected, I decided to see a romantic comedy. My usual policy is to know
very little about a film before I walk into the theater so that I can approach
the experience unbiased. Based on what I had heard about "She's So Lovely"
(woman has to choose between her husband and lover), it looked as it fit the bill.
>From a screenplay by the late John Cassavetes and directed by his son Nick
("Unhook The Stars"), the film looks at lives that exist in a nightmare world
of alcoholic haze and insanity. Maureen (Robin Wright Penn) is a pregnant
bleached blonde who spends her days drinking herself into a stupor and falling
down. Her realm is one where when she is beaten and raped by a neighbor, the
event is almost lost in the daze.
When her husband Eddie (Sean Penn) returns from one of his frequent several
days away without a phone call and learns of the assault, he has a major break
with reality and goes after the culprit. The rampage ends with Eddie shooting
a mental health worker and being institutionalized for an indeterminate time.
When he is released 10 years later and pronounced "cured" (although he
believes that he was only in for three months), the world is a different
place. Maureen has divorced him and married Joey (John Travolta), a well off
businessman and is raising her three daughters (one is Eddie's) with him in suburbia.
Although Eddie can't quite understand what is going on, he heads to the better
side of town to take his love back. The civilized veneer of the people who
live in the little pink houses of Pleasant Valley proves thin indeed when the
three meet face-to-face.
The actors are top rate. Wright Penn especially deserves admiration for her
depiction of the "lovely" as a particularly unattractive seedy woman. It's
certainly not a "babe" role and is a courageous one. Penn digs deep inside to
come up with a angry deranged maniac who is still capable of feelings of love.
Travolta with limited screen time does well as the only semi-sane member of
the cast.
Harry Dean Stanton and Debi Mazar are entertaining as Eddie and Maureen's
friends and could have used a bit more exposure. You can hear the audience
breath a sigh of relief when they appear. Their lives are spent in a seedy
bar, but they seem normal compared to the rest.
It's useless to complain that many of the characters' actions don't make
sense. These people are so separated from any semblance of reasonableness that
they could do _anything_ and it would fit in the film. Minutes after stating
that she doesn't drink or smoke, Maureen shows up with whiskey and a
cigarette. She never visits, calls or writes Eddie during the 10 years yet she
considers leaving her husband and children when he is released. 
Their relationship is summed up when she tells him "I want to smash beer
bottles over people's heads. I just want to smash them cause I love you so
much." These are not people that you want to know.
When we left the theater, we walked to get ice cream to shake the movie out of
our heads. The shop was closed and we ended up standing in front of the movie
house staring down the street wet with rain for several minutes. The world
seemed an ugly place. It's a powerful film but not an uplifting one.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 22 years and is still looking
for a quality feel-good film. Email suggestions to mredman@bvoice.com)
[This appeared in the 9/11/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Mirimax)
Directed by     Nick Cassavetes
Written by      John Cassavetes
Cast            Sean Penn, Robin Wright Penn, John Travolta, Harry Dean 
                Stanton, Debi Mazar, James Gandolfini, Gena Rowlands
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language)
Running Time    100 minutes
Reviewed at     The Garner Towne Square 10, Garner, NC (31AUG97)
     Sean and Robin Wright Penn star as Mr. and Mrs.  Soused, a pair of
substance-abusing, a-few-shots-short-of-a-full-bottle barflies who are
so very much in love that neither an extended stay in a mental hospital
(for him) or divorce, remarriage, and kids (for her) can keep them apart
for long.  They're the most memorable characters in this engrossing (and
ultimately absurd) actors showcase, the centerpiece of which is Mr.
Penn's riveting, Cannes award-winning performance.  Forrest Gump's
girlfriend is quite good, as well, anchoring the film-- or the first
hour, at least-- with a compelling study in skank.  (And you thought the
cast of CAREER GIRLS were strangers to shampoo!) Also on hand is John
Travolta, who cusses and fusses through a late appearance as the
exasperated second husband.  (He's quite funny and gets off the best
line in the film, telling his character's pre-teen daughter to "shut up
and drink your beer.") As for the story, well, seeing is disbelieving.
Sure, the film's first half is easy-going enough, but after ten years
pass and loverboy returns to reclaim his wife, we're told nothing about
her, or how she's doing, or what she's thinking, or why she's be-bopping
out the door five seconds after attempting to slit her wrists.  It's a
baffling turn of events that rivals CONSPIRACY THEORY for sheer second-
hour suckiness.  Directed by Nick Cassavettes (UNHOOK THE STARS), from
his late father's unproduced screenplay.

Author
Jamie Peck
Miramax / 1:28 / 1997 / R (language, violence) 
Cast: Robin Wright Penn; Sean Penn; John Travolta; Harry Dean Stanton; 
Debi Mazar; Gena Rowlands; James Gandolfini; Chloe Webb 
Director: Nick Cassavetes 
Screenplay: John Cassavetes 
"She's So Lovely," a "romantic fable" scripted by the late John 
Cassavetes and directed by his son Nick, opens to the tune of Bjork's 
wild "It's Oh So Quiet." In retrospect, it's a great selection, because 
the movie, much like the song, is about how passion can drive you crazy. 
But as "She's So Lovely" hacks away at getting its point across, it also 
commits several deadly errors that render it from being the hip, offbeat 
fairy tale it so aspires to be. Chief among them is the drawback that 
its strange cast of characters fails to ever make much sense. 
Case in point: Eddie (Sean Penn) and Maureen (Robin Wright Penn) are one 
of the most bizarre husband-and-wife pairings that filmdom has likely 
ever seen. He disappears for several days at a time while she carts her 
pregnant self around town, scanning the local bars for her spouse and 
taking time to enjoy herself with a few drinks while she's at it. 
Maureen gets a little too free-spirited during a particular one of 
Eddie's absences, and spends the afternoon sharing whiskey with a creepy 
neighbor (James Gandolfini) who then beats her up after she rejects his 
advances. When Eddie finally resurfaces and catches a glimpse of 
Maureen's bruised face, he eventually wigs out and hits the streets with 
a loaded gun. 
No fair telling what havoc ensues immediately thereafter, but the movie 
then flashes forward 10 years. Eddie, now released from the mental 
institution where he's spent the last decade, gets a dye job and a new 
look and begins searching for Maureen. She, meanwhile, has gone from 
happy hour to homemaker, married a wealthy hothead named Joey (John 
Travolta), raised a trio of adorable little girls and established living 
quarters in quaint suburban decadence. Inevitably, Eddie crashes 
Maureen's pleasant but unfulfilling lifestyle, and inevitably, there's a 
mental (and physical) tug-of-war between Eddie and Joey as to who she'll 
profess her undying devotion to. 
This is love? The movie says it is, but that's its main undoing -- Eddie 
and Maureen repeatedly tell us and each other that they're in love, but 
"She's So Lovely" does little in the way of showing off their inner 
workings. Both are unstable, fragile creatures, and the film seems to 
think that bizarre personal similarities constitute an explanation as to 
how their relationship works. It doesn't. We're also never given any 
reason as to why the new-and-improved Maureen -- if she is in fact so 
preoccupied with her past life with Eddie -- would so willingly project 
her affection on Joey. This love triangle, as "different" as it sounds, 
fails to click in most cases because it doesn't break its character 
surfaces or lets its cast portray people with little more dimension than 
cartoons. 
Speaking of the cast, "She's So Lovely" has a nice one, with the two 
Penns (real-life man and wife, in case you hadn't already figured that 
out) and the lone Travolta performing successfully enough to overlap 
some of the movie's gaping flaws. They also compensate for a very shaky 
shift in tone; the Eddie-Maureen first half is too serious to be 
dramatic and too silly to be serious, but act two, featuring Eddie's 
release and the events there on, makes the proceedings insanely quirky 
(Joey to nine-year-old daughter: "Shut up and drink your beer!"). 
Travolta steals most of his scenes in a smaller-than-you-might-suspect 
supporting role, male Penn is nicely subtle and female Penn does
an almost-fascinating combination of Betty Boop, Olive Oyle and Mira 
Sorvino's "Mighty Aphrodite" lead. 
The title's a little off too, because I came away thinking that Penn's 
Maureen is anything but lovely. I also blinked at how quick the film 
delivers its resolution, which is extremely abrupt but also too fast to 
be boring. "She's So Lovely" isn't a terrible movie by any means, but it 
is one with a lot of ill-used talent. It's an interesting (I hesitate to 
use the word "refreshing") change-of-pace to see a summer movie that at 
least attempts to tackle an unusual topic, albeit one where John 
Travolta doesn't trade faces with anybody and the biggest special effect 
is Sean Penn's spunky bleached-blonde hairdo. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Steve Kong
In no way is she so lovely, both in physical looks and personality. Sean
Penn and wife Robin Wright Penn star in this Nick Cassavetes' film written
by his late father John Cassavetes.
She So Lovely is a love story by some means, but it's more of a character
study of two characters, Sean Penn's Eddie and Robin Wright Penn's Maureen.
Eddie and Maureen are married, and Eddie is often a very jealous man, who
has violent outbreaks. Maureen is raped early on in the film and when Eddie
finds outs, we know what's going to happen. So does Maureen, she calls the
authorities on Eddie, and he is caught. Eddie is put into an institution
and Maureen moves on in life.
John Travolta's name is featured prominently when this film is advertised,
and that was one of the reasons that I went to see the film. Unfortunately,
Travolta shows up very late in the film, and spends only thirty or so
minutes on screen. Compounding this, Travolta really had nothing to do but
drink, smoke, and being angry.
Nick Cassavetes, whom you saw as the bald gangster in this summer's
Face/Off, takes the reigns, and directs his late father's script. Nick does
a good job of keeping the film moving along, but the script is somewhat
weak. The last half seems tacked on and adlibbed. 
Sean Penn is the biggest reason to see She's So Lovely. He does a great job
with his role going through the many stages of his character, from caring
and loving to angry and violent to sedated and free going.
The "she" that is referred to in the title is Maureen. Robin Wright does a
good job with her character also, inserting all sorts of ticks and gestures
to the character. Her character is filmed the opposite of lovely, often
filmed to look pare, skinny, and plain. Lovely she's not. And as you get to
know Maureen more, she's not beautiful inside, often drinking too much,
smoking too much, and leaving responsibilities. 
She's So Lovely is definitely not a date movie, it is often depressing. And
though there is definitely love between Eddie and Maureen, we get to know
them well, and in the end it doesn't matter if they are in love or not, we
just don't like them. She's So Lovely is not a film that I can say that I
can recommend. But, it is also not a film that I can say to pass up. Catch
this one on video when it comes out. 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Nick Cassavetes' second attempt at directing is based on a script
written by his late father, indie-actor/director John Cassavetes.
Nick's initial foray into the world of cinematic direction produced the
touching UNHOOK THE STARS (7.5/10) back in 1996, starring his mother,
Gena Rowlands.
PLOT:
Husband/wife Eddie (Penn) and Maureen (Wright Penn) are two poor, wild,
crazy kids in love. One day, Eddie's erratic and aggressive behaviour
goes too far. He snaps a twig in his brain, and is committed to an
institution for 10 years. When he gets out, Maureen has divorced him,
re-married another, had three kids, and resides in the suburbs. Eddie
wants her back. Joey (Travolta), Maureen's new husband, doesn't
appreciate Eddie's sentiment.
CRITIQUE:
This movie was hard to rate because I really liked the first half of
the film which dealt with the life and times of the young couple in
love. Sean Penn and Robin Wright Penn put on some amazingly gritty
performances (Sean received a best actor award at the 1997 Cannes Film
Festival for his role) during this first period, and truly transport
you into their loving eyes and hearts. The rest of the movie....well...
Unfortunately for all involved with this picture, the second half of
the film turns into a completely unrealistic and outrageous scenario,
in which we are meant to understand things which simply do not make any
sense, and given very little support by way of the script by
Cassavetes. I especially didn't care about the way the kids were
treated in this film ("drink your beer!" to a nine-year old?).
Admittedly, perhaps the success of the first half, left me with a
greater disappointment with the latter half, but either way, I would
say that the ending of this movie does rate as highly unbelievable and
unsubstantiated. Having said that, the first half was very good, and so
were the performances by real-life husband and wife team, Sean and
Robin Wright. Travolta was okay, but he is only in the movie for about
20 minutes or so, and does little more than smoke and swear.
Cassavetes' follow-up to the endearing UNHOOK THE STARS seems to have
been a great vehicle for the Penns to showcase their acting talents,
but lacks the solid finale or any realistic conclusions in the second
half. 
Little Known Facts: 
This film was previously dubbed SHE'S DE LOVELY and CALL IT LOVE.
Sean Penn was married to Madonna from 1985-89. He has since been quoted
as saying "I'm very fond of my ex-wife, but at twenty-four I didn't
realize the difference between a great first date and a lifetime
commitment." 
Sean's brothers include musician Michael Penn and fellow actor Chris
Penn. Sean and brother Chris used to hang out with Martin's Sheen's
sons, Charlie Sheen and Emilio Estevez, throughout their junior high
and high school years, occasionally dabbling in filmmaking with their
handheld Super-8 cameras.
When Robin Wright Penn was 15, she used to date Charlie Sheen. She was
also married to fellow actor Jason Patric from 1988-90.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SHE'S SO LOVELY (director: Nick Cassavetes; cast: Sean Penn (Eddie),
Robin Wright Penn (Maureen), John Travolta (Joey), Harry Dean Stanton
(Tony 'Shorty' Russo), Debi Mazar (Georgie), Gena Rowlands (Mrs. Green),
James Gandolfini (Kiefer, the neighbor), Susan Traylor (Lucinda), Kelsey
Mulrooney (Jennie,Eddie's daughter), 1997)
We have to wait until the near end of this love triangle, a bleak drama
about lowlife angst, to hear the words of the Cole Porter tune, of which
this film takes its title from, spoken by Eddie (Sean) to Joey
(Travolta), "She doesn't love you. She doesn't love me.
She's...delovely." But even these words don't make sense, as we find out
soon afterwards, that their wife definetly loves one of them more than
the other. Maureen (Robin) is the ex-wife of Eddie and the current wife
of Joey. She is also the real-life wife of Sean.
Maureen and Eddie are a couple, who love each other madly, but have many
problems such as booze, drugs, and Eddie's habit of disappearing from
time-to-time. During one of these disappearing acts, the pregnant
Maureen is savagely beaten up and probably raped by her neighbor, Kiefer
(Gandolfini), but when Eddie returns, she is afraid to tell him this,
fearing he will kill the neighbor. So when she lies to him and tells him
the marks on her face are from a fall, he doesn't believe her and goes
into a rage, forcing her to call EMS. But this backfires and Eddie
shoots one of the attendants, as a result he is sent away to the mental
house for 10 years. When he gets out, his wife who never visited him
while he was institutionalized, has divorced him and remarried a
successful construction company owner, Joey, who raises the 9-year-old
she had with Eddie, plus raising their own two daughters. But she now
must choose which is the one she really loves and wants to stay with.
The film wants to look like a "hip" independent movie, even though this
John Cassavetes's scripted work (he died in 1989), directed by his son,
is a Hollywood produced movie. It ends up looking not quite like a John
Cassavetes independent film should look. It seems to be written as if
someone thought that it would be cute to keep leaving out key parts to
the story. As a result, the film suffers from incohesiveness, but
because of the caliber of actors involved, they make a Cassavetes
sandwich seem like it is a Cassavetes sandwich, even if there is not
much real Cassavetes in the sandwich. In other words, the story just
wasn't there, it didn't seem to be original, and this from a script by
the real McCoy of indie films, is astonishing, to say the least, even
the ending of the film feels like a blatant rip off of  THE GRADUATE.
The film, however, managed to be entertaining. It just mostly lacked
insight into what these characters were about. Nothing was resolved or
could be fully understood. For example, it made no sense to think that
Eddie was well enough to be let free from the institution and still
didn't know that he was there for a decade not for three months. Too
many other things about the movie were either murky or didn't add up,
unless you are willing to except anything goes as a satisfactory story
line when it comes to dealing with those who are unstable.
What worked for me, was the comic reactions by both Stanton and
Travolta, it broke the heavy barrage of emoting from the Penns. I also
thought that Gandolfini did an excellent job in his brief appearance on
screen. He held my attention with his mix of manic sadistic moves and
cruel humor. Without them, this film would have taken itself too serious
for the untasty Cassavetes sandwich it was trying to serve its too
willing captives in the audience.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ken Varnum
Starring: Sean Penn, Robin Wright Penn, Harry Dean Stanton, John Travolta,
Debi Mazar
This movie about two dysfunctional families never really gets off the ground,
despite some good performances from a basically competent cast.  Eddie (Sean
Penn)  and Maureen (Robin Wright Penn) are a not-so-happily married couple
down on their luck.  Living in rented rooms in the seedier part of an unnamed
city, they spend what little income they have at the local bar, owned by
Shorty (Stanton), Eddie's best friend, and his wife Georgie (Mazar).  Maureen
and Eddie share an odd relationship marked by Eddie's frequent
disappearances.  On his return, he promises her the world and professes his
undying love.  Their manic reunions all too soon lead to new lows, as Eddie
disappears again.  Like a junky craving the next high, Maureen suffers
through the lows to reach the next high. Their relationship is further
complicated by Maureen's pregnancy.  She wants the baby and the father, but
deep down seems to sense the inevitability of losing the latter.
During one of Eddie's absences, Maureen is attacked by Kiefer, her neighbor,
who gets her drunk (with her cooperation) and then insists on intimacy.  She
leaves badly bruised and in fear of what Eddie might do -- not to her, but to
Kiefer. She lies about what happens to ensure that no harm will come to Eddie
as the result of his inevitable rage.  He lashes out as she expects, and ends
up in an institution for what he believes to be 3 months -- but in reality is
10 years.
During this decade, Maureen divorces Eddie and remarries a more solid and
reliable individual, Joey (Travolta, in a small role).        Her life falls apart
again when Eddie is released from the institution and comes to find her. Joey
insists on bringing Eddie into his home and making his wife choose between
her husband (and father of two children) and stability (Joey makes a good
living, drives a Cadillac, and they live in a large house in the suburbs) and
the love of her previous life.        She chooses her past, and sacrifices not only
her new life but her old (by giving up her and Eddie's daughter to Joey). 
But the Eddie that she knew is gone, replaced by a mere shell of the man he
was.  Maureen is herself a mere shell, more an automaton than a woman -- as
if she had gone through whatever therapy and treatment Eddie was given along
with him.  Perhaps these two really do need each other and can find happiness
(or maybe the lack of sadness) together, but the movie's denouement was not
convincing.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Penn, Robin Wright Penn, John Travolta, Harry Dean Stanton, 
      Debi Mazar, James Gandolfini, Gena Rowlands
Director: Nick Cassavetes
Producer: Rene Cleitman
Screenplay: John Cassavetes
Cinematography: Thierry Arbogast
Music: Joseph Vitarelli
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     For anyone who is familiar with the movies of the late John 
Cassavetes, one of America's most fiercely independent film makers of 
the '60s and '70s, there will be no doubt that the screenplay for SHE'S 
SO LOVELY came from his pen.  The director of this picture is Nick 
Cassavetes (UNHOOK THE STARS), the son of John and actress Gena 
Rowlands.  And, since Rowlands appears in SHE'S SO LOVELY, this is, in a 
sense, a family production.  The younger Cassavetes' approach to 
directing is different from his father's.  Nick is more of a polished, 
traditional film maker.  John relied upon improvisations from both his 
actors and his cinematographer; Nick scripts and choreographs everything 
beforehand.  He may be following in his father's footsteps, but he is 
not attempting to copy him.
     What might SHE'S SO LOVELY have been like had John Cassavetes 
directed it?  While it's impossible to know for sure, we need look no 
farther than Cassavetes' most celebrated film, A WOMAN UNDER THE 
INFLUENCE, for some clues.  Both films are about the alcohol-enhanced 
deterioration of a mad woman, and the pressure brought to bear on a 
family by an increasingly-traumatic situation.  And there are times when 
Robin Wright Penn's Maureen in SHE'S SO LOVELY recalls Gena Rowlands' 
Mabel in A WOMAN UNDER THE INFLUENCE.  So, while I'm not trying to 
suggest that the films are identical in any significant way, the 
similarities are striking enough to offer an idea of the kinds of themes 
that were important to John Cassavetes. 
     In 1996, there was a film called MAD LOVE, starring Chris O'Donnell 
and Drew Barrymore.  That title would have been very appropriate for 
SHE'S SO LOVELY, a darkly comic drama about the debilitating effects of 
drinking from a cocktail made of love and insanity.  Many of the film's 
themes are not fully realized, but, even in this form, it's difficult to 
deny the impact of SHE'S SO LOVELY, especially since it questions where 
our responsibility to ourselves ends and where our responsibility to our 
family begins.
     Real-life couple Sean Penn and Robin Wright Penn play Eddie and 
Maureen, a husband and wife who are very much in love.  When we first 
meet them, it's the late 1970s, although only the music, hairstyles, and 
clothing seem to differentiate the time period from today.  Both Eddie 
and Maureen exhibit streaks of violent, self-destructive behavior.  But, 
although Eddie carries a gun and isn't unwilling to use his fists, he 
never strikes Maureen.  She and the child she carries are his reason for 
living.  Neither husband nor wife is entirely sane, and when Eddie loses 
it in public and shoots a mental health care worker, he is sent away to 
an institution for the criminally insane.
     A decade passes before Eddie is given his release, but the world he 
returns to is far different from the one he left.  His best friend, 
Shorty (Harry Dean Stanton), is still the same, but his wife is not.  
During the last ten years, Maureen has cleaned herself up, divorced 
Eddie, and married a prosperous businessman named Joey (John Travolta).  
She lives in a big house with a swimming pool out back, and has three 
daughters (the oldest is a product of her troubled marriage to Eddie).  
It's an idyllic situation, yet when she learns of Eddie's release, 
Maureen feels the tug of long-buried feelings, and their re-emergence 
threatens not only her family's stability, but her own tenuous grip on 
sanity.
     The only truly likable character in the film is Eddie and Maureen's 
nine-year old daughter, Jeanie (nicely portrayed by young Kelsey 
Mulrooney).  Both of the leads are too mercurial to empathize with, and, 
although Joey is supposed to represent "sanity," his pugnacious 
insensitivity keeps him at arm's length.  This creates an interesting 
dynamic -- since we, the audience, don't have a rooting interest, we are 
able to watch the characters' actions from a somewhat detached 
perspective.
     While there are times that the script shows seams, the powerhouse 
performances of Penn and Wright Penn allow us to overlook many of these.  
In a way, SHE'S SO LOVELY functions more as an outline of a story than 
the actual story, but the two lead characters are presented so vividly, 
and their interaction is so intense, that it doesn't seem to matter 
much.  If there's a weakness in character development, it's that Joey is 
a pretty one-dimensional lout, and Travolta plays him much like Vincent 
Vega from PULP FICTION.  
     SHE'S SO LOVELY is uncomfortable because it challenges our 
perceptions about love and family.  Maureen and Joey have the American 
dream, but does it really mean anything?  And is true love just another 
form of insanity?  Some viewers will undoubtedly be dismayed by the 
film's abrupt ending (which isn't really an ending at all), but, by the 
time the end credits roll, we know all that we need to know to guess how 
things will probably turn out.  SHE'S SO LOVELY isn't a flawless 
production, but it's a fitting tribute to John Cassavetes, and a 
reminder of the many ways that a woman can be under the influence.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Nick Cassavetes / Screenplay: John
Cassavetes / Stars: Sean Penn (Eddie), Robin
Wright Penn (Maureen), John Travolta (Joey), Harry
Dean Stanton (Shorty), Debi Mazar (Georgie), James
Gandolfini (Kiefer), Kelsey Mulrooney (Jeanie) /
MPAA Rating: R / Review: ** (out of ****)
The only way to approach "She's So Lovely" is with
the understanding that everyone in the film is
crazy in one way or another. Their decisions are
illogical and often infuriating, and the movie has
no pretension of passing judgment on them or even
understanding why they are the way they are. You
must come to this film with the anticipation that
little or nothing about these characters makes
sense, because if you try to understand them, you
will be completely frustrated.
Personally, I am not a big fan of this kind of
film, and I have to admit this movie frustrated
me. I don't mind crazy characters, but I like to
have some kind of reasoning behind their mania. In
movies like "She's So Lovely," the characters'
weirdness is just taken for granted with no frame
of reference, and it gives license for the
filmmakers to do almost anything, because it can
be explained away. Remember, they're crazy -- it
doesn't have to make sense.
The film was directed by Nick Cassavetes, the son
of legendary actor and pioneer independent
writer/director John Cassavetes, who wrote the
script. The elder Cassavetes had originally
intended to direct and star in the film himself
back in the 1970s, but he was never able to get
the project off the ground before he died in 1989.
While his son's directing style is much more
controlled and refined than his father's, he
respects the manic people which are so dear to his
father. Alcoholism, insanity, and violence are all
at the heart of "She's So Lovely," although at
times it's intended to play as a comedy.
The film opens with Maureen (Robin Wright Penn),
waking up in a drunken stupor to find that her
husband, Eddie Quinn (Sean Penn) is still missing
after three days. She's pregnant, and apparently
Eddie is having trouble dealing with that fact, so
he tends to disappear for days at a time. She goes
down to the seedy, smoke-filled local bar where
Eddie usually hangs out, but his best friend
Shorty (Harry Dean Stanton) hasn't seen him.
Maureen ends up having drinks with her neighbor,
Kiefer (James Gandolfini), and when they go back
up to his apartment, he attacks her and beats her
up.
Maureen is terrified that Eddie will find out
Kiefer beat her up, because she knows Eddie is
slightly imbalanced and has an intense violent
streak. So, when she finally finds him, she lies
and says she fell. It doesn't take Eddie long to
figure out what happened, and he goes after Kiefer
with a gun. Maureen calls the local mental
institution to pick Eddie up, and when the
orderlies arrive to take him away, Eddie shoots on
of them in the stomach. He is eventually caught by
the police, and locked up in the institution.
Fast forward ten years, and Maureen has cleaned
herself up, gotten off drugs, divorced Eddie,
stopped wearing heavy black eye make-up, and is
now married to a rich contractor named Joey (John
Travolta). She and Joey have three daughters, one
of whom is actually Eddie's, and they live in
comfortable suburban splendor. Unfortunately, that
splendor is disrupted when Eddie is released from
the institution, and comes looking for Maureen,
sure that he still loves her and she still loves
him. In fact, he's absolutely right. Maureen tells
Joey to his face the morning Eddie is being
released, "I love you, but I love him
more."
"She's So Lovely" begins and ends very abruptly.
Many people will be extremely baffled by it,
especially because the previews made it look like
a quirky romantic comedy. The movie seems to want
to tell a simple story, but it has everything
going against it. It comes at you in sudden
bursts, and there is little explanation about
characters or situations. For instance,
Maureen-Eddie and Maureen-Joey is bridged with a
black screen and the titles "Ten Years Later."
There movie doesn't go into how and why Maureen
and Joey got together and, more importantly, why
their marriage seems so unhappy.
Although it's readily apparent that Maureen will
most likely leave Joey for Eddie, you don't feel
sorry for Joey because he's a loud-mouthed,
obnoxious, boor of a man. Was he like this when
Maureen first met him? If he was, is it because
she's naturally attracted to crude, violent men?
In fact, the movie doesn't give us anyone to
identify with (unless you're a sociopath), so we
are given the strange opportunity to sit back and
not take sides while Maureen, Eddie, Joey and even
Shorty fight it out in the living room like a
sitcom on acid.
The saving grace of "She's So Lovely" are the
performances, especially Sean Penn's which won him
top honors at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival. His
Eddie is a constant enigma, ranging from fiercely
violent to almost child-like passivity. Travolta
plays strongly against type, and it is only his
insensitive idiocy that adds any laughs to the
film. Robin Wright Penn, who is married to Sean
Penn in real life, gives an affecting performance
as the woman caught in the middle (although her
New York accent is a bit overbearing at times).
She is the most confusing character because you
keep wanting to believe that she is sane, when in
fact, she may be the craziest person in the whole
movie.
"She's So Lovely" is really more of a curiosity
piece than anything else. It's not really
satisfying as a well-told story or as a character
study, so it can only be taken as an off-beat
movie that defies all the typical rules of comedy
and drama. Not for all tastes, but some will find
it quite fascinating, although I wasn't one of
them.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
She's So Lovely (1997)
Sean Penn, Robin Wright Penn, John Travolta. Directed by Nick Cassavetes.
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Maureen and Eddie are crazy in love. They live in a run-down apartment in 
a seedy neighborhood. Maureen spends a great deal of her time looking for 
Eddie, who disappears a lot. Despite being pregnant, she smokes and 
drinks while wandering around complaining about her husband and seeking a 
little company. Eddie is an alcoholic, prone towards oddly poetic 
statements and bursts of irrational behavior. Maureen and Eddie are a 
mess, not the easiest people to be around, but one thing is for sure, 
they are crazy in love with each other.  
Their devotion is the core of "She's So Lovely", a gritty character study 
starring Sean Penn, Robin Wright Penn and John Travolta. Actor and 
independent film director John Cassavetes wrote the script 20 years ago, 
intending to star in the film along with his wife, Gena Rowlands. Shortly 
before his death in 1989, Cassavetes rewrote the screenplay for Sean Penn,
 who initially planned only to direct the film. Eventually, Cassavetes' 
son Nick became director, with Mr. And Mrs. Penn playing the lead roles. 
The film is divided into two acts. In the first, a burly neighbor (James 
Gandolfini) invites Maureen (Wright Penn) out for some friendly drinking 
and dancing. When they return to their apartment building, it becomes 
clear that his intentions are more than friendly and he assaults the 
mother-to-be. She concocts a story to tell Eddie about her bruises, 
prompting him to slur "That's all I get; fables to cover foibles". 
Eventually, Eddie goes postal during a drunken binge and ends up 
institutionalized in a mental hospital. Maureen desperately assures him 
that he'll be better in "three months or so".  The second half of the 
film takes place ten years later, as Eddie is released from the hospital, 
unaware of how much time has passed. He learns that Maureen has remarried 
and has three children, two from new husband Joey (John Travolta). His 
head still fuzzy from years of medication, Eddie sets off to fetch his 
wife.
"She's So Lovely" was a hit at the Cannes Film Festival, garnering a Best 
Actor award for Penn. He deserves it. Penn's acting is nothing short of 
dazzling in this film. He invests great detail into Eddie, creating a 
damaged man who is both simple-minded and remarkably complex. There are 
hints of other characters in Eddie, everyone from Joe Pesci's explosive 
thug in "Goodfellas" to Dustin Hoffman's autistic savant from "Rainman", 
but Eddie remains a unique and compelling individual. When he tells a 
friend "You can't see my obscurity", the line feels real, the kind of 
statement one might make while groping through a fog of drunkenness and 
near-psychosis. Eddie is a lost man, tethered to this earth only by his 
unwavering love for his wife Maureen.
Robin Wright Penn throws herself totally into the role of Maureen. Her 
New York accent goes over the top periodically, but her character is 
credible nonetheless. With dark eyes and an uneven gait, Maureen is 
compulsive and abrasive. She takes care of her daily activities in a 
perfunctory manner, with her inner demons lurking just beneath the 
surface. Maureen isn't particularly likable, but she certainly is 
fascinating. The real-life chemistry between the Penns transfers onto the 
screen smoothly, their scenes together are electric.
John Travolta does fine work in his supporting role as Maureen's second 
husband. Realizing there would be no screen time to establish the back-
story for his character, Travolta makes every moment count. Bursting with 
nervous energy, his Joey is a devoted husband and father who dreads 
Eddie's arrival, knowing deep inside that while Maureen is his wife, 
Eddie is her one true love. 
"She's So Lovely" is an odd bird, a love story about people its hard to 
like. Maureen is self-destructive and very angry, Joey swears constantly 
in front of his young daughters, and Eddie is just plain nuts, but 
Cassavetes' script and the skilled cast locate the sweetness within these 
unpleasant people. Despite the horrible behavior of their parents, the 
three daughters are bright, well spoken young women. That seems 
incongruous initially, but in the end it really makes sense. Despite all 
the swearing and histrionics, Eddie, Maureen and Joey are essentially 
decent people, and decent people produce secure children. 
And despite all the grit and ugliness, "She's So Lovely" is a pure and 
simple love story. Thanks to the wonderful performances from Penn, Wright 
Penn and Travolta, it's a memorable one as well. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Promotional posters for SHE'S SO LOVELY describe it as "a film by
Nick Cassavetes from a fable by John Cassavetes," a tag-line which
prompted a visit to my American Heritage Dictionary:
     "fable [fa' b(e)l] n.  1) a concise narrative making an edifying or
cautionary point, often employing as characters animals which speak and
act like human beings."
     I suppose you could say that SHE'S SO LOVELY fits that definition, in
the sense that it makes a cautionary point.  Unfortunately, the point is
made at Nick Cassavetes' expense:  don't go messing around with a legend
just because you happen to be related.  When Nick tries to remain true to
his father's spirit in the film's first half, the result is strained and
dated.  When he tries to forge his own path in the film's second half, the
result is an incomprehensible mess.
     As for animals acting like people, you won't find any in SHE'S SO
LOVELY.  People acting like animals...well, that's another story.  Eddie
Quinn (Sean Penn) is a short-tempered, vaguely unstable sort with an
indeterminate employment history; his pregnant wife Maureen (Robin Wright
Penn) sits around chain-smoking and drinking herself stupid while waiting
for Eddie to return from one of his regular multi-day disappearing acts.
One such bender puts Maureen in a dangerous position with a burly neighbor
(James Gandolfini), who slaps her around when she refuses his advances.
Maureen doesn't tell Eddie the real cause of her injuries, afraid that
anger will push Eddie over the edge.  Instead, Eddie's conviction that
Maureen is lying to him pushes him over the edge, landing him in a mental
institution for a decade.
     There is at least a convincingly seamy aura to the portion of SHE'S
SO LOVELY devoted to Eddie and Maureen's kinetic romance.  Vintage
Cassavetes ambiance drips from the depressingly silent flop houses and
dive bars, and from the characters wandering around in a directionless,
drunken daze.  Yet even in its best moments, SHE'S SO LOVELY feels not 
quite right.  It's like the steak transported through the telepods in
David Cronenberg's version of THE FLY, a story from another era which has
been rendered synthetic in its transport to 1997.  Despite the strong
performances and affectingly crazy exploits of Penn and Penn, there's the
feel of an homage to the first half of SHE'S SO LOVELY.  It has no unique
identity.
     To show you how far looking for a unique identity gets you, witness
the second half of SHE'S SO LOVELY.  It's set ten years after the first
half, with Eddie just about to be released from the institution and
Maureen remarried to construction company boss Joey Giamanni (John
Travolta).  Maureen is still in love with Eddie, though, which
understandably irritates the man to whom she's presently married and with
whom she has had two other daughters.  
     There is a vein of tension which could have yielded dramatic gold in
the scenes between ex-husband and ex-wife, between father and the daughter
he's never seen, and between one husband and the first husband who claims
his wife's deepest affections.  But young Cassavetes treats the whole
episode as the wacky premise for a profane situation comedy, as though
Papa had banged out a very special episode of "My Two Dads" twenty years
ago.  The whimsical score by Joseph Vitarelli consistently undermines the
seriousness of the matters at hand; situations like Eddie's appointment
with an effeminate hairdresser are treated as atmospheric goofiness.
Meanwhile John Cassavetes' prose, removed from the barfly milieu which
gives his dialogue a sad poetry, ends up in the mouth of Travolta's
blustering middle-class husband and becomes purple enough to warrant a
place in the Incredible Hulk's wardrobe ("You're a glorified piece of blue
sky," he snorts at his step-daughter).  Instead of wondering whom Maureen
will end up with, your mind wanders to why Nick didn't go all the way and
use a laugh track.
     Ultimately, it's hard to figure out what Nick Cassavetes was thinking
when he decided to resurrect SHE'S SO LOVELY.  For that matter, it's not
clear what John was thinking when he wrote it, with its half-realized
characters, awkwardly constructed narrative and weightless romantic
triangle.  There's a lesson to be learned here, something like "it's best
to let sleeping scripts lie."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Hey Daddy, what are you doing?" inquires Joey's nine year old
step-daughter, Jeanie.  "Shut and drink your beer!" retorts Joey.  John
Travolta plays heavily against type as Joey, the wealthy construction
company owner who cusses a blue streak and sees no problem suggesting a
beer to his daughter as an appropriate afternoon beverage.
     SHE'S SO LOVELY, from a old script by John Cassavetes and directed
by his son Nick, operates in a sea of booze and a cloud of smoke
surrounded by the constant threat of violence.  The star of the film is
a highly likable but completely crazy Sean Penn as Eddie, Jeanie's
father.  Eddie, a cheap hood with a gun, likes nothing better than
showing up without money and talking his way into clubs and closed
restaurants.  With the smile of a small puppy, he has a host of
friends, but there is that temper and that lack of sanity that gets him
into more trouble than he can handle.
     As the show opens, his pregnant wife Maureen, played by his real
wife, Robin Wright Penn, is searching for her AWOL husband.  She
stumbles intoxicated out of her fleabag apartment to call on the pay
phone in the hall.  When nobody knows Eddie's whereabouts, Maureen
decides to go drinking instead with her scumbag neighbor, who ends up
beating and raping her.  Although the rape happens off camera and the
scene cuts away quickly, it is one of several parts of the film that
can be hard to take.
     Eddie begins to lose it, beating up people, shooting them, and
jumping through plate glass windows.  "We were made for each other,"
concludes a cut-up Eddie to his battered wife.  "We're both banged up."
And they are both low-class alcoholics who do seem well matched.
     Soon he begins to lose it with her, and his mind begins to
deteriorate.  "Can you type 100 words a minute?"  he screams at her in
one of his many bizarre streams of dialog.  "Can you sew?  Can you
dance?  What can you do?"  The answer, of course, is that she can share
bottles with him, but she just takes his diatribes without response.
     Nick Cassavetes, whose UNHOOK THE STARS earlier this year was
beautiful and uplifting, at least knows how to stage scenes well in
this disquieting film.  When Eddie totally flips out, he sits bleeding
at a bus stop with his pants down and his gun beside him.  As the cops
surround him, Maureen runs up to him from out of nowhere, wearing big,
fluffy house shoes.  The scene seems about as unbelievable as the rest
of the film, but visually it certainly shocks the audience into paying
attention.
     In the second half, the story skips forward ten years.  Maureen,
now Joey's wife, has been transformed to look well off, but she talks
and acts with the jumpy anxiety and crudeness of her earlier life.
Although the people in the film drink and smoke constantly, Maureen
gives the impression that she mainlines caffeine as well.  (In a bit of
irony, Joey brags to Eddie about how great his own relationship is with
Maureen.  "We quit smoking together" he says while he puffs away.)
     The show has such excellent actors as Harry Dean Stanton, Debi
Mazar, Sally Kellerman, James Gandolfini, and Gena Rowlands in the
minor roles.  Although all the actors accomplish what they set out to
do, only Sean Penn gives an exceptional performance.  Still, you have
to ask yourself if these are people you want to spend a couple of hours
with.
     "I'm really depressed," Eddie confides to Maureen when he is
released from the institution where he has spent the show's missing ten
years.  You may feel the same way when the ending credits release you
from your time with these unhappy alcoholics.
     SHE'S SO LOVELY runs 1:52.  It is rated R for violence, alcohol
abuse and profanity.  The show would be acceptable only for the most
mature teenagers.  I admired the performances but did not like the film
enough to recommend it.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
