Title
Review for Hollywood Rated 'R' (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Something special for all of those interested in exploitation films, and 
an education for those who've never seen any.  Appropriately 
exploitative documentary (there's nudity and coarse language) by 
directing team Doug Headline and Dominique Cazenave takes us through the 
fifties, sixties, and seventies and looks at the changes in 
non-Hollywood products, charting their evolution from nudity to violence 
to horror to drugs to blaxploitation.  There aren't many film clips but 
plenty of trailers, which unfortunately are of a very poor photographic 
quality and give the impression that these films looked a lot worse than 
they actually were (I have yet to see THE CRAWLING HAND, but after 
seeing the promo I think it should be a priority).  It should be pointed 
out however that the trailers were often more entertaining than the 
films themselves: nowhere today, for example, would you see a film 
advertised with the shrieking tagline (and possible solipsism) "See a 
human being murdered before your eyes!" 
Mostly, though, HOLLYWOOD RATED R is a collection of talking heads - as 
the interviews are delivered with such affection and interest for the 
subject, the one and a half hour running time passes quickly.  John 
Landis almost steals the show with his enthusiastic performance, but 
there are many other delights in store, often of the 
two-for-the-price-of-one variety: e.g. Charles Napier tells us about his 
career with Russ Meyer (and offers an interesting explanation for 
Meyer's use of remote locations); David Friedman talks of his 
collaboration with goremeister Herschell Gordon Lewis; Barbara Steele 
gives a surprisingly animated interview about the role of women in film, 
referring to her work with Mario Bava and Jonathon Demme; and Forrest 
Ackerman and Joe Dante reminisce about the William Castle movies they 
saw as kids (how I envy those guys!).  I wish Headline and Cazenave had 
cut a couple of the slower interviews - there's a labored one which is 
intercut with all kinds of gags and sound effects, but it still doesn't 
come across as particularly interesting - and gotten someone like Paul 
Bartel on screen instead.  If you've never sampled this unique genre of 
films, then this may well whet your appetite.  Most interesting line 
comes from director Larry Cohen - "All movies are exploitation".  

