Title
Review for Hedwig and the Angry Inch (2000)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
HEDWIG AND THE ANGRY INCH (2000) / *** 1/2
Directed by John Cameron Mitchell. Screenplay by Mitchell, based on the
play written by Mitchell with music and lyrics by Stephen Trask. Starring
Mitchell, Michael Pitt, Miriam Shor. Running time: 95 minutes. Rated AA by
the MFCB. Reviewed on October 14th, 2001.
Synopsis: An East German homosexual named Hansel (Mitchell) falls in love 
with an American army sergeant. In order to cross the Berlin Wall and 
marry him, Hansel endures a sex change operation; but the procedure is 
botched, leaving him with a one-inch reminder of his true gender. Calling 
himself Hedwig, Hansel goes to America where, after divorcing hir husband, 
s/he begins a songwriting career. But when Hedwig's new boyfriend (Pitt) 
steals all hir songs and becomes famous, Hedwig starts a band of hir own 
and sets out in pursuit across the country.
Review: "Hedwig And The Angry Inch" is a kinetic, outrageous, enormously 
entertaining rock musical, a rare example of a genre which has all but 
vanished. But this is also a compelling exploration of gender. Hedwig is a 
transsexual, but more out of necessity than desire; the film chronicles 
hir acceptance of hir sex, embodied by the "angry inch" left between hir 
legs. Performances are fine across the board, including Mitchell in the 
challenging title role, able to maintain a campy, over-the-top persona 
without losing the audience's interest or sympathy. Also very good are 
Pitt as Hedwig's ex-lover-turned-rock-star and Shor as a band member whose 
relationship with Hedwig is never really defined and doesn't need to be. 
Mitchell's script has plenty of off-kilter laughs, and sensibly the film 
encompasses more humour than just jokes of a sexual nature; a look back to 
Hedwig's dysfunctional childhood (including days spent playing in the 
oven) is hilarious. Mitchell's offbeat direction compliments the story 
nicely: part-drama, part-documentary, part-music video, part-undefinable 
(including some amusing breaking of the fourth wall, as when Hedwig and 
his band invites the audience to sing along to a song). Also not to be 
missed is the movie's inspired soundtrack, mostly written by Stephen 
Trask, incorporating everything from punk rock to neo-country.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Rachel Gordon
Following the success of Hedwig and the Angry Inch Off-Broadway and in
other major cities comes this colorfully energetic filmed adaptation. 
Written, directed by, and starring the original, ever-talented John
Cameron Mitchell, Hedwig delivers the guilty pleasure of entertainment
through another's pain.
The brassy title derives from the fact that Hedwig, born Hansel,
underwent an unsuccessful sex change operation when marrying an officer
to flee an oppressive, still-halved Berlin.  His childhood isn't a
pretty picture, so it's easy enough to imagine the desperation strong
enough to drive him towards accepting the drastic change.  Hansel
wouldn't have had a problem adapting to womanhood as he considered
himself a "girly boy" anyway, but with a one-inch penis and no breasts,
his difficulties increase.
Once in America, Hedwig's husband leaves him for another boy.  Hedwig
gets by with odd jobs and finds solace in American music.  Inspired by
artists like David Bowie, heard over American Forces Radio while in
Germany, Hedwig joins up with a band and writes songs based on his life.
Now it's arguable that someone bitching about their dysfunctional life
for an hour and a half could be depressing, boring, or otherwise not
worth the bother.  But Hedwig is such a charismatic protagonist that
this is never an issue.  He's high maintenance for anyone in his circle,
and even cruel to those most patient with him.  On the flipside, he's
full of contagious humor and self-sacrifice for his passion, be it
people or music.  He has an admirable presence whenever he walks in a
room, and it's not just because he's in drag.
Sadly, the film lacks some of the emotional intimacy that occurs when
watching a live performance.  Instead of all the musical numbers
occurring over one evening's performance, Hedwig's gigs are spread out
through different dives.  Each stop is carefully planned to follow the
more popular Tommy Gnossis, Hedwig's ex-lover/now-enemy.  This only gets
monotonous when each audience, excepting the last, have the same drawn,
scared look on their faces as Hedwig belts out his unfortunate life
story.
The story takes great advantage of the film medium by using animated
fantasy images to convey Hedwig's ultimate purpose to find his other
half.  Flashbacks, normally used in films as easy exposition, give the
circumstances of Hedwig's life more weight.  It is far more spellbinding
to actually see Hansel fall for the officer, and Hedwig's early
connection with Tommy, than it is to simply hear about it from painted
lips.
Another accomplishment is the film's ability to combine music and a
dramatic story on screen.  Usually when someone bursts into song in a
film, an audience will cower in a corner to cover their ears and watch
for facial muscles to relax.  But because music is Hedwig's life, and
therapy, it is just as pertinent to the story as his daily life and
flashbacks.  And because the music varies in tempo and lyrical style, it
compliments Hedwig's rocky journey.
For a hard knocks story, Hedwig and the Angry Inch is an enjoyable
ride.  You'll either sit back and say "At least my life is better than
that," or simply be amazed at how good a musical movie about a
half-woman, half-man can be.
Director: John Cameron Mitchell
Producer: Pamela Koffler, Kaite Roumel, Christine Vachon
Writer: John Cameron Mitchell, Stephen Trask
Starring: John Cameron Mitchell, Miriam Shor, Michael Pitt, Andrea
Martin, Alberta Watson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Musicals make my skin crawl, and Moulin Rouge made me hate that stupid genre
even more than I already did.  So I approached Hedwig and the Angry Inch
with great trepidation, even though the film had already garnered accolades
from numerous festivals around the world, including the Audience and
Director's Awards at Sundance.  But Dancer in the Dark took home the top
trophies at Cannes, so that shows you how much festival folks know about
musicals.
Rouge was everything Hedwig is not: annoying, pretentious, spastic and more
about the director than the characters.  Not only is it the best musical
I've ever seen, it's the best new film I've seen so far this year
(Apocalypse Now Redux doesn't count).  Hedwig's songs stuck with me for
days, and somebody will literally have to cause me bodily harm to harvest
the soundtrack from my CD player.
Granted, I'm not ready to run out to the store to buy The Sound of Music,
but I am ready to lavish writer/director/star John Cameron Mitchell with
heaps and heaps of over-the-top praise.  He stars as the eponymous Hedwig,
who we first see performing with his band (The Angry Inch) at a St Louis
restaurant before a handful of groupies and several dozen surprised dinner
patrons.  They're just not the typical entertainment you'd expect to see at
a family eatery, and Hedwig's shocking lyrics about his crazy adventures are
enough to redden even the most jaded cheeks.
Hedwig, we learn, is in the midst of a lawsuit pitting himself against
Rolling Stone Artist of the Year and MTV darling Tommy Gnosis (Michael Pitt,
Dawson's Creek).  The two were, at one time, in a very close relationship
that saw Hedwig pen the songs that made Tommy a star.  Not only did Tommy
kick Hedwig to the curb, he didn't credit him on his multi-platinum album,
either.  Hedwig's manager, Phyllis Stein (SCTV's Andrea Martin), has the
band following Tommy's sold-out tour around the country, but instead of
playing to packed arenas, they're stuck in a chain of Bilgewater's seafood
restaurants.
As Hedwig's tour continues, his songs (and occasional narration) explain his
life's story from his origin in East Germany through a botched sex change
operation (hence the title) prompted by a black sugar daddy (literally) and
a move to the United States.  The film is full of animation snippets (a la
Pink Floyd The Wall) that illustrate Hedwig's desire to find the perfect
life-mate and become a complete being.  He likens himself to the old,
divided Germany - incomplete and stuck in limbo between male and female.
Cameron, who could be Rachel Griffiths' twin brother, is completely
believable in this role, and some will be floored to learn he isn't really a
cross-dressing East German with a tiny lump of flesh where his penis used to
be.  Apparently, the inspiration for the film was a German babysitter
Cameron knew when he was a teenager in Kansas.  Years later, he created the
off-Broadway play that eventually became this film.  Even though he
performed as Hedwig for several years on stage, Cameron's performance is
still amazing, and his skills as a director should be commended, as well.
Hedwig could become America's newest sing-a-long cult musical, in the vein
of The Rocky Horror Picture Show.  It's goofy and sincere, and I'm not sure
I've ever seen a film that is both to the degree that Hedwig is.  And the
music, which was written by Stephen Trask, is some of the best stuff you'll
hear this year, assuming you dig the whole T.Rex/Bowie/Iggy Pop/Lou Reed
thing (Bob Mould plays lead guitar on each number).
1:35 - R for sexual content and language

Author
Robin Clifford
Hedwig (John Cameron Mitchell) was born a boy named Hansel in East Berlin.
As a teen seeking his "other half," he reluctantly agrees to a sex change
operation in order to marry American G.I. Luther (Maurice Dean Wint). The
operation, performed by a hack surgeon, is botched, and the "angry inch" is
all that's left. Now a "she", Hedwig comes to America, is abandoned by
Luther, forms a rock band and falls for her 17-year old lover/protégé,
Tommy, only to be rejected by him later, too. She and her band, The Angry
Inch, shadows the now-famous Tommy Gnosis across the US (for revenge?), but
Hedwig is really in search of her lost other half in "Hedwig and the Angry
Inch."
First time helmer John Cameron Mitchell, along with composer/lyricist
Stephen Trask, created and starred in their acclaimed off-Broadway
production that has become the movie. And quite a movie it is in its
eclectic variety of songs, outrageous costumes, sets and makeup and,
especially, a riveting performance by Mitchell as the title character.
Mitchell and Trask have reinvented the movie musical and couple it with the
underlying story of just whom Hedwig is and what she is looking for.
I am, by far, not a big fan of musicals. Sure, there are exceptions, like
Bob Fosse's "All That Jazz" and "Cabaret," but, for the most part, they are
just not my cup of tea. "Hedwig and the Angry Inch" is an exception,
though, with its combination of humor, wit and a collection of tunes that
covers musical styles ranging from "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" and
Meatloaf to David Bowie to The Sex Pistols. The original songs, by Stephen
Trask (also appearing as one of the members of the band The Angry Inch),
are full of energy and variety and, even though it's not my kind of music,
I found every one entertaining and fun. The audience I saw "Hedwig" with
thought so, too.
The main attraction to this one-man/woman show is the presence of its star.
John Cameron Mitchell gives a solid, sometimes fun, sometimes angry
performance as a person searching for self-enlightenment and love. As a
young boy growing up in East Berlin, Hansel is abused by his G.I. father
and raised by his German mother in a tiny flat so small that "mother would
make me play in the oven" where he listened to pop music on Armed Forces
Radio. Later, as a young man, he meets Luther, another G.I. and is swept
off of his feet. The ensuing Angry Inch incident comes soon after.
Flash forward to a trailer park in Junction City, Kansas, and Luther is
leaving Hedwig for another boy. Frustrated and broke, she takes on
baby-sitting and the odd "job" to make ends meet. She also forms a band
with four Korean housewives and the musical talent of Hedwig is born. She
meets, falls for and loses young Tommy, who steals her songs and goes off
to become a rock sensation. Jealous and angry, Hedwig and her new band
begins a campaign to shadow Tommy's tours and, with the help of her
manager, Phyllis Stein (Andrea Martin), is trying get a law suit going
against the star for stealing her songs. Hedwig and The Angry Inch get
gigs, not coincidentally, at a chain of seafood restaurants that just
happen to be next to the forums where Tommy Gnosis is playing. Things
finally come to a head, so to speak, in New York City.
The popularity of the off-Broadway musical and its offshoots have garnered
a ready-made audience base for "Hedwig." The wit, humor, music and search
for identity has great appeal to young adults, but the charismatic presence
of Mitchell makes this a cut above what it could have been. It is this
one-man/woman show that casts its spotlight on its "internationally
ignored" rock star and Mitchell is outstanding in the role. There isn't a
lot going on with other characters, though there are amusing little
sidebars, like Hedwig's backup singer/lover, Yitzak (Miriam Shor), deciding
to break away from the band to join a Polynesian road show of "Rent" as a
Puerto Rican drag queen.
The low budget that the moviemakers have for the production belies the
quality of the film. Attention to details - Hedwig's costumes and
outrageous "Cabaret"-like makeup; the seedy trailer park setting; and, the
kitschy seafood restaurants - are loads of fun to watch and lend the
appropriate air to the proceeds, all on what has to be a beer budget.
"Hedwig and the Angry Inch" may not be for everybody, but the energy of the
effort, the songs, the imaginative sets and costumes and a fast steady pace
make it a pleasure to watch. If you're a fan of contemporary, edgy music,
it is an even bigger draw. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Hedwig_and_the_Angry_Inch_ (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
        Never mind the fact that she's an East German transsexual whose botched
sex-change operation left her with the titular "angry inch"--the character of
struggling glam rocker Hedwig (John Cameron Mitchell) is an absolutely
refreshing screen creation simply due to her appealingly real personality: a mix
of exuberance, self-effacing humor, and unabashed romanticism.  In a similar
vein, _Hedwig_and_the_Angry_Inch_ is an absolute breath of fresh air, due to the
very authentic talents of Mitchell.  As writer, director, and star of this
adaptation of his popular Off-Broadway musical, he pulls off a stunning
cinematic hat trick that's all too rare for a first-time filmmaker.  Not to be
discounted is the invaluable contribution of Stephen Trask, who composed all of
the film's memorable, toe-tapping tunes (I dare anyone to not sing along to the
central production number "Wig in a Box") and has a supporting role as well.
        Being based on what is essentially a one-man show on the stage, _Hedwig_
the film cannot completely overcome one key shortcoming (no pun intended): the
flatness of all characters surrounding Hedwig.  She is the only character
developed to any substantial degree, a problem when it comes time to addressing
secondary but no less key issues such as her current husband Yitzhak's (Miriam
Shor, in an inspired bit of opposite gender-bending) relationship-threatening
desire to don wigs and dresses.  The sketchy development of supporting players
also affects one of the film's main concerns, Hedwig's relationship with
ex-lover Tommy Gnosis (Michael Pitt), who went on to rock stardom with the songs
she wrote; one never quite gets why she is so hung up on such a shallow young
twit, and Pitt's vacant performance (Trask provides Tommy's incongruously
passionate singing voice) fails to fill in any gaps.
        But _Hedwig_ is ultimately about her ongoing pursuit of love and
fulfillment, and that journey is intensely involving.  Through Mitchell's
vibrant performance and smart directing choices (the use of abstract animation
interludes is especially novel), not to mention Trask's indelible melodies, one
gets to know the character so intimately that her unusual life circumstances are
a non-issue.  Hedwig comes to life as a living, breathing, warts-and-all person
who wants nothing more than to be happy and whole, and Mitchell's emotional and
entertaining execution of this universal story resonates long after you've left
the theatre... and made your way to the record store to buy the soundtrack.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HEDWIG AND THE ANGRY INCH (director/writer: John Cameron Mitchell; screenwriter:
from a play by John Cameron Mitchell; cinematographer: Frank G. DeMarco; editor:
Andrew Marcus; cast: John Cameron Mitchell (Hedwig), Andrea Martin (Phyllis
Stein), Michael Pitt (Tommy Gnosis), Alberta Watson (Hansel's Mom), Stephen
Trask (Skszp), Rob Campbell (Krzysztof), Theodore Liscinski (Jacek), Michael
Aronov (Schlatko), Miriam Shor (Yit zhak), Maurice Dean Wint (Sgt. Luther
Robinson); Runtime: 95; Fine Line Features; 2000) 
A deliciously innovative and refreshing glam rock musical about a drag queen
from East Berlin, based on the hit off-Broadway show that ran in New York from
1998-2000. It was produced on the low-budget of $6 million. If you don't think
that was low, then compare it with this year's other musical "Moulin Rouge" and
its $50 million budget. It's the strange odyssey of a gay man who became a
transvestite, Hedwig (John Cameron Mitchell), his ups and downs and how this
outlandish character, certainly someone with a much different lifestyle than
most in the audience but nevertheless someone who can win them over to his side
by having the viewer empathize with his plight. It was a poetically touching
film, one that was more complex than what might have been thought from a work
that calls itself a "post-punk, neo-glam rock musical." It was no easy task to
make Hedwig a sympathetic figure, someone who sings about finding love as a
transvestite and is obsessed with his sex-change operation; but, this colorful
production is very energetic and electrifying, offering the style of music that
is similar to pop culture icons Iggy Pop, David Bowie, and Lou Reed. 
Its main theme song is an interesting one: "The Origin of Love," derived from
Plato's theory that human beings - having been split in two by the angry gods -
are in constant search for their other halves. The song becomes Hedwig's rather
unique theory of the evolution of human sexuality from a transsexual
perspective. You can take it or leave it, but there it is to be heard as the cry
of one voice telling of his own madness. I thought it was wonderfully vibrant, a
chance to know about someone most of us will never meet either in life or
through other films. 
Hedwig is born as a boy called Hansel whose life's dream is to find his other
half. He is the child of an East Berlin mother (Watson) and an American G.I.
father who sexually abuses him. Stuck in this depressing part of Germany and in
a claustrophobic apartment, his mother tells him to play in the oven. The child
finds a release from his misery by dancing to American rock and roll heard on
Armed Forces Radio, where he becomes exuberant over such artists as Toni
Tennille and Debby Boone. When he's a young adult of college age, he meets a
black G.I. who offers him candy and sex. He reluctantly undergoes a sex-change
operation to consumate this marriage--which will get him out of the dreaded
environment of East Berlin. But the operation is botched and he's left with a
mound of flesh that measures one-inch where his male organ should have been
--thus the film's title. After moving to a Kansas trailer-park, Hedwig's husband
deserts him for another pretty young male lover. 
Thusly, Hedwig reinvents himself as a rock singer, and is seen on an
unsuccessful tour in the Bilgewater chain of restaurants as arranged by his
nervous manager Phyllis Stein (Andrea Martin). His band, named Hedwig and the
Angry Inch, sings to an unappreciative low-brow audience that can't relate to
him as he sings about his life, the Berlin Wall, his philosophy, and the love he
has. An example of the lyrics he treats them to is "I rose from off of the
doctor's slab/Like Lazarus from the pit/Now everyone wants to take a stab/And
desecrate me with blood, graffiti and spit." 
He is also stalking a former teen-aged protege for the purposes of a law suit,
who is a would-be Jesus freak who disavows God because he "micro-managed Adam
and Eve." He teamed up with this shallow son of an American general, even giving
him his stage name, Tommy Gnossis (Pitt). But Tommy, a friendly Judas with a
grey cross painted on his forehead, deserted him and stole the music he
wrote--becoming a wealthy super-star from those songs inspired by their
unfulfilled love. 
Meanwhile, the band's co-vocalist and his current sex partner, Yitzhak (Miriam
Shor), a female playing a male character who would rather be a drag queen, is
having trouble relating with Hedwig's abusive behavior and is thinking of
splitting from the band to go on tour overseas with the rock group called Rent.
This is the artful and alluring Mr. Mitchell's film all the way, as he puts his
heart and soul into it both as a singer and an actor. He also wrote the
screenplay and made his debut as a director. His rich voice sounds like David
Bowie', using the songs written by Stephen Trask to fill the screen with a
parody of Bowie's Ziggy Stardust. He also struts across the stage as a
super-star would, dons a multitude of wigs, lovingly shows off gams that are the
equal of Betty Grable's, and captures our attention with his sad and meaningful
story. It's one that calls out for tolerance in a spirited way, as it transcends
pop culture and touches on the search the young have to find something in this
world to believe in. His search for knowledge leads to him trying to find the
origin of love and in finding his identity. This is something the film touched
on in its teasing way, giving us something to chew over in this unusual tale. 
I thought the best line in the film comes when Hedwig's mother choosing to live
in a communist country curtly says: "Jesus died for our sins," as Hedwig
counters "Hitler died for Germany's sins." 
The film was both amateurish and glossy in a professional sense, and whatever it
did--worked; even using many gimmicky filmmaking techniques - including the
stunningly gorgeous animated pieces by award-winning artist Emily Hubley. 
This is the best transvestite rock musical ever (it got right both the music and
the emotional impact of the pain suffered by the star), and it is at least
better by an inch than its only other cult film rival "The Rocky Horror Picture
Show." Though the latter will in all probability still be more popular with a
wider audience. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
     You'd be angry too.  Hedwig used to be Hansel, an East German boy of
confused sexuality who fell in love with an American sergeant (Maurice Dean
Wint).  In order to pass the physical to get married, he had to undergo a sex
change operation (`To be free, one must give up a little piece of oneself,' his
mother counseled).  The operation went awry, and the residue was the eponymous
unit of measure.
     Writer/director/star John Cameron Mitchell created this rock fantasy of
gender identity Off-Broadway, where it became a cult hit, and he has transferred
it with notable success to the big screen (it has garnered a mantel-full of
awards, from Berlin to Sundance.)  The movie fairly bristles with originality
and energy; it stands out from the wasteland of failed summer blockbusters like
a whirling dervish in a Benedictine monastery.  Originality and energy in
themselves aren't enough to insure a worthwhile movie, but here they're
buttressed by a pretty solid serving of talent as well.
     Hedwig and her backup group the Angry Inch, and their manager (the
wonderful Andrea Martin) are touring a series of salad bar restaurants called
Bilgewater's, playing to scattered audiences of bored and bemused burghers,
always in the same cities where rock megastar Tommy Gnossis (Michael Pitt) is
playing to arenas packed with adoring fans.  In a series of songs and flashbacks
we piece together Hedwig's checkered history: molested by his G.I. father,
neglected by his East German mother (`Our apartment was so small mother made me
play in the oven'), inspired by the music of American masters (Toni Tenille,
Debbie Boone) on Armed Forces Radio, wooed, semi-transgendered, wed, and then
abandoned in a Kansas trailer park by her soldier boy, forced to shift for
herself as a nanny for yet another military man, whose born-again teenage son
Tommy becomes her musical protégé and almost lover.  Together they write songs
and create his Tommy Gnossis persona, but when he discovers her angry inch and
departs in revulsion, he takes her songs and all the credit and becomes a star. 
One question that nags is why, with the same material, Tommy is a superstar and
Hedwig is playing the salad circuit.  It would be hard to make the case that
gender confusion has been a drag on success in the rock era.
     `Hedwig' is all about duality and wholeness.  With the help of some
kaleidoscopically imaginative animation by Emily Hubley (daughter of veteran
animators Faith and John Hubley), it draws on sources as diverse as Plato and
the Berlin wall to explore the case that all of us are divided, all of us
contain masculine and feminine, all of us are searching for that complementary
self who will make us whole.  As philosophy that's all very well and good, and
probably as original as you want it to be.  What makes this movie rock is the
terrific performance of Mitchell in drag, bearing a startling resemblance to
Rachel Griffiths, and singing the daylights out of a slew of very listenable
songs in the glam rock tradition of David Bowie and Lou Reed, penned by fellow
cast member Stephen Trask.  Completing the drag race is Miriam Shor as Yitzak,
Hedwig's lead guitarist and lover, in vintage Axl Rose whiskers and doing a
creditable job of sensitive maleness to help stir the broth.  When at the end
Shor morphs back into a woman and Mitchell into a man, sort of, it bridges the
genderation gap and closes the circle.
     When a movie starts off with the pinwheeling fireworks this one musters,
you pray for it not to lose that magical edge; regrettably, those prayers are
not answered.  `Hedwig' bogs down in love story sentimentality and passages
that, for all of their brash naughtiness, are no better than soapsuds beneath
the glitter.  But momentum counts for a lot, and almost carries it over the
soggy parts.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
HEDWIG AND THE ANGRY INCH, starring John Cameron Mitchell, who also writes and
directs, is a musical comedy/drama about a transvestite singer.  With a big
blonde wig and eight coats of make-up, Hedwig Schmidt (Mitchell) is initially
funny.  But with it's thin narrative, based on Mitchell's off Broadway play, the
story doesn't have much to offer save its one, recurring visual joke of Hedwig
belting out songs in nondescript salad bars and coffee shops, whose patrons
don't know what to make of Hedwig and his band.  Few are impressed, and most
just stare, which was about my reaction to the movie.  To be fair, comedy is a
very personal medium, and the stranger on my left laughed constantly.
In flashbacks, we learn that Hedwig, then known as Hansel, was born in Germany
at the time of the building of the Berlin Wall.  The product of an East German
mother and a GI father, he had a trying childhood.  The movie's best scene
occurs when the 6-year-old Hansel (Ben Mayer-Goodman) is shown jumping up and
down on his bed, acting like a rock star as he listens to the American Forces
Network on the radio.  When Hansel gets older, he kind of changes sex and
marries a GI just like mom did.
Another subplot concerns Hedwig's troubled romance with a big rock star, Tommy
Gnosis (Michael Pitt).  Throughout the film, they cut back to crudely drawn
animations in order to illustrate various points.  These drawings left me as
cold as the rest of the movie.  Perhaps if I had liked the music, which I
didn't, I could have enjoyed the film.  As it is, all I can say is that Mitchell
does throw his heart and soul into the production.  I just wish that the result
had more to offer than a promising beginning.
HEDWIG AND THE ANGRY INCH runs 1:35.  It is rated R for sexual content and
language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 3, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley it will be playing at the Camera Cinemas.  The movie was
shown recently at the Camera Cinema Club (http://www.cameracinemas.com/club) of
Los Gatos and San Jose.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Hedwig and the Angry Inch (2001)
John Cameron Mitchell, Miriam Shor, Stephen Trask, Michael Pitt,
Theodore Liscinski, Michael Aronov, Andrea Martin, Maurice Dean Wint,
Ben Mayer-Goodman. Animation by Emily Hubley. Adapted from the stage
play by John Cameron Mitchell and Stephen Trask. Music and lyrics by
Stephn Trask. Written and directed by John Cameron Mitchell. 91 minutes.
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Had "Hedwig and the Angry Inch" came out in the '70s, right after David
Bowie's "Ziggy Stardust," it likely would now be regarded as one of the
most popular rock musicals of all time. Released in the 500 channel,
sensory overload world of 2001, however, the big screen adaptation of
the acclaimed off-Broadway musical must do battle with countless other
productions clamoring for attention.
I almost missed it. Every August, the major studios try to squeeze the
last few dollars out of summer moviegoers by dumping all of their
shakier offerings on the marketplace at once. I was so busy trying to
keep up with national releases like "Summer Catch" and "Bubble Boy" that
I passed over any independent film that looked like it would only have a
short local run. But an e-mail from a reader asking why I hadn't
reviewed the movie prompted me to make a late evening trip to the
theater.
"Hedwig and the Angry Inch" is a gender-bending glam-rock spectacular
packed with great songs. Stylistically, the hook-laden tunes are
reminiscent of Bowie, "Bat Out of Hell" era Meatloaf and "The Rocky
Horror Show," without ever seeming like imitations. As with "Tommy,"
"Hedwig" tells a story of isolation, pain and defiance, but without the
bloated feel of that beloved, but overrated rock opera.
Writer-director-star John Cameron Mitchell and composer-lyricist Stephen
Trask have cooked up a real winner.
Mitchell stars as Hedwig, a singer from East Berlin touring a chain of
U.S. coffee shops with her pan-Slavic band, the Angry Inch. While the
patrons of the run-down restaurants look on in shock, and sometimes
horror, Hedwig boldly tells the sad story of her life in song.
She was once a boy named Hansel (Ben Mayer-Goodman), living with his
mother (Alberta Watson) and listening to rock and roll on American Armed
Forces Radio. Life is an exercise in duality for Hansel. A wall splits
his hometown into two parts. Mother describes love as the emotion that
comes when you find your other half.
As Hansel grows up, the duality becomes more pronounced. After initially
mistaking him for a girl, a GI from the States (Maurice Dean Wint) falls
in love with Hansel and wants to marry him. Alas, Hansel will never pass
the mandatory physical. Mother helpfully suggests a sex change, but the
operation goes bad, hence the references to "the angry inch" (yes, I
know this part is squirm-inducing, but stick with me - it's worth it).
Several years later, Mr. Right is long gone and Hansel becomes Hedwig,
decked out in a Farrah Fawcett-style wig and fronting a band made up of
Korean women. Hedwig finds a new love in Tommy (Michael Pitt), a
beatific lad with a unique take on Christianity. But Tommy does Hedwig
wrong, stealing her songs and becoming a superstar.
Cut to the present. Tommy Gnosis' stadium tour is thriving and Hedwig is
suing him. Despite warnings from her manager (Andrea Martin) that she
could easily be labeled a stalker, Hegwig and her new band, the Angry
Inch, continue their coffee shop tour, shadowing the thief by playing
whatever city he is in.
If this sounds like a bizarre premise for a rock musical, take a few
seconds and consider the plotlines of "Tommy" and "Rocky Horror."
As Hedwig, John Cameron Mitchell does a magnificent job taking a
character that could have simply been a caricature or an icon and
turning her into a compelling human being. Mitchell has world-class
style and vocal chords to match. Even though the backstory is unusually
strong, Mitchell never forgets that the production is first and foremost
a rock musical. Everything is propelled by one terrific song after
another and, trust me, these are full-fledged rock songs, not the
over-processed fluff that passes for rock in most musicals.
While Mitchell remains in the center of the stage throughout the film,
there is much of interest on the sidelines. Miriam Shor does fine work
as Yitzhak, Hedwig's lover and bandmate, conveying a great deal through
expressions alone. Decked out in a bandanna and a surprisingly
convincing beard, she makes a mighty attractive man. As always, "SCTV"
veteran Andrea Martin is a welcome presence onscreen and Michael Pitt is
beguiling as Tommy, the angelic-appearing little rat. Artist Emily
Hubley adds to the magic with a string of dandy animated sequences that
charm the eye while underlining the central themes of the musical.
"Hedwig and the Angry Inch" surrounds a weird, funny and touching story
with a knockout series of songs performed by an exceptional cast. True
originals do not come along very often  don't let this slip out of town
without seeing it.

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A little boy born in East Germany (named Hansel) loves the American music. One
day, he gets the opportunity to meet and marry an American G.I., but first, he
must get a sex change (enter Hedwig). Once married, the two move to the States,
but quickly thereafter, get a divorce. At that point, Hedwig starts writing
music and meets another confused boy, who soon turns into a star. That boy also
turns his back on Hedwig, and it isn't long before Hedwig puts together his/her
own band and tours the States via seafood restaurants. This is the story of
his/her life, told via flashbacks and musical numbers.
CRITIQUE:
An artsy-fartsy musical with great songs and a superb performance by John
Cameron Mitchell, doesn't really come together as a whole, with over-the-top
symbolism, incoherence and too much pretension to retain my interest all the
whole way through. In fact, this isn't so much of a realistic, articulate,
behind-the-scenes look at the rise of a rock 'n roll star, as it is an
ambiguous, overly poetic and incomprehensible struggle of a man, his sexuality
and his identity as a whole person on this planet. I guess that I was expecting
the former going in. The film is somewhat interesting to a point, but I was
personally never able to involve myself too much, as the basic symbolic and
incongruent nature of the film left me feeling cold and distant. But it is
definitely tuned to a certain type of audience. Chances are that if you are a
fan of THE WALL, THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW or even PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE
DESERT, the elements tangled in this movie will likely strike your fancy (some
of the characters in this film even ask the audience to sing along at some
point, and provide the lyrics of their song, on-screen).
Well, I personally don't care for those films, and didn't really get into the
whole "show" atmosphere of this movie either. I guess I might've looked at it
all too literally, but like I said earlier, I just didn't care enough about the
characters to delve into the "so the butterfly represents his freedom?" side of
things. All I know is that the film left me with many questions unanswered and
didn't make me feel any more fulfilled. What was Hedwig's relationship with that
other member of his band (with the beard)? What happened with Hedwig and Tommy
Gnosis at the end of the movie? (was that an actual sequence or a fantasy?) What
ever happened to the lawsuit? And more... All of which were part of the film and
interested me somewhat. If the only idea behind the film was for the main
character to uncover his/her sexuality, then that's one thing, but as many of
the relationships and situations presented themselves in this movie, I wanted
some resolution to those pieces as well. I didn't get it.
The film's humor also didn't tickle my funny bone either. Then again, I've seen
many a film in these art-house theatres in which patrons are rolling down the
aisles with laughter, while all I see is a tiny bit of whimsy on the screen.
Some of these films are also better enjoyed with the added "atmosphere" of a
plant called marijuana, and I can certainly see how this movie ingrains within
itself some nifty visual elements, in order to jazz up that experience. But
being sober as I was and expecting a coherent, funny, musical with a transsexual
twist, I didn't leave the theater very satisfied. I came out having watched an
existential story of a confused man caught up in a musical lifestyle, wrapped in
metaphors, dramatics and more questions than answers. I will, on the other hand,
definitely hand some props out to the lead in this film, John Cameron Mitchell,
who is also the man who wrote, directed and created the play on which this movie
is based, and the tunes, which will likely be enjoyed by anyone who digs The Sex
Pistols, David Bowie and the whole 70s glam-rock scene.
Note: BTW, it seems as though pretty much every single "mainstream" critic in
the United States loved this movie from top to bottom (and thought that it was
really funny to boot!), so you might want to take that into consideration
yourself. But having said that, the main reason that I started this dinky
website in the first place was because films like this would sometimes be
uniformly applauded by the "official" critics, while I, a regular "JoBlo" in the
audience, just wouldn't get what all the fuss was about. This movie is a perfect
example of why I continue to write movie reviews.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Moulin Rouge (8/10) - Grease (8/10) - Everyone Says I Love You (5/10) - The
Opposite of Sex (8/10) - Dancer in the Dark (5/10) - O Brother, Where Art Thou
(7/10) - Love's Labour's Lost (8/10)

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fine Line Features/ Killer Films
 Director: John Cameron Mitchell
 Writer:  John Cameron Mitchell
 Cast: John Cameron Mitchell, Miriam Shor, Stephen Trask,
Michael Pitt, Theodore Liscinski, Michael
Aronov, Andrea Martin, Ben Mayer-Goodman
    In Steven Spielberg's monumental fairy tale "A.I.: Artificial
Intelligence," a lonely and unhappy robot named David is able to
give love to his parents but his affection is not reciprocated.  In
that touching story, we in the audience ignore the fact that David
is an android, as Spielberg means us to do, and root for him to
get that metaphoric kiss from the princess--and become a real
human being.  The idea that one cannot be whole without love is
pretty much part of the American culture, but John Cameron
Mitchell subverts the notion that the love of another is the alpha
and omega of human existence with his canny film taken from the
off-Broadway hit by the same name, "Hedwig and the Angry Inch." 
Like Woody Allen, Mitchell's role as writer, actor and star in his
own movie puts just about the entire burden of success on his
shoulders, and the hugely talented man comes across with a
poignant, funny, production featuring his tour de force
performance as the title character.  As a musical in which the
songs regularly advance the plot, "Hedwig" is as different from
"The Sound of Music" as Bach's "Passacaglia and Fugue" is from
Bill Haley's "Rock Around the Clock."  The key word is "different,"
and therein lies much of its appeal.  Saturated as we here in New
York are with Broadway revivals of dated works like "Annie Get
Your Gun," "Kiss Me Kate," and "42nd Street, we should greet
this transsexual named Hedwig with the open arms that she
herself longs for during most of the story's 91 minutes, a
refreshing blend of Stephen Trask's stirring and meaningful rock
music, Frank G. DeMarco's pastel cinematography, Emily
Hubley's imaginative animation, and a production design by
Therese De Prez that appropriately expands the play well beyond
the stage.
   "Hedwig and the Angry Inch," which is the remarkable John
Cameron Mitchell's film debut as a director, premiered at the
recent Sundance Festival and should attract quite a bit of
enthusiasm from the critics as well when it opens, presumably on
a limited number of screens.  Told with an abundance of
flashbacks, the yarn  opens with a rousing song belted out by
Mitchell, after which we flash back to his more youthful days as a
child in Berlin with the name of Hansel (Ben Mayer-Goodman). 
Though Hansel watches his mother slapping and pounding her
man and driving him from their East Berlin digs, he absorbs a
lesson from his mom (Albert Watson) that life is worthwhile only
when you find your other half--poor advice that informs the lad's
thinking when he's not bopping to the sounds of rock on
American Forces Radio.  Encouraged to marry an American
soldier (Maurice Dean Wint) to get out of communist East Berlin,
he must first get a physical--which requires him to get a primitive
sex change operation which is botched: the doctor took away five
inches below the belt, leaving one inch behind.
   Mitchell takes us on a dismal tour of Hedwig's rock band which
the singer, donning various copious wigs, takes to the most
dismal and sparsely inhabited clubs and coffee houses in Miami
Beach, Kansas and the like, at one point recruiting a small group
of Korean women to play electric guitar.  At one point he falls in
love with a cherubic Jesus freak, Tommy (Michael Pitt), who
reacts strongly upon finally touching the eponymous angry inch. 
Hedwig will see himself not only betrayed by the no-longer-
innocent young man but virtually deserted by his lead backup
singer, Yitzhak (Miriam Shor--who looks every bit a man).
   If "A.I." is the exploration of unrequited love, then "Hedwig and
the Angry Inch" is an inquiry into the meaning of wholeness.  Are
we as individuals spending too much time preening and primping
and marketing ourselves to others, as though their affection for us
is all that we require?  Should we not look more deeply into our
own selves for what we feel we we're missing?
   What puts "Hedwig" over the top is the fortunate marriage of
music and motif, personality and panache.  Mitchell is astounding
in the role of a man whose identity as a transsexual is almost
incidental to his search for completion.  He tugs at our
heartstrings, he makes us laugh, he forces us to care far more
than the pathetic folks in the audience during his character's early
career as a songwriter and interpreter.  He is backed up by a
technical team that meshes animation, music and design, giving
the picture the very completion that Hedwig himself so earnestly
seeks.
Rated R.  Running time: 91 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
After undergoing a botched sex change operation, Hansel becomes Hedwig, marries
and American GI and leaves East Berlin behind for rural Kansas.  Abandoned in
a trailer park, Hedwig turns to his love of glitter rock and creates a goth 
icon out of seventeen year old Army brat Tommy Gnosis (Michael Pitt, "Finding
Forrester") who steals Hedwig's music and leaves her.  Writer/director/star 
John Cameron Mitchell adapts his lyricist/composer Stephen Trask's smash 
off-Broadway musical, "Hedwig and the Angry Inch," for the big screen.
The rock musical is created anew with John Cameron Mitchell's dynamic, 
fearlessly individual vision and Stephen Trask's perfectly evocative music 
and lyrics.  "Hedwig and the Angry Inch" plays like a well-established cult
film the first time you see it.
Present day Hedwig is obsessed with her ungrateful creation, Tommy Gnosis.
As he tours huge rock arenas, Hedwig and her band, The Angry Inch, follow
playing a chain of seafood restaurants called Bilgewater's.  Hedwig's manager
(Andrea Martin) futilely tries to keep the still lovesick Hedwig from stalking 
Tommy while negotiating a law suit against him.  Meanwhile, Hedwig's husband
and backup singer Yitzhak (played by a woman, Miriam Shor) pines over Hedwig's
wigs while she pines over Tommy.
The stunningly androgynous Mitchell spins Hedwig's tale of two halves
straining to become one with wit, intelligence and bawdy humor (after his
botched op, Hedwig observes 'My first day as a woman and already it's that
time of the month').  He's taken his own experiences as an Army brat and 
melded them with a German babysitter he once knew to create Hedwig, introduced 
as young Hansel (Ben Mayer-Goodman) whose home town is itself divided in two 
by the Berlin Wall.  Weaned on Armed Forces radio, Hedwig (Hansel's mother's 
name, which he adopts along with her passport) worships a personal pantheon 
comprised of David Bowie, Iggy Pop and Lou Reed.
After a hilarious Gummi Bear courtship by the fickle Luther, Hedwig finds
herself in a dead end trailer park, ironically left for a young boy.  Plucky
Hedwig forms a band with Korean Army brides while sexually servicing their
husbands for cash.  Once her eyes lock with Tommy's, 'a seventeen year old
classic rock loving Jesus freak with a fish on his truck,' she's lost and
quickly seduces him while babysitting his infant sibling.  In present day,
Hedwig does meet up again with Tommy in ironically similar circumstances
before she learns how to heal herself and unite her two halves.
Mitchell hasn't simply recorded his musical, but inventively places his
camera and changes his locations (the play is smartly recalled when Hedwig's
Kansas trailer wall drops down to transform into a stage for an Angry Inch
performance).  In addition to the fine work by Directory of Photography
Frank DeMarco and Production Designer Therese DePrez ("I Shot Andy Warhol"),
costume design by Madonna's personal stylist Arianne Phillips ("The Crow")
nails the home made glitter rock look.  Wig and Make-up Designer Mike Potter,
who designed the original Hedwig look for the stage, repeats his fabulous
work for the film.
John Cameron Mitchell's confident, unique voice makes "Hedwig and
the Angry Inch" a true American original and the best American movie of the 
year.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
