Title
Review for Raging Bull (1980)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Long Che Chan
Raging Bull is about violence.  It is a graphic film that uses time and
space in and out of the boxing ring to full effect.  The celebrated
1940s and '50s boxer, Jake LaMotta (Robert DeNiro), is portrayed here as
sleazy, jealous, and brutal; he's an animal.  For Martin Scorsese,
Robert DeNiro, and Paul Schrader, Raging Bull had to be made and their
passion paid off: over time, the film has become the team's most famous
achievement after Taxi Driver and has been named the best film of the
‘80s and one of the greatest films of all time.  It is a relentless
movie and the complete opposite of the much more affectionate tribute to
boxing, Rocky.
However, as critics are eager to point out, Raging Bull is not about
boxing.  It looks at the sport as an outlet for expressing one's
inclement emotions.  Jake LaMotta, a middleweight boxing champion, is
extremely violent in nature and he doesn't box for the sake of boxing
but to calm his frustrations.  To him, being inhumane is almost
medicinal.  Living in New York, LaMotta is plagued by several things but
mainly by his ever-present jealousy and suspicion of the women in his
life.  Being the brute that he is, he tries to turn his lovers into
subservient, timid creatures.  This ends his first marriage and scars a
second one to a blonde young woman named Vicki (Cathy Moriarty).
Jake's brother and manager, Joey (Joe Pesci), is similarly burdened by
him.  During the straining course of LaMotta's boxing career, Jake seems
to enjoy being the victim.  Seeking the sin of relatives and friends, he
pulls crimes out of thin air and accuses those close to him of them.
Vicki is loyal but emotionally emaciated by Jake's merciless scrutiny of
her every move.  She can't even say goodbye to a male acquaintance
without being interrogated by Jake.  We never learn if Vicki is cheating
on him but, from what we witness on screen, he has no good reason to
suspect her of betrayal.
The fights in Raging Bull, both in and out of the boxing ring, are
bloody.  Perfectly edited by Thelma Schoonmaker and exceptionally framed
and photographed by Michael Chapman, the film boasts several vicious
boxing sequences. We watch LaMotta punch his opponent into a pulp.  When
his wife briefly comments that a future opponent, Janiro, is
good-looking, he goes into a fit of rage.  When he finally fights
Janiro, he wounds his face so bad that a Mafia boss in the audience
quips "He ain't pretty no more." Martin Scorsese twists time and space
in the film, putting us inside the ring with two very angry men (there
are many sequences with LaMotta fighting Sugar Ray Robinson).  Scorsese
uses a stark soundtrack that is, at one moment, loud with screaming
spectators of a fight, then filled with quiet suspense as one rival
prepares to bloody the other.  Time and space is also manipulated
outside the ring.  To Jake, Vicki is an enigmatic, God-like figure.  We
see Vicki in slow-motion several times.  We also see those who LaMotta
believes to be Vicki's lovers in slow-motion.
Towards the end of the film, everyone leaves Jake. The last straw for
Joey is when Jake accuses him of cheating with Vicki.  It is amazing how
LaMotta blows every single movement of his wife out of proportion.
Vicki gives Joey a kiss and he goes flying with fury.  Vicki eventually
files for divorce when Jake retires and becomes a shoddy, overweight
emcee at bars.
The most famous scene in the film is LaMotta's recitation of the "I
coulda been a contenda…" speech from On the Waterfront.  Jake's reading
tells us of his relationship with his estranged brother, Joey, and his
regret for becoming what he now seems to be, "a bum."  DeNiro delivers
the scene without a shred of emotion but the parallels between Terry
Malloy's situation in Waterfront and LaMotta's in Raging Bull are
evident and profound to us.
Robert DeNiro's performance is searing.  His gaining fifty pounds for
the role of Jake LaMotta has become one of Hollywood's greatest
behind-the-scenes stories.  More importantly, DeNiro succeeds in showing
us LaMotta's ugliness and brutality and, at the end, his pathetic but
present streak of humanity.  LaMotta reaches a place of loss and slight
self-revelation at the end of Raging Bull and DeNiro makes his crisis
subtlety moving.
Raging Bull seems to be Martin Scorsese's film, however.  Incorporating
his trademark Italian-flavored dialogue (which is often hilarious and
lightens up the heavy issues of human bondage at hand), his sense of
physical and emotional violence, and his way with actors, Scorsese made
Raging Bull an indisputable masterpiece.  It is one of the most
unsympathetic and saddening portraits of a character whose inner demons
have eaten away his integrity.

Author
Brian Koller
Considered by many to be the best film of the 1980s,
"Raging Bull" falls short of that extremely high
standard.  However, it is still a great film, with
excellent performances from Robert De Niro and
Joe Pesci, and glorious black and white cinematography.
"Raging Bull" tells the story of middleweight boxer
Jake La Motta, from relatively early in his career
to about a decade after his retirement.  This covers
the years 1943 through 1964.  La Motta is the scourge
of his division, with only Sugar Ray Robinson able
to defeat him.  La Motta, an argumentative and
violent man, is managed by his equally querulous
brother Pesci.  La Motta leaves his hostile first
wife for blond beauty Cathy Moriarty, but his obsessive
jealousy towards her threatens their marriage as well
as his relationship with his brother.
Eventually, La Motta's career fails due to age and
corpulence.  He becomes a night club entertainer,
falls on hard times, but he is no quitter.
"Raging Bull" isn't for everyone.  There is much
violence and "adult" language.  The film should appeal
to men more than to women.  Men will be more likely
to sympathize and even admire La Motta, while women
will be more likely to condemn him for his violence
and self-destructive ways.
De Niro put on nearly fifty pounds in order to better
play the older, heavyset La Motta.  This is acting
beyond the call of duty.  De Niro is cool and intense
at the same time, but Pesci also gives a great
performance.  The dialogue between De Niro and Pesci
is great, and the flood of obscenities is admittedly
entertaining.
"Raging Bull" is a relentless character study, but
there is some comic relief.  La Motta buys a newfangled
television set, and is unable to get a picture on it.
One scene has him staring blankfaced at a scrambled
signal.
"Raging Bull" won Academy Awards for Best Actor
(De Niro) and Film Editing (Thelma Schoonmaker).
The editing award was undoubtedly due to the boxing
sequences, with their unusual slow motion and close-ups.
The film was also nominated for Best Picture,
Best Supporting Actor (Pesci) and Actress (Moriarty),
as well as Director (Martin Scorsese) and Cinematography
(Michael Chapman).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1980
Running Length: 2:09
MPAA Classification: R (Extreme & frequent profanity, graphic violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, Cathy Moriarty, Frank Vincent, 
      Nicholas Colasanto
Director: Martin Scorsese
Producers: Irwin Winkler and Robert Chartoff
Screenplay: Paul Schrader and Mardik Martin based on the book by 
      Jake La Motta with Joseph Carter and Peter Savage
Cinematography: Michael Chapman
Music: Robbie Robertson
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Some critics, including Siskel & Ebert, are on the record stating 
that Martin Scorsese's RAGING BULL, the story of boxer Jake La Motta, is 
the best film of the '80s.  Since there are still a number of '80s films 
that I haven't seen, I don't feel qualified to make such a judgment, but 
I'll say this without hesitation:  RAGING BULL is a great motion 
picture, and I would be surprised if more than a handful of films 
released between January 1, 1980 and December 31, 1989 come close to its 
level.
     Bio-pics often fall into one of two categories:  overblown hero-
worship or a dry, dull textbook account.  It's rare that a movie with 
the moniker "based on the life of…" comes across as anything more than 
sporadically energetic and marginally entertaining.  RAGING BULL is the 
perfect counterexample, and a brilliant argument for film makers to 
continue to work in this genre.  The picture takes the life of boxer 
Jake La Motta, a Middleweight icon from the '40s and '50s, and develops 
one of the most compelling character studies ever to reach the big 
screen.  For all 129 minutes, director Martin Scorsese and actor Robert 
De Niro (in the title role) have us mesmerized by this individual who is 
by turns sympathetic, sad, and horrifying.  
     Historically, RAGING BULL is said to be mostly accurately, with the 
lion's share of the details culled from La Motta's own autobiography 
(which was co-written with Joseph Carter and Peter Savage).  However, 
although La Motta is credited as the movie's "consultant," he was 
reportedly unhappy with the final result, because it portrays him as 
nothing short of an uncouth, insensitive lout.  The La Motta of the 
movie is a man of extreme appetites who is driven by base, bestial 
impulses – paranoia, jealousy, and blind rage.  Sex and violence are 
inextricably linked.  The title is apt – La Motta is a raging bull.  
     In the ring, he is a terror, not just beating his opponents, but 
destroying them.  Outside of it, he is no less vicious or more easily 
controlled.  The two people who spar with him on life's canvas are his 
wife, Vicki (Cathy Moriarty), and his brother/manager, Joey (Joe Pesci).  
These are the two who mean the most to Jake, and who, as a result of his 
inability to trust himself or others, he loses.  He beats Vicki 
mercilessly because he suspects her of infidelity, and, when he 
inaccurately believes that his brother betrayed him, his lets loose with 
an explosion of violence.  
     RAGING BULL opens in 1941 when La Motta, an up-and-coming fighter, 
is battling his way into the upper echelon of the Middleweight Class.  
Over the years, he wins several key bouts, including one against his 
arch-rival, Sugar Ray Robinson (Johnny Barnes), but his unwillingness to 
capitulate with the local godfather keeps him from an opportunity to 
participate in a championship match.  Meanwhile, away from the ring, La 
Motta falls in love with 15-year old Vicki, who he marries after 
discarding his shrewish first wife.  Vicki becomes Jake's greatest prize 
(a wife, in his view, is not a companion, but a possession) and the 
source of his most extreme pain.  His own insecurity is so great that he 
cannot accept that a woman as beautiful as Vicki could be faithful to 
him.  Hence, he is constantly haunted by a belief that she is sleeping 
with someone else – perhaps even his brother.  (This leads to the famous 
line parodied in WAITING FOR GUFFMAN and elsewhere:  "Are you f**king my 
wife???")
     In the late '40s, La Motta gets his first shot at a championship 
fight, but with one huge condition:  he must take a fall.  He does it so 
badly that an investigation is launched and he is almost thrown out of 
boxing.  Two years later, he wins the championship, only to lose it in a 
subsequent bout to Sugar Ray.  By the late '50s and early '60s, when the 
film ends, Jake has become a pathetic figure – a broke, overweight loser 
who has spent time in jail for corrupting the morals of a minor, has 
lost his wife and children, and is trying to earn a few bucks by doing a 
cheap standup routine.
     RAGING BULL is the other side of ROCKY.  Sylvester Stallone's tale 
of boxing triumph was released to great critical acclaim in 1976.  It 
won the 1977 Best Picture Oscar, and a sequel arrived in theaters before 
RAGING BULL went into production.  But, where ROCKY romanticizes boxing, 
RAGING BULL takes a cold, unflinching look at the violence both inside 
and outside of the ring.  While Scorsese's primary aim is to present a 
riveting deconstruction of La Motta the man, he never backs away from 
showing the seedy, ugly underside of a sport where gambling, greed, and 
organized crime force fighters to throw matches to continue working.  
ROCKY shows boxing at its noblest; RAGING BULL shows it at its most 
diseased.
     There's little I can say here that hasn't already said about De 
Niro's performance.  In a career that has included many fine roles, this 
is his most outstanding.  The level of intensity De Niro brings to La 
Motta is unwavering.  And, although there's a lot of Travis Bickle (De 
Niro's character in TAXI DRIVER) in La Motta, Scorsese and De Niro go to 
great lengths to make sure that, if we never fully sympathize with him, 
at least we understand the forces that drive him.  This is a complete 
characterization and a perfect example of acting.  As the younger Jake, 
De Niro is trim and fit.  As the fat, older man, De Niro gained 50 
pounds and turned his body into a grotesque parody of its normal form.  
How many actors would go that far?  The Best Oscar statue is only one 
testimony to the lasting power of the performance.
     Cathy Moriarty and Joe Pesci both earned nominations for their 
supporting work (although neither won).  Their portrayals have the same 
raw energy that infuses De Niro's.  Pesci, who has basically re-created 
the same personality in two other Scorsese films (GOODFELLAS and 
CASINO), presents Joey as a slightly more intelligent version of his 
brother.  The misogyny and violence are still there, only better 
concealed.  But, when Joey snaps, as he does in one scene where he 
pounds on a mobster (Frank Vincent), it's startling to behold.  
Moriarty, on the other hand, must play the temptress with virginal 
qualities – the only kind of woman who would ensnare Jake.  Later, she's 
called upon to portray the battered wife and mother whose love has 
turned into fear.
     Scorsese and cinematographer Michael Chapman elected to shoot the 
bulk of RAGING BULL in black-and-white (a few "home movie" segments are 
in color).  The choice is perfect for the movie, giving RAGING BULL a 
unique look in an era when a black-and-white approach is almost unheard 
of.  (One important recent exception, SCHINDLER'S LIST, eschewed color 
for some of the same reasons that RAGING BULL did.)  In black-and-white 
(especially considering Scorsese's choice of shots and use of slow 
motion), the violence is stark and disturbing.  There's no room for 
romanticism in the ring with inky black blood staining the canvas.  
During fight sequences, the director also uses a number of point-of-view 
shots designed to show the world, however briefly, from La Motta's 
perspective.
     Scorsese could have chosen to end the film with La Motta's loss to 
Sugar Ray, where he surrendered his Middleweight crown.  After that, his 
career was all downhill.  Yet the director allows the film to run for 
thirty minutes after this pivotal moment, stretching more than a decade 
into La Motta's future.  The reason is obvious:  Scorsese isn't as 
interested in boxing as he is in the character.  Following his 
retirement, La Motta is still as violent and volatile as ever, but he 
has lost the arena in which he can legally unleash those tendencies.  We 
see the results of this beast let loose on society and how the 
consequences of his actions reduce him to a parody of his former self.  
Who cannot feel a surge of pity for La Motta as he quietly recites 
Marlon Brando's speech from ON THE WATERFRONT?  ("I coulda been a 
contenda.")
     Perhaps RAGING BULL is indeed the best film of the '80s.  And, if 
not, it's certainly perilously close to the zenith.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."
