Title
Review for Anatomy of a Murder (1959)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ANATOMY OF A MURDER (1959) Directed by Otto Preminger. Written 
by Wendell Mayes from a novel by Judge John D. Voelker 
(writing under the nom de plume Robert Traver). 
Still one of the best courtroom dramas made. Ben Gazzara 
(perhaps the ideal screen hypocrite) here in his second film, 
is an Army lieutenant accused of killing a barman, the 
presumed rapist (throughout,this, as well as the rape, remain 
presumptions) of provocative wife, (Lee Remick in her third 
movie role). He is defended by small-town lawyer James 
Stewart, prosecuted by nasty, big-city George C. Scott. 
Preminger filmed in a real Michigan locale, with clever long 
takes. Clever too is the casting, as the judge, of Boston 
lawyer Joseph N. Welch, the avuncular hero of the 
McCarthy-Army hearings ("Have you no shame, Senator?") that 
had brought about the downfall of the dangerous and paranoid 
Senator from Wisconsin.
The "Anatomy" in question is less that of the trial--which 
remains ambiguous to the end -- than of the American judicial 
system, so that there are in-references, often humorous. Among 
them, a drunken lawyer (Stewart's assistant) is named Parnell, 
which sounds much like  a reference to J. Parnell Thomas who 
was, in a sense, McCarthy's predecessor as chairman of the 
House Un-American Committee of The Hollywood Ten notoriety -- 
and who later landed in prison for financial malfeasance.
The film was a sensation in its day, for its unprecedented 
discussion of sexual matters, rape and a pair of panties. Its 
performances are excellent as well as precise, down to minor 
figures. Note, for example, that of a hostile barman. 
Preminger treats his movie with almost glacial objectivity. 
The visuals are realistic, the photography by Sam Leavitt is 
in creamy black and white with a full scale of shadings. 
The movie made a star of Lee Remick after Lana Turner had 
declined the role. "Anatomy of A Murder" received eight 
Academy Award nominations: for Picture, Actor (Stewart), 
Supporting Actor (Arthur O'Connell and George C. Scott), 
Writing, Cinematography, Editing (Louis R. Loeffler).   
Though it won no Oscars, it was a major hit and high up on 
many Best Movie of the Year lists. The New York Film Critics 
gave it their Best Screenplay prize; the Venice Film Festival 
named James Stewart Best Actor.  
Aside from it other virtues, including a fine Duke Ellington 
score (Ellington has a walk-on role too),the film is something 
of a landmark in the undoing of Hollywood self-censorship. 
Otto Preminger had already breached its prudishness in 1952 
with the comedy "The Moon Is Blue," in which the female lead 
Maggie McNamara used then-taboo language (as when she asked 
William Holden :" Are you trying to seduce me?") or other 
no-no words like "virgin." It may seem ludicrous, in our 
current over-the-top times, that such matters created a furore 
then, but such are the facts.
Then, in 1955, Preminger's "The Man With the Golden Arm," 
about a drug-addict  (Frank Sinatra), heightened the 
controversy. As this was followed in 1959 by "Anatomy of a 
Murder," one might say that those three Preminger movies, 
albeit entirely different,were a kind of Code-breaking 
trilogy. 
"Anatomy" runs 161 minutes, Seeing it on tape or on a cable 
premium channel without commercials is by far the best way. 
