Title
Review for Paradise (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     PARADISE is a film written and directed by Mary Agnes Donoghue.  It
stars Melanie Griffith, Don Johnson, Elijah Wood, Thora Birch, and
Sheila McCarthy.
     PARADISE is a remake of Jean-Loup Hubert's autobiographical 1987
French film LE GRAND CHEMIN.  This is Touchstone's (read Disney's) third
remake of a French film (the other two being THREE MEN AND A BABY (from
TROIS HOMMES ET UN COUFFIN) and THREE FUGITIVES (from LES FUGITIFS).
PARADISE is the most successful of the three, although the Disney people
have some very odd ideas of how people live in the country.
     What makes PARADISE more successful is the degree to which it
remains faithful to the French original aided by the surprising
performances turned in by Griffith and Johnson.  The story is simple,
spare, told in small scenes that exist without explanation or comment.
This stands in contrast to the larger-than-life, hand-holding feel of
the typical Hollywood film.  And even though Griffith and Johnson are
considerably more glamorous than their French counterparts (Richard
Bohringer and Anemone), they are instantly believable as partners in a
troubled marriage, people living too long with loss and guilt, people
who cut themselves off from contact with the very people who could heal
their pain.
     Honestly, I had no idea either Griffith or Johnson was such a good
actor.  Griffith captures the lost, hiding character of her part in
gestures of meekness and a whispery voice of a woman on the verge of a
nervous and marital breakdown.  Johnson turns what must be his best
performance as the man who must climb out of self-loathing and
bitterness.  These were performances I could believe in.
     Probably, the only member of the cast member whom I found to be
problematic was Elijah Wood, who played the boy in AVALON and who here
plays the insecure, loner city boy, the scholarship boy at the private
school who no more fits in with the sons of wealth than he does with the
street toughs who chase him in his own neighborhood.  Wood is supposed
to be the catalyst who saves the married couple he's sent to live with
as well as the tomboy who befriends him and, of course, himself.  I
found his part too pat, his character too passive, to be really
believable or understandable.
     Sheila McCarthy as the boy's mother, Thora Birch as the tomboy, and
Louise Latham as her unwed, unweddable mother turn in fine acting jobs.
Birch's role was conceived by Donoghue more seriously than I would have
preferred; she is after all a pretty funny little girl.  Her mother's
comic potential becomes in the hands of Donoghue more irritating than
funny and I was left wondering why anyone would put with such a person,
at least until the climactic scene.  Donoghue in general was so intent
on making a serious relationship film, so intent on eschewing Hollywood
fantasies, that she over-corrected into the realm of good intentions and
some dry stretches.
     Overall, I enjoyed PARADISE very much and can recommend it.  Try to
catch a bargain matinee to maximize your enjoyment.
     (NOTE: this film is rated PG-13 for language and some nudity.)
