Title
Review for Kippur (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Amos Gitai. Screenplay by Gitai and Marie-Jose Sanselme.
Starring Liron Levo, Tomer Russo, Uri Ran-Klausner. Running time: 124
minutes. This film is not yet rated by the MFCB. Reviewed on September 
30th, 2001.
Synopsis: On the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur in 1973, Egyptian and 
Syrian armies attacked Israel. "Kippur" follows two Israeli soldiers, 
Weinraub (Levo) and Ruso (Russo), who become separated from their unit in 
the confusion following the incursion. Rescuing a military doctor 
(Ran-Klausner) whose car has broken down, Weinraub and Ruso join his 
rescue-and-retrieval operation, trying to ferry out the wounded while 
death rains down all around them.
Review: "Kippur" is less a drama about war than a meditation on its 
effects. There are no great clashes between opposing armies, no scenes of 
individual heroism (at least, not of the conventional sort). Indeed, the 
Egyptian and Syrian armies are never glimpsed, and the front-line Israeli 
troops who appear are, for the most part, either dead, wounded or in 
flight. Instead, Gitai paints "Kippur" with devastating images of what the 
war did to his country and his countrymen. We see great plains turned into 
seas of mud by the grinding tire tracks of the tanks. Officers are reduced 
to confused wretches, unable to differentiate the dead from the survivors. 
And Gitai impresses upon us the sheer monotony of war: long stretches of 
"Kippur" are spent watching the characters sit waiting in silence, or 
haplessly trying to rescue a casualty from a sodden battlefield. "Kippur" 
is a movie of impressions, not plot. With a running time of more than two 
hours, this does lend the movie an agonisingly repetitive feel, and it is 
unfortunate that Gitai does not develop better characters on which to hang 
the viewer's interest. But though the middle part of "Kippur" is a chore 
to get through, the final act exhibits some fine filmmaking, as Gitai 
effectively shocks us out of our complacency. And war, after all, is one 
thing about which we should never be complacent.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/
