Title
Review for Lovemaster, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     Comedian Craig Shoemaker says pretty early on in his new film THE
LOVEMASTER, "My life is my act!"
     He's not joking, and if you've ever heard any of Shoemaker's
stand-up material, you know what you're in for with his feature film,
where Shoemaker blends his multiple stage personalities with stories
about growing up, the mysteries of women, and 1970's television, the
result being a campy goulash of howlingly-funny comedy.
     Most of the film is cut together from an Arizona stand-up
performance, where Shoemaker's real forte shines.  That forte is the
characters that he plays on stage, from a much-too-realistic Barney
Fife, to "vagina man" (don't ask), to the end-all, be-all of human lust
-- The Lovemaster, a guy so sexy he makes Barry White look like a wuss. 
Shoemaker slips in and out of these characters like a schizophrenic
without his Prozac, getting more and more twisted until finally,
safe-&-sane Craig inevitably pops out, trying to undo all he's done with
a fey cry, "Erase! Erase! Erase!"
     While the 82-minute picture is mostly stand-up, it also includes
some flashback vignettes outside the club, mainly to expound upon jokes
Shoemaker has going on inside.  These mainly involve Craig and his
therapist (George Wendt), wife (Harley Jane Kozak), platonic friend
(Courtney Thorne-Smith), and dream date (Farrah Fawcett).  And while
these bits are supposed to show you how his life *is* his act, the act
itself is usually a lot funnier.  (Austinites will also enjoy cameos
from the city's KLBJ morning radio personalities -- Dale Dudley, Bob
Fonseca, and Debra Cole.)
     Of course, making a movie in the environs of a comedy club
certainly has its limitations, and Shoemaker does his best to overcome
them, mainly by toying with audience members, and succeeds as well as
can be expected.  Still, there's something lacking in the production
values of the whole thing.  And while the jokes don't really get going
until the halfway point, THE LOVEMASTER still remains a fine example of
the stand-up genre.
     [Watch for an interview with The Lovemaster himself, coming soon!]
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit The Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
