Title
Review for Terrorist, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Any interest for this beautifully photographed Indian film will surely
be generated by the screen credit, "John Malkovich Presents."  While he
had little to do with the financing or actual production, he discovered
The Terrorist during an international film festival and was so terribly
moved that he pushed for a distribution deal with the minor league
company Phaedra Cinema.
Malli (played by expressive newcomer Ayesha Dharkar) is a nineteen-year
old rebel girl whose only home has been a guerilla camp nestled deep in
the forests of an unnamed country.  She has been asked to perform a
crucial assassination that requires her to strap on a bomb and, when the
moment arrives, blow up herself and her enemy.  Sounds like a lean, mean
novella in the Ernest Hemingway mold.
Patient viewers who respond to the visual poetry of Robert Bresson or
Terrence Malick will find much to appreciate here.  Of course, as soon
as a review mentions the notion of visual poetry, some folks may start
running for the hills.  Indeed, this is understandable.  The Terrorist
is slow, meditative, and more than slightly pretentious.
There's not much in the way of dialogue or exposition.  Much of the
time, the camera simply follows Manni as she wanders through rivers and
hills, teardrops and rain.  The natural light sources create a strange
pastiche of aqua colored landscapes.  Often, shots will linger on
close-ups of Dharkar, whose eyes burn with charisma.  If that sounds
boring to you, give this movie a wide berth.
Early scenes are taut with violence as Manni casually blows away a
prisoner-of-war, then undergoes a grueling interrogation as her
superiors wade through five teenage girls seeking the right candidate
for the job.  While director/cinematographer Santosh Sivan wields his
camera with austere grace, these early scenes set up what amounts to a
fairly generic story -- Bresson's interpretation of Mad Magazine's Spy
Vs. Spy.
Bottom line: it's difficult not to get utterly bored, no matter how much
of an art house cinephile you aspire to be.  If the thought of Manni
tromping through minefields with a battle-scarred little boy (Vishwas)
sounds exciting, be forewarned that you're faced with endless shots of
them walking, thinking, or staring off into nothingness.  This
particular subplot ends on a hollow, predictable note right after Manni
says goodbye to this friend.  If you've seen any films set in a war-torn
country, it won't shock you.
There's a token love story, just as there is the inevitable guilt over
her mission.  If more attention had been paid to illuminating her inner
thoughts or struggle, perhaps The Terrorist would amount to more than
several reels of affecting pictures.  We are presented with a motion
picture with themes that would have been better articulated in the
medium of a slide show or book.
If you're not into the whole art house thing, you may get some enjoyment
out of putting on your Cultural Anthropologist cap and using The
Terrorist as a point of entry into the portal of John Malkovich.  To
those with the desire to experience this elusive actor's taste in
cinema, I offer this tiny hint: it's only a rental away.
Director: Santosh Sivan
Producers: Jit Joshi, A. Sreekar Prasad 
Writers: Santosh Sivan, Ravi Deshpande, Vijay Deveshwar
Starring: Ayesha Dharker, K. Krishna, Sonu Sisupal, Vishwas
http://www.phaedracinema.com/terrorist.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
19-year-old Malli, an intelligent, dark haired beauty, should have her
thoughts fixed on her bright future ahead.  Instead, they are filled
with horrific flashbacks and contemplation of her upcoming martyrdom.
Santosh Sivan's brilliant first film, THE TERRORIST, was released in
India under the less judgmental title of MALLI.  The point of the movie
is to get behind the mind and conscience of an individual willing to die
for a cause.  The story carefully avoids telling us the cause for which
Malli fights.  We know that her brother died for it, but, we have no
idea if the government against which she struggles is left or right wing
or anything at all about it other than it is responsible for atrocities.
When we meet Malli, she is executing a traitor.  Tied up to a tree, he
watches in horror as a masked assassin points a gun at his throat and
pulls the trigger, splattering his blood all over her mask.  As she
uncovers her face, we see an innocent looking young woman who looks like
she would be just as comfortable hanging out at the mall with her
friends as killing someone.  Played as a mesmerizing enigma by Ayesha
Dharkar, Malli is someone about whom you know everything and nothing.
The director's background is as a cinematographer, and he lens this
picture to stunning effect.  Malli's round face with its
silver-dollar-sized eyes fills frame after frame until you feel that her
image might break the edges of the celluloid.  Her wide eyes hypnotize
you with their intensity.
After she kills the traitor, the director cuts to an innocent scene by
the river as one of her girlfriends combs through her hair, proclaiming
that, if she were a man, she would marry Malli.
Water, a universal symbol of purity, turns out to be the movie's most
important supporting character.  Whether a torrential downpour or the
gentle water from a shower, the water is always symbolic.  As Malli
relaxes in an outdoor shower, her mind drifts to the key events, usually
tragic ones, of her brief life.  The surprise of the movie is that, with
its lush scenes of nature, it is more often sweetly touching than
frighteningly dramatic.  The director finds beauty everywhere and at the
most unlikely times.
After the river scene, we switch to Malli participating in an open gun
battle in something approximating more traditional warfare.  Soon after
that she wins the competition to sacrifice herself.  Their unseen leader
needs a girl to present a garland to a VIP.  After placing the garland
around his neck, the girl is to push a button which will detonate the
plastic explosive around her waist, killing everyone nearby.
The competition is keen.  One girl admits to hesitation on her last
mission because she would have had to kill a child.  The girl promises
not to let such things slow her down again.  Pleased with his choice of
Malli, the leader tells her, "You're supreme -- a thinking bomb."
Malli isn't what we've come to expect in our depiction of zealots.  She
is determined to do whatever it takes, and yet she possesses an amazing
tenderness for such a hardened killer.  As she stares directly into your
eyes, you feel her saying something to you, but her precise message to
you remains as elusive as the politics to which she has dedicated her
life.
The director coaxes incredible performances out of even the minor
characters.  One particularly memorable one, a lad of perhaps 11, Lotus
(Vishwas), serves as Malli's guide through a mine-infested forest.
Lotus is the only surviving member after the massacre of his village.
Not surprising, he is troubled by nightmares.  One minute, he's a brave
soldier for the cause, and the next he's a whimpering little boy.  He
has had to grow up fast, leaving emotional growth scars all over his
lithe body.
The director's gift for cinematography makes the picture mesmerizing.
Among the other memorable images are the times he keeps the camera in
shallow focus as something important happens in the background.  This
technique is used to maximum effect as Malli's face fills the frame
while in the background bouncing lights come toward her.  These colorful
lights slowly transform into a very blurry image of the VIP.
What will go through her mind in those last few seconds of her life (and
of the VIP's)?  Will her indefatigable courage fail her in her moment of
supreme sacrifice?  And what will be the result of her action?
These are all intriguing questions.  But, the journey up to the
assassination is the reward in this unusual, fascinating and brilliant
picture by Santosh Sivan.  The film creates instant excitement for the
director's next project.
THE TERRORIST runs 1:35.  The film is in Tamil with English subtitles.
It is not rated but would be R for violence and would be fine for older
teenagers.
The film is playing now in limited released in the United States.  In
the Silicon Valley, it is currently showing at the Camera 3 for what
will probably be a very brief run.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
