Title
Review for Daylight (1996)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DAYLIGHT *  Directed by Rob Cohen. Written by Leslie Bohem .Photography,
David Eggby. Editing,Peter Amundson. Production design, Benjamin Fernandez.
Music,Randy Edelman. Producers, John David, Joseph M. Singer and David T.
Friendly .Cast: Sylvester Stallone (Kit Latura), Amy Brenneman (Madelyne
Thompson), Viggo Mortensen (Roy Nord), Jay O. Sanders (Steven Crighton),
Karen Young (Sarah Crighton), Danielle Harris (Ashley Crighton), Claire
Bloom (Eleanor Trilling), Colin Fox (Roger Trilling), Vanessa Bell Calloway
(Grace), Stan Shaw (George Tyrell),Sage Stallone (Vincent), et al.  110
min. Rated PG-13
When the Titanic went down the ship's orchestra was playing "Nearer My God
to Thee."  You'd half expect the survivors in the disastrous disaster flick
"Daylight" to intone "Nearer Stallone to Thee." They don't, but many
members of the audience may be humming "Nearing the End, Whoopee!" The film
reminds me of the fellow who would repeatedly hit his own head with a
mallet, "because it feels so good when I stop."
In tired old fashion "Daylight" opens with the Motley Group Introduction.
Among them:  a disappointed writer from Indiana who, in her awful apartment
fights cockroaches and rats while getting her manuscripts rejected; a
dysfunctional family of three; a band of evil-looking thugs who hijack the
car of a diamond merchant (he too, for some reason,  looks evil-- perhaps
he's a thief?). There's also Claire Bloom (in the nadir role of her life),
her old husband and their dog, returning from a visit to a canine
psychiatrist (sic); a prison bus transporting convicts; a sportswear
entrepreneur who wastes some of our time in an irrelevant executive
meeting; various Tunnel and Bridge supervisors, including African-American
Vanessa Bell who is also the girlfriend of sweet tunnel cop Stan Shaw. Last
but not you-know-what is El Stallone as a limo driver. His name, Kit
Latura, spelled backwards is Arutal Tik.
What those disparate (and often desperate) people have in common is that
they all find themselves in vehicles going through congested streets.A band
of evil-looking thugs has hijacked the car of a diamond merchant (he too,
for some reason,  looks evil-- perhaps he's a thief?). The ridiculously
ugly criminals drive in a wild, totally unbelievable and incredibly stupid
manner and transform the New York streets into battlefields.
The army of cars, buses and trucks reaches a tunnel connecting Manhattan to
New Jersey. It is unnamed and not identified as its model, the Holland
Tunnel. In this underground/underwater location the stolen car has an
unfriendly encounter with trucks of chemicals. A lulu of an explosion
triggers a series of horrendous disasters, a mini-Hiroshima Holocaust of
flames, toxic air, flooding waters, loose electric cables - you name it,
they got it - which result in gruesomely abundant corpses, twisted bodies
and metal, both ends of the tunnel getting sealed, and the group of the
aforementioned motleys being trapped.
We  learn that Kit Latura (whose anagram is Trakit Aul) used to be the
Chief of   Emergency Medical Services but was disgraced when a wrong
decision by him resulted in the death of some of his men. The details come
out in bits uttered without the clarity of crystal, but no matter. Right
away you get the point:  Kit Latura (or Arial Tukt) must save his
fellow-humans plus the Jungian dog to redeem himself. Which he does.
It's a horrendous task that involves subterranean alpinism, trips (a la
Flash Gordon serials) through enormous, murderous exhaust fans, acrobatics,
immunity to pain and wounds, the strength of Samson,time out for wise
sayings, rats, heroics by Stallone and some others, plus panicked, often
antagonistic men and women who -- you guessed it  -- will become brave and
understanding. There is also a scene of Stallone and his patootie-to-be
trapped in rising waters that are about to reach a ceiling -- straight from
the torture chambers of Emperor Ming, other serials, Fu ManChu and
black-and-white B-movies. There is outrageously obvious religious symbolism
when an exit is found just behind a wooden statue od Christ. As for
Political Correctness, the group will lose two black men, one white male
and one white woman.
The acting is broad. Stallone's inelegant voice and enunciation have not
changed. He seems to be searching all the time for which one of his two
facial expressions to choose. The sounds emitted by things and humans are
loud, speech is rapid, mumbled, often barely understandable except for the
"we're not going to get out of here, are we?" refrain.
All that is bad.With so much junk and overkill, at no time do you believe
the goings-on, feel any kinship, or share any pain in this puppetish movie.
Nor do you learn anything beyond the superficial about the characters, who
all go beyond stereotypes and into caricatures. I was, however, impressed
by those indestructible flashlights that never run down and shine so well
under water.
The Perils of Sylvester are made even more cartoonish since, if I
understand it correctly, the Emergency Medical Service is just what it says
it is. Yet Stallone is not only a fast-thinking acrobat-medic but a
technical savant who knows all there is about tunnels, their complexity and
their disasters.
"Daylight" is a return to the mostly dumb disaster flicks of the 1970s. The
director has stated that the first movie set he ever walked on was "The
Poseidon Adventure," which impressed him, as did soon after "The Towering
Inferno" whose lessons he took to heart when he was trapped on the ninth
floor of a Boston hotel in a fire where five people died.
The aim here clearly is to top those earlier pictures. I admit that its
special effects do just that, with modern techniques: miniatures,
scaled-down sets, computer graphics and other tricks. "Daylight" was shot
in the Italian Cinecitta Studios, with  means and logistics that are
impressive, hence the single star I give it. Otherwise, it rates 5 yawns
out of 5.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Universal)
Starring:  Sylvester Stallone, Amy Brenneman, Viggo Mortensen, Stan Shaw.
Screenplay:  Leslie Bohem.
Producers:  John Davis, Joseph M. Singer, David T. Friendly.
Director:  Rob Cohen.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, violence).
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It is one of the more trustworthy rules of popular culture that
everything old must eventually become new again, and 1996 at the movies
sure has looked a lot like the mid-70s.  TWISTER and INDEPENDENCE DAY were
less like contemporary action films than the were heirs to the disaster
epics of twenty years ago, with plucky bands of one-dimensional characters
trying to withstand barrages of special effects.  With two volcano films
and James Cameron's TITANIC on the horizon, it is beginning to feel like
Irwin Allen has taken over Hollywood again, and that thought doesn't
inspire much nostalgia.  DAYLIGHT is a POSEIDON ADVENTURE clone with a few
effectively tense moments, but it is so plodding and mechanical that it
is rarely entertaining.
     Sylvester Stallone stars as Kit Latura, a one-time Emergency Medical
Services worker now working as a chauffeur after a tragic accident cost
him his job.  His training will come in handy, however, when a massive
explosion involving toxic chemicals seals off an underwater commuter
tunnel between Manhattan and New Jersey.  With only twelve survivors
trapped in the tunnel -- including struggling playwright Madelyne Thompson
(Amy Brenneman), athletic gear tycoon Roy Nord (Viggo Mortensen) and
transit cop George Tyrell (Stan Shaw) -- Kit attempts a risky entry
through a route from which he will not be able to return.  That leaves him
in danger as well, though the greatest danger isn't entirely clear.  While
rising waters and a collapsing structure place the clock against them, the
group also finds progress threatened by internal dissent, as well as by a
dangerous procedure undertaken by officials on the outside which could
cost everyone their lives.
     DAYLIGHT begins with a couple of red-herring criminal activities
which end up causing the firestorm in the tunnel, but it is indicative of
the shortcomings of the script that the bad guys then become cinders
rather than sticking around to make any more sparks fly.  The survivors
are a predictably motley assortment, with the aforementioned individuals
joined by a few petty criminals, a dysfunctional family and an elderly
couple, and there are several squabbles as they try to decide what to do
and who should lead them.  There simply isn't enough to any of the
characters to give the conflict energy; everything we know about each of
them comes from a series of postage-stamp sized establishing scenes, and
that's not nearly enough.  With the vague bureaucratic malevolence
aboveground and the muted mutineering below ground as the only antagonism
in most of DAYLIGHT, the absence of a real villain becomes a distinct
drawback, and results in a plot which grinds from impossible situation to
yet-more-impossible situation.
     That is not to say that there is no drama in DAYLIGHT, though little
of it comes from the silly dialogue or thin characterizations.
Surprisingly, it also doesn't come from the special effects by Industrial
Light and Magic, which often have a strangely low-budget quality.  The
real drama comes from watching the dirty baker's dozen of our protagonists
realize that their only chance at survival lies in cooperation, and from
the difficult moral decisions of a crisis situation.  Repeatedly,
characters are forced to decide who can be saved, or whether someone is
worth saving, and director Rob Cohen (DRAGONHEART) somehow makes those
moments matter even though individual characters don't. When the entire
group joins together to free one of them trapped under a car, the heroism
of necessity gives DAYLIGHT a boost of substance.
     That alone might be more than you would expect from a Sylvester
Stallone action film, although Sly himself merely seems to be going
through the motions.  Screenwriter Leslie Bohem has handed him a character
which even seems to be a barely re-worked version of his tragedy-scarred,
redemption-hungry role in CLIFFHANGER, and he wanders grimly through most
of the film without showing us any hint of a personality.  He also has to
carry DAYLIGHT on his broad shoulders, because this is one disaster film
which doesn't blow its budget on putting an all-star cast in harm's way;
Amy Brenneman and Viggo Mortensen are no Faye Dunaway and Fred Astaire.
However, DAYLIGHT does try to follow up on one bit of disaster film trivia
-- both THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE and THE TOWERING INFERNO won Best Original
Song Academy Awards -- by serving up a sappy romantic ballad called
"Whenever There Is Love."  The female half of the duet?  Donna Summer.
Yes indeed, folks, it sure does feel like the mid-70s all over again.

Author
Paul Miller
When I got to the ticket window, I thought to myself, after Stallones'
last film (the bomb Judge Dredd), do I really want to plop down $5 to
get in to see his new one DAYLIGHT.  I did, and am thankful for it.
Daylight starts out with two shady guys argueing about getting rid of
toxic chemicals in New Jersey.  The deal between the two is made and the
chemicals are taken away, down the Holland Tunnel.  (If you don't know
this is the underwater tunnel that links New York to New Jersey).
In the next scene, some punks steal a car from a business man.  The cops
catch up to these punks and they try to get away.  By doing this, they
wreck.  And wouldn't you know it, right into the explosive toxic waste.
Well, a fire (very similar to the ones in Independence Day) engulfs the
whole tunnel.  Few people are still alive.   And on top of that, the
Tunnel has collaped on the ends and is barely still standing in the
middle.
Bring in Sly.  He's an ex-EMF operator and was for some reason or
another fired (they do explain why in the movie) and is now a cab
driver.  He finds a way to enter the tunnel  to tries to lead the group
of about a dozen to safety. 
That as far as I'm going to go with plot details.  Here's why I enjoyed
this movie:
1.  Sly shows acting skills in what I thought was just going to be
another "Sly" action movie.  Don't get me wrong, I love Cliffhanger,
etc, but you really need to know how to act when you have special
effects on your side.
2.  Special effects.  Yes, I know this sounds like a contradiction, but
the special effects were first rate!  This are some of the best special
effects I have seen in a long time.  The fire especially amazed me!
3.  Twists in the action.  You think everyone is going to die, or do
you?  You think everyone is going to pull through, somehow they will
find a way, or will they?  This constant thought and suspence makes you
have to think through this movie.
I thought this was a super movie with outstanding special effects and
good acting.  I would recommend it to anyone.
**** - If you haven't seen this movie, something is terribly wrong.
***  - Excellent movie!  Take an afternoon off work and take in this
       flick.
**   - Don't waste your money
*    - Your reputation will be ruined if you are seen at this movie.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This mildly diverting update of THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE stars Sly
Stallone as the sole rescuer of a group of motorists trapped in New York
City's Holland Tunnel after a chemical explosion seals off both ends.
Along with the survivors-- about a dozen, all carefully balanced by both
race and socio-economic status-- our hero, who's the city's former EMS
Chief, must contend with in-fighting, flood- ing, hypothermia,
structural collapse, and, last but not least, a flotilla of New York's
most-famous four-legged friends.  Why did it have to be rats?  Both the
dialogue and the plot are laughable-- witness Amy Brenneman wrestling
with a sparking power wire as if it were a live anaconda.
     The tunnel's resemblance to a future Universal Studios theme park
ride is also unfortunate.  Two early sequences do dazzle, though:  the
big fireball, which is a seat-gripper, and Stallone playing a Super
Mario Brother as he attempts to jump through four giant fans.  (Each is
timed separately and can be stopped only once and only for a few
seconds.) While the entire cast deserves a special Oscar for maintaining
the year's straightest faces, mention must be made of Stallone, who
never lets us forget how hard he works for his money, be it climbing
rocks, hanging from girders, or exploring underwater anterooms.  What a
guy.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Brian Takeshita
An explosion in an underwater tunnel connecting Manhattan and New
Jersey leaves the few survivors trapped and nearly inaccessible.  One
man, Kit Latura, can save them.  The problem is, Kit used to be head
of the Emergency Medical Service, but these days he is a driver for a
car service.  What happened?  Trying to effect a rescue, he made the
wrong call and got people killed.  Only the immediacy of the crisis
can jolt him back into action.  Sound familiar?  A few years ago, a
film starring Sylvester Stallone and based on a similar premise was
called CLIFFHANGER.  A couple of years before that, another movie
based on the same idea was called DEMOLITION MAN.  Stallone was in
that one, too.  This movie is called DAYLIGHT.  Hey, Kit Latura is
played by....Sylvester Stallone!
Ever see THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE?  Apparently so did Leslie Bohem, who
wrote the script for DAYLIGHT, since the survivors are all patterned
after characters from the 1972 movie.  We have Madelyne (Amy
Brenneman), a frustrated playwright who's purpose is to be scared when
Stallone needs to look strong, and to get into trouble when we need a
lady in distress, much like Pamela Sue Martin's Susan.  We have Steven
(Jay O. Sanders) the brute who is there to question everything Kit
does, just like Ernest Borgnine's Mr. Rogo.  There's Eleanor and Roger
Trilling (Claire Bloom and Colin Fox), an elderly couple who realize
the importance of having each other.  Did someone say Shelley Winters
and Jack Albertson?  Let's not forget George (Stan Shaw), the police
officer who knows his way around the tunnels.  It's good Stallone has
this guy, just like Gene Hackman had Roddy McDowell as the steward who
knew his way around the ship.
The borrowing from THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE goes beyond the supporting
characters themselves.  Even some of their fates are the same.  Oh,
and don't even get me started on plot points.  The disagreement on
which way to go, swimming underwater to find an exit, getting the
medallion out to the loved one (okay, in this case it's a bracelet),
they're all there.  Halfway through the movie, I wondered if DAYLIGHT
were a remake.
I should mention a key element which made the supporting characters of
DAYLIGHT different from the ones in THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE.  With few
exceptions, the characters in DAYLIGHT are all unworthy of our
sympathy.  Madelyne is fed up with New York due to the roaches and
rats in her apartment and her constant rejections from potential
producers, but the last straw comes when the married man with whom she
is having an affair can't get out of his marriage.  Oh yeah, I really
feel for her.  Eleanor and Roger's biggest concern is why their
Weimaraner won't breed.  Sure, poverty in New York City's streets
needs to take a powder and make way for the dog.  You get the idea.
At least you cared what happened to Red Buttons and Carol Lynley.
Stallone's performance in this film is much like the premise:  The
same as in previous movies.  Not to say it's a bad thing.  Stallone
has always been a convincing action hero and has played that kind of
part a lot better than the comedic roles he's tried in order to flex
those acting muscles.  It's just that we're not seeing anything new
this time around.  The supporting cast, on the other hand, turn in
lackluster performances of stock characters.  They might as well have
phoned it in.
The action itself is all stuff we've seen before.  Much of Stallone's
hanging from the tunnel ceilings looks a lot like he wants to prove he
can still climb like in CLIFFHANGER.  There's a scene with Stallone
and Brenneman in an underwater vortex which looks a great deal like
the last few minutes of TWISTER.  The most contrived of all scenes,
however, is the set up for Stallone's famous slow motion run away from
danger.  It's usually from an explosion or collapsing building or some
other such catastrophe, which invariably culminates in a leap toward
the camera.  Pained yell is optional.  In DAYLIGHT, Stallone runs from
a rolling flammable liquid trailer.  It's not really in slow motion,
but he's running in three and a half feet of water, so the illusion is
thus created.  Yes, yes, he makes the leap, but instead of toward the
camera to spirit himself that extra distance from danger, he leaps to
the side!  One wonders, "Why didn't he do that when the trailer was
much farther away?"  To create a false sense of tension, stupid.
One thing that caught my eye was how director Rob Cohen handles the
tunnel explosion.  Unlike anything I've seen before, this film
actually takes you into the explosion and keeps you there while the
fireball rolls over the unfortunate motorists.  Its debatable whether
or not what we see is an accurate representation, but the visual of
the whole thing is rather intriguing, and the notion of incineration
from the heat or asphyxiation from the fire's consumption of oxygen is
equally horrifying.  However, that was the only part of the movie that
was innovative.  Oh, in case you're about to tell me that flooding a
compartment in order to free yourself from Davy Jones' Locker is also
innovative, I refer you to AIRPORT '77.
Overall, DAYLIGHT is not a bad movie for what it is, which is two
hours of, well, Stallone.  You don't go into one of his movies
expecting great social commentary, so as long as you keep that in
mind, you can actually enjoy it.  I must, however, give credit to this
film for actually making me believe that the death-defying dog didn't
defy death after all.  You see, the dog in question was thought to
have died in the explosion, but soon comes trotting out from the
wreckage when called.  Fair enough.  But then, when the band of
survivors has to swim underwater to relative safety, the dog
(seemingly) does not make it.  I thought, "Wow, they killed the dog
after all."  Only after another tragedy does the dog resurface,
unscathed.  I'm beginning to think that dogs, not cats, have nine
lives.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Sylvester Stallone; Amy Brenneman; Viggo Mortensen; Dan Hedaya &
Jay O. Sanders
At first glance, Daylight would seem like your typical disaster movie. On
second glance it looks that way too. Although, as typical disaster movies
go, Daylight isn't that bad. Admittedly, it seems to rip off a great deal of
its plot devices from disaster flicks of days gone by (think Poseidon
Adventure). But the decent dialogue and surprisingly good acting make up for
the "haven't I seen this scene somewhere before?" feeling that creeps up all
too often during the film.
Sylvester Stallone stars as the recently fired head of New York's Emergency
Response team. By sheer luck, he is in the right place at the right time
when disaster strikes the unaware inhabitants of this little film. "What
disaster is that?" you ask, as you inch ever closer to the edge of your
seat. Glad you asked. Through a whole sequence of entirely probable events
(about as probable as hitting the lottery) a large explosion takes place in
the Lincoln tunnel running under the Hudson River in New York City. The
explosion results in the tunnel collapsing at both ends, which causes not
only massive loss of life, but traps a dozen people inside the wreckage of
the tunnel. Good old Sly, who is only feet away from entering the tunnel
when it collapses, offers his services to the rescuers, who gladly accept
it. Sly then enters the tunnel through a vent shaft (think Judge Dredd)
which he can only go in, and not out off, and proceeds to try to rescue
those trapped inside. So begins the fun, but the fun has to be quick,
because this tunnel has started to spring a leak.
The acting is about what you would expect of a Stallone movie. Not superb by
any means, but far above some of his other films (think Judge Dredd again).
Daylight's acting is probably average, or a little above, in terms of this
sort of genre, starring this particular star. Amy Brenneman is the only
actor of any note, and she does a pretty good job as Stallone's reluctant
helper. Oh yeah, Stallone's real life son, Sage, is in this too. Sage --
nice name. I guess it could be worse, he could have been named nutmeg or
parsley. Note to Sage -- you are still young. Go to school and get a good
education -- you don't have a future in acting.
The plot runs along the same lines as the acting -- interesting, but
predictable. Mostly due to the fact that it was pretty well recycled from a
dozen other action flicks. The biggest problem with a film of this nature is
that they try to cram too many things into the movie. As soon as the cast
clears one seemingly impossible hurdle, another one seems to pop right up,
even worse than the last one. I realize that it wouldn't be much of a movie
otherwise, but it does make the movie a bit predictable. Adding to the
predictability is the cast of characters, which of course, has to include at
least one or two difficult people who want to do things their own way and
think the qualified guy (in this case Stallone) doesn't know what he is
doing. Why is it in disaster movies we can never have everyone agree with
each other and all work together? Would this be too much to ask? Can't we
all just get along?
Special effects weren't bad -- but I've certainly seen better. Some of the
scenes, while fun to watch, were such blatant rip-offs that you had to
wonder if scripts from old movies were just copied verbatim. Especially all
of the scenes that involved anything underwater (the tunnel, of course,
starts to flood). I really expected Gene Hackman, Roddy McDowell and Ernest
Borgnine to appear at any minute -- I wasn't sure if I was watching Daylight
or The Poseidon Adventure. I suppose if you have to rip off a movie for good
ideas, The Poseidon Adventure is a good one to use. The underwater sequences
(aside from the deja vu) were very well shot and worked fairly well. They
were the best part of the movie by a long shot.
Better than average Stallone flick. I realize that's not saying much when
the man has Judge Dredd on his resume. But certainly not up to the standards
of Cliffhanger. Daylight is a fun movie, and as long as you aren't expecting
a whole lot you might even be pleasantly surprised.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sylvester Stallone, Amy Brenneman, Viggo Mortensen, 
      Jay O. Sanders, Karen Young, Danielle Harris, Stan Shaw, 
      Claire Bloom, Colin Fox, Dan Hedaya, Sage Stallone, 
      Vanessa Bell Calloway
Director: Rob Cohen
Producers: John Davis, David T. Friendly, and Joseph Singer
Screenplay: Leslie Bohem
Cinematography: David Eggby
Music: Randy Edelman
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     DAYLIGHT is an action picture without a villain.  Frankly, it 
doesn't have much of a plot, either.  Or characters, for that matter.  
In fact, the so-called dramatic elements of this movie are so shaky that 
you wonder if the film makers spent all of their money on a star 
(Sylvester Stallone, who reportedly got about $20 million) and special 
effects, then sort of made up the script as they went along.  This is 
the kind of effort that would make Irwin Allen proud. 
     Unless you've been isolated from the overhyped promo campaign for 
DAYLIGHT, you already know the basic story.  An out-of-control car 
zipping through the Holland Tunnel crashes into a truck carrying toxic 
waste.  There's an explosion of cataclysmic proportions that causes both 
ends of the tunnel -- in New York and New Jersey -- to collapse.  
Although almost everyone inside is killed, there are a few survivors.  
But the situation looks grim.  Air is running out.  Water, seeping 
through the crumbling walls, is rising.  Where's John McClane when you 
need him?
     Although Bruce Willis is nowhere to be found, Sylvester Stallone is 
on hand.  He plays Kit Lauria, the former head of New York City's 
Emergency Medical Services who has been driving a limo since his forced 
resignation.  Now, because he's on the scene when the disaster occurs, 
he becomes involved.  Ultimately, that participation puts his life in 
jeopardy as he decides to navigate his way through a series of huge fans 
and enter the tunnel to help the trapped victims.
     When it comes to pyrotechnics, DAYLIGHT has the right stuff.  The 
explosion at the beginning is truly breathtaking, rivaling anything that 
TWISTER's tornadoes threw at audiences.  Unfortunately, the film brings 
out the best it has to offer first.  None of the other action sequences, 
which include floods, more explosions, and cave-ins, approach the level 
of spectacle offered by the initial flash-and-bang.  As a result, it can 
be rightfully claimed that DAYLIGHT is actually anti-climactic.
     For the most part, however, the edge-of-the-seat moments accomplish 
what they intend to.  In fact, this movie is at its best when it's in 
high gear, because the audience isn't tempted to think too deeply about 
the other aspects of the production, many of which are subpar.  
Adrenaline is nice, but it's all-the-more rewarding in movies like DIE 
HARD and SPEED, when there's a little more to go with it.
     Director Rob Cohen shows a deft hand with the stunts, but he chokes 
on the numerous "character building" moments.  Not that the script, 
credited to Leslie Bohem, is an asset.  Most of the dialogue is poor, 
and some of it, including a ludicrous "raw oyster pep talk", is 
downright ridiculous.  DAYLIGHT probably would have worked better if all 
the players had been mute.  
     On top of that, there are too many incidental characters.  Of 
course, they're all stereotypes, but each gets so little screen time 
that it's difficult to care about any of them.  First of all, we have 
the requisite dysfunctional family -- a mother (a shrill Karen Young), 
father (David O. Sanders), and daughter (Danielle Harris, who twice 
played one of Michael Myers' HALLOWEEN victims).  There's also an 
elderly couple (Claire Bloom and Colin Fox), a group of convicts (one of 
whom is Stallone's real-life son, Sage), a failed writer (Amy 
Brenneman), and a cop (Stan Shaw).  Viggo Mortensen has a brief 
appearance as a would-be action hero who can't quite get the job done.  
Then there's also the above-ground crew, which features about four 
recognizable faces (including Dan Hedaya and Vanessa Bell Calloway).
     On the acting front, Stallone isn't all that bad.  He's playing a 
flawed hero, and there are actually signs of the kind of emoting he did 
long ago in ROCKY.  Amy Brenneman (FEAR) has the Sandra Bullock role 
opposite Stallone's Keanu Reeves, although she can't quite match up to 
Bullock's star quality.  Viggo Mortensen's (CRIMSON TIDE) brief time in 
the spotlight is enjoyable, particularly since the potentially-annoying 
character doesn't overstay his welcome.  Of the others, no one stands 
out, except perhaps Karen Young (the title character in Tom Noonan's THE 
WIFE), who is irritating.
     On balance, I have trouble recommending DAYLIGHT because it is 
riddled with problems.  Nevertheless, I doubt that action fans (and 
Stallone aficionados in particular) will be disappointed.  For, although 
as a complete story this film has more cracks than the collapsing 
tunnel, thrill-seekers in search of two hours of cinematic action will 
find that DAYLIGHT falls considerably short of being a disaster.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Kong
Well, I know that Stallone is 50 years old now, but in Daylight he doesn't 
look it!  Daylight is a great disaster movie.  If you've seen Cliffhanger, 
you'll know Stallone's character already.  A guy with a bad past, but is in 
the right place at the wrong time.  A tunnel connecting New York and New 
Jersey has both sides collapses when a group of robbers collide with a truck 
carrying *very* flammable toxic waste.  A dozen or so people survive the 
collapses and the incinerating fireball (and what a fire ball it was!)  
Stallone, a former Emergency Medical Service man, is chauffeuring a rich 
couple around, when they reach the outside of the tunnel, before the 
explosion.  Then, 30 minutes into the movie, BOOM!
>From here on, the plot takes a back seat, and we are treated to some of the 
best camera work and action staged.  Most all the action is plausible and will 
hold you at the edge of your seat.  There are a few melodramatic parts here, 
but, they tend to work out well.  There is no general antagonist in this film, 
but the action and suspense makes you forget all about that.
Daylight is a great film, I saw a non-matinee showing of it, and I thought it 
was worth every penny.  The characterizations are mostly flat, one dimesional, 
but they have enough in them to get you to care for some of the characters.   
Rob Cohen (Dragonheart) does a great job with this film.


Author
Phil Curtolo
Most of the time, with a trailer like the one Daylight has, it's
audience can expect a thrill-filled film with plenty of wild special
effects and basically no plot. This is not the case with Daylight, as a
good plot was added to good special effects to bring a well-done final
product to the big screen on December 6th.
During a routine auto theft, a car full of teens crashes violently into
a truck carrying toxic gases, causing the entire Lincoln Tunnel to burst
into flames, leaving only a dozen or so survivors. Actually, the blast
(which many critics called cheesy) was incredibly well done and was,
without a doubt, the best special effect in the film. 
The lucky survivors ranged from a few convicts, to a vacationing family,
to a wealthy couple and their dog, to a woman trying to escape the
madness of the big apple. They're only hope was Kit Latura (Sylvester
Stallone, Rocky), a taxi driver and former EMT Chief who jets to the
rescue. As a matter of fact, Sly hasn't been so good in a movie since
First Blood.
After the explosion, the survivors were gathered and acted very
naturally, which was an excellent characteristic of the film. They
panicked and began yelling and arguing amongst themselves and causing
more mayhem. If you think about it, 9 out of 10 real people would do the
exact same thing.
Walking through rubble and fiery waste for a while, the ceiling
implodes, and water starts to gush in. Now the fire's out, but they're
stuck in freezing water with no basic hope for survival, except for the
instincts of Latura, the only real character in the film. The other
stars weren't really characterized, but an actual feeling of sorrow can
be felt for Sly's character. He goes to rescue a dozen strangers,
knowing he has no way out. That takes guts and he's definitely got them.
Some really suspenseful scenes had Stallone trying to weave his way
through a maze of exhaust fans (taken from Sly's Tango & Cash) and
dangling from a wet beam trying to set an explosive without dropping it
(taken from just about every movie).
By all means, Sylvester Stallone has never been better, and his son,
Sage, wasn't too bad either (he played one of the convicts). Most of the
survivors' characters could've been developed more into people, but
their human-like actions made up for it.
It is hard not to say that Daylight is one of the best films of the
year, packed with everything from emotional drama to suspenseful
thrills. Get to a theater near you and see this great action-adventure
film.
Grade: A-, ****1/2 out of *****

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
In _Daylight_, Sylvester Stallone breaks no new ground, cinematically
speaking, but he covers familiar territory quite well.
Yesterday, as I was going about my business in the university
bookstore, I noticed this stand with these _Daylight_ movie posters on
it.  I had never heard of the movie, so I stopped by to check it out.
It turned out that they were giving away free passes to the movie for
people who had or applied for the credit card they were offering.  So,
I shrugged, thought, "Hey, they probably won't give me the card
anyway, and I could always use a free movie," so I signed up.  All in
all, I don't think I got that bad of a deal, either.
Rob Cohen, who has previously brought us such films as _Dragon: The
Bruce Lee Story_ and, more recently, _Dragonheart_ (gee, I wonder if
he likes dragons for some reason?  You think?), now brings us a very
nicely executed disaster picture, with FX by Industrial Light and
Magic, about the after-effects of an explosion that collapses a busy
tunnel between New York and New Jersey.
Sylvester Stallone plays Kit Latura, who is essentially a carbon copy
of the character he played in _Cliffhanger_: a paramedic on the outs
because he made a mistake that got people killed.  When the crisis
hits, he is in the right place at the right time and takes it upon
himself to go in and get everybody out.  There are other similarities
to _Cliffhanger_, too; perhaps the only real difference is that
_Cliffhanger_ had a villain, where _Daylight_'s bad guy is Mother
Nature.  In fact, had the two movies been made in Hong Kong, this
might have been titled _Cliffhanger II_--it bears the same
relationship to that film that most HK film "sequels" do to their
predecessors.
The first half-hour of _Daylight_ is setup.  Subplots are woven, and
the mechanism of the disaster is assembled.  We meet all the important
people...toxic waste disposal truck drivers; a young, frustrated,
jilted, rejected playwright; a family struggling to stay together; an
older couple and their dog; a truckload of prisoners; an ad agency
executive; a tunnel police officer; Stallone; and others.  We watch
the trucks trundle toward their destination; we watch Stallone and so
many others driving toward the tunnel for their various reasons.  And
then, thirty minutes into the film, _BOOM_.  And it's a big one.
>From there on in, it's Sly Stallone to the rescue.  And rescue he
does, enduring batterings, beatings, falls, repeated immersion in
34-degree water, explosions, mud, rats, and constant setbacks, before
going on to save the day, Sly-style.  Again...there's nothing new
here.
And yet there doesn't need to be.  The fun of _Daylight_ is not in the
story but in the execution.  The special-effects are first-rate,
thanks to Industrial Light and Magic, and the ensemble cast works well
together.  Once the film hits its stride, it carries the viewer right
along to the finish, with very few jars along the way.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows. Permission
granted for distribution through rec.arts.movies.reviews and all
associated archival. Permission granted for free redistribution via
cyberspace as long as this message remains attached. All other rights
reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A decade ago, when I worked for Apple, there was a group of
software designers who regularly went en masse to a select movie genre.
They picked out shows sure to be terrible and then had a great time
laughing in unison at them.  I thought of this group as I suffered
through Sylvester Stallone latest action thriller, DAYLIGHT.  I lost
count of how many times I laughed out loud at the wrong places.
Characters were dying, and I could not keep from laughing; the
circumstances were so ridiculous.
     One could make a cogent argument that action films should be
evaluated mainly on the special effects and the stunts.  By that
metric, DAYLIGHT delivers.  Not a great special effects movie, but a
perfectly acceptable one.  In the best part, a firestorm barbecues
everything in its path.  Not quite as impressive as in CHAIN REACTION,
but still pretty awesome.  Personally, I found the action sequences in
DAYLIGHT more tedious than exhilarating, but maybe I am too demanding.
     DAYLIGHT is set in a gritty New York City, where we see its caste
system.  Society is dichotomized into the superrich and the struggling
underclass.  On the upper end of the scale, is the founder of an
athletic clothing company.  He drives a Hummer and believes himself to
be invincible.  At the other end is a struggling playwright, Madelyne
Thompson (Amy Brenneman from CASPER and FEAR).  Her freezing cold
apartment has cockroaches on her kitchen counter and rats in her sock
drawer.  Go ahead, guess which one of these characters will survive and
which will perish.
     In a cliche infested story, we have a convoy of truckers taking
toxic waste through the Holland Tunnel on way to New Jersey to dump it.
Also in the tunnel are a bus load of convicts and cars full of assorted
other inhabitants of The Big Apple.
     Three kids with wildly colored hair and conspicuous body jewelry
rob a diamond messenger and steal his car.  In my favorite scene in the
show, he sends a threatening fax to his stolen car.  Now, there is a
concept -- faxes as car burglar alarm replacements.  To evade the
police the driver takes the Holland Tunnel, driving as though on a
Kamikaze mission.  So wild-eyed is the driver that, as he hits every
car in the tunnel, I began to wonder if the film was intended as a
parody of bad action movies.  The car, of course, takes a flying leap
into the drums of toxic waste, causing the obligatory explosion and
trapping a stratified cross section of the city's citizens.
     Near the entrance to the tunnel is limo driver Kit Lauria
(Stallone).  Kit used to be the head of New York City's Emergency
Medical Services, but he tried too hard to save some people and failed.
In the ensuing scandal, he was fired.  In charge now is a gung-ho new
chief "from California."  When his troops do not agree with his tunnel
rescue plan, he barks at them, "You listen to me.  The person who says
it can't be done is always interrupted by the person who just did it."
The script by Leslie Bohem (NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET 5) is full of such
inanities.  Soon our California macho man is toast, and Kit comes to
save the day.
     They should have a place for you to check your brain in the lobby
of the theater.  I lost count of all the nonsensical parts.  Consider
just two typical examples.
     First, the only way to enter the tunnel is for Kit to go through a
set of twenty foot wide exhaust fans.  The fans are computer controlled
and can be stopped only once and for just three minutes.  After that,
there is no way to stop them ever again.  No computer command and no
way to cut the power.  Sure.
     Second, the characters are warned about the dangers of hypothermia
since they spend most of their time in the 37 degree water.  How many
times do they get cold?  Once.
     Perhaps the least believable character is the bureaucrat who wants
to take an action that will kill the trapped survivors.  Her motivation
is to relieve the traffic congestion the explosion has caused.  She
explains, "The tunnel is an artery.  The city is bleeding."
     The seriousness which director Rob Cohen (DRAGONHEART) attaches to
this farce could be summed up by one of the convicts.  While death
seems imminent, Vincent, played by Stallone's son Sage, starts putting
the moves on another woman trapped in the tunnel.  He asks, "Listen, if
we don't die in here, I wondered if I could give you a call?"
     DAYLIGHT runs too long at 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for numerous
scenes of death and destruction.  If your kids can not handle heavy
violence, do not take them to this show.  My guess is that this means
the film is not for anyone under at least ten.  I enjoyed laughing at
the ludicrousness of the picture, but I would not suggest that anyone
else have to sit through this preposterous story.  I give the movie *
1/2 only for the action sequences.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Redman
Remember "The Poseidon Adventure"? It was one of the grandfathers of the
modern disaster movies, spawning "Airport", "Towering Inferno" and
zillions more. The latest off-spring takes after its ancestor more than
just in theme.
Somewhere in a small darkened room in LA, a studio executive sat
watching the upside-down ship disaster and had a flash of insight. They
could remake the film, but set it in the Manhattan-New Jersey tunnel and
cast Sylvester Stallone. There would be all of the same elements that
were in the popular movie from over 25 years ago: running for higher
ground to escape drowning in rushing waters, fires burning from the
walls for no apparent reason, hold-your-breath underwater scenes, a
racially and socially mixed group of survivors trying to make their way
to the top while some die on the way. And it will make tons at the box
office.
This is what is known in Hollywood as a "high concept". Out here in the
real world, high concepts often result in what is known as a "bad
movie".
A car-jacking trio of punks decide to make their getaway in the tunnel
-- it=92s easy to understand why they turned to a life of crime since the=
y
obviously couldn=92t get into the college of their choice because they
didn't understand the spatial relationship of how a tunnel works. The
equation 1 Exit =3D Easily Trapped never crosses their minds.
It turns out that it doesn't matter much as a few seconds later, their
vehicle careens into a truck loaded with toxic waste which blows up in a
fireball that shoots down the tunnel much like the scene from
"Independence Day". So much like it that it seems a waste to have spent
all of those big bucks on the special effects when they could have just
clipped film from "ID4".
The blast collapses the tunnel on both ends and kills the crooks and
just about everyone else on the highway except our intrepid band of
barely adequate actors. Stallone is on the outside and must jump through
a series of gigantic fans to come to the rescue. The fans can only be
turned off for a few seconds and each conveniently comes equipped with a
red digital timer installed, I suppose, so that anyone having to vault
through them would know how much time he has left.
He gets in, some people die, some live. Some are brave, some are not.
There's a lot of water and explosions. There=92s a big dog. No one cares.=
[This appeared in the 12/12/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com

Author
Alex Brenner
        Daylight is a film that demands an unusual amount of attention from
the critical eye, given its nominal genre.  It is, overall, a success,
and before cries are raised of conclusions coming at beginnings, this
shall be qualified.
Daylight is a film that will not let itself be categorised as a single
thing, and there is very little associated with it that can simply be
nailed down and left; there is a significance to this that extends
into genre history, as will be explained later.  In its origins, in
the performance of its star and even in the camerawork, there is not a
single thing which can be said to dominate.  For instance, Stallone
here seems to run through his entire oeuvre: the stumbling, melancholy
Rocky; the mythic action hero from Cliffhanger and Judge Dredd; the
man who is both bowed down by and an inspiration to the people who
surround him, the socially flawed icon of bravado that runs through
all of his work but was most callously exploited in Stop, or my Mom
Will Shoot!  This is supposed to be his last action film, and it is in
some way a summation of all that has gone before: when explaining to
the principle heroine an incident from his past, his speech is so
obscured that it is actually incomprehensible.  Stallone is, as ever,
laconically himself.  
And yet this summation cannot be seen as synthesis.  Works that have
displayed a true wit in bringing together disparate elements usually
exude an elegance and a great coherence which is lacking in Daylight.
To evince further: the film veers between forms.  In its opening
scenes there are suggestions that it will open out into a traditional
gung-ho action film.  However, as the darkness closes further and
further around the protagonists, we see that it really owes much more
to both disaster and submarine films, coming across nothing so much as
a cross between Crimson Tide and The Towering Inferno.  Still, though,
there remains the problem of the nature of this cross: Daylight is
neither black nor white, nor even grey, but rather it is many dots of
black and white arranged such that, from a distance, it appears to
possess chromatic unity, an illlusion that breaks down upon closer
perusal.  And this is indeed the fate that befalls many films of its
type, lacking either brilliance or even the single-mindedness of, say,
Die Hard, they are content merely to flop around in a nether world of
compromise, neither this nor that, but something rather dissipatedly
in between.
It is in resolving this difficulty that we may appreciate the strength
of Daylight.  Consider the analogy of a parachute: while flaccid, it
lacks any kind of life, and is simply a patchwork of different colours
all jumbled and crumpled in a heap on the ground, and yet, given a
strong motive force throwing it aloft, it assumes shape and form,
never the shape and form of something with an integral, durable
structure, but shape and form nonetheless.  Daylight's somewhat
dissolute nature is swept aside as the actual concept and its
realisation generate sufficiently huge power as to give the film a
real presence and even, on occasion, magnificence.
Still, one remains uncertain as to the origin of this power of
realisation, whether it derives from the details, the mini-climaxes,
which are often treated with brusqueness by the director - there is
one moment when Stallone's character nearly drops an explosive, an
event which I neither realised was occurring nor felt the importance
of, because it was simply lost in the noise - or from some kind of
grand overall sweep untroubled by such trivia, something which the
film lacks.  It does not come from the performances, nor from the more
literary aspects of its plot, more of which later.  So, what?
One may reasonably contend that the idea at the core of the film,
namely being trapped in a collapsing tunnel under seventy-five feet of
water while all around you exists ineptitude and attrition, is so
inherently strong that, given a certain minimal level of technical
achievement, a high order of suspense would arise necessarily.  And
the film is, indeed, technically excellent.  The camerawork, now
jittery, now steady, now whooshing, is really first-rate, and the
various cave-ins and blow-outs and explosions are visually very
impressive: the eye, being used to confinement, is readily awed by
sudden changes in scale and pace.  The editing is sharp, and the score
is functional at worst and pretty good at best.
There may arise at this point a thought: 'But surely all that, while
important, is not sufficient to make the film good?'  And with this
thought we may agree: there is something more.  One often feels that
the director has stayed his hand where a less disciplined one - Renny
Harlin's? - would have strayed, and the film feels economical.  And
yet the film is involving.  Too often in films of this type, the
protagonists are superhuman, and everyone else is simply shot, which
is surely not the case with Daylight.  This does not refer here to the
occasional sentimental moment, or the irritating and superficial
attempts to flesh out the humanity of the characters, but rather to
the fact that the film does a very good job of giving us an idea of
the torment, suffering, and, in the end, sheer exhaustion which they
undergo, and this must be to the director's credit.  One might not
have thought it after Dragonheart, but Rob Cohen seems to know what he
is doing.  Unfortunately, this rendering of primal humanity is marred
by what I think must owe to the script and to the studio executives,
that is, the not infrequent moments of aforementioned sentimentality.
One gets the idea that this kind of thing is inevitable, and so we
must be patient, and await the film's ascent out of melodrama each
time it descends into it.
The note which sounds most oddly, though by no means the most
unsuccessfully, are the odd hints of a more profound and intellectual
agenda that crop up here and there.  There can be no doubt that the
film as a whole is intended as a dramatisation of a Dantean or
Miltonian theme - 'long is the road, and hard, that leads up out of
darkness and into the light,' though the film that quoted that line
dramatised it both more strongly and with far greater profundity than
Daylight.  Yet there is also the suggestion of, depending on how you
look at it, a Christian or Conradian idea.  This suggestion is just
the faintest of suggestions, particularly if you choose to look at the
issue in the latter sense, but both the illuminated face of the icon
of Christ in the pitch blackness of the water as Stallone and
Brenneman swim for safety and the path to salvation being described by
the abominated rats scurrying amid the same icon's apparel could be
seen to redound upon both of these traditions.  But this is mere
speculation.
In summary then, one may say that, owing to its phenomenal momentum,
the flaws of Daylight are almost transformed into strengths, as, like
a boat in a storm, it pitches insanely and wildly from side to side,
as oppose to just, as it were, dawdling from side to side, and thus,
in the shape of the film do we gain a further insight into the
confusion and bewilderment experienced by the main characters.  A
relative of mine once saw fit to describe Crimson Tide as 'a very good
bad film,' and, amid cries of plagiarism, I shall describe Daylight as
not all a bad bad film, and, strongest in a litter of weaklings, the
finest example of its type that we have seen this year.

Author
Walter Frith
Sylvester Stallone has vowed that 'Daylight' will be the last big booming
action picture of his career.  Stallone made this decision while his
newborn daughter underwent emergency heart surgery earlier this year.  As
Sly approaches 50 this would be a good move and a chance for him to branch
out and search for the true acting ability he has despite what some
critics have said about him.  His roles in the original 'Rocky,' 'Paradise
Alley,' and 'Nighthawks' demonstrate that Stallone can do well at the
craft of acting.  'Daylight' takes place in New York City and one late
afternoon a horrifying accident takes place in the Lincoln tunnel which
connects New York and New Jersey underwater.  It was built around World
War I and is unstable in many places.  Hundreds are killed in the fiery
flash of action and the tunnel is sealed at both ends.  Stallone is a New
York City cab driver who arrives caught on the scene and offers his
services.  Unusual you say?  Perhaps, but Sly is a former EMS (Emergency
Medical Service) tactician who was fired by the city after a rescue under
his command killed several people.  Only a handful of survivors remain and
Stallone does his best to rescue them all.  This movie immediately put me
in mind of 'The Poseidon Adventure' (1972) in which a handful of survivors
tried to make it out from a luxury cruise liner which capsized.  Combine
that with stunts seen in other action/disaster films over the years and
you have the makings for a somewhat unoriginal but entertaining film with
graphic and stunningly realistic special effects courtesy of ILM. 
'Daylight' is from director Rob Cohen ('Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story') who
has woven an exciting action film together with somewhat shallow
characters but the scenes of rescue and survival are credible and this
film is a must for loyal Stallone fans while the rest of us are likely to
come out satisfied but will digest it quickly with our fast food treat we
like to get after the movie is out.  Other cast members are Amy Brenneman,
Viggo Mortensen, Dan Hedaya, Jay O. Sanders, Karen Young, Claire Bloom,
Barry Newman and Stan Shaw.
