Title
Review for Jason's Lyric (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Croal, NGai
     George McHenry isn't depraved enough to show a son giving his
father uncut heroin to shoot up, but that's about all that separates
his directorial debut JASON'S LYRIC from being as twisted as this
year's earlier entry in the inner city black pathology sweepstakes,
SUGAR HILL.  Still, he gives it the old college try, with scenes of
patricide, torture, spousal abuse, car-jacking and good old walk-by
shooting--if you're a bourgeois black filmmaker, it's the perfect
backdrop for an old-fashioned love story.
     Like many other young black male filmmakers, McHenry's aspirations
are blood simple: he wants to be a genre filmmaker.  But unlike their
white counterparts, most brothas don't have the courage of their
convictions (Carl Franklin's ONE FALSE MOVE is a rare exception).  As
if sex and violence weren't enough, they feel the need to further
commercialize their films by setting them in the 'hood.  Hence, the
all-star rap soundtracks, the use of rappers in key roles, and the
bullshit veneer of social consciousness.
     The final result is often a hodge-podge that starts nowhere and
spins its wheels in place for two hours, while delivering a set of
stereotypes--absent/dead fathers, crack hoes, gun-toting gangstas and
drug dealers--that could serve as a Klan recruitment tape.  Meanwhile,
white filmmakers like Quentin Tarantino, Roald Dahl and the Coen
brothers run celluloid rings around directors like John Singleton,
Matty Rich and the Hughes brothers.  Unfettered by ghetto "reality" and
too independent to know what the word "sellout" means, their
hard-boiled visions soar while ours remain embarrassingly earthbound.
     Like SUGAR HILL, JASON'S LYRIC is another lazy retelling of the
Cain and Abel myth.  Jason (Allen Payne) is the intelligent, upright
older brother who works at a television repair shop, never sasses his
moms and wakes up every night dripping in sweat, induced by nightmares
about his father's murder.  Joshua (Bokeem Woodbine) is that crazy
muthafucka from around the way--a gangsta that couldn't hold a job if
his life depended on it, sets his mother's nerves on edge and wards off
nightmares with a cold forty or a bottle of gin, no juice.
     Both live in Houston's Fifth Ward, which, as a result of McHenry's
efforts, might just have a twelve-gauge shot at replacing South-Central
L.A. as the mythical killing field of urban lore.  As the genre
demands, Jason is determined to be his brother's keeper.  But then he
meets a fine sista (is there any other kind in these movies?) named
Lyric (get it? Jason's Lyric) and starts dreaming of a world outside of
the ghetto (surprise, surprise).  At the same time, recent parolee
Joshua finds himself being pulled further in the local ghetto games by
Lyric's half-brother Alonzo (Treach of Naughty by Nature fame).  Before
we can say "Shakespearean tragedy," a bank job is botched and the walls
of Lyric's house are being painted the color of Elsinore: blood-red.
     You might think that producing NEW JACK CITY, which McHenry did,
would have gotten the need to make a 'hood film out of his system.  But
a man that would make two "House Party" sequels and once planned a
sequel to NEW JACK CITY is not a man to be noted for his originality.
JASON'S LYRIC lives up to that limited vision, encasing its actors in
all too-familiar roles.
     Forrest Whitaker, whose work in films as good as THE CRYING GAME
and as bad as BLOWN AWAY has generally been inventive phones in a
performance so shockingly bad that we want to avert our eyes.  The
good-father-that-goes-away-to-Vietnam-and-comes-back-in-shambles is old
hat by now, a lazy form of shorthand designed to evoke pity.  A better
director might have encouraged Whitaker to play Maddog against type, to
suggest an willfully unchecked self-loathing akin to Laurence
Fishburne's coke-addled Ike Turner in WHAT'S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT?"
Instead, McHenry pushes him into an undisciplined, boozy incoherence
that overshoots sentimentality and lands squarely on embarrassment.  By
the time one of his sons puts a bullet in him, it feels like we've been
put out of our misery.
     The film's leads don't fare much better.  Allen Payne has been
likened by some to a younger Denzel Washington, but that would suggest
that he can act, which no one should accuse him of.  His tough-loving
big brother act is only marginally more convincing than similar
performances by Cuba Gooding Jr. or Morris Chesnut, but it's just as
boring.  The scenes where he tries to woo Lyric have a sweet corniness
to them, which suggests that a respectable love story could have been
told had McHenry not been so preoccupied with Houston's mean streets.
     Bokeem Woodbine is no better--he doesn't have the
you-don't-like-how-I'm-livin'-well-fuck-you swagger of Ice Cube's
Doughboy from BOYZ N THE HOOD or the craziest-nigga-alive bravado of
Larenz Tate's O-Dog of MENACE II SOCIETY fame.  Fortunately, he
doesn't need it.  Joshua is a gangsta with a heart of cotton candy; he
doesn't have the heart for a life of crime, but it's the only way he
knows how express his anger.  The film awkwardly drives this home in
its only honestly powerful scene: when Joshua's mother throws away the
surprise dinner he cooked for her because it was bought with his drug
money, he runs out of the house and commits a violent car-jacking.  A
scene like this, coupled with Woodbine's rarely seen, beautiful smile
suggests depths that the screenplay doesn't have--it concludes that
Joshua is bad because he's just like his father.
     Ironically, the best of the three leads, Jada Pinkett, fares the
worst, because she's a prep-school brotha's wet-dream and an intelligent
knockout who spreads her legs on date number three--and nothing more.
After a couple sex scenes that look like outtakes from a bad Spike Lee
film, Lyric has nothing to do but cling to her man, try to get him out
of the 'hood and take a bullet at point-blank range.  It's this
insistence on simplistic pathology on the part of numerous black
filmmakers that makes so many black people call for a moratorium on
"negative images" when what's called for is complexity.  And if black
actors are in bad shape when looking for complex characters to play,
black actresses are in critical condition.  But McHenry don't love them
hoes anymore than he loves us in the audience.  Otherwise he would have
made a different film.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Originality is probably the most important characteristic of
any filmmaker that aspires for greatness. Without it the
films rely on formulas and cliches and start looking
indistinguishable from each other. That happens even with
the titles characterised by certain level of social and
political consciousness, and the good example might be given
by 1990s films that chronicled life of black youths in urban
America and often looked too similar to John Singleton's
BOYZ N THE HOOD. In his 1994 debut JASON'S LYRIC director
Doug McHenry tries somewhat different approach.
The plot of this movie is set in Houston's black
neighbourhood and tells the story of two brothers. The older
Jason (played by Allen Payne) is intelligent, and
responsible hard- working young man who rejects promotion
from his television repair shop only in order to be close
and take care of his mother Gloria (played by Suzzanne
Douglass). The other person Jason takes care of is his
younger brother Joshua (played by Bookeem Woodbine), whose
life revolves around petty crime and substance abuse.
Jason's life begins to change after he meets beautiful girl
Lyric (played by Jada Pinkett) and starts romantic
relationship with her. This opens new horizons for Jason and
he begins to think about moving out of the ghetto and
starting a new life. But the concern for his brother and
memories of tragic childhood incident involving his drunken
father Maddog (played by Forest Whitaker) is going to stop
him until it is too late.
The most important thing about JASON'S LYRIC is the script
by Bobby Smith Jr., which almost turns romance into major
plot element. This is quite an interesting approach,
especially for the often misogynist black ghetto sub-genre.
Unfortunately, the idea to have romantic black ghetto film
is compromised from the start, as soon as the character of
Lyric becomes related to the all-too-familiar world of
gangs, violence and local drug lords and the story ends in
rather predictable way for this kind of movies. Another idea
- to give some biblical overtones to the script via Cain vs.
Abel story - is also compromised with the heavy-handed
approach. However, the film is saved with excellent acting
(especially great Forest Whitaker in small but significant
role) and good direction. All in all, JASON'S LYRIC
represents failed yet refreshing experiment that
nevertheless can be seen as a decent film of its own.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
