Title
Review for Cascadeur (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: A decent adventure film with story line inspired by
Indiana Jones and action inspired by Jackie Chan movies.  Hardy Martins
does his own impressive stunts but not much acting in a film that is
diverting and lightweight.  Rating: 6 (0 to 10), 1 (-4 to +4)
   - Fast paced, well-produced little adventure film.  Since it does
     not try to be much more than that, the real test is whether it is
     better than the action films that show up in their dozens on
     cable.  It is of the same ilk, but this would stand out as being
     pretty good by comparison.
   - Solid action film with good pace and a little bit of humor.
   - "Cascadeur" means "stunt man."
   - Main character is a stuntman who has had an accident and is now
     living in the Black Forest collecting pine cones.  Christin, an
     art student looking for the Amber Chamber teams with Martins.
   - The only reason it would not be seen in the US is that the
     characters are all German and the McGuffin everybody is looking
     for requires some understanding of German history from the viewer.
     The Ark of the Covenant is meaningful to everybody from a Jewish,
     Christian, or Islamic background.  To care about the Amber Chamber
     (which is real, by the way) you have to know some German history.
     The Prussian king Friedrich Wilhelm I gave it to Peter the Great
     in 1716. The Amber Chamber was kept in the imperial Catherine
     Palace outside St.  Petersburg, then Leningrad, before being
     dismantled and removed by German troops in 1941. The chamber, last
     sighted in 1945, is an assembly of ornately carved amber wall
     panels and furniture.  It is the most sought-after of the Russian
     treasures stolen by the Germans in the Second World War.
   - The plot seems more sado-masochistic than a similar American film
     would be.
   - Main actor, Hardy Martins, is not a very expressive actor.  He
     looks like a taller Jean-Claude Van Damme.
