Title
Review for My Father the Hero (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
This is probably a film for Gerard Depardieu fans only.  It isn't great, it
isn't bad, and it has a few gags, and moments to keep us having some fun.
It is the story of a man and his daughter that go on a holiday, so he can
figure out what the hell he wants to do.  He is a hopeless romantic, and can
not make up his mind about the woman that loves him.
In the process, he ends up learning about his teenage daughter, who is
growing up ( literally ) and is having the time of her life, with her dad in
tow.  She ends up getting a few dates, and is in the way of learning
something, but she is having a terrible time, since she has started a habit
of lies, lies, lies, and stories, to make up for what she feels are her
inadequacies.
While not the funniest film around, it does have its good moments, and weird
bits.  But it is enjoyable, if not an ego acting showcase for Gerard
Depardieu, who is good.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Gerard Depardieu, Katherine Heigl, Dalton James, Faith Prince.
Screenplay:  Francis Veber & Charlie Peters.
Director:  Steve Miner.
     For a while there, I had declared a personal moratorium on
Disney's live-action formula pictures.  Although I found COOL RUNNINGS
moderately entertaining, I realized that was about as much as I could
expect: a smile here, a chuckle there, something I'd take my kids to
see if I had any and wanted to get them out of the house on a Saturday
afternoon.  With the presence of Gerard Depardieu, I had slightly
higher hopes for MY FATHER THE HERO, but I was kidding myself.  While
he lends a roguish charm to the proceedings, he's still trapped in a
movie which seems designed more to divert than to entertain.
     Depardieu plays Andre, a divorced father who has planned a
Bahamian vacation to spend time with his fourteen-year-old daughter
Nicole (Katherine Heigl).  Andre has been mostly absentee in recent
years, and as a result Nicole has developed a rather confused attitude
towards her father.  When she falls for a handsome island resident
(Dalton James), she tries to impress him by concocting a wild story
about her past, including telling him that Andre is her lover.  Word
spreads quickly around the resort, and Andre finds himself tremendously
confused at the reactions he's getting.  Eventually, Andre becomes
privvy to the story, and spins an even more complicated yarn in an
effort to win back his daughter's affections.
     It would be one thing if MY FATHER THE HERO were simply
predictable, which it is, but it is also just badly written.  MY
FATHER THE HERO is based on a French film I have not seen titled MON
PERE, CE HEROS, but it is hard to believe that the characters could
have been as fuzzy as they are here.  We are supposed to understand
that Andre has a selfish streak and a tendency to disappear from
people's lives, asserted by Nicole and emphasized by a telephone
relationship with a girlfriend who doesn't appear until the last scene
(in a cameo which shouldn't be a surprise if you recognize the voice).
However, we never see any indication in his interaction with Nicole
that he is anything but a completely doting father.  It is she who
tries to distance herself from Andre, not the other way around, so her
subsequent string of lies doesn't seem particularly motivated.  The
lies are just a device, and even if we believe it's just adolescence at
work there's no particular reason to care.  One doesn't necessarily
expect well-rounded characters from a film like MY FATHER THE HERO,
but one should at leas find reasonably coherent types.
     Still, as silly and incoherent as the script may be, Gerard
Depardieu still gets to read many of the lines, and he has superb comic
timing.  Once Andre is part of his daughter's fabrication, he plays
some light and clever scenes with the object of her affections, bland
Bill Campbell look-alike Dalton James.  Depardieu has a pleasant
rapport with Katherine Heigl, and with a flirtatious tourist played by
Faith Prince.  But it's part of the problem that he has such a rapport
with everyone; if part of the point is that Andre needs to become a
better father and a more selfless person, we never see any indication
that he is anything but a perfectly nice guy, if slightly
overprotective.  There would have been so many more comic possibilities
in a rakish playboy being saddled with everyone's belief that he is a
cradle-robber.  Heigl is lovely as Nicole, perhaps too lovely; I'm not
sure why she'd need to lie to hook anyone.
     MY FATHER, THE HERO is wholesome, good-natured and does virtually
nothing to offend.  But it needs more than that, namely something to
make it worth ninety minutes of anyone's time.  Gerard Depardieu is fun
to watch, and proves surprisingly adept at physical comedy.  It would
have been nice to see him work with a script that seemed to have any
imagination or sense of structure behind it.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Gerard Depardieu, Katherine Heigl, Dalton James, 
           Lauren Hutton, Faith Prince
Director:  Steve Miner
Producers:  Jacques Bar and Jean-Louis Livi
Screenplay:  Francis Verber and Charlie Peters based on MON PERE,
             CE HEROS by Gerard Lauzier
Music:  David Newman
Released by Touchstone Pictures
     Gerard Depardieu's interpretation of Cyrano De Bergerac was a
definitive character in modern cinema, not to mention a jewel in the
crown of his career.  In fact, he was so impressive in that role that
the producers of the comedy MY FATHER THE HERO took notice and gave him
something similar--a scene where, while in hiding, he feeds poetic
lines of love to his daughter as she courts the favor of a reluctant
boyfriend.  For some odd reason, it just doesn't have the same impact.
     The reunion of Andre (Gerard Depardieu) and his fourteen-year old
daughter Nicole (Katherine Heigl) is hardly a warm affair.  Despite
having planned their vacation to the Bahamas for a year, Andre is still
the focus of Nicole's anger as the result of a past misdeed.  After the
pair arrives at their destination, Nicole does all she can to get away
from her repressive ogre of a father.  When she meets Ben (Dalton
James) and her initial attempts to impress him fail, she tries a
different tactic: claiming that Andre is actually her lover (and an
ex-jailbird to boot).  And while the lie has favorable results for her,
the same can't be said for poor papa, who becomes the object of
suspicious glances, malicious rumors, and outright hostility.
     Admittedly, this is an unusual premise for a comedy, and MY FATHER
THE HERO sadly fails to take advantage of the possibilities.  Instead
of going for outright zaniness, the film attempts to stay within the
bounds of "good taste" and family values (in spite of the obvious
Oedipal inklings), which not only dilutes the humor but results in an
unwatchable climax involving a water rescue.  There are some funny
moments, such as Andre singing "Thank Heaven for Little Girls" to a
crowd of shocked onlookers, but there aren't enough laughs to justify
the rest of this lame production.
     Mr. Depardieu does the kind of job one might expect from a
respected actor thrown into a stupid movie.  He's fine, but the script
doesn't give him much opportunity to show his range.  Katherine Heigl
has little acting ability, as becomes apparent when her attempted sobs
come out as dry-eyed squints.  No one is likely to feel a great upsurge
of sympathy for Nicole during those moments.
     There is a big-name, surprise cameo in MY FATHER THE HERO.  The
appearance of this person is perhaps the single reason to sit through
the entire movie.  While the face isn't shown until the last scene,
it's possible for those viewers with discerning ears to determine the
identity very early.  I won't whose career has been blemished (although
they were smart enough to keep their name out of the credits), but
suffice it to say that few would expect a performer of this caliber to
be slumming.  Then again, one hardly anticipates Gerard Depardieu to be
a party to such rubbish, either.
     I won't dwell overmuch on the numerous implausibilities that occur
during the course of MY FATHER THE HERO.  This is, after all, a comedy,
and the rules of reality are often bent in the name of humor.  Too bad
the results aren't more impressive.  However, it is worth making note
of the absolute stupidity of Ben, who swallows every lie without a
moment's incredulity.  I'm surprised Nicole and Andre didn't try to
sell him a bridge.
     Nevertheless, the greatest flaw in MY FATHER THE HERO isn't the
feeble comedy, the limp characterization, or the mediocre acting.
Instead, it's the feeling of unease that pervades the first forty-five
minutes as Nicole and Andre clash while the film tries unsuccessfully
to make light of their dysfunctional relationship.  There are serious
issues bubbling away here that the movie doesn't know how to properly
address, attempting instead to turn them into fodder for humor.
Lighthearted motion pictures should never cause discomfort, but this
one does.
     It's easy to understand how one could be fooled into thinking that
MY FATHER THE HERO might be worth a trip to the theater.  After all,
the trailers contain a few funny moments, there's some potential to the
premise, and Gerard Depardieu lends an aura of respectability.
Unfortunately, all of this means very little.  As the old saying goes,
"appearances can be deceiving," and in this case, they are.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
