Title
Review for Gift, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Sam Raimi. Screenplay by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson.
Starring Cate Blanchett, Giovanni Ribisi, Keanu Reeves. Running time: 112
minutes. Rated AA by the MFCB. Reviewed on February 25th, 2001.
I enjoy a lot of different kinds of films, but none more so than the scary 
ones. There are few things more satisfying than sitting in a darkened 
theatre and feeling my heart pounding in my chest, sweat beading on my 
forehead, each breath coming just a little bit faster as the action on the 
screen unfolds. Being startled so much that I actually jump back in my 
seat -- that, to me, is perhaps the ultimate cinemagoing experience. It's 
the surest sign that I'm not just watching the movie, but am completely 
absorbed in it.
These days, sadly, Hollywood tends to favour the more low-brow slasher 
genre. Some of these are enjoyable enough in their own right (I'm a big 
fan of the original "Scream"), but too often they substitute gore for real 
terror, and that's a thrill that's far more ephemeral. Even the occasional 
movie which does harken back to more mature suspense frequently sacrifices 
atmosphere for cod mysticism -- last autumn's "Bless The Child" springs to 
mind.
"The Gift" attempts to reverse this trend. Its setting is a staple of the 
classic American thriller: the Deep South, in this case the backwoods town 
of Brixton, Georgia. Brixton is a place made up of rusted pick-ups and old 
Gothic mansions, murky lakes and gnarled old trees. The denizens are a 
superstitious lot making a pretense of living in modern times: they scoff 
at the unknown, until they have no other choice but to accept it. I was 
most reminded of the excellent but little-seen TV show "American Gothic" 
from the mid-Nineties (indeed, that programme's demonic sheriff, Gary 
Cole, makes an appearance here as a philandering lawyer).
The movie's title refers to the paranormal abilities of a woman named 
Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett). Annie's husband died a year earlier and she 
now supports herself and her three sons by telling people's fortunes with 
the help of a deck of Tarot-like cards. Amongst those who appeal to 
Annie's wisdom are a troubled mechanic (Giovanni Ribisi) and Valerie 
Barksdale (Hilary Swank), who is trapped in a marriage to abusive redneck 
Donnie (Keanu Reeves). When Donnie finds out that Annie has been 
encouraging Valerie to leave him, he threatens both her and her children. 
The local police are little help: not only are they friends of Donnie's, 
but they view Annie as little better than a Satan worshipper.
One evening, Annie and a friend go to the local country club to relax. 
There, Annie meets her son's school principal, Wayne Collins (Greg 
Kinnear). There is an obvious attraction between them, but Wayne is 
already engaged to heiress Jessica King (Katie Holmes), whose status as 
the town slut seems to be no secret at all, except to Wayne. That night, 
Jessica vanishes. Quickly exhausting their leads, the police reluctantly 
turn to Annie for help. Annie begins experiencing visions which help her 
uncover Jessica's grisly fate. But in the process, she puts herself and 
her boys at risk of an equally grim end.
In most good thrillers, the setting is as vital an ingredient as any 
actor, and director Sam Raimi does a fine job of filming his rural locale. 
Nature is filled with unseen menace, and we can readily believe that such 
an environment would have bred a woman like Annie. There is a palpable 
atmosphere in scenes such as one where the psychic wanders outdoors after 
experiencing a horrifying vision. We know that her ordeal is not finished 
yet, but the source of the terror could be anywhere.
Blanchett is in good form as the small-town seer, demonstrating that Annie 
is a normal woman who just happens to have a special talent -- no 
different than if she were a great pianist or a gifted surgeon. She sees 
her "gift" as simply a means to keep her family going. It is interesting 
to observe the role that Annie plays in the community of Brixton. While 
many view her with suspicion, for others she plays the same role that a 
psychiatrist might in a different setting. She doesn't just tell her 
customers' fortunes, but consoles them and advises them: she is as much 
counsellor as clairvoyant.
But despite these promising beginnings, Raimi, working from a script by 
Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, isn't able to maintain his momentum. 
Things start off far too slowly, for one, as Raimi awkwardly brings his 
player on stage. And then, just when things get rolling, the movie detours 
into a by-the-numbers legal sub-plot, with Annie defending herself and her 
abilities before the courts. The idea of fortune tellers being mistrusted 
and feared is hardly a new one, and "The Gift" does not put a new spin on 
the concept. As a result, this extended sequence is just marking time,
dragging out the proceedings between Jessica's disappearance and its 
ultimate resolution.
Simply put, "The Gift" is too straightforward a story for a feature film. 
There are no real twists and turns, and those that do crop up are obvious 
and predictable. The entire movie is cliche piled upon cliche: the 
would-be frights are standard fare, the plot unravels without enormous 
surprise, and most of the characters are common stereotypes, such as 
Reeves' country redneck and the woefully miscast Holmes' high-society 
trollop. Even a last-minute "Sixth Sense"-like twist has been lifted 
wholesale from any number of old folk tales.
"The Gift" is the sort of movie that probably would have been better off 
as part of an anthology (if Hollywood made those). Cut down to an hour or 
so, with a better balance between the plot and the film's focus on Annie 
as a character, this could have been a nice atmospheric piece. As it is, 
"The Gift" is entertaining in places, but is simply too insubstantial and 
too typical of the genre to succeed as a whole. While it's great to see an 
old-fashioned thriller back in theatres, I don't think it's too much to
expect a few new ideas too.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheGift.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Brandon Herring
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Keanu Reeves, Giovanni Ribisi, Katie Holmes, Greg 
Kinnear, Gary Cole, Hilary Swank, Kim Dickens, Michael Jeter, J.K. Simmons.
Directed by: Sam Raimi
Running Time: 111 minutes
Rated R: violence, language, sexuality, nudity.
Movies that start out, and capture me from the opening titles are movies that 
do not exist that much. The last movie to make me sit up and watch every 
single moment of the movie was 1999's "American Beauty", of course this year 
we had excellent movies such as "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon", "Traffic", 
and now "The Gift". It's a horror thriller directed by film master Sam Raimi 
that is so moody, well acted, and well written that in the end it is a treat 
to watch.
Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett) is a young woman in a small-town, who is 
widowed and lives with her three young boys. She brings in the people of this 
town because she is a psychic, and she gives readings for people and they 
give her as in her own words "donations". Annie, of course in this small town 
has a few enemies one of whom is Donnie Barksdale (Keanu Reeves), he believes 
she is a witch and she told his wife Valerie Barksdale (Hilary Swank) to 
leave him because he physically abuses her. Valerie however thinks of Annie 
as a friend as does the mentally unstable Buddy Cole (Giovanni Ribisi), who 
is oddly confused about having nightmares about a blue diamond.
When Annie is called to her son's school after he is in a fight, she meets 
the principal Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear) which she finds her self attracted 
too, however he is engaged to the young Jessica King (Katie Holmes). When 
Annie sees Wayne and Jessica together she gets a bad feeling that overcomes 
her and sees an image that she will never forget. At a party she sees these 
two again, and goes out to get some fresh air and catches Jessica with a 
wealthy lawyer David Duncan (Gary Cole), she doesn't disrupt the two, but 
learns of the disappearance of Jessica a few days later. The cops are drawn 
to Annie to try to help with her psychic abilities. As Annie is about to find 
out, there is a lot more than what it seems that lies beneath this 
disappearance. 
Sam Raimi has done such a great job with "The Gift" that I am proud to name 
it one of my best films of 2000. The thing that stands out the most in the 
film however is the acting, and especially that of Cate Blanchett in the lead 
role. To me she gives the best female performance I have seen, and definitely 
deserves an Oscar Nomination for her role. She is a very beautiful actress in 
Hollywood, and it's nice to see her starring in good movies (Her last being 
"The Talented Mr. Ripley"). In the supporting roles Greg Kinnear gives a 
somewhat bland performance, and doesn't really suit his character. After his 
Oscar Nominated role in 1997's "As Good As It Gets", he hasn't had really 
many big roles. Keanu Reeves is not one of my favorite actors at all, but he 
gives it all he can, and in the end Keanu Reeves actually clocks in a great 
performance as a realistically scary man. Hilary Swank fresh off her Oscar 
Winning role in 1999's best film "Boys Don't Cry", she gives yet another 
fantastic performance in a great but small role. Gary Cole whom is always 
good, gives a nice creepy performance as the rich lawyer. Next to Cate 
however I think Giovanni Ribisi gives the best performance in the movie as 
the mentally unstable Buddy, he gives it all he can and goes over the top in 
scenes and it works out great. Katie Holmes as the promiscuous Jessica is 
stellar in her performance, and shows she can do nudity in a non gratuitous 
style. Kim Dickens (Hollow Man) is nice in her small role also. 
The script written by Billy Bob Thorton (whom also starred in Sam's 1998 
masterpiece "A Simple Plan") is that of a great one. The dialogue is tightly 
written, and the twists and plot changes come fast and quick. The ending is 
especially surprising, and will leave a tear in your eye, and a smile on your 
face. Sam Raimi's direction puts so much atmosphere in the film, that at 
times you almost seem like you are a character in the film. For those fans of 
Raimi check out the car Cate Blanchett drives, a nice little homage to the 
"Evil Dead" series. 
"The Gift" is one of the best films of 2000, and one of my favorite thrillers 
in a long time. Everything in the movie stands out, from the acting, to the 
script, the direction, to the editing. I can't wait to watch this one again, 
its a winner!
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 1/26/01. (C)

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Gift (2000)
Cate Blanchett, Giovanni Ribisi, Keanu Reeves, Katie Holmes, Greg
Kinnear, Hilary Swank, Michael Jeter, Kim Dickens, Gary Cole, Rosemary
Harris, J.K. Simmons, Chelchie Ross, John Beasley. Music by Christopher
Young. Screenplay by Billy Bob Thornton, Tom Epperson. Directed by Sam
Raimi. 110 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
In "The Gift," Cate Blanchett plays Annie Wilson, a widowed mother in a
mossy southern town who inherited moderate clairvoyant abilities from
her grandmother. Annie supplements her monthly Social Security checks by
doing psychic readings for the locals, but instead of Tarot cards, she
uses a deck of cards with basic symbols on them. Now, to the best of my
understanding, these decks of cards depicting circles, squares, parallel
wavy lines, etc. are simply tools employed by researchers to test for
ESP, which begs the question: what the hell is Annie reading?
Granted, my knowledge in this area is limited, but I believe each Tarot
card has a specific meaning and that psychics divine messages from the
card faces and the order in which they are dealt. So what insight can be
drawn from basic geometric symbols? Surely this practice must be a
violation of the Supernatural Rules of Order. After all, if you can do
readings from ESP test cards, why not flash cards? Or recipe cards? Or
baseball cards ("Ah, it's a Sammy Sosa! You will have a life of
accomplishment, humility and lucrative endorsement deals.")
If my misgivings are sound, then Annie is either making a big mistake or
she's not very bright. The latter may be the case, as Annie does some
astonishingly stupid things later in the film.
The film, by the way, is the latest from Sam Raimi, who previously
offered the taut thriller, "A Simple Plan." Once again, Raimi proves
adept at assembling a strong cast and establishing an evocative
atmosphere. Unfortunately, the similarities between the two movies end
there. "The Gift" is an anemic throwaway that starts strong but fades
fast, due to a main plotline that offers few surprises and a secondary
story that is handled ineptly.
Shot from a dusty script by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, the
production follows Annie as she gets into a heap of trouble by
suggesting that battered wife Valerie Barksdale (Hilary Swank) should
seek help. Shortly after, Valerie's husband, Donnie (Keanu Reeves),
explodes into Annie's house and demands that she mind her own business,
while accusing her of worshipping Satan. Clearly, we do not need to ask
Jeff Foxworthy if this man might be a redneck.
In addition to Donnie and Valerie, Annie's circle of friends also
includes a mentally disturbed auto mechanic named Buddy Cole (fans of
"The Kids in the Hall" may insert their wisecracks here) with serious
parental issues, not to mention problems respecting other people's
personal space. Giovanni Ribisi does fine work with the role, managing
to make the character simultaneously creepy and endearing. The
resolution of Buddy's grim storyline is one of the most disappointing
parts of the film. Early on, his circumstances are given almost as much
screen time as Valerie's, but he quickly fades into the background. His
core situation is wrapped up early and abruptly in a scene so poorly
filmed that a key revelation becomes just one more element in a sea of
mayhem.
Raimi and company seem far more interested in getting and keeping Annie
in as much danger as possible. During a rare social outing, she
encounters oh-so-polite school principal Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear)
and his hot-to-trot fiancé, Jessica King (Katie Holmes, vamping it up
terribly and exposing her breasts for the first time onscreen). Annie
postpones buying wedding gifts when she spots Jessica screwing smarmy
lawyer David Duncan (Gary Cole) in the coatroom.
(WARNING: SPOILERS AHEAD) Jessica disappears that night and frustrated
cops eventually (and reluctantly) turn to Annie, who gets a vision of a
female body submerged in a pond. Said pond belongs to (surprise!)
Donnie, who ends up convicted of her murder. Case closed? Of course not.
Subsequent visions convince Annie that Donnie is not the killer, so what
does she do? She races to share her revelation with a member of the tiny
pool of suspects. If only the woman had spent less time on psychic
readings and more time boning up on "Movie Clichés 101." I won't reveal
any more. Suffice to say that the story builds to a cheesy "Twilight
Zone" style climax (END SPOILERS).
The positives in "The Gift" come mostly from the actors. Blanchett,
Swank and Kinnear are all solid, with Ribisi even better, but the movie
belongs to Keanu Reeves, who delivers a remarkably strong performance.
Trite though they may be, scenes of him terrorizing Annie provide the
only truly scary moments in the film.
Actually, there is one moment even scarier. It's the realization that a
script this lame actually was made into a feature film.

Author
Chad Polenz@aol.com
Author: ChadPolenz@aol.com
Subject: Review: The Gift (2000)
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Organization: None
X-Questions-to: graham@jetcity.com
X-Submissions-to: graham@ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #28093
Keywords: author=polenz
Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett), a widow who struggles to raise her children in 
a small town in Georgia is asked for help by local authorities in solving the 
case of a missing woman. Annie is something of a psychic, she has involuntary 
bouts with the supernatural where she can see the past and the future and 
physically feel the actions happenning to her she envisions. Her "gift" leads 
to the arrest of a nasty wife beater who may or may not have killed the 
pretty rich girl found in the swamp on his property. In an ultra conservative 
backwoods town will her testimony based on her psychic visions hold up in 
court? Do they even have the right man?
Aside from Keanu Reeves giving one of the best performances of his career as 
the loathable redneck Donnie Barksdale, there is little else going for the 
film. 
Lame, unoriginal screenplay. Predictable ending. Suspense scenes that are 
just plain boring. Ridicously trite characterization makes the entire South 
out to be ingnorant, hateful goobers. Relentless in its emotional 
sensationaliztion. 
"The Gift" is one of those movies that makes you wonder where you've seen 
this story before. It's a collection of every cliche and stereotype of the 
South ever made, and coming from a Yankee like me who dislikes the South 
that's really saying something. 
For an established, talented director Sam Raimi is unable to provide any kind 
of originality to this film. It's predictable from the first scene, the 
screenplay is written like a rip-off of a photocopied bootlegged play. You 
know that as nasty as the murder suspect is he didn't actually do it. It's no 
surprise either who the real villain turns out to be and what their motive 
was. Sigh, how trite. 
For a supernatural thriller this is neither scary nor intense because it's so 
cliche. "The Gift" is basically a glorified b-movie. 


Author
Laura Clifford
Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett, "Elizabeth") is a recently widowed mother of
three boys trying to make ends meet in Brixton, Georgia.  Having inheritted
the gift of second sight from her granny, Annie gives readings to townsfolk
like battered wife Valerie Barksdale (Hillary Swank, "Boys Don't Cry").
When Jessica King, (Katie Holmes, "Wonder Boys") the daughter of the town's
wealthiest man and fiance of school principal Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear)
has been missing for four days, Annie's asked to help in "The Gift."
With the talent involved in this project, from director Sam Raimi ("A Simple
Plan") and cowriters Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson (both of "One False 
Move") to the unusual ensemble cast (featuring one Oscar winner - Swank, and 
three nominees - Blanchett, Kinnear and Rosemary Harris), one would expect 
"The Gift" to be one humdinger of a film.  Alas, although Blanchett once again 
gives a flawless performance, "The Gift" is a mediocre thriller.  Think "What 
Lies Beneath" crossed with "To Kill a Mockingbird."
Through Annie, we're introduced to the cast of characters. Buddy (Giovanni
Ribisi, "Boiler Room") is the slow witted auto mechanic who's devoted to Annie, 
but clearly is disturbed by something repressed from his childhood.  Valerie's
Annie's battered client who's abusive, redneck husband Donnie (Keanu Reeves)
threatens not only Annie, but her children, because of her 'interference' in
his marriage.  He's also known as a bit of a ladies' man, which makes Valerie
jealous.  Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear) is the mild mannered school principal 
engaged to wild child rich girl Jessica (not only does Annie have a nightmarish 
vision upon meeting Jessica, she finds her in a compromising position in the 
country club ladies room on only her second encounter with the woman).  Already
we have more red herrings than we can shake a stick at.
The screenplay makes obvious choices and overplays its Southern Gothic hand
(Ribisi's character may as well have been called Boo Radley).  Character
development is lacking, particularly with Annie's three sons.  We're given
hints that Annie isn't coping well with her husband's death and that her 
behavior is impacting that of her eldest son, but the screenplay allows these 
hints to suffice rather than delving more deeply.  Wayne and Jessica as a 
couple are a head-scratcher.  The film's climax is more than a bit shopworn.
The cast is mostly fine with Blanchett elevating the film above its pulp
trash roots.  Reeves is quite effective as the brutish husband, creating a 
real fear of violence whenever he appears.  Swank follows her tour de force 
Oscar winning performance by playing it safe in a small supporting role.  
Gary Cole ("A Simple Plan") makes a mark as an unethical prosecution attorney.
Technically, the film is rather conventional showing none of the distinctive 
stylishness of Raimi's earlier work.  Kudos, though to visual effects 
supervisors Syd Dutton and Bill Taylor, who create some eerie visions from
Annie's point of view.  Original music by Christopher Young ("The Wonder Boys")
features fiddles to create a sense of place while also underlining the suspense.
As a filmgoing experience, "The Gift" is like getting a Crackerjacks prize in a 
Tiffany box.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Chad Polenz@aol.com
Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett), a widow who struggles to raise her children in 
a small town in Georgia is asked for help by local authorities in solving the 
case of a missing woman. Annie is something of a psychic, she has involuntary 
bouts with the supernatural where she can see the past and the future and 
physically feel the actions happenning to her she envisions. Her "gift" leads 
to the arrest of a nasty wife beater who may or may not have killed the 
pretty rich girl found in the swamp on his property. In an ultra conservative 
backwoods town will her testimony based on her psychic visions hold up in 
court? Do they even have the right man? 
Aside from Keanu Reeves giving one of the best performances of his career as 
the loathable redneck Donnie Barksdale, there is little else going for the 
film. 
Lame, unoriginal screenplay. Predictable ending. Suspense scenes that are 
just plain boring. Ridicously trite characterization makes the entire South 
out to be ingnorant, hateful goobers. Relentless in its emotional 
sensationaliztion. 
"The Gift" is one of those movies that makes you wonder where you've seen 
this story before. It's a collection of every cliche and stereotype of the 
South ever made, and coming from a Yankee like me who dislikes the South 
that's really saying something. 
For an established, talented director Sam Raimi is unable to provide any kind 
of originality to this film. It's predictable from the first scene, the 
screenplay is written like a rip-off of a photocopied bootlegged play. You 
know that as nasty as the murder suspect is he didn't actually do it. It's no 
surprise either who the real villain turns out to be and what their motive 
was. Sigh, how trite. 
For a supernatural thriller this is neither scary nor intense because it's so 
cliche. "The Gift" is basically a glorified b-movie. 


Author
Michael Dequina
The modestly budgeted _The_Gift_ marks a homecoming of sorts for
director Sam Raimi, who returns to his roots in the cinema of the
supernatural after a largely lambasted spin on the big-bucks mainstream
field with the Kevin Costner starrer _For_Love_of_the_Game_.  But unlike
his landmark _Evil_Dead_ splatter laffer series, Raimi is going for
straight-faced chills this time around--in a way, melding his flamboyant
_Evil_Dead_ instincts with the more cerebral thriller elements he
successfully tried on for size in _A_Simple_Plan_, his big studio
breakthrough.  To twist a tired cliché, the whole is a step short of the
sum of its parts.
One of the strongest parts in question is the central performance of
Cate Blanchett, shedding her usual period piece garb for the role of
Annie Wilson, a widowed mother of three sons in modern-day Brixton,
Georgia.  The gift of the title is Annie's clairvoyance, which enables
her to earn a modest living as a psychic reader despite the protests of
the town's more religious residents, who see her ability as the work of
the Devil.  When Jessica King (Katie Holmes), a vivacious young member of
Brixton high society, mysteriously disappears, Annie's gift forces her
into a prominent--albeit reluctant--place in the investigation. 
Blanchett's modulated turn is key to the psychological horror of the
piece; her controlled work as Annie finds herself increasingly unable to
control or make sense of her visions adds a layer of subtlety that not
only makes the proceedings a bit more unsettling but also consistently
grounded in a convincing reality.
For the most part, Blanchett's co-stars provide able support.  The big
surprise is Keanu Reeves, a real embarrassment as a villain in the
atrocious-as-a-whole _The_Watcher_, in the role of this film's main
baddie, hot-tempered redneck Donnie Barksdale (a part that would have
been a perfect fit for one of _The_Gift_'s writers, Billy Bob Thornton). 
As Donnie's abused wife and Annie's loyal client Valerie, Hilary Swank
makes an impression--unfortunately, however, one not as strong as the one
left by the ridiculously awful hair extensions she wears.  Holmes
memorably reveals another side of herself in every sense as the sexy
Jessica, and Greg Kinnear is ideally cast as her nice guy fiancé (though
one wonders why he's the only guy in town without an accent).  Sticking
out like a sore thumb from the rest of the cast is Giovanni Ribisi, who
plays a troubled young mechanic befriended by Annie.  Ribisi is a
talented actor, but he has a tendency to fly way off the handle if not
held properly in check--and that is the case here; it's hard to believe
that his scenery-devouring turn once generated some Oscar buzz.
And any preliminary awards buzz _The_Gift_ may have once had is
ultimately done in by Thornton and Tom Epperson's script.  To their
credit, they do succeed in setting up the flavor of this tiny Southern
town, and the character of Annie and her plight are well-drawn before
Blanchett's performance is factored in.  But the film is more a genre
piece than anything else, and it's under these more modest demands that
the script falls short.  While a few of the puzzle pieces come together
in an interesting way and there is the occasional creepy sequence (though
a lot of the credit for both goes to Raimi's ever-inventive visuals), the
film's central mystery is less than one.  The revelation of the person
responsible for Jessica's disappearance isn't so much a twist as an
inevitable, easily foreseeable turn; a fairly humdrum climax fails to
compensate for the disappointing lack of surprise--rendering this _Gift_
more akin to a lump of coal, albeit one with an uncommonly inviting
sheen.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Robin Clifford
Annie Wilson lives in the small Southern town of Blixton, Georgia, with her
three sons. The young widow has a knack for psychic vision and is called
upon by certain of the town folk to give readings, explain the past and
predict the future. Her talent is sorely tested when a rich socialite
disappears and Annie is called in by the police to help find the missing
heiress in Sam Raimi's "The Gift."
Director Raimi has had a most rewarding and eclectic career since his
breakthrough "Evil Dead" films. He has created stylish films like "The
Quick and the Dead," "A Simple Plan" and the sometimes beautiful "For Love
of the Game," always putting a different spin on each work. He continues
this track record with "The Gift," a supernatural thriller that is a
showcase for its star, Blanchett.
The story, by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, is a middling entry for
Raimi that is, disappointingly, a conventional whodunit coupled with
supernatural power. Annie has psychic powers that allow her to help the
various members of Brixton society who have come to depend on the gifted
woman.
Her steady stream of troubled clients includes Valerie (Hilary Swank), a
badly abused woman who comes to Annie for help but refuses to follow the
psychic's advice to leave her violent husband, Donnie (Keanu Reeves).
Donnie, a real redneck's redneck, declares Annie a witch working for the
devil and threatens her and her boys with violence if she continues
interfering in his life. Another patron, the simple but very troubled Buddy
(Giovanni Ribisi), seems to be collapsing within himself over childhood
abuse by his father, but may hold the key to later events.
The crux of this southern Gothic yarn is the disappearance of society girl
Jennifer King (Katie Holmes). Jennifer is high school principle Wayne
Collins' fiancée, but Annie soon learns the young woman has a promiscuous
and selfish streak, catching her in flagrante delicto at one point. When
Jennifer disappears one night, her frantic father begs Annie to use her
power to find his daughter. The visions she has lead to the arrest,
conveniently, of Donnie, sending the wife beater to prison for murder and
out of Annie's life.
This is where the convention of the story replaces imagination. From here
on in, doubt is raised as to Donnie's guilt and one suspect after another
start to come out of the woodwork. Almost everyone who has a line in the
movie falls under the suspicious gaze of the camera as Annie's psychic
vision point to one, then another, possible murderer. It gets very
confusing and forces the story to unravel into a morass of faux
accusations. So many suspects crop up over the course of the movie that I
thought I was watching the psychic edition of "Clue." The whirlwind of this
whodunit replaces suspense with a series of false leads as the real killer
is eventually brought to justice.
As I said, "The Gift" is a showcase for the very talented Cate Blanchett.
Since her breakthrough performance as the young queen in "Elizabeth," the
actress has shown versatility and is capable of a myriad of accents and
characters. With her natural-sounding southern drawl, Blanchett pulls you
into her character and the danger and confusion that her gift can cause.
Even as she tries to help here clientele with her visions, she denies the
impact they have, repeatedly, when they involve her or her own. It's not
the best performance of the year, but it does further establish the actress
as one of the most talented in the business today.
The supporting cast surrounding Annie provide an assemblage of
two-dimensional characters, here to give cause to the mystery and not too
much more. Keanu Reeves shows himself to be an actor willing to go against
type and be something other than just a pretty face. As such, he brings
attention to his character, Donnie Barksdale, and you believe, though he is
a wife-beating jerk, he is no murderer. Hilary Swank does her best as the
one-note Valerie, but the Academy Award winning actress is not given much
to do as the abused wife - except to look extremely abused. Giovanni Ribisi
needs to get his agent to get him roles other than the simple characters he
has played of late. Greg Kinnear and Katie Holmes are miscast as a couple.
Holmes, in particular, is too young for the femme fatale she is supposed to
be.
The moody production fits the temperament sought for "The Gift" with the
dark, atmospheric night scenery and swirling fog. It looks good and couples
nicely with the story up to the first half. After that, as the tale gets
confused, the decent techs become background only.
The draw to "The Gift" is Cate Blanchett. She is worth the price of
admission, though the movie, overall, is less than her considerable
efforts. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
"We Put the SIN in Cinema"
 ŠCopyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you charted the success of Sam Raimi's films on a graph, it would
look like a big `W.'  He started with the deliciously diabolical Evil
Dead trilogy and the first Darkman film, only to follow them up with the
extremely disappointing The Quick and the Dead.  Raimi rebounded with
the amazing A Simple Plan, but then, in a surprise to the director's
fans, he decided to make a baseball film with Kevin Costner.  Baseball?
Kevin Costner?  Fool me once (Bull Durham), shame on you.  Fool me twice
(Field of Dreams), shame on me.  Fool me three times (For Love of the
Game), and you'd better be wearing some kind of protection over your
private parts.
Luckily, Raimi's latest film, a welcome return to the frightening fare
that made him famous, is a big step in the right direction (his next
project is the new Spider-Man film).  The Gift is a nifty little
thriller with a terrific cast full of recent Oscar winners and nominees,
highlighted by a strong performance from Cate Blanchett (The Talented
Mr. Ripley).  Raimi proves he can still make with the creepy, but The
Gift has the misfortune of following three of the best hair-raisers in
quite some time (What Lies Beneath, The Sixth Sense and The Blair Witch
Project).  It's moody, atmospheric and, at times, downright unnerving,
but The Gift just isn't in the same league.
The film's first five minutes establish Annie Wilson (Blanchett) as a
recently widowed single mother with three children who live in the
swampy Georgia burg of Brixton.  She's a psychic, but more of a social
worker to her customers than a carnival sideshow act.  Annie prods
people to call their doctors when she sees something in her tarot cards
that indicate a medical problem.  When one client (Hilary Swank, Boys
Don't Cry) appears to have been beaten by her husband, Annie desperately
tries to talk her into leaving the brute (Keanu Reeves, The
Replacements).  She is admired and respected by the people she helps and
regarded as a bride of Satan/witch doctor/voodoo high priestess by the
rest of the redneck town.
The Gift's story, co-written by Plan's Oscar-nominated actor Billy Bob
Thornton and his One False Move and A Family Thing writing partner Tom
Epperson, centers on the disappearance of a local girl named Jessica
(Katie Holmes, Wonder Boys), who is engaged to the school principal
(Greg Kinnear, Loser) and the daughter of a prominent businessman.  Like
Laura Palmer, Jessica was a hot, young nymphomaniac, doing pretty much
every guy in Brixton, and eventually her nude carcass is discovered in a
body of water.  And, like Twin Peaks, Brixton is a town full of kooky
suspects, each of which seem to have a motive in Jessica's murder.
There's enough red herring here to fill Brixton's swamp.
Showing he's no stranger to the horror genre, Raimi fills The Gift with
enough of Annie's unnerving flashes forward and backward to keep you on
the edge of your seat.  When you can feel the tension in an audience
rise by a character simply drawing a bath, you know the director is
doing something right.  There is an awkward courtroom scene that feels
out of place, but, for the most part, Raimi does a very good job keeping
the somewhat clunky story moving along.  The supporting cast does well
(even Keanu) and seems to be having a pretty good time acting like
hillbillies (look for Danny Elfman in a two-second cameo as a
fiddle-playing hayseed).  But The Gift is as much Blanchett's film to
carry as it is Raimi's.  And they both do a splendid job.
1:51  R for adult language, violence, nudity, sexual content and some
disturbing imagery

Author
Bob Bloom
 The Gift (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Cate Blanchett, Keanu
Reeves, Giovanni Ribisi, Greg Kinnear, Katie Holmes, Hilary Swank, Gary
Cole and J.K. Simmons.  Screenplay by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom
Epperson. Directed by Sam Raimi. Rated R.
 With the exception of the performance of Cate Blanchett, The Gift is a
major disappointment.
 Written by actor-director Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, and
directed by Sam Raimi, the movie crawls, the plot is flimsy and the
suspense is minimal.
 This is one of those Southern Gothic tales filled with eccentric and
offbeat characters who seem to only exist below the Mason-Dixon line.
 Supposedly Thornton based Blanchettís Annie Wilson, who is psychic, on
his own mother who read fortunes.
 Annie, a young widow with three boys, uses her gift to do readings for
the locals in her rural Georgia town. At times, she has visions in which
she sees future events as well as some that already have passed.
 This gets her involved in the murder of Jessica King (Dawson Creekís
Katie Holmes), a young, rich, spoiled local woman who is found strangled
in a pond, a chain wrapped around her body.
 Of course, the main suspect, Donnie Barksdale (Keanu Reeves) is a
redneck, cheatiní, wife beater  who has threatened Annie because she
does readings for his abused spouse (Oscar-winner Hilary Swank), urging
the poor woman to leave Donnie.
 Now, since The Gift is part murder mystery, anyone with any film sense
knows immediately Reeves is not the killer.
 And so because the filmís main characters are sparse, the list of
suspects is greatly narrowed, making the identity of the killer easy to
determine. Is it Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear), her school principal
fiancé? Or is it David Duncan (Gary Cole), the county prosecutor with
whom Jessica was having an affair? Or could it be Buddy Cole (Giovanni
Ribisi), the local nut case who was sexually abused as a child by his
father? Or maybe it was Valerie Barksdale (Swank), who knew her hubby
was carryiní on with Jessica.
 The Gift would have been a better movie if it had concentrated more on
Annie Wilson and her interaction with the other townspeople ó some of
whom think sheís a witch ó than forcing its audience to walk through
this transparent labyrinth trying to guess who the killer really is.
 For Blanchettís Annie is very reluctant about using her power, which it
seems she considers more of a burden than a gift. Instead of telling
people their futures, she tries to set them on the right path to
determine their own destinies.
 The Gift is partly redeemed by its Twilight Zone-like resolution, but
overall it remains an unsatisfying endeavor.
 Blanchettís Annie is an interesting individual. At times she is
frightened by her gift, tentative about how to use it. Up front she
tells her clients that she cannot solve their problems, only suggest the
road they must take to reach their own resolution.
 At times, though, the script undermines her. When she realizes Donnie,
who has been convicted of Jessicaís death, is not guilty, she runs to
the prosecutor, spills the beans about seeing him and Jessica catching a
quickie in a closet, and insists he reopen the case.
 She also visits Wayne, telling him of her feelings that Donnie has been
railroaded. Not a smart thing to do since these two guys would now be
considered suspects.
 The performances in The Gift, other than Blanchettís, are rather
uneven. Reeves plays Donnie as if auditioning for one of the deranged
backwoodsmen from Deliverance; Ribisi gives another of his, ěHey look at
me, I'm nutsî characterization for which he seems to be becoming
typecast; Swank is totally wasted; while Kinnear plays Wayne as a rather
passive, colorless lacking any real personality.
 Only J.K. Simmons (best known as the racist inmate on HBOís Oz) is
memorable as the easy-going county sheriff who is dubious of Annieís
gift.
 The scene in which he asks about a missing eclair while she is trying
to give him information about the missing Jessica is priceless. If only
more sequences in The Gift could have been so well written.
 The Gift is a flawed movie that wastes the potential of its cast. It
falls short as a character study, a thriller and a mystery.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. More reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com and click on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Dennis Schwartz
GIFT, THE (director: Sam Raimi; screenwriters: Billy Bob Thornton/Tom Epperson;
cinematographer: Jamie Anderson; editors: Bob Murawski/Arthur Coburn; cast: Cate
Blanchett (Annie Wilson), Giovanni Ribisi (Buddy Cole), Keanu Reeves (Donnie
Barksdale), Katie Holmes (Jessica King), Greg Kinnear (Wayne Collins), Hilary
Swank (Valerie Barksdale),Chelchie Ross (Kenneth King), Kim Dickens (Linda),
Gary Cole (David Duncan), Rosemary Harris (Annie's Granny), J. K. Simmons
(Sheriff Pearl Johnson), Michael Jeter (Defense Attorney); Runtime: 112; A
Paramount Classics release; 2000) 
The Gift is a supernatural thriller whose motto is: 'always follow your
instincts.' I listened as the psychic said that was how she was taught to
believe what she sees by her kindly grandmother and by taking that advice I was
able to instantly guess who the murderer was, while the film's psychic had
lapses of memory and forgot from time to time that handy motto. Unfortunately
because of that glitch in the story and the film's gapping holes in logic, I
wasn't absorbed by this moody and atmospheric thriller as much as I should have
been. When you see how the film will be resolved before the main character does
and that person is playing a psychic, then there is something amiss about the
story. The suspense always felt tacked on to all the psychic visions that
dramatically kept the pot boiling. This ploy always felt contrived and the film
never quite felt real. 
It takes place in a nasty Southern small-town (it was filmed in Savannah, Ga.);
and, it involves a saintly widow, supporting three small boys because her
husband got killed in a factory explosion accident last year, who gets involved
in a murder mystery. Cate Blanchett gives a haunting performance as the psychic
Annie Wilson, someone who is both vulnerable and strong in character. The film
opens as she is shown reading her special cards to her clients and helping the
troubled in her community by offering them sound advice. Her girlfriend Linda
(Dickens) wants to know what kind of man is in her future; Valerie Barksdale
(Swank) is an abused woman who is afraid to confront her redneck husband Donnie
(Reeves) about the regular beatings he administers and is advised by Annie to
leave him; and, in town she runs into a mentally disturbed and violent young
garage mechanic, with a death wish, Buddy Cole (Ribisi), who is all bottled up
about his relationship with his father and she tries to get him to face those
bitter childhood memories. Ribisi's portrayal was hammy and particularly
uninteresting. 
The first half of the film builds up a case against what a wretched monster this
Donnie is, how he calls Annie a satanic witch and threatens her and the children
if she meddles in his marriage; he even violates her household by sneaking in to
use her cards to spell out satan on her bed. The mystery event occurs when an
attractive but promiscuous young woman from a prominent family, Jessica King
(Holmes), who is engaged to the clean-cut school principal, Wayne Collins
(Kinnear), turns up missing. Sheriff Johnson (Simmons) is not a believer in
psychics, nevertheless is forced to call on Annie at Mr. King's insistence.
Annie dreams that Jessica is dead in a pond, and when the sheriff's men dredge
Donnie's pond they find her body there and arrest him. 
When the case goes to trial Annie is surprised at who the district attorney
(Cole) is, because he was seen the night before the murder by her making love to
Jessica in the ladies' room of the rich social club she was visiting with her
friend Linda. The trial was poorly filmed and made a mockery of how a trial
should be run. Everything about it seemed unbelievable, as there was one scene
where Annie is ridiculously attacked by the defense lawyer (Jeter) on a personal
basis while the district attorney doesn't even object. 
This whodunit had many contrivances and they all sapped strength from the film's
already rather weak mystery story. The two things that kept this film watchable
were the suspenseful visuals of Annie's dark visions -- eerily recalling things
from the dead world, and Cate's gifted performance, that brought more to the
story than the script by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson could provide. This
is a return for Mr. Raimi ("The Evil Dead") to his B-film origins, but this time
with a Hollywood budget. As a Hollywood film it fails to deliver enough punch to
be a box-office hit, but as a B-film it seems easier to overlook the film's lack
of punch to its story and accept its ordinary Gothic story as possibly having
more to it than presented. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Norm Schrager
Maybe Paramount held back on giving The Gift a wide release during the
Christmas season to avoid too many reviewers saying, "This Gift is a
holiday lump of coal..." or something like that.  If so, good call.
The latest from Sam Raimi (For Love of the Game) is a muddled thriller,
filled with tired clichés and some of the worst casting in years. 
Raimi, along with screenwriters Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, try
so hard to create a "serious" psychic chiller that the film is
practically drained of any excitement.
The person "seeing dead people" in this one is Annie Wilson (Cate
Blanchett), a widowed mother of three in a small Southern town (where
else would Thornton set a story?).  She's a well-known seer, doling out
"fortune teller" information to the locals for a fee, and sometimes
giving them just good 'ol advice.
Exploiting every white trash stereotype, the filmmakers give Annie a
clientele that makes The Jerry Springer Show look like My Three Sons. 
Oscar winner Hilary Swank gets her ass beaten regularly by a hateful,
lunatic husband (Keanu Reeves!), and the local auto mechanic (Giovanni
Ribisi) looks for help within his abusive, bipolar world.  At times, the
depression is so one-dimensional and cartoonish, it's tough not to laugh
a little.
When a local rich girl (Katie Holmes) goes missing before her wedding,
Annie is asked to tell what she knows, whether it be from armchair
gossip or actual visions.  Of course, law enforcement is typically
skeptical, and Raimi and writers have thrown in enough thin characters
to make you think anyone could be responsible for the girl's
disappearance.
While that may be a good strategy to keep an audience guessing, the
dialogue and tension are so woefully thin that we don't give a damn in
the long run anyway.  Where are the Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson
that wrote the excellent One False Move?  This has none of that film's
creativity or development.
And although Raimi does provide some fuller, more introspective moments,
a la A Simple Plan, they come too little, too late.  The only real
reason to dig in to The Gift are Blanchett and Ribisi: She practically
disappears into her caring character, struggling with a slew of problems
both internal and external, and Ribisi's turn as Buddy Cole is a
guts-on-the-line performance of raw pain and terror.
Other than that, Reeves, Holmes, Greg Kinnear, and Gary Cole are either
misplaced, wasted, or overacting.  And do we really need to see Michael
Jeter as a smarmy defense attorney?!  Bad casting, a thin script, and a
scary movie with no fright: Another unfortunate slip in the curious
career of Sam Raimi.
Director: Sam Raimi 
Producers: James Jacks, Tom Rosenberg, Gary Lucchesi
Writers: Billy Bob Thornton, Tom Epperson
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Katie Holmes, Keanu Reeves, Giovanni Ribisi,
Greg Kinnear, Hilary Swank, Michael Jeter, J.K. Simmons, Gary Cole
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Classics/Lakeshore Entertainment
 Director: Sam Raimi
 Writer:  Billy Bob Thornton & Tom Epperson
 Cast: Cate Blanchett, Danny Elfman, Katie Holmes, Michael
Jeter, Greg Kinnear, Keanu Reeves, Giovanni Ribisi, Hilary
Swank
   Perhaps it's no fair to compare Dominik Moll's excellent
Hitchcockian thriller "With a Friend Like Harry" to Sam
Raimi's "The Gift."  Moll does not include a psychic in his
more earthy tale of an unfortuitous meeting between an
ordinary guy who teaches French to Japanese students in
Paris and an old school chum he meets in a gas station rest
room.  While Raimi's story features at least two psychos
who feel threatened by a psychic, Moll does better by
focusing on just one.  "With a Friend Like Harry" gains
suspense by avoiding special effects: more is less in that
murder mystery.  "The Gift" is the sort of movie that makes
one think of novels that begin "It Was a Dark and Stormy
Night."  Unoriginal?  That would be the way to describe
Raimi's by-the-numbers tingler which for all its supernatural
elements lacks the exceptional performances he got out of
his actors in "A Simple Plan"--his previous work that like "The
Gift," deals with an event that snowballs into a tsunami of
tension.  To Raimi's credit this time around, though, he keeps
the occultism on a short leash, tossing in just a single cheap
bathtub shot that could have come out of Robert Zemeckis's
"What Lies Beneath."  
   This southern Gothic yarn, filmed in Savannah, Georgia, is
set in the backwoods of that state, a place whose residents
may no longer leave their doors unlocked by whose wooden
houses bear fragile doors and windows easily accessible to
people with evil thoughts on their mind.  The principal
character, Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett), is a psychic who
feels guilty that she was unable to foresee and thereby
prevent her husband's death a year earlier in an explosion. 
With three kids a small social security check, she makes a
modest living with her deck of cards, acting more as the
town's would-be social worker than anything resembling a
gypsy fortune teller.  But her gift is not without drawbacks. 
While she counsels the physically absued Valerie Barksdale
(Hilary Swank) to leave her redneck husband Donnie (Keanu
Reeves), she and her three young children are threatened by
the violent knave.  When the beaten and bloodied body of the
whorish Jessica King (Katie Holmes) turns up in a pond on
Donnie's property, Donnie becomes the chief suspect.  But
while Annie might let sleeping dogs lie, delighted that this
creep is behind bars where he can beat up no more women,
her moral sense tells her that he may not be the murderer.
   As "The Gift" turns into a whodunnit, we in the audience
place our bets on the perp's identity.  Could that be Jessica's
fiance, the handsome but considerably older school principal
Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear)?  Or perhaps the convicted
man's wife, who suspects Jessica of having an affair with her
husband?  Maybe the evildoer is the off-the-wall nut-case
garage mechanic, Buddy Cole (Giovanina Ribisi), whose soul
is tainted with a fierce anger toward his father and whose
periodic tantrums show him physically and psychologically
capable of irrational mayhem.
   Cate Blanchett does show her breadth, her ability to play
nothing short of Queen Elizabeth in one year and a poor,
working girl in the boonies now.  But Raimi has given
Giovannia Ribisi, whose energy was nicely channeled in his
performance as a stockbroker in the excellent "Boiler Room,"
an off-the-wall demeanor that simply does not ring true. 
Raimi seems unsure whether to make Billy Bob Thornton and
Tom Epperson's script into something of the "Exorcist" genre
or a typical whodunnit mystery, but in either case "The Gift,"
scheduled for a holiday release, is of the sort that has stuffed
many a Christmas stocking for decades.
Rated R.  Running time: 115 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE GIFT, directed by Sam Raimi (A SIMPLE PLAN) and written by Billy Bob 
Thornton (Oscar winner for SLING BLADE) and Tom Epperson (ONE FALSE 
MOVE), is an entertaining psychological thriller and murder mystery.  
Even if the formulaic plot suffers from a certain amount of 
predictability, the movie has a superb cast who keep the tension up 
throughout.
Academy Award-nominee Cate Blanchett (ELIZABETH) delivers an empathetic 
performance as Annie Wilson, the only psychic reader, a.k.a. fortune 
teller, in a poor, small town.  She also serves as a one-person support 
group for all of the troubled people in town.  One of these is Valerie 
Barksdale (Hilary Swank, Best Actress winner for BOYS DON'T CRY), who is 
being abused by her husband Donnie (Keanu Reeves).  Giovanni Ribisi, who 
is best when playing nut cases, plays Buddy Cole, an auto mechanic full 
of hidden demons and another wounded soul being nurtured by Annie.  
Annie is a fairly recent widow with 3 young boys to raise on her own.  
Donnie, who thinks Annie is a witch, threatens her and her boys.  In a 
side story, Greg Kinnear plays the boys' principal, Wayne Collins, who 
is currently engaged to Jessica King (Katie Holmes), a frisky young 
woman with wandering eyes.
Into this soap opera of a story come a murder and a mystery.  Of course, 
Annie is asked to help out, and she reluctantly agrees.  The script 
carefully gives Annie less than laser sharp powers.  Her visions cannot 
be summoned at will.  When she does sense something, she experiences it 
personally.  As she trembles with palpable fear, she witnesses 
frightening events but frequently sees only small parts of a much larger 
episode.  Putting these mental puzzle pieces together in her head, she 
eventually draws certain conclusions.  Collecting the entire picture, 
however, is frequently difficult or impossible for her.
Blanchett's acting alone is enough to recommend the movie.  Annie is 
saddened by all of the woes she has heard and frightened by the events 
swirling around her.  Her power itself appears to be more burden than 
blessing.  Trembling, she keeps awaking from nightmare visions that are 
trying to reveal things to her so that she can help others.  She is a 
sensitive psychic who doesn't like to tell people the bad news that she 
sees coming.
Bringing up the natural background sounds sometimes and using 
melancholic instrumental country music at others, Raimi gives his movie 
a realism that transcends the story's more sensational elements.  I find 
that any movie, as this one does, that features a trial is usually a 
cinematic gift.  I'd trade a dozen teen comedies for one exceptional 
trial. I rate the trial in THE GIFT worth only two or three teen 
comedies. Still, a trial is a trial, and I'm happy to be able to enjoy 
it.
THE GIFT runs 1:50.  It is rated R for violence, language, sexuality and 
nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
FilmFan16@aol.com
Directed by Sam Raimi.
Cast: Cate Blanchett, Greg Kinnear, Giovanni Ribisi, Katie Holmes, Hilary 
Swank, Keanu Reeves, Kim Dickens, Gary Cole, Michael Jeter, J.K. Simmons, 
Rosemary Harris, Chelcie Ross, John Beasley, Danny Elfman.
2000 - 111 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 20, 2001.
Gothic murder-mystery yarns are not a new conceit. In fact, they've been 
around in books and on film for many, many years. Without the proper 
handling, they come off as old-fashioned, bland, and outdated. "The Gift," 
directed by Sam Raimi, is a tried-and-true effort that surprises very little, 
and includes everything from a wide array of suspects and red herrings, to 
mansions in the deep south with moss trees out front, to the eventual 
discovery of a waterlogged corpse found in a nearby pond. It's fairly obvious 
who the killer is; in fact, I predicted who it would be before the movie 
began and was correct in my preliminary suspicions. The film ultimately 
shouldn't work, but it does, thanks to a sparkling cast that fills each 
character with so many memorable nuances, the most fun to be had is in simply 
watching the people interact with each other. 
Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett) is a recently widowed mother of three sons who 
makes her living giving psychic readings to the residents of her backwater 
southern hometown. Some of her mainstay clients include Valerie Barksdale 
(Hilary Swank), who is severely abused by her husband Donnie (Keanu Reeves), 
and Buddy Cole (Giovanni Ribisi), an unstable mechanic who is confused by the 
nightmares he's been having about a mysterious blue diamond that is somehow 
linked to his father. For Annie, she does not give the readings merely for 
money, but uses it as a way of seeking solace in finding the good in 
everyone's future. Her late grandmother (Rosemary Harris) told her as a child 
that it was a gift she was given, and she should always remember that.
When Annie's eldest son is involved in a fight at school, she meets the 
nice-guy school principal, Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear), whom she finds 
herself attracted to. But Wayne is engaged to the wealthy Jessica King (Katie 
Holmes), whom Annie immediately gets a negative vibe about. At a party with 
her best friend Linda (Kim Dickens), Annie stumbles upon Jessica in a 
compromising position with lawyer David Duncan (Gary Cole). Soon after, 
Jessica has disappeared, leaving everyone in a frenzy over what could have 
possibly happened to her, and Annie starts to have nightmares and apparitions 
linking Jessica with the vicious redneck Donnie Barksdale, and the pond 
behind his home.
"The Gift" may be cliched on a sheer storytelling level, but the performances 
and tight direction from Raimi (who has redeemed himself for his embarrassing 
last film, 1999's "For Love of the Game") lift the picture up several 
notches. Slowly enveloping the viewer into the many intriguing characters and 
their individual plights, the disappearance of Jessica at the 30-minute mark 
divulges the movie's true intentions and transforms the proceedings into a 
taut, at times frightening, horror-mystery.
At the center of the film is the exceptional Cate Blanchett (1999's "The 
Talented Mr. Ripley"), who turns Annie Wilson from what could have been 
little more than a run-of-the-mill protagonist into a very exact, 
down-to-earth, realistic person with valid troubles and a caring attitude 
towards those around her. Blanchett takes the unextraordinary material and 
runs with it, giving the entire film a truly classy aura that it otherwise 
might not have had. We follow her at every turn because she is so 
mesmerizing, both as a character and an actress.
Blanchett isn't the only bright performer, as she is ably supported by one of 
the best casts of the year. In her first role following her Oscar win for 
1999's "Boys Don't Cry," Hilary Swank is excellent as the confused Valerie, 
who seeks guidance from Annie, but is too scared to take her biggest advice 
of all: to leave the grossly abusive Donnie. As Donnie, Keanu Reeves (2000's 
"The Watcher") makes an utterly convincing backwoods meanie, so much so that 
it is difficult to believe he is an actor at all. For the often-criticized 
Reeves, whose acting abilities have never been the best, this is the biggest 
compliment he could possibly get, and it is also one of the better 
performances he has given. Giovanni Ribisi (2000's "The Boiler Room") is 
heartbreaking as a mentally slow young man who sees Annie as his only friend, 
and wants her to do nothing but help him understand why he is being plagued 
by bad dreams about his dad. In the small, but pivotal role of the sleazy 
Jessica King, Katie Holmes (2000's "Wonder Boys") has turned in yet another 
stunning supporting turn. Her promiscuous role of Jessica is one she has 
never played before, and she is radiant in her few scenes. Finally, Kim 
Dickens (2000's "Hollow Man") makes her usual strong impression as Annie's 
spicy best friend, Linda.
The other notable aspect of "The Gift" is its moody atmosphere that lays such 
a thickly foreboding air over every scene it's almost suffocating. Thanks to 
cleverly construed editing by Arthur Coburn and Bob Murawski, and the 
successful use of different eerie sounds effects and a very good music score 
by Christopher Young, the movie not only achieves a scary undercurrent, but 
one that is filled with dread. Helped along by a strong screenplay by Billy 
Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, which makes the most of its setting and 
delightful cast, "The Gift" is that rarest of thrillers that actually 
thrills, and offers up a fair share of chills, too. It may not be 
groundbreakingly original, but it sure is an entertaining ride for the 
duration of its running time.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Ross Anthony
This ESP thriller starts off sluggishly, but opens up when Giovani 
Ribisi brings a crowbar to it at the end of the first third. Even before 
that, Ribisi's performances stand out against the bland acting and first 
act scripting of this "B" film. Greg Kinnear, though normally very good, 
is also bland. Hilary Swank gives her rather weak character some strong 
depth, but lead Cate Blanchett doesn't start to rock and roll until 
mid-film. 
Annie Wilson (Blanchett) has "the gift" of seeing things (as in dreams) 
that will happen or have happened someplace else. But for some reason, 
she still needs cards ... and a candle seems to help too. Can she 
provide direction when one sexy citizen of this small town shows up 
missing? Her deceased (we can assume) grandmother pays her a visit to 
remind her to follow her instinct. Annie turns away, and then back (and 
then ... what the?) gram is gone. It's the first of many spooky movie 
cliches. The flooded bathtub, dripping sink faucet, wind-squelched 
candles, googly-eyed corpse, old tire dragged from the pond, fingers 
reaching ever closer to the weapon scenes all occur later as the film 
unfolds. Unfortunately, barely fifty percent of the chilling suspense is 
actually chilling. 
But Ribisi is great. And you know what? Both lawyers are fantastic, and 
I just love the sheriff. The dialogue, especially in the "courtroom 
drama," (middle third of the film) is crisp and meaty ... some very 
sweet scenes there. 
Too bad Annie's motivations are kind of screwy. How and when she decides 
and doesn't decide to go to the police doesn't quite compute for a woman 
who has a family to consider. But the picture climaxes well enough and 
did I mention Ribisi is fantastic? 
The Gift. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Cate Blanchett, Giovanni Ribisi, Keanu Reeves, Greg Kinnear, 
Hilary Swank, Katie Holmes, Michael Jeter, Kim Dickens, Cary Cole, J.K. 
Simmon, Chelcie Ross. 
*  Directed by Sam Raimi. 
*  Written by Billy Bob Thornton, Tom Efferson. 
*  Produced by James Jacks, Tom Rosenberg, Gary Lucchesi at 
Alphaville/Lakeshore/Paramount Classics. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A card-reading psychic woman in a small redneck town gets caught up in the
middle of a murder mystery case in which her psychic readings reveal much
about the details of said killing.
CRITIQUE:
With all of the Internet hype regarding the unveiling of actress Katie
Holmes' well...unveiling, you'd have to wonder what exactly the title "gift"
was referring to (either way, a big thank you goes out to director Sam
Raimi!). Incidentally, for my separate review of Katie Holmes' visual
presentation, scroll down below. But childishness aside, let's talk about
the movie at hand. This is an okay movie with a so-so story, fun characters
and a really great cast which allow it to step up a notch. If you were here
in my room right now, you would see me standing up and applauding Keanu
Reeves for his performance in particular. Good God, man...whendja turn into
an actor, dude?! Seriously though, I will pretend for a second that Keanu
actually took a whiff of my review of him in THE WATCHER, in which I
suggested that he change his look when he's going to play a different
character than we're used to, so that the audience won't see "Keanu the
movie star" as much as "Keanu the actor". It definitely worked in this movie
so a special kudo goes out to him. Another major kudo is presented to the
infallible Cate Blanchett, who holds much of this slow-paced movie together,
and Giovanni Ribisi for convincing us that he's nuts...once again (he is
acting, right?).
And the reason that I am talking mostly about the actors in this review is
because the story is one that didn't really do much for me. Yes, the mystery
of the killer was a good one, with pretty much everyone in town checked off
as a suspect at one point or another, but as the end approached, I think it
became more than obvious to anyone who was paying attention, who the culprit
would be. I also didn't get much sense of originality from the story as a
whole. A couple of the psychic's "dream" sequences were scary and boo-like,
but other than that, the film offered very little in scares or thrills (if
that's what you're expecting). In fact, it's actually a difficult movie to
rate because I didn't hate it by any stretch of the imagination, but nothing
in it was altogether memorable either (other than Reeves' performance). Even
the director, Sam Raimi, who at one point in his career was known primarily
for his camera acrobatics, seemed to have taken a backseat on this one
(perhaps he was already prepping up for his next "little" movie called
SPIDER-MAN). Overall, the film did provide a creepy, haunting feel, some
solid performances and a semi-interesting mystery, but I can't really see
how anyone could get overly excited about this movie. A good flick that'll
probably go down easier on video and definitely not for the thrill-seekers.
Mini-Review of the "Katie Holmes scene":
The tension was mounting throughout this entire movie. When would the
"scene" appear? When would we, as a united perverted audience, be able to
partake in the twin peak wonders? Was Raimi gonna pull a veiled shot on our
ass, or were we gonna get a "clean shot" of all the action? Many questions
left unanswered. But it wasn't long before the many grumblers in the crowd,
the very same people who stood in line overnight to see this grand event,
were properly served the main course. The "money shot" had arrived and the
painful months of waiting ever since the rumor broke on the Net were finally
past. And with about fifteen minutes left in the film, and every other
teenager in the crowd moaning over the lack of Katie's "katies", suddenly
the gangly actress appeared on screen for a period of about 5-10 seconds,
breasts fully exposed to the screen, and the hearts, and pants, of many a
teen (and one adult, thank you very much). Their performances, in one word,
were...splendid!
A "mixture of early Brando and late 80s DeNiro" is probably the best way to
describe the two-some's exhibition, with a special shout-out going out to
the "left one" in particular, who obviously must've studied with either
Stella Adler or Lee Strassberg himself. Other audience members weren't as
restrained as I was, sitting with jaw in lap, smiling from ear to ear, and
some even violently crying out for more (Although we did eventually get The
Arrow to settle down). I for one was glad that I waited to see the double
twins on the big screen, and quickly sent in my deposit for the DVD, hoping
that a closer examination of said can-cans would ultimately deepen my
understanding of the material at hand. In fact, I vow to spend hours and
days inspecting it over and over again, if I have to. But it wasn't until I
was walking out of the theatre tonight, with my winter coat tied
conspicuously around my waist, that I fully realized the importance of this
one particular cinematic event. And as I came to grips with that very
thought and brushed the slumbering tear from my cheek (that was a tear,
wasn't it?), and thanked the God all-mighty, my wonder transformed into two
smaller thoughts: the first had to do with how I was going to get rid of my
woodie by the time I got home so that my girlfriend wouldn't pull a twenty
questions on me and the second was how I was ever going to...get a life and
grow up!!! Either way, the wait was over and my so-called "life" could
finally go on.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
A Simple Plan (8/10) - Red Rock West (9/10) - One False Move (8/10) -
Practical Magic (3/10) - In Dreams (5/10) - What Lies Beneath (7.5/10) - The
Sixth Sense (8/10)

Author
Susan Granger
  Written by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, this gothic
Southern mystery revolves around a single, widowed mom (Cate
Blanchett) in Brixton, Georgia, who "reads" cards, using her
genetically-inherited psychic insight to help her emotionally needy
friends and neighbors. Primary among these is a severely disturbed
garage mechanic (Giovanni Ribisi) who is tormented by childhood
memories of sexual abuse by his father and a desperate, battered wife
(Hilary Swank) whose face and body bear the marks of her husband's
unbridled temper. "You've got to get legal help," Cate counsels
her. But when Hilary's philandering husband (Keanu Reeves) calls Cate
a "Satan worshipper" and begins to terrorize her family, it's her
teenage son (Lynnsee Provence) whose emotional scars over the death of
his father burst open, causing behavior problems at school. That's
where Cate meets the principal (Greg Kinnear) and his sexy, socialite
fiance (Katie Holmes) who is curious about Cate's psychic gift. "I'm
not a fortune-teller," Cate protests. But when the spiteful,
duplicitous Katie mysteriously disappears, it's Cate's telepathic
"visions" that help the skeptical police track down the
culprit. Intuitive director Sam Raimi ("The Evil Dead," "Darkman"), a
master of spine-tingling, supernatural horror, uses surreal imagery
and disconcerting camerawork to augment the psychological terror. Cate
Blanchett delivers a subtle, nuanced performance, where guilt about
not being able to "forecast" her own husband's death lurks below the
surface. Keanu Reeves takes a real chance as a cruel, redneck type and
pulls it off creditably. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Gift" is a chilling, haunting 7.  "I see things and I sense things,"
says Cate. Problem is: I sensed whodunit far too soon.
