Title
Review for Sound and Fury (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
Introducing us to a world that few of us know exists, namely that of 
"deaf culture," Josh Aronson's documentary is aptly named SOUND AND FURY 
since members of the deaf community are surprisingly protective of their 
world and their culture.  The single biggest disappointment of the film 
is that we never learn exactly what comprises deaf culture, but we do 
discover that large numbers of deaf people are extremely protective of 
it.  This zealous cultural protection is fascinating.
The film uses the controversial cochlear implant as the focal point of 
tension between the deaf world and the hearing world.  A cochlear 
implant in the ear, if done when a child is young, is quite effective, 
allowing the child to develop hearing and speech.  But like bilingual 
education, it is controversial.  It is most effective when all of the 
subsequent education in done without the "crutch" of signing, just as 
total language immersion is more effective in teaching than a hybrid 
language approach.
Members of the deaf community, especially older ones, view it as a 
tragedy when a deaf person loses his deafness.  One of the deaf 
grandmothers says that she was happy and thanked God when her 
hearing-able daughter gave birth to a deaf son.  The suggestion that her 
grandson might get a hearing implant causes her to become extremely 
angry.  The word "abuse" is tossed around a lot.  One side views it as 
abuse not to give a deaf child the ability to hear while the other side 
views taking a deaf child out of the deaf world as abuse.
The focus of the story is a large, Long Island family.  One branch, 
Peter and Nita Artinian, who are deaf, are in sharp disagreement with 
Peter's brother Chris and his wife Mari, both of whom can hear.  Peter 
and Nita's 4-1/2-year-old deaf daughter Heather has decided that she 
wants an implant.  With a long list of sounds that she is excited about 
hearing, Heather gets her parents to look into it.  Since they feel that 
this would take Heather out of the rich deaf culture, they decide 
against it, knowing full well that, if she waits, it will be too late.
In contrast, Chris and Mari want all of the opportunities possible for 
their deaf, 1-year-old deaf son, so they decide to go through with the 
operation, even though Mari's deaf parents protest strongly.
As both families investigate the same operation and come to completely 
different conclusions, we learn a mixture of facts and folklore.  We are 
told that deaf high schools graduate students who, on average, read at a 
fourth-grade level.  When Nita defends her decision not to get the 
implant for Heather, her mother reminds Nita that she can't even read 
well enough to understand a cooking recipe.  In contrast, members of the 
deaf community raise doubts about the procedure and claim that it will 
turn the kids into robots.
The film takes an evenhanded approach to material that would be easy to 
slant.  Putting us inside the heads of both parents, we begin to feel 
the pain of making decisions that will affect their children forever.  
Of course, understanding some of their motivations doesn't mean that we 
can agree with them.  Sympathy is possible, but it is hard to condone 
Peter and Nita's actions.  Several analogies are suggested to them by 
Peter's parents.  Would they not want their children to see if what they 
shared with them was blindness rather than deafness?  What if they 
couldn't walk and they had children who did?  Would they want to break 
their legs?  Not accepting the analogies as being apropos, Peter and 
Nita bristle at the suggestions.  
Your reaction to the film may depend on your ability to hear.  Members 
of my audience who signed frequently during the movie got agitated and 
laughed at different times than I did.  The intriguing film should 
provoke strong emotions and raise excellent question regardless of the 
viewer's auditory ability.
SOUND AND FURY runs a fast 1:20.  The film has English subtitles and 
most of the characters sign.  It is not rated but would be a G.  Any 
child old enough to be interested could see it.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/066ed4fcd78e3b53882569820015c3b5?OpenDocument
        While we continue to watch the Michael Crichton take on the cochlear
implant-kitsch on E.R., some people are actually dealing with the issue
rather than racking up ratings.  One of these people is director Josh
Aronson, ex-still photographer and now-documentarian whose latest, Sound
and Fury, takes on the should-they-or-shouldn't-they issue of the use of
cochlear implantation to restore hearing.
        For some background on the subject, a cochlear implant is, in
simplistic terminology, a cure for deafness.  If implanted into a child
with hearing loss at an early age, there is no reason that the child
cannot live a "normal" life.  So, as many people who enter into the
theatre asked themselves, what is the issue?
        Well, for those who do not know deaf people, there is an entire "deaf
culture."  This culture uses American Sign Language, not lip reading, as
its official language, and takes comfort in the fact that its members
are composed entirely of the minority of the deaf.  Like many minority
cultures composed of people with disabilities, a psychological
self-defense mechanism makes the disability into an improvement.  A deaf
man might say, "Because I cannot hear, I do not have to deal with the
distractions of noise."
        This same phenomenon is also found in the mentally ill, and, although
it sounds ridiculous in the eyes of the layperson (why not fix something
that is broken?), for people who have grown up being deaf, it is an
accusation to say that deafness is wrong and that is at the heart of
Sound and Fury.
        Sound and Fury examines two Long Island families, one composed of
hearing parents who have just given birth to a deaf child, the other
(the in-laws) composed entirely of deaf people.  Both are considering
implanting their youngest child, and both have to deal with what that
means to their respective cultures.  Through countless interviews, with
doctors, with the parents, and with other deaf families, the issue is
examined objectively until each of the decisions are made, and, although
such a process might come across as long and tedious, it strikes the
viewer as an incredibly emotional ordeal that eventually tears both
families apart.
        Sound and Fury is informative, well edited, and absolutely
heartbreaking to watch, yet it does have a certain sensationalism around
it.  One wonders, watching the film, about the ethics of a filmmaker
seeking to document a family in trouble.  As the filmmaker tells of how
he received notice of the families and politely asked if he could
document their choices, you ask yourself if he knew the way the chips
were going to fall.  Still, his own ethics should not get in the way of
stating the simple truth: that Sound and Fury is probably the most
informative film on cochlear implants and on deaf culture that one could
ever hope to see.
http://www.nextwavefilms.com/sf/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Laura Clifford
Cochlear implants are bionic devices which feed sound waves to the brain's
auditory nerve.  When surgically implanted in young deaf children, the 
results can be amazing - a child deaf since birth can be speaking completely
normally within a couple of years.  Sound like a no-brainer of a medical
solution?  Director Josh Aronson's "Sound and Fury" documents the incredibly
complex arguments both for and against the device by following just one
family on Long Island, New York.
First we meet Peter Artinian, the deaf father of three deaf children.  He
states 'I'm happy being deaf.  It's very peaceful.'  Upon the birth of
each of his children he was happy to find they were 'just like me' and
his wife (their mother) Nina.
His hearing sister Mary and her husband are horrified to find that her
family's deafness has been inheritted by their son and are told about
cochlear implants.  They witness a five year old girl hearing and speaking
like a non-handicapped child two and a half years after receiving a cochlear
implant and are convinced that this is the way to go.  Peter is not only
incensed, he's very 'vocal' about it.  Then his eldest, Heather, expresses
interest in becoming a hearing child as well.  Family battle lines are
drawn for three generations.
While the advantages may be obvious, the surprise is that there are compelling
arguments made against the procedure, not the least of which is the
invasiveness of the surgery and device itself (it must be implanted within
the skull and is connected to the ear via a rather large plastic piece
plugged in behind the ear).  The nature of deaf culture is explored
as is the relationship between deaf/hearing parents and their deaf/hearing 
children.  The deaf adults even have some good comebacks when pressed on
the educational advantages of hearing.
The filmmakers use some ingenuity to showcase the argument.  We witness
the silence of deaf communication and then see a signed conversation that
is dubbed rather than subtitled to illustrate the difference between the
two worlds.  'Talking head' interviews begin with Peter Artinian and
are intercut with various family members in various groupings out in the
real world - gradually, more 'talking head' one-on-ones are added as the
arguments and their offshoots begin to take shape.  Irony is allowed to
speak for itself, such as when Heather says 'I don't want to sign, I
want to speak' - in sign.  Peter and Mary's deaf father makes some rather
arresting observations.  Things get really interesting when Peter's
wife Nina, begins to sway to the pro-implant side, even considering the
procedure for herself.
"Sound and Fury" is a provocative documentary that is sure to make its
audience consider things about deafness and handicaps in general that 
it might not otherwise.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In "Macbeth" Act V, Shakespeare says that "life...is a tale
told by an idiot, full of sound and fury signifying nothing." 
Josh Aronson's documentary, by analogy, is full of sound and
fury but signifies...literally.  "Sound and Fury," which gets its
name from the Shakespearean quote, is about the
controversy aroused by a fairly new technique known as
cochlear implants--which can enable deaf people to hear. 
For some characters in this picture, signifying, i.e. sign
language, replaces sound, while for others who want to hold
on to this form of communication and their opponents alike,
fury reigns.  Aronson's documentary, which deals not so
much with the technical aspects of cochlear implants, focuses
strongly on the emotional frenzy that this fairly new technique
has engendered and is the sort of documentary that the
"talking-heads" school of filmmakers should copy.  Avoiding
the procedure used by most documentarians, an approach
that embraces a deadly-dull series of interviews, Aronson
pumps us the drama by having his subjects actively engage
each other in what is a virtual knock-down, drag-out battle
over an issue that most of us had probably never before
considered to be controversial.
   That issue is this: imagine that you and your wife have
been deaf since birth.  You have a baby daughter who is also
born deaf and whom you support with a good job with a Wall
Street firm.  While you get along with your fellow executives
who are all hearing people, outside of work you have
socialized almost exclusively with deaf people with whom you
communicate by sign language.  You have no idea what
"music" means, you appreciate the beauty of a rainstorm
though you do not hear the pitter-patter of the drops or even
the loud claps of thunder.  Essentially you are part of--and
cherish--an entire culture separate from the hearing majority. 
You precocious daughter has picked up sign language and
seems happy enough.  
  Along comes a new technology, the cochlear implant, which
is a device implanted with invasive surgery into the hearing
canal and which can restore with reasonable accuracy your
child's ability to hear and, with the help of intensive speech
therapy, to speak normally.  Would you spring for the surgery
if you had the money and wanted only the best for your
child?
   Sounds like a no-brainer, doesn't it?  Handicapped kid
restored to the healthy world through a miraculous device? 
Not at all.  The fury of two parents in particular, Peter Artinian
and his wife Nita, will expose you to a subject that you never
would imagine to be controversial.  Peter does not want his
five-year-old daughter Heather to have the operation.  Why? 
Is it because he feels that the device implanted in the ear
with a correlative contraption hanging outside will make her
look freakish?  Is it because he fears that the operation will
be unsuccessful and could somehow damange Heather even
further?  Not at all.  Peter actually embraces his condition--
which he obviously does not consider a handicap.  He
argues, usually vociferously if that's the word we can use with
one who does not hear or speak, that he is part of a valuable
culture that he does not want his daughter to lose.  When
Peter's mother argues that her granddaughter should indeed
undergo the surgery, virtually calling her own son a child
abuser, Peter is shocked.  He had not known that his own
mother refuses to accept deafness as a feature to be
embraced rather than treated as a woeful handicap.
   Complementing the sound and fury of Peter and his mother
is the story of Peter's hearing brother, Chris, whose little boy
has been born deaf.  Chris wants his infant son to undergo
the surgery and he is supported strongly by his wife, Emily. 
Aronson opens up his film to bring in an array of people from
outside the extended family, including members of an
excellent school for the deaf in Maryland (where Peter, Nita
and Heather are going to move so that they can immerse
themselves totally into the culture of the deaf), doctors and
support personnel in the field of otolaryngology, and an
expanded community of deaf people who eschew changing
their ways.
   The documentary is awesome not only because Aronson
bypasses the usual talking-heads syndrome but because he
follows these people around and makes their regular
argumentation seem to be actually happening as though they
were not acting in front of a camera.  He even captures part
of an actual operation that took place on Chris's infant.  And
when a documentary makes a spectator want to jump out of
his seat and throw tomatoes at some of the performers, you
know that the film maker has captured the imagination of the
audience.  I sat in my seat dumbfounded and appalled at this
huge Luddite of a man who would veto this miraculous
surgery for his gifted daughter (and brainwash her into liking
her present, deaf condition) knowing that this is not the kind
of decision that the kid should make later when she is of age. 
The operation simply cannot wait that long.  Only when the
hospital can implant the device on a very young child does it
work well.  Wait until adulthood and you will have perhaps a
20% success rate, furnishing patients who will be able to hear
only muffled sound.  This guy Peter in my mind is analogous
to a Jehovah's witness who denies his infant a blood
transfusion that would save his life.  
   I can understand perfectly the view of a Chinese-American
parent who fears that his son is becoming too Americanized--
that the kid will refuse to speak or even learn Chinese, will
eschew garlic shrimp in black bean sauce in favor of a bland
McDonald cheeseburger, and will become as undisciplined as
the hoods in his local public school.  But I cannot for the life
of me fathom the concept that it's not only good to be deaf
but that given the opportunity to give your son or daughter
the power to hear, you would deny this technology to your
loved one.  When those who oppose Peter and Nita's
decision are given time to express their views, I felt like
leaping up in my seat and shouting, "Hear, Hear!"  Ultimately
the emotions that Aronson evokes in his audience are what
make this film a must-hear.
Not Rated.  Running time: 80 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Heather Artinian is a precocious little six-year old who has decided that
she wants to change her world from one of being deaf to hearing. The reason
for her decision is a controversial medical device, the cochlear implant,
which would help Heather to hear. With Heather's desire as a springboard,
the fine documentary, "Sound and Fury," explores the struggle for identity
of a deaf family in the hearing world. It also attacks the controversial
issue of turning our children into robots dependent on the kindness of
those who can hear, forsaking their soundless roots.
When one first hears of the subject matter of "Sound and Fury," a cure for
deafness in children through surgery and implant, it sounds like a
no-brainer. Of course, if a child is born deaf, the best thing, the right
thing, to do is to correct that deficiency. The cochlear implant is
installed inside the child's skull and is attached to an external connector
that, in turn, connects to a Walkman-like device that the child must carry
in order to hear. When implanted at a very young age, the device
successfully allows the child to hear and, thus, speak. The problem is, as
a child gets older in the deaf world, they become assimilated into it,
making the value of the implant to decrease, proportionately, with age.
Heather's two brothers and her parents, Peter and Nita, are all deaf. Peter
is a near-militant leader of the anti-implant deaf community on Long Island
and is stunned by his daughter's desire to enter the hearing world. Nita is
initially encouraging, but, when she finds out that implant would not work
for her - an adult mind would find it nearly impossible to assimilate the
cacophony of sounds that would invade their silent world - she joins Peter
in his adamancy against the process. They also fear that their silent
world, which revolves around American Sign Language, will grow increasingly
isolated as their children are given the chance to leave the realm of the
deaf.
So you say to yourself, "Wow, they're right to want to preserve a culture
of necessity and keep their children close." Then, docu filmmaker Josh
Aronson and his team shift gears. Peter's sister, Mary, and her husband are
blessed with the birth of twins, but one of the babies is deaf. The hearing
couple learn of the success of the cochlear implant and immediately see the
device as a savior for their child. The whole controversy over the implant
is focused on the Artinians and their nuclear family, both deaf and
hearing.
Peter's adamant anti-implant stance is argued just as strongly against by
his mother, who had to learn to adapt to the life of a deaf child and had
first hand experience of the pain and the prejudice a deaf person must face
in the hearing world. Peter wishes to preserve a world where he can freely
communicate with his family. He also sees that the independent and adaptive
world of the deaf is going to close in upon him and him and his family.
Peter is, I think, justly afraid of being left alone, deaf, in a hearing
world.
I find it amazing that a subject that, on the surface, is so cut-and-dried,
turns out to be one of the most intelligent and thought-provoking
documentaries I have ever seen. It presents both sides of the controversy
in a fair, even-handed manner that gives ample food for thought. Each
side's case is well represented in this familial microcosm of a process
that can, indeed, change the world of the deaf. Unfortunately, the implant
will leave those untreatable in a constantly contracting world that will
garner less and less understanding or sympathy from the hearing world as
time goes forth. Peter argues, too, that the process is extremely invasive
and anything but minor, but this argument has to be discounted. As medical
technology progresses, other, less invasive, devices will be developed,
making Peter's a moot point. The real issue is the isolation and loss of a
culture that has lived and survived among us hearing folk for thousands of
years.
"Sound and Fury" does exactly what a documentary is supposed to do - open
your eyes to another world unfamiliar to you. It does that and makes you do
an awful lot of thinking, too. I give it an A-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
