Title
Review for Alien (1979)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Ridley Scott
Writer: Dan O'Bannon (with story by Dan O'Bannon and Thilo Newman)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Tom Skerritt, Ian Holm, Veronica Cartwright,
Yaphet Kotto, Harry Dean Stanton, John Hurt, Bolaji Badejo, Helen Horton
Some horror films just get off on non-stop gore, cheap thrills, and,
well, bad acting.  "Alien" has none of these.  It's an atmospheric,
claustriophobic, slow-moving creep-fest, playing more like a cross
between a Hitchcock film and an Angathie Christie novel than a 50s
horror hokefest they show on "Mystery Science Theatre 3000."
"Alien" takes place almost entirely on a large mining ship returning to
earth.  It's a dark ship, filled with numerous crevices and ducts, and
seems almost inhuman.  There are seven people in hibernation for the
journey home: Dallas (Tom Skerritt), the semi-reluctant leader; Ash (Ian
Holm), the science officer who is always working for science first,
people later; Lambert (Veronica Cartwright), a frail woman; Parker
(Yaphett Kotto), a bitter technician; Brett (Harry Dean Stanton), who's
quiet and reserved; Kane (John Hurt), another officer; and, of course,
Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), stuck in middle management.
The crew is woken from hibernation to do a little job on the way home,
which requires them to journey down to the planet they're by, and do a
little reserarch.  The first forty minutes are very slow, allowing us to
just witness what is going on and get to know the characters in a
relaxing fashion.  We see some of them journey down to the planet, and
find a bunch of pods.  When one of them, Kane, gets too close to an open
pod, a little face hugger leaps out, and attaches itself to his face.
After awhile of not being able to get the hugger off, it dies, and Kane
seems fine.  Then at a frightening dinner, he begins coughing
uncontrolably, and an alien pops out of his stomach, killing him, and
escaping.  The rest of the film is a slow-moving, scary execution in
pure style as the alien hunts them down one by one, some twists come
out, and then it ends in a non-anti-climactic finale.
What's so memorable about "Alien," why it has survived the test of time,
and spurned out three sequels, is because of the way its constructed. 
Sure, it's slow moving, but that adds to the overall tension of the
film.  The alien is only seen in its fullness for a brief couple
seconds, and even then it's in the dark.  Ripley Scott has never been
one for pure nihilistic spectacle.  His "Blade Runner" is a thoughtful
futuristic film noir, filled with tension instead of excitement.  The
same applies to "Alien."  It's also not very gory, which actually works
for the better of the film.
The film was very monumental as it showed that a horror film could be
intelligent and even satirical.  The stance it takes on the government
is awesome, and utterly creepy.  Sure, it's a technqiue which is done in
all of the other sequels, but when Ripley discovers the truth, it's much
more of a shock than it was in the others.
The film is also monumental in the way of women's liberation.  Ellen
Ripley, as played by Sigourney Weaver, is a very strong woman role
model, one who is tough without becoming manly.  Weaver's an excellent
actress, one who can act seriously without becoming melodramatic.  Her
performances in the "Alien" films are an example that even women can
head up a big action pic (even if she got second bill for this).
All the acting in this is very good.  The best performances come from,
of course, Weaver; but also Tom Skerritt, who seems to not like what
he's doing on the ship; and the uber-god Ian Holm, who makes a perfect
Ash.  I suppose a little mention should go to John Hurt for being able
to act like an alien is actually popping out of his chest (and would do
again in Mel Brook's "Spaceballs").  All of them do a good job with the
film.
But, as always, the film's strength is with the director.  Each of the
"Alien" films have a different feel.  With Cameron, it was tense and
emotionally exhausting.  With Fincher, it was atmospheric.  With Jeunet,
it was, well, french and darkly comic and weird.  Director Ridley Scott
(who would go on to direct "Blade Runner" and "Thelma and Louise") goes
for creepy and leisurely.  There are only a few moments where there are
big shocks, and there are no moments of adrenalin pushing excitement,
which would be found in its first sequel, "Aliens."  Not to say that
"Alien" is without its tense moments.  The film is really an exercise in
mounting tension, starting out with none at all, then escalating to long
periods of heavy breathing, as Ripley tries to escape while afraid that
the Alien will pop out at any moment and take her life.
This is the strength of this film: the ability to make us cringe without
getting too gory on us.  In fact, there's relatively little blood in
this film, and it sometimes seems that the only thing that's cut from
this when it's on TV is the language, which is sometimes foul (it's a
mining ship, folks).  "Alien" is not just a visual tour de force, it's
an all-around tour de force.
The only problem I have with this one is it is sometimes TOO leisurely. 
I like how it takes 45 minutes to even see the first alien pod, but I
don't like sitting through it.  Sure, the film is amazing to look at,
and I like how it feels to just sit back and witness these people doing
stuff that we don't always understand - sometimes not knowing is part of
the overall brilliance - but for a second sitting, it seems even
longer.  The film really gets going when the alien has escaped from
Kane's body, even if it is predictable.  The direction holds it
together, and makes the film seem overall amazing.
"Alien" is the rare horror/sci-fi film that can still shock after years
of release.  Even when most of the stuff from this has been recycled
over and over again, and there have been three sequels, we can still go
back and have a great time by watching this film, an amazing example of
great and controlled filmmaking.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dragan Antulov
When science fiction becomes topic of discussions among
people who aren't fans or even superficial connoisseurs of
the genre, they usually have very narrow definition of what
science fiction film is or what it should be. Thanks to the
influence of people like George Lucas, Steven Spielberg or
Gene Roddenberry, science fiction is considered escapist
genre about fantastic worlds almost always better than our
own. However, in the late 1970s, after debilitating fuel
crisis, unprecedented political turmoil, and unstoppable
decline of world economy, future didn't seem bright anymore.
Filmmakers suddenly began using the media of science fiction
films to express their anxiety and scepticism towards things
to come. ALIEN, second feature film by Ridley Scott, also
joined the trend, this time by using big budget resources to
resurrect almost forgotten sub-genre of SF horror, until
then strictly in the B-movie domain.
The plot of ALIEN is set in a future that might look far,
yet in the same time share many elements with the world of
today. Interstellar flight isn't some breathtaking
scientific achievement anymore and private companies use
spaceships to bring precious ore to Earth. One of such ships
is "Nostromo", whose seven-member crew spends most of the
time hibernated. After they are awaken by ship's computer,
they realise that they are still far away from Earth.
"Nostromo" received a distress signal from an unknown planet
and the crew, led by Captain Dallas (Tom Skeritt) is ordered
to investigate. They land on the planet and small expedition
finds huge alien derelict. Inside the derelict, second
officer Kane (John Hurt) finds thousands of eggs, but one of
them explodes and alien organism gets attached for his face.
Comatose Kane is brought back to the ship, but first officer
Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) don't want to let him out of
quarantine. Her decision is overridden by science officer
Ash (Holm) who breaks security procedure in order to study
the organism.
The entire concept of ALIEN - concept that can explain its
great success as horror film - is just another story of
human beings confronted with their inherent limitations.
Technology can make human life longer or easier, yet it
can't remove human imperfection, brilliantly demonstrated in
this film both on physical and emotional level. Space, which
could create sense of wonders with its inconceivable beauty,
can in the same time be the source of horrors beyond
imagination, horrors that leave puny humans as helpless
victims, despite all their superior technology and
intelligence.
To illustrate that point, director Scott hired the talents
of a Swiss artist H.R. Giger, who had created the most
notorious monster in history of cinema. Like nobody else
before and after him, Giger succeeded in making a creature
that is completely alien from anything in human experience,
yet in the same time with shapes and forms that bring back
the worst fears from our collective subconscious. Whether it
is its a huge head, encroaching tail, clawed hand or double
set of constantly salivating mouth with sharp teeth - even
the glimpses are enough to make people anxious. Scott very
cleverly decided never to show the monster in full shot,
leaving to the viewer to draw complete picture in his mind,
most probably consumed by irrational fear.
Excellent contrast to all-powerful, invincible and
unstoppable monster are imperfect humans that reluctantly
become its enemy and prey. The screenwriter Dan O'Bannon,
who had already explored those themes in his low-budget
classic DARK STAR few years earlier, created very human and
believable characters to illustrate such flaws. They aren't
scientists or astronauts, they are simple working men more
interested in simple pay check than all the wonders of
universe, more likely to use four letter words than esoteric
scientific terms. Scene immediately after their awakening
brilliantly illustrates their disenchantment with space
technology - after spending months in hypersleep and
travelling tens of light years, the first thing they do is
to gather around table, smoke cigarettes and bicker about
low wages. Those characters are also enhanced through superb
acting by one of the strongest ensemble cast in history of
cinema. Most notable is Sigourney Weaver in her debut role,
who would prove that women can carry action movie in the
sequel; here, in the first film, she is just very capable
space officer, with strong will and more sense than anybody
else, yet also consumed by terror when she must face the
deadly foe. She managed to steal the top spot from nominally
lead actor, Tom Skeritt, who plays Captain like a man who
can establish authority without raising voice, yet in the
same time burdened by indecision and lack of courage. John
Hurt is also good, although he has the least of screen time.
Ian Holm is wonderful as antipathetic bureaucrat that values
scientific results more than human life; small hints about
his character only later reveal the even more disturbing
truth. Veronica Cartwright, originally cast to play Ripley,
is also more than impressive in a quite different role of
navigation officer Lambert; at first only bickering, her
character turns into incarnation of frailty and panic.
Finally, O'Bannon's script manages to create some kind of
social stratification even in the such little universe like
"Nostromo" - two of the characters are low paid blue-collar
types that dwell in the dark and greasy lower decks. Yaphet
Kotto is excellent as Parker, bickering giant that has a
great heart; and, finally, Harry Dean Stanton gives another
subtle performance of his quiet and dim-witted, yet very
sympathetic assistant Brett.
With strong cast and good script, ALIEN also benefited from
very good director. Ridley Scott, who was at his prime in
late 1970s and early 1980s, showed great skill in creating
very distinctive visual images. ALIEN perhaps doesn't look
as spectacular as his next  masterpiece, BLADE RUNNER, but
the thick atmosphere is here, with elaborate and extremely
detailed production and costume design. Special effects are
still impressive and very convincing, even after two decades
of science fiction movies that used superior techniques. The
disturbing feel of the movie is also enhanced by haunting
score written by veteran film composer Jerry Goldsmith, one
of his best. Scott is also good in editing, when he manages
to create some of the most shocking scenes in the history of
cinema. But, ALIEN functions wonderfully as whole, not just
like a mechanical sum of all those good elements. The film
has a relatively slow pace in the first half, when Scott
allows us to meet and study characters and claustrophobic
environment they inhabit. Then the plot thickens and second
half is a frightening thrill-ride. Unlike many less talented
horror directors of that era, Scott doesn't put emphasis on
gore (although the legendary dining scene has a plenty of
it) and tries to scare the viewers by creating haunting
atmosphere and implying terrible events instead.
The fear and anxiety that viewers share with the movie
protagonists made ALIEN one of the most successful horror
films, if not the best horror film of all times. Fact that
it created numerous imitations and spawned three sequels so
far speaks enough of its quality and importance. Yet the
best recommendation for this film is the multitude of fans
that watch this movie time and time again, re-experiencing
same, often not so pleasant emotions, yet enjoying the
rarely good work of art when they see one.

Author
Matthew K. Gold
The first third of Ridley Scott's Alien contains a brilliant reworking
of Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY. In the
opening scenes of the movie, Scott appropriates Kubrick's modernistic
set design and lighting, and finds a similar, patient sense
of rhythm and pace. Where 2001 is theoretical and abstract, however,
Ridley adds a dimension of gritty realism. He photographs a crew of
space travelers emerging from cryogenic sleep like butterflies unfolding
from their chrysalises, but when these characters come to life, the
first thing they do is gather around the breakfast table, slurp coffee,
smoke cigarettes, and argue about the wages they're receiving on the
trip. On board a commercial towing vehicle, they're like a bunch of
space-age
mechanics tooling around in a run-down jalopy. At one point early in the
film, we see the crew trying to land their vessel. Scott
shows this as a difficult, stressful task, which is unusual for the
sci-fi genre: usually directors cut from shots of a
tractor-beam-pull-in to shots of mechanics walking up to a safely landed
ship. In ALIEN, by contrast, we see the characters
sweat and grimace, and we come to know that grit is an indelible aspect
of the human spirit.
As exhilarating as the first third of this movie is--with Scott's long,
snake-like continuous shots, which mirror the motions of the aliens who
appear later in the film--the movie takes a downward turn exactly when
the alien kills its first victim. Scott replaces the deliberately slow
pace of the opening scenes with the dull rhythms of generic conventions.
Suddenly, instead of watching a great movie, we're watching a great
sci-fi/horror flick. The eccentric cast of characters, who are set up so
well at the beginning of the movie, are transformed into shallow,
murder-by-numbers victims by the end. Plot contrivances begin to build
up and annoy the viewer: why, for instance, when she has only seven
minutes to meet up with her companions, does Ripley suddenly obsess so
much about her cat? Yes, it shows that she has an execeptional
understanding of species other than her own, but it feels forced.
Earlier in the movie, she had an iron will, and was willing to sacrifice
two humans; near the end of the film, she turns unexpectedly
sentimental.
For many people, the ALIEN series is valuable because it places a woman
(Ripley/Sigourney Weaver) in the role of the action
hero. Weaver does a great job, and the battle-of-the-sexes scenes at the
beginning of the movie have an extremely realistic feel.
However, near the end of the film, Scott's camera resorts to the
familiar male gaze as it watches Weaver get out of her uniform.
Although this scene is undeniably sexy, it's also completely
gratuitous--I'm simply not convinced by explanations such as "her
nakedness is symbolic--she has to fight her last battle with the alien
when she is at her most vulnerable." After all, she gets out
of one uniform in order to get into another. It feels like a step
backward to me.
If I could split a movie in two, I'd take the first third of ALIEN and
put it in the shrine, and take the last two-thirds and give it a
3.5. Overall, it's a fine film, but in the end it doesn't live up to its
own promise.
     Directed by Ridley Scott. Cinematography by Derek Vanlint.
Production design by Roger Christian, Leslie Dilley, Anton
     Furst, and Michael Seymour. Written by Dan O'Bannon and Thilo
Newman.
     Starring Sigourney Weaver, Tom Skerrit, Veronica Cartwright, Harry
Dean Stanton, John Hurt, Ian Holm, Yaphet
     Kotto, Bolaji Badejo, and Helen Horton.

Author
Chad Polenz
1979, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 57 minutes]
starring: Sigourney Weaver (Ripley), Tom Skerrit (Dallas), Yaphet Kotto
(Parker) Ian Holm (Ash); written by Dan O'Bannon, Ronald Shusett; produced by
Gordon Carroll, David Giler, Walter Hill; directed by Ridley Scott.
>From the title alone, "Alien" doesn't sound too appealing because it's so
generic and boring. It's the epitome of a sci-fi title, and not surprisingly,
this is the epitome of a sci-fi movie. It takes place in the distant future
and in outer space, there's lots of advanced technology and slimy aliens, and
it tries to use both intelligent reasoning and barbaric violence to solve
problems - guess which method dominates?
The film opens in a dark, dismal manner as it establishes its setting of a
giant spaceship on its way back to Earth. Where it's coming from and what its
crew's mission is we never really find out, which is the film's first major
flaw. The first half hour is a tedious exercise in mood - all we get is
sci-fi jargon that is nearly impossible to comprehend as nothing said nor
done seems to lead to anything. However, I admired the bleak art direction -
it is full of intricate detail and is just as Gothic as Medieval cathedrals.
This helps to create a chilling mood, but is ultimately unable to save the
film from its screenplay.
We quickly meet our characters, but we're not given many clues as to who
these people are or what their purpose is. They all have radically different
personalities, and almost none of them seem like they should be on a such a
high-tech, important ship. 
First there's Tom Skerrit as Dallas, the stern leader who likes to bark
orders. Then there's Sigourney Weaver as Ripley, a strong-willed officer who
doesn't think the crew follows procedure correctly. Two other generic
characters include Yaphet Kotto as Parker, who tends to be exploited since
he's the only black character, and Ian Holm as Ash, the obsessed scientist
who values research over human life. The rest of the crew consists of another
scientist, a frail woman who worries and screams a lot, and another guy who
doesn't do much of anything.
The crew has been awoken from "hibernation" (the same technique used in
"2001") to investigate a signal coming from a nearby planet. Of course they
check it out and end up coming back on board the ship with an alien larvae
attached to one of the crew members. Ripley had warned them this could
happen, and since she's the main character who's never wrong, it creates a
somewhat suspenseful atmosphere due to the fear of the unknown. The problem
is, it takes almost 45 minutes for the film to raise this kind of interest.
And just as the film becomes thrilling and intriguing, it essentially turns
into a horror flick as an alien creature runs amok throughout the ship. One
by one the characters are killed off in the most predictable of ways. It's a
dark ship with lots of hiding places and no one is smart enough to hunt the
alien with a partner?
There is a fair attempt to balance the mindless cat-and-mouse game with a
subplot when we learn one of the crew is actually a robot and it would
willingly sacrifice the others to study the alien. There's some dialogue
like, "How do we kill it?"/ "You can't, it's a perfect organism." For such a
superior being, this alien never shows signs of intelligence. Its size and
composition certainly isn't any kind of advantage. And why must it hiss, drip
slime, and eat people?
I would say the film goes downhill from the mid-point on, but it never
really goes uphill enough to come down. Everything stays on the same level,
which isn't terribly low, but never gets very high. It does a satisfactory
job in terms of general storytelling, but falls short with its specific
attempts at characterization, suspense, and shock (the last act proves this).
"Alien" is rich with atmosphere in all respects, but takes the easy way out
by becoming another thriller. What's most disappointing is the fact it never
really had to.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Alien (1979)
Rated R for violence, language, and partial nudity.
----------  Out of 4 stars: ***1/2 (3 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Tom Skerrit, Sigourney Weaver, Ian Holm, John Hurt, Harry Dean Stanton, Veronica Cartwright, Yaphatt
Koto
ALIEN redefined the science fiction genre like no other.  Other films invented the sci-fi genre, but ALIEN
gave it the horror twist it has nowadays.  ALIEN opened in 1979, the year I was born, and so I never saw it in
the theaters.  In fact, I had never seen it until a couple years ago.  I had to rent the movie again for two
reasons: one, to see if my opinion changed of the film as it did with other films, and two, to refresh my
memory.  And there lies its main problem.  While it did a lot for the sci-fi genre, it isn't as memorable as
the two sequels.  That isn't saying that it's bad, because I feel it's better than ALIEN 3.  However, the film
now seems obsolete, with a hysterical portrayal of an advanced computer (nowadays, a home PC can do more than
that).  
I realize that it was made in 1979, and I can't dock it for these
reasons, but the reason I mark it down is because of the pacing.  The
pacing is off in the first hour of the movie, usually dragging on with
no suspense or action.  This is the same reason I am not a big fan of
Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.  However, once it picks up
speed, ALIEN hardly ever stops.  The suspense builds and builds, and
finally ends with a satisfying, if a little dull, conclusion.  The
film is predictable, but not to the point of ridiculousness.  However,
this doesn't extinguish any suspense, because we may know the alien is
in the room, but we don't know where it is or when it will attack.
This impending doom is something lacking in most modern day suspense
films.
ALIEN begins by explaining to us that there are seven people aboard a
massive ship called the Nostromo.  These seven people (and a cat) are
in hypersleep, heading towards Earth.  However, the computer starts
processing, and wakes everyone up from their sleep.  They find out
they still have quite a ways to go to Earth, but realize there is a
signal coming from a nearby planet, which must be investigated.  After
landing on the planet, three members of the crew go out to look for
the source of the signal.  Among them is Kane (John Hurt) who comes
across a strange blue mist, and underneath it are big, slimy
egg-shaped masses.  In reality, they are eggs, and one hatches in
front of Kane.  The alien inside jumps out and grabs onto Kane's suit.
Taking him back onto the ship, the crew study the lifeform.  Unable to
pull it off, they try to cut it off, only to find acid for blood which
threatens to eat through the ship's hull.
After a while, the alien falls off dead, and Kane wakes up.  The most
memorable and shocking moment occurs around this time, and even
explaining it couldn't lessen the impact it has.  If you haven't seen
it, you more than likely have heard about it, or seen it spoofed in
countless numbers of films.  I have already spoiled this scene in my
other reviews of other ALIEN films, so no need to leave it out here.
Sitting around the table, the crew eats dinner.  Suddenly, Kane starts
coughing and choking.  He breaks out in convulsions, and finally blood
spurts from his stomach.  Then a small alien breaks out, spraying
blood everywhere.  The alien then runs away, leaving the crew shocked
and bewildered.  This scene may have been spoofed several times, but
the impact is still quite shocking.  The way the movie leads up to the
scene is very slow and gradual, and from here on, the movie turns into
a very suspenseful thriller.
The final hour of ALIEN is pretty much a cat-and-mouse game with
deadly stakes.  ALIEN's chase sequence is quite intense, with one
truly frightening moment (it made me jump without playing any loud
musical chords!).  One by one, the crew members are picked off, until
finally only Ripley is left to fend for herself.  Well, the cat is
there too.  ALIEN likes to remind us of how effective movies of this
genre can be when done correctly.  Horror films have become a
disrespected genre, and ALIEN makes us wonder why.  With a heroine we
immediately care for, ALIEN makes us clench our seats in fearing the
inevitable.  We know how the movie will end up, and we know who is
going to be killed.  But Ridley Scott's direction creates a lot of
suspense from the dark sets and creepy mood.  With ALIEN, Scott has
produced a genre which hopefully will be around for a long time.
Sigourney Weaver makes her starring film debut with this motion
picture, and it launched a very successful career for her.  She has
starred in three sequels of ALIEN, as well as wonderful performances
in COPYCAT, DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, or the GHOSTBUSTER duo.  Watching
Weaver, I began to realize that despite her well-endowed list of
films, she hasn't become a big name with your average filmgoer.  This
is quite disappointing, because Weaver is one of the most believable
actresses available.  With her strong stature, she is capable of
playing many different roles believably.  Unfortunately, she isn't
given as many roles as she should get (in fact, if you think about it,
her roles usually profit millions more than Demi Moore, yet Moore is
still around and active).  Weaver deserves much more, and I think an
Academy Award is deserved (she's been snubbed three times; twice in
the same year).
As for the other performers, all are good, but are overshadowed by
Weaver.  Tom Skeritt is the strongest male figure, giving a nice,
low-key performance.  Skeritt is a very reliable actor, who normally
plays strong male characters.  Veronica Cartwright (originally pinned
for the role of Ripley) gives an okay performance, though I felt her
character was too stupid to live (and so, she is killed).  I have
never met a single person in my life who would actually stand in one
place, staring at an alien, while it approaches and kills them.  Ian
Holm gives a very nice performance as Ash, a character with something
to hide.  John Hurt gives a very good performance in his small role.
Yaphett Koto is strong as Parker, and Harry Dean Stanton is very good
as Lambert.  Acting like this is hardly ever in horror/sci-fi films
anymore.
ALIEN is rated R for violence and language, along with some partial
nudity.  ALIEN is a very effective and very scary motion picture,
which spawned a very successful franchise and is probably one of the
most famous series created.  INDIANA JONES and BACK TO THE FUTURE are
entertaining, but as a long-term series, ALIEN beats them out.  And
with the recent entry in the ALIEN series, these last three are likely
to gain popularity once again.  Ridley Scott has created a very
memorable and moody film, with technical details good enough to match
those today (sort of).
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: THE trend-setter for crossbreeds of horror and SF; still retains
all of its original power and vision. Indispensible.
ALIEN is a "haunted house movie in space" the way CASABLANCA was "a WWII
movie about a cabaret in Morocco". Categorizing it doesn't come close to
describing its power and unrelentingly near-sadistic psychic pressure. It is
easily the best movie of its kind, and has yet to be surpassed in its
capacity for creating giant, silent spaces of horror in viewer's minds.
The plot is direct and unadorned. A group of space pilots who're on the way
home -- "truckers in space" was the way the press kit described them -- get
pulled out of suspended animation because of a distress beacon. The company
they work for stipulates that they have to respond to any such call "on
penalty of total forfeiture of shares", as one of the crew members icily
explains it. They're not scientists or adventurers; they're just a gang of
ordinary beer-drinking Joes who wanna go home.
The signal turns out to be emanating from a derelict craft on a lifeless
planet. On closer inspection, they find what they believe to be the pilot --
in a shot that is by itself immortal -- and something... more correctly a
whole mess of somethings... in the cargo hold. And beyond that I will not
go, if only for the sake of the ones lucky enough to have not seen the movie
yet. See it in widescreen if you can manage it: much of the film's
remarkable Panavision photography loses a lot when cropped by almost fifty
percent for a TV screen.
Director Ridley Scott -- this was only his second feature-length film, after
THE DUELLISTS! -- keeps the movie fluid and calm for the most part. He has
eschewed using too many obvious horror-movie cliches: the false alarm, the
having-someone-jump-suddenly-into-the-frame shock, etc. When he does, he
turns them on his ear -- such as the scene with Dallas (Tom Skerritt) in the
tunnel, or the scene with Harry Dean Stanton in the bowels of the ship. Both
end with a shock, but take their time to deploy the shock properly, with
surgically-precise timing. He also keeps the acting toned way down -- no
one's reaching for effect here, except near the end when sweat and whites of
the eyes and flat-out hysteria are required. Sigourney Weaver, of course, is
most often remembered, but look also at the other actors, even in the
quietest moments.
And then there is the alien itself, which is a slithering anthology of
everything we ever imagined lived under our beds and in our closets as
scared children. H.R. Giger, the artist responsible for the movie's
cliche-shattering look, once told an interviewer that while brushing his
teeth one night on the ALIEN set, he bumped into a light bulb and sent it
swinging. This caused shadows to move, and made the alin sculpture in the
corner appear animated. He screamed.
The reason a movie like ALIEN still scares us -- REALLY scares us, not just
gives us cleverly gory barf-em-up shots -- isn't due to any one thing, but
an amalgam of elements. Films are collaborative; the best films are the
product of many great minds, not just one, and ALIEN had a truly golden
collection of people working together to bring us something that not only
entertains, not only scares, but that has defined a place in our collective
minds for many others to follow.
