Title
Review for Object of Beauty, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE OBJECT OF BEAUTY is a film written and directed by Michael
Lindsay-Hogg, starring John Malkovich and Andie MacDowell, with Joss
Ackland, Peter Reigert, Lolita Davidovich, and Rudi Davies.
      THE OBJECT OF BEAUTY brings together two actors from two of my
favorite 1989 films -- Malkovich in DANGEROUS LIAISONS, Andie MacDowell
in SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE -- in a story that seems to have been
written to showcase their delicate, aristocratic mannerisms.  If theirs
had been the only story, it would at best have resulted in a shallow
comedy of manners: two spoiled, jet-setters living off the last of their
used-up credit, united in their mutual mistrust, their mutual fear of
being broke and having to give up luxurious London hotels and the rest.
She owns a 9-inch Henry Moore sculpture worth $40,000; she won't sell
it, but she might fake its theft and take the insurance money.  But when
it turns up missing, they both think the other took it.
      What saves the characters and the movie is the radiant presence of
the hearing-impaired hotel maid played by Rudi Davies.  Her life of
poverty parallels Jake and Tina in their brocaded suite -- her struggle
to find a place for herself, her punk younger brother who wants to take
care of them someday (just as Tina is waiting for Jake to take care of
her), and the power of the Henry Moore over her life.  Davies doesn't
speak, she glows brighter than her red hair with a beauty than MacDowell
may someday achieve if she's lucky.  The same sad beauty of the Henry
Moore, the beauty of experience, of having lived, of having perceived
something behind the quotidian.
      Not that I don't admire Andie MacDowell greatly for her sly skills
as a deft, subtle comedienne.  I don't think she's quite as good here as
she was in SEX, LIES, AND VIDEOTAPE, but it's close, a talking point,
certainly.
      Malkovich's Jake reminds me of Jeremy Irons in REVERSAL OF
FORTUNE, if only less fascinating and more human.  He's funny,
despicable, and sympathetic, especially when he drops his upper-crust
moue long enough to give us a glimpse of the frightened man behind it.
      Of the other players, I give much praise to Joss Ackland, the
duplicitous hotel manager whose oleaginous will is to avoid scenes and
run his hotel "on a seamless cloud of perfection" whatever compromises
and dirty deals are required.  Peter Reigert is Tina's soon-to-be-ex,
the man who started it all by giving Tina the Henry Moore.  The little
bust is itself a kind of character, too, as it passes through many
hands, inspiring a range of emotions and serenely being itself in a
variety of environments.
     The only casting problem was that the script really had too little
for the wonderful Lolita Davidovitch to do.  Still it's always good to
see her on screen.
     Over all, THE OBJECT OF BEAUTY is a well-crafted, subtle comedy
about growth that makes humans out of us all.  Highly recommended --
even at full prices.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A well-crafted comedy with some nice
     dramatic moments and some serious things to say.  This story
     is of the theft of a valuable piece of art from a spendthrift
     American couple living in London.  The story touches a broad
     range of emotions with some of the minor characters more
     interesting than the main ones.  Rating: +2.
     It is fairly easy to make a comedy with an Eddie Murphy or a Bette
Midler mugging away on the screen and a lot of artificial gags.  With a film
like that, you know why it is enjoyable and ten minutes after it is over it
is really over.  It is much harder to make a comedy with solid, three-
dimensional characters in a situation that is not obviously comedic and just
let well-observed characters drive the story.  OBJECT OF BEAUTY is at least
nominally a comedy but it spans a broad range of emotion.  It is a good
story well-told.
     Jake and Tina (played by John Malkovitch and Andie MacDowell) are an
American wheeler-dealer and his girlfriend living together in a posh London
hotel and virtually hemorrhaging money.  The problem is that it is money
that Jake can ill-afford to waste on meals that cost over a hundred pounds.
Jake is hoping for a big return on an investment in cocoa which has been
washed out by a dock strike in Sierra Leone.  He needs money desperately and
wants to sell a valuable Henry Moore sculpture that Tina was given by her
husband Larry.  Tina prefers hiding the object d'art and claiming the
insurance.  Meanwhile the lonely deaf-mute chambermaid (delicately played by
Rudi Davis) finds that this little bronze head is the only solace for the
loneliness of her affliction.  She spirits the head away and keeps it as a
needed friend.  Since Jake and Tina had just discussed hiding the head for
the insurance, each suspects the other has done just that and is holding out
on the other.
     The story then moves between the two worlds.  One is the hotel where
Jake and Tina are finding this new strain destroying their relationship.  It
is also where Jake is finding it increasingly difficult to dodge the hotel
management on the matter of his bad credit while he is still getting them to
pursue the matter of the missing piece of art.  The other world is the
lonely one of Jenny (the chambermaid) and her delinquent brother.  Here what
has been a light comedy gives way to some serious drama including at least
two scenes of real dramatic power.
     The script by Michael Lindsey-Hogg, who also directed, seems to have
attracted a first-rate but oddly matched cast of supporting actors,
including Lolita Davidovich (from BLAZE) as Tina's best friend, veteran
British heavy Joss Ackland as the hotel manager, Bill Paterson (from COMFORT
AND JOY), and Peter Riegert (from ANIMAL HOUSE and CROSSING DELANCEY) as
Tina's real husband.  The script is subtle and rewarding in a way that the
British seem to do far better than the Americans.  This is a rewarding story
with a good balance of comedy and drama.  I rate it +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.
