Title
Review for Dances with Wolves (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Sandra J. Grossmann
     Lieutenant John Dunbar (Kevin Costner) secures a position as head
of a garrison on the remote edge of the frontier, smack in the middle of
Sioux territory.  (He got this post--and his buckskin Cisco--through an
impulsive act of suicide that was interpreted as heroism.)  The garrison
is deserted, but rather than turn back, Dunbar unloads the provisions,
begins cleaning the debris, drifts into a daily routine, and starts
keeping a journal.
     For roughly one-third of the film, the journal serves as the device
that justifies Dunbar's narrative.  We hear his written words, we see
the pictures he draws.  Through the narrative, we begin to "see" the
man.  He is quiet, he is unperturbed by isolation, he is content.  He is
unaware that his movements are watched by the neighboring Sioux; he's
also unaware that other whites have been murdered by Indians.
     In a break from the narrative pattern, we switch point of view and
sit in on a Sioux pow wow held to discuss Dunbar's invasion into their
territory.  Soon we switch point of view again, this time riding on a
children's raid.  Object: Cisco.  This vignette is a wonderful set of
scenes that does much to further character development and entertain us
at the same time.  Looking back, it's one of the most satisfying parts
of the film.  It works well because it's on a human scale and it
portrays human foibles.
     Gradually, and I mean gradually, Dunbar meets and interacts with
the Sioux.  In parallel, Dunbar befriends a lone wolf.  Those of us who
yearn for multiple levels in a film gladly recognize this wolf as
symbolic of Dunbar's developing relationship with the tribe.  And the
tribe sees Dunbar's antics with the wolf as proving that Dunbar is
"more" than a white man, since wolves are revered in Sioux culture.  (My
limited understanding is that wolves are spiritual, and honoring a man
with a name that includes "wolf" is a great honor indeed.)  Dunbar
becomes Dances with Wolves.
     A key event in the film is the buffalo hunt.  What a scene!  I'd
read earlier that the cast actually rode in a stampeding herd of 3,500
buffalo, but that didn't clue me in on the primal nature of the hunt
that shows so clearly in this scene.  The theatre I saw this in had a
THX sound system, which provides an immediacy that can't be described
easily.  Dunbar plays a pivotal role in the hunt, and the tribe adopts
him unreservedly.  (Incidentally, Costner had a spectacular fall during
this scene, yet refused to let a stuntman ride for him and even took the
stuntman's horse in order to get back in the scene.)   
     Up to this point, the film develops in a leisurely fashion,
mirroring the slow way that Dunbar becomes integrated into the tribe.
Although some critics felt the movie was slooooow, the pace seemed
appropriate and even comfortable to me.  What's lacking is much deeper
than a pacing problem.
     The idea of a white man adopted into a tribe is alluring but
insufficient material for real drama.  Another layer is required:
conflict.  Not just a battle-scene-type of conflict, but the gut-type
conflict: take a half-white, half-Indian and pull on both sides.  Make
him want both, make him see flaws in both, put him in conflict.  If you
don't have conflict, you don't have drama.  That's what's wrong with
this film.
     The whites are portrayed as such barbarians and the Sioux as such
noble humans that Dunbar never has moments of doubt.  Why should he?
Instead of Dunbar being pulled in two directions, the medicine man is
the one who has to weigh both sides and make the telling decision in the
film.  That is so very very wrong.
     Oh, the movie is beautiful and worth seeing, but it's a soft film
that ultimately falters and fades.  There are at least three ways that
this film violates good filmmaking: shifting points of view, the
central character's lack of conflict, and an ending that happens before
the characters see the results of their actions.
     To his credit, Costner stuck by his guns, getting Lakotah and
Pawnee dialects into the film with English subtitles.  It was an
important decision that worked well.  (The Sioux communities are
delighted with Costner--they've accepted him into their tribe.)  Also to
Costner's credit is the length of the movie that he insisted on, which
befits the nature of the material.  Another plus is the cinematography,
which is often breathtaking.  The acting is acceptable and occasionally
is much better than that.  
     It's a good Western, in summary, but it's not a great or important
film.  Go see it in a good theatre with a good sound system so you can
enjoy the things it does well.  Its flaws will be too apparent, and the
grandeur lost, if you wait to see it on a VCR.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     I'm not a Western fan at all, but when I first saw the trailer for
DANCES WITh WOLVES last fall, I knew I'd go see it.  The photography in
the movie is absolutely gorgeous.  Kevin Coster and the team that
photographed the movie did a magnificent job.
     The story is very simple on the surface.  A Union soldier asks to
be posted to the frontier after he accidentally becomes a hero after
being wounded in a battle.  Dunbar (Costner) wants to see the frontier
before it becomes shopping malls, and I can't say I blame him. (:-))  He
wants to see buffaloes.  His post turns out to be a deserted sod hut on
the prairie.  He's alone, and while he wonders why his relief never
shows up, he enjoys his solitude.
     Eventually, the local Indians find him, and they learn to trust one
another.  Communication between them is quite difficult, but it is made
a little easier when a white woman who has lived with the Indians since
her childhood agrees to "make the white man's talk."  The woman, Stands
with Fist, is portrayed by Mary McDonell.  The Indian holy man, Kicking
Bird, is portrayed by Graham Greene.  Greene gives a wonderful
performance, and McDonell's is a little more tentative (though so is her
character).
     Gradually, Dunbar spends more and more time with the Indians.  In
the movie's highlight, he joins them on a buffalo hunt which is a
magnificently photographed sequence.  Costner deserves enormous credit
in pulling that one off.
     Most of the movie is quite subtle and understated.  The photography
is the real star, the long shots of the prairie.  So when reality
"intrudes" about a half hour before the ending of the film, it's
jarring.  I suspect the people who gripe about revisionism in the movie
are complaining about this portion of the film.  The movie is quite long
and leisurely but never boring.  It also feels quite realistic until the
ending.
     While I still think AWAKENINGS was the best movie of last year,
DANCES WITH WOLVES is so strong for so long that it comes close to being
a great movie.  For a first directorial effort, Costner deserves an A.
     Aside from the ending, the Barry score is the film's other major
weakness.  John Barry hasn't written an original score in many years.
He wrote a nice military piece that's used in the beginning, but isn't
used for the rest of the movie.  Barry's score is okay, and it suits the
movie, but it isn't at all original.  If you've seen KING KONG [the
remake -Moderator] or OUT OF AFRICA or MOONRAKER, you've heard the score
already.
     This movie is an 8 on the Chuck scale.  I think it will win Best
Picture, Best Actor, and Best Cinematography.

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1990, PG-13, 181 minutes [3 hours, 1 minute]
[drama/western]
starring: Kevin Costner (John Dunbar/Dances With Wolves), Mary McDonnell
(Stands With A Fist), Graham Greene (Kicking Bird), Rodney A. Grant (Wind In
His Hair), written by Michael Blake (based on his novel), produced by Jim
Wilson, Kevin Costner, directed by Kevin Costner.
"Dances With Wolves" is touching and well made, but at times it seems as if
it's trying just a little too hard to exist. It has makings of a classic:
full of drama and passion, understanding and communication, and violence and
power, but perhaps they are emphasized a little too much.
Kevin Costner directed, produced, and stars in this epic tale about John
Dunbar, a Union lieutenant during the Civil War, who heads west to mark a
post for pioneers and soldiers. He encounters some Sioux Indians who are
portrayed rather savagely at first. We fear them and almost hate them as much
as Dunbar. Can they make peace?         
Much of the story revolves around the Indian tribe as we learn they are just
as afraid of the white man as he is of them. Dunbar makes his first real
gesture for peace when he encounters an injured Indian woman and gives her
medical attention. When he brings her back to her tribe, they are not
thankful, instead they scare him away. 
Eventually, the two sides work together and communicate. Both Dunbar and
Sioux wonder where all the Buffalo have gone, and this gives them their first
conflict to solve together.
Little happens in terms of plot and individual events. There isn't much
dialogue because the two people cannot speak the same language. However, the
body language and other forms of symbolic communication they use makes the
story interesting. The characters show their emotions through their actions,
they work together, hunt together and at least try to communicate with one
another. 
But a film cannot depend on indirect communication, so a translator (and a
lover) is provided. Mary McDonnell co-stars as Stands With A Fist, a white
woman who has lived with the Sioux since she was a child. It is obvious she
and Dunbar will fall in love, but it does not seem as cliche it sounds.
Because we are experiencing a new culture here, the concept of love is
different from what we are used to. This originality and sense of character
is what makes the film so great and touching. At first we feared the Sioux,
now they are our friends and our family.
I didn't like the third act that much, but it's the entire point of the
film. When Dunbar goes back to his cabin he is no longer John Dunbar, he is
Dances With Wolves, and when the newly arrived Northern Army sees him, they
mistake him for an Indian. These are the people we and Dunbar started out
with, and now we see them in a completely different manner. The story almost
becomes an adventure as we hope Dunbar will escape. It's exciting to watch,
but it does seem a bit much.
Despite a few flaws, "Dances With Wolves" is excellent for what it is. But
it does have a vivid theme about maturity, tolerance, and war and peace. We
are all John Dunbar, but how many of us go through such experiences to become
Dances With Wolves?
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Epic portrait of a Sioux tribal life as
     seen through the eyes of a Civil War officer.  American
     Indians have rarely or never been portrayed so believably and
     sympathetically.  Its biggest flaw is that the White Man does
     not seem as realistically portrayed.  The films resembles
     WHITE DAWN and FAREWELL TO THE KING in plot and spirit.
     Rating: high +2 (-4 to +4).
     I suspect that of all the films of 1989, the one that will be best
remembered will be GLORY.  It may not be the best film of 1989, but it has a
sort of timeless quality that will hold up for many years.  That was 1989.
This year I think we have an even better film that has that same timeless
quality.  There have been films in the past that have tried to give
sympathetic views of the American Indian.  It is not hard to be more
sympathetic than films like FORT APACHE.  LITTLE BIG MAN, unaccountably
popular, attempted to be sympathetic but gave the impression that the
writers knew nothing about American Indians.  (I do not know if the novel
was as bad or not.)  Other films such as CHEYENNE AUTUMN tried to speak of
injustices done to the Indians, but they too never got into the minds of
native Americans.  Perhaps DANCES WITH WOLVES, based on the novel by Michael
Blake, is no more authentic than is LITTLE BIG MAN, but it certainly feels
like the most authentic film ever made about American Indian culture.
     Kevin Costner directs and stars as John Dunbar, who is to have his leg
amputated due to wounds in a Civil War battle.  Not having the courage to
face his future, he attempts suicide and in doing so accidentally makes
himself a hero.  This not only wins him medical care sufficient to save his
leg, he is also given his choice of posting.  Wishing to see the Western
frontier before it is overrun by the white man, he requests a posting to an
isolated and deserted fort far out on the frontier.  His thoughts about
facing hostile animals and more hostile Sioux are overcome by his curiosity
and his willingness to accept and appreciate that which is alien to him.
The film picks up his enthusiasm to meet, understand, and befriend the very
alien culture of the neighboring Sioux.  He must first overcome their
distrust.  There the storyteller somewhat unrealistically contrives
circumstances in Dunbar's favor.  This is a long film and each stage of his
acceptance by the Sioux is shown and not overly glossed over.  In
particular, language problems are quite believably difficult and eventually
overcome by another contrivance.  Eventually Dunbar is accepted into the
Sioux society and Costner can show us how Sioux lived and thought.
     If the film has a major weakness it is that it exaggerates the
stupidity and strangeness (even if not the cruelty) of the hordes of
invading white men.  The positive view of the Sioux would be more believable
if the view of the White Man had more credibility.  There is a love story of
Dunbar with a white woman who has been Sioux since she was captured as a
child.  This subplot could have been a distraction from showing us the Sioux
lifestyle, but if so it was only a minor one.  Mary McDonnell, familiar from
MATEWAN, plays Dunbar's lover interest, Stands with a Fist.
     DANCES WITH WOLVES is told with a grace and humor that keeps the viewer
constantly entertained through its nearly three-hour length.  Costner is to
be congratulated for creating such an unorthodox film (about a quarter us in
Lakota, the Sioux language, and subtitled), and at the same time so
enjoyable a film his first time directing.  I give it a high +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.
