Title
Review for Zongsheng sihai (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
Written & Directed by John Woo
Starring Chow Yun Fat, Leslie Cheung, Cherie Chung
    I first discovered John Woo through this film--or, more correctly, 
through a couple of excerpts from this film, shown in a film criticism 
course I was taking at Southwest Missouri State University.  The 
instructor, Dr. Dave Daly, is a big Hong Kong movie fan...and he made 
me into one as well, for which I am eternally grateful.
    I don't think that many people who enjoy movies these days could 
possibly not have heard of John Woo; his two entries into the field of 
Hollywood cinema ("Hard Target," "Broken Arrow") have both done quite 
well in American theaters.  However, they may not be aware of his 
earier works.
    Starting with "A Better Tomorrow" in the mid-1980s, a seminal film 
which marked the beginning of the so-called "hero film" genre in Hong 
Kong, John Woo has made about a dozen action-packed adventure films, 
the most notable of which include "The Killer," "Bullet to the Head," 
and "Hard-Boiled."  
    These films contain action sequences the like of which most 
American movies no longer see; incredible feats of gunplay and 
acrobatics, accentuated by the inimitable Woo directorial style which 
makes use of slow-motion, camera angles and movement, perfect pacing, 
and incredible choreography that turns gunplay into a kind of bloody 
ballet.  
    Woo protagonists often clutch a gun in each hand and fire 
constantly, often apparently immune to the necessity of reloading.  
They have incredible coordination, deftly tossing and catching guns or 
other implements, often while performing a backflip or some other 
acrobatic feat at the same time.  They make use of what they find in 
their environment in ways that would make MacGyver jealous.  Getting 
shot once or twice barely slows them down.
    Admittedly, these are largely characteristics of all Hong Kong 
action cinema, or even the action genre in general to some extent.  
Still, they're never used quite so agilely as in a John Woo film.
    Sadly, Woo's style has been muted somewhat by the Hollywood 
environment in which he's made his latest films.  Still, John Woo's 
first two Hollywood films have been remarkably well-received by the 
moviegoing public; perhaps as he becomes more comfortable with the 
Hollywood studio system, he will begin to exert more creative control.  
One can only hope.
    "Once a Thief" stars two veteran actors from other John Woo films: 
Chow Yun Fat, who also starred in "A Better Tomorrow," "A Better 
Tomorrow 2," "The Killer," and "Hard-Boiled" plays Joe, and Leslie 
Cheung, who co-starred with Chow Yun Fat in "A Better Tomorrow," plays 
his foster brother, Jim.  Together with foster sister Cherie (Cherie 
Chung), they make up a trio of expert art thieves, who specialize in 
stealing paintings from museums.
    Over the course of the film, the threesome decides to retire from 
thievery and start a family of their own.  However, before they can do 
this, they are manipulated by their cruel foster father, who raised 
them to become thieves, into stealing a painting for him.  This they 
do, under duress...but they have no intention of actually giving it to 
him...
    Fans of John Woo's ultraviolent bulletfests such as "The Killer" 
or "Hard-Boiled" may be disappointed by "Once a Thief".  This film is 
a marked departure from the shoot-em-up style of other recent Woo 
films, a kind of return to the light-hearted comedies he directed 
prior to "A Better Tomorrow".  There is action involved, and plenty of 
it, but the gunfights are neither as intense or elaborate as 
"Hard-Boiled" (though it _does_ have the best vehicular chase sequence 
since James Bond).
    Of course, this does not detract from the movie at all; where Woo
shoot-em-ups are ponderous dramas with weighty philosophical and moral 
considerations, "Once a Thief" is simply pure, unadulterated _fun_.  
It's a thrill a minute to watch the thieves get themselves into and 
out of one improbable situation after another, and the acrobatic feats 
and a remarkable dance scene make it plain that Woo's wonderful talent 
for choreography is not limited to gunplay.
    The acting.  Chow Yun Fat is an experienced actor, with two 
decades and dozens of movies, television series, and other productions 
under his belt.  As in all his films, he is smooth, believable, and 
his style, his charisma, his lopsided grin at times put me in mind of 
Sean Connery.  Unlike in "The Killer" or "Hard-Boiled," here he gets 
to display his talent for comedy...and he certainly has that.  I wish 
I could see him in such roles more often.  Cheung, Chung, and the 
other members of the cast aren't bad either, but Chow Yun Fat 
generally steals almost every scene he's in.
    The scenery.  "Once a Thief" is set partially in Paris and 
elsewhere in France, and is filmed on-location.  Paris, Notre Dame, 
the villa from which they must steal the painting...it's beautiful, 
and it really adds to the ambience of the film.  And unlike in many 
American films, there is no reluctance to have conversations be held 
entirely or mostly in other languages than Cantonese--excellently- 
spoken French and English are both heard at various points in the 
film.  I suppose since they're subtitling it in Chinese anyway, it's 
no hassle for them to leave it be.
    The comedy.  This film has some wonderful comic moments, starting 
with the very first few scenes.  I won't give any of them away, as 
they're funnier when you go into them unprepared, but I will say that 
there are a couple of hilarious moments involving classical music that 
shouldn't be missed.
    The music, the visuals, the dialogue...all the elements in this 
film click and click often, and the plot moves along like a 
finely-tuned clock.  All in all, the only problems "Once a Thief" has 
are a couple of scenes where the editing is slightly jarring--the 
parachute landing where Chow Yun Fat abruptly changes direction 
between cuts, and the dance sequence where Cherie's hands change 
positions from cut to cut several times.  Of course, these are only 
minor problems, and anyone who was able to forgive the "mysterious 
vanishing robot arm" and other inconsistancies in "Jurassic Park" 
should have no trouble here.
    Another slight problem, though not with the film itself, is its 
availability.  Sadly, "Once a Thief" has not, to my knowledge, been 
released to the American video market save on laserdisc.  
Unfortunately, not everyone has an LD player, or is willing to buy the 
expensive foreign-import disc, or lives in an area where Asian 
theaters regularly show these films, so the only way many people can 
see "Once a Thief" is through pirating a copy of the LD from someone.  
Also, the subtitling is standard Hong Kong, in Chinese characters with 
English below them.  Sometimes it's a little hard to read, and the 
translation isn't always the best.  (At a couple of points in the 
film, someone is saying something in English, while the English 
subtitles at the bottom of the screen say something different!) 
    In conclusion, if you have a chance to watch this movie, see it, 
by all means.  Once again, John Woo proves that he could teach 
American cinema a great deal.
This review is copyright 1996 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for distribution through rec.arts.movies.reviews and all
associated archival.  Permission granted for free redistribution via
cyberspace as long as this message remains attached.  All other
rights reserved to the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | **TAKE NOTE!**  My homepage has changed to
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Author
Steve Kong
Once a Thief is something unexpected from John Woo. It's a light-hearted
comedy with some action to spice it up ­ this is a polar opposite of what
I've come to expect from Woo. Usually his films are full of action with
some comedy to spice it up. Once a Thief is a nice surprise from Woo, the
director that I admire most.
First, don't get the cheesy, though made by Woo, American re-make mixed up
with this classic Hong Kong version. Although the American re-make has some
elements of this version, it doesn't live up to what the Hong Kong version
has accomplished.
Once a Thief is about three thieves working together to steal exquisite
artwork from all around the world. They were raised as thieves by a mean
spirited and violent "father." The three thieves are Jim (Leslie Cheung),
Joe (Chow Yun-Fat), and Cherie (Cherie Chung). Jim and Joe have their eyes
on Cherie. Joe the charming womanizer seems to have Cherie's attention,
much to the dismay of the more sensitive and caring Jim. This love triangle
is only a part of the multi-layered story told by Once a Thief. The major
portion of the movie is spent on Jim, Joe, and Cherie vying for a painting
that their much-hated "father" has. They want to steal the painting, their
father wants to sell the painting, and the three thieves mysterious
godfather has something else in mind.
Here's my warning for those of you who are looking for a John Woo film in
the style of The Killer and Hard-Boiled: This film is not action filled
like those. If you're looking for action, try out Woo's other films.  If
you're looking to see what Woo can do when he's not doing action, look
here. Woo, who did comedy before striking it big with the action genre,
handles this film superbly. His sense of comedic timing is excellent.
Couple this with Chow Yun-Fat's comedic timing and hilarious onscreen
persona, and you have a film that is surprisingly watchable.
Chow, whom I'm used to seeing in more serious roles (Hard-Boiled, The
Corrupter), shows that he's not just a dramatic actor. He is hilarious in
Once a Thief and has many laugh-out-loud moments in the film. Cheung and
Chung also have their moments, but none like the ones that Chow is given.
There are some standout moments in Once a Thief to look for; first and
foremost is the sequence in which Jim and Joe go into a cellar to steal the
coveted painting. This is a mix of pure action and comedy that will have
you at the edge of your seats laughing. Another moment comes late in the
film when Chow Yun-Fat shows off his pseudo-kung fu skills in one of the
funniest and silliest fight sequences that I've seen.
Don't Miss Once a Thief; this is a John Woo film that shows that he isn't
strictly and action director. I was able to find Once a Thief on DVD.  If
you don't have a DVD player you can still find this one on video. 
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.
