Title
Review for Fluke (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The 1995 movie FLUKE takes the premise that humans can be
reincarnated into animals.  Its lead is a dog named Fluke who used to
be a human named Thomas Johnson (Matthew Modine).
     Thomas dies in a dramatic and realistic car accident in the
opening.  He appears to have been forced off the road by his business
partner, Jeff Newman (Eric Stoltz).  The story then switches to Fluke
when he is a newborn puppy.  As Fluke grows up he will remember the
accident in terrifying flashbacks.  He will also conjure up good old
memories of his wife Carol (Nancy Travis) and his son Brian (Max
Pomeranc).
     The show has two parts.  In the first, it is mainly the animals'
story.  Here Fluke runs around with a streetwise dog named Rumbo (voice
by Samuel L. Jackson).  In all of the show the animals talk to each
other, but without the mouth movements popularized in BABE.  In the
second part of the show, Fluke goes back to live with his old family,
and the humans take over more of the narrative.
     The story has an interesting premise, but second time director
Carlo Carlei does not know how to craft an involving movie out of it.
A pleasant enough film, but never a compelling one.
     FLUKE has high quality production values, but that is about it.
The cinematography by Raffaele Mertes is more impressive than the sets.
Similarly the music by Carlo Siliotto is much more touching than the
script by Carlo Carlei and James Carrington, based on a book by James
Herbert.
     All of the cast, especially Stoltz and Modine, have talent, but
none of it is demonstrated in FLUKE.  There is one consistently good
part, the acting by the dogs.  They perform many antics and behaviors
that you do not normally see in movies.  Too bad they could not have
inspired the Homo sapiens.
     The low point of the film occurs when the dogs are taken to a
cosmetics company so they can do research on them.  This segment is
little more than sensationalism masquerading as comedy, and not very
funny comedy.
     There are many better animal pictures out there.  Rent one of them
instead of FLUKE.
     FLUKE runs 1:36.  It is rated PG for a few bad words and some very
scary scenes of a vicious dog attack, a person dying, and two dramatic
car accidents - shown again and again.  Young kids are likely to be
frightened.  My son Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, gives it a thumbs sideways
because of the bloody parts.  He said it was an okay movie except for
the dogs who were really good actors.  I found it a well made, but
mediocre film that I cannot recommend.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Carlo Carlei. Cast Samuel L. Jackson, Matthew Modine, Nancy
Travis, Eric Stoltz, Max Pomeranc, Ron Perlman Written by Carlo Carlei,
James Carrington, James Herbert (novel).
When a puppy starts having visions of being a late husband, a departed
father and an ex-corporate manager, I begin to worry. Puppies have
enough problems of their own, without having to deal with the emotional
wranglings of an unbalanced past life. This movie is pure reincarnation
propaganda. One descends the chain of evolution if bad, and ascends if
not so bad. So we can assume from this precept that this homeless pup,
was once a bad little boy now become canine.
Matthew Modine, devoted husband, loving father and troubled business man
dies in a motor vehicle accident. He is now "Fluke", a mongrel dog who
remembers his past. He finds his family again (Nancy Travis and Max
Pomeranc) and worms his way back into their hearts; spending the time he
never had with his son, and staring longingly at his widowed wife in the
bathroom. When his best friend and ex-business partner (Eric Stoltz)
threatens to take away his family, he bites him. This is before he
realises that he is to blame for his own death, and comes to a decision
that he must leave his past as a man behind, if he is too have any
fulfillment as a dog.
If all this dog logic and philosophy is starting to get on your nerves -
you don't stand alone. Reincarnation stories have been done to death,
and this play for "Ghost" sympathisers is no exception. I say let this
dead man rest peacefully in his grave, and don't humiliate him by
bringing him back as a dog.
The final scene is that of crippled "Fluke" (another car accident),
hobbling through fields of wheat in eager anticipation of adventures
that await him. My advice for this stray, accident prone dog is to learn
to observe oncoming traffic, or next time being a goldfish would not be
too severe a fate.
So if it makes you feel any better, that your pet canine, feline or fish
is perhaps your beloved husband, child or cranky old Aunt; then by all
means let this movie guide you through the cathartic unpheaval of grief
and bereavment. However, don't let your sanity or better judgement, be
clouded by unrealistic expectations, that these animals are perhaps the
embodiment of your once great love. The disappointment that follows can
only be earth shattering.
There's nothing "Flukey" about dying and ending up as a mongrel dog, if
anything, like much of this movie, it's sheer bad luck.
