Title
Review for Last Days of Chez Nous, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE LAST DAYS OF CHEZ  NOUS (Australia, 1992) *** Director, Gillian 
Armstrong. Producer, Jan Chapman. Writer, Helen Garner. Photography, 
Geoffrey Simpson. Musi, Paul Grabowsky. Production design, Janet 
Patterson. Cast: Lisa Harrow, Bruno Ganz, Kerry Fox, Miranda Otte, et 
al.  A Fine Line release. In Australian without subtitles. 99 
minutes. Rated R (sexual subject matter).
"The Last Days of Chez Nous" had its international premiere in 
February 1992 at the Berlin Festival, and opened in New York in March 
1993.  Arriving locally unannounced and unpublicized, it will pass 
unnoticed and depart quickly. A pity, since it is an interesting, 
intimist, non-commercial, post-feminist work by world-class 
Australian women figures: director Gillian Armstrong ("My Brilliant 
Career," "Mrs. Soffel"), producer Jan Chapman ("the Piano"), 
novelist-screenwriter Helen Garner.
Dysfunctional families, always a subject of films, have been 
particularly stressed (internationally) in recent years. This movie's 
group consists of Beth (Lisa Harrow), a fortyish novelist; her French 
husband J.P. (the Swiss actor Bruno Ganz); Annie (Miranda Otte), her 
teen-age daughter by an earlier marriage; Beth's much younger sister 
Vicki (Kerry Fox of "An Angel at My Table") and two elderly parents.
There are tensions between husband and wife, openly aired in their 
"modern" relationship. She is appealing, talented, reliable yet 
insecure. He is a free soul, ego-centered and insensitive, who 
derides everything Australian. The daughter is sweet and caring.
The marriage teeters. Into this mixed picture comes Vicki back from a 
European trip. A flaky, infantile airhead, unemployed and pregnant to 
boot, Annie will "have a relationship" with J.P. during a trip that 
Beth takes in the outback with her father in an effort to come to 
terms with the old man's constant criticism that has distressed Beth 
throughout her life and, in a more complex way is mirrored by J.P.'s 
reproaches and outbursts.
This is the skeleton of the film, not very original but particularly 
well fleshed -out by the accumulated episodes and details. In the 
opening scene, Vicki, schlepping her suitcase, enters her sister's 
home. Everyone is out. She spots her homecoming cake, gobbles a big 
slice and seconds later is vomiting.
There is a profusion of good touches --in fact it is their aggregate 
that makes the film. Remarkable too is the picture's non-male (yet 
not anti-male), non-Hollywoodian point of view. In a dark way, 
matters of behavior and dialogue are refreshingly cliche-free. The 
film's pervasive but not overwhelming  female stance extends to the 
visuals. The women are not cover girls but real people, with splotchy 
legs, freckles,wrinkles, blemishes, imperfect teeth. And the main 
setting, the house, is claustrophobic and messy, in a lived-in rather 
than in an artily "dressed" way.
The messiness extends to the presentation of the characters who are 
initially to unscramble, a puzzle abetted by often murky Aussie 
accents and by the lack of any background given to the principals. 
Partly though, the unclarity of who's who is planned,  to show the 
shifting relationships.
Beth is supposedly a successful writer (although given her modest 
house you wonder how much authors are paid in Australia), and both as 
an artist and a person she is convincingly shown as particularly 
sensitive and vulnerable. Deftly and sympathetically portrayed, hers 
is a well-rounded portrait.
J.P., on the other hand, is underwritten. Aside from his French 
speech, accent and love of cheeses and wines, we are in the dark as 
to his past and present life, occupations or professions -- or for 
that matter about what makes J.P. tick. He represents, perhaps, to 
those inferiority-complexed Australians around him, a glib, 
sophisticated European, but this is too superficial to make a dent in 
us, the audience. He may be a volatile Continental, but enough is 
enough.
Some problems of exposition aside, "The Last Days of Chez Nous" is an 
affective, sorrowful movie. More than most Australian films it is 
also an unappetizing portrait of Down Under in every way: cities and 
streets,  interiors of houses or cafes, motels, nature, ill-dressed, 
dour and unintellectual people. It won't send the viewers rushing to 
a travel agency, but the portrayal of its principals, notably Beth, 
is realistic, striking and well-crafted.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
James Berardinelli
     Living together in one house are Beth (Lisa Harrow), her French
husband Jean-Pierre (Bruno Ganz), her younger sister Vicki (Kerry Fox),
her daughter Annie (Miranda Otto), and a boarder named Tim (Kiri
Paramore).  It's a strange family whose relationships with each other
are, to say the least, unusual.  All passion between Beth and
Jean-Pierre is dead, Vicki is depressed over an abortion she feels she
was pressured into, Annie and Tim are engaged is some
seemingly-innocent flirting, and Beth is obsessed about making peace
with her father (Bill Hunter) before he dies.
     Even character dramas/slice-of-life pictures should have a point.
Unfortunately, THE LAST DAYS OF CHEZ NOUS is sorely lacking in this
department.  What the viewer gets out of this film may not be worth the
investment of one hour and thirty-six minutes.  Certainly, there are
moments of power and emotion contained within, but the overall
production is not only lacking in focus, but doesn't seem to know where
it's going or when it's gotten there.
     There is a long, dreary sequence in the middle of the film where
Beth and her father go on a cross-country trek to mend their fractured
relationship.  While what happens on and because of this trip is
central to THE LAST DAYS OF CHEZ NOUS, the film drags during its
course.  The relationship between father and daughter is not
sufficiently developed for this journey of discovery to have more than
incidental meaning.  It is, frankly, uninteresting.
     Part of the problem is that the Beth, the central character of the
story, is too bland.  I managed to find some degree of empathy for
almost everyone in the film except her.  Lisa Harrow's acting isn't to
blame - Beth is exceptionally poorly-written.  The most powerful
moments of the movie are designed to revolve around her but, because
the character is so weakly presented, these scenes have little or no
impact.
     The bright spot of CHEZ NOUS is Kerry Fox.  The young Australian
actress is full of life and energy, and it comes through on screen,
often obscuring problems with her character's motivation.  Fox seems
equally capable of doing lighthearted moments and deeper drama, since
the role of Vicki requires both.  In scenes with both of the sisters,
Vicki's zest makes Beth look all-the-more lifeless.
     The ending, while a letdown, occurs at a good place to break the
story.  Like the rest of THE LAST DAYS OF CHEZ NOUS, there is something
fundamentally unsatisfying about it.  The film skims the surface of the
disintegration of a family, but rarely gets deep enough into the
characters and situations to create a forceful motion picture.  We
occasionally get glimpses of what CHEZ NOUS could have been had the
script been better realized, but there are not enough of those moments
to make this any better than a run-of-the-mill story of a dysfunctional
family.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
