Title
Review for House of Wax (1953)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        You always take a certain amount of risk when deciding to 
watch really old movies, even ones that are supposed to be classics. 
HOUSE OF WAX stars one of my favorite actors of the past, the late 
Vincent Price, who always lends a hilariously macabre feel to anything 
he appears in, from horror classics like THE TINGLER to token 
appearances in more recent efforts like EDWARD SCISSORHANDS 
and Michael Jackson's "Thriller" video. (MIKE: I'm not like other 
guys, but I do _like_ other guys.) Hell, he even cracked me up as 
Egghead (the heretofore uncredited predecessor of the Coneheads) on 
the 60's "Batman" show. And he's good in HOUSE OF WAX too.
        The problem with this movie is that even though Price's 
performance is excellent as usual, the movie itself just isn't very 
entertaining. It's one of those movies that's only 90 minutes long but is 
still padded with needless and boring material. In HOUSE OF WAX, 
Price gives two extended tours of his wax museum that serve no better 
purpose than filling space. Another sequence shows two characters 
exchanging a brief conversation while watching women dance at a 
vaudeville show. After their fifteen seconds of dialogue, we see the 
entire dance number for no reason. And yet another waste of time is a 
sequence on the opening day of Price's museum, when a barker with 
two ball-and-paddle toys tries to attract customers. It may be an 
entertaining scene but it serves no purpose.
        Price plays a wax sculptor whose investment partner burns 
down his museum while he's in it to collect the insurance money. Price 
is presumed dead but later resurfaces, opening a new wax museum, 
while a series of murders and subsequent body-stealings from the 
morgue begins. The weird part is every time a body disappears, a 
spitting image of the person pops up in Price's wax museum. One 
woman puts two and two together about the same time Price tells her 
she would make the perfect Marie Antoinette for a display he's about 
to make. Uh-oh!
        You might think going to all the trouble to kill a person, steal 
his body from the morgue, drag him back to the museum, dip him in 
wax and then put him on display is morbid and time-consuming but 
it's still a hell of a lot easier than carving the statues yourself, believe 
me. I had been carving a statue of Kurt Cobain for three weeks before I 
realized I could just steal his corpse. Then again, his head may not be 
in the best possible condition for display.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
