Title
Review for Shoot to Kill (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chuck Dowling
Shoot To Kill (1988) **** out of ***** - Cast: Sidney Poitier, Tom Berenger,
Kirstie Alley, Clancy Brown, Richard Masur, Andrew Robinson.  Written By:
Harv Zimmel, Michael Burton, and Daniel Petrie Jr.  Directed By: Roger
Spottiswoode. Running Time: 110 minutes.
"Shoot To Kill" is one of the most underrated action films of the 1980's. So
good in fact, that Sidney Poitier ended a ten-year absence from film to play
the lead role.
As the film begins, we see a man seemingly breaking into a jewelry store.
When the police arrive, along with FBI agent Warren Stantin (Poitier), we
find out that the man is the owner of the store and is stealing diamonds to
give to a man who has taken his family hostage. The police go to their
house, and the kidnapper makes his demands. He escapes with the man's wife
as a hostage and heads for the docks, where he has a boat waiting. He allows
Agent Stantin to accompany him in order to take the wife home once he's made
his escape. However, to prove a point, the kidnapper kills the wife and
heads off with the stolen diamonds.
The criminal, trying to flee to Canada, disguises himself and joins a group
of men out for a wilderness hike, led by Sarah (Kirstie Alley). The audience
has not seen the man's face to this point, so we have no idea which of the
five men in Sarah's group is the bad guy.
Stantin enlists the aid of Jonathan Knox (Berenger) to help him survive the
rugged terrain and to capture the criminal. To fuel Knox's desire to go,
Sarah just so happens to be his girlfriend. Knox would much rather go alone
than to have Stantin burden him. He knows that the very urban FBI agent
won't survive a day out in the woods. But Stantin doesn't give him much
choice. He feels responsible for the woman's death and is determined to get
his man.
Now there are a couple of problems with the film. For one, why would Stantin
be the only lawman in pursuit? I would think they would have teams of men
and choppers and dogs and all of that. Second, the scoring of the film is
awful. Third, the last 10 minutes or so really seem to contradict everything
that happened in the rest of the film. They end up chasing the criminal in
the city, complete with the obligitory car chase scene. Why would you end
this story in the city when these characters have been going through hell on
earth out in the wilderness? Let them shoot it out in the snow.
However, there's a lot going for "Shoot To Kill" to overlook those flaws and
to still recommend it. The screenplay is very well paced. Instead of wasting
20 minutes introducing us to the main characters, as about 98% of films do,
the plot starts right away and we get to know the characters as the story
progresses. It has a good little mystery involving the group of men and who
may be the killer. It has some very well staged and tense action scenes,
particularly the one involving a man-made crossing over a dangerous canyon.
It has the provenly successful "buddy picture" relationship of Knox and
Stantin. It also uses the tried and true "fish out of water" scenario as
Stantin learns all about the rough outdoors in winter. Granted those last
two are WAY overused nowadays, but when they are done well, as they are
here, it's not so bad. Poitier gives a good performance as the edgy FBI
agent, and he and Berenger have some good scenes together. "Shoot To Kill"
is a fun film, and very entertaining.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     If I were writing a syndicated column for THE NEW YORKER or FILM COMMENT,
I imagine I could have titled this review and that of HOUSEKEEPING [printed
elsewhere -ecl] "two from the Pacific NorthWest," since the majority of both
films take place in the timberlines of west Washington state.  Warning,
Warning, Will Robinson...  linking analogy approaching!  However, since Pauline
Kael has not suffered a massive stroke as of yet (her review of THREE MEN AND A
BABY left me with the impression that she had at least left the theater with
huge, throbbing veins sticking out of her neck) and hence no vacancy at the NY,
I'll just admit that I saw the two films last week, separated by a couple of
days.
     Frankly, I've had a bad time with TV and movie cops.  Growing up Under
Mass Media, almost all of them seemed to be inappropriate for the "heroic
policeman" role most boys have, somewhere, in the back of their head.  Jack
Webb was too dull (and later, too conservative--"Why do you think they call
it dope, son?"  *DUM-DA-DUMM-DUMM*!), along with the boys on ADAM-12; Steve
(Jack Lord) McGarret appeared almost immediately pompous to me ("Gosh, Steve,
you're always one step ahead of these guys."  "That's why I've got the big
office, Danno.").  Columbo was great, but can you imagine the good
Lt. protecting someone against several Mafia hit men?  And Dirty Harry was just
a detective with a good aim and a bad attitude; enjoying him was based on really
disliking his opponents.
     However, there was one guy whose several appearances as a policeman
impressed me as a young 'un, an actor who played the type of detective that
seemed in the best tradition of Holmes: someone with great intelligence,
resolution and deductive abilities *and* the ability to pull the fat out of the
fire in a tense situation.  While some of Sidney Poitier's appearances in
detective films were more concerned with racial issues than crime thrillers
(i.e. his Mr. Tibbs series--IN THE HEAT OF THE NIGHT, THEY CALL ME MR. TIBBS,
THE ORGANIZATION), he always portrayed a detective who was *really*
dangerous--he had brains.  Instead of twitching an eyebrow and muttering
vengeance, he'd read the clues, outsmart the villain...  and then blow him
away, in a perfectly legitimate shoot-out.  Under control, planning every
move--you could just *hear* his mind clicking away in the background.
     Well, he's back (but not as Tibbs) in SHOOT TO KILL, and clicking away
like crazy.  In the fine tradition of "Waste-His-Ass" movies everywhere (Brief
Definition: A "Waste-His-Ass" movie is a film that shows a villain performing
such heinous crimes during the first reel that the audience is heavily rooting
for the hero to cream the villain, i.e. "Waste-His-Ass"), we have a really
dangerous, brutal criminal who gets FBI agent Poitier involved in a hostage
situation and escapes.  Poitier tracks him down to (I'm required by state law
to say this: Beautiful) northern Washington, where he has joined a
hiking/fishing trip (led by Kirstie Alley).  Alley's boyfriend (Tom Beringer),
a "mountain man," sets out after them with Poitier in tow.  You can probably
guess the rest....
     Poitier does a good job as the FBI agent--he justifies the hero role by
deducing what's going on.  Beringer is fine as a foil to Poitier, especially in
the woods; Alley's character, though, is lucky she's not dead after the second
reel, considering how she treats the killer (I kept wanting to shout, "Use the
Vulcan Neck Pinch, Kirstie!").  There are some other good elements: the
photography is inventive (especially at the beginning of the film), and the
short mystery about which of the five fisherman on the trip is really the
killer is pretty good (I guessed wrong, though if I'd given it a little
thought, I would have come up with the correct answer).  And it's the first
movie since MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL to have a Moose Trainer in the
credits.  But it's overlong: by the end of the film, the manhunt has gotten
tedious, and the humor from Poitier's wilderness struggles are gone.  There are
some real gapes in logic (though not as many as the standard action pic is heir
to), and the soundtrack is annoying at time (the scene with Poitier and
Beringer climbing over the snow just cried for a narrator saying something like
"On and on... further and further... they trudged to their DESTINY because...
THE MOUNTIES ALWAYS GET THEIR MAN!").
     Conclusion: overlong, but redeemable with concessions.  However, if you
ever meet a grizzly bear in the woods, *do not* attempt Mr. Poitier's method of
protection.  Talk about the magic of movies...
