Title
Review for Help! (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, Ringo Starr, Leo
McKern, Eleanor Bron, Victor Spinetti, Roy Kinnear 
Written by: Marc Behm and Charles Wood 
Directed by: Richard Lester 
Running Time: 90 minutes 
"Hey, someone's got a hold of me finger." 
 --- Beatles drummer Ringo Starr after getting his hand stuck in a
vending machine... the first line spoken by any of The Beatles, in
Help!. 
Help!, the Beatles' second film, is charmingly goofy fun.  The plot
(which is completely insignificant by the way) is best described by the
back of the box for the film: Help! follows the Fab Four on a worldwide
jaunt around the globe. When a fan sends Ringo an ancient sacrificial
ring that becomes stuck on his finger, he becomes targeted by a group of
hilariously obsessed oriental mystics, as well as an ambitious scientist
who has his own plans for the ring.  On the run, the Beatles are chased
from London to the Swiss Alps to the Bahamas, outwitting their pursuers,
singing great songs and having a ball. 
All four band members are given their own individual "bits" of comedy. 
Ringo of course is the bearer of the ring and is constantly on the run,
Paul gets shrunk to microscopic size at one point, George has an action
sequence where he's hanging onto a moving car (Harrison actually does
the stunts too, amazingly), and John... well John basically behaves like
a ten year old tormenting everyone, especially those in a position of
authority.  Best joke of the film though comes at the beginning... the
house the Fab Four lives in and what they do when they come home is
hilarious! 
In interviews I've seen (from The Beatles Anthology I believe), the band
members talk about Help! saying it was basically an excuse for them to
visit places in the world they hadn't been yet.  You can definitely tell
that's the case.  There's no reason for The Beatles to suddenly show up
in the Swiss Alps for a wacky skiing montage, but it's fun nonetheless. 
The gags and the music are the reason to see this film, not the plot. 
Despite the fact that The Beatles are my favorite band of all time, I
had avoided watching this film up until this point (when I had to review
this DVD release).  The Beatles are the greatest rock band in history,
but I was worried that their films would be a disappointment, since
their expertise is in music of course... not movies.  And while they
rarely take any of the events going on around them seriously, they do a
fine job of being themselves.  That's all that's being asked of them. 
Help! is available on DVD from MPI Home Video as part of The Beatles DVD
Collection (as well as being available separately).  The film is
presented in its original fullframe aspect ratio.  Extras are plentiful
on the disc, as it includes: a 1960s interview with director Richard
Lester, Lester's short film The Running, Jumping and Standing Still
Film, alternate audio tracks in Spanish and French (as well as subtitles
in Spanish and French), bios for the filmmakers and the supporting cast
members, the original theatrical trailer (and trailers for A Hard Day's
Night, Magical Mystery Tour, The Beatles: The First US Visit, and "You
Can't Do That": The Making of A Hard Day's Night), two Beatles
newsreels, and behind the scenes footage from the production and the
film's premiere (accompanied by radio spots promoting the film),  
Also on the disc are detailed notes about the restoration process done
to the original print of the film (along with A Hard Day's Night). 
Despite the laborious work put into the restoration of Help!, there
still needs to be more.  Lots of scratches and artifacts are present
throughout... I would have hated to see this print before work began on
its restoration! 
The disc (and movie for that matter) really excels whenever a Beatles
song starts up, and the audio, which is adequate during the film itself,
then kicks into high gear.  You'll hear Beatles favorites like Help!,
You're Gonna Lose That Girl, You've Got To Love Your Love Away, Ticket
To Ride, I Need You, The Night Before, and Another Girl (as well as a
dramatic score rendition of A Hard Day's Night during the finale). 
Beatles fans should definitely add this this DVD to their collection. 
It's the best transfer of the film available and the extras make it all
the more valuable. 
