Title
Review for Kid, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   While watching this family movie, I couldn't help thinking of
a friend I have--call him Fred.  Fred teaches social studies in
junior high school and hates himself.  Not that teaching
in a public school should be considered demeaning, but this
guy graduated with honors from Columbia University.  A
reunion was coming up back in 1971, so I asked him whether
he was excited.  "I'm not going," he said with a grimace.  "I
can see myself re-introducing myself to my old classmates. 
Two guys are surgeons, one's a Wall Street tycoon, another
is an adviser to the governor."  Yeah, so? I asked.  "So they'll
ask me what I do, and I'll say I teach history at JHS 224 in
Brooklyn.  And do you know what they'll say?  They'll say,
'Hey, Fred, you always were good for a few jokes.  Now tell
us: what do you really do?'"
   Fred was indeed always good for a laugh and he told the
story in a joking way, but I could see underneath his
bonhomie was a sad man indeed.  When he enrolled in this
privileged, Ivy League institution, he wanted to be a doctor
like his father, and take over the old man's Manhattan Beach
(Brooklyn) practice.  But he just couldn't cut the mustard. 
Quite a few of us are like Fred, I'll bet...we dreamed first of
being firemen and cops, but then by the time high school and
college rolled around, we had more lofty ambitions--doctor,
lawyer, pilot, CEO.  Somehow, something didn't turn out right
and by the time we're forty years old we figure, that's it, this
is what I'll be doing until I retire...teacher, middle
management, freelance consultant.
   Jon Turteltaub's "Disney's The Kid" may be made
principally for the little ones but for the big guys who, like
Fred, have tasted life's disappointments, the movie can hit
home--even draw a tear or two in its sentimental patches.  (If
you're not sure they're meant to be sentimental, Marc
Shaiman's soaring music will clue you in when to cry).  Like
"Frequency" in theme--but without Gregory Hoblit's spooky
ambience--"Disney's The Kid" focuses on a 40-year-old who
is not doing what he dreamed of doing.  Eventually, we learn
what happened to him at the age of eight that gave him a
twitch in the eye and led him to become a middle-aged guy
without a wife, with few if any real friends, and worst of all,
without even a dog.  We learn at the same time as this man,
Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis), because a spot of magic has Russ
meet up with himself at eight years of age when he was
called Rusty (Spencer Breslin). Yep: little Rusty appears
without even a clap of thunder or a bolt of lightning, and for
the next week or so they bond and learn.  The kid learns
what will become of him.  The dad finds out where he went
wrong.
   Although Russ surrendered his childhood dream, we may
find it difficult to be sympathetic.  After all the guy has a
spacious home housing a brand-new shiny black Porsche and
is the owner of a public relations firm with himself as "image
maker" with clients like the state's governor, the city's mayor,
various executives looking to improve the way they come
across in public.  He even gives pro bono advice to an
anchorwoman on the eleven o'clock news whom he takes on
briefly while they are seatmates in first class, advising her to
shorten both her hair and her nails.  For those of us ordinary
guys who like to think that money can't buy happiness, this
movie is a godsend because if you buy that premise, you
might think that maybe even Bruce Willis--who made $54.5
million last year to put himself at the numero uno position
among actors--might be a tad unhappy.
   Bruce Willis acts out Audrey Wells's clever, though never
really hilarious script in such a way that we're never
convinced that he was ever a jerk--not now, not thirty-two
years ago.  For that, you'd have to substitute Steve Martin for
Willis. Even pudgy Spencer Breslin in the role of Russ thirty-
two years ago is just too smart, too boisterous to convince us
that the guy was ever a jerk.  Sure, the kid was beaten up at
recess time by a big bully, and sure, the little guy is subject
to a pratfall or two, but a loser?  No way.  Nonetheless as the
well-heeled, well-trimmed Russ (Willis lost quite a bit of
weight for the role) watches himself as a boy, he does realize
that he was always smarter than most and that with some
more confidence and less weight and perhaps a few boxing
lessons from a champ like Kenny (Chi McBride), he would
have grown up to become that pilot and would understand
why his dad often treated him so harshly that he took on a
permanent twitch in his eye.
   Spencer Breslin as the kid is obviously at home as an
actor, having begun his career at age 3 and has since been
in 50 TV commercials.  (He's the guy who would recite the
"two all-beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, cheese, pickles,
onions on a sesame seed bun") but after a while his
rambunctiousness and in-your-face assertiveness becomes
grating.  Russ's relationship with Amy (Emily Mortimer)
doesn't look real and in fact the news anchorwoman played
by Jean Smart would be more of the right match for him.  Lily
Tomlin, however, is well cast as Russ's assistant, Janet, the
kid of helper that any boss would love to have--efficient,
funny, able to talk back to the taskmaster as though she were
an equal.  As a whole, the picture is probably over the heads
of the targeted audience who may not really understand what
is at stake here but at the same time has reasonable appeal
for adults who had to give up their own dreams.  Once again,
though, isn't it difficult to sympathize with a guy who has
everything--looks, physique, profession, sports car, a pad that
could cover the pages of Architectural Digest--and who could
easily pick up a dog and a lovely mate for the asking--but
who missed out on becoming a pilot?
Rated PG.  Running time: 104 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis) is an overbearing, insulting, obnoxious 
PR consultant.  When he's called a jerk four times in one scene, he asks 
his assistant Amy (Emily Mortimer) if that makes it true.  "No," she 
says, "four times is a pattern.  It takes five times to be a fact."  
Shortly thereafter she calls him a jerk, and that was good enough for 
me.
     The premise of this comedy is that Russ needs serious help from his 
inner child to overcome his personality impediment, and through the 
magic of Disney, that help incarnates as his 8-year-old self, Rusty 
(Spencer Breslin).   Nobody seems to have much trouble accepting this 
curious phenomenon, and there's precious little explanation of how it 
happened, but Rusty looks as if he may have climbed out of a Campbell's 
Soup can. 
     Of all the under-explained phenomena in the movie, the 
undermost-explained is why people like Russ so much.  On the one hand 
we're shown what an obnoxious prick he is, and on the other we see 
people beaming at him and falling in love with him.  Maybe it's because 
he looks like Bruce Willis.  Amy admits that every time she's ready to 
leave, she gets a glimpse of the kid in him, and she just melts.
     Russ has spent his adult life overcoming the dweeb he was as a kid, 
and little Rusty is no more pleased to see how he turns out ("A dogless, 
chickless guy with a tick!")  The challenge is for each to change the 
other, and this movie has no conscience about that old "never mess with 
the past" caveat.  There's a surprise guest appearance by yet a third 
Russ character to round things off.
      Willis, who seems to have partitioned his career into the action 
Bruce Willis and the sensitive Bruce Willis here again shows his sweet, 
child-loving side, and Breslin overcomes some inept early scenes (but 
heck, he's only 8) to do an ingratiating job.  Best are Lily Tomlin as 
Russ's wry secretary ("How's Mini-you?"), and Jean Smart (Guinevere) as 
an understanding client.  A witty screenplay by Audrey Wells (Guinevere) 
helps carry this movie safely into the "fun for the family" zone.  But 
it's not recommended for diabetics.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Russell Morely Duritz (played by Bruce Willis) is an image
consultant.  He is very successful at this.  Unconcerned, he uses
his talents to make society's slimeballs acceptable to the public.
His assistant Amy (Emily Mortimer) tries to get him to reform him,
but he ignores her efforts.  Lately however, Russell's life does
seem to be unraveling.  He is seeing a red bi-plane flying overhead
and occasionally buzzing his convertible.  Nobody else seems to see
it.  There is a young child who seems to be breaking into Russell's
property.  But proof that what is happening is not in the realm of
the natural is that this Rusty (Spenser Breslin) turns out to be
Russell at age eight.  This is an opportunity for Russell to see
himself at age eight and come to understand better where he came
from.  Rusty gets a chance to see what he will really become: no
wife, no dog, in short a loser.
     Questions about what is going on in this film come in two
types.  One type is things that we can gloss over with the
explanation it is all magic, the other flavor is real logic flaws.
We can say that the fact Russell has very little memory of this
strange interlude is magical.  Part of the process is wiping the
memories clear.  It is a lot harder to explain why Russell remembers
so little of his life at age eight.  It is almost like he is delving
into the life of a stranger.
     DISNEY'S THE KID is light fantasy of the sort that when it
works, you get a magical film like a BEING JOHN MALKOVICH or even a
JOE VERSUS THE VOLCANO.  Here the magic makes the story run, but the
magical never takes hold of the viewer.  It seems like a strange
complaint but this film has a serious lack of Wonder and the
Wonderful.
     Bruce Willis and Spencer Breslin do act well together.  There
is a certain chemistry between them.  They do play off each other
well.  Lily Tomlin is present to be a voice of reason, Janet,
Russell's righteous secretary.  Similarly principled is Russell's
assistant Amy played by Emily Mortimer of THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS
and currently of LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST.
     Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler.. .
     I think the breezy summertime look of this film belies its
actual origins.  We have the story of a man nasty to people in and
out of his profession.  He is happy to go through life with no human
ties except to his employees whom he abuses.  He has little thought
about the future he is making.  Then through supernatural agencies
he is confronted with his past, his present, and his future.
Suddenly he knows what he wants in life and it transforms him into a
loving and generous man.  He will be good to his employees and will
have human ties.  Isn't this a plot we have seen someplace before?
Maybe it might be connected to some December holiday?

Author
Jon Popick
Imagine Hollywood had something similar to baseball^Ňs Hall of Fame and
that retired/dead stars had to have their entire careers summarized in a
brief paragraph on a bronze plaque hanging in an overpriced tourist
attraction somewhere in Los Angeles. What the heck would Bruce Willis^Ň
plaque say? Would it mention his great work in edgy films like Pulp
Fiction and Twelve Monkeys? Probably not. Would the plaque list the
actor^Ňs popular action films like Die Hard and Armageddon? Maybe, but
this is probably how Willis^Ň plaque would read:
^ÓBorn in West Germany, ^ŃBruno^Ň made the successful leap from bartender
to television^Ňs Moonlighting to feature films in the late 1980s. Willis
was best known for starring opposite talented child actors and providing
the voices for infants. He was married to actress Demi Moore for ten
years, and the two superstars had three kids with really dumb names^Ô
Okay, the last part might not make it on there, but you get the point.
Despite having a pretty eclectic resumé, Willis^Ň career may be
remembered this way. Why? Because the following mathematical formula is
the hottest thing in Hollywood: ^ÓWillis + pre-pubescent boy + clever
script = box office gold^Ô
The movie with the kid who could see dead people made how much money?
Quick, let^Ňs get Willis in something else with a kid right away. The
result is Disney^Ňs The Kid, a whimsical tale about a grumpy workaholic
that gets in touch with the kid he used to be by actually meeting the
kid he used to be. That^Ňs right; through some sort of kooky Freaky
Friday movie magic, the grouch actually meets himself at age seven.
Willis (The Whole Nine Yards) plays Russell Morley Duritz, an
over-stressed image consultant with a twitchy left eye. The Kid^Ňs first
five minutes sets up Russell as a maniacal jerk that shuns his own
family but helps his crooked, high-profile clients look better in the
public^Ňs eye. Though this is supposed to make Russell an unsympathetic
character, I couldn^Ňt help but think that the world would be a better
place with more people like him. He^Ňs smart, efficient and cuts through
the bull with a blunt honesty that comes off as rude and arrogant. If
saying things that are on your mind is a bad thing, then lock me up.
A few days before his fortieth birthday, Russell begins seeing some
strange things. A red bi-plane seems to be following him around and a
snot-nosed kid appears in his house, somehow evading his
state-of-the-art security system. At first, he thinks he^Ňs hallucinating
the whole thing, but after comparing scars and birthmarks, he realizes
that the kid, Rusty (Spencer Breslin from the short-lived Dan Ackroyd
sitcom Soul Man), is really himself from thirty-two years ago.
The rest of The Kid involves Russell hating Rusty and trying to get rid
of him, but eventually growing attached to the boy and learning a little
bit about himself in the process before the film winds down to a
two-hankie finale that should choke up anyone that has recently had a
pulse. I^Ňm sure The Kid will hit home with anyone under age twelve or
over age forty, but everybody else might just roll their eyes at the
films sentimentality, which is hammered home by South Park musical
collaborator Marc Shaiman^Ňs sweeping score.
Breslin is a revelation as young Rusty, who shrieks his disappointment
that he grows up to be wife-less, dog-less and cool-job-less. Willis
plays a pretty good tight-ass but looks like he^Ňs having way too much
fun doing it. There are times when Willis is barely able to stifle his
smirk when he^Ňs supposed to be miserable. He did nasty and irritable
much better with General William Devereaux in The Siege. Willis^Ň
apparent new best friend Matthew Perry makes a funny unbilled cameo, as
well.
The Kid^Ňs script, which was written by Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award
winner Audrey Wells (Guinevere), is pretty clever for a family film, but
it had a bunch of problems, too. Russell spends his whole life trying to
distance himself from his past, yet somehow has totally forgotten the
most traumatic event that ever happened to him. And the film is dragged
down a bit by the romance between Russell and his perky moralistic
sidekick (played by British waif Emily Mortimer, Love^Ňs Labour^Ňs Lost).
She^Ňs not even the best match for Russell. He would have been better off
with his wisecracking personal assistant (Lily Tomlin, Tea With
Mussolini) or a local television news anchor (Jean Smart from Wells^Ň
Guinevere).
The Kid was directed by Jon Turteltaub, who has helmed such
non-kid-friendly films as Instinct and Phenomenon. It plays pretty
similarly to a couple of films that have already come out this year,
especially the arthouse release of Pip Karmel^Ňs Me Myself I, where
Rachel Griffiths goes through a similar ordeal on her thirtieth
birthday. You know, movies like these are the reason people dread the
big 3-0 and 4-0 (and beyond). They aren^Ňt upset about getting older ^Ö
they^Ňre worried about having to meet themselves.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Even if you don't like Bruce Willis as a person, or think that he sucks as
an actor, you gotta give the guy credit for this much: he sure does like to
diversify his roles! In the past two years alone, he's played an action hero
saving the world in ARMAGEDDON, a general in THE SIEGE, a quirky car
salesman in the very trippy BREAKFAST OF CHAMPIONS, second fiddle to a kid
who saw dead people in THE SIXTH SENSE, an aging husband in THE STORY OF US
and a comedic hitman in THE WHOLE NINE YARDS. So what's missing on his list?
Well, howsabout a good ol' fashioned sugary sweet children's Disney movie?
Check! Phew...okay, now let's dust John McLane out of the woodworks and get
ready to die some more!
PLOT:
An aging image consultant with a huge chip on his shoulder, a frigid
attitude, and little love in his life suddenly finds himself confronted with
his 8-year old self. Why his younger counterpart has all of a sudden become
a part of his present reality is unknown to the man, but he is certainly
going to do his best to find out.
CRITIQUE:
A kid's movie presented by Disney, this film makes no bones about itself.
It's a simple tale offering a predictable but important life lesson, a
handful of laughs via the latest cute kid in town Spencer Breslin, a
happy-go-lucky booming score, but certainly nothing more than an above
average Disney Sunday Night Movie of the Week starring Bruce Willis in a bad
hairpiece. In fact, if it wasn't for the adorable performance put forth by
the kid in this film, or the final act's resolution of said fantastical
situation, I wouldn't have recommended this film at all. But something about
the film's conclusion "got me" (read: I wept openly within myself... :), and
despite it being an obvious pull at the ol' heart strings via the most
powerful corporate company in the world of entertainment (M-I-C-K-E-Y
etc...), I still appreciated the sentiment and credited the film for that
much. I also happened to see this film with a few kids in tow (not my own),
and they all seemed to truly enjoy it. They cracked up at the kid on the
screen, made fun of Bruce and hopefully picked up a bit of the message
contained within (and a free toy plane given away to all kid attendees), so
target audience-wise, the course is certainly set to be flown.
Bruce was okay in the film, but he honestly didn't have much to do. He just
stood around as the straight man and acted nasty to just about everyone. The
romance angle of the film also didn't work for me, with a lot of it feeling
manufactured, a convenient device for the entire setup. In the end, this
film certainly isn't going to break any new ground (see BIG to know what I'm
talking about) or knock anybody over their ass in appreciation of its
entertainment value, but as a parent, you certainly can't go too wrong with
this film. In fact, it is more than likely that many adults will also see a
bit of themselves in the Willis character and hopefully take a little
something away from the film themselves. So if you've already seen CHICKEN
RUN, and need a safe, cute, sentimental fluff piece to present to the kids,
this film might just be the one for you.

Author
John Beachem
Russell Duritz (Bruce Willis) is a professional image consultant, which 
means he makes his living telling people what is wrong with them and bossing 
them around. Russell is blunt, rude, demanding, and absolutely miserable. He 
spends his time insulting his two employees; his sharp tongued secretary, 
Janet (Lily Tomlin), and his adoring assistant, Amy (Emily Mortimer). His 
life has been this way for some time now, until one evening when a familiar 
looking boy, named Rusty (Spencer Breslin), shows up in his house. After a 
few tests for scars and birthmarks, Russell determines that Rusty is his 
younger self, somehow arrived in the future. He first thinks he's crazy, and 
tries the "very powerful medication" his psychiatrist prescribed. After that 
doesn't work he asks Janet to make the boy go away (she finds this very 
amusing). Finally he decides the boy was sent to him so Russell could 
improve his childhood, and he has to figure out how to do that, and then how 
to send him back. While his interests first lie entirely in getting rid of 
this boy, he slowly realizes Rusty may have been sent to improve Russell's 
life, not vice-versa.
Walking into a live action Disney movie (or an animated one for that 
matter), one expects a certain level of sappiness and schmaltz. I'm not sure 
why the execs at Disney think kids like this (I sure didn't when I was a 
kid), but I suppose it's hard to argue with the kind of money these movies 
keep pulling in. In the beginning of "The Kid" I was pleased to find the 
schmaltz level was surprisingly low, and it stayed this way for the first 
half of the film. Instead of the expected cheesy sentimentality, we get 
Bruce Willis acting like a highly amusing jerk and Lily Tomlin delivering 
lines in a hilarious dead-pan style. Yet just as I was getting my hopes up, 
and thinking maybe this would be quite an entertaining movie, Audrey Wells 
("George of the Jungle") lays on the schmaltz in the last half like she was 
storing it up, hoping to kill us with one big blast. As I sat there, reeling 
from blow after blow (everything from childhood redemption against bullies 
to cute little puppy dogs named Chester), two thoughts were flying through 
my mind: "how could a movie change so drastically in five minutes?" and "why 
did Bruce allow this to happen?"
Speaking of Bruce, he turns in one of his most deadpan performances to date. 
By that I mean for the entire first half of the film, he shows next to no 
emotion. This may not sound great to everyone, but it's a comfortable, 
familiar style coming from Willis. The problem comes in the second half when 
he is asked to act in a way he has never acted before, jubilant and happy. 
Saying things like "Holy Smokes" just doesn't seem like Bruce, and he 
actually looks pained when saying it. Newcomer Spencer Breslin gives an 
adequate turn as Bruce's most recent adolescent co-star, but he's no Haley 
Joel Osment. The two standout performances come from Lily Tomlin ("Tea With 
Mussolini"), as mentioned earlier, and Emily Mortimer ("Scream 3") as 
Bruce's perfect foil. Mortimer pulls off an amazing feat, she acts bubbly 
and happy with enough restraint to avoid becoming irritating. The only 
problem I had with her character was that Wells underused her to the point 
where we developed no attachment to the character except to hate Bruce for 
being mean to her. Watch for Jean Smart (From back in the days of "Designing 
Women") in a strange supporting role as a television anchor-woman that Bruce 
unwillingly gives advice to.
I wasn't entirely sure how to write this review, because by the end I'd 
gotten the distinct impression I'd witnessed two very different movies. One 
was fun and entertaining, the other was irritating and schmaltzy. I decided 
the first half earned a four star rating and the second earned a two, so it 
averaged out to a three overall. I would have been tempted to give it a 
three and a half if it weren't for the fact that (this is a minor spoiler 
folks, read no further if you don't want to know anything about the movie) 
nothing is really explained in the end. We get some sort of weird, quasi, 
psuedo-explanation involving the future and a bi-plane, but that hardly 
qualifies. In fact, Jon Turteltaub ("Instinct") doesn't do much to explain 
things here. He throws an occasional sci-fi like scene of a '50s airport 
diner vanishing into thin air into the mix just to spice things up, but he 
doesn't even attempt to explain how all the events portrayed were made 
possible. Another point to mark against "The Kid" is the irritating score by 
Marc Shaiman ("South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut"). The music blasts 
throughout the theater in a deeply dramatic fashion all the time, even when 
dramatic music isn't needed. "The Kid" runs a little too long at 104 
minutes, and I'd recommend it only to die hard Bruce Willis fans and to 
those interested in seeing a younger talent on the rise in Emily Mortimer. 
For a lack of any explanation for how the events in the movie occurred and 
for a very Disney like second half I give it three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jon Turteltaub.
Cast: Bruce Willis, Spencer Breslin, Emily Mortimer, Lily Tomlin, Jean Smart, 
Chi McBride, Daniel Von Bargen, Dana Ivey.
2000 - 101 minutes
Rated PG (for mild violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 8, 2000.
The superfluously titled "Disney's The Kid" is a spin on one of the late-'80s 
most recycled premises, in which a character transforms from a child into a 
child in an adult's body overnight (1988's "Big"), or the souls of parent and 
child switch places (1987's "Like Father, Like Son," 1988's "Vice Versa"). 
The hook this time is that there is no role reversals or character switches, 
but that the adult and child versions of the same man come face-to-face. 
Bearing a striking resemblance in many ways to Penny Marshall's wonderfully 
magical "Big," it is easy to see how, with special handling and care, 
"Disney's The Kid" might have been able to rise to the former picture's 
level. Unfortunately, due to director Jon Turteltaub's and screenwriter 
Audrey Wells' syrupy treatment, both of whom stubbornly struggle at nearly 
every turn to make the film one children would be entertained 
through-and-through at, they botch the film's ambitious chances at greatness.
Like a train traveling full speed down a railroad track, Turteltaub's idea of 
making a successful children's fantasy is to keep moving, moving, moving, 
without pausing long enough to take a breather and getting to know the 
characters onscreen a little better. In fact, "Disney's The Kid" is almost 
annoying in the way it has been so obviously dumbed down in order to please 
the little kiddies in the audience and make a quick buck (that's Disney, for 
you).
Nearing his 40th birthday, Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis) is a workaholic image 
consultant who cares about little else other than himself, including his 
long-suffering partner and quasi-girlfriend Amy (Emily Mortimer). Following 
eerie instances in which he keeps imagining seeing a shiny, red plane flying 
in the air, and, at one point, follows a young child who was seen trespassing 
on his property into a restaurant, only for it to disappear into thin air 
after exiting the building, Russ suspects that he may be having a 
psychological issue. 
That's when the precocious 8-year-old Russ Duritz (Spencer Breslin) shows up, 
unsure how he got where he is but inexplicably linked to his grumpy 
40-year-old self. This time, however, Russ is relieved to learn that his 
personal assistant, Janet (Lily Tomlin), and Amy can also see the child, and 
becomes convinced that the chubby, little "Rusty" was brought here so that he 
can help him out with his own image, which cost him a fair amount of 
heartache throughout his school years. The more the two bond, though, the 
more the adult Russ starts to remember about a portion of his childhood that 
he has since blocked out, as it becomes increasingly clear the younger Russ 
appeared to help him come to terms with the one event in his life that 
changed him from an innocent boy into a hard-edged, unhappy man.
"Disney's The Kid" is a plodding motion picture whose blueprint is 
fundamentally predictable, causing an absence of interest to be invested into 
the plot particulars. Acquiring a troubling headache is another story 
altogether, as there is so much yelling and repetition in the opening half 
that it begins to get on your nerves. The last 45 minutes are more 
surprising, as the film slows down its quick pace to nowhere and gets a 
little serious. Without discussing the particulars, both versions of Russ 
find themselves facing the turning point in their life that changed them, and 
know that if they don't recognize the problem the second time around, their 
ill-omened future will be unavoidable.
In recent years, Bruce Willis has truly been branching out as an actor, 
appearing in everything from a horror film (1999's "The Sixth Sense"), to 
action (1998's "Armageddon"), to quirky comedy (1999's "Breakfast of 
Champions"), to screwball comedy (2000's "The Whole Nine Yards"), to human 
drama (1999's "The Story of Us"), to a family picture ("Disney's The Kid"). 
After years of being labeled little other than an action star, Willis has had 
a major career turnabout, proving that he is not only serious about his 
profession, but a fine actor, indeed. As the patronizing Russ Duritz, whose 
completely lost all signs of wide-eyed innocence and youth, Willis gives a 
genuinely touching performance. His counterpart, newcomer Spencer Breslin, is 
brightly unaffected, abandoning few signs of being an unctuous child actor.
As Amy, Russ' potential love interest, Emily Mortimer (2000's "Scream 3") 
sparkles. A natural talent and beauty, Mortimer gives Amy a much-needed 
warm-heartedness that balances out the cold Russ. The irreplaceable Lily 
Tomlin is also on hand in the underwritten role of Janet, Russ' assistant, 
and while she gives it her all and stands out in her few scenes, Tomlin is 
honestly too good to be wasting her time in throwaway parts like this. 
Finally, Jean Smart is a vibrant standout, developing her character of 
Deirdre, an aspiring newsanchor with an unexpected human connection to Russ, 
with an added level of realism that is truly refreshing.
When the climax finally arrived, it required a hint of subtle, yet powerful, 
resonance, much like "Big" did, and achieved. Ultimately, "Disney's The Kid" 
is rarely ever discreet in its emotions, and the finale is hampered, like 
much of what came before, by being just too cute and gushy for its own good. 
The final scene, between Russ and Amy, and played effectively to the tune, 
"(Your Love Keeps Lifting Me) Higher and Higher," on the other hand, does 
hold the subtlety required, and ends on a strong note. But the damage had 
already been done. Throughout "Disney's The Kid," I couldn't help but imagine 
how the film might have been drastically altered had only the cloying music 
score, by Marc Shaiman, been changed from its current kiddie origins to 
something more sophisticated and refined. In retrospect, the misguided score 
might have been all that needed to be modified for a mediocre film to be a 
good one. At every turn, "Disney's The Kid" screams out for that special, 
gentle touch, and the filmmakers sadly never realize it. Or maybe they just 
didn't care.

Author
Laura Clifford
Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis) is fast approaching his 40th birthday. He's a
successful image consultant, makes a lot of money, and has an expensive home
and a fancy car. But, he's a loser when it comes to the things that count in 
life - a family, friends, and people who care. Russ is at an emotional 
crossroads and, though he doesn't realize it, needs help. A pudgy 8-year old 
boy named Rusty (Spencer Breslin) arrives on his doorstep. When Russ realizes 
that Rusty is himself, 32-years ago, he makes a start on the road to personal 
redemption in "Disney's The Kid."
It gives me a chill when I see a movie title include the name of the company
that made it. When I saw the title of "Disney's The Kid," I knew that the
family entertainment giant was trying a little misdirection, as if to say, 
"Pay no attention to this movie. Just look who made it! That's the important 
thing." It isn't. The story is the important thing and "The Kid" lacks a good 
one.
"If only I knew what I know now when I was growing up...." Everyone has said
this to himself or herself at least once and probably many times over the
years.  It's an interesting premise, like time travel, and one that is ripe 
with possibilities. Unfortunately, the screenplay by Audrey Wells ("Guinevere")
doesn't capitalize on the idea. Basically, the story for "The Kid" is about a
pretty unlikable character, Russ, who happens to be very good at what he does.
His consultation business is lucrative and his clients are happy with his
efforts, but nobody likes the man. Even his loyal assistant, Janet (Lily
Tomlin), seems to tolerate the taciturn, often rude, style that defines Russ.
When Russ's alter ego, Rusty, arrives on the scene, there is no explanation,
aside from some vague magical incidents that don't explain anything. The boy
just appears out of the blue with a toy airplane, which Russ believes is his
from 32 years ago. Matching birthmarks and scars, the pair realizes that they
are the same person, but separated by decades. From here on in, it's a matter
of who helps whom. Rusty sees his future life as, "I'm 40, I don't fly jets 
and I don't have a dog. I'm a loser!" Russ sees his past life as something to 
be forgotten. This odd little couple must come to grips with their life crises 
and turn to each other for help. Russ shows Rusty how to defend himself against
bullies, while Rusty teaches Russ the importance of nurturing the kid within.
Bruce Willis seems to have made a career choice to star in film with kids.
"Mercury Rising" and "The Sixth Sense" come to mind with the former a thriller,
the later a horror flick, and both starring a little boy, too. "The Kid" is a
comedy, but no one apparently told Willis that his latest is supposed to be
funny as he gives a humorless performance as Russ. Compounding Willis's wooden
perf is the unendearing one by little Spencer Breslin as Rusty. The kid schleps
around and endlessly complains of not having a dog (and you know where that's
going to go. As you do with just about everything in the movie.) Young Breslin
doesn't have the personality or charm to make you like him. In the end, you
don't care about either Russ or Rusty.
The supporting cast is lightweight in number and the players are allowed to be
symbols only. Emily Mortimer, as Russ's assistant Amy, is the obvious love
interest in the film, though why she would deign to be seen in the company of
her rude boss is a question I asked more than once. The script covers this by
having Amy declare to Russ, "I [sometimes] see the kid in you." I'm glad she
does, because I never did. Nonetheless, Mortimer is pretty and perky in the
role. Jean Smart gets some mileage as a middle-aged southern belle who
relocates to LA as a news anchor. Her Deirdre becomes Russ's muse and advisor, 
basically telling him the obvious - let the inner kid out.
The production, led by helmer John Turteltaub, is straightforward. There is
little to take note of as the team behind the camera goes through the motions
of capturing the action. There's not a lot of passion in front of or behind the
camera.
When I first saw the trailers for "Disney's The Kid," I was less than
enthusiastic about seeing it. Now, having been there, I find my instincts were
correct. Save your money (or, go see "Chicken Run" instead). I give it a D+.
Bruce Willis once again braves sharing the screen with a child (and TWO
dogs, including a handicapped one!) in "Disney's the Kid."  He's Russ Duritz, 
an image consultant with a long-suffering assistant (Lily Tomlin) who buffers 
him from his father and an employee, Amy (Emily Mortimer, "Love's Labour's 
Lost") who keeps having her hopes of finding his good side dashed.
We witness a day in the life of Russ, where he treats people rudely (although
the script, by Audrey Wells ("Guinevere"), needed some real toughening up
in this regard) and engineers a media moment with a bunch of kids recruited
at a baseball game to save a dishonorable client.  Amy protests (script
problems again - why would she work for this guy if she constantly rejects his 
methods?) and Russ redeems himself by tossing the video.  Of course, he then 
has to spoil the good will he's generated by shoving her childlike enthusiasm 
for a perfect moon back in her face.
Then things get really weird when it appears a little kid is breaking into
his highly secure LA home.  (And, oh yeah, he's been buzzed by a bright red
biplane, too.)  A toy plane is left on Russ' doorstep and then he catches
the kid, who claims the plane because his name, Rusty, is painted on the
bottom.  Turns out - surprise - that this is Russ' plane and he's just been
introduced to himself as a child.
"Disney's the Kid" is an odd hybrid of a movie - the Disney inserted in the
title implies a kids' film, but it's really a midlife crisis flick mixed
with some fantastical time travel elements (the pilot plus multi-generational
male bonding aspect recalls Mel Gibson's "Forever Young").  Unfortunately the
story never seems to get out of the concept phase and Turteltaub's
("Phenomenon," "Instinct") direction is bland, but the cast can't be faulted.
Willis generously lets his costars shine, even as his character is undone
by writing that can't live up to its convictions (Russ doesn't seem unhappy
with his lot until he's made aware that he should be).  Young Spencer Breslin
(TV commercials) is a solid foil, never playing for the sap factor and 
able to pull off his disdain for 'a dogless, chickless guy' as being a loser
(he also does a pretty good job with the 'Holy smokes' signature line he
must say repeatedly).
Support really shines in this centerless film with Lily Tomlin's Janet 
leading the pack in a naturally comic performance as the power behind the
throne.  Jean Smart (a vet of screenwriter Wells' "Guinevere") exudes warmth 
in a small but pivotal role of a new LA news anchor who gets free advice from 
the early, begrudging Russ in order to pop up later and return the favor more 
generously.  Emily Mortimer finally establishes herself with a character that
actually has a personality (her performances in "Scream 3" and "Love's Labour's
Lost" hardly being memorable).  She holds her own against both Willis and
Breslin with adroit charm.
"Disney's the Kid" continues to waste its potential with an overly
sappy, overly 'happily ever after' ending that would actually make life almost 
not worth living for the two different-aged Russes if any of these pedestrian 
filmmakers stopped to think about it.  

Author
Ross Anthony
A single prop, fire engine red biplane dive-bombs into the life of Russell
Duritz (Bruce Willis). He's a high powered, self-confidant, expensive suit
wearing, image consultant for the stars and politicians; but he's a jerk. At
least that's what his assistant, Amy, thinks of him (when she's not falling
in love with him). "We can't go around anymore talking about what we're
going to be like when we grow up - we are up!"
On the outside, he's completely smooth, rock solid and successful, but his
inner child is so abused, we'll lets just say a real lively taste of his
childhood drops by for a visit. "I don't have time to go crazy. If you want
me to go crazy you'll just have to get on the phone with Janet and schedule
an appointment!"
It's a wonderful premise, charming, magical, endearing -- Bruce and "the
Kid" are equally so; but there are a few tweaks left untweaked - mostly in
conducting. A film is like a symphony - it's intensity and dynamics need to
be carefully controlled. Appropriately held back after the first act, this
film longed to rock and roll in the third, but it didn't quite bust out.
This could have been remedied by reducing the length of the segment where
Bruce and kid are trying to figure out what to do with each other, make a
quicker run to the climax - beefing up the peak, then extending the
resolution to include family relationships etc.
The film never quite sold the fact that Bruce was a jerk/loser in need of a
supernatural visitation. In fact, I found his cut-to-the-chase, brutally
honest personality quite refreshing. Yes, he was no saint, but neither the
Scrooge character we'd expect to be crying for inexplicable intervention.
Even with this error, the film is still delightful. It's clean, polished,
seeded well with juicy funny lines and solid talent. Lily Tomlin is smashing
as Bruce's eye-rolling secretary. I enjoyed the red paint motif and slick
opening sequence. A very strong B+, but it's more of an adult movie which
kids might like, than visa versa.
The Kid. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Bruce Willis, Spencer Breslin, Emily Mortimer, Lily Tomlin, Jean
Smart, Chi McBride.
Directed by John Turteltaub
Written by Audrey Wells
Produced by Jon Turtletaub, Christina Steinberg, Hunt Lowry at
Disney/Junction ent.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

KID, THE (director: Jon Turteltaub; screenwriter: Audrey Wells;
cinematographer: Peter Menzies Jr.; editor: Peter Honess/David Rennie;
cast: Bruce Willis (Russ Duritz), Spencer Breslin (Rusty Duritz), Emily
Mortimer (Amy), Lily Tomlin  (Janet), Jean Smart (Deirdre Lafever), Chi
McBride (Kenny), Daniel Von Bergen (Sam Duritz), Dana Ivey (Dr.
Alexander); Runtime: 104; 2000)
This Disney presentation of a time travel fantasy tale has the good
sense not to try and spend too much time clearing up what theoretical
scientists say is impossible: It is not possible to go back to the past
and change history. "The Kid" is a children's story but is stretched
into an adult one as well. It is a self-discovery tale, about a
40-year-old, ego-driven, high-powered "image consultant," Russ Duritz
(Bruce Willis) who meets himself as a pudgy dweeb, when he was an eight
year old (Spencer Breslin). The kid is presented as someone real, who is
not happy at the way he sees he turned out as a man. He tells Bruce
Willis he is not impressed with his money or status, but thinks he
turned out to be a loser because he has a facial tic, there is no lady
in the house, no family, no dog, and he is not a jet pilot.
Bruce, at first, thinks he is having hallucinations when he sees the kid
break into his secure theft-proof house. This causes him to see a shrink
and demand some powerful medication to prevent a nervous breakdown. When
he keeps seeing the kid and a small red airplane circling him, he still
thinks he is hallucinating. When he calls his loyal and tough-minded
assistant, Janet (Lili Tomlin), to verify if the kid is real, that is
all the proof the film needs that this is actually happening.
When he sits down with the adorable, always alert youngster, they
compare distinguishing characteristics such as birthmarks and scars, and
Bruce comes to the puzzling conclusion that this kid must be himself.
The story is about Bruce and how he must take hold of his cold
lifestyle, where he has become a person without any love in his life,
being held back from finding love because of his stunted childhood. It
is usually through dreams, drugs, one's creative work, psychoanalysis,
or meditation that one looks back at their past, but Bruce is too
blocked for any of that. If one were to overlook all the impossibilities
about this story and just concentrate on how the Bruce Willis character
comes to resolve his problem, then the film is somewhat engaging.
Though, it is sad to say that he resolves his problem the typical macho
way, by beating up his nemesis.
His interactions with others, like with Amy (Emily Mortimer), is
stand-offish. She works for him and wants to love him, but he has lost
touch with his feelings and doesn't realize that he loves her.
He is seated next to an attractive woman, Deirde (Jean Smart), on a
plane heading for L.A., where she is to be a news anchorperson. When she
finds out what he does for a living, she pesters him for advice on
improving her image. He gruffly gives her sound advice for free, which
he says he will give her only if she shuts up for the rest of the
flight. He thereby roughly critiques her for the way she cuts her hair,
has her eyebrows, does her makeup, and the kind of clothes she wears.
The kid acts as a catalyst to bring back Bruce's memories of what made
him turn out so cold. There is the schoolyard fight with a bully who is
always picking on him, that he has repressed. The fight takes place just
before his eight birthday. Bruce gets one of his clients, a boxer
(McBride), to teach the kid a one-two punch, which the kid uses in the
eventful fight that is soon to take place, as this time Bruce wins the
fight. But the new outcome doesn't change the events of Bruce's life, it
just changes the way he sees things now. Through seeing himself again as
a child, he reaches a new understanding about his father, whom he
detests because he never understood how to raise him. He had to raise
him as a single-parent after his mother died before his ninth birthday,
and he caused the child to feel insecure by frequently moving. These
childhood traumas, once they are better understood, make it easier for
Bruce to know who he is.
The movie was ably directed by Jon Turtletaub (While You Were
Sleeping/Phenomenon) and written by Audrey Wells (The Truth About Cats
and Dogs). It has a balanced mixture of adult sentimentalities and
childish comedy that should bring both children and adults into the same
movie theater, each finding something in the film to experience
together.
The idea of the film is intriguing, of a man who will live his future as
he knows he should because he got to the bottom of what troubled him
when he was growing up, and though the story is impossible and the
self-absorbed Bruce is now learning to be nice to those close to him
that he has hurt before, seemed like a stretch, it is still a
family-fare film with a few more ideas thrown in than the usual Disney
flicks. Though this type of supernatural movie has been tried often
(Back to the Future/Frequency/12 Monkeys), this film had a nice quality
to it, making it rather special. Bruce Willis works very well with
children, he seems to be a natural, and all his previous films with
children also attest to this, including his recent supernatural thriller
"The Sixth Sense."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Susan Granger
Working with Hayley Joel Osment in "The Sixth Sense" boosted
Bruce Willis's career and now he's got a new pint-sized co-star in
pudgy, eight year-old Spencer Breslin. Spencer plays Willis's
character, Russ Duritz, as a child.  He's transported from the '70s to
the present to help his arrogant, aging self - that's Willis - an
unhappy, unmarried, insensitive "image consultant" who is alienated
from his family and doesn't even own a dog - get back in touch with
the kid within. Rusty, as he was called back then, is appalled to
learn what will become of him, moaning, "I grew up to be a loser!" But
Russ eventually finds out what went wrong along the way, causing him
to give up his dreams of being a pilot and to acquire a twitch in his
left eye. Working from a script by Audrey Wells ("The Truth About Cats
and Dogs," "Guinevere") under the restrained direction of Jon
Turtletaub ("While You Were Sleeping," "Phenomenon"), Willis is
utterly charming and captivating, as he discovers that being rich,
living in an Architectural Digest house and driving a shiny black
Porsche isn't as fulfilling as loving people and having them love
you. 'Sound like "It's a Wonderful Life?" So be it - except Frank
Capra would never have tolerated Marc Shaiman's intrusive, syrupy
score. If you think Spencer Breslin looks familiar, he's the
TV-commercial kid who ordered "two all-beef patties, cheese, pickles,
lettuce, onions, special sauce on a sesame-seed bun." As for the
women, Lily Tomlin plays Russ's long-suffering assistant, Emily
Mortimer's his perky co-worker, and Jean Smart's the savvy TV
anchorwoman I wish he'd wound up with. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Disney's The Kid" is a sweet, not-overly-sentimental 7, a
heart-warming family fantasy. And you'll discover why the moon
sometimes looks orange.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
DISNEY'S THE KID (2000)
Rated PG; running time 104 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0219854
Official site: http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/thekid/
Written by: Audrey Wells
Directed by: Jon Turteltaub
Cast: Bruce Willis, Spencer Breslin, Emily Mortimer, Lily Tomlin,
Jean Smart, Chi McBride, Richard Jenkins, Jeri Ryan
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsthekid.html
You wanna know what grates my cheese? [go ahead, nod. You know you
wanna.]  Ok, I'll tell ya: doofus creativity-challenged movie executives
who cut-n-paste together movie trailers that might as well be released
as mini-movies, since they show almost all the best parts of the flick
in question (and do so a kabillion times before the movie opens, at
that) - and certainly give away way more of the movie than the audience
needs to know, not allowing that magical "aha!" moment when we Discover
what's happening in a film for our at least halfway-intelligent selves.
Between those oafs in the movie business, and their TeeVee
promo-creating counterparts, I'd like to round 'em all up and take
grandaddy's best belt to their ig'nant little hides, I tell ya.
And if that's the biggest rant I could muster up about DISNEY'S THE KID,
then I reckon it had to be a pretty decent movie.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis) is, in a word, a jerk.  At least, that's what
the world thinks of him, and he plays the part well.  Russ, a nearly
40-year-old professional image consultant who admittedly gets off on
telling people what to do, has little patience for displays of emotion
or affection, especially as concerns his father, with whom he has
lingering Childhood Issues (which, as we find later, develop into Adult
Unfulfillment Issues).  Everyone - from his put-upon pseudo girlfriend
Amy (the delightful Emily Mortimer), put-upon assistant Janet (the
somewhat delightful Lily Tomlin), professional boxer and Russ' client
Kenny (the not as delightful, but good looking baldie Chi McBride), and
Diedre Lafere (the surprisingly delightful Jean Smart), a very friendly
TV anchorwoman he met on a plane - thinks Russ is in dire need of a soul
makeover, not to mention, a clue.  And he just might find both in
8-year-old Rusty (the sho'nuff delightful Spencer Breslin), who has a
whole lot in common with Russ.  A younger version of Russ, that is.
The Upshot:
Bruce Willis, near as I can tell, has three acting personas: there's the
Serious, Silent type, like the characters he played in flicks like THE
SIXTH SENSE and DIE HARD [1 only; 2 and 3 were pale imitations.  See
also: Mel Gibson in "Lethal Weapons 2-36"]; the Sincerely Humorous type
that he shared with his audience in the early days of the MOONLIGHTING
TV series; and then there's the Gotta Get Pi-zaid type that helped to
further stink up an already malodorous HUDSON HAWK.  Of the three, I
prefer his Sincerely Humorous persona.  That's the one that showed up in
The Kid - and from all appearances, his co-stars grooved with that
persona, too.
Willis performs remarkably well as a man who has filled his life with
Big Status-y Things to try (unsuccessfully) to fill the gaps that come
from a life's dream deferred.  Neither mawkish nor completely
irredeemable (consider: would a total jerk *really* pay for someone
else's groceries, just to get out of a grocery store quickly?  Force his
way through the line, sure; but, pay in full?), his Russ has a mid-life
crisis of a different sort than we're used to seeing.  Here, Russ'
discovery comes through the mirror of his younger self, who sees the
"small" things older Russ *doesn't* have - a meaningful job, a family,
heck, even a dog [how could he not have a dog, sheesh!] - as the true
mark of a life gone wrong.   It would be easy for that character to be
played as a kick-me target to laughed at; it is much to Willis' credit
that, for the most part, he avoids derision in that sense.
Each of the lead actors and their characters seemed to Play Well with
Willis - and he, in turn, gets an A for Sharing Playspace (Reasonably)
Nicely with them.  Emily Mortimer was a nice discovery for me here
(though, I must admit, she would've made a better "best friend" type for
Russ than a possible girlfriend.  Jean Smart absolutely sizzled
on-screen and provided more than a match for Bruce Willis; hard to
understand [she said, tongue firmly in-cheek] why the choice was made to
pair Willis with the younger actress instead.  Ah, Hollyweird).  The
screeching irritant of Renee Zellwiger in ME, MYSELF & IRENE having been
the last (non-cartoon) female lead I'd been exposed to, Mortimer
provided a pleasant contrast in her very user-friendly approach to a
character that could've easily been played as cloying and pathetic in
the wrong hands.  Mortimer's "hands" reminded me of some of the better
works of actress Minnie Driver; I look forward to seeing more of
Mortimer in movies to come.
Similarly, both Jean Smart and Spencer Breslin exceeded my expectations.
Smart, most notably known for her time on CBS-TV in DESIGNING WOMEN, was
always too broad a broad in that show; here, she kept the Good Ol' Girl
drawl in check, delivering a much more subtle, yet substantial,
performance in a role that was kind of strangely written in the first
place.  It threatened to be *over*written, but she pulled it off
nonetheless.  And even though many of his best lines were already
trailer-spoiled, Breslin's Rusty, bless his chubby little heart, had me
in stitches at times, and - remembering my own sometimes torturous
childhood - nearly in tears at others.  If nothing else, he deserves
hosannas for having more in common with child actor Haley Joel Osment
from THE SIXTH SENSE, than with the bratty Macaulay Culkin from HOME
ALONE (for now, at least.  I'll keep a good thought for Breslin; we
don't need another Culkin loosed upon us).
That's not to say, of course, that DISNEY'S THE KID didn't have its
faults.  "Kid" almost included too many characters (Chi McBride's boxer
Kenny, who Russ seeks out to help him teach Rusty how to defend himself,
was right on the edge of being a Diversity Addendum), the smarmily-cute
level got notched up near 11 a couple of times, and some obvious Issues
(for instance, the big How'd It All Happen In The First Place question)
might have, in a lesser flick, left me gasping for fresh air.  But "Kid"
had enough good clean fun, acted and filmed breezily, to balance it all
out.  I found myself laughing, and smiling, with ease, throughout this
Disney flick.
Issues of trailer-spoilage by numbnut preview creators aside (which, to
its credit, the movie overcame), you'll learn nothing new in DISNEY'S
THE KID that you haven't seen before in other "childhood reversal"
flicks like BIG ("Kid"'s sibling in overall theme), for instance.  Then
again, it might just be that in our rush to get from Here to There, we
adults have forgotten those lessons that BIG and DISNEY'S THE KID are
trying to teach us, if we'd only listen.  Or maybe, it's just as good an
excuse as any to laugh at ourselves for an hour our two.  Can't beat
that with a stick, eh?
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
Not for nothin', but it must be said: whathell was Kenny Edmonds
thinking???
(Watch the movie, during the wedding scene, or buy the soundtrack.
You'll see - better yet, you'll *hear* - what I mean).
Bammer's Bottom Line:
If you liked Tom Hanks' turn in BIG - and I loved Tom Hanks' turn in BIG
- you'll like this flick.  DISNEY'S THE KID is a feel-good movie that
won't leave you feeling guilty for playing along with it, even though
kids were watching and laughing at the same jokes as we adults laughed
at.  Now if I could just hunt down the stoopid trailer-makers that give
away damn near the whole movie, like the vermin that they are...
DISNEY'S THE KID (rating: greenlight):
I wouldn't be a kid again if you paid me; but I wonder how 8-year-old
Rose would Like Me Now.  Hmmm...

Author
Jon Popick
Imagine Hollywood had something similar to baseball^Ňs Hall of Fame and
that retired/dead stars had to have their entire careers summarized in a
brief paragraph on a bronze plaque hanging in an overpriced tourist
attraction somewhere in Los Angeles. What the heck would Bruce Willis^Ň
plaque say? Would it mention his great work in edgy films like Pulp
Fiction and Twelve Monkeys? Probably not. Would the plaque list the
actor^Ňs popular action films like Die Hard and Armageddon? Maybe, but
this is probably how Willis^Ň plaque would read:
^ÓBorn in West Germany, ^ŃBruno^Ň made the successful leap from bartender
to television^Ňs Moonlighting to feature films in the late 1980s. Willis
was best known for starring opposite talented child actors and providing
the voices for infants. He was married to actress Demi Moore for ten
years, and the two superstars had three kids with really dumb names^Ô
Okay, the last part might not make it on there, but you get the point.
Despite having a pretty eclectic resumé, Willis^Ň career may be
remembered this way. Why? Because the following mathematical formula is
the hottest thing in Hollywood: ^ÓWillis + pre-pubescent boy + clever
script = box office gold^Ô
The movie with the kid who could see dead people made how much money?
Quick, let^Ňs get Willis in something else with a kid right away. The
result is Disney^Ňs The Kid, a whimsical tale about a grumpy workaholic
that gets in touch with the kid he used to be by actually meeting the
kid he used to be. That^Ňs right; through some sort of kooky Freaky
Friday movie magic, the grouch actually meets himself at age seven.
Willis (The Whole Nine Yards) plays Russell Morley Duritz, an
over-stressed image consultant with a twitchy left eye. The Kid^Ňs first
five minutes sets up Russell as a maniacal jerk that shuns his own
family but helps his crooked, high-profile clients look better in the
public^Ňs eye. Though this is supposed to make Russell an unsympathetic
character, I couldn^Ňt help but think that the world would be a better
place with more people like him. He^Ňs smart, efficient and cuts through
the bull with a blunt honesty that comes off as rude and arrogant. If
saying things that are on your mind is a bad thing, then lock me up.
A few days before his fortieth birthday, Russell begins seeing some
strange things. A red bi-plane seems to be following him around and a
snot-nosed kid appears in his house, somehow evading his
state-of-the-art security system. At first, he thinks he^Ňs hallucinating
the whole thing, but after comparing scars and birthmarks, he realizes
that the kid, Rusty (Spencer Breslin from the short-lived Dan Ackroyd
sitcom Soul Man), is really himself from thirty-two years ago.
The rest of The Kid involves Russell hating Rusty and trying to get rid
of him, but eventually growing attached to the boy and learning a little
bit about himself in the process before the film winds down to a
two-hankie finale that should choke up anyone that has recently had a
pulse. I^Ňm sure The Kid will hit home with anyone under age twelve or
over age forty, but everybody else might just roll their eyes at the
films sentimentality, which is hammered home by South Park musical
collaborator Marc Shaiman^Ňs sweeping score.
Breslin is a revelation as young Rusty, who shrieks his disappointment
that he grows up to be wife-less, dog-less and cool-job-less. Willis
plays a pretty good tight-ass but looks like he^Ňs having way too much
fun doing it. There are times when Willis is barely able to stifle his
smirk when he^Ňs supposed to be miserable. He did nasty and irritable
much better with General William Devereaux in The Siege. Willis^Ň
apparent new best friend Matthew Perry makes a funny unbilled cameo, as
well.
The Kid^Ňs script, which was written by Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award
winner Audrey Wells (Guinevere), is pretty clever for a family film, but
it had a bunch of problems, too. Russell spends his whole life trying to
distance himself from his past, yet somehow has totally forgotten the
most traumatic event that ever happened to him. And the film is dragged
down a bit by the romance between Russell and his perky moralistic
sidekick (played by British waif Emily Mortimer, Love^Ňs Labour^Ňs Lost).
She^Ňs not even the best match for Russell. He would have been better off
with his wisecracking personal assistant (Lily Tomlin, Tea With
Mussolini) or a local television news anchor (Jean Smart from Wells^Ň
Guinevere).
The Kid was directed by Jon Turteltaub, who has helmed such
non-kid-friendly films as Instinct and Phenomenon. It plays pretty
similarly to a couple of films that have already come out this year,
especially the arthouse release of Pip Karmel^Ňs Me Myself I, where
Rachel Griffiths goes through a similar ordeal on her thirtieth
birthday. You know, movies like these are the reason people dread the
big 3-0 and 4-0 (and beyond). They aren^Ňt upset about getting older ^Ö
they^Ňre worried about having to meet themselves.

Author
Laura Clifford
Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis) is fast approaching his 40th birthday. He's a
successful image consultant, makes a lot of money, and has an expensive home
and a fancy car. But, he's a loser when it comes to the things that count in 
life - a family, friends, and people who care. Russ is at an emotional 
crossroads and, though he doesn't realize it, needs help. A pudgy 8-year old 
boy named Rusty (Spencer Breslin) arrives on his doorstep. When Russ realizes 
that Rusty is himself, 32-years ago, he makes a start on the road to personal 
redemption in "Disney's The Kid."
It gives me a chill when I see a movie title include the name of the company
that made it. When I saw the title of "Disney's The Kid," I knew that the
family entertainment giant was trying a little misdirection, as if to say, 
"Pay no attention to this movie. Just look who made it! That's the important 
thing." It isn't. The story is the important thing and "The Kid" lacks a good 
one.
"If only I knew what I know now when I was growing up...." Everyone has said
this to himself or herself at least once and probably many times over the
years.  It's an interesting premise, like time travel, and one that is ripe 
with possibilities. Unfortunately, the screenplay by Audrey Wells
("Guinevere")
doesn't capitalize on the idea. Basically, the story for "The Kid" is about a
pretty unlikable character, Russ, who happens to be very good at what he does.
His consultation business is lucrative and his clients are happy with his
efforts, but nobody likes the man. Even his loyal assistant, Janet (Lily
Tomlin), seems to tolerate the taciturn, often rude, style that defines Russ.
When Russ's alter ego, Rusty, arrives on the scene, there is no explanation,
aside from some vague magical incidents that don't explain anything. The boy
just appears out of the blue with a toy airplane, which Russ believes is his
from 32 years ago. Matching birthmarks and scars, the pair realizes that they
are the same person, but separated by decades. From here on in, it's a matter
of who helps whom. Rusty sees his future life as, "I'm 40, I don't fly jets 
and I don't have a dog. I'm a loser!" Russ sees his past life as something to 
be forgotten. This odd little couple must come to grips with their life
crises 
and turn to each other for help. Russ shows Rusty how to defend himself
against
bullies, while Rusty teaches Russ the importance of nurturing the kid within.
Bruce Willis seems to have made a career choice to star in film with kids.
"Mercury Rising" and "The Sixth Sense" come to mind with the former a
thriller,
the later a horror flick, and both starring a little boy, too. "The Kid" is a
comedy, but no one apparently told Willis that his latest is supposed to be
funny as he gives a humorless performance as Russ. Compounding Willis's wooden
perf is the unendearing one by little Spencer Breslin as Rusty. The kid
schleps
around and endlessly complains of not having a dog (and you know where that's
going to go. As you do with just about everything in the movie.) Young Breslin
doesn't have the personality or charm to make you like him. In the end, you
don't care about either Russ or Rusty.
The supporting cast is lightweight in number and the players are allowed to be
symbols only. Emily Mortimer, as Russ's assistant Amy, is the obvious love
interest in the film, though why she would deign to be seen in the company of
her rude boss is a question I asked more than once. The script covers this by
having Amy declare to Russ, "I [sometimes] see the kid in you." I'm glad she
does, because I never did. Nonetheless, Mortimer is pretty and perky in the
role. Jean Smart gets some mileage as a middle-aged southern belle who
relocates to LA as a news anchor. Her Deirdre becomes Russ's muse and
advisor, 
basically telling him the obvious - let the inner kid out.
The production, led by helmer John Turteltaub, is straightforward. There is
little to take note of as the team behind the camera goes through the motions
of capturing the action. There's not a lot of passion in front of or behind
the
camera.
When I first saw the trailers for "Disney's The Kid," I was less than
enthusiastic about seeing it. Now, having been there, I find my instincts were
correct. Save your money (or, go see "Chicken Run" instead). I give it a D+.
Bruce Willis once again braves sharing the screen with a child (and TWO
dogs, including a handicapped one!) in "Disney's the Kid."  He's Russ Duritz, 
an image consultant with a long-suffering assistant (Lily Tomlin) who buffers 
him from his father and an employee, Amy (Emily Mortimer, "Love's Labour's 
Lost") who keeps having her hopes of finding his good side dashed.
We witness a day in the life of Russ, where he treats people rudely (although
the script, by Audrey Wells ("Guinevere"), needed some real toughening up
in this regard) and engineers a media moment with a bunch of kids recruited
at a baseball game to save a dishonorable client.  Amy protests (script
problems again - why would she work for this guy if she constantly rejects
his 
methods?) and Russ redeems himself by tossing the video.  Of course, he then 
has to spoil the good will he's generated by shoving her childlike enthusiasm 
for a perfect moon back in her face.
Then things get really weird when it appears a little kid is breaking into
his highly secure LA home.  (And, oh yeah, he's been buzzed by a bright red
biplane, too.)  A toy plane is left on Russ' doorstep and then he catches
the kid, who claims the plane because his name, Rusty, is painted on the
bottom.  Turns out - surprise - that this is Russ' plane and he's just been
introduced to himself as a child.
"Disney's the Kid" is an odd hybrid of a movie - the Disney inserted in the
title implies a kids' film, but it's really a midlife crisis flick mixed
with some fantastical time travel elements (the pilot plus multi-generational
male bonding aspect recalls Mel Gibson's "Forever Young").  Unfortunately the
story never seems to get out of the concept phase and Turteltaub's
("Phenomenon," "Instinct") direction is bland, but the cast can't be faulted.
Willis generously lets his costars shine, even as his character is undone
by writing that can't live up to its convictions (Russ doesn't seem unhappy
with his lot until he's made aware that he should be).  Young Spencer Breslin
(TV commercials) is a solid foil, never playing for the sap factor and 
able to pull off his disdain for 'a dogless, chickless guy' as being a loser
(he also does a pretty good job with the 'Holy smokes' signature line he
must say repeatedly).
Support really shines in this centerless film with Lily Tomlin's Janet 
leading the pack in a naturally comic performance as the power behind the
throne.  Jean Smart (a vet of screenwriter Wells' "Guinevere") exudes warmth 
in a small but pivotal role of a new LA news anchor who gets free advice from 
the early, begrudging Russ in order to pop up later and return the favor more 
generously.  Emily Mortimer finally establishes herself with a character that
actually has a personality (her performances in "Scream 3" and "Love's
Labour's
Lost" hardly being memorable).  She holds her own against both Willis and
Breslin with adroit charm.
"Disney's the Kid" continues to waste its potential with an overly
sappy, overly 'happily ever after' ending that would actually make life
almost 
not worth living for the two different-aged Russes if any of these pedestrian 
filmmakers stopped to think about it.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
In DISNEY'S THE KID, Russ Duritz (Bruce Willis) is a control freak who
doesn't abide any troubles in his life.  With an assistant, Janet,
played in full scene-stealing mode by Lily Tomlin, who is ready to try
to turn the power off on Atlanta if need be, Russ never lets problems
get near him.  He also keeps love, in the form of a warm and beautiful
girlfriend, Amy (Emily Mortimer), at arm's length.
One day into his rigid world comes a pair of hallucinations.  The first
involves a guy in a shiny red biplane who keeps swooping about.  The
other, and the more troubling, is an 8-year-old named Rusty (Spencer
Breslin), who starts hanging around Russ's lavish home.
A very uptight image consultant, Russ surrounds himself with material
possessions from $2,000 suits to sleek sports cars.  He's a cynical
human being who thinks he can manipulate opinion at will -- after all
that's what he does for a living and he's the best at it.
His past is an embarrassment to him and something which he never thinks
about.  When his dad asks for personal help in packing, he sends a check
to hire movers instead.
Russ's carefully orchestrated life is torn apart when he learns that
Rusty is himself at age 8.  Although Russ is supremely proud of his
conspicuous accomplishments, Rusty isn't so pleased to learn how his
life has turned out.  "No dog!" Rusty wails.  "No dog!  I grow up to be
guy with no dog!"  Rusty is also disappointed to learn that he isn't
married and doesn't fly jets as he planned.  "I'm a loser!" Rusty
concludes.
Russ, on the other hand, remembers what a pudgy, clumsy, whimpering
child he was and is not pleased either.  When he tries to teach himself
(as a kid) a thing or two, the results are hilarious, albeit not
particularly successful.
The chemistry between the two actors is delightful.  Physically they
look like such an odd pairing that their relationship will never work,
but it does beautifully.  The kid holds his own against a famous star
and gives as much as he gets.  You can see the mutual respect in their
eyes.
The script by Audrey Wells (THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS) is funny
without ever being insulting or patronizing.  Avoiding slapstick almost
entirely, the script is remarkably intelligent and sharp.
The story, which is at once sweet and serious, turns into a journey of
exploration for Russ, and it's a trip that he has avoided all of his
life.  "When I look at him, I see awful memories," Russ tells Amy about
Rusty.  "Memories that I've spent my life trying to forget."  The kid is
obviously there for a purpose.  But what exactly?  The poor kid, on the
other hand, just wants to get home and out of all this time traveling.
The conclusion wraps things up well and without ever trying to become
FREQUENCY 2.  DISNEY'S THE KID is a unique little movie with a big
heart.  You'll laugh, you might even cry, and your heart will be touched
-- something that probably isn't the least bit obvious from the
saccharine and sort of silly trailers for the picture.  A satisfying
movie, it is wonderful family entertainment as well, although very young
viewers may get very fidgety as the ones did at our screening.  But for
the older kids and the adults, the movie has a lot to offer.
DISNEY'S THE KID runs 1:41.  It is rated PG for mild language and has
nothing to offend any one of any age.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, was there with several of his classmates of the
same age.  He found the film funny, cute and really sweet and gave it a
full ****.  Johanna, who also gave it ****, was bursting with positive
adjectives, ranging from fantastic to hilarious.  Maxim thought it was
funny and gave it ***.  The odd man out was Alan, who gave it just one
*, calling it really stupid and dumb.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
