Title
Review for Hollywood Shuffle (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE (1987)
Rated R; running time 81 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0093200
Written by: Robert Townsend, Keenen Ivory Wayans, Dom Irrera
Directed by: Robert Townsend
Cast: Robert Townsend, Anne-Marie Johnson, Craigus R. Johnson,
Helen Martin, Brad Sanders, Keenen Ivory Wayans, Ludie Washington,
Eugene R. Glazer, Lisa Mende, Dom Irrera, Sena Ayn Black,
Grand L. Bush, Roy Fegan, David McKnight, Nancy Cheryll Davis,
Damon Wayans, Richard Cummings Jr.
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamshshuffle.html
Want to know what drives me to do my job as an entertainment critic?
[Trust me: it ain't the money].  Well, you've come to the right place.
If WILD WILD WEST was the impetus for me to co-found 3BlackChicks Review
with my partner The Diva, then for me, HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE is the
inspiration that keeps me going on.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE, a self-financed, semi-autobiographical film by writer
and director Robert Townsend, tells the story of Bobby Taylor
(Townsend), an inspiring actor struggling to make it in show business
while maintaining his dignity and self-respect.  This is hard to do, as
he's surrounded by crab-in-a-barrel coworkers (Keenen Ivory Wayans,
Ludie Washington) to the left of him, and exploitative idiot TV
executives (Eugene R. Glazer, Lisa Mende, Dom Irrera), to the right.
Bobby is stuck in the middle with a strong support system, including
girlfriend Lydia (Anne-Marie Johnson), younger brother Stevie (Craigus
R. Johnson), their grandmother (the late Helen Martin) - and a healthy
imagination.  One in which he sees himself not as a jive talkin'
knucklehead or a thug, as the rest of Hollywood sees him - but as a film
noir detective, or Shakespearean thesp, or action hero.  You know: just
like any old actor.
The Upshot:
I have a lot of love in my heart for this film, on so many levels.  I
admire Robert Townsend for having the fortitude to do the film in the
first place, mostly on his own dime, enlisting a huge group of fellow
actors, comedians, and other struggling artists, to help him make HS a
reality (listing them all here would take way too much space; I
encourage you to check out the IMDB listing for complete cast credits).
I remember watching interviews in which he talked about financing HS on
maxed-out credit cards - back in the days when that kind of thing was
fairly rare - and thought it was the coolest thing in the world to
believe in something so strongly that you would put yourself in
potential debt to keep it going.  That lesson wasn't been lost on me, to
this day.
But mostly, I love HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE because, even after 14 years, and a
bit of progress on the Black Folk In Hollywood front, I find it still
relevant; and more importantly, still *funny*.  As with another old
favorite of mine, BLAZING SADDLES, there are certain lines that never
fail to Take Me Back as soon as I hear them:
  -"He killeded my brutha! I *loveded* my brutha!"
  -"I'm making Winky Dinky Dog hoecakes...'cause hoes gotta eat, too!"
  -"We need you to be a little more 'Black'.  You know: stick your
    ass out, buck your eyes...you know how they do."
But Townsend and his writers don't rely on one-liners to carry the day,
no sirree; intermixed with the "serious" moral theme that drives the
story, Townsend sprinkled daydream sketches throughout HOLLYWOOD
SHUFFLE, skits in which castmembers played various multiple parts.  I
compare these rough skits to SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE when it was still
funny, or MONTY PYTHON'S FLYING CIRCUS...N' The Hood.
Townsend, who polished up some of the sketches from this film and used
them in his series of skit comedy specials on HBO [who could forget "The
Bold, The Black, and The Beautiful"?  Not me!], successfully
collaborated with Keenen Ivory Wayans on those specials as well as in
this movie.  I want to point out two sketches in particular: "Noir
Detective", which leads to the funniest bit I've ever seen this
particular Wayans brother do, in the person of Jerry Curl Johnson; and
obviously, "Speed & Tyrone: Sneakin' In The Movies".  Once you see the
latter skit, you'll have a taste of 3BC Flava.
HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE isn't the kind of movie everyone will Get; if it seems
dated, I think that's because some people are convinced that We *Have*
Overcome, and should Get On With It.  I'm not quite there yet.  From the
looks of things, We've just traded jive talkin' superfly pimps and hoes,
for trash talkin' gangstas and babymamas.  Yeah, progress.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
The Black Factor is abundantly clear throughout HS; let's go for the
White Factor instead.
I won't waste my time here browbeating well-meaning Whites into
submission.  I won't pile more guilt onto those fatcat con men who are
part of the Power Structure Oppressing Black Hollywood, or wonder why so
many of those Blaxploitation TV shows had Jewish writers.  And while I"m
not doing stuff, I won't I take to task those House Kneegrows who
continue to stick out their ass and buck their eyes for a non-feeling,
non-thinking Electronic Massa.  No, my sole purpose here is to wonder
exactly how lost some White Folk will be, hearing strange concepts like
"jheri curl", "light-skinned Blacks don't make good crooks" (and its
natural extension, the "paperbag test"), "crabs-in-a-barrel", and such.
On the real, it brings to mind a heartfelt email one of my readers sent,
asking me if I thought Spike Lee was at all concerned with whether White
viewers will understand the message in his movies.  Hell, Robert
Townsend isn't seen as an Angry Black Man to those who might make such
references - and I wonder if White viewers will understand *Townsend's*
message any better.
I'd make it easier by providing a "Bammer's Blactionary" here, but I've
long since retired that twist, sorry.  I think ya betta ask somebody.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I've been grumbling for awhile now that I couldn't find HOLLYWOOD
SHUFFLE on DVD at Netflix; but I just did a cursory search and it's
there (I screened a VHS version).  Now that I know that it can be
purchased, Amazon here I come!
HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE (rating: greenlight):
My new goal is to catch up to Robert Townsend, and shake his hand.
After all, he's partially responsible for "3BlackChicks Review"; and one
of these days, I plan on telling him so.

Author
Steve Fritzinger
     With HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE, first time writer/director Robert Townsend creates
a very entertaining film.  This good-natured parody of movie-making gets most
of its laughs from gentle but well-aimed shots at the stereotypes connected to
black actors and white film makers.  Along the way HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE takes time
out to lampoon hard-boiled detectives, Eddie Murphy, TV movie critics and the
rewards of stardom.
     Townsend also stars as Bobby, a struggling young black actor who works
part-time at the local "Winky Dinky Dog" hot dog stand.  Bobby is trying out
for his first movie role playing a street hood named Jivetime Jimmy.
Unfortunately while Bobby hopes this part will put him on the road to stardom,
he also feels the role is so absurdly unrealistic in its portrayal of blacks
that to take the part would be selling out his integrity.
     The best scenes in HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE take place in Bobby's mind, as he
daydreams and images the consequences of his actions.  The tone of these
scenes ranges from a dry Pythonisque humor to absurd visual humor that would be
at home in one of the "Airplane" movies.
     With the exception of Bobby's family and girlfriend, the other characters
are caricatures of actors, producers, and hog dog vendors, but these
caricatures are not presented in a mean-spirited way.  You are left with the
feeling that Townsend is spoofing the stereotypes, not poking fun at the people
associated with the stereotypes.
     An intelligent comedy, and an effective parody, HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE rates a
+3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  TV situation comedy punctuated with
     hilarious skits.  Robert Townsend produced, directed, and
     starred in this comedy about the lack of roles for black
     actors in Hollywood.  The story could have been better but
     the humor of the skits was right on target.
     What should I tell you about HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE?  I saw it with an
audience that loved it.  Three people I was with were darn insulting to me
because I did not love it too.  Should I say positive things to tell you
what was good about it or say negative things to tell you why it wasn't
great?  Some of both, I suspect.
     Bobby Taylor (played by Robert Townsend, who also produced and
directed) is a talented black actor doing what a lot of talented black
actors do.  He's working at a fast-food restaurant and desperately trying to
find an acting job.  There are few actings jobs for blacks at all and they
are all as street pimps, muggers, servants, or slaves.  Not that Bobby
wouldn't love to get one of these roles, but deep down he wants to play
great dramatic roles, like starring in ripoffs of RAMBO and INDIANA JONES.
As Bobby goes through the frustrating life of an aspiring black actor, he
imagines skits relevant to his situation.
     The film is structured perhaps not so much as a story but as a set of
skits with a connecting story.  The skits, while not always entirely
original, are funny.  They are very funny.  One is as ad for the "Black
Actors School" that is great.  And another, a take-off of review programs,
is magnificent.  The problems with the film are all with the connecting
story.  I am not saying it is actively bad.  It just is not particularly
good.  yes, it makes a serious point--that there are few good Hollywood
roles for black actors--and further, it suggests that black actors should
refuse to take the stereotyped roles that have traditionally been given to
blacks.  But the story is just not done on a very high level.  There is too
little time left after the skits to do a story of any more depth than an
episode of THE JEFFERSONS.  What's left is manipulative and sentimental.
Talk about stereotypes: there is Bobby's sweet but cantankerous grandmother
and his adorable little brother.  Without the skits the story might be good
enough to play on TV, on ABC, maybe.  With the skits, the film is quite
worth seeing.  Rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
