Title
Review for Feng yu shuang liu xing (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Those accustomed to Jackie Chan in his early Hong Kong films
are probably aware that the popular actor had to follow the
same path as most of other major stars. He had to work his
way up to the leading roles by playing second fiddles or
characters that could be hardly associated with his current
screen charisma. One of such interesting cases is THE KILLER
METEORS, 1976 kung fu film directed by Lo Wei.
The hero of this film is My Way (played by Jimmy Wang Wu),
martial arts expert equipped with secret and deadly weapon
called "killer meteors". His reputation is such that any
other martial arts expert or heavy in the neighbourhood has
to pay him annual tribute just to stay alive. My Way's
deadly reputation is matched only by those of "Immortal" Wa
Wu Bin (played by Jackie Chan), another "Killer Meteor" who
seeks his help. When two "Killer Meteors" meet, Wa Wu Bin is
just a shadow of his former self, being poisoned by his
treacherous wife, Madam Tempest, who gives him antidote in
order to keep him alive. My Way is asked to steal the well-
guarded antidote and he accepts, entering the deadly web of
intrigue, treachery and shifting loyalties.
Fight scenes in THE KILLER METEORS are shorter and less
spectacular than in an average kung fu film. But this is
probably a good thing, since longer scenes would stand in
the way of the plot, which is incredibly complex for a
simple genre movie. There are numerous characters with
hidden personal agendas and even more twists, enough to fill
entire season of soap opera series, but screenwriter Ku Lung
somehow manages to squeeze all that into feature film
format. The resulting confusion should be attributed to poor
dubbing and bad editing. Lo Wei's direction is hardly
stellar, and some special effects are truly laughable. On
the other hand, they give THE KILLER METEORS certain trash
quality, together with some unintentionally funny lines
spoken by characters. This film is still very entertaining,
but probably less to those who take kung fu films more
seriously. For those without prejudice, it could provide a
good guilty pleasure.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
