Title
Review for Casino (1995)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
John Paul Powell
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Nov. 22, 1995.) 
Starring: Robert De Niro, Sharon Stone, Joe Pesci, James Woods,
          Don Rickles, Alan King and Kevin Pollak.
Directed by: Martin Scorsese. 
Screenplay by: Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese.
Based On The Book by: Nicholas Pileggi.
Produced by: Barbara De Fina.
A Universal Pictures release.
     "They call it Paradise.  I don't know why.  To call some place
Paradise ... kiss it goodbye." - The Eagles (The Last Resort)
     The Mormons were bright bulbs.  They moved in, spent two years
milking cows and praying, then split.  In 1864, the army built a fort
protecting prospectors from rattlesnake/cactus swarmings and the
occasional coyote drive-by shootings.  In 1931, the Nevada legislature
took a sledgehammer to Pandora's Box.  Quickie divorces and gambling
were legalized.  Sin City rolled out the welcome wagon.
     Las Vegas.  In Spanish, it's "the meadows."  Meadows where money
DOES grow on trees.  The politicians planted the seeds.  Organized
crime picked the fruit.
     Mob hirelings Lefty Rosenthal and Tony "The Ant" Spilotro were
among a host of crooks operating casinos and skimming the till for
out-of-state bosses.  Rosenthal, the superlative gambler was the
brains.  Spilotro, the muscle.  Though Martin Scorsese and
writer/journalist Nicholas Pileggi swapped names (Sam "Ace"  Rothstein
and Nicky Santoro); CASINO shadows Lefty and Ant's paradise flushed.
     Rothstein (Robert De Niro) is the mob's cash register, the
fictional Tangiers Casino frontman.  He minds the store, oversees
employees and patrons, puts out the trash (undesirables) and regulates
the take so the bosses get their cut.  He pulls the wool over
everyone's eyes.  The city, the press, the politicians hail him as a
community leader.  Rothstein is stunned. "Back home, they put me in
jail for what I'm doing.  Here, they give me awards," he says.
     Nicky Santoro (Joe Pesci) handles the "complications."  He
safeguards the investment.  The psychopathic pitbull cracks skulls and
if need be, buries troublemakers in the desert.  Dead rats don't chat.
     The green comes pouring in.  Bosses are happy counting the
profits.  Rothstein is content running the casino.  Everyone's
delirious save Santoro.  He craves the Big Score.  It's Las Vegas,
circa 1973.  Nobody's eyeballing the bank vault.  If you've got the
balls, they'll do everything but hold the door open as you loot the
joint.
     Santoro's gluttony rocks the boat and Rothstein treads water.
Dunking Rothstein are his pill-popping, booze-swilling, blood-sucking
tipsy wife Ginger (Sharon Stone) and her bottom feeding chum Lester
(James Woods).  The internal wrangling nukes Eden.
     Martin Scorsese loves the material.  You can tell.  It's in the
detailed plotting as Scorsese steers us behind the scenes.  A gambler
bets and loses, the cash is brought to the casino vault where it's
counted and packaged.  A middleman nabs the money (the "counters" look
the other way), fills a case, drives to the airport and boards a plane
to Kansas City, motors to a nondescript bakery and presents the case to
the bosses.  Scorsese and Pileggi have done more than their homework,
they've aced the final exam.
     It's in the performances Scorsese commands.  Parroting his
Goodfellas part, Joe Pesci talks tough and goes ape-shit.  We chuckle
and we cringe.  Under Scorsese's guidance, we observe what Sharon Stone
is capable of if she spends time concentrating on acting and not
doffing her duds.  CASINO is her foremost accomplishment.  Normally,
anyone wearing a flashy pink suit would have popcorn and spitballs
lobbed at them.  But this is De Niro and we wouldn't dare.
     It's in the realistic dialogue and violence.  De Niro and Pesci
relate their inner thoughts via narration.  The gritty, colourful,
witty dialogue underscores the biographical content, as does the
violence.  There are four brutal scenes that caused Yankee censors to
stain their pants and badger Scorsese with the dreaded NC-17 rating.
Scorsese doesn't fade to black or cut away.  Why should he? These are
gangsters, not Avon reps.  Gangsters commit repellent deeds.  Like it or
not, that's life.  That's reality.
     Censor Boards, why worry? We're adults.  We're potty trained.
Look ... we can even tie our shoelaces.  By fingering the violence, you
shelve the message.  The mob angle is actually the framework for a
morality tale.  Of how greed can corrupt, how love can blind and how
mistrust can poison any relationship.
     CASINO is rated M for Masterpiece.  Two exploding cars.
Gratuitous 70s blue eyeliner.  Ventilated craniums.  One head crushed
in a vice.  Guest star John Bloom (a.k.a. movie critic Joe Bob Briggs).
Two baseball bat attacks.  Blueberry muffins.  Gratuitous Frankie
Avalon.  No Wayne Newton.  Three old fossils (Steve Allan, Jayne
Meadows and Jerry Vale).  One Black and Decker hammer attack.  Pesci
Gin-Sus a drunk.  Half the Smothers Brothers.
Outreach Rating: 10 high rollers / 10.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, Sharon Stone, Don Rickles, James Woods,
      Alan King, Kevin Pollak, Frank Vincent, L. Q. Jones
Director: Martin Scorsese
Producer: Barbara De Fina
Screenplay: Nicholas Pileggi & Martin Scorsese based on the book by
      Nicholas Pileggi
Cinematography: Robert Richardson
Music: various artists
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     After viewing CASINO, you may never look at Las Vegas in quite the
same way.  While this film, adapted from Nicholas Pileggi's nonfiction
book, CASINO: LOVE AND HONOR IN LAS VEGAS, doesn't offer much in the way
of startling revelations, it presents a fascinating insider's
perspective of what goes on behind-the-scenes in the country's gambling
mecca.  As is stated several times, Vegas isn't about fun, glitz, or
glamour.  Those things are just the surface gloss.  Instead, it's all
about greed and money--bringing customers in, keeping them playing,
and sucking them dry.
     CASINO opens with short sequence in 1983 before moving on to the
meat of the story, which is related through flashbacks.  Director Martin
Scorsese makes heavy use of voiceovers, employing disembodied monologues
by both lead actors--Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci--to fill in gaps.
The sheer volume of words sporadically detracts from character
development, but it is integrated successfully enough not to seem overly
intrusive.  While the intelligence and wit of the voiceovers makes them
palatable, such nonstop talking isn't always the best way to convey a
story--the temptation to tell something, rather than show it, is too
great.  CASINO doesn't always avoid that trap.
     In every way--from the fantastic sets, rich dialogue, and
unapologetic violence to the well-portrayed characters and themes of
loyalty and betrayal--CASINO is pure Scorsese.  Although not the
director's top work, this is nevertheless compelling film making.
Scorsese has never pulled punches in breathing life into his ideas, and
he doesn't start here.  If there's an obvious weakness in CASINO, it's
that it occasionally seems derivative of GOODFELLAS.
     During its three-hour running time, CASINO tells the story of two
men's intermingled lives.  "Back home years ago" (as an on-screen
caption reads), they were friends and co-workers.  Sam "Ace" Rothstein
(Robert De Niro, in his eighth acting collaboration with Scorsese) was a
gambler who never lost.  He researched all his bets carefully, and
rarely made a bad pick.  His winning tendencies gained him popularity
and favor with the local mob, who used Nicky Santoro (Joe Pesci) to
shadow and protect him.  Now that Ace has moved to Vegas to manage the
Tangiers Casino, Nicky isn't far behind.  And, while the two gravitate
to opposite sides of the law, with Ace keeping his fingers clean and
Nicky taking over the local crime scene, their paths continue to cross,
and their encounters become increasingly less friendly.  Stirred into
the mix is Ace's girlfriend, Ginger (Sharon Stone), an expert hustler
who attracts men like flies.  Although she agrees to marry Ace, she
continues a liaison with her former pimp (James Woods) while encouraging
Nicky's affections.
     As usual, Scorsese obtains excellent performances from his leads.
Joe Pesci, essentially reprising his GOODFELLAS performance, will
probably get all the attention, since this sort of flamboyance attracts
raves.  Actually, though, it's De Niro's more subtle, better-contained
acting that's riveting.  CASINO is supposed to focus on both Ace and
Nicky, but, despite nearly equal screen time for each, our sympathy is
drawn towards the former.  For this, De Niro's portrayal shares equal
responsibility with the screenplay.
     In his most recent four films, Scorsese has shown the ability to
take a mediocre actress and cull an impressive performance from her.  In
GOODFELLAS, it was Lorraine Bracco.  In CAPE FEAR, Juliette Lewis.  In
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, Michelle Pfeiffer (arguably the best of the
bunch).  And now, in CASINO, it's Sharon Stone, whose resume (BASIC
INSTINCT, SLIVER, THE SPECIALIST) is enough to make any serious movie-
goer wince.  Surprisingly, however, she's fine--not Oscar material,
but strong enough not to drag down the film.  Stone doesn't stick out
like a sore thumb, and, based on Scorsese's track record, a lion's share
of the credit for this should be given to him.
     Supporting players include a restrained James Woods, comedian Don
Rickles in a serious role, Alan King (also playing it straight), and
Kevin Pollak.  Scorsese's mother has a brief (and very funny) appearance
as the no-nonsense parent of a bumbling, small-time gangster.  And faces
associated with Vegas, like Steve Allen, Frankie Avalon, Jayne Meadows,
and Jerry Vale, have cameos.
     CASINO was filmed in Las Vegas, and this shows in the splashiness
and energy of nearly every scene.  By using gaudy costumes and a 70's
soundtrack, Scorsese takes us back some two decades.  Starting with the
vivid opening credits (designed by Elaine and Saul Bass, whose amazing
work on THE AGE OF INNOCENCE was one of that film's highlights), CASINO
sparkles like its fake diamond of a host city.  The cinematography,
which uses surprisingly few tricks other than freeze-framing to
emphasize key moments, is crisp and clean.
     By now, audiences have come to expect forceful films from Martin
Scorsese.  With CASINO, he doesn't disappoint.  The movie is long, but,
with a fast-moving storyline, escalating tension, and surprisingly
robust humor, the three hours move quickly.  Several flaws, mostly
minor, keep CASINO on a plateau slightly below that of the director's
best (MEAN STREETS, RAGING BULL, TAXI DRIVER, GOODFELLAS), but, in this
relatively-bland Thanksgiving movie season, this is one of the few
entries worth making an effort to see.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Jerry Saravia
The greatest American film director since Orson Welles is Martin Scorsese, and
he has an extensive resume to prove it. In the 1990's, he has dazzled us with
"GoodFellas," "Cape Fear," and "The Age of Innocence." These films are the
best, most thought-provoking and entertaining of the decade, offering
multitudes of cinematic pleasures. "Casino" is one more to add to the crop, an
indelibly fascinating saga of the Mob's fallout from Las Vegas in the late 70's
and early 80's. 
"Casino" stars the great Robert De Niro as Sam "Ace" Rothstein, a high-rolling
gambler and expert bookie who runs the fictional Tangiers hotel casino for the
mob "back home" (purportedly Chicago, but names had to be dropped in the event
of a lawsuit). Ace has to maintain active control of the casino and make sure
not to disturb the Mob's constant "skimming" of money from the count rooms. Ace
is acutely aware of how a casino is run and knows every single trick in the
book - he even weighs each roll of dice to see if it meets his standards. He is
the quintissential control freak, going so far as to make sure that there are
an equal amount of blueberries in each muffin at the restaurants!
Enter Joe Pesci as the childhood friend of Ace's, known as Nicky Santoro, a
volatile, brutally violent Mob enforcer (he has no qualms of squeezing a guy's
head in a vise in one of the most shockingly profane moments in film history).
Nicky comes to Vegas to keep an eye on Ace, who is reluctant to have him in
tow. Throughout the years, Nicky causes so much trouble for Ace (opening a
jewelry store and performing all kinds of heists, not to mention multiple
murders) that they can't even be seen together. 
On one night at the casino, Ace sees the beautiful Ginger McKenna (Sharon
Stone), a glitzy hooker who swindles from her escorts, and the moment he sees
this grand beauty, he becomes enamored to the tune of Mickey and Sylvia's "Love
is Strange." They have an affair, but Ginger does not love him despite agreeing
to his marriage proposal. This is not a marriage, it is a monetary arrangement.
What does she have to lose? She has everything money can buy including an array
of fur coats, garish outfits, an excessive amount of jewelry, a beautiful house
with a pool (which they never seem to enjoy), and a "key" to his safety deposit
box. Ginger is basically "set up for life." 
"Casino" is based on actual events as depicted in the gritty non-fiction book
by Nicholas Pileggi, and the script is written by Pileggi and Scorsese (they
previously collaborated on "GoodFellas"). The alcoholic/drug addict Ginger and
the explosive Nicky lead Ace downhill with their bantering and brief affair.
The FBI and the Mob eventually curtail the Vegas business of skimming leading
to what many say was the last remnants of the Old West. 
"Casino" boasts some great performances including De Niro as the highly
repressed "Ace" - a man who does not change through the course of the story and
is more interested in controlling all the odds than anything else. Joe Pesci is
at his snarling, foul-mouthed, hateful best here since "GoodFellas," playing
essentially the same role - a diminutive thug prone to sadistic violence. In
addition, he clumsily resorts to careless behavior when sleeping with Ace's
wife, and relentlessly badgers dealers for no reason. 
There are also equally meaty roles supplied by Kevin Pollak as a crooked
realtor turned politician, L.Q. Jones as one of the casino supporters who has a
tiff with Ace concerning the firing of his son (amusingly played by Drive-In
Critic Joe Bob Briggs), Alan King as a cigar-chomping Teamster, Frank Vincent
as Nicky's partner in crime, and even Scorsese's mother, Catherine Scorsese, as
the mother of a mobster who chastises him for cursing.
Sharon Stone is the true revelation in Scorsese's epic, bringing down all the
king's horses and all the king's men in Ace's casino empire. She contrasts
nicely from glamorous hustler to pathetic, boorish drunk. An example of her
transition is evident early in the film when the just-married Ginger sobbingly
calls her former pimp lover, Lester Diamond (James Woods), whom she gives money
to in need. Ginger is so sickened by Ace's surveillance that she resorts to
cocaine and binge drinking. Later in the film, out of desperation, she runs
away with her daughter to Lester. Sharon Stone flawlessly depicts Ginger's
changes and attitudes, both emotionally and fashionably, and is more vibrant on
screen than ever before. 
"Casino" is full of so many great scenes, including the first hour which is a
docudrama of how casinos are run, how the Mob skims profits, and how the money
is packaged and shipped from Vegas to "Back Home," as the titles indicate. The
first count room sequence is an unedited marvel that runs a little more than
two minutes as we see how they make an entrance and leave with a suitcase of
money without anyone asking any questions. We even see how the pit bosses and
casino managers track all the players - there's a moment of sudden violence
when a con-artist is given a fake heart attack and his hand is severely
pummeled by a mallet. Scorsese's point, as in "GoodFellas," is that the Mob
will go through severe measures to make sure you get the point. 
The dramatic personal stories of Ace, Ginger and Nicky sets up the second half
of the film, and they are expertly handled by Scorsese, especially the scenes
of torment between Ace and Ginger where he seems to watch her like a hawk.
Still, Scorsese overdoes the emotional scenes between Ace's quiet rage and
Ginger's inebriated periods spent in bed - they weigh the movie down a bit in
the middle section. The scenes between Ginger and Nicky don't make a lot of
sense either but their portentous affair does show a relentless nature within
them that leads to their tragic denouements. The slimy James Woods knows how to
play sleaze and does it with poise as Lester - I do wish it was a more
full-bodied character so we could understand Ginger's attraction to him. Still,
this is Wood's finest role since 1989's "True Believer." 
Any way you slice it, "Casino" is still a stunning work of art by Scorsese, and
it ranks as one of the best crime films ever made. The characters are not
weaved with any sense of sympathy or sentiment, yet you will not easily forget
them. They stay with you, and the restrained Ace (the most complex, fully-drawn
De Niro/Scorsese character yet) is the first Scorsese male protagonist who will
stop at nothing to keep his female counterpart with him. Despite her severe
problems, Ace will do anything to help her because he loves her and their
daughter, and it is one more person he feels he can control. 
"Casino" is not as great as "GoodFellas" and does not possess the same
force-of-nature style, but it is as equally honest, scintillating, humanistic
and complex.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com

Author
Christopher Null
     The way I see it, Martin Scorcese has one problem: He's in love with
the sound of his own voice, as it comes out through the dialogue of films
like GOODFELLAS and now, CASINO.  Clocking in at three *long* hours,
CASINO is an entertaining and engrossing film, but just drags a simple
story into a sprawling, epic tale that desperately needs a little
trimming.
     Based on a true story, CASINO is the tale of Sam Rothstein (Robert
DeNiro), the best of the old bookmakers, who is hand-picked by his mob
bosses "Back Home" to go to Las Vegas to run the Tangiers Casino.  Sam has
to contend with managing the bosses' skim going out the back door, cheats
at the tables, the law breathing down his neck, and strung-out hustler
Ginger (Sharon Stone), whom Sam falls for, and, despite his better
judgment, eventually marries.  Add to the mix Nicky Santoro (Joe Pesci),
who basically reprises his role from GOODFELLAS as a "problem solver" with
a temper from hell, and it's pure chaos in the high-glamour world of 1973
Las Vegas.
     Scorcese directs with his characteristic style, creating a film that
is at once surreal and full of gritty realism, particularly when the
violent Nicky plies his trade.  The film ranges from glued-to-the-screen
sequences, the best of which is when Sam and his crew bust a couple of
blackjack cheats, to a number of dull scenes, mainly about Sam fighting to
get his gaming license.  If Scorcese had kept the best two hours of the
film, it would have been one of the best of the year.  As it stands now,
CASINO is still good, but just doesn't cut it as a long-term classic.
     I also fault Scorcese for the overuse of voice-over coupled with
rapid-fire visuals.  Especially in the opening scenes, when the characters
and setting are being introduced, it's a nonstop deluge of sensory
information--too much to process, too quickly.  But hey, who am I to tell
Martin Scorcese how to make a film?
     The best part of CASINO is smart acting by the three principals as
well as the supporting characters (including Don Rickles, of all people,
in a memorable role).  DeNiro evokes real sympathy for Sam, and Stone's
Ginger is the consummate Bad Girl.  You get a bad taste in your mouth just
watching her and Pesci on screen.  Also watch for a smarmy James Woods as
Ginger's old pimp.  The other saving grace is CASINO's unexpected and
frequent comic relief, which is played up beautifully to ease the film's
tension.
     Scorcese has improved on the flaws of GOODFELLAS, making a cozy
little epic that's worth seeing.  Just remember to bring provisions for
the experience.  You're going to be there for awhile.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 179 minutes [2 hours, 59 minutes]
[crime/drama]
starring: Robert De Niro (Sammy "Ace" Rothstein), Joe Pesci (Nicky Santonio),
Sharon Stone (Ginger), James Woods (Lester), produced by Barbara DeFina,
written by Martin Scorsese, Nicholas Pieggi (based on his novel), directed by
Martin Scorsese.
Las Vegas is all about greed, everyone knows that. It was founded by
gangsters in the 1930s and continued to be run by organized crime for about
40 years. "Casino" is a good crime film that pulls no punches in its
depiction of Las Vegas as seen through the mafia. We get a lot of complex
criminal operations with families, honor, etc., but underneath it all lies a
typical soap opera. Even the criminal element can't get away from melodrama.
Robert De Niro stars as Sammy "Ace" Rothstein, a typical 1970s "Family Man"
who turns his attention to Las Vegas. His problem is he doesn't know who to
trust or what to do. He seems to want to run a legitimate business, but he
still must respect his elders through charitable, yet illegal, donations. He
meets a woman named Ginger (Stone), who, much like him, is a master swindler
and gambler - who says opposites attract? Eventually they marry but Ginger
never seems to truly love Sammy. She is perhaps an even better con artist
than he and manages to swindle $2 million in cash and thousands of dollars in
jewelry from him because he trusts her.
One of the passive themes of the film is love and trust, especially when it
comes to organized crime. Which is more important, loyalty to the mob or
one's lover? However, this is only implied as such, there is not enough
detail put into the relationship between Sammy and Ginger. At first they are
in love, but then their lives fall apart because Ginger still is a loose
cannon and is swindling her husband's money. She becomes an alcoholic and a
drug addict, letting her own life be ruined even though she has everything
she needs.
 Of course there's Joe Pesci as the stubborn and vicious crime boss Nicky San
tonio, who moves to Las Vegas and tries to take over a city that is not his.
Meanwhile Sammy is trying to run a reputable casino, but has constant clashes
with Nicky are affecting his personal and professional life.
It certainly is interesting to watch how the mafia ran Las Vegas and the
attitude they had, but at times it becomes too confusing and too detailed for
its own good. Then again, the details make the story very suspenseful, and
almost scary in a way.
"Casino" works well as a crime film and a straight drama, although it does
become somewhat melodramatic at times. Even a great director like Scorsese
probably wouldn't intentionally include standard, dramatic elements just to
tell a story.  I've got no problem with drama, it's melodrama that bothers
me.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
In Casino, director Martin Scorsese takes a good look at those who run
Las Vegas' casinos as well as the also-rans.  The thought that some 30
million people visit Las Vegas each year (and, I confess to being one
of them), is enough to make you sick at heart. You may win now and then
but in the final computation everyone is a loser.  Of course, that does
not include the gangsters who run the casinos. For them it's a gold
mine.
Scorsese's film is based on the real life story (from Nicholas
Pileggi's book) of Sam "Ace" Rothstein, a big time bookie, who was sent
to Las Vegas by "the mob" to find out who was stealing, who tinkered
with the mechanisms of slot machines so they would win huge jackpots,
and to put a stop to it, as well as watch that the blackjack dealers
were kept honest.  Oddly, you are left with a lot of empathy for
Rothstein (Robert De Niro) largely because the way he plays his role
and Scorsese's direction.
While Rothstein may have known everything there was to know about
gambling, drugs, prostitution, alcohol. etc. he nevertheless falls
heavily for Ginger McKenna (Sharon Stone).  He even goes so far as to
marry her, while she becomes a drug and alcohol user. This bodes no
good for Ace.   I do not think it did much for Sharon Stone, either, as
I felt she was miscast.
There is one other main character, Nicky (Joe Pesci), a childhood
friend of Ace, but too much of a trigger-happy mobster. Pesci runs away
with the film as he bends all his efforts to take over the operations
from his pal, Ace.
Also in the cast but in smaller roles are Alan King, James Woods, Don
Rickles L Q Jones and Kevin Pollak.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Uni)
Directed by    Martin Scorsese
Written by     Nicholas Pilegii and Martin Scorsese, based on the
               book by Pilegii
Cast           Robert DeNiro, Sharon Stone, Joe Pesci, James Woods,
               Kevin Pollock, Alan King, Don Rickles
MPAA Rating    "R" (for violence, language, sexual content, etc.)
Running Time   177 minutes
Reviewed at    Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (16NOV95)
     Finally.  The GOODFELLAS gang (Martin Scorsese, Nicholas Pilegii,
Robert De Niro, and Joe Pesci) reunites for this stunning, yet demanding
story of mob interests in 1970's Las Vegas.  Based on Pilegii's non-
fiction book, CASINO is the story of bookie-turned-casino boss Sam "Ace"
Rothstein (De Niro).  He's the brains behind the operation of the
Tangiers Hotel and Casino, who, along with problem pal Nicky Santoro
(Pesci), works to keep the cash flowing back to the Midwestern mob
bosses.
     Despite the prickly prospects of the subject matter--as well as a
177-minute running time--the first hour of CASINO is nothing short of
incredible.  The story opens with an extended introduction into casino
management and the mob ties therein.  Every conceivable base is covered
as Pesci and De Niro narrate over a steady stream of oldies, while
Scorsese's camera stays in constant motion through quick cut after cut
after cut.  It's a great start that slows, somewhat, in the second hour.
     With the introduction of Ginger McKenna (Sharon Stone), a Vegas
vamp who ends up holding "Ace's" ace, the narrative becomes more
conventional.  No problem.  Stone proves up to the task of the excep- 
tionally demanding role, though her cool chemistry with costar De Niro
is muted and often difficult to read.  In fact, one could argue that,
even though it's a dramatic portend to later events, her entire subplot
could be easily excised without any noticeable reduction to the overall
structure, or emotion, of the story.
     If De Niro and Stone are both a bit distant, Pesci is right there.
He's the actor with the most fire, even if he's playing awfully close to
his Oscar-winning role from GOODFELLAS.  (Anyone for a tally of how
often Pesci says the f-word?  Or how many cigs De Niro smokes?) Backing
the big three is a shrewd supporting cast that includes James Woods,
Alan King, Kevin Pollock, and a serious Don Rickles.  (The funny Don
Rickles can be heard in TOY STORY, also opening this week.)
     The third, and final hour of CASINO lacks something.  As each of
the characters close on their grim, inescapable outcomes, there's
neither a rush, nor a relief at the end.  No overt emotion for the
viewer other than, perhaps, horror at the grisly fates suffered by some.
(Hint:  you'll be taking back junior's baseball-bat Christmas present
after watching this one.) The beginning may be a blast, but the ending
is nothing special.  CASINO just ends; and that's that.
     Technical credits are easily some of the best of the year.  Dante
Ferretti's eye-popping production design is a winner, as are Rita Ryack
and John Dunn's fine, period costumes.  Great soundtrack, too.  Such a
sumptuous production. I can't wait to see it again.
BOTTOM LINE:  Scorsese.  Casual viewers beware.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Martin Scorsese
Writers: Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese (based on the book
"Casino: Love and Honor in Las Vegas by Nicholas Pileggi)
Starring: Robert DeNiro, Sharon Stone, Joe Pesci, Frank Vincent, James
Woods, Don Rickles, Alan King, Kevin Pollak, L.Q. Jones, Dick Smothers,
John Bloom, Pasquale Cajano, Catherine Scorsese, Melissa Prophet, Bill
Allison, Frankie Avalon, Steve Allen, Jerry Vale
Martin Scorsese has a knack for making a film fascinating from start to
finish, while still presenting an interesting and brilliant take on
something that's familiar and cliched.  "After Hours" was a brilliant
everything-bad-that-could-happen-happens film, "Cape Fear" was a
fantastic stalker thriller, and "The Age of Innocence" put an ingenius
twist on the costume drama, stripping it down to its bone.  "Casino" is
your brilliant Vegas flick, stripping that down to the bone, and
exposing what makes its so alluring.
On first glance, this film resembles Scorsese's "Goodfellas."  We have
some of the same actors in the leads, a female who causes a rift, lots
of swearing and graphic violence, a narration undertoned with a great
soundtrack of oldies and rock tunes, a rise and fall structure, and a
cameo from Marty's mom, Catherine (but she's in most of his films
anyway).  But this is purely superficial, and on closer examination,
it's nothing like it.
While "Goodfellas" showed that the allure of the mafia was that you
could basically get away with anything anytime you wanted, "Casino"
shows that the allure of Vegas is because of the mafia.  When you go
there (though I've never been there), you get the feeling that you're
living life on the edge, playing against the rules, and if you're caught
cheating, you could easily be killed.  Of course, it's not like that
anymore, but "Casino" takes us back in time to the glory days of Vegas,
when it was still run by the mafia.
It does this by telling us a little melodrama, which is something we've
heard before, but is given a magnificent backdrop that it can affect. 
Our protagonist is Sam Rothstein (Robert DeNiro), a bone fide gambler
who knows everything about it.  He is chosen by the mafiasos who run
Vegas from far away to run one of their biggest casinos: The Tangiers. 
For the first hour or so, we get an in-depth introduction to this world,
which tells us all the inside material, and just engulfs us into it so
we can feel the right way when it begins to collapse piece by piece. 
One of the best things about Scorsese is his attention to every single
detail about the worlds he creates.  I have a feeling if this guy ever
did a documentary, it'd make millions.
But two people enter Sam's life, and begin to tear apart the foundation
of Vegas: Sam's old tempermental bud, Nicky Santoro (Joe Pesci), not far
from his Tommy character in "Goodfellas;" and Ginger McKenna (Sharon
Stone), a con artist/hooker who seduces Sam without much strain, but
begins to selfishly tear it apart due to some of her weaknesses.  Even
though she ends up marrying Sam early in the film, she still has a sick
devotion to her old pimp/friend, Lester Diamond (James Woods, at his
sleaziest), who begins to spark some nerves in Sam.
While this plot is, yes, cliche-ridden, it is nevertheless fascinating,
and works flawlessly with the backdrop.  The mafia, after all, can get
too greedy and selfish for their own good, and can self-destruct due to
just one person's slip up or stupidity.  Over the course of the three
hour film, this is what happens, but the film makes us care for the
characters and for what we have been shown as Vegas that it becomes
devastating when it crumbles at the end.
This is the magic of Scorsese: to make a film which is so real that if
anything happens to it, it has almost the same impact on the audience as
it does to the characters on the screen.  The film is never boring, and
is never a film where you continually check your watch for the time. 
Scorsese is a master at seducing his audience into watching his world
unfold, and even the first hour where very little action happens, it's
probably the best time you'll have at the movies for a long time.
Every scene is carefully plotted out, and every shot is framed
perfectly.  As many people have once said, "You haven't seen 'Casino'
till you've seen the Widescreen Version," and that's true.  If you see
his cropped pan-and-scan version, you're missing out on half the movie. 
You miss a lot of the great swooping camera work that Scorsese is famous
for, and that's one of the best things about watching Scorsese.  No
other director has utlized the camera so well as he has.
The soundtrack, while not as great as the one for "Goodfellas," is
nevertheless amazing, and enhances every scene it is used in.  I
particularly love his usage of vintage Stones songs, with whom he has an
obvious affection for.  But this time, he actually goes so far as to use
Devo's remake of "Satisfaction," which plays throughout the ending (a
note should be made that he also uses their signature hit, "Whip It"). 
My favorite scene in the movie, where two cheaters are caught and dealt
with appropriately, is enhanced to perfect heights with a great Rod
Stewart song (not sure of the name), which is accentuates every beat of
the scene.  Scorsese would also make a great music video director
(though he did do Michael Jackson's "Bad").
The acting, as always, is amazing.  DeNiro plays a more reserved
character this time, seeming to be in perpetual deep thought, but always
looking tough.  Pesci is predictably awesome, even if his character is
very reminiscent of the one in "Goodfellas," and even if he has trouble
with nailing his accent (it's Bostonian, then Long Islandian, then
Kentuckian...).  And Sharon Stone, whom I thought would suck when
compared to these two leads, is actually awesome.  She hits the right
note of her character, making her seductive and lovable, yet still
possessing all her flaws.  Her decent into madness is also very well
done.
In the supporting cast, we have Don Rickles acting surprisingly reserved
and controlled in the role of the manager of the Tangiers, Alan King
also acting very reserved and controlled in the role of one of the chief
of staff of the Tangiers, and Kevin Pollak...whew...also acting very
reserved and controlled in the role of another chief of staff at the
Tangiers.  So Scorsese does have good control over his comedians in
serious roles (not to mention, Dick Smothers is a hypocritical senator,
and Joe Bob Briggs himself - as John Bloom: his real name? - plays a
stupid hick working as the slot machine manager because his uncle is a
town commissioner).  And James Woods goes pretty wild with his role.  No
shock there.
Special note should be made to Frank Vincent, who has been in Scorsese's
"Raging Bull" and "Goodfellas" in smaller roles, and in both of them,
was beaten up horrifically by Pesci's respective characters.  In this
one, he finally gets a bigger part, and also his revenge on Pesci...
Scorsese is the real king of the movie though.  Like Tarantino, Woody
Allen, and Kubrick, he attracts crowds just because of his name in the
directing slot.  His films are, for the most part, incredible
masterpieces which astound and complex people for as long as they live
after they've seen them.  "Casino" has some flaws, but it is one of the
most fascinating films he's ever made.  While taking an interesting
stance on the allure of Vegas, he also creates a film which is
engrossing from start to finish, and not many directors can hold their
audiences in their grip like he can.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CASINO is a disturbing show by the great director Martin Scorsese
(MEAN STREETS, TAXI DRIVER, RAGING BULL, THE KING OF COMEDY,
GOODFELLAS, CAPE FEAR, and THE AGE OF INNOCENCE).  Scorsese is obsessed
with evil and violence.  Think of him as the Darth Vader of directors,
and yet, his work is frequently brilliant.  His THE AGE OF INNOCENCE
was my second favorite movie of 1993.  (To answer your question,
GETTYSBURG was number one for me that year).  Scorsese has a talent of
which most directors can only dream.
     Like the FBI warnings on the front of video tapes, let me warn all
viewers who are incapable or unwilling to see movies with extremely
graphic and arguably gratuitously violent scenes, you should pass on
this movie.  Feel free to read the review of course.  I will cover the
gory aspects at the end when I discuss its ridiculous mere R rating.
     We are told that CASINO is a fictional show with fictional
characters that was adapted from a true story.  This means the audience
hasn't a clue as to how true or realistic any of this is.  I bought
some parts, but doubted others.  The degree of reality was not a big
issue for me in this picture.
     CASINO starts in the year 1983 with Sam "Ace" Rothstein (Robert
DeNiro) being blown to bits in a mob hit in Las Vegas.  It then
flashbacks back to ten years earlier and spends the rest of the movie
slowly working back to 1983.  It seems that Ace is one of the world's
best gamblers since he does the research to make sure his bets are all
sure things.  He makes so much money for the mob that they make him
manager of their Tangiers casino in Las Vegas.  He is a consummate
businessman and turns the Tangiers into a highly efficient operation
that is a money pump for the mob.
     The mob bosses stay safely in Kansas City, and they send a runner
once a week to skim money off of the top of the casino's take.  When
the runner comes, Ace and everyone else turn their heads.  Ace has a
series of titles at the casino to keep one step ahead of the gaming
commission, but the casino is nominally run by a puppet director of the
Teamster's Union pension fund, Phillip Greene (Kevin Pollak).  It turns
out all you had to do then to work in a casino was apply for a license,
actually getting one was unnecessary.  It took ten years to process the
application, and so long as you change titles every few years, your
application would go to the back to the bottom of the stack thus
ensuring that any unsavory past and any mob connections are never
discovered.  This and the details of operating a casino is the best
part of the show.  I collected tons of fun trivia about how pit bosses
work, how card cheating schemes are detected, etc.
     Eventually Ace, the Albert Speer of the casino business, has his
world complicated by the arrival of his old mob friend Nicky Santoro
(Joe Pesci).  Ace just wants to run a "clean" casino and spend his time
figuring out more innovative marketing techniques.  Nicky, on the other
hand, wants to use mayhem and murder to arrange payoffs from everyone
in all of the casinos, but especially in the Tangiers.  Since Nicky is
a made man, and Ace is Jewish, Nicky holds the upper hand with the mob.
     To further complicate this picture, we have Sharon Stone as Ginger
McKenna.  Ginger is a hooker, an alcoholic, and a heavy cocaine user
whom Ace falls in love with and marries much to the chagrin of her
sleazy pimp, Lester Diamond (James Woods).
     CASINO is told in a long series of narratives with all of the
leads and feature actors getting their chance to tell their version of
the story.  Actually most of the movie is told in narration that is
periodically interrupted to let the whole cast get a chance to speak.
In one scene the action freezes while the actor tells why he is going
to chose to say what does.  I found this extreme narration approach
intriguing, but ultimate tiring.  In fact, one of the chief problems
with CASINO is that at about three hours long, it overstays its
welcome.
     The best parts of the movie are the costumes by John Dunn II and
Rita Ryack.  Ace wears one iridescent suit after another - orange,
peach, lime green, cranberry red, salmon, chartreuse, you name it, but
always with a contrasting solid colored shirt and tie.  To complement
this, the violent Nicky sticks to dull grays and black outfits with
little character.  I think the costume designers are a shoe-in at award
time.  I believe they must have used Crazy Glue to attach a cigarette
to Ace's hand since he has one in every scene in the movie.  The sets
by Dante Ferretti are fun too - full of solid gold rather than pink
flamingos as well as other tributes to the bad guys' bad taste.
     There is no bad acting in CASINO.  Stone plays the most complex
role of her career and amazingly is pretty good at it, but I still
liked her best in BASIC INSTINCT.  Most of her movies have been
terrible, but she does have talent in addition to good looks.  DeNiro
is one of the best actors alive today, but I found Ace to be of his
least interesting roles.  I got tired of Ace after a while.  Woods has
a small but well done role as a wasted loser.  Pesci was a little too
out of control for my taste, but it was a good piece of acting.
     Now about that violence. In CASINO you will get to see heads with
large holes shot into them at close range followed by blood spurting
everywhere.  Bad guys will yank pencils out of people's hands and stab
them in the throat.  You have to endure seeing a man's hand being
smashed with a hammer and the sounds of the bones being broken as the
bloods gushes out.  In the most disturbing of all of the images, men
are killed with baseball bats with the sound of large bones snapping
and blood flowing everywhere, and then you get to see them buried
alive.  You can handle that?  Great, you are certified to see this
film.  Whether you want to or not of course is another matter.  I found
myself watching my back in the parking lot when I left the theater; I
had lost a little trust in my fellow man.
     CASINO runs a little under three hours, but your seat will feel
like it is at least five due to the plodding pace by editor Thelma
Schoonmaker.  The movie is rated R by the MPAA which is is a travesty.
This movies is clearly NC-17.  With the aforementioned heavy violence,
heavy cocaine and alcohol abuse, sex, and constant smoking, it deserves
an NC-17.  I do not think is appropriate for teenagers.  Actually, with
much tighter editing, say an hour less movie and even if they left in
all of the gore, I could recommend this movie to adult audiences with
strong stomachs.  As released, I give it a mild thumbs down and award
it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Merch
   CASINO (1995) is one of those rare movies where everything falls
wonderfully into place.  The script is magnificent, with nary a weak point
in sight.  The story follows the rise and fall of two gangsters, played to
perfection by Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci as they leave their mid-western
gambling roots and literally "take over" Las Vegas.  One tries to take the
high road by running the Tangiers Hotel and Casino (De Niro), while the
other (Pesci) takes the low road, becoming one of the most feared (and
sought-after) men in the city.  Both try to please the bosses "back home",
to varying degrees of success.  Marty Scorsese turns in a wonderful job of
directing, and will be forever credited for taking Sharon Stone (who plays
Ginger, the coke-head alcoholic wife) from the terrible material she has
had post-"Basic Instinct" to her Golden Globe win for Best Actress and her
subsequent Oscar nomination for this part.  The musical score is peppered
with over 30 songs from the 70's and 80's, which serve in many cases as
narratives (i.e. after Stone and De Niro have a falling out, "I'm Sorry"
plays).  CASINO is a well done film, and will please many groups of
people: fans of the actors (Stone has an especially showy part), lovers of
the genre (gangster films), and those who appreciate wonderful atmosphere
(you at some points would really swear that this was really filmed during
the era it portrays).  
   CASINO is rated R for brief nudity (none, surprisingly, done by Sharon
Stone), heavy language, and some very graphic violence.  It has a running
time of 179 minutes, and also stars Don Rickles, James Woods, Alan King,
and Kevin Pollak (A Few Good Men).  

Author
Sheena Stewart
***CASINO doesn't play with a full deck***
     There are two things in life I am fairly certain about (actually,
there are plenty more but only two are relevant to this review).
     One, as a choice of vacation destinations, Las Vegas ranks just
slightly behind Rwanda and Bosnia.  Two, if Sharon Stone hadn't
given us a gynaecologist eye view of her assets in BASIC
INSTINCT, she'd probably have gone the Tawny Kitaen route of
low-budget bit parts.  After seeing the latest movie featuring both Las
Vegas and Stone, neither of those beliefs has changed.
     Up front I admit I'm probably not the best person to review a
Mafia movie.  Truth is, other than THE GODFATHER (only parts I and II),
I'd never really enjoyed a mob movie.
     And even though Martin Scorsese has emphatically stressed his
latest movie CASINO is not a mafia movie, it most definitely is.
     Not to say that CASINO is a bad movie  it's actually quite good.
Not surprising when you bring together a cast that includes Robert De
Niro, Joe Pesci, James Woods and Kevin Pollack.  Each bring unique
perspectives to their roles.  Unfortunately, what they're given to work
with is what trips the movie up.
     De Niro is Ace, a one-time hustler who's worked his way up through
the ranks to become the frontman for the mob's Vegas operation.  Pesci
is Nicky Santaro, Ace's buddy and mob hitman.  It's his job to wrap up
loose ends and in Vegas 1973 there is plenty to keep him busy.
     Then there's Stone as Ginger McKenna.  Under the guidance of
her boyfriend/pimp, played by Woods, Ginger hustles her way through the
Vegas scene before hooking up with Ace.  Once married to Ace, Ginger
begins a steady descent into pills and booze parallels the fall of the
mob's control of Vegas.
     It's here where the movie unravels.  Although Stone is undoubtedly
better than she has ever been, she's still not very good.  No matter
how hard she tries she just seems out of synch with the likes of De
Niro.  In the end it's hard to ever really get into the story because
her presence distracts you from whatever else is going on.  Too bad,
because this might have been the one that convinced me mob movies
aren't all so bad.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Following the structure of a classical tragedy, CASINO chronicles
in fascinating detail the rise and fall of Sam "Ace" Rothstein, the
mob-assigned manager of a prestigious Las Vegas casino.  Martin
Scorsese co-wrote the screenplay with Nicholas Pileggi, basing it on
Pileggi's novel.  The two previously co-wrote GOODFELLAS, based on
another Pileggi novel.  (Pileggi also co-wrote the screenplay for the
upcoming CITY HALL.)
     CASINO has an epic length, just short of three hours, and while
the central plot advances slowly the film is filled with the engrossing
details of what is involved with the running of a major casino as well
as telling a complex yet never confusing story.
     Ace (played by Robert De Niro) is a consummate gambler who does
his homework for bets in painstaking detail.  His skill has earned
enough for the Kansas City Mob that they reward him, a non-Italian Jew,
by letting him manage the Tangiers Casino.  This is a position in which
he can get very powerful while becoming very rich.  In the job he
really comes into his own as a perfectionist who oversees all the
details, some unsavory, of running the high-profit show.  Ace
reluctantly allows his friend since childhood Nick Santoro (Joe Pesci)
to come to Las Vegas and to get involved with the Tangiers.  Ace also
falls for a beautiful hustler, Ginger McKenna (Sharon Stone).  Neither
turns out to be a good decision.  Nick is a loose cannon thug with a
volatile temper.  He will do whatever it takes to get money and power.
Even as Ace's power and prestige increase, the seeds of his downfall
are being sown by idealistic but questionable decisions.  Ace's
marriage and over-generosity to Ginger, his trust of the uncontrollable
Nick, and his unwillingness to rehire the incompetent brother-in-law of
a local official all lead to major trouble.  As he and Nick narrate,
each self-righteously defends his own actions.
     Robert De Niro is fine as Ace, though the character is well within
the range of characters he has played before.  Pesci's violent thug is
very much the same character he played in GOODFELLAS, though perhaps
with a shorter fuse here and with more of a penchant for cruelty.  The
actor who really shows us something new is Sharon Stone, whose descent
into alcohol, cocaine, and rage is her most effective screen role to
date.   As an apparent joke, the deeper addicted Stone gets, the more
she is made up to look like Michelle Pfeiffer.  James Woods is around
playing his usual slimeball character.  Don Rickles is surprisingly
effective in one of his rare serious roles.
     Scorsese's style with this film is fresh and new, though not all
of his touches really work perfectly.  The film starts near the story's
end with Ace in a car bombing and blown through a strange credit
sequence with impressions of the lights of Las Vegas.  The sequence is
strange and the floating through of De Niro in what looks like a car
ejection seat is very odd, indeed, almost reminding one of Fellini.
The sequence was created by Elaine and Saul Bass.  Saul Bass was one of
the classic credit sequence designers of the 1960s.  Scorsese does use
violence more often than in previous films.  And what is there is very
strong stuff and is not for the sensitive.  Borrowing a touch from
FORREST GUMP, the film is seasoned with popular music of the 1970s,
often as a commentary on the story.
     The whole package is a riveting account and a well-told story.
Though the script does not always play absolutely fair with the
audience, the small cheats help lead to unexpected plot twists.  No
film I have seen this year has a better shot at a Best Picture Academy
Award.  I give CASINO a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
