Title
Review for Leopard Son, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE LEOPARD SON is a G rated nature documentary movie produced by
The Discovery Channel and released to the theaters.  Think of it as a
live action BAMBI if you like.  The star of this film, however, is the
son of a leopard.
     The show starts with a few old black and white still photos of the
naturalist and filmmaker Hugo van Lawick, who was Jane Goodall's
husband.  THE LEOPARD SON is van Lawick's tale set in the Serengeti
plain of Africa and narrated by John Gielgud.  Van Lawick's star goes
from a young leopard cub, who spends all of his time frolicking while
his mother kills for him, to his trek across the plain as a full grown
leopard off to fend for himself.
     The show is full of the circle of life where animals eat other for
food, but it is rarely gory.  The food chain is treated in a natural
fashion, and my son Jeffrey (age 7 1/2) came away full of facts about
who can terrorize who in the animal kingdom.  Even his dad learned a
lot about the animal hierarchy that was not obvious.  I figured, for
example, that a leopard would scare off a baboon, but a leopard is no
match for a baboon's strong jaws.
     I was surprised at how dull the narration is.  Gielgud's usual
melodious voice seems tired and uninvolved.  The tone is pleasant
enough, but it lacks the necessary degree of warmth to make it
compelling.  The pedantic script could have learned a lot from THE
LIVING DESERT and the other Disney nature documentaries from the 50s.
They knew how to use a little humor to enliven the story.
     The script mainly tries to be a fact based autobiography, but
thankfully does have its more poetic moments.  The narrator says, "The
hyenas are used to the sounds of death and arise instantly with larceny
in their hearts."  Later he remarks about the animals, "It looks like a
game, but it's so much more.  It's about determination and
persistence."  When the leopard son learns of a tragedy in the family,
the narrator reflects, "some lessons are hard, others harder still."
"It is those left behind who suffer most."
     The scenery, especially of the large animal herds and of the
sunlight and the mist, is spectacular.  It never ceases to amaze me how
they can get so close even with telephoto lens to photograph animals in
the wild.  All of this notwithstanding, I was a bit disappointed by the
cinematography.  I thought the colors seemed washed out and overall, it
did not match in quality the images being captured.
     The editing seems sloppy as well.  Too often the editing consisted
of one long slow scene pasted to another with the effect being too
often tedious.  My son had his head on my shoulder quite a bit which he
only does when a slow begins to lose his interest.
     The film's sounds are quite effective with the low rumble of the
lions and the whinny roar of the young cheetahs being particularly
fascinating.  On the other hand, Stewart Copeland's music, which tries
to mimic African rhythms, left me cold.
     In a reflection partially on our culture and partially on some new
friends of his, my son told me that "the leopard son's dad was divorced
from his mom."  He reasoned this out since the dad was not in the show.
He never considered that the father might have died or that it was a
natural occurrence among animals.
     THE LEOPARD SON runs 1:25 but seems longer.  It is rated G.  Small
kids might be scared by a couple of the killing scenes, but I don't
think so since they are handled so carefully.  Will your kids like it?
I guess it depends if they like Discovery Channel sort of shows and if
they are patient.  This dad was frequently bored during the show.
Nevertheless, my son is a testament to the effect that the film has
appeal.  He loved it, gave it four thumbs up, and was full of little
animal anecdotes and facts after it was over.  I tried, but just can
not bring myself to recommend this picture no matter how well
intentioned.  I do give it a ** rating for some nice parts.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Narrated by John Gielgud
Director: Hugo Van Lawick
Producers: Hugo Van Lawick and Tim Cowling
Written by Michael Olmert
Cinematography: Hugo Van Lawick and Matthew Aeberhard
Music: Stewart Copeland
U.S. Distributor: Discovery Channel Pictures 
     Cable TV channel involvement in the motion picture industry is 
nothing new.  HBO and Showtime have been financing movies for years.  
However, in 1996, other cable networks have begun to stake out their 
piece of the action.  Nickelodeon made the Paramount Pictures release, 
HARRIET THE SPY, MTV produced JOE'S APARTMENT, and now the Discovery 
Channel has come out with THE LEOPARD SON, a beautifully-photographed, 
thoroughly charming documentary about the coming of age of a male 
leopard on the plains of the Serengeti.
     Even frequent viewers of made-for-TV nature specials won't be fully 
prepared for the majesty of THE LEOPARD SON.  This is a singularly 
cinematic experience that will lose much when cropped for television 
viewing.  And, because the cinematography is by far the most important 
aspect of this movie, the high aptitude level evidenced by directors of 
photography Hugo Van Lawick and Matthew Aeberhard makes this a rewarding 
motion picture experience.
     Van Lawick is a Dutch photographer and naturalist who has spent 
most of his adult life living on the plains of the Serengeti.  In his 
own words, "To be as close as possible to nature as I could -- that was 
my dream."  THE LEOPARD SON is his filmed journal of two years in the 
life of a young male leopard.  Van Lawick's camera first captures the 
cub when he's only a few weeks old, then follows him through youth and 
adolescence to adulthood.  Along the way, we observe his relationship 
with his mother, his first attempts at hunting his own meals, and the 
harsh lessons that identify his place in the food chain.  And, in a film 
which has a leopard as the central character, there are supporting 
appearances by all manner of other African wildlife, including baboons, 
elephants, giraffes, hyenas, rhinos, cheetahs, and lions.  Some children 
may rightfully see this as a kind of live action LION KING.
     What's unusual about THE LEOPARD SON is that it's a nature film 
with characters and a plot.  We are drawn into the drama of the title 
creature's life, and find ourselves rooting for him to hunt down a meal, 
rediscover his mother, make peace with his half-siblings, and, in the 
end, find a mate.  As in any well-constructed motion picture, there's 
humor, pathos, passion, and danger.  Unfortunately, however, we are 
subjected to an irritatingly repetitive and superfluous voiceover 
provided by Sir John Gielgud.  This would have been a better film 
without it.  THE LEOPARD SON is so well-crafted visually that it doesn't 
need a narrator.
     Van Lawick is discreet when it comes to showing the brutal 
consequences of being inattentive on the Serengeti, but even his 
carefully-edited shots of death have power.  As a whole, THE LEOPARD SON 
is a long string of memorable images -- a twitching tail sticking above 
breeze-blown grasses, golden sunlight streaming through broken clouds, a 
misty, pastel dawn, a leopard silhouetted by the setting sun.  Depending 
on the circumstances, the photography can be intimate or panoramic.  
There are nearly as many shots of the leopard's eyes as there are broad, 
sweeping views of the plains.
     While THE LEOPARD SON doesn't match Jean-Jacques Annaud's 1988 
feature, THE BEAR, for creativity and emotional power, it is still the 
best wildlife drama to reach theater screens in years.  Even those who 
find Gielgud's voiceover intrusive will be so captivated by the visual 
splendor that they're unlikely to complain.  Despite its low-key, 
limited release, THE LEOPARD SON is a family gem that's worth seeking 
out... even if you don't have a family.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman
