Title
Review for Flat, De (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the last decade Hollywood, in desperate search for any
original idea, turned to Old Continent and many films
originally made in France, Denmark or Holland got their
American versions. However, this process never went in
single direction. Lack of stars, budget and other resources
didn't prevent European filmmakers from creating their own
versions of popular Hollywood films. HOUSE CALL, Dutch
thriller directed in 1995 by Ben Verbong, is one of such
examples.
Protagonist of this film is Roos Hartman (played by Renee
Soutendijk), single mother who just moved into the large
apartment complex near the sea in order to work as a
resident physician for other tenants. Soon she becomes a
witness to the gruesome murder of another tenant, but she is
unaware of killer's identity. While police suspects her
mysterious but good-looking neighbour Eric Coenen (played by
Victor L"w), Roos Hartman begins romantic relationship with
him. However, after a while some details emerge and Roos
begins wondering whether she made a right choice or not.
Even the least experienced viewers wouldn't fail to notice a
great deal of similarities between HOUSE CALL and SLIVER,
one of the most underrated erotic thrillers of early 1990s.
Director Verbong and writer Jean van der Velde almost
shamelessly copy situations, characters and even some
particular scenes from Noyce's 1993 film. Naturally, that
means that the entire plot development is, more or less,
quite predicatble. To make things even worse, Verbong is not
Noyce and Dutch actress Renee Soutendijk is not in the same
league as Sharon Stone, so the viewers would quickly lose
interest for this film. Because of that, HOUSE CALL looks
like a cheap and unsuccessful attempt of reaping the fruits
of someone else's labour.
Review written on September 22nd 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com -
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
