Title
Review for Baby's Day Out (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Joe Mantegna, Joe Pantoliano, Brian Haley, Lara Flynn Boyle,
           Matthew Glave, Cynthia Nixon, Adam and Jacob Worton 
Director:  Patrick Read Johnson 
Producers:  John Hughes and Richard Vane 
Screenplay:  John Hughes 
Cinematography:  Thomas E. Ackerman 
Music:  Bruce Broughton 
Released by 20th Century Fox 
     Imagine that you're a villain in a John Hughes film.  What do you
do?  A good bet might be to find someplace safe and secure to hide,
especially if you catch sight of any kids under the age of twelve.
     Like someone unwilling to venture down an untrodden road, Hughes
has yet again come back to the worn-out HOME ALONE concept, this time
substituting a nine-month old toddler for wisecracking Macaulay
Culkin.  In this cased, however, the baby's smiles and chuckles are
more endearing than Culkin's one-liners.
     There are three villains instead of two.  And while their names
aren't Larry, Curly, and Moe, the similarities are neither superficial
nor incidental.  These Three Stooges (played by Joe Mantegna, Joe
Pantoliano, and Brian Haley) are out to make $5 million by kidnapping
Baby Bink (Adam and Jacob Worton), the son of the ultra-rich,
ultra-chic Benningtons (Lara Flynn Boyle and Matthew Glave).  What they
didn't count on was their own incompetence and, once the baby slips
through their fingers, they're always a crawl behind him.
     For someone over the age of ten (or thereabouts), BABY'S DAY OUT
has enough slapstick to be amusing--at least for a while.  There isn't
a scintilla of intellectual humor in the whole movie, and the repeated
bashings and burnings received by the hapless villains get tiring after
the first hour.  There also seem to be an inordinate number of jokes
dealing with the crushing, mutilation, or incineration of male
reproductive organs.
     Young children will also laugh at this film, but there's a
question about whether the content is suitable.  With HOME ALONE, most
of the damage done to the thugs was relatively minor, at least compared
to what happens in BABY'S DAY OUT.  This time around, the cartoon
mentality is taken to its Wiley Coyote absolute, with the Stooges
constantly surviving crippling or should-be-fatal accidents.  Somehow,
it's more disturbing than funny when it happens to reel people, as
opposed to animated creatures.
     Other than the slapstick, there's little to recommend this movie.
A subplot involving how a status-obsessed mother comes to grips with
her missing child is horribly misplaced, and these strains of melodrama
are cloying.  Whenever Lara Flynn Boyle appears on screen, it's the
fervent wish of nearly every member of the audience that the movie turn
its attention back to the baby.
     Like Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern before them, the trio in BABY'S
DAY OUT make amusingly inept crooks.  Baby Bink is cute, but that's
what little kids are supposed to be, and most of the impressive baby
stunts result from ILM's work, not the incredible athletic ability of
the Worton boys.
     Maybe the worst thing to happen to John Hughes was the success of
HOME ALONE.  Since then, with the exception of ONLY THE LONELY (which
was already in production by the time Kevin's family left without him),
the filmmaker hasn't released a movie with even a spark of
originality.  Before Culkin, Hughes occasionally came up with something
entertaining.  Now, he has become redundant and tiresome.
     Doubtless, if BABY'S DAY OUT makes money, there will be more of
this fare to come.  And, with the protagonists getting younger with
each new picture, one wonders if the next release of this sort might
end up being called ADVENTURES IN THE WOMB.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Patrick Read Johnson 
Written by      John Hughes
Cast Joe Mantegna, Lara Flynn Boyle, Joe Pantoliano, Brian Haley,
     Cynthia Nixon, Adam Robert Worton, Jacob Joesph Worton
MPAA Rating     "PG"
Running Time    98 minutes
     Expand the final fifteen minutes of HOME ALONE into a
feature-length film and you've got BABY'S DAY OUT--an agreeably
amusing children's comedy about a bumbling band of kid kidnappers who
are unwittingly outwitted by an innocent infant.
     The plot tracks a trio of crooks-posed-as-photographers (Mantegna,
Pantoliano, Haley) who steal nine-month-old Bennington August Cottwell
IV, aka Baby Bink, from his old-money home.  But the plan goes awry
when Baby crawls out an open window and into the streets of downtown
Chicago!  Following the path of his favorite story, called "Baby's Day
Out," Baby rides a bus and visits the zoo and winds up at a skyscraper
construction site.
     While Baby stays unscathed, the crooks fare worse for the wear.
The stooges get hit by boards and dropped from roofs and, of course,
suffer multiple crotch injuries.  (John Wayne Bobbitt should probably
steer clear of this one.)
     Like he did in PLANES, TRAINS, and AUTOMOBILES, John Hughes again
demonstrates his mastery of the simple set-up and extended execution.
Here, he's aided and abetted by a director, Patrick Read Johnson, whose
choreography could rival a Coen brother.  Best bit: baby crawling
across a busy city street.
     BABY'S DAY OUT has only two emotions--awww and ouch--and the
actors play them accordingly.  Forget the cartoon concern of Lara Flynn
Boyle or Cynthia Nixon, disposable as mom and nanny, respectively, the
ones to watch are the ones who are wincing.
     Joe Mantegna is a great head stooge, barking lines like "that
little doo-doo machine is my retirement money." Brian Haley has a great
scene with a gorilla, while Joe Pantolianto plays Curly to Mantegna's
Moe. *He* is funny.
     Needless to say, twins Adam and Jacob Warton are adorable beyond
belief.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Joe Mantegna, Lara Flynn Boyle, Joe Pantoliano, Brian
Haley, Adam & Jacob Worton.
Screenplay:  John Hughes.
Director:  Patrick Read Johnson.
     Just as a little role playing exercise, pretend you're John
Hughes.  The HOME ALONE films have grossed somewhere in the
neighborhood of a gazillion dollars, and you're not convinced that
particular cow has been fully milked.  Unfortunately, Macaulay Culkin
has crossed the line from adorable moppet to gawky adolescent, and last
year's variation on the theme, DENNIS THE MENACE, didn't do well enough
to warrant a sequel.  So what do you do?  Apparently, you write and
produce BABY'S DAY OUT, yet another kiddie-pleaser featuring copious
cartoon mayhem directed at bad guys.  Strangely, though, there is a
modicum of originality present, thanks to imaginative visual effects
and the charmed wanderings of Baby Bink.
     Baby Bink (twins Adam & Jacob Worton) is the 9-month-old son of
the wealthy Cotwells (Lara Flynn Boyle, Matthew Glave), self-
absorbed socialites whose primary concern is getting Bink's picture
in the paper.  To that end they hire a photographer, but the three
men (Joe Mantegna, Joe Pantoliano and Brian Haley) who show up at
the Cotwell mansion have other plans for Bink ... plans that include a
$5 million ransom.  Of course, getting the ransom requires actually
having the baby, and when Bink slips out through a window to explore
New York, the three hapless kidnappers find themselves perpetually
chasing down the little tyke, and racking up a growing injury count in
the process.
     For anyone who has seen either HOME ALONE or its carbon copy
sequel, there is very little new to be found in BABY'S DAY OUT.  Joe
Pesci has been replaced by Joe Mantegna, and Daniel Stern has been
split into Joe Pantoliano and comic Brian Haley.  Mantegna appears
embarrassed much of the time, making his slow burn look like a plea for
sympathy from the audience.  The scenes of the three villains being
thwarted in their attempts to re-acquire Bink are a parade of Wile E.
Coyote routines, most recognizably a shot of Haley dropping from a
great height to produce a small plume of dust; director Patrick Read
Johnson at times seems to cop more liberally from Chuck Jones than from
John Hughes.  Still, there are only so many ways that the male
genitalia can be mangled before intense boredom sets in.  I heard gales
of laughter from kids in my audience at such mid-section humor, but I
think they would have responded the same to a 90 minute loop of kicks
to the groin.
     What is most annoying about films like BABY'S DAY OUT is that they
pretend to have an emotional message.  In one scene, Lara Flynn Boyle
tearfully acknowledges her misplaced priorities when the kidnapped Bink
does appear in the paper, and later comforts Bink's distraught nanny by
admitting that the nanny is probably more of a mother to Bink than
herself.  But BABY'S DAY OUT is no more about good parenting than SPEED
is about traffic safety.  Hughes and Johnson make no attempt to follow
up these token gestures with any closure; it's just typical Hughesian
troweled-on emotion to make the violence more palatable.
     If there is one reason for anyone of driving age to sit through
BABY'S DAY OUT, it is to see the clever special effects which allow
Bink to survive every adventure with nary a smudge of dirt to tell the
tale.  One sequence finds him crawling across a busy street as cars
whiz by in every lane but the one he happens to be in.  Later, he makes
his way through a construction site in Rube Goldberg fashion, sitting
blissfully as tractors roll over him and sliding down girders onto
moving elevators.  These are fun moments, made all the more appealing
by the adorable Wortons as Bink.
     Naturally, Hughes ends BABY'S DAY OUT with a teaser for a sequel.
But enough is enough, John.  The Wortons are probably two by now; that
doesn't mean you can squeeze four more films out of them.
