Title
Review for Moonstruck (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The children of the post-war baby boom are edging their way up around
forty and it has been a while since filmmakers have targeted the forty-and-
up crowd.  Then the final months of 1987 saw two good comedies that did not
taste of bubble gum.  One was BROADCAST NEWS and the other, only now getting
a wide release, is MOONSTRUCK.  Norman Jewison, who is still on a career-
long roll, directed this delightful and endearing comedy about many kinds of
love.
     MOONSTRUCK is set in a never-never land where the moon stays completely
full three days in a row and everyone is Italian-American and good at heart.
Loretta (played by Cher) is engaged to Johnny (played by Danny Aiello).
But Johnny wants to hold off on the marriage for a month until his ailing
mother in Sicily dies.  He is going to Sicily to be by his mother but leaves
a request that Loretta invite his brother Ronny (played by Nicholas Cage).
If you can't figure out what kind of problems that can cause, you ought to
hang it up.  But the plot is not as important as the beautiful yet
economical characterizations.  Jewison has a talent like Louis Malle for
creating a feeling that the viewer knows a character after just moments of
screen time.  In one scene a woman is telling Loretta about the fickleness
of men.  The woman tells her husband she sees a wolf in him.  He responds
that he can still see the girl he married in her.  He has spoken one
sentence on the screen and already he has won over the audience.
     Jewison can charm magical performances from his actors.  He did it in
FIDDLER ON THE ROOF and he does it here.  I personally have never been fond
of Cher as an actress but if this were the only film I had ever seen her in,
I would anxiously be awaiting her next performance.  Vincent Gardenia, on
the other hand, is a good actor and he too turns in one of his best
performances.  And one more touch adding to the effect: Like THE KILLING
FIELDS, A ROOM WITH A VIEW, FATAL ATTRACTION, and several other recent
films, MOONSTRUCK makes good use of the transcendentally beautiful opera
music of Giacomo Puccini.  In this case, the film is filled with the music
of LA BOHEME.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
What a beautiful thing it is to be in love. And what a royal pain in the
ass. MOONSTRUCK knows this, and is entertaining all the more because it is a
slyly knowing romantic comedy, a wicked one, even. It knows about love --
why we fall in love, why we resist love, and why we make ourselves into
complete fricking idiots over love. Mostly the last bit.
Cher (who is great in this) stars as a woman who has already loved and lost;
she's in her thirties, and that's enough time, apparently, for her to have
been married and widowed. Has her heart been scarred for life? Maybe. She
meets and gets engaged to a fellow named Johnny Cammareri (the
always-enjoyable Danny Aiello), but the whole thing has the flavor of an
afterthought. Then she bumps into Johnny's bitter and distant brother,
played by Nicholas Cage, and lightning strikes.
She's not the only one. Her mother (Olympia Dukakis) meets up with Perry
(John Mahoney), a professor who's been pulling the
female-students-find-mature-intelligent-men-sooo-sexy routine for a little
too long, and he finds himself drawn to this woman who's competely against
"type" for him. Opposites attracting, and all that. Cher's father
(hilariously played by Vincent Gardenia) is also a moon-eyed romantic in his
own way -- and his way happens to be played out via adultery, with a woman
so dry and cynical, it's like he had an affair to have another woman to
kvetch with.
The movie works by combining clockwork plotting with careful and intelligent
pieces of human comedy. One of the best scenes in the movie has Cage's
character unveiling the source of his bitterness: his brother caused him to
accidentally lose a hand in a bread slicer (he now has a wooden
replacement), and now he's submerged himself in bread-baking almost as a
kind of pathological self-penitence. "Bread, bread, bread," he shouts,
throwing loaves from one end of the room to the other, "the 'staff of life'.
For everyone except me." Cher is uncompromising: "You think you're the only
one who ever shed a tear?" She doesn't know it yet, and neither does he, but
the fact that the two of them can be so confrontational with each other is
the key to them being happy together.
What's best about the movie is the total feeling of the package -- it's a
date movie, to be sure, one that pairs up all the right couples in the end
and leaves you smiling. What's even better is that the smiles it earns from
you are endearing and real. A common cliche about reviewing a movie like
this is "See it with someone you love", and in this case I can't escape
making a recommendation like that.
