Title
Review for Primal Fear (1996)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Steve Kong
Primal Fear is a movie in which Richard Gere gives one of his best
performances yet.  Primal Fear is more than just a show case for Richard
Gere's acting abilities, it also show cases the acting abilities of all the
supporting cast, including one great performance by Edward Norton.
Primal Fear follows the life of Martin Vail (Richard Gere) who is a high
profile lawyer that is known to most all in the city of Chicago and gets
magazine cover interviews.  Vail chases high profile cases instead of
ambulances, he believes that everyone should get a good defense, and he
doesn't care if the person is guilty or not, he just wants to defend them.
That is until he runs in to Aaron Stampler, who is accused of the murder of
the Archbishop of the church where Stampler is an altar boy.
Primal Fear has many threads running throughout the movie, and eventually
the all tie together, but it is not so obvious how they will.  The script
for Primal Fear is literate and does not treat the audience like idiots.
This movie serves to show case the acting talents of more than just Richard
Gere.  Along with Edward Norton as Aaron Stampler, Laura Linney, John
Mahoney, Alfre Woodard, Frances McDormand all give well balanced
performances throughout the film.
I highly recommend Primal Fear, it is a smart well written film that is
can't be missed.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PRIMAL FEAR (1996) ** 1/4 . Directed by Gregory Hoblit. 
Written by Steve Shagan and Ann Biderman, from the novel by 
William Diehl. Photography, Michael Chapman. Editing,  David 
Rosenbloom. Production design, Jeannine Oppewall. Producer, 
GaryLucchesi.  Music, James Newton Howard. Cast : Richard Gere 
(Martin Vail), Laura Linney (Janet Venable), Andre Braugher 
(Tommy Goodman), John Mahoney (John Shaughnessy), Alfre 
Woodard (Judge Miriam Shoat), Frances McDormand (Dr. Molly 
Arrington), Steven Bauer (Joey Pinero), Stanley Anderson 
(Archbishop Rushman), Edward Norton (Aaron Stampler), et al. A 
Paramount release. 131 minutes. Rated R (graphic violence, 
sex,language). 
Alas poor Archbishop Rushman! Chicago knew him, Horatio: a 
fellow of infinite resources, of most excellent connections. 
But the Primate never had a chance to become a Prince of the 
Church. Someone gorily slashed him to death. 
Into the fray steps Martin Vail (Gere), a prosecutor turned 
opportunistic super-lawyer. Clever, cool, calculating, chic 
Vail--currently the cover boy of a glossy magazine--has 
attained fame and fortune. To get more media attention, he 
takes on "pro bono" (free services for the public good) the 
defense of Rushman's suspected murderer.
Blood-covered Aaron Stampler (Norton), fleeing the scene of 
the crime, is caught after a chase on foot. Everything points 
to him, everything that is, except motive. Aaron,  from rural 
Kentucky, may or may not be innocent but he certainly looks 
like an innocent, a simple-minded young man. He was devoted to 
the Archbishop who had rescued him from the big city's mean 
streets and made him an altar boy. Aaron tells Vail that he 
didn't do it, that he was at the prelate's place, that a third 
party did it. But he, Aaron, did not get a look at the 
murderer because he "lost time," which is how he describes his 
frequent blackouts, some of which Vail witnesses.
The script, co-written by Oscar-winner ("Save the Tiger") 
Steve Shagan, is convoluted. It involves Chicago politics, 
financial schemes, the Rushman Fund, Church-owned land, 
prosecuting attorney Janet Venable (Linney) who had been 
Vail's lover, her boss the State's Attorney, influential 
figures, an honest Alderman, an underworld figure, and more... 
Everyone wants to direct movies these days, even the clergy. 
"Primal Fear" is the first feature by TV's nine-Emmy winner 
Gregory Hoblit who some years ago was taken off the film "Sea 
of Love." Growing up in Berkeley, Hoblit did the usual Sixties 
thing, an irony as his father was an FBI man. He made his name 
mostly with series like "Hill Street Blues," "LA Law," "NYPD 
Blue." 
The influence of the jazzy, fast-cut, elliptical, multi-imaged 
TV style of such programs is evident in "Primal Fear." This 
does not hurt. What does is the murky tangle resulting from 
the subplots, allusions and implications. It is common for 
television series to place in certain episodes additional 
characters who may get developed in future segments. But in a 
single big-screen, detection-and-courtroom movie this clutter 
can distract and make the picture less interesting than 
Inspector Morse or Hercule Poirot whodunits. 
There are also contradictions, loose ends that dangle yet 
cannot be revealed without giving away too much. It doesn't 
help either that Vail and Venable are now conveniently on 
opposite sides; that the resumption of their affair is 
telegraphed with semaphores; that we get no information about, 
or a sense of those two, their earlier relationship, their 
private lives. The duo may be adequate to the task of their 
current legalisms, but they remain unidimensional. 
What you get is only what you see, and that is pretty 
interesting: Vail's and his staff's procedures, the 
strangeness of Aaron, the lawyer-client relationship. Best  of 
all is the acting by Norton and Gere. Edward Norton, in his 
film debut as the inarticulate, timid, bewildered and pathetic 
Aaron gives a rich, original performance with unexpected 
turns. His phone must be ringing with offers. Already we can 
expect to see him in Woody Allen and Milos Forman movies.
Norton steals the show, but Richard Gere is quite good doing 
his specialty, the man you cannot warm up to. His career is a 
puzzle. He's had some triumphs, like "Days of Heaven," "An 
Officer and a Gentleman," and many duds, like "Breathless" and 
"King David." Later two good films went unnoticed: "Miles from 
Home"  by Richard  Pearce (("A Family Thing"),and the flawed, 
nasty but effective "Internal Affairs" by Mike Figgis 
("Leaving La Vegas").
The hit "Pretty Woman" was Gere's box-office comeback. Yet 
after it, Akira Kurosawa's  excellent "Rhapsody in August" 
played only briefly in art houses and was under-appreciated. 
So was Gere's against-type sensitive performance as a 
Japanese-American. Five failures or mediocrities followed, the 
last one being "First Knight." 
Now "Primal Fear" (an irrelevant, forgettable title), does a 
repair job on the Gere image. It also boosts the talented 
Andre Braugher of TV's "Homicide" fame.(He was still an 
unknown when Hoblit directed him in the Spielberg-produced 
1993 pilot "Class of '61"). As the investigator who works for 
Vail, he has some good moments and one wonderful short scene 
testifying on the stand with  ironic answers. 
The movie is essentially old wine in new bottles, even though 
the product placement is not for wine but for Bud Light beer. 
Still, it is helped by surprises and revelations, a peculiar 
Jekyll and Hyde reprise, Oscar-winning ("Raging Bull") 
cinematographer Chapman, designer Oppewall, and an unobtrusive 
score. As courtroom drama, it breaks no new ground, but as 
momentary entertainment it is OK.  

Author
Christopher Null
     It's been a long time since a *really* bad movie has come down the
pike, but it had to happen eventually.  This time up, it's PRIMAL FEAR,
yet another badly-titled Richard Gere-as-a-lawyer flick that will keep you
groaning in your seat when you aren't busy laughing at the unintentional
humor.
     If you had the misfortune of seeing Gere in 1992's FINAL ANALYSIS,
you'll be familiar with the setup.  Gere plays Martin Vail, a
self-described bigshot defense attorney in Chicago.  Laura Linney is Janet
Venable, a crass and unlikable public prosecutor, who spends most of the
film developing her primary character trait:  being a bitch.  Aaron
Stampler (Edward Norton) is who the lawyers fighting over (when they
aren't rehashing their 6 month-long affair), because it turns out that
Aaron butchered the local Archbishop.  Maybe.
     And before you can say "O.J." the oh-so-exciting plot twists start
coming, and these include but are not limited to multiple personalities,
malingering, a pedophilic porn video, and corruption in the church and
city officials.  Most of it is a wild goose chase.  All of it is idiotic. 
And worst of all, it goes on *forever.*
     What makes PRIMAL FEAR so bad?  The plot is stupid.  The characters
are plastic and all of them are loathsome, from the victim to the killer
to the lawyers and even to the judge (played horribly by Alfre Woodard). 
The dialogue is ridiculous, especially in the big courtroom scenes.  Hell,
even the ill-fitting *costumes* are bad!
     The only redeeming feature of the picture is PRIMAL FEAR's campy and
unmeant hilarity (which starts with the title of the film), but that isn't
saying a whole lot.  In the end, all I can say about PRIMAL FEAR is this: 
be afraid.  Be very afraid.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Richard Gere, Edward Norton, Laura Linney, Alfre Woodard, 
      John Mahoney, Frances McDormand, Terry O'Quinn
Director: Gregory Hoblit
Producer: Gary Lucchesi
Screenplay: Steve Shagan and Ann Biderman based on the novel by 
      William Diehl
Cinematography: Michael Chapman
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     One of the most unfortunate aspects of a courtroom thriller is the 
tendency to degenerate into preposterous melodrama.  It's as if the 
basic situation of having a person on trial for their life isn't 
inherently powerful enough.  As a result, cheap theatrics are thrown in 
to spice things up, and, in the process, wreck any semblance of 
credibility.  PRIMAL FEAR, director Gregory Hoblit's adaptation of 
William Diehl's novel, is an obvious example.  At times, it's taut, 
sharp, and astute, but those qualities are overwhelmed by a storyline 
that takes too many wrong turns.
     The big "twist" at the end (which won't be much of a surprise to 
anyone who has seen more than a handful of courtroom thrillers) isn't 
the only thing that hurts PRIMAL FEAR, since nearly every scene in the 
last half-hour has something wrong with it.  Although the film would 
like the audience to believe that it's addressing important issues about 
justice and court procedures, those things are mere window dressing for 
a tawdry plot that involves sex-obsessed archbishops, suspects with 
multiple personalities, and a corrupt prosecutor.  We've seen all these 
things before in more cleverly-written screenplays.
     One thing that PRIMAL FEAR does well, at least at the outset, is to 
present an uncompromising picture of a fast-talking, high-profile 
defense attorney.  Martin Vail (Richard Gere) isn't in law because he 
believes in its purity or some equally naive drivel -- he's there 
because he likes the money, the power, and the spotlight.  In his words, 
"Why gamble with money when you can gamble with people's lives?"  When 
asked whether he has to believe in a client's innocence to present a 
defense, Vail retorts, "You don't know [whether he's guilty].  You don't 
ask.  You don't care.  You do the... job."  He's jaded and callous, so 
it's disappointing when the film turns him into a crusader struggling 
with issues of conscience.  This development doesn't make him three-
dimensional; it makes him inconsistent and unfathomable.
     The story centers around Vail's latest case -- he's defending a 19-
year old altar boy, Aaron Stampler (Edward Norton), who is accused of 
brutally murdering the beloved archbishop of Chicago.  The headline-
chasing Vail is taking the case pro bono for its publicity value.  His 
opponent, prosecutor Janet Venable (Laura Linney), is Vail's ex-lover 
and ex-protege.  Frankly, we could have done without all the out-of-
court interaction between these two -- it's extraneous padding that 
expands the too-long running time.
     Is Aaron guilty, or is he the victim of a frame-up?  What dark 
secrets lurk in the archbishop's past?  And how can the investigators in 
this case be so incredibly obtuse that they miss so many obvious things?  
PRIMAL FEAR tries to answer the first two questions.  It doesn't care 
much about the third, and that's one of its problems.  
     Richard Gere does what Richard Gere has been doing in every film 
since his last real performance (in SOMMERSBY) -- he looks dapper and 
executes his lines with workmanlike efficiency.  Laura Linney, who 
recently appeared in CONGO, is adequate in the largely thankless role of 
Vail's adversary.  Despite their prominent billing, neither John Mahoney 
(as Janet's boss) nor Alfre Woodard (as the judge) is afforded 
significant exposure.  The only actor who does anything memorable is 
Edward Norton, whose performance might remind viewers of Kevin Spacey's 
Oscar-winning turn in THE USUAL SUSPECTS.
     Even had PRIMAL FEAR trimmed its length to something more 
reasonable, it still wouldn't have been involving.  The flat, 
unsympathetic characters generate no interest and the overplotted story 
offers more cliches than legitimate surprises.  Most of the film's 
better aspects, like Vail's cynicism about the judicial process, fall by 
the wayside to facilitate the absurd conclusion.  Despite high 
production standards and a slick advertising campaign, PRIMAL FEAR is as 
trite and routine as any made-for-TV courtroom drama.  

Author
John Paul Powell
Originally published in the Outreach Connection Newspaper
(April 4, 1996)
I confess. I throw myself on the mercy of the court. Yes, it's true. I was one
of the bazillion people glued to the Simpson trial. Scantily clad women
lathered in oil could parade through my living room tossing hundred dollar
bills in the air and I wouldn't have blinked.  
Ok. You got me. I would have. But only to snatch up the dough as my wife would
sock me into next Thursday if I gaped at the gals. (She has a mean right hook,
yah know!) 
Of the droning testimony, the bombastic grandstanding and the farcical 
courtroom antics, what sticks in my mind is a distraught Christopher Darden
breaking down at the prosecution's post-verdict press conference. His throat
seizing and choking off the words. Darden weeping openly, whispering an 
apology to the victim's families and stumbling away a broken man.  
Christopher Darden thought his cause was just and true. He was championing
good. He was defending the victims. Good wins out over evil...doesn't it? In
comic books, movies and novels maybe, but not in real life. Killers go free.
Children die. Dictators hold power. Innocent people suffer. Crimes go 
unpunished.  
At times, evil does triumph and when corrupted souls prevail, raising their
hands in victory isn't enough. They smirk from ear to ear. They spit in your
face. They rub your nose in it. That's the nature of the beast.
Darden swallowed the bitter pill that we carbon-based humanoids can't and 
won't accept: the undisputable fact that life isn't fair. Don't look for any
Christopher Dardens in Primal Fear. The opposing lawyers (Richard Gere and
Laura Linney) concern themselves more with humiliating their counterparts,
petting their egos and padding their bank accounts than seeking the truth.  
Ignore the Hollywood actors and you have yourself a documentary crucifying
the legal profession.  
Defence attorney Martin Vail (Gere) is a bleached Johnnie Cochrane. You can
mow down a kindergarten class in broad daylight. Not a problem. Vail has no
qualms about defending you. As long as you don't admit responsibility and the
case promises to put his mug on the evening news; he'll take you on in a
heartbeat. Don't have two dimes to rub together? Relax. If it's a high-profile
case, Vail will bill the State. 
What distinguishes Vail from the likes of Cochrane is that Vail is man enough
to acknowledge that he's in it for the fame. Which is what causes him to 
quickly lay claim to the Butcher Boy Of Saint Mike's case. 
Aaron (Edward Norton), a transplanted hayseed is charged with the murder of an
Arch Bishop. (Which chimes in at about 10 million Hail Mary's. Give or take a
few hundred.) Arch Bishop Rushman's body was found carved like a Christmas
turkey, a mysterious message carved in his chest. Aaron was seen fleeing the
scene. Johnny Appleseed insists that it wasn't he who mistook Rushman for a 
holiday bird but distinctly saw a shadowy figure (That shadowy figure again?
Does he get around or what?) standing over the body. If Aaron is convicted 
it's say goodnight Gracie.
Prosecuting Appleseed is Janet Venable (Linney), Vail's former six month one
night stand. Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned. Vail is in for the fight
of his life. 
The true test of any courtroom drama is whether or not it sedates the audience
when the trial takes centre stage. Primal Fear shrewdly side-steps this 
impasse by fast forwarding the proceedings. The pacing meets with applause.
It's the casting that begs for a raspberry.  
Martin Vail is as unscrupulous as they come. He doesn't bend the rules. He 
ties them in friggin' knots. Vail steals evidence from the crime scene. He 
defends gangland bosses. He threatens uncooperative witnesses. Richard Gere is
not suited for this role. His appeal detracts heavily from Vail's unethical
actions. The violations don't seem as grievous because they are committed by
the charming Richard Gere.  
Primal Fear is Lens Man Gregory Hoblit's feature film debut. Hoblit has won
bushels of Emmys for directing and writing duties on such hit programs as
Hill Street Blues, L.A. Law and NYPD Blue. (He also contributed to Steven
Bochco's Cop Rock but I won't hold that against him.) Hoblit's extensive
television background is as transparent as transparent can be. The means
by which Hoblit jumps from scene to scene and the film's overall look
mirrors television's uninspiring "point and shoot" rational.
Withdraw Steve Shagan and Ann Biderman's gripping screenplay and you 
could cite Hoblit for impersonating a director.  
Edward Norton - Hoblit's aerial shots x Frasier's Dad (John Mahoney) swearing
up a storm - Richard Gere as Vail x Venable breaking communist anti-smoking
laws + one naughty video tape x Gere for saying to Norton: "Now for the 
important stuff. What's your suit size?" - Hoblit's Boob Tube style x shish
kebabed fingers - perturbing Male/Female posturing + two wild foot chases x a
bold conclusion - a wasted Alfre Woodard = lawyers take it in the shorts. 

Author
Alex Christensen
3 of 4 stars; solid but not exceptional
The pitch: "It'll be like _The_Firm_ meets _American_Gigolo_!"
        What can you expect from a legal thriller? Well, if you go by the 
John Grisham-genre standard, not much courtroom action at all. I enjoyed 
_The_Firm_, _The_Pelican_Brief_ (which not many people know is a sequel to 
_All_the_President's_Men_ with Denzel Washington in the Redford role and 
Julia Roberts in the Dustin Hoffman role), and _The_Client_, but there is 
something distinctly anti-lawyer about them. Maybe it is because Grisham 
was fed up with lawyers during his career as one, maybe he is just 
matching the national mood. His heroes are always new to the legal system 
and forced through events to "take it on," of course, always triumphing 
in the end.  The plots are tight and have explosions and fights and danger.
        Not to complain too much, but _Primal_Fear_ is certainly not a 
well-plotted movie. The pacing, the acting, the mood, are all sustained, 
but the actual events of the story may leave you feeling used and a bit 
deceived yourself. The ending is such that I hesitate to call it a 
"thriller," but I think in the end the hokey final moments are not enough 
to spoil what turns out to be a quite entertaining ride.
        _Primal_Fear_ is a different kind of thriller. There is very little 
idealism except that which is actually generated during the film. That 
is, instead of a hero on a white horse in the Tom Cruise/Julia 
Roberts/Susan Sarandon role, we have Richard Gere, steeped in corruption 
from the beginning, not innocent of the ways in which justice is 
administered, who somehow finds a way to redeem himself. Most of the 
action takes place between two people in small, enclosed spaces, or in 
the courtroom. Somehow, director Gregory Hoblit manages to sustain the 
audience's interest anyhow, often stunningly.
        A lot of the criticism of Richard Gere is that he always plays 
the same character. He is basically a "hair actor" like Michael 
Douglas--once you see his hairstyle, you know all the intricacies of his 
character. I disagree with this assessment of Gere. Anyone who has seen 
Mike Figgis's _Internal_Affairs_ knows that Gere is capable of real depth. 
And yet, in _First_Knight_, _Sommersby_, _Pretty_Woman_, and others, Gere 
has only given us blandly good-looking heroes without a trace of realism. 
Which is odd, because when Gere is good, he is pretty damn good. In 
_Primal_Fear_, he is pretty damn good.
        His character is Martin Vail, a defense attorney who sees a shot 
at the really big time when an altar boy is accused of killing the 
archbishop of Chicago. He offers to defend the accused killer, Aaron 
Stampler (Edward Norton), pro bono. This involves him in an actually not 
very complicated web of intrigue and deceit which gradually unwinds itself.
        The fun of the film is all in the rhythm and the interaction of 
the characters. Unfortunately, even with a high-powered cast including 
Laura Linney, Frances McDormand, Andre Braugher, John Mahoney, and Maura 
Tierney, there are really only two characters in _Primal_Fear_: Gere's Vail 
and first-time film actor Norton's Stampler. So they have to sustain a 
lot. Fortunately, both are up to the task.
        Gere plays Vail as a character who acts completely despicably, 
always scrambling for advantage. And he enjoys being as slick as he is. 
And yet, there is an underlying optimism, if not idealism, that give the 
portrayal depth. This performance is really very well modulated and 
manages to capture something about Vail that makes you believe in him.
        And as Gere said of Edward Norton, he "is emerging as one of the 
monster actors of our time." After only one film? Yep. Without giving 
away too much of the plot, the demands of the character of Aaron Stampler 
are extraordinary. Yet, even though you can see the cliched ending coming 
a mile away, you still believe absolutely in Aaron Stampler. Without 
Norton, the movie wouldn't even sustain itself as long as it does. 
Essentially, Norton found himself, as an actor, having to play a 
character who is a great actor. The sophistication and layers of his 
performance suggest that he is already miles ahead of most first-time 
actors, and promise a great career ahead of him. It is very early for 
Oscar talk, but I think it is not overstepping to say that so far, Norton 
has given one of the strongest supporting performances of the year.
        Overall, there is something about _Primal_Fear_ that is a bit too 
easy, a bit too shadily manipulative--but leaving the theater, you are not 
that upset about it. You have seen, after all, some great actors playing 
some pretty good roles with absolutely perfect pitch. And you even kind 
of get sucked in to the story, even though you know you probably shouldn't.
        As an old guy coming out of the theater where I work said after 
seeing the film, "I don't trust you; I don't trust nobody."

Author
Michael Redman
Richard Gere can be a commanding actor, but he's not always in great films.
Everything comes together here. Gere is a big time Chicago defense attorney
who takes on a seemingly unwinable case in hopes of even more publicity. It
doesn't go exactly as he expects.
Gere's client, Aaron (Edward Norton), is a shy stuttering Tennessee boy who is
accused of brutally murdering and mutilating a Catholic archbishop. The
evidence is stacked against him. He was caught running from the scene covered
in the bishop's blood. His bloody footprints are all over the murder scene. He
has a relationship with the priest.
Gere talks to the boy, believes that he is actually innocent and sets about
finding the real killer. Despite the lawyer's proclamations that he doesn't
care about the guilt of his clients and that the real thrill is gambling with
people's lives, he becomes involved with Aaron and is determined to free him.
Lots of complications and twists. The prosecuting attorney is Gere's former
co-worker and lover. They both work each other's motives to their legal
advantages and it gets messy. Her boss had major economic dealings with the
archbishop that went sour and seems to have crime connections. Aaron gets
weirder and weirder as the trial goes on. Gere's case is falling apart and he
is faced with about a dozen ethical dilemmas.
Gere is exceptional as the well-dressed reserved counselor, but just once, I
wanted to see him kick back and come out of his "suit" persona. Even when he
loses it, you don't see very far inside. Norton's Aaron is convincing: he
comes across as the backwoods kid misplaced in the big city. The supporting
cast does a fine job of holding together the story.
As with most of the effective courtroom dramas, the cinematography is crisp
and rich. The story will keep you on the edge of your seat. Nothing is what it seems.
[This appeared in the 4/11/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Robin Redcrest
     My date and I both walked out of this movie with the same reaction
- "We wasted a Saturday night on this?" Movies like this aren't filmed,
they're programmed. Here's how it's done:
1. Turn on the computer, call up the software for "star vehicle for
aging sex symbol - male"
2. Plug in the name of Richard Gere, because he can't act his way 
out of a paper bag, but he looks great for 46 and you can generate 
word of mouth by getting columnists to discuss the merits of his 
neck wrinkles over Robert Redford's.
3. Plug in a plot that plays on people's fears of corrupt politics,
corrupt law and Archbishops who diddle little boys in the back room.
4. Finish up with a female lead who can't seem to get over the fact 
that her opposing council on a major trial is an ex-lover who 
treated her badly, and who she'd go back to in a heartbeat, for 
reasons that no one can figure out except maybe a penchant for neck 
wrinkles. I loved her seething indignation when her ex baited and 
manipulated her and how somehow she dissolved into his arms at the 
end because - not in spite of the fact, but because - he completely 
ruined her. It was so distasteful, it might as well have been a rape 
scene where she started to enjoy herself. Hollywood - WAKE UP!
     My date was an attorney, so we at least had some fun dissing the
legal inconsistencies. Testimony is stricken that is later referred to
in court - hello? A sideline of questioning that is relevant to the
plot but - oops! - not the trial is allowed. I watched every "L.A. Law"
episode ever made, and Mike, or Grace or Arnie or Victor would've
gotten hooted out of L.A. County Court for trying some of this stuff.
(http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/primalfear.html)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     A densely plotted, poorly paced adaptation of the William Diehl
best seller, PRIMAL FEAR does have *one* thing going for it:  the cast
is *very* handsome.  Richard Gere, in one of his good roles, as a high-
profile Chicago defense attorney; Laura Linney (CONGO) as the prosecutor
he once dated; Andre Braugher (TV's "Homicide") as his investigative
assistant; John Mahoney as the state attorney he antagonizes; and the
list goes on.
     They all meet in court, after the brutal murder of the city's
beloved archbishop yields a single suspect:  a soft-spoken altar boy
(played with surprising conviction by newcomer Edward Norton Hey
Ralph!).  Despite a few faces that don't register-- neither Frances
McDormand's psychiatrist nor Alfre Woodard's no-nonsense judge make an
impression-- it's fun to watch so many good actors knock-around on
screen.  Too bad that award-winning television director Gregory Hoblit
doesn't know where to go with it.
     As a potboiler thriller-- or, even, as a decent courtroom drama--
PRIMAL FEAR is just too slow.  Despite an enormous amount of plotting,
the film lacks any real sense of urgency.  Very few scenes *move*.  (You
may even fall asleep!) And, as a character study, PRIMAL FEAR is just
too murky.  Gere's character is a fantastic creation:  a hotshot lawyer
with principals and, ah, convictions.  The problem is that we're never
shown how the events in the film affect *him*.  Instead of, say, a coda
that indicates growth, change, or awareness, all we get are a few
closing shots of him outdoors, standing alone.  What's the point?
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Joan Ellis
You won't find "Primal Fear" on the "recommended" list of
the Catholic Church. The film's premise is a karate chop to the
gut of churchly piety, but it's a bold premise strengthened by
good acting and crisp dialogue. It even offers a breath-catching
moment that draws a collective gasp from the audience--suspense,
the old-fashioned way. 
The opening scenes are Paramount's entry in this year's
sweepstakes of graphic gore--unnecessary, as always, and never
carrying the wallop of a good line or image. Surely there's a
better way to establish a crime than showing a victim with 78
stab wounds and a six-digit number carved on his chest.  
Martin Vale (Richard Gere) is a defense attorney whose
adrenaline rushes at the first news of an indefensible criminal.
Aaron Stampler (Edward Norton) is a 19-year-old suspect in the
grizzly, hands-over-the-eyes murder of Chicago's Archbishop.
Altar boy, soft-spoken southern lad with a disarming stutter,
covered with the Archbishop's blood, Aaron is an irresistible
magnet for Martin, who can hardly get to him fast enough. 
"I'm your mother, your father, your priest," Martin tells
the boy. "I don't want you talking to anyone but me." He doesn't,
and thereby hangs the tale. Martin's courtroom opponent in this
game he loves is Janet Venable (Laura Linney), his former lover
and colleague in the prosecutor's office. She is nearly his equal
in courtroom strategy, certainly his peer in conversational
poison darts. 
Martin, who professes not to care a whit whether a client is
innocent or guilty, now has one with no prior record and no
apparent motive--a situation that is a serious challenge to his
cynicism. In spite of himself, he begins to dig down through the
layers to determine whether his client is innocent or whether he
is evil wrapped in the body of a boy scout. When this movie
drags, we know it is marching toward something big, even with
weights on its feet.
The trial unfolds as the now standard media circus. Boom
mikes, anchors, and reporters stake out the courthouse. Sound
familiar? But Martin, it turns out, has a little more soul than
Johnnie Cochran. Richard Gere is unexpectedly effective in making
a very interesting character of the cynic we thought we had
figured out.  
Laura Linney is very good as the fast-talking but vulnerable
prosecutor. Andre Braugher is sharp and funny as Tommy, Martin's
lead investigator. Alfre Woodard lends her dignity to the role of
the judge, who has become jaded now that her intelligence has
been confirmed by power. Edward Norton, in his first movie role,
is simply terrific as the suspect. 
The audience gasps and groans in the grip of a good
old-fashioned courtroom melodrama that is based not so much on
the rules of evidence as on the new rules of celebrity. It's a
good story with a grand villain and a fine portrait by Richard
Gere of the loneliness of the long-distance defense attorney.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     PRIMAL FEAR is an excellent whodunit full of lots of plot twists
and surprises.  Some things you think are clearly so, aren't; whereas
other obvious facts are actually true.  The script by Ann Biderman and
Steve Shagan and based on the novel by William Diehl is like the maze
at a fun house.  Some paths seem to work and do whereas others you
think you see clearly but don't.  Other than the great plot, there are
two outstanding performances by Edward Norton and Richard Gere.  All of
this notwithstanding, the movie, because of the direction by Gregory
Hoblit, is less than the sum of its parts and overall is not near as
good a movie as it could have been or should have been.
     As the movie starts, rich and famous lawyer Martin Vail (Richard
Gere) is explaining his legal philosophy to a reporter who is writing
an article on Vail's techniques.  Vail tells him, "If your mother says
she loves you, get a second opinion."  Vail helps out little guys too.
One of these, Joey Pinero (Steven Bauer from THIEF OF HEARTS), has Vail
worried he will be murdered by some important people in the corrupt
Chicago city government, but Joey tells him not to be concerned since,
"How are they going to kill a man who never sleeps?"
     Soon the big crime happens.  In a gory scene the beloved
Archbishop Rushman (Stanley Anderson) is stabbed and murdered in his
bedroom.  From the house the police chase Aaron Stampler (Edward
Norton).  His clothes are covered in blood and the TV news covers the
chase live from their helicopters.  Vail sees the TV coverage and
decides he will try the case pro bono for Stampler.  Stampler is
surprised but agrees.
     Vail reads Stampler the riot act on how to behave in court telling
him, "I don't have to believe you.  I don't care if you are innocent.
I'm your mother, your father, your priest."  He goes on to order him,
"I speak.  You do not speak.  All you do is sit there and look
innocent."  He better look innocent and Vail better be a brilliant
attorney because it looks like an open and shut case if there ever was
one.
     The prosecutor is Vail's old flame Janet Venable (Laura Linney).
Linney's performance as his ex-girlfriend works, but she is not
convincing as a prosecutor.  She should have spent some time watching
Marcia Clark tapes.  As the defense's psychiatrist, Dr. Molly
Arrington, is the wonderful lead from FARGO Frances McDormand.
Certainly not her best work, but well done.
     As the trial goes on, Vail periodically talks more with the
magazine reporter.  Vail tells him, "I chose to believe in the basic
goodness of people.  Some basically good people do some very bad
things."  When he hits a low point in the trial he tells him, "You been
saving up for a rainy day?  Guess what it's raining."
     What I have told you thus far, just sets up the situation.  I will
not reveal more.  In fact Gere demanded that critics seeing the film
early sign a contract not to reveal the ending.  I will not reveal it
other than to say I did not guess it, and, moreover, I thought it was
the best part of the movie.  So if you hate the movie, don't leave
early and miss the best part.
     Besides the already mentioned actors, John Mahoney is good as a
slimeball political boss and ex-lead prosecutor named John Shaughnessy.
For some reason Alfre Woodard gives a performance totally on autopilot
as Judge Miriam Shoat.  She acts like she is just there to read her
lines, and they should have paided her extra if they wanted her to put
in any feeling.
     Gere gives one of his best performances ever.  Only in MR. JONES,
which most people have never seen, but should, do I remember him doing
better.  He is so suave at first. Watch little things like the
confident way to sits in a chair or conducts an interview.  Later as
the trial is not going well, he is vulnerable and despondent.  Even
better than Gere's, is Norton's performance, which I expect to get him
an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor.  He is frighten,
naive, respectful, and many other less obvious characteristics all at
once.
     The film has strong editing by David Rosenbloom.  Notice the way
he cuts back and forth in a scene to create a seamless feeling of
tension.  Each frame builds on the other like pieces in a jigsaw
puzzle.  The music by James Newton Howard is bold and dramatic.
     With few exceptions the components of a great thriller and
courtroom drama are in place, and yet, the director came up short.
Although I liked what I saw, the picture is frequently not believable
enough.  The director has his actors too removed.  They do not engage
the audience and pull them into the drama to the extent they should.
In the right hands, this material could have been made into a ****
film.  Two outstanding performances and a terrific plot.  Don't get me
wrong; as done, this is an excellent movie, but I wish it had lived up
to its potential.
     PRIMAL FEAR runs 2:10 but doesn't feel long at all.  It is rated R
for one gory scene with lots of pictures of it to see later, a little
sex and brief nudity.  I think the film would be fine for teenagers.  I
recommend the picture and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Not being in the legal profession I am hardly in a position to
comment on the antics of the attorneys in PRIMAL FEAR.  I doubt that
lawyers visit the murder location looking for clues; they have
investigators for that.  But as sheer entertainment this is the film
to see.  For one thing, Richard Geer has never been as charming,
ingratiating and just a pleasure to watch in his role of a hotshot
lawyer more interested in seeing his picture on the cover of a
magazine than in defending a client . . . until he comes across
Aaron-Roy who is accused of murdering a very prominent Catholic
churchman, the Archbishop of Chicago.
     Martin Vail (Richard Gere) is the lawyer whose whole being is
devoted to always winning, to be the most sought after attorney.
Intrigued by the young man (Edward Norton) accused of the murder and
whom everyone believes is the killer, he decides to take the case
without a fee.  Thus begins a film that has more twists and turns, ups
and downs, all tense and exciting, than a roller coaster ride.  You
will love every surprise, of which there are enough for several films.
One of my favorites scenes is the very last when Vail is about to
leave the courthouse and sees through the door the crowd of newspeople
and photographers waiting for him.  I thought it was a great touch
that packed a big exclamation mark on an already stirring film.
     Mention should be made of the great casting by Deborah Aquila
and Jan Shannon, a category I have never previously mentioned.
Janet Venable (Laura Linney) is the prosecuting attorney who once was
"very close" to Vail and may still wish for a closer relationship is
exciting in and out the courtroom.  Alfre Woodard, a fine actress, is
perfect as the judge..  There is Andre Braugher (Tommy Goodman) as
Vail's investigator,  John Mahoney and Frances McDormand, all turning
in excellent performances.  Wow!

Author
Scott Marcus
Cast: Richard Gere, Edward Norton, Laura Linney, John Mahoney, Alfre
      Woodard, Stephen Bauer, Frances McDormand
Director: Gregory Hoblit
Screenplay: Ann Biderman, Steve Shagan, based on William Diehl's
            novel.
Running Time: 130 minutes
Grade: B+
Richard Gere is not one of my favorite actors. However, I like
courtroom dramas, and this film looked good enough to take a chance
on. I wasn't disappointed. It wasn't a great film, but it was
interesting, and took several unexpected turns. One thing: what's with
the title? Not only is it extremely forgettable, it doesn't really
have much to do with the film, as far as I could determine. In the
long run, it will probably hurt the film, as people won't be able to
think of or remember it.
Martin Vail (Richard Gere) is a grandiose defense attorney. He loves
the money and the fame that go along with defending (successfully)
rich scum, such as mafia men and drug-dealers. Once he sees that the
accused killer of a prominent Chicago Archbishop is a baby-faced alter
boy, he wants in on the case, presumably for the press he'll get. We
soon find out that the prosecutor assigned is a former lover, Janet
Venable (Laura Linney). Vail himself is a former prosecutor, and quit
because of tensions between himself and the District Attorney, played
very well by John Mahoney (Frasier's father on the TV series).
There is an underlying theme of dichotomy in the movie: people have
public faces, and private faces. We see this in the murdered
archbishop, in the accused, and, most strongly, defense attorney
Martin Vail.
Richard Gere does a fairly good job. At first, he appears to be a
money- and attention-grabbing lawyer, with no consideration of the
truth. But we see another side, as he becomes a seeker of justice, and
comes to believe in his client.
Alfre Woodard, as the judge, is capable, though somewhat wasted in a
standard role. Laura Linney also does journeyman work; nothing
spectacular, but acceptable. Her relationship with Vail is believable;
their verbal fencing adds to the film. The actor who playes Vail's
investigator (unfortunately, I don't remember his name) is quite good.
His female assistant (she looked very familiar, but I can't remember
where I've seen her) was also capable, but unspectacular. The best
performance in the film was by Edward Norton.  He was excellent, as
the timid altar-boy turned alleged "Butcher Boy of St. Mike's".
I was impressed by the depth of the plot; there are red-herrings, and
dead-ends, that in a lesser film would lead to a predictable ending. I
liked the plot twists the film took, and most of the supporting
characters, thus I give PRIMAL FEAR a respectable B+ rating.
Review written: Thursday, 4 April 1996
