Title
Review for Bacheha-Ye aseman (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
E.H. Goh
Like "White Balloon", it focuses on the lives of ordinary children.
Unlike "White Balloon" which stretches over one incident in realtime,
"Children...." involves a string of events and problems encountered by
them. It was very interesting to see how they go about solving it.
These solutions, funny or ineffective they might be, exude innocence,
which is the very soul of this masterpiece.That untainted innocence is
unattainable by conventional city dwellers, both young and old. Like
almost all Iranian productions, everything was done in the most
authentic way, more real than dramatic.It would have easily taken the
dramatic turn by exploiting the hard lives the kids are having to gain
sympathy. Fortunately, that fact was downplayed so as not to get in the
way of storytelling or perhaps, what I perceived as hardships might be
a common sight in Iran ( I hope not).
Iranian productions like to end on a pondering note but that does not
always mean open ended endings. I guess with all  the loose ends tied
up there's no need to go any further by including a most probably corny
conclusion.   So they left the obvious to imagination and fired off a
last burst of lingering creativity, then subtly the curtain fell.
If you have not seen any Iranian films and wonder what's the big fuss
about? This will be a very good one to start with because of its
accessibility, in other words, it's of relatively high entertainment
value for an arthouse fare. But if you adore Iranian films, then this
one could be a little less intriguing. Nonetheless, it's still as
endearingly heartfelt.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
I actually watched this little gem at the Singapore Film Festival in 1998.
It was just a random pick from the massive list of films that were shown
during the festival. Well, it turned out to be the best I saw in the
festival and I daresay one of the best ever in my lifetime. CHILDREN OF
HEAVEN is showcases maverick yet masterful film-making, dealing very little
with dialogue, allowing the visuals to sweep the hearts of audiences all
over. This is the way films were initially made to excite the human soul.
How can a simple story of a little boy, Ali who loses here sister Zahra's
tattered shoes mean so much to me? Its the simplicity of the entire plot
that really stole my soul while watching this film. The tattered pair of
shoes which meant so much and caused much dilemma to the two young
protagonists seem too trivial to be significant yet hold so much importance
in reminding us what we people are really made of. The surmounting dilemmas
which the two had to endure were never life-threatening but nonetheless
remain a very important situation to them both; well, at least for that
period of time. The film climaxes wonderfully with every knot tied and every
injury healed, leaving the audience a sense of satisfaction; mentally and 
spiritually.
After this film, I rushed to catch a few other Iranian films in this year's
festival. Though they were all similar in many ways (simplicity, bare
minimum film-making) all never did measure up to CHILDREN OF HEAVEN. The
director Majid Majidi did a wonderful job in visual storytelling with his
tight close-ups and well-placed slow-mos as well as silent film treatment in
various sequences, simply classic stuff. The lead children actor/actress
were wonderful in their roles, manipulative in their expression but highly
believable!
Unlike films that try to achieve heart-warming effect on audiences with
heavenly thespians and massive production budget, CHILDREN OF HEAVEN will
manipulate our minds but one thing for sure, we won't leave feeling cheated.
This film was awarded best film in the Singapore Film Festival and the
Montreal Film Festival. It was also one of the nominees for best foreign
film.
Be sure to catch this film, you won't be disappointed and I'm pretty sure we
won't be seeing a film like this for a long-long time.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CHILDREN OF HEAVEN  (director: Majid Majidi; cast: Amir Naji (Ali's
Father), Mir Farrokh Hashemian (Ali), Bahareh Seddiqi (Zahra), Nafiseh
Jafar Mohammadi (Roya), Fereshteh Sarabandi (Ali's Mother), Kamal
Mir-karimi (the Principal), Behzad Rafi'i (the Coach). 1997-Iran)
In this kidpic, which is a very safe movie to make in today's Iran, as
even with the intolerant dictator Khomeini dead, and a more liberal
regime in its place, there is still no room for anything but subtle
dissension to get sneaked into the story, because of strict censorship,
and the most fertile ground to do that sneaking in, is in a type of film
like this one, where there is no challenge to the ongoing political
system and its fundamentalist religious system, as everything is seen
through the children's eyes. The only thing, is that I couldn't pick up
any subtle attacks against the regime. Maybe it was too subtle for me to
pick up, or maybe there was no dissensions, this was just meant to be a
tear jerker of a film.
The story is guileless. It is about a lost pair of shoes and a shared
pair of sneakers, which if it was an American film and didn't give me a
chance to see a country such as Iran, which I am unfamiliar with, but
curious to see how it looks under this new regime, I would have been
really disappointed at how weakly structured it was. But because it is
Iran and I am aware how difficult it is to make a film under censorship
there, I am more tolerant of its flaws than I ordinarily would be.
When Ali, the nine year old, fails to come home with his younger sister
Zahra's shoes that he retrieved from being repaired at the shoe shop,
this left the children with a big problem in their life, because their
God fearing, uneducated but honest parents, who are impoverished, owing
money to the landlord and the grocer, are in no position to get the
child a new pair of shoes. Ali must get the shoes back, but he is not
aware that a blind garbage collector took them by mistake, so rather
than burden the parents with further money problems and get a beating
besides, and also unnecessarily excite his very sick mother, who on
doctor's orders must not work, Ali devises a plan where he shares his
sneakers with his sister, so they both can go to school, but this is his
and was her only pair of shoes; and, as they go to school in different
shifts, it is possible for them to pull this switch off if their timing
is perfect, but since their timing was off, he keeps getting caught by
the principal coming late to class, and besides, his sneakers are much
too large for her, making their plight more dramatic. Why he doesn't
tell his teacher about this problem, I don't understand, especially
since his teacher seemed like a kind man, and, since this might be a
problem that is not that uncommon in a school where a lot of the
children are poor. But, then again, if he did that, that might have
taken away the reason for making this slight film, in the first place.
Most of the film takes place as we watch these two darling children run
to make their classes, while switching Ali's sneakers in an alleyway,
giving us a chance to see that most of the other children where their
south Tehran neighborhood is, are also suffering from severe money
problems. At one point of the film, we will see how the rich live, in
the north side of Tehran, in luxurious roomy houses, with clean
drive-ways, and inter-coms, and gated entrances, with lush gardens; and,
the problem the rich kids are shown to have, is from boredom, but when
it comes down to the nitty-gritty, the film seems to be saying, all kids
are kids, as we see how easily Ali becomes friends with one of the rich
kids.
If this film was made in the States, its theme could be, the NY state
lottery theme, "You gotta be in it to win it." As the kids try to solve
their dire problem by having the athletic Ali, enter a marathon race for
the city school kids, where third prize is to win a pair of sneakers;
and for Ali, he has to rely on his gym teacher to enter him because he
was unaware of the race until it was too late to enter it himself.
During the race, the filmmaker pulls out a bagful of cinematography
tricks and borrowed shots from other directors to make the race an
exciting one, but a race that left me unimpressed with what kind of
point the filmmaker was making.
If one, could summarize, how this feel good Iranian version of that old
Hollywood standard formula works here, tugging at the audiences'
heartstrings every chance it can get, as quickly as tears fall from
Ali's wide oval eyes and a frown covers Zahra, as whenever bad news
comes her way, which is most of the time, we see a frown appear on her.
I assume, what the film is trying to say, is see how you must solve your
problems on your own, don't blame it on the government.
The few times Zahra does smile, her smile is a very warm and generous
one, like when a little schoolgirl classmate of hers, who happens to be
the daughter of the blind garbageman, who has given her Zahra's shoes he
picked up by mistake, returns the pen Zahra lost, which was a gift to
her from Ali, for not telling their mother that he lost her shoes. He
got the pen from his teacher for being an excellent student. I guess the
point being made here is, both girls can be generous and have learned
how to live with their poverty.
The father's poverty reflects the director's own background, which is
why the family is so touchingly portrayed but in such a manipulative
manner, that it fails to be as convincing a portrayal as it could have
been, if done in a more free flowing form.
The father is seen as a true believer, never questioning authority,
deeming everything to be in the hands of God, whereas his religious
beliefs are so strong, he would not even take a piece of sugar that he
is chopping up for the Mosque to have for his tea.This display of moral
rectitude, reveals how simple things can be if you just have faith and
perseverance to endure life's hardships. Is this what the film is really
trying to say?
When the father takes Ali by bike to the rich part of town, seeking work
for them as gardeners, it is an eye opening experience to see them pass
through a modern and sleek city. They get lucky through Ali's ability to
talk to the rich people in the other side of town and land a job that
pays them well, but as to be expected, in this most manipulative of
films, things quickly reverse, as the father's brakes fail and the bike
crashes, so all the money they made, goes for hospital bills and new
brakes.
Children of Heaven does humanize the Iranian people, and show them to be
a warm people, able to help out others in need, as when Ali brings soup
his mother made to their elderly neighbors. But as an impactful film, it
falls on its face with a thud, unable to make heaven seem  to be a real
place for children, where everything that is bitter is shown to be
really fine despite what appears to be not so fine: rich people are not
bad they can be nice, schools are not that rigid they can be
accomodating, religion is unquestioned but that is because it is
necessary, being poor can make you sad but it is not the worst thing in
the world, and obedience is sometimes difficult to understand but it can
be rewarding.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Edwin Jahiel
CHILDREN OF HEAVEN ( BACHEHA-YE ASEMAN) (Iran, 1997; US release 1999) ***
Written and directed by Majid Majidi. Photography, Parviz Malek-zadeh.
Editing, Hassan Hassan-doost. Set design, Ashgar Nezadh Imani. Production
mgr., Seyed Saeed Seyedzade. Music, Keivan Jahanshahi. Produced by Donah
Film Co. & Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children & Young
Adults. Cast: Amir Naji (Ali's Father), Mir Farrokh Hashemian (Ali),
Bahareh Seddiqi (Zahra), Nafiseh Jafar Mohammadi (Roya), Fereshteh
Sarabandi (Ali's Mother), Kamal Mir-karimi (the Principal) and Behzad
Rafi'i (the Coach). A Miramax release. 88 minutes. In Farsi, with English
subtitles. Rated G.
At the Art Theater.
Iranian cinema became known around the mid-1960s. In 1979,  the fall of the
Shah and the takeover by the Ayatollah Khomeini's regime made the country
into a theocracy with many restrictions and severe censorship.During the
Khomeini decade, cinema declined in numbers, quality and scope.
With the death of Khomeini and a (very relative) "liberalization," good
filmmaking picked up. Several  directors --these days the big name is Abbas
Kiarostami --became world figures, not in the entertainment-oriented,
subtitles-loathing USA, but in Europe and its festivals. Censorship
however, though somewhat relaxed, is still going strong in Iran.
Iranian movies have a special niche from the Shah's days on: films for
and/or about children. An Iranian researcher preparing a video documentary
interviewed several filmmakers on such movies. Other than the expected
reasons ("kids are our future" etc.) a major  stated or subsumed factor was
those films are "safer" and face reduced censorship. As I construe this,
many kidpics can also be an alibi for hinting at negative social and other
conditions.
Before  several autocratic regimes dissolved, the device of circumventing
the censors via indirection was thriving in many countries. In Franco's
Spain or Communist Poland and Czechoslovakia, seemingly non-political
subjects and characters used, in fact "invisible" allusions through
symbols, metaphors, humor or irony, to make their critical points. The work
of many filmmakers was enriched and refined by necessary subtleties. Many
movies of this kind were among the best of national productions.
Children of Heaven is about two kids, Ali, 9, and his younger sister Zahra,
and about a pair of sneakers, Zahra's only shoes. Their working-class
family is dirt poor --but honest, of course. It lacks most  basic
necessities and is hounded by their landlord for overdue rent. In their
home and on the streets, we get telling views of how the other half lives,
more probably the other nine-tenths.
Even the gift of a ballpoint pen takes on large dimensions. I couldn't help
wondering what one of the household's Persian rugs might fetch in the West,
and perhaps keep the group in comfort for  a long time
During one of his many errands, Ali has Zahra's pitiful sneakers repaired
by a cobbler.  Within minutes these get mistakenly picked up by a blind
trashman. Returning home, the terribly upset Ali  is greeted by Zahra's
enchanting smile--before, that is, he tells her the awful truth. Zahra will
smile just twice again in the course of the hour-and-a-half movie.
The siblings say nothing of the loss to their parents since the family is
too poor to afford new shoes. I also suppose that Iranian youngsters,
unlike those of most western countries, have a traditional respect of their
seniors--and respect often goes hand in hand with fear of being the bearer
of bad news.
In their predicament, the siblings decide to share Ali's own (and only)
pair of sneakers when the children go to their respective schools. Zahra's
school is in the morning, Ali's in the afternoon, so there's a kind of
relay race as she passes on the sneakers to her impatiently waiting
brother. Times don't dovetail precisely, so the boy gets to school just
minutes late, is caught three times by the strict but kind (as we later
see) principal. Why Ali doesn't give the man his perfectly good excuse
baffles me. Is Iran so tight-lipped before authority?
The schoolchildren are so nicely disciplined and well-mannered in their
shabby classrooms that it makes American schools look like high-tech
infernos. Yet my Western eyes were depressed by the identically garbed
female pupils in dark pants and blouses and huge white head scarves.
Complications and supense follow. Zahra sees her old shoes being worn by a
classmate. Father gets on his rickety old bicycle with Ali, to seek
gardening jobs for the rich. They cross a Tehran that's beyond their
depressed areas. It's a revelation, another world, a modern city with wide
road, tree-lined avenues, tall buildings, consumer advertising.
Reaching a beautiful residential neighborhood, they are in a fairyland of
clean, quiet, empty   streets totally walled palatial villas with gardens,
intercoms from the gate door to the house, and at times guard dogs .(Read:
splendid but dehumanized)
The points made by the contrasts are obvious. Disembodied refusals are
heard on the intercoms. The father, a terrible, tongue-tied salesman, is
rescued by Ali's making the proposals. Papa gets new respect for his son as
he is hired by a nice old grandfather who pays him handsomely. (Read:
wealthy people do have a heart). Ali plays with the grandson.(Read: kids
are kids, with no social distinctions. Read also: poor little rich boys are
bored and isolated, as in a number of Hollywood pictures).
Once the job is done, the pair leave in high spirits. You sense that
something bad is going to happen. It does, when the bike's brakes don't
work. It is not a serious accident but financially the poor people are back
to square one.
At the boys school, the gym teacher had announced an inter-school
competition of long distance running, four kilometers. The first prize is
two weeks in a holiday camp, a dream for have-not students. Ali,
preoccupied with his troubles and bad shoes did not sign up, but
discovering that third prize is a pair of sneakers, he begs tearfully to
enter the race. The teacher relents.
In an American film, the boy would have won not just third place but first.
I won't say any more. The hard race is well and suspensefully  filmed, the
movie's conclusion is very good, without a neat wrap-up --a big plus.
Acting is good, kids and adults are "real." Among the grownups are several
instances of kindness. The style of COH mixes the documentary and the
dramatic, is clearly (and by the director's admission) derived from Italian
neorealist films, notably De Sica's classic The Bicycle Thief (1948) and
certain other European movies on poverty.
In fact, a new Majidi movie ( all I know is that it is a
"comedy-documentary") made in Iran, produced by Kevin Costner and Jim
Wilson, was announced for February 1999. Its title : The Bicycle Thief. I
have no news of it. Perhaps its U.S. release was postponed because a
re-release of De Sica's The Bicycle Thief has been playing recently in a
few U.S. locations.
COH was a major hit in Iran and a 1999 Oscar nominee for Best Foreign Film.
It is  a good picture, although a number of tricks, plot devices, obvious
constructions, coincidences (note the blind man and the girl with Zahra's
shoes) and manipulations, all for a good cause no doubt, will be sensed by
the viewers. Try as he may, writer-director  Majidi cannot even approximate
the starkness of De Sica's tone. The Italian film was in black and white
and in wet wintry weather, while the colors and sunshine of COH act as a
small palliative to the characters' travails.
The category "Children's Films" may give the false impression that this is
a Disneyfied movie. No, it is for adults, and for young ones who are able
to read the subtitles on the screen.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some public schools in the U.S. are copying an idea
started by the prep schools and now require students to wear
uniforms to class.  In that way, say the proponents, the
youngsters will not be trying to one-up each other, implying
"My dad makes more than yours."  What they neglected to
require was uniform footwear, and so the inevitable resulted. 
Kids are competing over their running shoes.  Nikes are "in"
one year, Adidas the next.  With sneakers now running
upwards of $150 a pair, it's no wonder that some pupils,
especially those living in poorer neighborhoods, are using
illegal means to acquire the money in order to buy status, if
not from head to toe than at least from toe to ankle.  
   In Iran, on the other hand, the poorer kids don't even think
of choosing their shoes for prestige.  They're just happy they
have something to wear to school at all.  "The Children of
Heaven," a gossamer work by the wonderful writer-director
Majid Majidi, an adorable nine-year-old named Ali must not
only settle for a pair of ratty old white sneakers in order to
attend class at all. He actually has to share them with his
younger sister, Zahra; to meet her when she finishes her
morning classes and to quickly change footwear with her so
that he can get to his school for his later session.  Why
doesn't she have her own?  Unfortunately, when Ali took
them to the local shoemaker for repair, he left them for just a
minute or so outside the vegetable merchant's shop. When
he returned, they had disappeared.  Ali must spend a good
portion of this story trying to replace them not only because
sharing the pair's only shoes is an arduous task but because
Zahra threatens to report the loss to her mom and dad, and
that could lead to a beating.
   From this unlikely premise, Majidi etches out a charming
tale, a fable, really, that painlessly instructs us westerners in
some of the customs of his Middle Eastern land while at the
same time obliquely criticizing the vast gulf between Tehran's
many poor and its highly privileged wealthy class. 
Cinematographer Parviz Malekezade's camera focuses in on
one of Tehran's more ragged neighborhoods, a labyrinth of
rundown streets and tattered markets which is home to nine-
year-old Ali, his seven-year-old sister Zahra, their crying baby
brother, their ailing mother and overworked father. 
The family are five months behind in their rent and regularly
threatened by the landlord.  The vegetable man guides Ali to
the cheaper potatoes on the floor while refusing to allow
another day of credit.  At some point Ali's father, portrayed at
first as a cranky and craggy fellow who seems uninterested in
his children but then as a caring family patriarch, takes the
boy "uptown" on the family's threadbare bicycle where they
offer their gardening services to the rich who are protected
behind high walls and fierce, barking dogs.
    The narrative is simple enough, but Majidi mines the film
for sights rich in symbolism and local color.  A blind beggar
hugs his little girl when she arrives home and buys her the
best pair of shoes he can afford.  The schoolgirls and women
are clothed to a person in their traditional religious headdress
but are conspicuously absent from services in the mosque as
they are from important cultural institutions throughout the
land.  Teachers in the shabby elementary school do what
they can with the limited supplies they can dole out, the
principals lecturing the kids on the importance of cleanliness
while the instructors administer written tests to shyly obedient
children.  The men on the faculty run the gamut from a
bearded, serious fellow to a rotund coach who could easily fit
into the athletic staff of an American high school.  
   The two youngsters are portrayed as the titled children of
heaven. Yet they are not saintly or especially goody two-
shoes but rather harbor envious sentiment toward those who
have more than they, if only a simple pair of loafers or a
clean set of sneakers.  
   The acting is tops all around.  Happily, "The Children of
Heaven" is not a tearjerker nor does it conclude on a sticky
utopian note. While a Hollywood ending would have
demanded that Ali replace his sister's shoes as promised,
Majidi's conclusion would have likely brought a broad smile to
the face of O. Henry.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Please post the following review to the newsgroup.
rated PG
in Persian with English subtitles
starring Mohammad Amir Naji, Fereshte Sarabandi, Karnal Mirkarimi
written and directed by Majid Majidi
Once in a very long while, a film comes along that doesn't need an
epic story in order to grasp the viewer and tell a simple story in an
epic way. Majid Majidi's CHILDREN OF HEAVEN is such a film. Over the
years, Iranian directors have shown skill in telling a simple but
subtle BICYCLE THIEFesque story. The reason for this is that in a
country like Iran, where there is no freedom of speech, you cannot
degrade the country in any way, especially on film. So the filmmakers
had to be able to express art with subtlety, as to not generate
controversy.
CHILDREN OF HEAVEN tells the story of a small, impoverished Iranian
boy who goes to the marketplace and gets his sister's shoes stolen by
accident. The boy promises his sister that she will get the shoes
back, as long as she doesn't tell their parents. The children must
then share one pair of sneakers, to be traded back and forth between
the time they go to school(she goes in the morning, while he goes in
the afternoon). The children try some clever schemes in order to get
the shoes back, but none of them seem to work. That is really the
film's entire plot, but it moves rather swiftly and never becomes
dull(in Iran, it was a huge hit among children). But during the film,
if you pay close attention, you can tell that Majidi is actually
crafting a brilliant study on the different wealth classes of Iran. In
short, CHILDREN OF HEAVEN deserves it's Oscar nomination for Best
Foreign Language Film just as much or even more than any of the other
nominees, and it makes you wish that Miramax spent just as much money
promoting this film as it did LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL or SHAKESPEARE IN
LOVE.  


Author
Steve Rhodes
Ali (Mohammad Amir Naji), an Iranian third-grader, is working hard to
come in third place in the big race.  Battling hundreds of other
competitors about his age, he races four kilometers around the lake.  As
he approaches the finish line, he is in danger of overachieving -- only
a third place finish will win the shoes he needs.  Ever since he lost
his sister's shoes, they have been time-sharing his pair of shoes, so he
desperately needs exactly two runners in front of him.
CHILDREN OF HEAVEN (BACHEHA-YE ASEMAN), written and directed by Majid
Majidi, is less a movie than a visual pantomime of a short story.  The
thin narrative and sparse dialog almost dares critics not to like it by
imbuing just about every character with near sainthood.  When we finally
meet the one family we expect to hate, it turns out to be led by a blind
beggar with a heart of gold.  Add in the amateurish acting, and you
would seem to have a recipe for a film that will cause people to smile
politely and try think of kind things to say.
The director does fashion a few nice visuals.  The movie opens with an
intimate close-up of a little girl's shoes being mended.  Another lovely
little image has kids blowing soap bubbles at each other.  Too often,
however, he runs out of ideas and just films the same ugly alleyway,
again and again.
The story's dirt-poor family hasn't paid their rent in 5 months, and
they're overdrawn on their credit with the grocer.  The son, Ali, loses
his first-grade sister Zahra's (Mir Farrokh Hashemian) shoes on the way
back from the shoe repair shop.  The plot revolves around the logistics
of sharing shoes and of obtaining a replacement pair.  Using little
dialog, the film sticks to the visuals to tell the bulk of its story.
The kids spend large amount of their screen time either racing to swap
shoes or waiting for the one with the shoes to return home.
As a change of pace, one day Ali and his father take a beat-up bike and
go looking for work as gardeners in Tehran's wealthy enclaves, where the
rich live in alabaster mansions behind large gated walls.  The movie's
best sequence occurs when the father gets inside the gates and views the
exterior of one of the elaborate homes.  His saucer-sized eyes speak
volumes, as he is dumbstruck by the opulence.
Many obvious questions are never answered.  Why don't their parents ever
realize the shoes are missing?  And, why don't the kids wear their
sandals, which they both have, rather than continue getting in trouble
for being late to school?
The movie does contain one amazing scene.  We actually see the kids
doing homework!  Kids all over America do this everyday -- except in
American movies.
CHILDREN OF HEAVEN runs just 1:28.  The film is in Persian with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be a G since nothing even remotely
offensive occurs.  The picture would be fine for all ages, but kids
would probably need to be at least 9 to be interested.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
By Ross Anthony
The Children of Heaven is a sweet film about a boy, his sister and shoes.
Ali is a 10 year old living in a small town in Iran. His family is poor and
behind in rent payments; his mother ill. Ali sincerely tries to help out,
but he ends up losing his little sister Zahra's shoes during an errand to
have them repaired.
"How can I go to school without shoes?" Zahra pleads.
Ali and Zahra work out a plan to share his modest sneakers. Since her school
hours end just as his begin, Zahra wears the worn gymies first. Though he's
an excellent student, this "sneaker relay" causes Ali to be tardy. As for
Zahra, ashamed of the oversized shoes her lamenting gaze falls on the
footwear of all the other children in the playground.
I wept during this picture, but not from empathy; it was the stark beauty.
Ali's family is poor, but not to be pitied. The father, loud and full of
bombast, is nonetheless loving and dedicated. The beauty emanates from the
eyes of the children. Majid Majidi (writer/director) puts into film that
wonderful majestic world we used to see before puberty, when a pair of shoes
and a shiny pen could make you come running home from school with a skip in
your step and a smile that no news story could dampen. When your parents'
approval or disapproval was paramount. When the love between brothers and
sisters wasn't something to be contemplated, manipulated or even
expressed -- it simply was.
It doesn't matter if you grew up in Cincinnati or Tehran, that childhood
spirit proves universal.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
