Title
Review for Men (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Sometimes I will walk into a videostore and find an obscure film that never got
anywhere or got much distribution, yet managed to find its way into a video
store like Blockbuster. There are two major films I can think of that are not
talked about much or receive any merit. There was the delightful Paul Mazursky
comedy "Next Stop, Greenwich Village," and the far more obscure "Crooked
Hearts." "Crooked Hearts" amazingly never attracted any attention at all,
despite a cast that includes Juliette Lewis, Peter Coyote, Jennifer Jason
Leigh, Noah Wyle, among others. Sure enough, I found another film on the video
shelves that I never heard of called "Some Girls" (also known as "Men," 'Some
Girl," and "Girl Talk"). I was immediately interested because of the cast, and
of course Juliette Lewis is in it. What a surprise to discover a fitfully good
film that no one ever heard of! "Men" was shown at the Los Angeles Independent
Film Festival where it won an Audience Award. It never actually got
distribution, but it is now on video.
"Men" stars Marissa Ribisi as Claire, a red-haired girl who drinks heavily with
her friends at singles clubs (though it mostly looks like they are at an
unpopulated bar). Claire had just got dumped and gets into a bitter mood,
ignoring her brothers and family. Her friends include April (Juliette Lewis)
who sleeps around and expects to be picked up by her friends the morning after,
the punk rocker Jenn (Pamela Segall) who has theories on sexual practices, and
the bartender Neil (Michael Rapaport), April's semi-boyfriend who is always
ignored by her. There is also Claire's brother, Jason (Giovanni Ribisi), a
seemingly nerdy, vivacious guy who wants a date with the reluctant Jenn.  
"Men" is written by Marissa Ribisi (Giovanni's sister) and Brie Shaffer, and
they pay special close attention to Claire and April. If nothing else, this
film should have been called "Women," as the women are really the ones who
dominate."Some Girls" (the video title) detracts from the film's emotional
moments - this is not just another twentysomething, Generation X programmer
with bland stars from "Dawson's Creek." At least, these two women possess some
integrity.
Claire is the focus of the film, and her distraught emotions are based on
relationships with guys who find her too weird but love her curly red hair. She
meets one guy at a magazine stand, Chad (Jeremy Sisto), who loves her hair and
finds her "intriguing." Of course, everyone warns Claire that any guy named
Chad is bound to be trouble. 
April supposedly abhors men, and is drawn to Neil's kindness and compassion.
Still, she feels the need to have one-night stands and hurts everyone who gets
in her way.  
If "Men" sounds mediocre and a time-waster based on its scantly told story and
largely underdeveloped characters, then I would not recommend it. However, I
must confess that I enjoyed it. Giovanni lends the film a quietly erratic
energy whenever he is on screen - he gets all the best lines. I also enjoyed
watching short-haired Juliette Lewis (finally a good role since "The Evening
Star") and the lovely, sweet presence of Marissa Ribisi - they make their
characters human and heartfelt. The sight of Ribisi wearing angel wings lends
the film a certain kind of poignance.
"Men" does not feel complete, and has too many characters who drift around
without any insight into their nature (Pamela Segall's Jenn is one character I
wanted to know more about). Still, "Men" is a sweet, innocent, droll film that
merits a little more attention than it got. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com
