Title
Review for Patriot, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
Homer Yen
"The Patriot," a powerful and impressive looking
period piece set during the American Revolution, tells
the story of a family being torn apart by war and a
father torn between duty to his family and duty to his
country.  Full of stirring moments, it is a sweeping
saga that showcases beautifully filmed and brilliantly
choreographed battles, a patriotic soundtrack that
combines the reverie of fife and drums with majestic
orchestrations, and utterly unbridled flag-waving
jingoism.  I can barely contain my enthusiasm and am
saluting as I write this.
In 1776, the American colonists have come to a
critical juncture.  Fed up with British rule,
revolutionaries charge that "if principles dictate
independence, then war is the only way."  However,
countless lives will be lost, though the sacrifice in
the name of freedom is worthwhile.  Benjamin Martin
(Mel Gibson) hopes that instead of voting for war,
America might adopt a more diplomatic course of
action.  Benjamin was once a brilliant military
tactician and warrior, but is now the loving parent of
seven.  He doesn't wish to leave them fatherless.  "I
am a parent," he says.  "I don't have the luxury of
principles."
Although Benjamin remains adamant about his pacifist
stance, his eldest son, Gabriel (Heath Ledger) is
compelled by the crusade.  Against his father's
wishes, he enlists, grateful to serve the cause of
liberty.  But he is horrified to see the
disorganization of the American army.  The Red Coats
are an impressive force who marches into battle with
an imposing cadence.  Going muzzle-to-muzzle against
them in an open field is madness.  The American front
lines continually collapse, leading to swift defeats. 
General Cornwallis of the British Army states, "those
rustics are so inept that it takes the honor out of
victory."
Eventually, the battle winds up right on Benjamin's
front lawn.  His political stance is shattered when he
encounters the ruthless Colonel Tavington (Jason
Isaacs).  Gabriel is captured; their plantation home
is burned to the ground.  Tavington doesn't abide by
the rules of war and displays a brutality that is
horrifying.  He shoots innocent children, mercilessly
kills prisoners-of-war, and even locks dozens of
people inside a church and then instructs his men to
burn it down.  This is the kind of villain that
elicits boos from the audience.  It's impossible not
to hate him, and the audience will not find
satisfaction unless he dies by the hand of Benjamin.
We increasingly cheer for our
pacifist-turned-revolutionary hero, as he becomes
something of a colonial Robin Hood.  Recruiting men
throughout the countryside, he employs guerrilla
tactics and mounts a series of successful skirmishes. 
In addition to his superb military skills, he is also
adept at humiliating the enemy.  We find much levity
in watching him make a mockery of General Cornwallis. 
Yet like the American army, who is outmanned and
outmatched, so too is Benjamin.  As the battle wears
on, personal losses begin to mount.  
However, the colonists' and Benjamin's fighting spirit
never dies.  Even in the darkest of moments, there is
time for a miraculous turnaround.  This leads to a
final, glorious engagement between the
Colonial/British forces and between Benjamin Martin
and Colonel Tavington.  An American victory may turn
the tide of war.  And for our hero, payback may be
close at hand.  This sequence, with flying
cannonballs, thousands of soldiers fighting, and its
swings in momentum are nothing less than riveting.
"The Patriot" packs as much raw power and energy as
any fireworks display and is certainly one of the best
films of the year.  Gibson gives a compelling
Oscar-worthy performance full of passion, courage and
strength.  As far as summer movies go, this film is as
good as it gets, featuring bold emotions, an epic
storyline, incredibly visualized battle sequences and
a monumental dramatic arc.  To miss this film would be
an act of treason.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on July 14, 2000; certificate 15; 157 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Roland Emmerich; produced by Mark Gordon, Gary Levinsohn.
Written by Robert Rodat.
Photographed by Caleb Deschanel; edited by David Brenner.
CAST.....
Mel Gibson..... Benjamin Martin
Heath Ledger..... Gabriel Martin
Jason Isaacs..... Colonel William Tavington
Joely Richardson..... Charlotte Selton
Chris Cooper..... Colonel Harry Burwell
Tom Wilkinson..... General Cornwallis
You don't send a boy to do a man's job. Roland Emmerich -- the director of 
such dreadful action films as "Independence Day", and the recent "Godzilla" 
remake -- should not have been assigned an epic about the American 
Revolutionary War. It's nonetheless unsurprising that my opening maxim never 
occurred to anyone involved with "The Patriot". After all, they did approve a 
script in which two small boys are given guns and told to shoot at British 
people in the woods.
The tots are about ten years old, or maybe a little younger. The film's hero, 
played by Mel Gibson, is a widower whose farm is unjustly attacked by 
'Redcoats' (the nickname for the Brits); he's also the one who supplied the 
kids with their weapons, and ordered them to commit murder. After their 
shooting spree, when Gibson is tucking the lads into bed, one of them reports 
"I'm glad I've killed, pop!"
America -- although a film as blindly patriotic as this would never admit it 
-- already has enough gun-crazed maniacs. Their defence for bearing arms is 
that 1) the constitution allows it, and 2) they need to do so for home 
protection. With scenes like the one above, "The Patriot" serves as an 
incitement of those freaks, and also of the pathetic flag-wavers who wear 
stars-and-stripes shorts at street parades and recite "We really do live in 
the land of the free and the home of the brave!" as if paraphrasing a line 
from one's national anthem is the same thing as seriously examining one's 
country.
"The Patriot" is being advertised as the Revolutionary War equivalent of 
Gibson's great Scottish epic "Braveheart", but it's nowhere near as 
entertaining, and does a much more methodical job of demonising the British 
while glamorising a revolt. The narrative essentially consists of Gibson and 
a small band of merry men wandering around the country discussing "the 
cause"; although now and again Gibson meets up with his family, or there will 
be another attack from those horrid Recoats. Of course there is a token black 
character among Gibson's troupe, who gets some racist comments at first, but 
then apologies, so none of the Americans come off looking evil.
When the level of the storytelling becomes apparent, we hold out hope that we 
can at least expect some spectacular sequences of dumb action. But there is 
hardly any fighting until the climax, when comes a highly implausible battle 
scene, with Gibson running through the bloody lines unharmed, carrying the 
American flag. Then he thrusts it into the ground and has a ridiculous clash 
with a British officer (Jason Isaacs), where each man wields two swords in 
each hand, and juts them at each other in time to swashbuckler music chords. 
To picture this, recall the Jim Carrey comedy "Cable Guy", with its parody of 
the famous "Star Trek" fight.
Gibson opens every scene with a flustered, confused expression and then turns 
it into a frown. It's like "Braveheart" going senile but sporadically 
returning to his old self. The dialogue that he and all the other actors have 
to speak varies from horribly stilted ("Men! Richly fight for the cause about 
which you spake!"; "Father... this yonder boy be two years younger than I!") 
to nonsensical ("I'm a parent, I don't have the luxury of principles") to 
lazy and pedestrian ("Daddy, daddy, come back!"). And there are scenes of 
ineptitude, such as when Gibson's platoon creep up behind a British ship, and 
then Emmerich cuts to a wide shot to show the boat blow up. How the hell did 
that happen? Did they throw a hand grenade? Where did they find one of those, 
being in the 1770s an' all?
Like "U-571", another dreadful recent war movie, "The Patriot" has drawn fire 
for its reworking of history. The real-life figure Gibson's character is 
based on was known for shooting civilians for sport, and raping his slaves 
(in the film, he doesn't even keep slaves; the Negroes working his land are 
free men). And William Tavington, the English colonel who the screenplay pits 
him against, did not murder children or use any unorthodox tactics. Even if 
you don't care about the facts, "The Patriot" is incompetent and 
disappointing. I dragged a buddy to the screening with me, and felt compelled 
to apologise both during and after. I think I'll ring him again right now.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
THE PATRIOT (2000)
Rated R; running time 165 minutes
Genre: Action
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0187393
Official site: http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/thepatriot/
Written by: Robert Rodat
Directed by: Roland Emmerich
Cast: Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Jason Isaacs,
Chris Cooper, Tcheky Karyo, Trevor Morgan, Lisa Brenner, Bryan Chafin,
Skye McCole Bartusiak, Tom Wilkinson, Rene Auberjonois, Logan Lerman,
Adam Baldwin, Beatrice Bush, Mika Boorem, Mary Jo Deschanel,
Shan Omar Huey, Gil Johnson, Jay Arlen Jones, Jamieson Price, Hank
Stone, Kristian Truelsen, Mark Twogood, Joey D. Vieira, Grahame Wood,
Peter Woodward
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamspatriot.html
I've been to plenty of long movies before.  THE GREEN MILE clocked in at
3 hours plus (though it didn't seem that long to me).  And on the other
end of that spectrum, STUART LITTLE (chronologically short at just 94
minutes) seemed *much* longer.  I've been to plenty of long movies
before.  THE PATRIOT wasn't just long.  It was *torture*; sheer
manipulative torture.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
1776.  A time of upheaval and revolution in these (not quite) United
States Of America.
Widower Benjamin Martin (Mel Gibson) is a man who has known war, and no
longer wants any parts of it; he just wants to farm, make bad rocking
chairs, and be left alone to raise his seven young children.  His eldest
son, Gabriel (Heath Ledger), doesn't understand Ben's pacifistic mood,
and wants to join the Colonials to fight against the Evil British Empire
and old tax baron King George.   After the Evil British Colonel William
Tavington (Jason Isaacs) wreaks havoc on Ben's family and land, Ben
leaves his youngest children with their aunt Charlotte (Joely
Richardson), so he and Gabriel can join forces with Regular Army Colonel
Harry Burwell (Chris Cooper) and French Army officer Jean Villeneuve
(Tcheky Karyo) to create a militia to go up against Tavington and
slightly-less Evil General Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson).
[And lots more stuff that takes up two hours and forty-five minutes of
movie time.]
The Upshot:
I sat myself down and thought long and hard about what made me the
maddest about THE PATRIOT, to the point where its greenlight for its
epic sweep and beautifully-filmed tale, turned into a yellowlight for
its manipulative nature.  Here's what I told a dear friend about it,
with regard to the other "based on a true[r than *this* one, dadgummit]
story" out this week, THE PERFECT STORM:
    What I liked most about [THE PERFECT STORM] (and conversely,
    hated most about THE PATRIOT), is the way the actors seemed to
    capture the real, messily imperfect folks they played; from
    everything I've read about the production [of "Perfect"], the
    actors and director and such were extremely cognizant of the
    background story, and wanted very much to do those people honor
    (rather than playing the "Look at me, I'm an artiste and a
    battle-recreator!" game that Gibson and the folks attached to
    "Patriot" seemed to).  It shows.
"Manipulative" is the word I keep coming back to when I think about THE
PATRIOT.  It's not enough, it seems, that this movie is being released
around the fourth of July; Independence Day roun' dese hea' parts.  No;
"we must forcefully remind The Uhmerkin Public", the filmmakers seemed
to say, "that Gibson...uh, blue-eyed Benjamin Martin, was a True
American Hero, by having him Wave The Flag Meaningfully at every
opportunity!  And hey, while you're at it, have a few of his friends and
family members die Slow Heroic Deaths with the camera trained on their
faces for a godawful long time, whydoncha?  And ooh yeah, that image of
Mel baby Running Boldly Into Battle with just that battered flag,
*that'll* hit 'em where it hurts, eh?"
Bah.  Just tell me the story, dammit; let *me* decide when and where to
cheer for them, eh?  I don't need no friggin' equivalent to a laugh
track, spattered into so many manipulative scenes.  Bad moviemakers.
Bad, Bad moviemakers.
In all fairness, though, THE PATRIOT latches on to its single-mindedness
and never lets go; at least it's not wishy-washy in its dogged
determination to make the viewer Love Benjamin and his family for being
Epic Heroes.  Even when it speaks of Ben's Unspeakable Past, you learn
early on that Ben was just doing what he had to do For God And Country.
Can't blame a fella for that, even when it leaves him bloody, can ya?
Not the way these moviemakers were selling the story, you can't.
(And don't get me wrong: not having had to ever do much heavy fighting
outside of the time Judy hit me in the stomach with a two-by-four when I
was 13, I'm *not* saying that War Ain't Really Hell; I'm sure it is that
and much more.  What I *am* saying, however, is that the audience
doesn't need to be battered upside the head with the Wifflebat to get
that point.  I understood it after the first hour of my battering; I
didn't need to have it go on for the whole almost-three hours, sheesh!)
I know I'll be in the minority of the reviewing population--I heard
Raving Reviews about "Patriot" blaring on the radio just before I went
to see it (which, in and of itself, gave me a Bad Feeling)--but this
telling of THE PATRIOT didn't move me at all.  Actually, it did: it
moved me from being sympathetic to the cause of a young--and, let's be
honest: White--nation getting its legs under itself, to being cynical
and critical about that *other* part of itself that THE PATRIOT tried to
whitewash over: the folks that were somehow forgotten in "We The People".
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
We The People.  Hold These Truths To Be Self-Evident.  All Men Are
Created Equal.  That is, "we, the White, male landowners, see it that
way--about us".  All others need not apply.
It was this undeniable truth about the establishment of "a more perfect
union"--that its people were only "created equal" if and only if they
were White, male landowners--that grated me most about THE PATRIOT and
its whitewashing-over of its colorful tale.  If the folks behind this
movie had not addressed it (slavery: the big It) at all, then, fine.  I
wouldn't have had an issue with their looking-over of that big It.  But
they addressed It.  Badly.  Shame on 'em, I say.
A little truth goes a long way; but "Patriot" couldn't seem to face up
to the realities of its own time, *this* late into the moviemaking game
(well past the time when the filmmakers could've claimed ignorance about
such things).  And that--much more than the fact that I never caught the
name of the Black slave character, only knowing him from his
introduction as "my nigra"--is what finally brought "Patriot"'s house of
cards tumbling down for me.  In all its flag-waving, it seemed to forget
that even back then, these States weren't as United as the Founding
Fathers claimed they were.
History, it seems, *does* tend to repeat itself.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Call me cynical, call me anti-American, whatever; but I hate feeling
manipulated, and that's exactly how I felt watching THE PATRIOT.  I went
into this movie with an open mind, hoping to learn something more about
what made the early revolutionaries in these, yes, great United States,
tick.  I came out of it with a contempt for what I had just been put
through.  And that's *never* A Good Thing.
THE PATRIOT (rating: yellowlight):
If only they had stopped waving the flag long enough to see the hearts
and souls that went into weaving that symbol of independence...

Author
John Beachem
Benjamin Martin (Mel Gibson) is a former war hero who now runs a plantation 
with his family in late 18th century South Carolina. The rest of the country 
is up in arms about King George's taxation from England, and they are crying 
for revolution. Martin says he will not fight, but his son, Gabriel (Heath 
Ledger), joins the colonial army against his father's will. Martin's friend, 
Col. Burwell (the excellent Chris Cooper), is Gabriel's commanding officer 
and promises to look after the boy. Martin tries to go on with his life, but 
soon finds himself drawn into the conflict when the sadistic British Colonel 
Tavington (Jason Isaacs) destroys his home and his life. Martin decides to 
seek revenge by joining and eventually leading the local militia. His ambush 
tactics and countless victories cause the British to give him the nickname 
"The Ghost". As Benjamin and Gabriel continue to win victories, the British 
decide that more brutal tactics are in order. General Cornwallis (Tom 
Wilkinson), who is in charge of the South Carolina aspect of the war, 
employs Colonel Tavington to use whatever means are necessary to bring 
Martin in. This includes going after his family, being watched by his 
deceased wife's sister, Charlotte (Joely Richardson).
I must admit, "The Patriot" wasn't quite what I expected after seeing the 
movie's trailers. I think I expected a massive, three hour long epic like 
"Braveheart", but it was... well, something quite different. Actually, 
that's one of the biggest problems with this movie; "The Patriot" is never 
quite sure what kind of movie it's trying to be. It switches around amongst 
several possible genres without ever finding one that quite fits. At times 
the movie is a glorious war movie, then a movie showing the horrors of war, 
then a social commentary, a history lesson, a heart-warming family movie, a 
sappy romantic movie. The list goes on and on, but I'll stop here rather 
than driving what I'm trying to say through your head like a rail road 
spike. Despite this and a cliche ridden plot, "The Patriot" is still a 
decent and entertaining movie thanks to some great acting, costumes, 
scenery, and music. It also features some magnificent battle scenes, 
courtesy of Roland Emmerich's ("Independence Day") astute direction. When 
"The Patriot" stays on the battlefield, it's rousing and entertaining; when 
it tries to be more emotional, things go somewhat awry.
Mel Gibson gives an outstanding performance and leads a strong cast through 
an otherwise weak script. Gibson's acting is interesting; he appears wooden 
and emotionless at first but develops more and more emotion as the story 
goes on. Heath Ledger ("10 Things I Hate About You") delivers a promising, 
if somewhat inexperienced performance, as the brash and willful son. Off the 
battlefield, the film is at its best when dealing with the father-son 
relationship. Ledger and Gibson are backed up by a colorful supporting cast 
composed of good, reliable actors like: Rene Oborjonois (Star Trek: Deep 
Space Nine) as a Reverend turned warrior; the always great Chris Cooper; and 
Tcheky Karyo ("The Messenger") as a French soldier who offers his services 
to the revolution. The only weak link in the cast (but what a weak link it 
is) is newcomer Lisa Brenner as Gabriel's love interest, Anne. Not only does 
she give a terrible performance, but she delivers a key dramatic speech to a 
crowd of supporters, at one point, and does it so poorly I actually started 
laughing out loud. Last we have Jason Isaacs ("Armageddon", "Event Horizon") 
giving a great performance in a horrible part. Isaac's historically 
inaccurate character is about as chiched a villain as is possible. The man 
does everything but laugh maniacally and twirl his moustache (thankfully he 
doesn't have a moustache). Yet Isaacs is such a good performer and was 
obviously having such fun with the part, it really didn't matter.
There are a lot of things working for "The Patriot" and nearly as many 
working against it. On the for side we have some great performances, good 
direction, interesting battle scenes, and yet another wonderful score from 
John Williams (can the man do no wrong?). Against it we have a cliched 
script, one really bad performance, and a story that doesn't know where it's 
going. You'll have to weigh the pros and cons before deciding whether or not 
to see this. I felt the battle scenes tilted the pros in favor of a higher 
rating. Speaking of the battle scenes, one of the first ones we see is truly 
fascinating. It involves Benjamin Martin attacking a caravan, practically on 
his own, and defeating every soldier in it. This was a fascinating scene 
because the tactics used by the British were quite historically accurate 
(and obviously very poor since they were beaten by one man), and there was a 
realism to the scene that you don't often get in these kinds of movies. I'd 
best warn those of you who are faint of heart, "The Patriot" takes no 
prisoners and edits nothing out. We see all the horrors that come with war, 
including innocent men, women, and children being slaughtered by the enemy. 
A few of these scenes are absolutely heart wrenching (some people in the 
theater broke down crying). "The Patriot" runs a long 164 minutes, and as 
interesting as the movie may be, it feels that long. I'd recommend it to 
fans of Gibson since he turns in a stellar performance, and to anyone who 
enjoyed "Braveheart" since the similarities are obvious. History buffs (like 
me) will find certain segments painfully inaccurate (I'm pretty sure 18th 
century muskets weren't capable of that kind of accuracy, and George 
Washington played a slightly more significant role in the war), but should 
still have a good time catching historical references. I give the film three 
and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Jerry Saravia
The Revolutionary War has barely made much of an impression in cinema
history, especially with the forgettable "Revolution" by director Hugh Hudson
that was a huge flop back in 1985. It only takes someone like Mel Gibson to
give the audience what they want: a feverish action picture using history as
an excuse for gangland warfare, which is what makes "The Patriot" a success.
No quill pens, no rousing speeches, only an abundant supply of blood and
guts. "The Patriot" is not much more but it has the potential to be more than
it is. 
Ponytailed Gibson plays the fictional Benjamin Martin (based on the real-life
"Swamp Fox" Francis Marion), a widowed father of seven kids living in South
Carolina during the turbulent times of 1776, just after the Revolutionary War
had started. Martin is opposed to the war, and is against his older son
(Heath Ledger) from joining to fight the fight, namely against the British
Redcoats. In one crucial scene, Gibson tells the people at a convention that
why fight a war where there is one tyrant thousands of miles away when there
are three hundred one mile away, or something to that effect. That scene
resonates strongly but is soon forgotten in the way of grisly, gory violence.
Martin faces an ordeal of his own when the redcoats come to his home where he
is caring for the wounded soldiers, and a sadistic, volatile British leader,
Colonel Tavington (Jason Issacs), murders one of Martin's sons and all the
wounded in cold blood. Now Martin is mad as hell, and is in full-killing mode
as he takes his family out of his home, now burned to the ground, and brings
his sons with rifles in hand to take out twenty redcoats. The scene is
intense and bloody as Martin, armed with a musket and a tomahawk, slices and
decapitates with nary a trace of respite - he is Mad Max bent on an unending
ode of vengeance. He also forms a militia, bent on destruction and murder all
in the name of freedom from the British.
"The Patriot" is a revenge tale,  as packed with thrills and action as one
can expect. Gibson does this kind of role perfectly, and he exudes the humor
and pathos of a warrior with a dark past as he did in "Braveheart." But I was
somewhat bothered by the characterization, notably when reference is made by
other members of the militia about Benjamin's days fighting the French and
Indian War (he finally explains all to his son about his beastly, brutal
methods). If Martin is such a ferocious, animalistic warrior, why is he so
opposed to the war? Sure, he does not want his sons to join but why is he so
unwilling to fight the fight? It only takes having one of his own family
members killed for Benjamin to change his mind, but the one brutal scene
where he tomahawks a redcoat repeatedly hints at other aspects of the
character that the writer, Robert Rodat, and the director, Roland Emmerich,
are unwilling to explore. There is a crucial line of dialogue, spoken in
voice-over at the beginning, that suggest more levels to Martin's
personality: "I have long feared that my sins would return to visit me." They
have, but "The Patriot" does not cut it as a character study, it is pure
action targeted to entice viewers, not to make them think about what war does
to men. A shame coming from Rodat who explored this theme ever so briefly
with "Saving Private Ryan." 
As an action picture, "The Patriot" delivers in more ways than one. The
performances also hit the right notes, including Tom Wilkinson as Lord
General Cornwallis, who leads the British troops in the South - his battle
strategies have always been exceptional but he has underestimated Martin's
militia. I also like Heath Ledger, a strong young actor who holds his own
with Gibson and does a fine job playing his son. There is also a nice
throwaway role by Rene Auberjonois as the courageous pastor who joins the
militia (as pastors did in those days) - if only there was more screen time
devoted to him. The rest of the militia are depicted as stereotypical
one-dimensional grunts. And Tavington, as played by Issacs, is so
unredeemingly evil that I only wish some hint of humanity was placed there.
He is also given the benefit of the old "the killer is never really dead"
syndrome. Please, those idiotic syndromes have no place in cinema anymore,
especially an ambitious action picture like this one. 
"The Patriot" is fine entertainment, dazzling, humorous and exciting (watch
out for that cannonball that aims directly at the audience at one point).
There is an instant visceral charge to it, but there is no intellectual
weight, and no true moral resonance. In its fervent patriotic spirit, it says
that it was the right thing to fight the war and to die for your country to
acquire independence. It just doesn't tell us why. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Roland Emerich
WRITTEN BY: Robert Rodat
CAST: Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Jason Isaacs, Chris Cooper
1776. South Carolina. Benjamin Martin (Mel Gibson) is  the legendary "Hero of Fort Wilderness". He has portrayed his patriotism and courage in many a battle. Now he is retired from his dark past and spends his days with his children. But times are uncertain. In the north, lightning from the storm clouds of war against the Crown have already touched off brush fires. The Colonies are calling are searching for volunteers to join the regular army. A longing for freedom is in the air. The country mobilizes against the British in an attempt to gain independence. Ben's oldest son Gabriel (Heath Ledger), dreams of becoming a soldier and fight for freedom. His father's objections do not prevent him from leaving home and exchange his peaceful life for an uncertain and carnival everyday life on the battlefield. But the good spirits and the glorious patriotism slowly fade away when the fierce British armies occupy the States, proving the resistance to be helpless. Led by the incredibly ev!
il Col. Tavington (Jason Isaacs), the soldiers burn Ben's house and kill one of his sons, despite of the fact that Ben has been helping wounded Englishmen. In Ben this awakens a gruesome rage and hunger for revenge. He takes up arms along side his idealistic son, and leads the Militia into a battle of freedom. Soon many hear about the successful crusade, which awakens a spark of hope in the American souls... 
Robert Rodat's ("Saving Private Ryan") script drags for all too long, making even the magnificent battles and Kirk M. Petruchelli's beautiful set design look tiring. Besides the fact that his story is not historically accurate, it is not structured in an even manner. There are some logical irrationalities along the way. There is no natural float or balance in the story line. The events progress either too fast or far too slowly. None of the characters represent anything besides their excessive patriotism. The love story feels as it has been inserted into the script along the way. There is no sensuality, emotions, meaning or realism in this relationship, which comes as unexpected as thunder from a clear sky.
With Mel Gibson's name on the marquee, comparisons with Braveheart are unavoidable. In fact, the role of Benjamin Martin appears to be an attempt to create "Braveheart 2" and find another William Wallace-like part for the high profile actor. Unfortunately, the script doesn't provide enough tension, fury and intelligence to be even compared to the likes of 'Braveheart'. Emirich's most successful picture "Independence Day" succeeds in being exactly what it is supposed to be -- a light popcorn-entertainment. 'The Patriot' does not, because Emerich aims higher than his capabilities. His film does not depict the important historic events with a sense of realism. Instead it glorifies them with magical images, terrible villains and noble heroes that risk their lives for a greater cause. In other words, Emerich turned the fight for freedom into MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE. You almost expect 007 or Godzilla to appear from the shadows.
As a historical film with a lot of modern action, 'The Patriot' challenges "Gladiator", but looses the duel immediately. Neither the plot, script or acting can measure up. And even its visual abilities, that are grand, with Caleb Deschanel's rich cinematography, and very decent costume design by Deborah Lynn Scott, can't quite measure up to Ridley Scott's epic. 'The Patriot's main fault is that it is too patriotic. It's too preachy with its simple symbolism and stereotypical melodrama. Every frame is drained in sticky patriotism, which makes it at times tough to bare. Picture this: Mel Gibson dodges bullets and runs right through the battlefield as soldiers die around him. As he nobly kills his virtually unstoppable and evil nemesis, his eyes turn to the sunset where his brave men are running with American flags towards the frightened Englishmen. All of this is of course accompanied by John Williams' loud and patriotic fanfare that rises above the screams of victory. And thus,!
 no matter how hard Gibson tries to recapture his golden moments of 'Braveheart' and no matter how honest Ledger delivers his lines, nothing can save this film from being a pompous cliché. It's big, it's beautiful, it's expensive, it's well acted, but it's not very convincing. Starting seriously and impressively, Emerich soon tiers and resorts to what he does best -- brainless, but occasionally entertaining popcorn films. 'The Patriot' has its moments. The beautiful shots of the sea and war galleons in the sunset and a couple of emotionally charging moments, such as when Ben teaches his sons to kill, but mostly it remains a pompous, unreal and seldom exciting celebration of the way to the America that we know today. Of course I could be disappointed, but what can we expect from the director of 'Godzilla'? 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures/Centropolis
 Director: Roland Emmerich
 Writer: Robert Rodat
 Cast: Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Jason
Isaacs, Trevor Morgan, Bryan Chafin, Skye McCole
Bartusiak, Beatrice Bush, Rene Auberjonois, Donal Logue,
Logan Lerman, Michael Neeley, Chris Cooper, Tcheky Karyo,
   When Playboy magazine critic Leonard Maltin slammed
Hugh Hudson's 1985 movie about the American War for
Independence, "Revolution," he predicted that "thanks to this
megabomb, it'll be 2776 until we get another one."  Though
critics are never wrong, this is the exception.  "Revolution,"
one of only about a half-dozen films that deal seriously with
the Eighteenth-Century conflict, featured top actors Al Pacino,
Donald Sutherland, Natassja Kinski and Joan Plowright. 
Nonetheless, Maltin called the script ludicrous and the acting
a travesty.  Unless you get a chance to take in D.W. Griffith's
1924 silent, "America," with Lionel Barrymore in an especially
villainous role, "The Patriot" will likely be your first opportunity
to see Redcoats and peasants battle in open fields, their
stated mission to prevent the armies of General Cornwallis
from moving swiftly North to New York.
   While "Gone With the Wind" exploited our fascination with
the Civil War during a good deal of the last century,
Americans now seem to have lost interest in that
conflagration and, indeed, for history in general.  What could
be more unusual, more horrifying, than the great experiment
in modern democracy's pitting brother against brother during
the 1860's?  And nowadays, who could imagine that
Americans could so enthusiastically fight the British people,
now our staunchest allies?  Perhaps the apathy lies with the
history curriculum, which sucks the life out of these events by
concentrating on laundry lists of causes and results and the
political attitudes of only high government officials.
   Utilizing Robert Rodat's ("Saving Private Ryan")
screenplay, German director Roland Emmerich presents the
rebellion of England's thirteen colonies with a full range of
human emotions and ideologies.  "The Patriot" examines the
theme of father-son conflict, pits the pleas of pacifism against
the allure of belligerence, sets the cowardice of collaboration
against the mandate of patriotism.  Some battle sequences 
rival even the exceptional panoramas of Steven Spielberg's
"Saving Private Ryan." Solid performances by Mel Gibson in
the title role and handsome Australian Heath Ledger as his
defiant son fashion "The Patriot" as a spectacle that could
cause its audience to rise up against the dull treatment of this
marvelous episode from history teachers.  By fixing attention
on the lives of ordinary southerners during the final quarter of
the Eighteenth Century, the film at once illuminates the ways
that we ourselves might have fared were we living in good old
colony times and crosses the border into schmaltz and
cutesy-poo sentimentality.
   Emmerich opens on a scene with the kind of humorous
metaphoric resonance that can be easily grasped by a the
broad audience which the picture hopes to attract.  Benjamin
Martin (Mel Gibson), a French-and-Indian war hero noted for
his ability to fight guerrilla style rather than confront the
enemy on open grasslands, has retired to raise his seven
children as a single parent.  Since his wife had died leaving
the youngsters largely in the custody of his sister-in-law
Charlotte (Joely Richardson), Martin is now determined to lay
down his muskets despite the call to arms by his neighbors in
the early stages of the Revolution.  But when the Redcoats
take the fighting right into Martin's back yard, gratuitously
shooting one of his sons in the back while taking another to
be hanged, Martin can no longer embrace pacifism.  Arming
his male children, he sets out to free his eldest son, Gabriel
(Heath Ledger) and avenge the death of his boy at the hands
of the evil Col. William Tavington (Jason Isaacs), whose
arrant brutality shocks even the officer's superior and
supreme commander of the English forces, General
Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson).
   What follows during this two hour and forty-one minutes'
epic is a series of scenes, alternately ruthless and emotional,
as Emmerich unfolds a microcosm of the war's effect on
ordinary American families during the final year of the colonial
experience.  While critics will be divided on which aspect is
the more effective--the scenes of carnage in the fields or the
display of family tensions and political strife within the
environs of Charleston--I would applaud principally the
former. Emmerich's cinematographer, Caleb Deschanel,
makes more than effective use of costume designer Deborah
L. Scott's uniforms, the outfits contrasting the majestic attire
of the English (which ironically increased their vulnerability)
with the peasant threads of the irregular fighting forces known
as the militia.  This was a time that every citizen was armed,
when attempts to pass gun control laws would be properly
looked upon with laughter by the raggedy bunch of "farmers
with pitchforks" whose ability to take on the disciplined armies
of Redcoats so shocked Cornwallis.  (The right of the people
to keep bear arms, "a well-regulated Militia, being necessary
to the security of a free State," was to be incorporated into
the Constitution fifteen years later and to become one of the
most politically charged battlefields in our own time.)  
   The most memorable scene occurs shortly after the
lingering opening of the movie, as Martin hands guns to his
kids, who then methodically and with no small butchery
ambush and wipe out a force of Redcoats holding Gabriel
prisoner.  This is the scene bound to be the most talked-
about one in the movie, as present-day Americans, horrified
by a sequence of murders committed by youngsters in
Columbine High School and other institutions of learning, will
protest the butchery.  
   While Martin's struggle with his insubordinate son Gabriel
is well-handled--the teenager insisting on his prerogative to
sign up for the conflict like any adult--other aspects of family
life are maudlin.  Emmerich often lingers on the scrubbed
faces of the Martin brood, capturing the love-hate feelings of
Martin's youngest, Susan (Skye McCole Bartusiak) in the
manner of a TV soap while frequently cutting to the other
children, Thomas, Williams, Samuel, Nathan and Margaret
simply to evoke "awww's" from those in the audience who
enjoy expressing their affinity to young'uns.  Nor does
Emmerich shy away from too obviously suggesting the shy
attraction between Martin and Charlotte, with Charlotte at one
time pretentiously intoning, "I am not my sister."  The family
sequence that does stand out involves the mostly New
England custom of bundling, in which a young man and his
sweetheart are allowed to spend some time alone in bed
without undressing.  The way the Pennsylvania Dutch do this
is to place a wooden board between the lovers, but in the
situation at hand, Gabriel is swaddled in a primitive
straitjacket to immobilize his arms and legs before he is
joined in the sack by his girl friend, while his in-laws-to-be
retire to the next room, their ears scrunched tightly to the
wall.
   The largest flaw in this mostly meritorious project is its
predictability.  How often have we heard the hero hiss to the
villain, "Before this war is over, I am going to kill you," and
have the two meet in the open battlefield, seeking each other
out to decide their fate?  And how often have we seen the
tables turned as antagonists, facing each other, talk instead
of shooting, or get tricked as the opponents play dead? 
Jason Isaacs is convincing, however one-sidedly ruthless, as
the gung-ho officer who believes that the English have no
right to play by the rules of war if they want to win, and Mel
Gibson, photogenic as ever, mirrors the complexity of Tom
Wilkinson's Cornwallis.
Rated R.  Running Time: 161 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Patriot (2000)
Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Jason Isaacs, Chris Cooper,
Tcheky Karyo, Rene Auberjonois, Lisa Brenner, Tom Wilkinson, Donal Logue,
Leon Rippy, Adam Baldwin, Gregory Smith, Mika Boorem, Skye McCole Bartusiak,
Trevor Morgan, Joey D. Vieira, Jay Arlen Jones. Music by John Williams.
Screenplay by Robert Rodat. Directed by Roland Emmerich. 164 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with the
word "subscribe" in the subject line.
During the whopping two hour and 44 minute running time of "The Patriot," my
mood shifted repeatedly. Early on, I found the oh-so-perfect picture
postcard lighting of every single damn scene so maddening that I leaned to a
friend and growled, "I hate this movie!" Then a juicy battle scene
reinvigorated my fading spirits. Later, I even got a little misty during a
quiet father/son moment. But just as I was ready to surrender to the story's
rah-rah momentum, the filmmakers threw in a series of
hero-charging-forward-waving-the-flag-in-slow-motion images so cheesy that I
wanted to scream, "Run for your lives, they've remade 'The Postman!'"
What else should I have expected from a Revolutionary War epic presented by
the producer and director team responsible for "Stargate," "Independence
Day" and "Godzilla?" Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich are infamous for their
ability to take intriguing premises and turn them into overcooked,
cliché-filled, pop culture goulash. Many people find their concoctions
satisfying, but as for me, pass the Pepto Bismo, please.
To be fair, "The Patriot" is one of their better offerings. The screenplay,
by "Saving Private Ryan" author Robert Rodat, explores the horrifying
concept of having a war fought in your own backyard, while effectively
presenting the differences between the Brits' formal, "gentlemanly" approach
to combat and the American militia's guerrilla tactics.
But Devlin and Emmerich's treatment of the script is remarkably ham-handed.
John William's thunderous score assaults the viewer, as Mel Gibson turns
from a war-wary father into a colonial Rambo. This film isn't about
patriotism, it's about revenge. The ads should read "Gibson's back, and this
time it's personal! Welcome to 'Death Wish 1776.'"
Mel plays Benjamin Martin, a South Carolina widower determined to stay out
of the uprising against the British and raise his seven children in peace. A
veteran of the French and Indian War, he is haunted by memories of
atrocities committed during battle. But his eldest son, Gabriel (Heath
Ledger), views the hesitancy of his father with disdain and defiantly joins
the rebels.
Months later, the fighting draws near and Gabriel returns home injured.
While caring for him, and other wounded soldiers from both sides, Benjamin
is visited by British troops, led by the sadistic Colonel William Tavington
(Jason Isaacs). In short order, Tavington has his men burn down the Martin
home, arrests Gabriel and orders his execution and then shoots Martin's
second eldest boy. As soon as Tavington leaves, Benjamin arms his children,
rescues Gabriel and becomes leader of the area militia. His reputation as
"The Ghost" grows to the point that British General Cornwallis (Tom
Wilkinson) sends out his troops to capture Benjamin Martin, by any means
necessary.
At times, "The Patriot" delivers on its promises. Subdued conversations
between Benjamin and Gabriel are moving, thanks to the skills of Mel Gibson
and Heath Ledger, a handsome Aussie with talent and charisma reminiscent of
Gibson in his youth. A visit to a black refuge by the sea provides a welcome
respite from the fighting. Best of all is a clever, well-staged
prisoner-exchange negotiation between Martin and Cornwallis.
While a couple of the extremely graphic battle scenes are gripping, most
lack focus, playing out as mere excuses for Director Emmerich to fill the
screen with as much blood and gore as possible (he seems particularly fond
of showing the effect of cannonballs on human extremities).
Many civilian moments are as cloying as the battles are grisly. Every scene
is filled with gorgeous skies, sunbeams streaming through the trees and
other storybook imagery that blunts the sense of realism. Young Anne Howard
(Lisa Brenner) comes off more like a contemporary woman than a colonial lass
as she challenges the men-folk to enter the fray. While delivering her
speech, she exchanges so many coy smiles with Gabriel that her words seem
less like a call-to-arms and more like foreplay.
The single most infuriating scene comes straight out of a teen slasher
flick. A good guy shoots a bad guy, who falls to the earth face down. Our
hero silently approaches and leans over the body when - surprise! - the
villain, apparently possessed of considerable psychic ability, springs
around at precisely the right moment to strike a fatal blow. Who knew that
the great-great-great grandfather of Jason from "Friday the 13th" was
British?
"The Patriot" has its moments, to be sure, and I fully expect it to be one
of the biggest hits of this anemic summer movie season. But the next time
Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich decide to crank out another of their
manipulative popcorn epics, I hope they'll stick to aliens and giant lizards
and leave our history alone.

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Patriot (2000) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger,
Joely Richardson, Jason Isaacs, Chris Cooper and Tom Wilkinson. Music by
John Williams. Screenplay by Robert Rodat. Directed by Roland Emmerich.
 "The Patriot" is a rousing, bloody, violent adventure that despite its
drawbacks, will more than likely be a huge crowd pleaser.
 And I have to admit that regardless of the movie's obvious flaws, I
remained enthralled and entertained for nearly its entire 164 minutes.
 This, of course, is mainly due to the charismatic presence of Mel
Gibson as fictional Revolutionary War hero Benjamin Martin, a South
Carolina landowner loosely based on Frances Marion, the legendary `Swamp
Fox.'
 "The Patriot" feels like a movie created by people who study
demographics. There's blood and guts for the guys; a love story,
featuring two attractive young people, for the women; a paean to
brotherhood for the liberals; and a good dose of God, country and
flag-waving for the conservatives.
 In other words, "The Patriot" offers something for everyone.
 The movie earns its R rating. The battle scenes are brutal with men
losing limbs as well as lives. Screenwriter Robert Rodat ("Saving
Private Ryan") captures the futility of 18th-century warfare in which
armies would line up across from each other on the field and use the
opposing force for target practice until one army gave up and fled.
 Gibson's Martin, realizing how ineffectual such tactics are, adopts
guerrilla warfare and hit-and-run forays to achieve his successes.
 At the outset Martin opposes fighting. A heroic veteran of the French
and Indian Wars, he is tired of bloodshed.
 However, when an arrogant and thoroughly despicable British dragoon,
Col. William Tavington (Jason Isascs) cold-bloodedly kills Martin's
15-year-old son, Martin is instantly transformed into a lethal foe, who
harasses the British at every turn.
 Martin's transformation comes to quickly, too easily. And that is one
of the movie's flaws.
 Another is Isaacs' performance as Tavington. He has no redeeming
qualities. He is absolutely evil, casually killing men, women and
children without hesitation.
 Also fighting the war is hunky Heath Ledger ("Ten Things I Hate About
You") as Gabriel, Martin's eldest son, who fights alongside his father.
This young actor is the main reason young women will flock to "The
Patriot." Like Gibson, he is a ruggedly handsome individual.
 Another problem with the film is its political correctness. There is
just too much of it. A young woman speechifies in church about the
necessity of men going to fight for their beliefs.
 Then there's the minor subplot of the redneck member of Martin's army
who dislikes then comes to respect the black slave who also is a member
of the group.
 Director Roland Emmerich keeps the proceedings in motion. There is very
little dead space. He is ably abetted by Caleb Deschanel's expert and
portrait-like cinematography.
 But this is Gibson's movie, an old-fashioned star turn. He makes some
of Rodat's overripe dialogue  palatable. He has a vulnerability about
him, a sense of regret for what he has to do and loss for the personal
cost the war is extracting from him.
 John Williams offers another of his red, white and blue symphonic
concoctions. It blends perfectly with the action on the screen.
 Overall, "The Patriot" will hold your attention. I have to admit that
it more than compensates for its weaknesses. A larger-than-life hero, a
hissable villain, a moving love story. Who could ask for anything more?
 "The Patriot" may be history as redefined by Hollywood, but it still
manages to convey the tenacity and will of those who, knowing they were
vastly outnumbered, continued with dogged determination to fight for
their dream.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Bloom's reviews can be found on the Internet Movie Datatbase at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Chad Polenz
Mel Gibson stars in a really long, epic drama about a man who leads a 
revolution against the evil British
empire. A man who's a great fighter and leader but whose family life has been 
hell and is ready to die for
his beliefs. 
No, I didn't copy that line from a review of "Braveheart," that's an accurate 
plot description to the latest
wannabe blockbuster from Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin - the guys behind 
"Independence Day" and
"Godzilla." This film also tries to appeal to our patriotism with the big 
common enemy being the British in
the late 18th century during the American Revolution. It doesn't pay off very 
well here because the
screenplay langer on and on about Gibson's family life and the depressing 
hardships they must endure due
to the war. 
There's a lot of "Gone With The Wind"-like melodrama combined with some 
"Braveheart"-like battle scenes
but neither are nearly as good. More concentration of the Americans' overall 
strategy is needed to clarify
the screenplay and the human drama is laid on too thick. This is one of those 
films designed to kiss-up to
the Academy (not unlike "Gladiator") that leaves us little guys out in the 
cold... sort of. One more cut and
this could have been a great flick, this cut is just all right. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Susan Granger
 Do you realize there's never been a big, blockbuster
Revolutionary War movie - until now? "The Patriot" will change all
that. In 1776 in South Carolina, Benjamin Martin (Mel Gibson), a
former hero of the French and Indian War, is now a widower and devoted
father of seven children. Rebuking those who advocate war against
England's King George III over taxation, he's become a pacifist -
until the battle literally lands in his backyard, as a cruel, arrogant
British colonel (Jason Isaacs) deliberately murders an innocent
child. Savage, bloody revenge quickly follows as Martin, wielding a
Cherokee tomahawk, organizes the civilian militia. These excellent
marksmen are guerrilla fighters, avoiding muzzle-to-muzzle
confrontations with Redcoats in an open field. But Martin's not the
real patriot - that honor goes to his idealistic son Gabriel (Heath
Ledger), whose early enlistment in the Colonial Army is motivated by
principle. Written by Robert Rodat ("Saving Private Ryan") and
directed by Roland Emmerich ("Independence Day"), it's a challenging,
exciting, character-driven story, capturing the human element that is
too often lost in history - with heart-wrenching moments like melting
a lead toy soldier into ammunition. As the tale's emotional pivot, the
conflicted father and reluctant hero, Mel Gibson delivers a touching,
tautly textured performance, ably supported by Heath Ledger, Jason
Isaacs, Chris Cooper, Tcheky Karyo, Rene Aubjonois, Lisa Brenner and
Tom Wilkinson. Caleb Deschanel's cinematography is magnificent, even
when capturing the violence of war at its most brutal, and John
Williams's score is superb. Sure, there are some cliches, but on the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Patriot" is a compelling,
powerful 10. It's a stunning, sweeping, spectacular saga.

Author
Christopher Null
A note to filmmakers who want to make a movie about a war:  Please
understand that your film does not need to be as long as the actual war
itself.  We will not hold it against you if it's shorter.  As such, I
will try to keep this review to a length where you can read it in a few
minutes.
The Patriot gives Mel Gibson the opportunity to do something he's never
done before:  To orate at length about the evils of taxation without
representation... oh, okay... and to kill a bunch of damn redcoats!!!
Faced with the death of his wife, The Patriot offers us Gibson the
widower pacifist, playing the part of South Carolina colonialist
Benjamin Martin, unswayed by arguments that war should be initiated
against Britain.  When his son Gabriel (Heath Ledger) enlists despite
his father's forbiddance, Martin is left at home to raise his other six
kids while the war rages around him.
Circumstances arise to take the life of one of the children at the hands
of the uber-evil redcoat Colonel Tavington (Jason Isaacs), which awakens
the repressed blood lust in the former soldier Martin.  Perhaps one of
the best battle scenes ever filmed follows, with Martin and two of his
kids picking off 20 redcoats in the forest, leaving Martin covered in
gore.
The Patriot soon becomes the epic it was intended to be, with grand
colonial battles fought by lines of soldiers politely shooting at one
another until one side is dead.  But Martin (an amalgam of several real
Revolutionaries) brings dirty guerilla tactics to the war, and after
forming a militia of scrappy mercenaries, soon he's got General
Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson) running scared.
While The Patriot will draw obvious comparisons to Braveheart, it is
actually far more reminiscent of Kevin Costner's Robin Hood sprinkled
with a bit of The Last of the Mohicans.  Martin lives in the woods and
attacks the Brits in small groups, absconding with their booty.  There's
even a holy man (Rene Auberjonois) and a foreigner (Tchéky Karyo, in a
great supporting turn as a French sympathizer) who fight alongside the
rebels.
This turns out to be a good thing, because God knows we don't need
another Braveheart.  The Patriot also turns out to be a message movie,
filled with issues regarding honor vs. survival, vengeance vs.
forgiveness, negotiation vs. war, and glory vs. sacrifice.  This isn't
just some ordinary war movie.  It's deep, with John Williams' score
driving the heart-tugging home and Roland Emmerich's direction not
getting in the way.  And I say all that in a rare moment of non-sarcasm.
Unfortunately, at close to three hours in length, The Patriot has plenty
of time to get hokey.  The bad guy is drawn as broadly as a Bond
villain, and a gaggle of subplots don't add much to the film, just
making it unnecessarily longer.  The anti-slavery motif is especially
hokey and unneeded.
But, as usual, I quibble.  The Patriot, against all expectations, is
probably the best movie I've seen this summer to date.  And where else
can a German director and an Australian star put together a movie about
the Revolutionary War.  Ah, only in America.
Director: Roland Emmerich
Producer: Dean Devlin
Writer: Robert Rodat
Starring: Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Jason Isaacs,
Chris Cooper, Tchéky Karyo, Rene Auberjonois, Lisa Brenner, Tom
Wilkinson, Donal Logue
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Jon Popick
If you liked Braveheart, you probably liked Gladiator. They both had
Australian stars playing extremely manly, likeable heroes who lead
rag-tag bunches of untrained men against seemingly insurmountable
forces.  Each has a really bad guy doing really rotten stuff to really
innocent people.  And each of the male leads are reluctant warriors,
dragged into large-scale confrontation only after somebody messes with
their family in some horrible way.
The Patriot is more of the same - even more so than Gladiator - and
could have saved a fortune in marketing costs by just calling itself
Braveheart II:  The Phantom Menace.  In this installment, Mel Gibson
battles the English on American soil during the Revolutionary War, as
opposed to Braveheart's 13th century Scotland backdrop.  Gibson
(Payback) plays Benjamin Martin, a man who could be a direct descendant
of William Wallace  (he does everything but wear the kilt and the blue
face paint).
The film starts off in 1776 South Carolina.  Martin, a former war
captain, has turned decidedly anti-war ever since his beloved wife went
tits up. The reason for his pacifism?  He's afraid of leaving his seven
children without a father.  Martin even goes to the Continental Congress
in Charleston to vote against the war, but his side loses and, to make
matters worse, his oldest son Gabriel (Heath Ledger, 10 Things I Hate
About You) signs up to fight the Redcoats.
Before long, the battles are literally being fought in Martin's
backyard. Gabriel is captured by the ridiculously ruthless Col. William
Tavington  (Jason Isaacs, The End of the Affair) and ordered to hang for
betraying King George.  Some other stuff happens that I won't give away
here, but before you know it, Martin is wielding his tomahawk and
covered in English blood.  He even teaches two of his younger sons how
to attack a procession of English officers.  The scene, which has
already sparked a lot of debate over the whole kids/guns issue, is a
revelation as both boys are so scared that they end up looking through
the sights of their guns with tears in their eyes.  Kudos to
screenwriter Robert Rodat (Saving Private Ryan) for this splendid scene.
Like Braveheart's Wallace, Martin has a smart mouth, a cocky attitude
and fights like he's immune to death.  He uses eyebrow-raising tricks
and unconventional combat techniques, and apparently is the guy that
came up with the idea of hiding behind rocks and trees while engaged in
gunfire with the enemy (as opposed to marching in a straight line in a
wide-open field, which was all the rage back then).  And he can mix it
up like nobody's business, brandishing a long list of weapons from guns
to flagpoles.
But there are problems with Martin's character, too.  He's way too
squeaky-clean and noble.  Even his slaves aren't slaves (they just love
working his fields).  Interestingly enough, Martin's character is
supposedly based on one Francis `The Swamp Fox' Marion, a Revolutionary
War hero and noted racist that bragged about hunting American Indians
for sport.  Allegedly, The Patriot was intended to be a biopic about
Marion's life, but once Sony Pictures heard about the Swamp Fox's
real-life exploits, they changed the name of the character and, as they
say, the rest is history.  Here, some brief mentions are made to some
atrocity that Martin may have committed against the French and the
Cherokee at a place called Fort Wilderness.  But Gibson is Gibson - as
long as he's bashing people's skulls in, the world is a happy place.
The Patriot simply looks amazing from the first frame to the last.  It's
one of those films whose scenes seem to be set during sunrise or
sundown, thanks to cinematographer Caleb Deschanel's (Anna & The King)
warm photography.  There are several scenes set in a foggy graveyard
marsh, where Martin and his band of merry men meet to discuss battle
plans.  It looks like something out of Sleepy Hollow.  Perennial
Oscar-nominee John Williams (Angela's Ashes) score manages to press most
of the right buttons.
The Patriot was produced and directed by the team that brought us
Godzilla and ID4 (Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin), but this film is
leaps and bounds better than those two travesties.  And this film is the
second in two weeks to feature either Gibson (he lends his voice to
Rocky the Rooster in the animated Chicken Run) or the underused Chris
Cooper (Me, Myself & Irene), who plays Col. Harry Burwell in this
picture.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Roland Emmerich.
Cast: Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Jason Isaacs, Chris Cooper, Joely Richardson, 
Lisa Brenner, Tcheky Karyo, Rene Auberjonois, Gregory Smith, Mika Boorem, 
Skye McCole Bartusiak, Donal Logue, Leon Rippy, Adam Baldwin, Trevor Morgan, 
Joey D. Vieira.
2000 - 164 minutes
Rated R (for graphic violence, gore, and mild profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 1, 2000.
An attempt by director Roland Emmerich and producer Dean Devlin (who both 
created 1996's "Independence Day" and 1998's "Godzilla") to make an 
Oscar-worthy motion picture set during the Revolutionary War just sounds like 
trouble. After all, for filmmakers who have spent their whole career creating 
aliens and giant lizards, a reality-based war epic simply would seem out of 
their league. The outcome of their endeavor is "The Patriot," and it is no 
better than anyone should have expected, which is to say that it isn't any 
good at all.
Strictly amateur night concerning the basic storyline, which does not 
thoughtfully examine the battle of the Colonies, circa the late-18th century, 
but lays out a threadbare revenge plotline that is as misguided in its ideas 
as it is in its lackluster delivery of them. Instead of creating characters, 
director Emmerich and screenwriter Robert Rodat have gone back to the old 
standby of "good versus evil," which is exactly what they did in 
"Independence Day," replacing extraterrestrials with the British. And the 
relationships that evolve throughout the story are stripped to their bare 
minimum, with each person getting their chance to deliver big, meaningful 
speeches about patriotism and independence, but little in the way of 
character-defining dialogue. Granted, shallowness may be difficult to pull 
off in a nearly 3-hour drama but Emmerich and Rodat have managed just that.
Mel Gibson toplines the respectable, if unextraordinary, cast as the 
conciliatory Benjamin Martin, who has lived in South Carolina raising his 
seven children by himself ever since his beloved wife passed away. Despite 
the callings of his comrades, Benjamin wants no part in joining the militia, 
instead set on continuing to be a parent to his kids. His eldest son, the 
patriotic 18-year-old Gabriel (Heath Ledger), however, does join his fellow 
men in the fight for his homeland. Returning home one night wounded, Benjamin 
takes it upon himself to treat Gabriel and the other hurt soldiers. When the 
Green Dragoons, headed by the conniving English Colonel Tavington (Jason 
Isaacs), catch wind of this, and ultimately capture Gabriel and 
cold-bloodedly murder Benjamin's 15-year-old son, Thomas (Gregory Smith), it 
sets off a timebomb within Benjamin that forces him to join Gabriel in the 
war, as well as avenge his late son by any means possible.
Following a promising opening thirty minutes that includes a courageously 
controversial depiction of two of Benjamin's young sons bearing arms and 
murdering the Green Dragoons, and, albeit briefly, showing their reactions, 
as well as Benjamin's, on the power of the weapons they hold, "The Patriot" 
careens off-course for the 135-minute duration, to which it never repairs 
itself. Aimlessly wandering around in a needlessly simplistic storyline that 
is drug out to an unbearable length, but without giving any depth or insight 
to what is occurring onscreen, the film is so problematic in so many 
different ways, it is almost surprising that Mel Gibson would have agreed to 
take part in the project.
Much of "The Patriot" is so unserviceable that it occasionally borders on 
some sort of Monty Python war parody, with pratfalls and unequivocally inane 
dialogue that I would never wish upon any actor, no matter how talented they 
are, to have to utter on the big screen. Worst of all is that much of the 
humor is, indeed, intentional, but not one attempt at comedy is the least bit 
successful or appropriate in the confines of the otherwise dark subject 
matter.
There are two inevitable romantic subplots, one of them between Gabriel and 
the fair maiden Anne (Lisa Brenner), whose father is hard of hearing and 
always misunderstanding what others are saying to him. Following three scenes 
together (one which is carried out with both of the principles having black 
ink smeared on their teeth), we are supposed to believe that Gabriel and Anne 
are deeply in love, and so they get married. The second romance, even more 
poorly handled than the Gabriel/Anne debacle (if that is possible), is 
between Benjamin and his late wife's sister, Charlotte (Joely Richardson), 
and is so inconsequential that only two brief scenes are afforded to their 
budding romantic relationship.
No less than three child death scenes are portrayed in "The Patriot," with a 
variation each time of a father weeping over the lifeless body, and followed 
by an alteration of how the parent deals with the death. The war scenes on 
display (many of which are filmed in slow-motion) are plentiful, as well, but 
become tedious long before the climactic battle has been carried out, 
primarily because there isn't enough substance present to withhold the amount 
of time you are asked to spend with the picture. The film basically runs 
around in circles with nowhere to go until the finale that pits Benjamin 
head-to-head with Colonel Tavington, whom he has vowed to kill.
Mel Gibson may be stuck in a creative wasteland here, but he is stunning and 
focused as Benjamin Martin, who cares for his family so much, he will do 
anything to get back at those who have wronged them. It is clear that Gibson 
does have his heart in the right place, and must have taken the role based on 
his connection with the character, since he himself has just as many children 
as Benjamin, and obviously loves them a great deal. The problem is, Gibson 
played a character much like this one in his far superior 1995 drama, 
"Braveheart," which had intelligence and complexity to go along with its 
intense scenes of violence.
Heath Ledger (1999's "10 Things I Hate About You"), an Australian actor who 
pulls off a believable American accent, is powerful and passionate as 
Gabriel, but it intermittently is difficult to watch him perform in a film 
that he is so clearly above. Meanwhile, Jason Isaacs, as the token villain, 
is appropriately slimy and despicable, efficiently creating a figure that 
audiences will be able to hate. I say 'figure,' rather than 'character,' 
because at no point throughout does screenwriter Rodat give Colonel Tavington 
any positive qualities or traits aside from his thirst for killing. All other 
performances mostly blend into the background and are wasted, including Joely 
Richardson, as Aunt Charlotte; Lisa Brenner, as Gabriel's love, Anne Howard; 
and Chris Cooper, as Colonel Harry Burwell, an old comrade of Benjamin's.
For someone who sees the majority of films released, I will be the first to 
admit that I am sometimes a little slow to predict what is going to happen, 
but at every point in "The Patriot," I made a guess on what would occur next, 
and was consistently right. Aside from its predictability, its views on 
patriotism, and the treatment the battle scenes get, were something that got 
deeply under my skin. As someone who personally finds war a sad, devastating, 
and pointless act, its music score, by John Williams, was utterly offensive, 
with its upbeat, flag-waving strains played over shots of death and the 
destruction of human life. There is a difference between portraying the 
facts, and sensationalizing war. Perhaps it would have been in Roland 
Emmerich's best interest to realize this, before turning his version of the 
Revolutionary War into some sort of fantasy where death is a chauvinistic 
punchline, rather than a tragedy.

Author
Laura Clifford
South Carolina. 1776. Benjamin Martin (Mel Gibson), a farmer and furniture
maker, is a pacifist. A hero in the French and Indian War, the recently widowed
planter has seven children to raise and the rebellion is not for him or his
family. Even when his eldest son, Gabriel (Heath Ledger), goes off to join the
rebel militia, ashamed of his father, Ben steadfastly maintains his
isolationism. But, fate takes a hand and, after a violent battle between
British regulars and the rag-tage rebels at Martin's front door, a cruel, 
sadistic British officer, Col. William Tavington (Jason Isaacs), brutally guns 
down one of the farmer's sons, sparking revenge and revolution in "The Patriot."
Director/co-executive producer Roland Emmerich has been the master of the 
cliche since his American debut with the Jean-Claude Van Damme-er "Universal 
Soldier."  He continued his record with "StarGate," "Independence Day" and 
"Godzilla."  While the latter film was not all that successful, it and the 
others gave Emmerich the clout to helm a big budget, Revolutionary War 
actioner starring Mel Gibson and a cast of thousands. Despite the budget and 
star, the director has, once again, made another formulaic, cliche-ridden flick.
The American rebellion against King George is an admirable backdrop for the
routine story by Robert Rodat ("Saving Private Ryan," another routine tale),
that could have been called "Braveheart 2." The peaceful Benjamin is driven to
the brink and beyond by a sadist who does something really cruel (and stupid)
to incense the hero to action. Lots of fighting takes place and just deserts are
delivered in the end and all the rebels live happily ever after. From the
beginning to the end, you know the story before it happens. There were moments
where the tale could have taken an interesting twist, but never does.
Originally, "The Patriot" was supposed to be based on the exploits of Francis
Marion, The Swamp Fox, but political correctness, due to some nefarious deeds
by Marion, made the makers switch to a fiction with only a real life backdrop of
the Revolutionary War.
There are three things, though, that put "The Patriot" a notch above the rest
of Emmerich's oeuvres - the aforementioned bucks, the star power and draw of Mel
Gibson, and one of the best production teams I have seen behind the camera. The
technical staff involved helps to overshadow the oft-used tale and, through the
magic of movement on screen, succeed in recreating the look and feel of the
period and of war.
Emmerich has assembled an often-awarded team of film crafters and their
collective experience is obvious in the finished product. Foremost is the
dazzling photography by the brilliant Caleb Deschanel ("The Natural," "Fly Away
Home"). The lenser has always been a favorite of mine and has given the movies
he shoots the most beautiful and striking images one will ever see on the
screen. His fine eye for composition makes "The Patriot" one of the best
looking films of the year. The huge, panoramic battle scenes are crystal clear 
and visually stunning. His close-up photography of the fighting is fast, furious
and frightening in its intensity. Even routine scenes have an artistry in how 
they are photographed.
Lending, strongly, to the look and period feel are the production design by
Kirk M. Petrucelli ("Mystery Men") and costuming by Deborah L. Scott 
(Oscar-winner for "Titanic"). The scope of "The Patriot" production is awesome 
and these folks and their creative teams provide Class A work. Attention to 
details - and the use of "recreators" as extras, fans of the Revolutionary War 
who spend their free time recreating battles for the sheer fun of it - is a 
major plus and propels the film beyond mediocrity.
The principle cast is OK, not great. Mel gives a cookie cutter perf, but is
still damn good looking and carries the physical demands of the role with his
usual ability. Heath Ledger made a nice little splash in his American debut
flick, "10 Things I Hate About You," and has an amiable likableness but lacks
the intensity needed for his character Gabriel. Jason Isaacs is wickedly wicked
as the evil bad guy, Col. Tavington -  I realize that atrocities happen in war,
but this guy is a mix of all the bad traits of Genghis Khan, Adolph Hitler,
Vlad the Impaler and Lizzy Borden rolled into one. No wonder the English press 
is up in arms over the way the Brits are depicted here.
Supporting cast is peppered with solid actors who help, thankfully, to flesh
out the background characters. Chris Cooper ("October Sky") gives credence as 
the embattled rebel commander, Col. Harry Burwell, who is struggling to defeat 
the enemy against enormous odds. Tcheky Karyo is amusing as the lead element of
French assistance to the American Cause. He's no one-man army, but provides the
needed wit against the French jokes delivered periodically through the film.
Tom Wilkinson gives his General Cornwallis a pompous arrogance of empire that 
rings true. Minor characters, like volunteer John Billings (Leon Rippy), add
dimension to the background cast. One false note is Joely Richardson in her 
vacuous perf as Ben's sister-in-law (and love interest), Charlotte Selton.
"The Patriot" is a mixed bag of a film. The tale is unoriginal and
unimaginative, but the depiction of the mundane story is handled in an
outstanding manner. The sheer force of the technical, artistic side of the
movie overshadows its trite tale of revenge. Even at 160 minutes long, I was 
visually entertained, at least, and I give it a B.
Producer (Mark Gordon) and screenwriter (Robert Rodat) of "Saving Private Ryan"
team up with the director (Roland Emmerich) of "Independence Day" on a tale
based on French and Indian War hero Benjamin Martin's (Mel Gibson) stand to 
keep himself and his family peaceful and safe during the American Revolution.
'Why should I trade a tyrant 3,000 miles away for 3,000 tyrants a mile away?'
he asks when declaration of war is being debated.  A recent widower with seven 
children ranging from pre-toddler to eighteen, Martin is also haunted by the 
brutality both endured and inflicted during his legendary heroics at Fort 
Wilderness, reminding less experienced men that 'this war will be fought
amongst us...your children will learn of it with their own eyes.'
His words turn out to be very prophetic, as the war can soon be viewed from
his South Carolina home's wraparound porch.  His eldest, Gabriel (Heath
Ledger, "10 Things I Hate About You"), who enlisted against his father's
wishes, crawls back into his home wounded.  The Martins and their free black 
workers tend the fallen from both sides of the battle, when Colonel Tavington
(Jason Isaacs, "The End of the Affair") arrives and instructs his men to
gather up the sticken British and massacre the enemy wounded.  Gabriel's
taken prisoner and his fifteen year old brother Thomas attempts to save him.
Tavington shoots the boy in front of his father's eyes.  Benjamin Martin
now has red-hot revenge burning in his brain.
First, Martin spirits a new legend, that of The Ghost, by slaying twenty
departing British officers (with the assistance of young sons Matthew and
Samuel,  the latter of which is traumatized by the event) in order to 
free Gabriel.  Then he forms a militia with the aid of his old friend Colonel
Henry Burwell (Chris Cooper, "October Sky") and Frenchman Major Jean Villeneuve
(Tcheky Karyo, "Addicted to Love"), claiming his son Gabriel in the bargain.
Martin's men are so successful, they capture the attention of General
Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson, "The Full Monty") himself, whom Martin outwits
in a clever prisoner exchange gambit.  Cornwallis' pride is so damaged, he
orders the uncivilized and ungentlemanly Tavington to use any means necessary
to take Martin down.
Technically, "The Patriot" is first rate, featuring gorgeous cinematography
by Caleb Deschanel ("The Natural") realistic period design by Kirk M.
Petruccelli ("Blade") and costume by Deborah L. Scott ("Wild Wild West"),
although John Williams' score is forgettable.  Special effects include a
cannonball hurtling directly at the audience, brutal battle scenes and their
aftermath, and seamless matte shots - beautiful work.
Acting is a mixed bag.  While Gibson is good in the role it seems like a 
second rate William Wallace for him.  I for one am tired of seeing Gibson's 
tortured face as once again his character is called upon to endure unspeakable 
horrors, yet the man does convincingly play a heroic leader.  Heath Ledger 
acquits himself nicely as the son learning the complexities of his father and 
of life, although frankly, I found him more interesting in his teenage romantic
comedy debut.  Tcheky Karyo is always a pleasurable addition and his reactions 
to Gibson's French baiting lend a believable amount of levity.  Wilkinson is a 
fine Cornwallis.  Leon Rippy ("Stargate") is another good sidekick for Mel
as farmer recruit John Billings and Adam Baldwin has an interesting 'almost
cameo' as Captain Wilkins, an American loyal to the Brits.  The women don't 
fare as well, with Gibson's love interest, Joely Richardson (as his 
sister-in-law Charlotte Selton) delivering her lines as if she had marbles in 
her mouth and newcomer Lisa Brenner (as Gabriel's fiance Anne Howard) being 
far too modern for the period.  
The villain of the piece, Jason Isaac's Tavington, is a fatal flaw of
multiple dimensions.  Tavington is an unrelenting sadist whose only motivation
appears to be greed.  The actor was more than likely instructed to play
the part broadly, so fault lies more properly with the filmmakers who chose
to use every cliche in the book in making this film.  In a war fought by
thousands, it's a foregone conclusion that Tavington and Martin will come
head to head at every crucial moment until a climatic last stand.  Tavington
even gets a "Halloween" moment, 'rising from the dead' as soon as his opponent
drops his weaon (always the telltale sign).  It's sad to admit, but I was
hoping our hero was decapitated against the backdrop of an American flag just
to break the tedium of 'been there, done that.'  
"The Patriot" certainly isn't a bad film, just one that shows its commercial
molding all too blatantly.  Audiences who haven't been exposed to a lot of 
movies will more than likely enjoy it tremendously.  It has craftmanship of
the highest order in its look and sound and many scenes, particularly the
ones that take advantage of Gibson's comedic talents, play very well.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
A note to filmmakers who want to make a movie about a war:  Please
understand that your film does not need to be as long as the actual war
itself.  We will not hold it against you if it's shorter.  As such, I
will try to keep this review to a length where you can read it in a few
minutes.
The Patriot gives Mel Gibson the opportunity to do something he's never
done before:  To orate at length about the evils of taxation without
representation... oh, okay... and to kill a bunch of damn redcoats!!!
Faced with the death of his wife, The Patriot offers us Gibson the
widower pacifist, playing the part of South Carolina colonialist
Benjamin Martin, unswayed by arguments that war should be initiated
against Britain.  When his son Gabriel (Heath Ledger) enlists despite
his father's forbiddance, Martin is left at home to raise his other six
kids while the war rages around him.
Circumstances arise to take the life of one of the children at the hands
of the uber-evil redcoat Colonel Tavington (Jason Isaacs), which awakens
the repressed blood lust in the former soldier Martin.  Perhaps one of
the best battle scenes ever filmed follows, with Martin and two of his
kids picking off 20 redcoats in the forest, leaving Martin covered in
gore.
The Patriot soon becomes the epic it was intended to be, with grand
colonial battles fought by lines of soldiers politely shooting at one
another until one side is dead.  But Martin (an amalgam of several real
Revolutionaries) brings dirty guerilla tactics to the war, and after
forming a militia of scrappy mercenaries, soon he's got General
Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson) running scared.
While The Patriot will draw obvious comparisons to Braveheart, it is
actually far more reminiscent of Kevin Costner's Robin Hood sprinkled
with a bit of The Last of the Mohicans.  Martin lives in the woods and
attacks the Brits in small groups, absconding with their booty.  There's
even a holy man (Rene Auberjonois) and a foreigner (Tchéky Karyo, in a
great supporting turn as a French sympathizer) who fight alongside the
rebels.
This turns out to be a good thing, because God knows we don't need
another Braveheart.  The Patriot also turns out to be a message movie,
filled with issues regarding honor vs. survival, vengeance vs.
forgiveness, negotiation vs. war, and glory vs. sacrifice.  This isn't
just some ordinary war movie.  It's deep, with John Williams' score
driving the heart-tugging home and Roland Emmerich's direction not
getting in the way.  And I say all that in a rare moment of non-sarcasm.
Unfortunately, at close to three hours in length, The Patriot has plenty
of time to get hokey.  The bad guy is drawn as broadly as a Bond
villain, and a gaggle of subplots don't add much to the film, just
making it unnecessarily longer.  The anti-slavery motif is especially
hokey and unneeded.
But, as usual, I quibble.  The Patriot, against all expectations, is
probably the best movie I've seen this summer to date.  And where else
can a German director and an Australian star put together a movie about
the Revolutionary War.  Ah, only in America.
Director: Roland Emmerich
Producer: Dean Devlin
Writer: Robert Rodat
Starring: Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Jason Isaacs,
Chris Cooper, Tchéky Karyo, Rene Auberjonois, Lisa Brenner, Tom
Wilkinson, Donal Logue
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dennis Schwartz
PATRIOT, THE (director: Roland Emmerich; screenwriter: Robert Rodat;
cinematographer: Caleb Deschanel; editor: David Brenner; cast: Mel
Gibson (Benjamin Martin), Heath Ledger (Gabriel Martin), Joely
Richardson (Charlotte Selton), Jason Isaacs (Col. William Tavington),
Chris Cooper (Col. Harry Burwell), Tcheky Karyo (Jean Villeneuve), Rene
Auberjonois (Reverend Oliver), Lisa Brenner (Anne Howard), Donal Logue
(Dan Scott), Tom Wilkinson (General Cornwallis), Gregory Smith (Thomas),
2000)
There have been very few films about the American Revolution and most of
them have been terrible, with the exception of D.W. Griffith's 1924 epic
"America." German director Roland Emmerich (Independence Day/Godzilla)
and screenwriter Robert Rodat (he also scripted "Saving Private Ryan")
combine to work their mindless view of history on this corny, flag
waving, dumb film, which tries to make the American Revolution fit into
the politically correct thinking of the 21st century. They make this
story into a personal revenge movie and pull all the strings out for
popular consumption. At least, they kept it moving at a brisk pace, but,
unfortunately, they used a good deal of violence. There were a multitude
of choreographed battle scenes, face-to-face combat scenes, and sweeping
panoramic shots of the beautiful countryside, which should take your
mind off all the empty messages of the film. The filmmaker even made
slavery appear as not such a bad thing by having the slaves seem more
like workers than slaves, they just seemed to be having themselves a
good old time on the plantation. When the 158-minutes are up, you might
not have much of an historical perspective of the war, but you should
feel good that the arch villain got his just desserts.
The Revoluntionary War in 1776 brings a South Carolina farmer, Ben
Martin (Mel Gibson), who is a widower with seven children eventually
into the conflict, against his anti-war feelings. The forty-something
aged farmer is reluctant to go to war after becoming a hero in the
previous French and Indian war, where a bloody massacre at Fort
Wilderness occurred that he wants to forget about.
His reason for getting pulled into this war is personal. When his
headstrong son Gabriel (Heath) comes home wounded from the war and the
British soldiers come to his plantation to fetch him, Mel's other
teenage son Thomas (Gregory Smith) is unnecessarily shot when he tries
to release Gabriel, who is told that he will be hung. Then, Mel's house
is torched by the mean-spirited villain in the film, British Colonel
Tavington (Isaacs).
The colonel's villain role is about as one-dimensional and predictable
as it gets for such a villain, whereby he becomes more cartoonish and
less menacing as the story rolls on. Somewhere after the halfway point
in this epic (sic!), Mel tells him that he's going to kill him and it
then becomes a matter of how. And there you have the plot, which is not
much on history and not much on character development.
Mel becomes known to the British as "The Ghost" after he kills twenty of
them in an ambush of the patrol bringing Gabriel to the British command,
where he is to be hung. Mel gets the help of his young boys to shoot the
officers, while he gets a chance to use his Cherokee tomahawk from the
French and Indian war to hack the soldiers to death. After that attack,
Mel sends the kids to stay with his wife's sister and he joins with his
old friend Col. Harry Burwell (Chris Cooper) and leads the local militia
in guerilla-type attacks against the British patrols. He becomes a
growing menace to the Redcoats  - so much so, that even General
Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson) orders that he must be captured by any means
possible.
Everything is so predictable about this glossy photographed film,
everything is so banal, everything seems so dishonest, and the dialogue
is so disparaging, that I found this to be such a morbid attempt at
history, such a futile way to tell a story. And the story itself is a
questionable one, since the Mel Gibson character is loosely based on
Francis Marion, whom historians credit with being a racist.
Everything from the acting and the script was flat. The obligatory
romance Mel has with his wife's sister (Joely), simply had no magic in
it. Everyone was reduced to a cardboard figure, and the war seemed to be
a manufactured one, as if this film was made as a TV episode. The story
lacked vitality, only scoring points for its fine costumes and John
Williams musical score. The film always seemed to be an unhealthy
mixture of mawkishness and carnality, offering nothing but shallow
responses for all its preaching about freedom. No scene seemed truly
honest; the most honest scene is when Mel is embracing his children and
the most dishonest, is showing him with the Negroes who just love being
his slaves.
This film resembles those other exploitive Mel Gibson movies, where
someone dear to him gets hurt and he gets revenge. Only this film comes
with some bogus history lesson thrown in, which makes it more shamefully
exploitive, a "Payback " with the Redcoats as the gangsters. I had an
ugly feeling when I left the theater, like someone was trying awfully
hard to sell me on patriotism: using children, the flag, a horrid
villain, all to shamelessly stir me up, instead of telling me a story
about a credible character who got involved in the War for Independence.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Roland Emmerich. Screenplay by Robert Rodat. Starring Mel
Gibson, Heath Ledger, Jason Isaacs. Running time: 164 minutes. Rated AA
for blood letting and violent scenes by the MFCB. Reviewed on July 4th, 
2000.
I find it amusing that one of the previews before "The Patriot" was for 
"The Hollow Man". That title so accurately sums up this picture: hollow. 
It's been a long time since a movie tried so hard to involve me 
emotionally, and fail so miserably. Don't get me wrong -- "The Patriot" 
looks great, and is broadly entertaining. But much of its almost 
three-hour running time is wasted on flimsy characters and tedious 
retreads masquerading as emotional high points. For once, I wish the 
filmmakers had just been trying to make a summer action pic.
Comparisons with star Mel Gibson's last historical epic, 1995's 
"Braveheart", are perhaps inevitable. Both movies feature Gibson as the 
leader of a band of insurgents against oppressive British rule. There he 
was trying to free Scotland, here it is the American colonies during the 
Revolutionary War. The death of Gibson's wife and ultra-realistic battle 
scenes figure prominently in both pictures. But "Braveheart" stirred a 
raw, genuine response from me. "The Patriot" clearly strives for the same 
sort of impact, but never achieves it. Is it just that I've become more 
cynical in the five years between the two films? Perhaps. But I think 
it's more than that.
"Braveheart", you see, featured real characters. Gibson's William Wallace 
was a compelling hero, and his fate left me both shattered and uplifted. 
Benjamin Martin in "The Patriot" is just Gibson on autopilot. He's not 
poorly-acted, but he's all window dressing with nothing underneath. I 
believed in William Wallace; I can't say the same for Benjamin Martin. 
The same criticism can be levied at Heath Ledger, who plays Ben's eldest 
son Christian. Ledger spends the whole movie mumbling listlessly, like he 
didn't realise rehearsal was over.
For a movie about family to work, we must be convinced of the bonds 
between them, no matter how strained, but "The Patriot" never forges 
those bonds. Indeed, so tepid is the interaction amongst the castmembers 
that it feels almost as if they each filmed their scenes individually, so 
that they could be composited electronically in post-production. Most 
unfortunate is the lack of chemistry between the two stars -- Gibson and 
Ledger feel more like passing acquaintances than father and son.
There is a good story underlying "The Patriot", if only it were in 
service to a better film. Benjamin is a veteran of the French-Indian War, 
but now preaches dialogue instead of combat. Against his father's wishes, 
Christian runs off to join the continental army. When the War of 
Independence comes as close as the Martins' South Carolina fields, Ben 
elects to care for the wounded on both sides, which happens to include 
Christian. But the brutal British Colonel Tavington (Jason Isaacs) has 
the Martin homestead burned anyway, and Christian is arrested for 
carrying colonial dispatches. When another of the Martin sons intervenes, 
Tavington shoots him dead.
This spurs Benjamin into action. Accompanied by two more sons, he 
ambushes and slaughters the British contingent bringing Christian back to 
their camp. That night, one son tells him he's glad he killed British 
soldiers. Here was a perfect opportunity to examine the effects of war on 
the young. But no, the movie passes it by, instead confining itself to 
safe territory well-trod by other movies. Judging from "The Patriot", 
pretty much the only negative ramifications of war are that men have to 
leave home for long spells, and sometimes they never come back. Well, duh.
Things go downhill from there. There are obligatory romances, one each 
for Christian and Benjamin. Christian's at least benefits from involving 
a somewhat charismatic paramour, Anne (Lisa Brenner). Benjamin, however, 
is shoehorned into an unconvincing attraction to his dead wife's sister 
(Joely Richardson). There is no spark between them, and the whole thing 
happens only because the movie demands it. Cliche after cliche is paraded 
across the screen: The bad guy who's not quite dead yet. The token black 
soldier. When a recalcitrant Benjamin is assigned to recruit civilians 
for a militia, the locals demur, until Anne gives a stirring speech. A 
pause and then... you guessed it, one by one all the naysayers stand in 
support of Ben.
The villains of "The Patriot" fare no better than the heroes. Isaacs' 
Tavington has no motivation, and no characterisation beyond "he's mean". 
Tavington was a real person, and his wicked depiction here has drawn the 
wrath of the city of Liverpool, which considers him a hero. Liverpudlians 
needn't worry: I doubt anyone could believe this portrayal is accurate, 
because no real person is so utterly devoid of personality. Tavington's 
superior is General Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson), who is at least useful 
for comic relief -- although much of the humor here is so banal, it's 
barely worth a groan. When Benjamin's militia blows up a British supply
ship during a party at Cornwallis' estate, one dim-witted aristocrat
ecstatically exclaims, "Fireworks!"
It is when "The Patriot" concentrates on the war that it finally kicks 
into high gear. Director Roland Emmerich does the movie no favours by 
filming many of the battle scenes with a tedious, mechanical style (close 
up of American soldier, wide shot, close up of British soldier, wide 
shot, repeat), but the realism and intensity of the combat overcomes 
this, especially in the exciting final clash. Every now and then, 
Robert Rodat's script shows a spark of creativity, or at least reuses old 
ideas in entertaining ways -- look at what becomes of Cornwallis' dogs, 
for example. And the beautiful period detail is a major attraction, with 
the whole movie looking as though it was lifted from a Leutze painting.
But "The Patriot" is ultimately a disappointment -- although, given that 
Emmerich and producer Dean Devlin masterminded "Independence Day" and 
the 1998 "Godzilla", two films with the most grotesque 
budget-to-intelligence ratios in recent history, maybe that's actually 
not such a bad thing. This is "Braveheart" lite: great fighting sequences 
trapped in a shallow narrative.
And why, if the movie spans five years, do the Martin children never age 
a day?
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/ThePatriot.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Roland Emmerich directing a movie that doesn't feature major special effects
gadgetry or giant creatures pulverizing metropolitan cities? Say it ain't
so. Well, it is so, and so is the fact that star Mel Gibson reportedly
received a cool $25 million bucks for making this period piece. But with the
word of mouth starting off strong and the success of another periodic epic
still riding the wave of the early summer box-office (can anyone say
GLADIATOR), things are looking mighty good for the man behind such popcorn
fare as GODZILLA and INDEPENDENCE DAY.
PLOT:
A widowed father of seven children is suddenly pulled back into the savagery
of battle when his family is threatened by the American Revolution. With his
oldest son by his side, the father reluctantly joins the fight against the
British Redcoats and hopes to bring about the freedom of their nation.
CRITIQUE:
A slow-starting film, which presents an interesting story, some entertaining
battle sequences and a flawless representation of the times, ultimately
succeeds with an emotional connection to its characters, but not without its
sporadic lags. Surprised was I to find myself tearing up in some spots of
this movie, with numerous comfort moments needed for the Mrs. as well. In
fact, much unlike the GLADIATOR, this film manages to pack many moments of
emotion into its web of war, and further unlike the former epic, does so
without breaking any major ground with any of its battle sequences. Mind
you, the last 30 minutes of the film are definitely rock-solid, with an
all-out attack scenario sure to have most glued to their seats. But the core
of the film is centered more around its characters, with Mel juggling the
state of his family, sins from his past and the brutality of war, while his
son, the effective Heath Ledger, rides along with his idealistic
deliberations of honor and pursuit of justice. I liked the people in this
film, they seemed real to me and I ultimately cared about what happened to
each and every one of them.
Having said that, the film did begin to spread its emotions a little too
thin at some point, at which I wondered whether or not it would be able to
maintain an even balance with the film's action. But it did indeed, with
various small but carefully orchestrated battles spreading their way along
to the major one in the end. I found a lot of this war unsettling, only
because I wasn't used to this face-to-face combat, with lines of folks just
standing in front of one another and firing away. Very strange. But
ultimately, the direction and feel of the film just won me over and
completely immersed was I in its time. And that's saying a lot, because I
personally am not a fan of period films. Gibson kicked arse in the lead,
with enough genuine pain, anguish, revenge and pure adrenaline pumping
through his performance to demand your attention. But the film is really
taken to another level with the aid of a tangible enemy, a villain who in
this case is played to a tee by Jason Isaacs, slashing and burning
everything in sight. A delicious part handled masterfully by the actor
transports us from a seat among the audience, to a willing contestant and
rooter for the home team. In the end, this is not a "fun" movie by any
stretch of the imagination. It's bloody as heck, legs are chopped off,
people get killed left and right, the struggle seems to go on forever, and
very few (but timely) moments of comedic relief ever break through. But in
the end, the sense of relief and unburden is all worth it, with the film's
best cinematic moments saved for its last precious half hour.
A long arduous journey which definitely won't fulfill all appetites
certainly does a good job of representing a frenetic time and place in
history, presenting us with several well-developed characters and offering
us a handful of exciting battle scenes. It might have benefited from a
little trim and definitely provided one too many bleak moments for my taste,
but all in all, a solid effort for everyone involved.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The story begins in 1776.  While certain of the American
colonists are engaged in declaring their independence from Britain,
the British are finding it almost impossible to engage the
colonists' army on the battlefield.  The Americans know almost
nothing about fighting and if it could be brought to a European
style battle, the British are almost certain they could bring the
rebellion to a quick end.  (As one of the British in the film puts
it, "These rustics are so inept it nearly takes the honor out of
winning.")  The British have to try a new approach.  Their ace in
the hole is the unpopularity of the rebellion in the southern
colonies like the Carolinas.  If they can sweep from the south, pick
up southern support and sweep north with it, they can probably
capture the Continental Army.  To do this they take Charleston and,
reinforced by locals, are ready for the northward sweep.  Locally
the operation is led by General Cornwallis.
     Benjamin Martin (played by Mel Gibson) is a South Carolina
farmer.  He fought Indians and French in the Indian wars and came
out a war hero, but at the same time he is a man hating what the
wars had done to him.  Now he is a widower with seven children who
wants no part of war.  He watches in fear as the British and the
Americans fight.  He refuses to give his support to the rebellion
even though his eldest child Gabriel (Australian Heath Ledger) is
anxious to fight the British.  Colonel Harry Burwell (Chris Cooper),
a war buddy of Benjamin's, leads the locals.  Finally Benjamin lets
Gabriel join up.  As the months pass the war gets closer and closer
to the Martin Farm.  But it takes Gabriel's return, wounded and with
army dispatches, to bring his father into the war.  The merciless
Col. William Tavington (Jason Isaacs) finds Gabriel at the farm and
against the rules of war sentences him to hang.  In a feeble attempt
to resist, a brother is killed and Tavington orders the house razed
to the ground.  Benjamin knows less feeble ways to resist and is at
long last drawn into the seemingly impossible conflict. Soon he is a
rebel leader hiding in the swamps and known by the nickname "the
Ghost" and putting some of the honor back into the winning.
     If all this sounds like the beginnings of a children's movie,
perhaps a reframing of adventures of Robin Hood, the facts will
certainly bear that interpretation.  There are many good things
about THE PATRIOT, but the core of the plot is not one of them.
There are episodes in this film one would expect from a children's
TV show.  While there are some nice battlefield scenes, when
Benjamin fights the British hand-to-hand, they are far too easy to
beat.  One shot and they are dead.  It is almost like knocking down
nine-pins.  People are a lot harder to kill than that.  Benjamin
Martin is in part based on Francis Marion, nicknamed "the Swamp
Fox."  A part of preparation I did to see this film was to watch
Walt Disney's THE SWAMP FOX, starring Leslie Nielson.  This is by
far the nicer production but at heart I would put the two stories on
a par with each other.  The film is directed by Roland Emmerich and
produced by him and Dean Devlin.  This is the team responsible for
STARGATE, INDEPENDENCE DAY, and GODZILLA.  They consciously aim
films at a level of young teenagers, and THE PATRIOT is no
exception, though the historical recreation, the costumes, the look
of the film, all should make this a film of interest to a wider
audience than the basic plot would alone.
     While the plot is on a childish level, the script as a whole is
somewhat better.  Written by Robert Rodat, author of SAVING PRIVATE
RYAN, the film contains some rather noteworthy discussions of the
ethics of war.  Tavington, the blood enemy of Martin, sort of this
films Sheriff of Nottingham, is totally ruthless with his enemy and
is happy to slaughter any of the enemy who get in his way.
Cornwallis (played by Tom Wilkinson) and several others of the
British do not buy into his concept of total war and are shocked at
his brutality.  This sympathy to particular British, even while
making the British the enemy may seem like a small thing, but notice
that in films like GANDHI there are almost no sympathetic British
characters.  It is nice to see someone saying that as a colonial
power Britain had some scruples.
     With the exception of its treatment of the British colonialists
the script tries a little hard to be politically correct.  Most of
the Americans we meet are against slavery and live in friendly
neighborliness with a colony of blacks.  There have been some
protests that Benjamin Martin is based on Francis Marion and Marion
is currently interpreted as being what we would call a racist.  In
fact he seems to be based only in part on parts of him.  Martin
should probably be considered a wholly fictional character.  While I
am on the subject of discussions of the philosophy of war, there is
a marvelous exchange between Cornwallis and Martin in which
Cornwallis complains that it is wrong for Martin to target British
officers.  If you kill off the officers and leave just the men you
will have chaos on the battlefield, he complains.  In one sentence
he douses us with culture shock and sums up the differences of 18th
century warfare and the more modern brand that was coming.  That may
well be the best written line in any film I have seen this year.
     Culture shock is just why one wants to see historical films.
How many Americans have had an opportunity to look out their front
window and see two armies fighting?  How many have seen the battle
wash like a wave over their homes?  Luckily almost nobody since the
Civil War.  It is rare that we see any film about the Revolutionary
War and far rarer that we see that war from the eyes of the southern
colonies.  Still some of what we see is a little hard to believe.
Several of the scenes created for this film seem to have been
digitally enhanced so they seem less like real photographic scenes
and more like nicely composed paintings.  But nicely created is what
we see of the day-to-day life in the southern colonies.  This part
was overseen by experts from the Smithsonian Institute and what we
see does have an air of authenticity.  Some of the battle scenes are
also authentic in a brutal sort of way.  The destruction done by
swords and cannonballs and even musket balls obviously could be
fairly brutal compared to the relatively clean wounds made by
bullets.  If anything this film underplays how much gore there
really was in a battle, though seeing Gibson go at someone with an
Indian hatchet (mercifully behind foliage) and seeing pieces of
person flying is something that parent should be warned against
before bringing young children.  The costume work with this film is
excellent.  Some of the scenes with Mel Gibson riding with the
banner of the American flag are a bit over-ripe in the same way as
scene that people complained about in THE POSTMAN.  John Williams
has written a decent score, though at times it is reminiscent of
Hans Zimmer.
     Mel Gibson is a good actor, probably better than most with his
popularity, but some of what was needed for this role he just did
not have.  He does not express sadness well.  When Clint Eastwood
loses his home and family in THE OUTLAW JOSEY WALES you do feel his
loss.  Gibson does not convey the same sort of loss well.  Chris
Cooper has been an actor I have looked for since MATEWAN.  He is
becoming a lot easier to find.  AMERICAN BEAUTY seems to have made
his name, but recently I have seen him in OCTOBER SKY, and two days
before THE PATRIOT he was in ME, MYSELF & IRENE.  Other notables in
this film include Rene Auberjonois, Tcheky Karyo, and Tom Wilkinson.
     On a plot level THE PATRIOT is a disappointment, but most
everything else is done well.  That earns the film a 7 on the 0 to
10 scale and a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Laura Clifford
South Carolina. 1776. Benjamin Martin (Mel Gibson), a farmer and furniture
maker, is a pacifist. A hero in the French and Indian War, the recently widowed
planter has seven children to raise and the rebellion is not for him or his
family. Even when his eldest son, Gabriel (Heath Ledger), goes off to join the
rebel militia, ashamed of his father, Ben steadfastly maintains his
isolationism. But, fate takes a hand and, after a violent battle between
British regulars and the rag-tage rebels at Martin's front door, a cruel, 
sadistic British officer, Col. William Tavington (Jason Isaacs), brutally guns 
down one of the farmer's sons, sparking revenge and revolution in "The Patriot."
Director/co-executive producer Roland Emmerich has been the master of the 
cliche since his American debut with the Jean-Claude Van Damme-er "Universal 
Soldier."  He continued his record with "StarGate," "Independence Day" and 
"Godzilla."  While the latter film was not all that successful, it and the 
others gave Emmerich the clout to helm a big budget, Revolutionary War 
actioner starring Mel Gibson and a cast of thousands. Despite the budget and 
star, the director has, once again, made another formulaic, cliche-ridden flick.
The American rebellion against King George is an admirable backdrop for the
routine story by Robert Rodat ("Saving Private Ryan," another routine tale),
that could have been called "Braveheart 2." The peaceful Benjamin is driven to
the brink and beyond by a sadist who does something really cruel (and stupid)
to incense the hero to action. Lots of fighting takes place and just deserts are
delivered in the end and all the rebels live happily ever after. From the
beginning to the end, you know the story before it happens. There were moments
where the tale could have taken an interesting twist, but never does.
Originally, "The Patriot" was supposed to be based on the exploits of Francis
Marion, The Swamp Fox, but political correctness, due to some nefarious deeds
by Marion, made the makers switch to a fiction with only a real life backdrop of
the Revolutionary War.
There are three things, though, that put "The Patriot" a notch above the rest
of Emmerich's oeuvres - the aforementioned bucks, the star power and draw of Mel
Gibson, and one of the best production teams I have seen behind the camera. The
technical staff involved helps to overshadow the oft-used tale and, through the
magic of movement on screen, succeed in recreating the look and feel of the
period and of war.
Emmerich has assembled an often-awarded team of film crafters and their
collective experience is obvious in the finished product. Foremost is the
dazzling photography by the brilliant Caleb Deschanel ("The Natural," "Fly Away
Home"). The lenser has always been a favorite of mine and has given the movies
he shoots the most beautiful and striking images one will ever see on the
screen. His fine eye for composition makes "The Patriot" one of the best
looking films of the year. The huge, panoramic battle scenes are crystal clear 
and visually stunning. His close-up photography of the fighting is fast, furious
and frightening in its intensity. Even routine scenes have an artistry in how 
they are photographed.
Lending, strongly, to the look and period feel are the production design by
Kirk M. Petrucelli ("Mystery Men") and costuming by Deborah L. Scott 
(Oscar-winner for "Titanic"). The scope of "The Patriot" production is awesome 
and these folks and their creative teams provide Class A work. Attention to 
details - and the use of "recreators" as extras, fans of the Revolutionary War 
who spend their free time recreating battles for the sheer fun of it - is a 
major plus and propels the film beyond mediocrity.
The principle cast is OK, not great. Mel gives a cookie cutter perf, but is
still damn good looking and carries the physical demands of the role with his
usual ability. Heath Ledger made a nice little splash in his American debut
flick, "10 Things I Hate About You," and has an amiable likableness but lacks
the intensity needed for his character Gabriel. Jason Isaacs is wickedly wicked
as the evil bad guy, Col. Tavington -  I realize that atrocities happen in war,
but this guy is a mix of all the bad traits of Genghis Khan, Adolph Hitler,
Vlad the Impaler and Lizzy Borden rolled into one. No wonder the English press 
is up in arms over the way the Brits are depicted here.
Supporting cast is peppered with solid actors who help, thankfully, to flesh
out the background characters. Chris Cooper ("October Sky") gives credence as 
the embattled rebel commander, Col. Harry Burwell, who is struggling to defeat 
the enemy against enormous odds. Tcheky Karyo is amusing as the lead element of
French assistance to the American Cause. He's no one-man army, but provides the
needed wit against the French jokes delivered periodically through the film.
Tom Wilkinson gives his General Cornwallis a pompous arrogance of empire that 
rings true. Minor characters, like volunteer John Billings (Leon Rippy), add
dimension to the background cast. One false note is Joely Richardson in her 
vacuous perf as Ben's sister-in-law (and love interest), Charlotte Selton.
"The Patriot" is a mixed bag of a film. The tale is unoriginal and
unimaginative, but the depiction of the mundane story is handled in an
outstanding manner. The sheer force of the technical, artistic side of the
movie overshadows its trite tale of revenge. Even at 160 minutes long, I was 
visually entertained, at least, and I give it a B.
Producer (Mark Gordon) and screenwriter (Robert Rodat) of "Saving Private Ryan"
team up with the director (Roland Emmerich) of "Independence Day" on a tale
based on French and Indian War hero Benjamin Martin's (Mel Gibson) stand to 
keep himself and his family peaceful and safe during the American Revolution.
'Why should I trade a tyrant 3,000 miles away for 3,000 tyrants a mile away?'
he asks when declaration of war is being debated.  A recent widower with seven 
children ranging from pre-toddler to eighteen, Martin is also haunted by the 
brutality both endured and inflicted during his legendary heroics at Fort 
Wilderness, reminding less experienced men that 'this war will be fought
amongst us...your children will learn of it with their own eyes.'
His words turn out to be very prophetic, as the war can soon be viewed from
his South Carolina home's wraparound porch.  His eldest, Gabriel (Heath
Ledger, "10 Things I Hate About You"), who enlisted against his father's
wishes, crawls back into his home wounded.  The Martins and their free black 
workers tend the fallen from both sides of the battle, when Colonel Tavington
(Jason Isaacs, "The End of the Affair") arrives and instructs his men to
gather up the sticken British and massacre the enemy wounded.  Gabriel's
taken prisoner and his fifteen year old brother Thomas attempts to save him.
Tavington shoots the boy in front of his father's eyes.  Benjamin Martin
now has red-hot revenge burning in his brain.
First, Martin spirits a new legend, that of The Ghost, by slaying twenty
departing British officers (with the assistance of young sons Matthew and
Samuel,  the latter of which is traumatized by the event) in order to 
free Gabriel.  Then he forms a militia with the aid of his old friend Colonel
Henry Burwell (Chris Cooper, "October Sky") and Frenchman Major Jean Villeneuve
(Tcheky Karyo, "Addicted to Love"), claiming his son Gabriel in the bargain.
Martin's men are so successful, they capture the attention of General
Cornwallis (Tom Wilkinson, "The Full Monty") himself, whom Martin outwits
in a clever prisoner exchange gambit.  Cornwallis' pride is so damaged, he
orders the uncivilized and ungentlemanly Tavington to use any means necessary
to take Martin down.
Technically, "The Patriot" is first rate, featuring gorgeous cinematography
by Caleb Deschanel ("The Natural") realistic period design by Kirk M.
Petruccelli ("Blade") and costume by Deborah L. Scott ("Wild Wild West"),
although John Williams' score is forgettable.  Special effects include a
cannonball hurtling directly at the audience, brutal battle scenes and their
aftermath, and seamless matte shots - beautiful work.
Acting is a mixed bag.  While Gibson is good in the role it seems like a 
second rate William Wallace for him.  I for one am tired of seeing Gibson's 
tortured face as once again his character is called upon to endure unspeakable 
horrors, yet the man does convincingly play a heroic leader.  Heath Ledger 
acquits himself nicely as the son learning the complexities of his father and 
of life, although frankly, I found him more interesting in his teenage romantic
comedy debut.  Tcheky Karyo is always a pleasurable addition and his reactions 
to Gibson's French baiting lend a believable amount of levity.  Wilkinson is a 
fine Cornwallis.  Leon Rippy ("Stargate") is another good sidekick for Mel
as farmer recruit John Billings and Adam Baldwin has an interesting 'almost
cameo' as Captain Wilkins, an American loyal to the Brits.  The women don't 
fare as well, with Gibson's love interest, Joely Richardson (as his 
sister-in-law Charlotte Selton) delivering her lines as if she had marbles in 
her mouth and newcomer Lisa Brenner (as Gabriel's fiance Anne Howard) being 
far too modern for the period.  
The villain of the piece, Jason Isaac's Tavington, is a fatal flaw of
multiple dimensions.  Tavington is an unrelenting sadist whose only motivation
appears to be greed.  The actor was more than likely instructed to play
the part broadly, so fault lies more properly with the filmmakers who chose
to use every cliche in the book in making this film.  In a war fought by
thousands, it's a foregone conclusion that Tavington and Martin will come
head to head at every crucial moment until a climatic last stand.  Tavington
even gets a "Halloween" moment, 'rising from the dead' as soon as his opponent
drops his weaon (always the telltale sign).  It's sad to admit, but I was
hoping our hero was decapitated against the backdrop of an American flag just
to break the tedium of 'been there, done that.'  
"The Patriot" certainly isn't a bad film, just one that shows its commercial
molding all too blatantly.  Audiences who haven't been exposed to a lot of 
movies will more than likely enjoy it tremendously.  It has craftmanship of
the highest order in its look and sound and many scenes, particularly the
ones that take advantage of Gibson's comedic talents, play very well.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
"The Patriot" loyally rides strong in the first act. But becomes somewhat
disillusioned during the third and especially the second acts. Mel Gibson
fervently brings the father/soldier role to life.
In the 1770's, "retired" from the service, Mel is called to arms as a
Patriot, a supporter of a free America, to win the country from those pesky
British during our revolutionary war. A family man, he shrugs, "I'm a parent
... I don't have the luxury of principles."
There's a great deal of heartfelt father, son, family tension in the early
portion of the film, but all that gives way to blood, guts and the gory of a
very realistic wartime barbarity ... a sort of red, white and blue
"Braveheart." But as the body count mounts, the film changes its mind about
how it will portray killing. Eventually, the gory of war becomes the glory
of war.
Also a bitter mixture: the graphic seriousness of hand to hand, bayonet to
face field battles with corny throwaway humor. Though just a hand full in
number, these comic relief quips ... ring like laughter at a funeral. And
the schmaltz ... it's laid on maple syrup thick. I have a high tolerance for
melodrama, but this dose, tipped my strong stomach. One church/militia
recruitment scene breaks the schmaltz barrier and should have been cut from
the film.
Tough to swallow also, Mel twice uses the same shallow "trick" to fool red
coat officers. The first time it was cute, the second time, blatently
ridiculous in a film that strives to portray the revolutionary war
realistically. And the scene where these hungry war torn militiamen grimace
at the prospect of eating dog - just foolish. They're starving!
But you've gotta love Mel! When you see him there in the middle of South
Carolina, shots whizzing by, canons exploding, cotton wisping in the cold
cloudy sky like snow, riding a strong steed while clasping that gorgeously
unfurled 13-star United States of America flag ... you kind of forget about
all those years he spent in Australia. Preparing to rescue one of his sons,
Mel is absolutely savagely loving, brutally fatherly as he dashes through
the forest carrying an armful of muskets. That scene is beautiful.
Fantastically cast, Heath Ledger (of "10 Ten Things I Hate About You" fame)
gives a steadfast performance as Mel's number one son. Also contributing in
the acting department, Chris Cooper (who usually plays the jerk-dad,
"American Beauty") is commanding in perhaps his only good guy role this
year. And of course, the fight scenes are careful, powerful, stunning, and
quite realistic.
It's a big film, two and a half hours. You'll leave feeling like you've just
watched a mini-miniseries.
The Patriot. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Chris Cooper, Tcheky
Karyo, Jason Isaacs, Tom Wilkinson.
Directed by Roland Emmerich.
Written by Robert Rodat.
Produced by Dean Devlin, Mark Gordon, Gary Levinsohn at
Mutual/Centropolis/Columbia.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
Starring Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Jason Isaacs, Joely
Richardson, Tcheky Karyo, Chris Cooper and Tom
Wilkinson
As a revolutionary war hero in The Patriot, Mel Gibson
provides another macho man performance for Hollywood
audiences. You know the type: his shirt is always
shredded, his face always scarred, he has a soft spot
for his loved ones and a "to kill" list for his
enemies. Oscar-hungry director/executive producer
Roland Emmerich did not intend to, but he made the
stereotypical action hero for the 18th century. As
Gibson delivers lines like, "Before this war is over,
I am going to kill you," Schwarzenegger in Commando or
Stallone in Cobra immediately come to mind. Oddly
enough, The Patriot is as much an epic
three-hour-tear-fest like Gladiator, as it is a
ninety-minute guilty pleasure. At times absorbing, at
others enjoyably insipid, this is good, bloody Summer
fun. 
I probably would have despised this film had it not
been released over the July 4th weekend. Some of the
images are so zealously Americanized (the flag is used
as a lifesaving weapon for example), that Independence
Day seems the only appropriate time of year to
wholeheartedly accept it. Like Emmerich's ID4, this is
obvious propaganda where the Americans are the hapless
underdogs motivated by freedom for all. Sure it's
predictable and melodramatic, but for a moment after
leaving the theater, I was dumbfounded with
patriotism. And isn't that the point of The Patriot? 
Gibson plays Benjamin Martin, the lionized French and
Indian War veteran, who, at the beginning of the film,
is emotionally suffering after his loving wife passed
away. He is left to father seven children at his South
Carolina estate along with black servants (not
slaves!). As the Revolutionary War rumbles miles away,
Martin swears to keep his family close and away from
the battlefields. But when the oldest son enlists
anyway and another is murdered by a wicked Redcoat
colonel (Jason Isaacs), Martin quickly decides to save
the day (or save the fate of America as presented by
Emmerich). Forming a band of aggressive farmers and
using guerilla tactics considered unfair in the art of
war, Martin becomes the number one target of the
British Army. 
The best parts of The Patriot are the scenes in which
Martin and his rugged militia men outsmart the British
armies left and right. Every time the farmers attacked
the unsuspecting enemy, to see the disbelief on
British General Cornwallis' (Tom Wilkinson) face was
priceless entertainment. And as the tension gradually
formulates with the running time, a final battle is
inevitable. 
As for the numerous battle scenes, they are expertly
done. Clearer and more realistic than those of
Gladiator, the gruesome images are what give this film
an R rating. You really get a sense of how warfare was
performed during that time period. Everything is
performed in an orderly (but still quite gory) fashion
- one side shoots, then the other side, then the
remaining soldiers charge. It's organized, strategic
and, according to Martin, ineffective. There is a very
interesting contrast between the traditional battle
style and Martin's take-no-prisoners method. 
What drives Martin to these supposedly unfair actions,
are the originally brutal tactics of Colonel
Tavington. Played wonderfully by Jason Isaacs,
Tavington is the type who loves to glare down from his
horse at civilians, who nervously avoid eye contact.
This character is viciously evil; he kills women and
children and then laughs about it on the way home;
even his eyes are evil. His portrayal has sparked some
controversy in Britain, some claim that he falsely
represents his countrymen as "cowardly" and
"sadistic." I disagree with this accusation. Tavington
does not represent his country; his unnecessary
executions shock his own colleagues and even anger his
General. Besides Tavington, the Redcoats remain stick
figures that are neither glorified nor patronized. And
stick figures make the easiest enemies in these kinds
of movies - why give the audience a reason to love the
bad guys? Heck, why not spend the entire film glossing
up the good guys?
The Patriot is three hours of fictional fireworks.
With an action hero seeking revenge and a comic book
villain ready to take him down, it's a Lethal Weapon
for the colonial times. God Bless America! And God
Bless The Patriot!

Author
Steve Rhodes
In the American Revolutionary War, even a boy's toy soldiers had a part
to play.  When Benjamin Martin's son is murdered by a British soldier,
Ben uses his son's metal soldiers as material for bullets to avenge his
son's death.
THE PATRIOT by Roland Emmerich (INDEPENDENCE DAY) is a stirring and
unapologetically patriotic film.  Rather than trying to tell the whole
story of the war, it concentrates on one man's struggle and on the role
of the militia.  Within this limited scope, it succeeds handsomely.  Its
only shortcoming is that the final cut includes too much fluff and minor
romances.  At a half-hour shorter, its impact would have been
dramatically heightened.
When we first meet Ben (Mel Gibson), a widower with 7 children and a
veteran of the French and Indian Wars, he wants no part in the
revolution that's brewing all about him.  A South Carolina farmer in
1776, he's called to the assembly to vote on a resolution for their
state to join in the struggle.
Ben argues convincingly against South Carolina's participation in the
conflict.  "An elected legislature can trample a man's rights as quickly
as a king can," he points out.  When it becomes clear that the vote will
go against him, one of his friends asks about his principles.  "I'm a
parent," Ben reminds him.  "I haven't got the luxury of principles."
Mel Gibson delivers an understated but strong performance, bringing
humanity to a role that could easily dissolve into caricature.  With his
convincing expressions of grief and dedication, we empathize with his
plight.  In contrast, another of this summer's would-be action heroes,
George Clooney (THE PERFECT STORM), was so wooden in his delivery that
we didn't care what happened to his character.
After Ben's second son, Thomas (Gregory Smith), is shot in the back by
the story's chief villain, an eminently hissable Col. William Tavington
(Jason Isaacs), Ben enlists in the cause and fights along side his
eldest son, Gabriel (Heath Ledger from 10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU).
Coming to be known as "The Ghost," Ben leads a rag-tag band of militia
in skirmishes with the British that don't follow the gentlemanly rules
of engagement.  Back then wars were extremely organized slaughter.  Each
side formed neat lines like two kindergarten classes on their way to
recess.  When the respective lines met, each side stood upright and
proud, while shooting and being shot at.  In contrast the militia snuck
around in the swamps and hid behind trees, which wasn't the way true
gentlemen were supposed to play the game of war.
Meanwhile, back at the front, the regular Continental army finds the
large and well-trained British about to win the war.  "These rustics are
so inept, it nearly takes the honor out of victory," say the pompous and
supremely confident leader of the British troops, General Cornwallis
(Tom Wilkinson from THE FULL MONTY).  "Nearly," he adds cockily.
Much of the action concerns the atrocities committed by a British
colonel and his men against our civilians, including women and children.
The most horrific of these is the torching of a locked church full of
non-combatants.  There is also a scene in which our side commits some
atrocities in retribution.
The film includes many a rousing scene as when Ben picks up Old Glory to
rejuvenate soldiers on the verge of retreat.  The music by John Williams
(STAR WARS) is strong and effective but never overwhelming.
The movie whets our appetite for more movies about the Revolutionary
War.  It is, arguably, the most important time in our country's history
but, sadly, one of the most ignored by filmmakers.  Maybe, just maybe,
this picture will inspire the creation of many others about this period.
One can hope.
THE PATRIOT runs 2:44.  It is rated R for strong war violence and would
be fine for teenagers.  Given the low test scores of our teenagers on
American history, they should all see this movie.  Besides teaching
them, it might encourage them to learn more about this era.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
