Title
Review for Leprechaun 3 (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1995. Director - Brian Trenchard-Smith, Screenplay - David Dubos, 
Producers - Jeff Geoffray, Walter Josten & Henry Seggerman, Photography 
- David Lewis, Music - Dennis Michael Tenney, Visual Effects - Kim 
Bailey, Mechanical Effects - Frank Ceglia, Makeup Effects - Atlantic 
West Effects (Supervisor - Gabe Bartalos), Production Design - Ken 
Archele. Production Company - Trimark.
Warwick Davis (The Leprechaun), John Gatins (Scott), Lee Armstrong 
(Tammy Larson), Caroline Williams (Loretta), John De Mita (Fazio the 
Great), Michael Callan (Mitch), Marcelo Tubert (Gupta), Tom Drugan 
(Art), Roger Hewlett (Tony)
Plot: The remains of the leprechaun are sold to a Vegas pawnbroker and 
accidentally revived. A shilling from its pot of gold passes through the 
hands of various people in one of the casinos. Its' ability to grant the 
possessor's wish is discovered by accident whereupon it immediately 
becomes sought the greedy and ruthless. But to each the leprechaun gives 
a sadistic death as it fights to get its shilling back.
Brian Trenchard-Smith is an Australian director, the greater part of 
whose output could be best described as hackwork. In between churning 
out episodes for Australian-shot US tv series like `Time Trax' (1993) 
and `Mission: Impossible' (1988), he made a variety of undistinguished 
films such as `Turkey Shoot' aka `Escape 2000' (1983) and `BMX Bandits' 
(1983). However tucked in between this are a couple of quite decent 
small films that show Trenchard-Smith capable of promise - the subtly 
effective children's film `Frog Dreaming' aka `The Quest' (1986) and the 
near-future satire `Dead-End Drive-In' (1986). Following 
Trenchard-Smith's migration to the US in the 1990s, his output has 
consisted mostly of production-line tv movies. But with 1994's amazingly 
silly `Night of the Demons 2', Trenchard-Smith jumped on the post-`Elm 
Street' camp horror bandwagon. This approach was clearly enough to net 
Trenchard-Smith directorship of not only `Leprechaun 3' but also its 
immediate sequel `Leprechaun 4' (1996).
As with the other films in the series, `Leprechaun 3' is a lame attempt 
to spin out another `Elm Street'-styled horror franchise with a boogey 
man despatching an array of victims amid bad puns and cartoonish gore 
set-pieces. The typically gimmicky showcase despatches get pretty silly 
- one victim turned into a human one-arm bandit uncontrollably spilling 
coins out of his mouth; a killer android/mannequin torso electrocuting a 
victim during sex. And in the most amazingly silly effect that one has 
quite seen on screen in some time, Caroline Williams gets her wish for a 
perfect figure which, before being blown up, is transformed into a butt 
and set of breasts so big she is unable to turn around.

