Title
Review for Hand That Rocks the Cradle, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Annabella Sciorra is three months pregnant when her gynecologist
moves.  A new gynecologist is recommended to her.  When she goes to her
first appointment he sexually molests her.  She files a suit against him
and when she does four other women also file suit.  The doctor commits
suicide when he hears about it.  His widow, Rebecca DeMornay, is also
pregnant and she loses her baby due to a miscarriage because of stress.
DeMornay feels that Sciorra and her husband Matt McCoy are responsible
for the loss of DeMornay's baby.  Six months later, Sciorra is putting
in a greenhouse and has trouble building it and taking care of her new
baby so she puts an advertisement in the newspaper for a nanny.
DeMornay answers the advertisement under a false name and gets the job.
The reason DeMornay takes the job is to try to take Sciorra's family
away from her.
     THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE is a suspense film, not a horror
film.  It is not very gory and, like ALIEN, mostly relies on suspense
to carry you through the film.  On a zero to five scale I give THE HAND
THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE a five.  It is rated R for  female nudity, adult
situations, adult humor, violence, and explicit language.
     Before I went to see THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, I had heard
mixed opinions on the film from my friends ranging from, "It's wonderful
go out and see it" to "It's a piece of trash don't bother."  I am happy
to say that after seeing the film I give it a "It's wonderful go out and
see it."  I highly recommend that you go out and see this film, but head
out to the theater early, because I went to the late showing (around
9:30 PM) and ten minutes before show time the show was sold out.
     Rebecca DeMornay (who has been in many films including RISKY
BUSINESS, the made-for-cable film BY DAWN'S EARLY LIGHT, and most
recently BACKDRAFT) is the main star of the film.  She has the most
interesting, and most three dimensional, character in the film.  She has
to make the children like her, while still getting her revenge on
Sciorra's character.  She is the evil presence that the audience isn't
supposed to like.  And in the film when DeMornay gets punched the
audience in the showing I went to applauded.
     Annabella Sciorra plays the mother of the children.  She has to
put up with all the problems that start to occur after DeMornay shows
up.  Her role was played down, probably so DeMornay's would stand out.
And Matt McCoy (the new man in POLICE ACADEMY 5: ASSIGNMENT MIAMI BEACH
and POLICE ACADEMY 6: CITY UNDER SIEGE) plays Sciorra's husband.  His
conflict in the film, is that he has to resist DeMornay's tempting to
leave Sciorra.
     Ernie Hudson (a ghostbuster) plays a mentally-slow person who is
working at McCoy and Sciorra's house.  He is doing outside work like
putting up a fence, and painting the house.  He is the person that the
audience is supposed to like the most, or at least I did.  I feel that
his character was the best written and really got the audience to feel
for him the most.  The film doesn't in anyway put down mentally retarded
people, but instead puts out the message that they are people and have
rights too.
     The director, Chris Hanson, did a good job picking camera angles
and the lighting for the film.  He can make even a daylight scene feel
spooky, something that not all directors can do.
     So, see this film, in the theater, for it will not be as spooky on
a television screen.
