Title
Review for Adventures of Huck Finn, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
     Huck Finn (Elijah Wood) is a young lad with a penchant for getting
into mischief.  He spends the bulk of his days playing truant from
school, getting into fights, and lying to his two female guardians
about how he got black eyes.  One day, Huck's drunken, good-for-nothing
father (Ron Perlman) arrives and takes his son away with him, looking
for a way to get his hands on $600 left to Huck by his late mother.
Huck escapes from his father's clutches, and, in the company of a
runaway slave by the name of Jim (Cortney B. Vance), sets off on a
journey by boat down the Mississippi with the eventual goal of getting
Jim's freedom.  Along the way, the pair meets a number of interesting
people and become involved in several adventures.
     Whenever a book is adapted into a movie, there are sacrifices and
interpretations that must be made because the totality of the written
work cannot possibly be translated to the screen.  The choices become
even more difficult when the work is one as widely-read and
well-beloved as Mark Twain's THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.  In
the case of this latest filmed version, Stephen Sommers' script is
faithful in spirit--if not in all the details--to the original.  Much
of Twain's keen insight into human nature, as well as his finely-tuned
sense-of-humor, is kept intact in Disney's 1993 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCK
FINN.  It should be noted, however, that significant chunks of the
novel are missing--including the bulk of the ending--and the character
of Tom Sawyer doesn't make an appearance.  While it's easy to debate
the merits of what was cut, the final result manages to convey a good
sense of some of the book's scope
     Family films are something of a scarcity, and those that fit into
the category of "good entertainment" even less common.  THE ADVENTURES
OF HUCK FINN is one such rare movie.  Very young children may be a
little frightened by some of the violence in the film but, overall,
it's an excellent choice for a family's night out.  As is true of the
book, there are many levels on which the story can be enjoyed.
Children will like the adventure, but there's plenty to keep adults
engrossed as well.  Much of the wit will certainly go over the heads of
younger viewers, as will the clever characterizations of several of the
people who cross Huck's path.
     Young Elijah Wood shows enough aptitude to carry this film.  Once
he puts on the suspenders and the attitude, he is decidedly convincing.
With good supporting performances by Jason Robards as The King and
Robbie Coltrane as The Duke, the acting in THE ADVENTURES OF HUCK FINN
is without problems.
     One of the things that impressed me the most about this movie is
the realism of the river scenes.  Of necessity, less of the movie takes
place on the Mississippi than in the book, but the river remains an
important part of the plot and the cinematography is notable.  It's
genuinely awe-inspiring, and a little frightening, to see a giant
steamboat bearing down on a little raft, and the scenes on the sinking
boat are handled expertly.
     Disney has a reputation for watering down subjects that may cause
controversy.  HUCK FINN is a story with a single major issue--that of
slavery--at its core.  Unlike the book, the movie never uses the word
"nigger" (it's an omission that's not particularly noticeable and
certainly less offensive), but that's about the only thing that's
obviously sanitized.  The evils of slavery are shown--rather
graphically, at times--and it would be wrong to assume that THE
ADVENTURES OF HUCK FINN doesn't have a social agenda.  Also displayed
with frankness is the brutality of Huck's father.  Other versions have
toned this down, but Sommers' script is, in this instance, completely
faithful to the book.
     Some will doubtless argue that this latest updating of the story
of Huckleberry Finn didn't need to be made.  Regardless, the 1993
version of HUCK FINN is an entertaining and worthwhile movie experience
with a solid story to please just about everyone in the family.  It's
not a milestone motion picture, nor can it be considered the definitive
adaptation of Twain's work, but, on the whole, it deserves some
recognition and credit.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jean Yves Desbiens
     I was ready to hate this movie; imagine a story on slavery,
hypocrisy, child abuse, Mark Twains legacy reduced to a pile of
harmless cliches by the great civilising influence ;-) of Disney.  But
this was not the case--I actually liked this movie.  I had not read the
book, but knew about its dark moments and talked with people who had
read it before seeing it.  Since it is based on a well-known book that
I haven't read, I will take for granted that they haven't changed the
story, save some cleaning in language; those in know will soon correct
me if I am wrong.
     There are some problems with this movie: the acting of the main
characters is sometimes a bit forced, the kid that plays Huck seems to
be camera-conscious, the dialogues are squeaky-clean (Disney label
picture), and of course the word Negro is not used by anybody in this
movie even though it would have been heard all the time in its
timeframe (but it is seen many times on a poster so they didn't go for
total PC).  The characterisation of the characters is also weak, but is
mainly because the book could hardly fit in a 1-hour 45-minute time
slot (this is already as long as any kid is expected to stay put for a
movie).  A "greater" more adult movie adaptation of the book would last
at least 2 hours and 30 minutes and seeing as the main actor is a
child, not many adults would want to see it and no child could see it.
Still, the movie seems a bit rushed.  Indeed the action never stops a
moment even when the situations would call for such a pause--no time
for grieving in this film.
     So what is good about this movie?  Well, actually it's the
identification of us with the child, his desire for liberty, to play,
to live and not have to worry about violence and other things, but
being confronted with it nevertheless.  Indeed, Huck is the rebel
within us all, the one that would want to just drift down life's river
without a care, doing as he pleases, but there are cares down this
river, choices have to be made and dangers circumvented.  Indeed, it's
implied by the book and movie that the search for freedom is not easy
and that our freedom and safety may come at the expense of others.
Last but not least, freedom from society is harder to accomplish than
merely running away from it; it permeates everything and always seam to
catch up with us along the way; its better to face the facts and rid
our minds off those ideas implanted in it and it is that that really
permits Jim, the slave that Huck has befriended to be finally free.
Jim goes against all the stereotypes that pervaded that era:  he is
physically powerful, but gentle and with a subtle way of putting his
idea across, he longs to be free (but won't rebel openly), he will wait
for the right time to continue his journey.  Jim is like the
Mississippi River, powerful but gentle, trapped within its banks until
rain comes and it spills over the banks.  The Mississippi, in fact, is
the main character in this movie--it's never very far away.
     As for performances, King played by Jason Robards is great, Huck's
father also turns in a great show in his evil ways, the kid that does
Huck is most of the time good; as for Jim played by another actor that
I don't remember the name of, his acting is uneven but still decent, as
is all the cast.
     Yes there are philosophical undertones to the movie (or is it just
me? :-)), but as the title suggests, this movie is at its base an
adventure towards a place where freedom and dreams lies down a mighty
river with the countless dangers of human nature spread along the way.
As such, it works pretty well, as I already said; the compression of
everything in so little time pretty much makes it a non-stop ride with
humour and danger stalking every step.  And to my great relief, the
pipe-smoking Huck is still there (there will be outcry about that one I
am sure).  This film is violent but unlike other movies it is not
graphic.  People do get hurt and even our heroes gets hurt--violence is
not glorious here; it is a sort of disease that pervades the whole
area, it's apparent that this is the case (an
America=gratuitous-violence allusion is even made as a sarcastic
joke).  That is why I think this movie, while violent, sometimes scary
for kids, is highly recommended by me for them, even adults who will
want see a nice adaptation of a classic book can enjoy this movie.
     So recapitulating, this is a movie parents should be taking kids
to.  It is violent, scary, but also humourous, action-filled, and even
thought provoking.  Ideally, parents should set up this movie before
viewing with some explanations about what was going on (but this is
probably to much to ask); a discussion should also follow the viewing,
answering the many questions the children will certainly have about
what they have seen.  I know that this demands some effort and that
TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES demand no efforts at all (although there
the violence is seen as a fun thing if you see through their ninja oat
mumbo-jumbo), but this will be rewarding.  The theater was filled with
kids and their parents when I went there and there was very little
talking by them (5-15 years mostly).  Imagine, 400 kids riveted for an
hour and forty-five minutes; it is not an easy feat.  This movie should
do well if the reaction to this preview is any indication--even
applause at the end!  As for the adults, find the child within and you
will enjoy Huck Finn, I sure did (but I read rec.arts.disney so I am
biased :-).
Rating on a scale of one to ten: 9 for kids, 7 for adults.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This is a reasonably faithful
     adaptation of what may be the great American novel. Although
     whittled down from the intricate novel, this version will
     entertain kids and adults.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     As unlikely as it seems, the great novel of Spain is a burlesque about
a madman who anachronistically thinks he is a knight.  DON QUIXOTE is a
novel you can read at nearly any age.  It is simple enough to enjoy at age
ten and as you grow it becomes more and more sophisticated.  England's great
story for all ages is ALICE IN WONDERLAND.  In the United States we also
have our story for all ages.  It is not even a stand-alone, but is the
second book in a series that also includes boy detective stories.  Yet THE
ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN--often considered to be the finest American
novel ever written--is a book you can read and enjoy at ten or at sixty.
Disney Studios has adapted the picaresque novel into a fairly entertaining
adventure film.
     For those lucky people who still have their first reading of
HUCKLEBERRY FINN ahead of them, here is what the story is about: The setting
is the pre-Civil War South.  Huck (played by Elijah Wood), the wild adoptee
of two old women, is kidnapped by his real father, a violent alcoholic.
Huck escapes to the Mississippi River and runs into runaway slave Jim
(played by Courtney B. Vance).  They strike up a partnership made uneasy by
Huck's conscience telling him it is wrong to help a slave escape.  The novel
tells of the strange people they meet during their escape and of Huck's
growing respect for Jim.
     This version, while occasionally adopting modern values, is actually
fairly accurate to the novel, though the character Tom Sawyer has been
written out.  Wood as Huck is an odd casting choice since he seems too young
and cute.  Ron Perlman, who played a gentle beast in the television series
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, plays a not-so-gentle monster as Pap Finn.  Younger
children may be frightened by Pap's drunken rage.
     The recreation of the Old South seems fairly authentic.  Bill Conti has
written a striking orchestral score.  This production, like the book, can be
appreciated at nearly any age.  I rate the film a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
