Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
Number of Reviews
29

Author
Jesse Kaplan
Cast:  Nicholas Cage, John Cusack, John Malkovich, Steve Bushemi, Ving
Rhames, Colin Meamy and a bunch of no-name Cons
Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer
Directed by Simon West
Is this the sequal to THE ROCK?  Thats what I was wondering as I first
saw the trailers for this movie.  I mean, Jerry Bruckheimer, the mad
producer and Nicholas Cage action star.  Apparently thats what he wants
us to believe.  Segal, Ford, Stallone, Willis are all getting older so
why not a new one.  Well, I don't know if Cage can be that guy.  With
CON AIR, he comes off looking like a dirty old redneck who is trapped in
one of his earlier films, RAISING ARIZONA.
Cage (THE ROCK, LEAVING LAS VEGAS) stars as Cameron Poe, an imprisoned
man going home to his family after eight years in the big house.  You
see, Poe is one of those Movie heroes who is perfect in every regard.
He was in jail because he defended his wife from some thugs and
accidentally killed a man.  On his way home, aboard a plane, The
Prisoners of whom he was travveling with take control of the plane and
he is forced to react back.
        The Cons are lead by Cyrus "The Virus", a man so deadly he has
diseases named after him.  I'm not sure hwy all the prisenors started
listening to him aboard the plane, I could actully smell the bad breath
from the auidence.  Anyway, they take over the plane and Cage is a good
guy up there who must stop them.
        On the ground, FBI agent Vince Larken (John Cusack, CITY HALL,
GROSSE POINT BLANK) is trying to salvage the plane.  While another fat
guy agent (Colin Meamy) wants to blow up the plane.
        What to say about CON AIR?  You know exactly whats going to
happen the whole way.  This is a predictible noisy thriller.  Where THE
ROCK had great acting, an exciting plot and great editing, CON AIR has
neither.  Malkovich is not convincing nor Cage.  Cusack gives one of the
few good performances in this flim.  Another good one goes to Steve
Bushemi (PULP FICTION, FARGO), whom I always like, as a Hanibal Lecter
charachter.  He gets all the best lines.
        CON AIR has some good scenes no doubt, but the main reason it
falls is beacuse you have seen it all before.  Forget this film and go
see AIR FORCE ONE for some real terror in the skies.
        For some good laughs, decent action and John Cusack's
performance, I give this film **1/2.  It's Rated R for graphic language
and violence.


Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
Fro more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Every summer Hollywood rolls out the latest batch of mega-movies, upping 
the ante each year with better special effects and bigger explosions. 
After months of promotional bombardment, we dutifully trot to the 
theaters, becoming more jaded with each cinematic thrill ride. What a 
headache it must be for the West Coast big boys as they try to figure out 
how to top themselves. 
For Jerry Bruckheimer, producer of the utterly superficial and enormously 
successful flicks TOP GUN, CRIMSON TIDE and THE ROCK, the answer is 
simple. Hire a group of extremely well-respected character actors, give 
them large injections of testosterone, take a story that barely even nods 
at credibility, then press the accelerator to the floor for two hours and 
blow the hell out of anything that moves. The result is extremely 
entertaining and utterly vapid; a hoot of a summer movie that succeeds 
because of its own excess. To paraphrase an old Cheech and Chong bit, CON 
AIR is shit, but it's good shit. 
CON AIR works because the filmmakers are acutely aware of just how 
ridiculous their movie is, and they let us in on the joke. Early in the 
action/thriller about a group of convicts who hijack a prison transport 
plane, we meet the bad boys. As each convict makes his grandiose entrance,
 reproachful prison officials read their names and stats in the same 
fashion announcers use during Pro-Wrestling introductions. There's 
Diamond Dog (Ving Rhames,) murderer and Black militant. Johnny 23 (Danny 
Trejo,) a serial rapist who adds another heart-shaped tattoo for each new 
victim. Garland Greene (Steve Buscemi,) a soft-spoken Hannilbal Lecter 
clone, and a host of other larger-than-life monsters. The group's leader 
is Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom, a glib psychopath played with extreme gusto 
by John Malkovich. Alone, any of these characters would make a memorable 
villain. Together, they create a riotous sense of overkill. Watching 
these guys is like visiting a Manson Family reunion.
Now for the good guys. A pumped-up Nicholas Cage plays Cameron Poe, a 
celebrated Army Ranger finishing a prison term for killing a man while 
defending his wife. Cage anchors the film beautifully, using his RAISING 
ARIZONA accent and a single-minded fixation on doing the right thing at 
any cost to create a corn-pone Superman. Cage's Poe has the deadly 
earnestness of Gregory Peck and the fighting skills of Bruce Lee on 
steroids. The combination is absurd, but set next to the planeload of 
scenery-gnashing bad guys, he seems positively normal. While Poe tries to 
sabotage the hijacking in order to assist a friend and rescue a female 
prison guard, corrections officials on the ground work on damage control. 
Colm Meany, the great dough-faced Celtic actor from STAR TREK:TNG and 
DEEP SPACE NINE, plays a blustery D.E.A. agent battling John Cusack, a 
liberal U.S. Marshall trying to use reason to defuse the situation. 
Eventually, Cusack joins forces with Cage for the requisite battle to the 
bitter end with Malkovich and his cronies.
Along the way, CON AIR lobs a staggering barrage of violence, explosions, 
stunts, and fight scenes, including a whale of a set piece involving a 
sports car. The pace is frenetic, and could have easily become enervating 
were it not for the crisp, witty dialogue. As silly as CON AIR's story is,
 the script is sharp, with clever one-liners judiciously placed 
throughout the action. Cage, Cusack and Malkovich are particularly adept 
at delivering wisecracks at just the right moments.
CON AIR's combination of over-the-top action and off-the-wall humor works 
well for most of the film. Bruckheimer doesn't know when to quit though, 
and drags things out a wee bit too long, with a gratuitous battle in Las 
Vegas. As a former resident of Las Vegas, I'm delighted with Hollywood's 
fixation on blowing up the town, but CON AIR's Vegas battle comes several 
minutes after a scene that easily could have served as the climax of the 
film. There really was no need for yet another battle and besides, MARS 
ATTACKS blew up Las Vegas much better. 
I've avoided giving many of the particulars from CON AIR because it's 
much more fun to see this sort of thing yourself. If you're looking for a 
film of substance, avoid this machismo-fest at all costs. If, however, 
you want to see a hyper-violent, funny, patently absurd movie virtually 
intoxicated on its own cheekiness, try CON AIR. You'll never mistake it 
for art, but as far as summer movies go, this is a pretty effective 
thrill machine.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Simon West
Writer: Scott Rosenberg
Starring: Nicolas Cage, John Malkovich, John Cusack, Ving Rhames, Steve 
Buscemi, Dave Chappelle, Colm Meaney, Mykelti Williamson, Danny Trejo, 
Rachel Ticotin
We all know the mother of all mindless action pics is NOT "Speed," but 
the great "Die Hard."  Not the sequels, the first one.  It was fun, 
action-packed and had an outrageous plot, filled with an invincible, 
wise-cracking hero was shot several times, beaten up by Germans, and 
still lived to get in the limo with his ex-estranged wife.  Not that it 
was totally mindless.  It had some logic to it.  But most of all it was 
fun.
Most films in this little sub-genre (including "Speed," "Passenger 57," 
and "Under Siege" - "Executive Decision" doesn't belong her, it was too 
believable and thoughtful and had little physical action) pretty much 
blow (I'm sure "Speed 2" is gonna suck).  But "Con Air" gets that right 
pitch of fun-filled action with huge lapses in logic and a great, witty 
screenplay from Scott Rosenberg (of indie fame - "Beautiful Girls" and 
"Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead).  He makes it so fun to listen 
to them shoot out one-liners that when there are long lapses in action, 
it's just a thrill to watch them shoot them out - not that the 
dialogue's anywhere near that of Tarantino, they're in totally different 
sub-genres.
This would be crap if it weren't for the direction of Simon West, a 
newcomer, who handles the film with the exact approach it needs.  The 
film KNOWS it's stupid and moronic, and it plays that up in a gleeful 
way.  He creates wonderfully silly action sequences that had me 
laughing.  One scene in particular is when the star, Nic Cage, fights a 
convict to the death in the hull of the plane when he's found out who he 
is.  He first tells the con to put down the bunny he bought for his 
daughter who he is going to see later on, but the con doesn't put it 
down.  They fight, Nic kills him and then says "Why didn't he put down 
the bunny?" or something like that.  Another shot that is hysterical is 
after the cool plane crash at the end, the cops are in there searching 
for survivors and find this one guy who was handcuffed to a bar.  The 
shot shows the guy dead, leaning against the wall with his arm still 
hanging from the handcuffs.  They pull the corpse away and the arm still 
stands there unmoved.  Clever shots like this make "Con Air" worth the 
admission.
The plot is hilariously ridiculous: a plane transpoting cons is taken 
over by the cons, led by the gleefully insane Cyrus the Virus (John 
Malkovich, in his best kind of roles, as wacky villains).  But on the 
plane is Cameron Poe (Nicolas Cage) who served 8 years in a 
pennitentiary for killing man in self defense while protecting his 
pregnant wife.  He has never seen his little girl since he didn't want 
her to see him around all these mean convicts and he is looking forward 
to getting home.  So he wants to use his military training to try to 
stop the cons from escaping to Mexico and killing all the innocent 
guards.
Among the cons, other than Cyrus, are: Diamond Dog (Ving Rhames), who is 
a rascist black militant who wrote a popular book and could get on 
Geraldo if he wanted to; Johnny 23 (Danny Trejo), a rapist with a flower 
tatoo for every woman he's raped ("I'd be Johnny 600 if they knew the 
whole truth!") and has his eye set on the female guard (Rachel Ticotin); 
and Garland Greene, "The Marietta Mangler" (indie uber-god Steve 
Buscemi), who is a Hannibal Lector-esque man who theorizes that he's not 
crazy but those of us who work for 55 years, go into retirement and wind 
up in a nursing home are the true crazy ones.  Also on board is 
Cameron's cell-mate (Mykelti Williamson, completing the whole "Forrest 
Gump" parody since Cameron's from Alabama), who needs his shot of 
insulin or he'll die...but all the needles are broken.
Above all this is Nicolas Cage who, when I first heard about it, seemed 
dreadfully miscast.  He's an Oscar winner who turned to big-budget 
action pics after his "Leaving Las Vegas" role, which he did perfectly. 
 But I'm glad he's picked good action pics so far.  So great as the 
dorky guy in "The Rock," he at first seems awkward as a muscle-bound 
action hero who beats up deadly convicts and runs from fireballs.  But 
he's so convincing that this soon disappears.  He handles Cameron's 
character with style and makes him a soft-spoken man with a lot going on 
inside. But his hick accent kinda drifts into the hick parody of his 
H.I. character in the Coen Brothers' awesome "Raising Arizona."
Also great is John Cusack, who usually doesn't do this kind of fare, but 
he signed up because of the cast and the cool script.  He's not wasted 
but he has an expendable character.  He makes the most of it, playing 
what was sort of like Nicolas Cage's role in "The Rock."  He's no action 
actor, but he does do a great run scene you'll dig.  And brit actor Colm 
Meaney is one hell of a great jerk, with his real name serving as a nice 
little joke.  (hah hah - you don't have to laugh, it was a bad joke, I 
know)
And John Malkovich is gerat as the main villain.  He commands the film 
nicely and steals every scene he's in.
The thing to admire from "Con Air" is it doesn't even attempt to oust 
"Die Hard" from its throne, but puts some nice twists on an old sub 
genre.  I reccomend this to anyone who likes good dumb action pics.  
It's certainly one hell of a ride, albeit a stupid one.

Author
Kristian M Lin
        There's a detail near the end of "Con Air" that epitomizes
everything that's right and wrong with the movie.  The bad guys have crash
landed their plane on the Las Vegas Strip, and some of them commandeer a
fire truck to make good their escape.  U.S. Marshal Vince Larkin (John
Cusack) chases after them on a police motorcycle.  He shoots at them with
his gun until he runs out of bullets, upon which he, like many other
action heroes, throws his gun away.  He then catches up to the truck,
leaps aboard, grabs a hatchet, chops a hole in the roof of the cab and
tells the driver, a convict named Swamp Thing (M.C. Gainey) to pull over.
Swamp Thing just laughs at him.
        Now, if Larkin had been thinking like a regular person, he would
have held on to his empty gun and pointed it at Swamp Thing to get him to
pull over.  But this being an action movie, that wouldn't have been any
fun.  So, without his gun, Larkin has to grab a fire hose, poke it through
the hole in the roof and blast Swamp Thing into oblivion with it.  You
have to admit it's a nice visual.
        "Con Air" begins when Cameron Poe (Nicolas Cage), who killed a man
trying to rape his wife, receives his parole from prison.  He hitches a
ride aboard a plane loaded with insanely violent criminals.  Of course,
the criminals take over the plane, and Poe does his best to thwart their
plans.  Meanwhile, on the ground, Larkin figures out that Poe's a good guy
and tries to convince his colleagues of that before they blow the plane
out of the sky.
        It's easy to point out "Con Air's" many flaws.  Director Simon
West stuffs action into every frame until the movie wears on you.  Scott
Rosenberg's script tries way too hard to be hip and funny ("If you say
anything, the next wings you see will be on the flies buzzing around your
rotting corpse," a villain says rather tortuously).  The movie spends too
much time building up its bad guys, and there's so many of them that they
create a nightmare of loose ends.  The hero's got a family to come home
to, but he stays on the plane to keep the male guards from being killed,
the female guard from being raped, and a diabetic convict friend of his
from dying.  All this raises the film's B.S. quotient sky high.
        Still, I enjoyed this picture more than I expected to, and it has 
a lot to do with the cast.  Cage once again manages to play a virtuous
paragon without cloying.  Better still is John Malkovich as Cyrus "The 
Virus" Grissom, who becomes the prisoners' ringleader.  This movie shakes
Malkovich out of his recent torpor (see "Mary Reilly" or "The Portrait of
a Lady") and lets him unleash his ferocious side.
        On the downside, the brilliant Cusack in a cliched role becomes a
self-righteous bore (a quality he displayed, and sent up, in "Bullets
Over Broadway").  Steve Buscemi is all wrong as a psycho killer - his
criminal characters (in "Reservoir Dogs" and "Fargo," among others) are so
memorable because they try so hard to make sense out of everything.  This
actor shouldn't be unhinged.
        Anyway, it isn't likely that you'll go into "Con Air" with too
many illusions.  It's an action flick that fulfills one's modest
expectations.

Author
V. B. Daniel
     Okay, here's the deal. 'Member back in kidhood when you saw an ad
during Saturday cartoons for some fab-o new toy? This
fill-in-the-blank, whatever it was, had the right-on dig-o-rama. It
was flashy, shiny, cool. It did backflips, shot sparks, spun like a
top, made rattatat noises, had kung fu grip. The  fresh-scrubbed kids
in the commercial -- all freckly-faced and chipper -- looked like they
were having  the time of their lives playing with it. The announcer
was all frothy and screamin', "Be sure to get the
fill-in-the-blank today!" 
          Well, you'd go absolutely batcrap to get that dang
fill-in-the-blank. You'd whine and carry on, pitch a
peemortal fit or three. You'd drop oh-so-subtle hints to your parents,
like, "Momma, I just GOTTA have a fill-in-the-blank!" You'd drag her
through the store like a wrecker pullin' a Taurus, 'til you could plop
her in front of the shelf, so she could see exactly what the box
looked like and its exact location on the shelf. And, she'd try to put
you off with, A) "Save your allowance..." B) "Maybe for your
birthday," or , C) "We'll see...." (I always detested, "We'll see....)
Then finally, some interminable eon later, you got it! The
fill-in-the-blank! After all the hullabaloo, the  fill-in-the-blank
was finally in your hands! And you played with it. And, without fail,
the fill-in-the-blank  turned out to be a big gyp. It broke, it didn't
fly, it didn't make the same sounds it made on TV. You didn't have
freckles and you weren't all that chipper. And, now, you were stuck
with it. 
          My dear patients, that's exactly how I felt last night when
I left the theater after seeing Con Air, Paramount's float in the
summer blockbuster parade. I'd seen trailer after trailer for the
thing, not realizing I was being duped with the same marketing finesse
that made the fill-in-the-blank so appealing years ago. And, by
criminy, all I was left with was a box of 180 dB explosions and an
empty shell of a movie. No spinnin' tops, no shootin' sparks, no kung
fu grip. Batteries not included. 
          Nicolas Cage stars as Cameron Poe, a prison parolee being
transported with a batch of the most heinous criminals on Planet
Reebok. The nare-do-wells (surprise!) hijack the plane to escape. And
 the only way Poe can prove he's not a heinous criminal himself is to
 stop this merry band of goons. Simple, huh? 
          We get the standard creepy turn from John Malkovich, this
time as criminal mastermind Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom. If you saw In
The  Line Of Fire, you've caught Cyrus the Virus. His name was
different in that film, but it's the same person.
          Super-cool Ving Rhames (Pulp Fiction, Mission:Impossible) is
second-in-command Nathan "Diamond Dog" Jones. And, oh, yes, Steve
"Where's the Orthodontist" Buscemi plays Garland "The Marietta
Mangler" Greene, a Lecter-wannabe (whose character never kills anyone
in this movie, by the way....). I love how movie prisoners always have
a nickname that ends up in quotations; even when it's spoken, you
 just want to do that arms-up-two-fingers-of-each-
hand-scratchin'-in-mid-air-universal-symbol-for-
quotations-sort-of-dealie. 
          Add to this mishmash one John Cusack, as U.S. Marshall Vince
Larkin, and you've got a very promising action thriller, bigger and
better than The Fugitive or The Rock. Right? 
          Wrong. In fact, this drivel should not even be within
spittin' distance of the moviehouse. The Nickster, doing some funky
Elvis-Rosco P. Coltrain-Dukes-of-Hazzard voice, is buffed up and oily,
he sports a nice long hair weave, and has the most consistent T-shirt
sweat-stains since Bruce Willis in Die Hard. But, despite his
Nickness, which is always so fun to watch, he does not make this movie
great. In fact, he's merely the man that keeps this cinematic upchuck
from getting my dreaded DEAD ON ARRIVAL rating. 
          You pull Cage out of the pot, and you've got a relentless
storm of car wrecks, plane wrecks, and other gas-induced explosions,
peppered with silly murders and absolutely the lamest dialogue this
side of Godzilla 1985. This is producer Jerry Bruckheimer's first film
without his late partner and friend of the  working girl Don Simpson,
and it really makes one wonder exactly who the brains of that twosome
really was. Bruck-man can go over the top with the best of them (and
here, WAY over the top), but it's simply mindless violence for the
sake of the legendary "Summer Slam Action Flick." Unlike his last year
winner, The Rock, there's no attempt to balance the gunpowder with a
little wit, thought, and common sense story structure. 
          And, while we're raking over Bruck-man, let's point out
something else here. Con Air marks his pattern of pulling directors
from the ranks of TV commercials. (The Rock's Michael Bay, Top Gun's
Tony Scott, Flashdance's Adrian Lyne all got their start puking out
small-screen harpies for Madison Avenue.) I have no doubt that this
man Simon West could direct a feature movie, but, somehow, I get the
feeling that  West was only doing what he was told to do instead of
putting his own stamp on the movie. I find it hard  to believe that a
first-time director chose to not tell any sort of story. No, gentle
readers, this thing smells of Bruck-man telling West, "I said
EXPLOSION, not EXPOSITION." 
          Sorry, West and Bruck. You let your testosterone get the
better of you this time. You'll probably make a small mint from the
Bang Junkies who get off seeing Las Vegas blow up, but, as for making
a good movie, you missed the trick completely. C'mon guys, don't
forget: some assembly required. 

Author
David Wilcock
Here we have another trashy Jerry Bruckheimer film. And to be honest, it's
very dull, and not too exciting. This is not because there are no explosions
and stunts, it's just the fact that we've seen it all before!
The story is nearly exactly the same as Execuitve Decision, and Turbelence.
Cage plays Cameron Poe, who's going back to see his wife and kid after being
in prison for killing a man while defending his wife. So, he gets on a plane
home. However, this plane is also transporting nasty, horrible, cliched
villians, who, NO!, take over the plane. Didn't see that coming, did you?
So, Cage is now fighting for his life against these nasty crimnials. On the
ground, a 'fed' is trying to get him home safely, (played by John Cusack)
while Colm Meaney just wants to blow the plabe out of the sky.
The thing is, we've seen it all before, so it's dull, dull, DULL! If you're
looking for trashy rubbish with no oringinality however, you could do worse
than this. However, I can't really recommended it. It's just another dumb
action film!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Welcome to the silly season.  It's summer, and every weekend
brings a new hundred million dollar action movie.  (Some price tags
being slightly less.)  Serious movies avoid the heat of summer when
people's brains are fried.  This diminution of mental capacity causes
movie goers to flock to blockbusters promising even louder explosions
than the film the week before.
     Producer Jerry Bruckheimer, whose middle name must be "excess,"
last year gave us THE ROCK.  Remember the car chase in it that felt
like it was on a Moebius strip and would never end?  Well, that was
subtle filmmaking compared to the fireworks style extravaganza that
ends his latest picture CON AIR.  Of course, that part is set in the
town that loves people who overindulge -- Las Vegas.  The worst part of
the conclusion is that when you breathe a slight of relief that this
repetitive and overly long film is finally over, it isn't.
     But I am getting ahead of myself.  As one who has sat through CON
AIR, it is easy to dwell on the ending credits since that means you can
leave.  Still, along the way, Scott Rosenberg's script does have many
good one-liners to amuse us, and CON AIR works best as a comedy.
You've seen all of the stunts and special effects before so there is
little left to focus on other than the acting, which stays at the comic
book level, and the dialog.
     I kept thinking that if their budget were cut in half, they would
have made a better picture.  If the special effects department were put
on a much stricter budget, the show might have had to develop the
characters beyond caricature.
     A frequent complaint about movies is that the villain is not
strong enough, but here the movie is populated by a plethora of bad
guys.  "The worst of the worst" prisoners are being transported on the
a U. S. Marshal's airplane, which the inmates nickname Con Air (Convict
Airlines), to a new maximum security prison.  The U. S. Marshal in
charge is Vince Larkin (John Cusack from GROSS POINTE BLANK), who
quotes Dostoevski and talks like a walking thesaurus.
     The hero of the picture is Cameron Poe played by Nicolas Cage, the
great character actor from LEAVING LAS VEGAS who seems to be slumming
by taking this part.  Eight years ago, ex-Army Ranger Cameron killed a
man trying to harm his pregnant wife Tricia, played with fashion model
beauty by Monica Potter.  Cameron is about to be paroled and is
hitching his way back on Con Air for his release.
     This flight is transporting every manner of criminal including a
Hannibal Lecter clone named Garland "The Marietta Mangler" Greene,
played by Steve Buscemi in a horrible bit of miscasting.  One con tells
us that "the way he killed the people, he made the Manson Family look
like the Partridge Family."  Get the point.  These guys are bad, bad,
bad.  Or as Cameron puts it, "Somehow they managed to get every creep
and freak in the universe on this one plane."
     The leader of the convicts, Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom, is played
by John Malkovich in his perennial slime ball, intellectual role.
"Cyrus is a poster child for the criminally insane," according to
Larkin.
     As the plane is being loaded, Larkin assures his coworker that
there is no reason to worry about the operation.  "This is a well oiled
machine," he tells her.  "All we have to worry about is stale peanuts
and a little bit of turbulence."  For the three people in the world who
haven't seen the trailers and know nothing of the movie, this line is a
tip off that all hell is about to break loose.
     If you want to have fun in the picture, bring a pad and keep a
count of the story's illogical aspects.  My favorite involves the
number of guns the guards take on board the plane to protect
themselves.  Want to venture a guess?  It's one little pistol that the
pilot keeps in a locked box in the cockpit.  When the inevitable break
occurs in mid-air, the lack of guns becomes a severe handicap for the
guards.  But boy-oh-boy do lots of people die anyway.
     In order to appeal to women, the movie was supposedly softened up
by Cage's adding little family touches like his stuffed bunny.  (At a
key point, Cyrus actually threatens Cameron with "Make a move and the
bunny gets it!")  Disney is marketing the film's almost non-existent
love story angle in an attempt to broaden the demographics of the
audience.  Even religion enters the picture when Cameron tells his
dying buddy, "I'm going to show you that God does exist."
     Like a roulette player that plays it safe by betting on all the
numbers, this movie does not miss anything.  Did I mention that there
is a transvestite named "Sally Can't Dance" (Renoly), a black militant
named Nathan "Diamond Dog" Jones (Ving Rhames), and a tattooed rapist
named John "Johnny 23" Baca (Danny Trejo)?  Johnny has 23 counts of
rape but brags the real number is 600.
     Although I had fun listening to the dialog, the show is pure
balderdash and about as imaginative as Saturday morning cartoons.  A
rock 'em, sock 'em, meaningless time at the movies.
     CON AIR runs 1:55.  It is rated R for strong violence and
language.  The violence was cartoonish enough so that the film is
probably acceptable for most teenagers.  I cannot recommend the show
although I did laugh often enough to give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) In a Newsweek story, Jerry Bruckheimer, producer of
Con Air, said that, after reading an earlier version of the script, he
insisted that the movie be more character driven. David Ansen, the
Newsweek reviewer, said that he couldn't detect the subtleties of the
characters through all of the loud explosions.
This particular outing is about an escape. A group of America's worst
criminals are being flown to a new, state-of-the-art jail. Oh, and
Cameron Poe is also on the flight. He's being released to go home to
his wife and daughter. Two of the cons manage to unlock their cuffs,
free the rest of the prisoners, kill most of the guards, and hijack the
plane. Cameron Poe decides to help bring the plane down and return the
criminals to captivity which entails many fights, shooting and of
course, explosions
One scene stood out as an interesting quirk. The entire movie takes
place on or near this airplane. There is very little opportunity for
car crashes.  But one is worked into the script where a body is
jettisoned from the plane and lands on a car. The movie didn't require
that we see the body land; in fact the scene is an interlude, isolated
by the elevator music soundtrack; and just for kicks, three or four
cars crash into the car onto which the body has fallen. You gotta
admire the ability to include a car crash scene into a movie that
doesn't call for it.
John Malkovich was good as the evil leader of the escapees. I almost
wonder if his talents are being wasted, but this seems to be the sort
of role that he takes most often, so I suspect he likes it.
At the end of an action movie, the bad guy has to die, and he has to be
doing something so awful and unrelentingly that he deserves it. Con Air
makes a mistake at the end of the movie by making the villain's death
unnecessarily gruesome. We don't really feel sorry for him, but by the
time he was staring death in the face, he wasn't fighting back
anymore.
Producer Bruckheimer knows what he's doing. He's the man behind Top
Gun, Crimson Tide, The Rock, and now Con Air. His formula is rather
simple:  testosterone, loud rock music, cool explosions, a little plot
here and there, and voila: a summer blockbuster.
One idea that Bruckheimer's been toying with recently is including a
dweebish, bookish young man in the mix and making his masculinity
really show through. In The Rock, Nicolas Cage was more of a scientist
than a mercenary, but he's put in a tough circumstance where he has to
become a mercenary to survive. In Con Air, that role is filled by John
Cusack. Cusack is an upper-middle manager in the prison system, but he
gets some hands-on experience with escaped convicts by the time the
movie's over.
I must admit that I had fun watching this movie, as I did watching all
the other Bruckheimer movies, but it's not a great movie. It may not
even be a good movie, except that it's fun.
Even so, there is something about Jerry Bruckheimer movies that leaves
me feeling a little slimy. First, there is a certain macho, military
point of view to all of his movies. Somehow male posturing is linked to
patriotism in a Bruckheimer film and I have to disagree. There's more
to patriotism than blowing up enemies of society.  And second, the
problem in all Bruckheimer movies is a man (or men) with too much
testosterone, and inevitably, the solution is more testosterone.  I'm
not saying a more feminine attitude would make a better action movie,
but the idea that the solution to violence is more violence is
disquieting.
But that's what we can expect from Hollywood in these June scorchers,
and given the genre, Con Air is okay.
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Chuck Dowling
Con-Air (1997) *1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Nicolas Cage, John Malkovich, John
Cusack, Steve Buscemi, Ving Rhames, Colm Meaney. Don Davis. Written by:
Scott Rosenberg. Directed by: Simon West. Running Time: 115 minutes.
Sometimes I just don't know what's worse: a movie that's bad from start to
finish, or a bad movie which every once in a while shows a moment of
creativity, but then returns to being bad. "Con-Air" falls into the latter
catagory.
The plot, if you can call it one, is childishly simple. Convicts take over a
prison plane and attempt to escape to a foreign country. Good guys try to
stop them. That's it. The film's main hero is Nicolas Cage, a former US
Ranger who was sent to jail for accidentally killing a punk who was
attacking him and his wife. (I guess that jail sentence was to send a
message out to all people that accidentally killing a drunken hoodlum while
defending your family WILL NOT BE TOLERATED!) This of course is merely just
a gimmick to have a "good" guy on the plane when it gets hijacked. It just
so happens that Cage is being paroled, and is just trying to return home to
his wife and daughter.
The criminals who hijack the plane are John Malkovich, who plays Cyrus the
Virus. His nickname is unjustified, as he never does anything to seemingly
serve such a nickname. His assistant is Ving Rhames, who plays Diamond Dog.
His nickname is unjustified, as he never does anything to seemingly serve
such a nickname. Along the way they are joined by another criminal, Steve
Buscemi, who plays the Marietta Mangler. His nickname is unjustified, as he
never does anything to seemingly serve such a nickname. I think you can see
a trend here.
The problem with "Con Air" is that it must have been written by a four year
old. The "Oh Come On!" factor is high with this one, as more of the movie
progresses you'll want to actually jeer the stupidity running rampant on the
screen. There's not one new idea or concept here, and every cliche is beaten
to hell, and then some more. For example, any movie where criminals hijack
an airplane or an airport, do you think the main bad guy will sarcastically
use flight attendant phrases, such as: "Enjoy your flight" or "Welcome
aboard Con-Air"? What makes the whole thing infinitely more frustrating is
that while this four year old was writing the script, apparently his folks
would wander into the room and scribble a decent line of dialogue or a brief
moment into the script. Then they'd wander off again to let the little one
finish his little story.
The characters are one of the most disappointing things about the film. For
no reason whatsoever, the writer gave Nicolas Cage's character an accent,
and Cage decides to do a very slight variation of his "Raising Arizona"
character's accent. This distracted me for the whole film, as all I could do
was remember how good "Raising Arizona" is, and how retardedly stupid it is
for this character to have a pointless, sometimes unintelligible accent. The
last part of the film winds up in Las Vegas, and imagine that! Nicolas Cage
is in Las Vegas! Can he do a movie not in Vegas?
John Cusack, who for some reason made this film yet completely trashes this
type of film in interviews, is completely wrong in the part of a US Marshall
(!). But, his character is worthless, and really has no bearing on anything.
He's given a nemesis, a DEA agent (Colm Meaney), who's only purpose is to
argue with Cusack. These two men argue about how things should be handled,
who's tougher, blah blah blah, which only made me wonder why the government
assigned two different agencies to this prison transfer but didn't bother to
give anyone control of the situation.
Malkovich is just doing a slightly more maniacial version of his bad guy
from "In The Line of Fire", which again distracted me because all I could do
is remember how good "In The Line of Fire" was. His character also isn't
extremely bright. He hides all the plans for the hijacking in his old jail
cell, which are immediately discovered (and amazing decoded by Cusack in a
matter of seconds). The problem is that these are papers, which could have
easily been ripped up and flushed. But instead he just casually hides all
this important evidence, which instantly lets the cops know what to do. A
brilliant criminal indeed. Also, I can't watch Malkovich much because he's
always giving interviews about how he doesn't really like films and would
rather be in the theater.
Buscemi's character holds the most promise, as he gets a truly great
entrance scene. Unfortunately as it turns out, his character - a mass
murderer - turns out to be nothing but comic relief. A funny serial killer.
His character's final scene, the last shot of the film, is supposed to be a
big joke. But when you see it, really think about it. Is it really funny? If
it happened near you, would you find it hilarious or be scared to death?
What a total waste of potential there.
Amazingly the most sympathetic and crucial character of the film is a
stuffed bunny rabbit. No, I'm not joking. Cage is bringing it home for his
little girl, and you'll notice that throughout the film that this bunny
rabbit is the basis for the film's turning points, as well as a basis for
unintentional hilarity. Get this... at one point to threaten Nicholas Cage,
Malkovich actually picks up the toy, holds a gun to it, and in all
seriousness says "Stay back or the bunny gets it". Please feel free to throw
the remainder of your soda at the screen when this happens. I guess the four
year old thought it was hilarious.
After a slow opening 20 minutes to set the story, "Con-Air" is non-stop
action. But it's so unoriginal and uninspired that you'll want it to stop.
Also, I don't know what the director has done in the past, but he should not
have been allowed to shoot or edit action sequences. The spastic and rapid
fire editing makes "Natural Born Killers" look like one big tracking shot,
as every time action takes place it's like looking at a cartoonist's
flipbook of completely random images. It's much too noisy, as bullets fly,
things explode, AND heavy score music blasts the audience all at once. If
there was any dialogue in there, I hope I missed it. I guess one other big
problem is that there's a false sense of urgency about capturing these guys.
They don't have some sort of master plan to cause great harm to people,
they're just trying to get to the Carribbean or wherever there's a
non-extradition treaty. Nothing in the script was well thought out.
"Con-Air" is a total disappointment. Hopefully others can recognize its
insulting stupidity and it will fade quickly from the summer movie scene.  [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Last year around this time, moviegoers were treated to a loud, explosive,
big budget summer blockbuster called "The Rock."  Produced by Jerry
Bruckheimer and Don Simpson, the film featured some big-name stars, a
no-name director, and a plot concerning a bunch of terrorists making life
difficult for our hero, Nicolas Cage.  This summer, following the death of
partner Simpson, Bruckheimer is flying solo, bringing us a loud, explosive,
big budget action flick that features some big-name stars, a no-name
director, and a plot concerning a bunch of convicts making life difficult
for our hero, Nicolas Cage.
Sounds like a can't-lose formula, doesn't it?
Whereas "The Rock" was an intelligent, exciting, noisy piece of
entertainment, "Con Air" is just plain noisy.
What "Con Air" is missing, first and foremost, is Sean Connery, whose
dignified presence grounded "The Rock."  "Con Air" has an impressive
line-up of stars, but not one of them can fill Connery's shoes.
John Cusack, as U.S. marshal Vince Larkin, tries his best, but his
character--an "annoying, wise-ass bookworm creep"--is too fresh faced and
frantic to bring this picture home.  Colm Meaney plays a real meaney of a
D.E.A. agent, Duncan Malloy, whose sports car license plate reads "AZZ
KIKR."  Both want to bring the plane down, Larkin safely, Malloy with
extreme force, so there's plenty for them to bicker about on the ground.
Then there's the fleshed-out roster of killers, rapists, and general
threats to society onboard the massive C-123 transport plane that's
transferring them all to a maximum security prison:
John Malkovich, as Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom, the leader of the piece, who
likes to brag that he's killed more men than cancer.  It takes more than a
shaved head and a few snappy one-liners to play the embodiment of evil.
Malkovich plays it for laughs, but his obvious asides ("Welcome to Con Air"
and "Thank you for flying Con Air," for example) grow tiresome quickly.
And after all, Connery's often-imitated "Welcome to the Rock, gentlemen"
sounded so much better with a Scottish brogue.
Ving Rhames ("Striptease," "Rosewood"), as the militant Diamond Dog,
doesn't have much of a role.
The hatchet-faced Danny Trejo is Johnny 23, so named because of the number
of women he's raped.  He's featured in a particularly vile scene, in which
he threatens to make Rachel Ticotin's prison guard number 24, all in the
name of cinema.
And last but not least, Steve Buscemi plays the Hannibal Lecter-inspired
sociopath Garland Greene, replete with leather face mask and ironic
observations.  Buscemi actually gets the most frequent flyer mileage out of
his character simply by playing it straight (if you're familiar with
Buscemi's work, you'll know that's not easy).  As the cargo plane crash
lands on the Vegas strip, Buscemi's character is singing "He's Got the
Whole World in His Hands," proving beyond a doubt his psychotic tendencies.
Yes.  For Buscemi, that's pretty straight.
As someone in the film astutely observes, this motley crew of undesirables
makes the Manson family look like the Partridge family.
Then there's Cage, as parolee Cameron Poe.  Poe's heading home to meet his
wife and daughter after serving an eight-year sentence for manslaughter,
the result of some necessary roughness outside a bar and a feeble defense
lawyer.  Poe gets to stow his carry-on luggage with Grissom's gang, and you
just know he'll have more to worry about than "stale peanuts and a little
turbulence."  (Speaking of "Turbulence," the smug "Con Air" arrives even
later at the gate than that absurd '96 flightfest.)
Cage has an interesting filmography, including a recent Oscar-winning
performance in "Leaving Las Vegas."  He's had his greatest moments playing
oddball characters such as H.I. McDonough in "Raising Arizona"; the bitter,
passionate baker in "Moonstruck"; and a cockroach-eating bloodsucker in
"Vampire's Kiss."  Although his flagrant shirtlessness in "Con Air" proves
that he's buff-enuf to play an action hero, it seems a pity to waste his
unique talents on this kind of pap.
In "Con Air," a lot of things blow up, and blow up some more.  After about
two hours, the explosions, shootings, explosions, wise-cracks, explosions,
and intrusive sentimental interludes get very boring.  While assuredly
market wise, "Con Air" is significantly less than Rock-solid.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, John Malkovich, Ving Rhames, Steve
Buscemi, Mykelti Williamson, Rachel Ticotin, Colm Meaney, Danny Trejo,
Nick Chinlund, David Chappelle, M.C. Gainey Director: Simon West
Screenplay: Scott Rosenberg
There must be a good reason to justify mass destruction and excessively
loud noise on screen. People will not warm to pure special effects and
explosions which dazzle the eye like fireworks in the sky. So what
better than to introduce a weather beaten, unfairly punished, tortured
hero (Cage), who has served seven years in a penitentiary, for defending
his honour and protecting his wife.
Years pass as quickly as the sands of an egg timer, and soon our hero
has finished his sentence, and is aboard a plane carrying the convicted
to their release destinations or to their new prison home. He must
survive the journey of his life aboard 'Con Air' -
'Convicts-Onboard-No-smoking-And-Intellectual/Irreverent-Ratbags'.
It is the eve of his daughter's seventh birthday, and our hero will do
anything, and I mean literally anything, to be able to give his child a
birthday present in person. That is, of course, unless he gets waylaid
by other honourable deeds, such as finding an insulin syringe for his
best friend who is about to lapse into diabetic ketoacidosis, or
preventing the rape of a female law enforcer.
Such honour is certainly lacking amongst our assorted passengers,
ranging from the petty pick pocket, to the numeric rapist; from the
politically-incorrect racist, to the intellectually well-achieved mass
murderer, and of course a Hannibal Lector persona for added variety.
Just as we all have different styles of reviewing movies, this rat-bag
assortments of waylaid souls, intermingle to create a symphony of
destruction in the hi-jack of the decade.
Some petty quirks and misdemeanours to point out. Diabetics who have not
eaten the entire plane flight, will more likely develop hypoglycaemia
(low blood sugars, before coma) than acidosis (high blood sugars, before
coma). To which our hero, should be looking for jelly beans and not a
syringe full of insulin. According to this movie, singing has life
changing effects on the psychotic and mentally ill. Who knows? I guess
anything is possible if you survive a plane crash in the middle of
Vegas.
Comment: 'The Flight of the Repeated Offender.'

Author
James Sanford
         Turn down the bone-rattling Dolby Digital soundtrack of ``Con
Air,'' and you'll hear the sound of the assembly line that produced
it.
  It's taken years to refine the process of building a
blockbuster and the ``Con Air'' team don't deviate from the standard
procedure. After all, originality might get in the way of the
pyrotechnics.
  The formula is thus: Cast actors with a bit of box-office
clout, such as Nicolas Cage, John Cusack and John Malkovich; hire a
director (in this case, Simon West) smart enough to shoot each
explosion with several cameras, so it can be shown multiple times from
different angles; find a script with all the depth and complexities of
a coloring book. And ``Action!''...
  ``Con Air,'' which is much better produced than it is
written or acted, spins a wild and wooly yarn about a
prisoner-transport plane that's hijacked in mid-air by the
inmates. These cunning cons are helpfully described by one officer of
the law as being ``the worst of the worst,'' and in Scott Rosenberg's
screenplay, each of the primary heavies comes with his own tagline.
  For instance, leader Cyrus ``the Virus'' Grissom (Malkovich,
all but sleepwalking) is ``a poster child for the criminally insane.''
The crimes of Hannibal Lecter wannabe Garland Greene (Steve Buscemi)
make ``the Manson family look like the Partridge Family.'' Militant
Nathan Jones (Ving Rhames), aka ``Diamond Dog,'' wrote an
autobiography and ``they're talking to Denzel about the movie.''
  Also onboard is Cameron Poe (Cage), an ex-Army Ranger who
has served his time and is supposed to be on his way home to his
ever-loving wife (Monica Potter). Looking startlingly pumped-up and
sporting locks that would make Michael Bolton envious, Cage reverts to
a ``po' folks'' accent and drops phrases like ``makes no never-mind''
to assure us that Poe is true-blue, despite his sordid
surroundings. Convention dictates that Poe will end up serving as a
double agent, appearing to assist Cyrus and company while secretly
betraying them.
  West's shoot-it-in-slow-motion style owes more to MTV than
to director Sam Peckinpah, who pioneered it and knew the key to using
undercranking effectively was to employ it sparingly. West simply
doesn't seem to have any other technique.
  Fresh moments in ``Con Air'' are few, although there's an
inspired bit of sick humor incorporating a falling body, bird
droppings and Percy Faith's Muzak masterpiece, ``A Summer Place,'' as
well as an odd nod to exotica, in the form of a Hispanic transvestite
passenger (played by the androgynous Renoly), who takes time out from
shooting cops to vogue about in a form-fitting sun-dress.
  The rest of the movie is less concerned with pushing the
boundaries of its genre than in pushing the buttons of its audience,
something West and Rosenberg do surprisingly well: For all its
calculation and predictability, ``Con-Air'' should appease the
action-starved. The picture delivers most of what it promises,
although unlike the first two ``Die Hard'' movies or ``Terminator 2,''
there's no extra spin on the material.
  In fact, Rosenberg doesn't waste a minute on building
Cusack's character, ground-bound U.S. Marshal Vince Larkin; as a
result, Cusack, who often gives his roles an eccentric edge, can do
little in this film except run from fireballs and duck when flying
debris comes his way.  Dumpling-cheeked Irish character actor Colm
Meaney (``The Commitments,'' ``The Snapper'') is squeezed into the
thankless role of a braying DEA stooge.
  Compared to Disney's action extravaganzas of the past two
summers, ``Con Air'' has none of the suspense of ``Crimson Tide'' or
``The Rock,'' although it does get off the ground faster than either
of those predecessors. As some would say, if you like this sort of
thing, this is the sort of thing you'll like.

Author
Nick Schaden
        I have to admit, I'm always wary of big budget, "blockbusters".  From
the previews, "Con Air" did look a little too polished.   However,
mainly because of the star power, I went, and I'm glad I did.   But
first:
        "Con Air" is the story of a nice young US Army Ranger Cameron Poe
(Nicholas Cage) who gets in a drunken brawl protecting his wife (Monica
Potter).   Poe kills a man during the brawl, and gets hauled off to jail
for several years.   Finally, Poe is released on parole, but to get back
home he has to hitch a flight with the absolute most meanest, sickest
criminals in the world (hence the name "Con Air").   As you can probably
guess, the plane is overtaken by the evil criminals (played notably by
John Malkovich, Steve Buscemi and Ving Rhames), and of course, the only
man that can stop it? Bad boy Cameron Poe.
        If you notice a sense of cynicism in that last paragraph, you're
right.  In short, the biggest weakness of "Con Air" is that the movie is
just too polished and too predictable.   Poe seems to get out of
situations in the usual "just missed that explosion" kind of fanfare,
and as always (a classic action movie clich) the bad guys are too evil,
too smart, and the guards and cops are just too stupid.  To boot, the
film's final sequence (a crash in the middle of Las Vegas) pushes the
boundaries of reality more than most action movies.
        But wait!   All is not lost.   What puts this action movie above much
of the pack?  First, the acting and characterization. While the southern
drawl does sound fake, Nicholas Cage easily fulfills his role as action
hero, and the supporting cast (while canned as "sell outs" by many other
critics) works wonderfully.   Furthermore, in many other action  movies,
we get characterization of only the main villain, with the rest of his
henchmen playing  little more than cannon fodder.    However, in "Con
Air", director Simon West fleshes out not just  Malkovitch's character
(the leader of the cons) but also takes time for the supporting cast too
(Buscemi, Rhames and others).
        Second, the movie is so slickly put together that the action seems to
naturally fall into place, and the movie has a fast pace that seems to
allow my previously mentioned problems to be less of a burden.  All in
all, while I know the movie suffered through one too many action movie
clichs, and a not-so-original plot, "Con Air" flies with finesse and
style, a quality that can't be found in many other action flicks.

Author
Cameron Shelley
Con Air is a strange marriage indeed. It combines the criminal
chic movie recently updated by Quentin Tarrantino a la
Reservoir Dogs and Pulp Fiction with the heroic but tragically
mistreated military man brought to us only last year in
Bruckheimer's The Rock. How can you put together a basically
moral, sympathetic hero with a bunch of America's worst
criminals and have the audience like them all, all at the same
time? The answer, as Con Air shows, is to just do it - embrace
the incongruities!
The plot centers around the misfortune of one Cameron Poe,
an ex Army Ranger, who is sent to the bighouse for killing a
man who attacked his pregnant wife. So unfair!!! After serving
his time, Poe is loaded onto a US Marshalls Service flight for
transport home. As chance would have it, that flight is also
filled with some of the worst criminals currently warehoused
in the US prison system - all on their way to a new
mega-maximum security facility. Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom
leads the cons in revolt and takes over the plane. Poe's
homecoming is irrevocably delayed!
The plot setup for this film is certainly its worst element. A
good deal of time is essentially wasted at the outset of this
picture, during which Poe's character is elaborated. Poe, of
course, is going to need lots of equipment for his flight, so he is
gifted with special training with the US Army Rangers (twice
decorated, if I recall), a very strong but easily bruised sense of
loyalty, and a secure place in society (his lovely family). An
eight year prison term brings him completely up to spec. Each
of these details is laboriously presented and remarked upon, as
if they might be difficult for the audience to understand. Such
an introduction, if better handled, would be appropriate for a
more complex character and I can't help but wonder if there
was originally some intention to make the movie a little more
suspenseful, to make Poe's choice of what to do on the plane a
little more difficult, but there is never really a moment's doubt.
Although Poe and his wife make a couple of remarks about his
"problem" - an overweaning pride or something - nothing
much materializes out of this particular thread.
The criminal mayhem wreaked by Cyrus and his many cronies
gets the movie up to action speed and maintains it for much of
the remainder of the picture. Each of the criminals set free on
the flight comes from a familiar mould. Cyrus seems to be
something of a cross between Jack Nicholson's Joker and the
Unabomber, and is brought to the screen via the standard John
Malkovich performance a la Mitch Leary from In the Line of
Fire. Garland Greene is an obvious imitation of Hannibal
Lector, although Buscemi wisely steers clear of outright
impersonation. You get the idea: a hit parade of murderers,
rapists, etc. Fortunately, each of these characters is played
knowingly and energetically and it is quite clear that no one is
taking them seriously. Even the long-suffering Poe, who could,
in theory, easily end up dead on this flight just shrugs as he
helps the cops and his friend get out alive, making only the
observation,
Funny how that happens! The various policemen chasing the
escaping cons also know their parts. Duncan Malloy is a rabid
DEA G-man whose solution to everything is fast cars and a hail
of gunfire, whereas Vince Larkin is the sandal-wearing
college-boy who quotes Dostoevsky but has a stout heart.
So, everyone knows which side of Con Air's bread is buttered,
and most of the movie is spent listening to amusing dialog and
observing the planes and bullets flying and stuff blowing up.
Perhaps to make up for its slow start, the movie concludes with
no less than three action-packed endings! First the plane
crashes at Lerner field, then it crashes again in Las Vegas, at
which point the action switches to a fire engine which then
crashes elsewhere in Las Vegas. The crashes are spaced out by
lots of chasing, fighting, gunfire and explosions. (Something
about Nicolas Cage and Las Vegas...I don't know.) Finally, there
is the inevitable and thankfully brief reunion between Poe and
his wife and daughter. Anyway, Bruckheimer has taken the
basic elements of the action picture and simply put more of
them on screen. The presentation is generally deft, efficient,
and effective, making Con Air a serviceable entry in the action
picture genre.
The action is interleaved with some occasional attempts at
suspense, as when Poe's true, good intentions are nearly
exposed in flight, and when Greene is given the opportunity to
murder a small child. Suspense aimed at Poe is brief and
quickly comes to nothing, whereas Greene's encounter with
the little girl threatens to wreck the tongue-in-cheek feel of the
whole movie. Fortunately, Greene does not murder the girl
and the whole episode is made subject of an awkward joke, but
it does serve to demonstrate the frailty of the movie's
understanding with the audience. As if to remind everyone of
this tacit agreement, the movie ends with Greene enjoying an
umbrella drink at a roulette table, followed by portraits of the
main cast members smiling for the camera as the credits roll.
"Just kidding, remember!"
In a recent interview, Nicolas Cage remarked that he did Con
Air because he feels he hasn't perfected the art of the action
picture. Well, Con Air certainly has more explosions, gunfire,
and chases than, say, The Rock (but "that's just a rock"), and
Cage plays a tougher character in this one. I'm not convinced
that such changes represent progress, however, even for the
action picture genre. Con Air is a competently professional
piece of work, but plays out a very thin and limited concept
without leaving Cage with any obvious avenue of
development. Mind you, if he does end up playing Superman
next year, he'll be able to endure even more insults and
explosions than he did in this outing.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Nicolas Cage comes up with an ingenious survival mechanism for his
role in the wink-and-a-concussive-nudge bombast-o-rama CON AIR.  The
opening credits sequence introduces us to Cage as Cameron Poe, a Gulf War
veteran convicted of manslaughter and serving eight years in prison after
an ill-fated bar-room brawl.  The prison scenes are accompanied by
voice-overs in which Poe, in a languid Southern drawl, describes prison
life to his wife back home and offers simple homilies for the daughter he
has never met.  If the scene gives you a tickle of familiarity, it
probably should.  Cage appears to realize that CON AIR is going to be
utterly dim-witted and ridiculous, and that he's going to have to do
something to keep himself entertained.  And thus he slips into a familiar,
surreal role as his own commentary on the proceedings -- Cage plays
Cameron Poe as a buffed-up version of RAISING ARIZONA's H. I. McDonnough.
     Cage should have known what he was getting himself into.  He got a
paycheck from Jerry Bruckheimer last year for THE ROCK, and if there's one
thing you can count on from a Bruckheimer production (even without his
late partner Don Simpson), it's that you can count on seeing everything
you saw in the _last_ Bruckheimer production.  The critical difference
between THE ROCK and CON AIR is Cage's performance.  In THE ROCK, Cage
appeared to be having the time of his life jumping into the action fray
for the first time.  That sense of discovery has been replaced by a wry
self-awareness.  While the plot of CON AIR finds Poe a parolee on board a
hijacked prison transport plane whose goal is just to get home, Cage's
goal is different but just as simple:  to get out of the film with some
measure of dignity intact.
     Audiences, too, should know what they're getting themselves into with
a Bruckheimer production.  In fact, the marketing people are counting on
it.  No one who loathed THE ROCK for its swear-grunt-blast repetitiveness
will be converted by CON AIR; no one who loved THE ROCK for exactly the
same reasons will be dissuaded.  Director Simon West (yet another TV
commercial auteur plucked by Bruckheimer from the advertising equivalent
of the Schwab's soda fountain) delivers exactly the kind of
adrenaline/testosterone cocktail which could launch an endocrinology
lecture (it's perversely appropriate that one sympathetic con spends most
of the flight nearing a diabetic coma; like insulin, CON AIR does the
work of a gland).  What he doesn't deliver is a moment of suspense.  A
Bruckheimer film has no use for Hitchcock's notion that showing you the
bomb under the desk creates a more interesting scene than just blowing up
the desk; a really, _really_ big desk and a really, _really_ big bomb will
serve the purpose nicely.
     If either West or Bruckheimer were interested in genuine tension,
they might have done something with CON AIR's creepiest set-up.  At a
desert stop for the plane-load of convicts, serial killer Garland Greene
(Steve Buscemi) wanders of into a trailer park where he meets a little
girl having a tea party in a drained swimming pool.  Their tete-a-tete is
eerie and menacing, providing a welcome shift in tone and giving Buscemi a
chance to stand out in a cast with too many villains (Danny Trejo, Ving
Rhames and a characteristically reptilian John Malkovich among them).  In
fact, CON AIR usually opts for too much of something when the tiniest
measure of restraint would have been an improvement -- too many 
characters, too much editing, too many dopey punch lines, too much of the
cheap, ugly appeals to machismo which characterize too many Bruckheimer
efforts.
     It is that kind of exhausting excess to which Cage is responding with
his detached performance.  While Malkovich goes for the outrageous and
John Cusack (as a U. S. Marshal) goes for earnest, Cage looks like he just
wants to go to sleep.  His recycled RAISING ARIZONA performance is a means
of escape, his chase after a stuffed bunny a continuation of his pursuit
of that big box of Huggies.  It doesn't bode well for Cage's appearance in
FACE/OFF later this month; perhaps he already realizes that all he can do
in action films is more of the same over and over.  There's a word for
people like you, Nicolas.  That word is called recidivist...repeat
offender.

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 45 minutes]
starring: Nicholas Cage (Cameron Poe), John Cusack (U.S. Marshal Vince
Larkin), John Malkovich (Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom), Ving Rhames (Nathan
"Diamond Dog" Jones); written by Scott Rosenberg; produced by Jerry
Bruckheimer; directed by Simon West.
Seen Friday, November 21, 1997 at 8 p.m. at the SUNY Morrisville STUAC Little
Theater (Morrisville, N.Y.) for $2, by myself. [Theater rating: **1/2: small
screen, worn film, good seats, average sound]
I think there's only one way to make an action film successful, and that is
to not present the story as something to take seriously and to incorporate a
sense of satire. In its most basic form, "Con Air" is just as mindless and
over-the-top as every other action blockbuster, but it follows this rule
perfectly and thus it works.
The film opens with a painfully generic scene we've seen countless times
before. The main character, Cameron Poe (Cage), a military officer, returns
to his Southern home to visit his pregnant wife, but gets into a bar-room
brawl that ends up sending him to prison. Although this might not be the best
way to set up the story, it's forgivable because it only lasts about 10
minutes. This is minimal storytelling, but at least it's not disguised
storytelling.
After seven years, Poe is released and sent home on a routine prisoner
transfer flight, but considering the movie's title, there isn't anything
"routine" here. And so, after the plane takes off all Hell breaks loose and
the prisoners, as lead by the vile Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom (Malkovich), and
Nathan "Diamond Dog" Jones (Rhames), manage to break free of their shackles
and over-power the guards through some violent, but surprisingly believable,
means. 
What's original is the fact the prisoners are quite clever and often funny.
They're not easy-to-hate villains as they have individual personalities. We
do get some one-liners here and there, but the things they say are pretty
funny. Also, they don't just blow away the guards and fly to freedom, they
have an intricate, detailed plan that doesn't require jargon and rhetoric to
be explained.
Once the film really gets in gear, it develops a tense atmosphere. Poe is a
likable character and we're hoping he'll return home safely, but the way
things go it doesn't seem like this will happen. The  scenario gives the film
a unique twist as we're almost hoping the prisoners will outsmart the
authorities, because if they don't, Poe will be shot down with the rest of
them.
Of course, in a movie like this there has to be the
other-hero-who-no-one-believes-has-figured-out-what's-really-going-on-until-it
's-too-late, and that character is U.S. Marshal Vince Larkin (Cusack).
Through a very uncanny method, Poe manages to get a message to Larkin about
the situation, but no one believes him and he has to take matters into his
own hands. It's surprising seeing Cusack here, but I believe his presence
just reinforces the satirical atmosphere. He manages to bring life to the
character, while adding suspense to the story, and yet he doesn't upstage
Cage (unlike the rivalry between Cage and Connery in "The Rock"). 
The majority of the film consists of the action it promises and delivers
well. The story isn't concerned with a general plot, but with many individual
sub-plots that each have their own build-ups and payoffs. This allows for
lots of shoot-outs, explosions, and out-running of fireballs, but the pacing
flows smoothly and the story always remains interesting. The satire is
consistent and provides for a  "self-aware" atmosphere, so we get lines like:
"I'm going to save the day;" "Somehow they managed to pack every freak in the
world on this plane;" and (after seeing a Corvette dangling from the plane by
a rope) "On any other day that might seem strange."
I'll admit "Con Air" isn't the most intelligent film ever made. Sometimes
the action is exhausting and the cliches are lame, but for the most part it
is enjoyable - and isn't that all we really want in a movie?

To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, John Malkovich, Ving Rhames, 
      Steve Buscemi, Mykelti Williamson, Rachel Ticotin, Colm Meaney, 
      Danny Trejo, Nick Chinlund, David Chappelle, M.C. Gainey 
Director: Simon West 
Producer: Jerry Bruckheimer 
Screenplay: Scott Rosenberg 
Cinematography: David Tattersall 
Music: Mark Mancina and Trevor Rabin 
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures 
     CON AIR, producer Jerry Bruckheimer's generic follow-up to 1996's 
blockbuster, THE ROCK, is the kind of motion picture that critics refer 
to when they moan about the "dumbing down" of American cinema.  This 
movie is a perfect example of what's wrong with many big-budget films 
today:  no characters, no intelligence, and, worst of all, little fun.  
Although director Simon West intends for CON AIR to be a comic book come 
to life, it lacks the visual flair and imagination of all but the most 
trite comics.  The film relies on impressive pyrotechnic displays, but 
it has been a long time since a well-executed explosion enraptured an 
audience.  CON AIR is noisy and flashy, but that can be said about any 
of the numerous, same-genre pictures that reach screens every year.  
What the movie lacks are tension and excitement to go along with all the 
bangs.  The action sequences are presented in a pedestrian fashion, and 
there are too few instances when we feel that the protagonist is in any 
real danger. 
     Our hero is Cameron Poe (Nicolas Cage), an ex-Army Ranger and 
Desert Storm veteran who has spent the last eight years in prison 
serving a sentence for manslaughter (he accidentally killed a man who 
was threatening his pregnant wife).  Now, he has been paroled, and he's 
on his way home to be reunited with his wife and meet his daughter for 
the first time.  One problem:  the flight he's on is carrying a load of 
vicious criminals bound for detention at a new prison in Alabama.  They 
get loose and take over the plane, and suddenly Cameron finds himself 
taking orders from Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom (John Malkovich), the self-
proclaimed "poster child for the criminally insane."  Meanwhile, on the 
ground, a U.S. Marshal named Vince Larkin (John Cusack) is trying to 
bring the situation to a peaceful conclusion, despite interference from 
a Federal agent (Colm Meaney), who wants to shoot down the plane. 
     At least CON AIR isn't as obviously bad as TURBULENCE.  For 
starters, this film has a couple of assets that the earlier "terror in 
the sky" film lacked:  Nicolas Cage and John Cusack.  While the actors 
are far from their career best here (in fact, Cage often looks bored), 
mediocre acting from these two is preferable to what we got from Ray 
Liotta and Lauren Holly.  Actually, the really colorful performances 
belong to the actors playing the criminals.  In addition to Malkovich's 
predatory Cyrus (a role he could probably do in his sleep), Ving Rhames 
gives us a nasty black militant named Diamond Dog Jones, Steve Buscemi 
is at his creepy best as The Marietta Mangler, and Danny Trejo is a 
serial rapist with a tattoo on his arm for each of his victims.  
(Incidentally, the movie's ambiguous attitude towards Buscemi's 
character, a child murderer, is disturbing.) 
     CON AIR divides the characters into clearly-defined groups of good 
and bad (with the members of the latter category vastly outnumbering 
those of the former).  Predictably, with no shades of gray, there isn't 
one interesting character.  Cameron, a candidate for sainthood, has a 
spotless record -- even the murder that sent him to prison was 
justifiable.  He's too clean to be anything but bland, and, worse still, 
Scott Rosenberg's script doesn't give him any of the one-liners that 
we've come to expect from action heroes in this sort of movie.  He's 
like John McLane of DIE HARD without the wisecracking charisma. 
     Another thing that's noteworthy about CON AIR is how poorly it's 
patched together.  In his recent review of the movie ROUGH MAGIC, film 
critic Roger Ebert made the observation that "It's a cliche to talk 
about great visuals, since if you point a camera in the right direction 
you can make almost anything look good."  Somehow, the cinematographer 
of CON AIR (with an assist from the editor) manages to disprove this 
theory.  With the exception of a few nicely composed shots, the film's 
look is uniformly stale.   
     Action movies are typically lauded for their tremendous special 
effects and their ability to keep viewers on the edge of their seats.  
CON AIR falls short in both categories.  In fact, beyond some scenery-
chewing by several over-the-top actors and a couple of mildly engaging 
chase sequences, there's little here to justify the seemingly endless 
two hour length.  Sitting through this movie is like watching a dog 
running in circles chasing its tail -- the amusement factor dies quickly 
as the situation become repetitive.  Unless you're desperate for a way 
to kill time, CON AIR is one flight you can afford to miss. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael Redman
When talking about summer films, it's a cliche to suggest that the
audience leave their brains at home because the movie is all action and
fun but low on thought. There's a reason why some phrases become
overworked. They're true.
Nicolas Cage plays a convict headed home to his family in "Rambo III: In
The Clouds"...no, that's "Die Hard Behind Bars"...err, whatever they're
calling this year's buff lone wolf defending the helpless against all
odds film. Cage has much depth as an actor than Stallone has ever shown,
but here he does a credible Sly.
Cameron Poe (Cage) is an Army Ranger in the wrong place at the wrong
time who accidentally kills one of a group of men intent on raping his
pregnant wife. After hiring what must be the worst attorney in the
western hemisphere, our hero ends up setting out the next several years
in a federal prison pining away for his wife and Casey, the daughter
he's never seen.
When it's finally his day to go home which just happens to be Casey's
birthday, for some reason he's put aboard the "Jailbird", a plane loaded
with the most dangerous scum of the earth. (Of course the "some reason"
is that without that plot element, we would have no film.) Loaded with
such luminaries as Cyrus The Virus (John Malkovich) and Diamond Dog
(Ving Rhames), the craft is a traveling freak show of depravity.
Unknown to Poe, the rest of the cons have hatched a plot to hijack their
air taxi. During a scheduled stop to pick up new travelers, he has the
opportunity to safely leave but doesn't since his buddy is about to slip
into a diabetic coma because he has no syringe for his insulin. "You
don't leave a fallen man behind."
The latest guest of honor is the ultimate mass murderer Garland Greene
(Steve Buscemi) who once wore the head of a little girl as a hat on a
drive through three states. Trussed up like Hannibal Lector, soft-spoken
Greene is easily the creepiest of the bunch.
Then everything blows up and crashes and gets shot and bursts into
fireballs just like you knew it would.
On the ground US Marshal Vince Larkin (John Cusack) is trying to
recapture the plane while engaging in absurd jurisdiction disputes with
a gung-ho DEA agent who wants to solve the problem with missiles.
There are a few weak moments in the energy. Poe's extended search for a
set of works for his ailing friend gets in the way of the heat. He
spends his time looking through boxes and cabinets while a firefight
rages outside and the medical authenticity for the insulin need is iffy.
Other than that, the explosions are non-stop and it's a thrill-a-minute
excursion. The effects are spectacular especially during the crash
landing.
Cyrus  is the most interesting of the characters as Malkovich once again
is the evil mastermind or as he says "the poster child for the
criminally insane". Although Cyrus gets more screen time, the most
unsettling scene goes to the smiling Greene and a young girl having a
nice little tea party in a decrepit abandoned swimming pool. It's also
the most puzzling piece of the movie as the reason for the resolution of
that moment is left to the imagination of the viewer.
All the actors are in fine form although in the best of all possible
worlds, they would have had more to work with. Everyone's playing the
same characters that they have before and Cage even looks a tad bored
occasionally.
Oh well. It's a good looking movie with a lot of "wow"s. Just the thing
to luxuriate in on these hot dry summer days. That is, if we ever make
it to that season.
[This appeared in the 6/12/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Walter Frith
Comments on this review may also be sent to wfrith@icom.ca
'CON AIR' EXHILARATES INTO A SLAM BANG EXAMPLE OF SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF
At first I thought 'Con Air' would be just another mindless action picture
filled with explosions, shootings, brawls and just about everything including
the kitchen sink but it has much more under the surface in its technique,
style and execution.  Although quite unbelievable at times it does use the
theory of suspension of disbelief quite well and is a satisfying way to spend
two hours in a movie theatre.
Nicolas Cage stars as a military soldier whose training makes him a lethal
weapon and one night while defending his wife he killed a man in a drunken
brawl and was sentenced to eight years in prison.  The movie shows small
scenes pieced together of his life in prison over the opening credits mostly
and the movie then picks up upon his release from prison.  He is to be
transported by plane to his destination of freedom.  Unfortunately for him
the plane also contains some of the most dangerous, smartest and low life
criminals in the United States.  Their leader (John Malkovich) practically
steals the show and the prisoners take control of the plane and the rest is
pretty obvious.  
'Con Air' is extremely slick and well paced and has appropriate humour from
time to time.  The criminals make the movie's colourful observations known to
the audience and the three outstanding portraits aside from Malkovich come
from Ving Rhames, Steve Buscemi and Nicolas Cage whose character is a nice
contrast and while he is a convicted criminal himself, he is the saving grace
in making the predatory criminals see that they aren't as invincible as they
think they are.
Cage is truly a gifted and smart performer whose risks in recent years in
choosing quirky and off beat roles have paid off handsomely and the icing on
the cake came with his Oscar win for Best Actor in 1995's 'Leaving Las
Vegas'.  'Con Air' is the kind of action film with good character development
and is not for the faint of heart but is for those who like their violent
action mixed with a sense of style and exhilarating stunts.
Visit Mr. Frith's 'Movie Reviews' section of 'The Review' at
http://www.arrowweb.com/review

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The titles change, but the rest is the same. Summer action 
movies have become a staple of modern cinema, and CON-AIR does 
little to distinguish itself from the rest. It's got a lot of low-brow 
entertainment in the form of violence, explosions and bad one-
liners. It makes the good and bad characters appealing with big-
name veterans of the genre, like Nicolas Cage (THE ROCK) and 
John Malkovich (IN THE LINE OF FIRE).
        Both of those movies were far classier in their presentation 
of the action essentials. IN THE LINE OF FIRE actually had a little 
in the way of character development and characters we cared about 
and THE ROCK featured high school level writing, with some good 
moments that reminded us the characters themselves knew they 
were stuck in an unbelievable action movie. CON-AIR is written on 
the junior high level, and these characters go through the routine in 
predictable fashion. The three most popular settings for action flicks 
are cruise ships, the middle of nowhere and airplanes. Since the 
current releases SPEED 2 and BREAKDOWN have taken the first 
two settings, CON-AIR appropriates the airplane motif, as you no 
doubt guessed from the title. Call it PASSENGER 58.
        First comes the obligatory prologue. Some action movies 
skip this and go straight into the action, but CON-AIRwants us to 
take it somewhat seriously, so we see returning soldier Cage meet up 
with his barmaid wife for a romantic slow dance. A bunch of drunks 
have their eyes on her and end up attacking Cage in the parking lot 
(yes, it's raining cats and dogs at the time). He accidentally kills one 
and is sent off to jail for a 10-year sentence.
        Flash forward about 8 years. Cage is being paroled and his 
cellmate, played by Mykelti Williamson (Bubba from FORREST 
GUMP), is coming with him. Yeah, they're going on the giant 
convict airplane that's being used to transport some of the worst 
criminals in the country. The Clintons always fly first class on it. 
So it's a planeful of crazies and Cage, with long messianic hair and 
a week's worth of George Michael stubble.
        Security is top-notch on con-air, as always, but three or four 
of the prisoners manage to take over the plane in less than five 
minutes, an amazing ode to the American attention span. Malkovich 
is the ringleader and his right-hand-man is Ving "Marsellus" 
Rhames, a black power type with his own hidden agenda. That angle 
is never developed, though, because that would be plot, and we can't 
handle plot in a movie like this. We just have to remember who's 
bad and who's good.
        Besides Cage, there aren't too many on the right side of the 
law. There's a chained guard (Rachel Ticotin) who spends most of 
her time being eyed by a big rapist, and a U.S. Marshall (John 
Cusack) who manages to figure everything out at the exact right 
time to further the action. Cusack himself becomes an action hero 
toward the end, more proof that even the most serious actors can be 
lured into the world of dumb action movies. Hell, Cage won an 
Oscar last year, Malkovich was nominated for one and here they 
both are trading comic book one-liners and shooting at each other. 
We even have indie film great Steve Buscemi as a child molester 
who spends most of his time commenting on the action instead of 
participating in it.
        CON-AIRcould have been better, if the dialogue was worthy 
of the actors who spoke it and perhaps the writers hadn't tried so 
hard to throw in every action cliche in the book. It also has a 
disturbing side to it, with all the talk from the rapists and child 
molesters, that keeps it from being completely fun to watch. 
Otherwise, it's all the usual auto-pilot stuff, even an obligatory Las 
Vegas chase climax aboard a fire truck. It's James Bond without the 
class.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Fred M. Hung
When the Bruckheimer/Simpson team brought Crimson Tide to the screen
back in 1995, I was incredibly surprised.  I had previously associated
the duo with such popcorn successes as Top Gun and Days of Thunder. 
Never did I expect a clever and taught thriller that challenged the
audience with theoretical dilemmas as well as entertained with gripping
drama.  When The Rock emerged in 1996, again, I was impressed by the
charismatic chemistry between Connery and Cage, in addtion to the
awesome performance of the misled anti-villain like Ed Harris' Gen.
Hummel.
After the death of Simpson, Bruckheimer ventures alone (you can tell by
the slightly modified lightning intro that marks each of their films)
with his entry into the summer season, CON AIR, with Nicolas Cage, John
Malkovich, and John Cusack.  Cage is a US Army Ranger wrongfully
imprisoned.  Unluckily, on day of his parole he finds himself on a
hijacked plane filled with the Justice Department's most wanted.
Simply put, to the extent that a film's purpose is to entertain, Con Air
accomplishes just that -- and no more.  Many of the current
Bruckheimer/Simpson patents are present, including the news footage of
military action to start, the very Hans Zimmer-ish score by Mark
Mancina, and a script that again seems edited by Tarantino.  Since the
script does not offer much range within the protagonists, Cage comes off
competent, as does Cusack.  Cage's character, Sgt. Cameron Poe, is
almost caricature -- terse, deadly, but at heart a family man.  Cusack's
Deputy Marshal Larkin, however, is basically Cusack with gun.  
Malkovich, however, is underused.  While certainly capable of so much
more (refer to In the Line of Fire, Dangerous Liasons, and the Killing
Fields), Malkovich is just having fun in his maniacal portrayal of Cyrus
"the Virus."  To his credit, the image of Malkovich holding Cage's bunny
hostage will should go down in the annals of film history as one of the
funniest hostage moments ever.  Unfortunately, much of these clever
moments are eclipsed by pyrotechnics.  
Buscemi steals the show in his limited moments.  It is difficult to
describe accurately his role, a sort of Shakespearean narrative clown
crossed with Hannibal Lecter.  His presense in the film is nonetheless
ambitious as the screenwriters remind us that all is in good fun.  
The action is solid.  Bruckheimer and company are geniuses when
combining testosterone soundtracks, TNT, and intense close ups.  In a
way, expectation may be Con Air's greatest enemy.  The audience is
already expecting high explosions, chases, and mounting body counts. 
Although Con Air delivers adequately all these, in the end one might
leave somewhat anti-climatic.  After all, how thrilling is it to put on
a familiar pair of old shoes?

Author
Michael Dequina
Don Simpson may be dead, but former producing partner Jerry
Bruckheimer keeps the old Simpson/Bruckheimer spirit alive with Con Air, a
loud, superslick, ultramacho, and all-around entertaining blast of action
and excitement.
A buffed-up Nicolas Cage stars as Cameron Poe, a decorated Army
Ranger who lands in prison after killing a thug in a drunken brawl.  Years
pass, and the paroled Poe is one flight away from a new life with his wife
(Monica Potter) and the young daughter (Landry Allbright) he has yet to
meet.  However, the flight he boards is one reserved for the transport of a
number of the nation's most dangerous felons.  Under the leadership of Cyrus
"The Virus" Grissom (John Malkovich), the convicts hijack the plane, and
it's up to Cameron, with the ground support of U.S. Marshal Larkin (John
Cusack), to save the day.
Con Air marks the first production of the Simpson-less Jerry
Bruckheimer Productions, but most, if not all, of the hallmarks of
Simpson/Bruckheimer productions are here.  Helming the feature is a director
hired to make things look good (commercial director Simon West, best known
for the spot where a boy is sucked into a Pepsi bottle); there are
explosions and gunplay galore; the musical score (by Mark Mancina and Trevor
Rabin) is loud and pounding; and, most of all, nary a trace of estrogen in
evidence.  There is a female guard aboard the flight (played by Rachel
Ticotin), but the character is of little consequence; the same can be said
of Potter's role as Cameron's wife, which is even smaller than Vanessa
Marcil's analogous bit role in the final S/B production, The Rock.
This formula can grow tiresome without some refreshing tweaks, and
that is where the actors, with the help of screenwriter Scott Rosenberg (who
also wrote--of all things--Beautiful Girls), come in.  Cage continues to
carve out a niche in the action market without sacrificing his penchant for
quirky roles.  He is more of a traditional kick-ass action hero here than he
was in The Rock, but his Cameron Poe is still an oddball--trailer park white
trash with a hint of Elvis (complete with matching accent and politeness
streak).  Also not sacrificing any eccentricity is Malkovich, whose Cyrus
the Virus is the type of effete, cerebral, and decadent character he's been
playing for years in less commercial projects (most recently The Portrait of
a Lady).  Steve Buscemi plays one of the most bizarre characters of the
bunch, notorious mass murderer Garland Greene.  As written by Rosenberg and
played by Buscemi, "The Mangler" is a deliciously ironic character, the con
with the most notorious rap sheet and reputation--who is also, as it turns
out, perhaps the most innocuous of the bunch.  One con who is not fleshed
out as well as he could have been is Ving Rhames's Diamond Dog, a black
militant.  Cusack's stressed-out Larkin is the straightest character in the
piece, but he brings his own sense of vitality to the role.  I'm all for
interesting, unique characters, but one I could have done without is Sally
Can't Dance, a flamboyantly gay, cross-dressing con played to the camp hilt
by Renoly.  Though his presence does set up one of the funnier throwaway
gags in the film, the character is a somewhat of a drag, a superfluous
flourish in a film already filled to the brim with eccentrics.
Bruckheimer films get the job done as far as action and pyrotechnics
(for which the audience sees the film in the first place), but they tend to
come up short is in the area of emotion.  Any attempt at anything
approaching serious drama, especially in a film as loud and frenetic as
this, cannot help but seem like an afterthought.  Even worse, these moments
are played so earnestly that they come off as a joke, which is exactly what
happens here with Cameron's tender moments with his wife and child.  A
number of people in the audience could not help but laugh because West lays
on the sap about as thick as he does the explosives in the overpowering
action scenes.
As action icons Stallone and Schwarzenegger creep into middle age,
the time is right for the emergence of some new, fresh blood to headline
action/adventure films.  With The Rock and now with the thrill ride of Con
Air, Nicolas Cage proves that he can not only look and play the part but
also add on a layer of refreshing character dimensions and quirks to the
traditional kick-ass hero.  In doing so, he is truly breathing new life and
then some into the action genre.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     CON AIR, the latest testosterone poisoner from late Don Simpson
producing partner Jerry Bruckheimer, starring Nicholas Cage as the lone
good-guy bad guy aboard a hijacked prison plane, may not be the worst
movie of the year-- it's too entertaining to be called that-- but it is
an exhausting failure, nonetheless.  Bad Choices abound, from editing to
story structure to Cage's accent, which renders the hair-extended hero
sounding like a cross between the King and Hi, his character from RAIS-
ING ARIZONA.  (Cage's comment on a car, hanging from the ass-end of a
plane: "Awhn any other day, this maht seem strange."  Thankyouverymuch.)
Call it wrongway filmmaking at its finest, CON AIR is as jaw-dropping
awful as last summer's MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  And, I believe, even more
fun.  For every preposterous plot point, for every momentum-sapping
sidetrack, for every hundredth slow-mo shot of something exploding,
there's a huge laugh lurking right around the corner, be it from one of
a dozen scene-stealing villains, to one of a dozen vehicular collisions,
to one of a (double) dozen fall-out-of-your-seat-funny one-liners.  And
I haven't even mentioned the theme from A SUMMER PLACE.  Bad movies
should be so much fun.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
CON AIR ** Directed by Simon West. Written by Scott Rosenberg.  Produced by
Jerry Bruckheimer Pictures / Buena Vista Pictures.Photography, David
Tattersall. Editing, Chris Lebenzon, Steve Mirkovich. Music, Mark Mancina,
Trevor Rabin. Special effects, Computer Film Company / Dream Quest. Cast:
Nicolas Cage (Cameron Poe), John Cusack  (US Marshal Vince Larkin),  John
Malkovich  ( Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom), Steve Buscemi ( Garland "The
Marietta Mangler" Greene),Nick Chinlund  (Billy "Billy Bedlam" Bedform),
Rachel Ticotin ( Guard Sarah Bishop), Colm Meaney ( Agent Duncan Malloy),
M.C. Gainey  (Jimmy Earl "Swamp Thing" West), Ving Rhames (Nathan "Diamond
Dog" Jones), Brendan Kelly ( Conrad), Mykelti Williamson (Baby O),  Danny
Trejo (John "Johnny 23" Baca), Renoly (Sally Can't Dance), et al. A Buena
Vista  release. 115 min. Rated R (extreme violence and language).
As I staggered from the excesses of "Con Air" into the daylight, I thought
that the category this and many other pictures belong to is "Traction
Movies," short for Trash and Action. What sets "Con Air" in a niche within
Traction films, seems to be that no other film I remember has had such a
colossal number of camera shots.
This is done by keeping them brief and keeping them coming at you at  an
average rate of about one shot per second. Since, minus final credits, this
movie runs about 112 minutes, times 60 this makes it a total of 6720
seconds or 6720 images. If I am wrong, it still feels that way.
Thanks to a cast of able actors  ( Cage, Cusack, Malkovich, Buscemi,
others) the film survives. The performers, given a lot to do physically and
very little thespianly are caricatural, one-dimensional cliches, yet each
does the most with what he has. The good guys (plus Guard Rachel Ticotin)
though not always pleasant, are in law enforcement. The
much-worse-than-bad, arch-criminal  guys are convicts.
The real hero, however, is Cameron Poe whom Nicholas Cage plays with a
drawl and with what might just be a certain amount of boredom. As a  just
discharged ace Army Ranger, he meets his pretty (blonde, of course)
waitress wife who is pregnant. Defending her against some drunken scum, he
accidentally kills one of them.
This involuntary manslaughter sends Cage to the pen for eight years in  an
unlikely miscarriage of justice. The man is a model prisoner. He keeps fit,
betters himself, reads constantly, does origami, corresponds sweetly with
wife and daughter --  and in case you missed that fleeting shot, also has a
lithograph of Jesus on his wall.
Paroled, Cage is improbably put on a special plane, a flying high-security
jail, along with a bunch of the worst serial killers, serial rapists and
serial you-name-it imaginable. Not merely  The Dirty Dozen but the
Amazingly Filthy And Then Some Dozen. In ways that stun one's imagination,
the cons, though thoroughly searched, carry the means to take over the
plane. They do just that, triggering the Law's search for and duels with,
the beastly hijackers.
Their leader is Cyrus the Virus (Malkovich) whose viciousness is matched by
his amazingly high I.Q. and who initially wears an absurd Hannibal Lecter
mask. The smartest lawman is John Cusack, whose efforts are complicated by
Agent Colm Meaney, here a sort of  meanie, but  familiar as a wonderfully
warm  Irish dad in "The Snapper," and warm too in the lesser "The Van."
Cage is, of course, The Man Who Will Save the Situation. A Great Guy
through and through, at times almost saintly, he must vanquish the
criminals if he wants to see his family, also to save Guard Ticotin from
rape and to get insulin for his best buddy who is also in the plane.
The machine-gun-fast succession of events or fractions of events becomes
from the start such overkill (in all senses) that you can't really keep up
with details. The facts are  impossible to describe, remember, or to make
any sense of. It's an orgy of plot-holes,   contradictions and
impossibilities. The audience sits there with eyes and brains numbed. By
the time the may try to formulate an objection or ask a neighbors "what
happened?" a new situation is already on the screen, then another, then
another.  (Among the myriad question marks is why Buscemi is given such
slick aphorisms and why he does not assassinate a little girl).
The movie is as understanding-proof as it is critic-proof, meaning that it
will make money even if all the reviews are bad. And bad they should be,
except that "Con Air," no matter how insane or guilty of esthetic, moral
and cinematic crimes, is not boring. It keep going and it keeps you going.
"Con Air" climaxes with a preposterous destruction of much of Las Vegas as
the airplane, piloted by convict "Swamp Thing" plows through the city, then
a fire engine, driven by the same man keeps up the mayhem. The immense
absurdity is campily comical. It makes you wonder if Swamp Thing should not
get a medal.

Author
Adam Joyce
Jerry Bruckenheimer and Nicolas Cage, respective producer and star of The
Rock, team up again for an all action thrill ride titled Con Air.
Cameron Poe, played by Cage, with a newly found muscle-bound physique, is
about to be released on parole to see his wife and 7 year old daughter -
whom he has never before met. He has been counting down the days to his
release from prison since being convicted of manslaughter for defending
himself. Coincidentally his release date is his daughter's birthday and
again, coincidentally, of course, he lands a ride home on a special plane
for the transportation of criminals, with psychopaths, rapists and an
assortment of the nastiest guys on Earth as his fellow passengers. This
effectively sets up what is to follow.
The aircraft is inevitably captured by the criminals after take-off, with a
particularly clever but evil character called Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom,
played solidly by John Malkovich, acting as the ring leader. All the
criminals, Poe included, are released from their shackles, and the guards
locked up. Although quite a few characters, guards and criminals inclusive,
are killed in the exciting chaos of the capture - violence is what drives
the narrative. Poe's only aim is to get home to see his wife and child, but
stays on board the aircraft when given a chance to leave in order to save a
friend. 
Poe is the (stereo)typically heroic character, the wholly good saviour of
the day, who acts in-line with the other criminals in order to save his
friend. Meanwhile, the long arm of the law follows the aircraft. John
Cusack plays Vince Larkin, the US Marshal who has the responsibility of
looking after the aircraft, and finds himself trying to convince the DEA
agent, Colm Meaney, not to have the plane shot down, but to spare it in the
hope that Poe will help them.
Con Air supplies its audience with a very generous amount of action and
violence. This is combined with a touch of comedy and those essential
dramatic moments. The performances are convincing, especially from the lead
actors, Cage, Cusack and Malkovich. It's particularly interesting to
discover the histories and backgrounds to each of the criminals, one can
even develop a peculiar fondness for some, and unlike some films, follow
their individual efforts as opposed to a mass of unknown characters
fighting the good guys.
The story is somewhat (to put it kindly) predictable and cliched, with a
most unoriginally happy ending. Most of the characters are also heavily
stereotyped, but what else would one expect in an action movie of this
calibre? However, these seeming negatives detract nothing from an exciting,
involving action packed film. Once Con Air gets flying, the action and
interest doesn't stop. Essentially an entertaining film, one of the best
action adventures of recent times (if you don't judge the script and plot).
As impressive, if not moreso, than The Rock.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/review.htm

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A roaring behemoth of an action movie that manages to be great fun
and totally ridiculous at the same time. All that's missing is Jackie Chan.
Somehow this movie works. CON AIR is totally ridiculous and over-the-top;
there's not a moment in it that could be believed. And yet there it is, and
it's great fun. Hong Kong ultraviolence comes to Hollywood, sort of.
Nicholas Cage stars as Cameron Poe, a Gulf War veteran. After coming home
from the front to his sweetheart, he gets into a vicious fight with a bunch
of rednecks for threatening his wife and kills one of them. For this he's
sent to jail for seven years, and while nobody in the audience believed that
such a thing would ever go to trial (self-defense? hello?), we bought it and
went on, because the movie proceeded to set up Poe as an interesting fellow.
He spends his time in jail educating himself, keeping himself together, and
forming a rapport with other inmates. And now that he's being let out on
parole, he's preparing to see his daughter in the flesh for the first time.
Something has to go wrong, of course, and it does. Bigtime. The plane that
Poe's being put on is also being used to transport a gang of brutally
hard-core lifers and death-row criminals to a newly-built max-security
prison. One of them, the charmingly named "Cyrus the Virus" (played by John
Malkovitch with the sleazy charm of a mass murderer turned talk show host),
has hatched a plan that involves clockwork timing, the help of several other
inmates, and hostage-taking. On top of *that*, one of the other prisoners is
a plant -- a DEA agent with a hideout gun who's been put on board to get
information from one of the conspirators about a Central American drug lord.
Everything goes wrong at once. I will not spoil too many of the details,
because part of the fun of the movie is watching how the well-oiled machine
of the prisoner transport goes horribly wrong. Ultimately, Poe is put into a
very sticky situation -- a whole web of them, in fact, where he has to try
to survive as well as help out a newly-made friend or three. Poe, muscular
and graceful, looks both very in and out of place amongst the neo-Nazis and
mass murderers that make up the rest of the crew, and he does everything he
can to distance himself from them. The criminals themselves are not too
smart, but the Virus is clever and resourceful, and makes up for it. They
supply the deadly, anarchic energy that the crazy plan he's dreamed up needs
to succeed, and there's a weird, perverse pleasure in seeing them get away
with so much of what they do.
Also in the bubbling pot of the plot are John Cusack, as the supervisor of
the flight, who startles everyone around him by whipping out one piece of
remarkable improvisation after another. He locks horns hard with the DEA man
(a very enjoyable Colm Meaney), and takes a peculiarly delicious form of
revenge on the man -- and his sports car.
The movie doesn't stop once it gets into high gear. I've hardly seen another
movie that creates the level of non-stop tension and forward motion that
this one does. It also sustains it against all odds -- logical,
intellectual, whatever. The movie just doesn't look back, and when the
audience walked out, they were drained and exhilarated. Not one single
believable thing had happened, but the movie creates such a strong sense of
personalities and character, that we ignore the silliness of it all and have
a great time watching things blow up. And that happens *in extremis*. There
is one stunt that, even if it was faked, had most of the audience on the
floor -- involving the plane, its mooring line, gunfire, a shed, a control
tower and a car. You'll see what I mean.
All the actors do a fine job: Malkovitch is disturbing and twisted; Cage is
solemn and also with a twinkle of smarts in his eye; Cusack is
irrepressible; Meaney is hilarious. Steve Buscemi also pokes his head in, as
a disturbed serial killer, although his role feels as though it should
either have been cut out completely or expanded on further. I love him as an
actor, but he needed to have his material brought to fruition for his role
to really work here.
CON AIR will no doubt live on in the hearts of action/stunt/explosion fans
everywhere, and is destined to be a fratboy action favorite alongside HARD
BOILED, LETHAL WEAPON and DIE HARD. I suspect a sequel won't be long in
coming; any bets?

Author
Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
If Cameron Poe, Nick Cage's character in Con Air, had had a better lawyer
at his trial, then it would have saved us all a lot of grief. Somehow, his
attorney (A rare appearance by Lionel Hutz outside of The Simpsons,
perhaps?) convinces him to plea guilty to a manslaughter charge as part of
a plea bargain, and then the judge turns around and gives him the full
sentence anyway. A real lawyer might have objected, raised his hand,
coughed loudly, something, but not Poe's. Poe's lawyer waves bye-bye as
they haul his client off to jail.
You see, Cameron Poe, veteran Army Ranger, killed a man who assaulted him
outside a bar. Again, a real lawyer might have tried to claim it was in
self-defense, or even in the defense of his wife and unborn child.
Instead, this Hollywood lawyer lets Poe go to prison when the judge
mutters some nonsense about his Ranger training qualifying him as a deadly
weapon. If we had a good lawyer, we might think about suing Touchstone
pictures for false advertising -- they claimed this was a good movie.
Con Air is one of the latest in the long string of action "event" movies
that have visited us each summer since 1988's Die Hard. Unfortunately, few
of them have managed to capture Die Hard's magic, although the body counts
and testosterone levels have only gone up. Con Air isn't one of the better
efforts.
Poe is paroled about seven years after his conviction, and he's scheduled
to go home to his wife and daughter aboard a prison transport plane.
Because Poe is in an action event film, however, his plane is hijacked by
the other prisoners. These aren't just any prisoners, though. They're the
meanest, orneriest, most psychopathic killers and rapists that the
screenwriter and casting agents could cook up. Frankly, they're a bit
disappointing.
First up is Cyrus "the Virus" Grissom (John Malkovich), the mastermind
behind the escape. His second-in-command is Diamond Dog (Ving Rhames), a
black militant playing along with the white guy until the breakout is
over. Steve Buscemi shows up later in Hannibal-Lecter-style restraints as
Garland Greene, serial killer extraordinaire. There are also a dozen other
inmates too inane to describe.
Poe plays along, hoping for an opportunity to extract himself from the
situation, but he's prevented from doing so by certain contrived
circumstances. Circumstance #1: his diabetic cell buddy, Baby-O, is also
on board, and needs a shot of insulin to live. Circumstance #2: The only
guard to survive the first round of hijack hyjinx is a woman named Bishop
who quickly becomes a target for the token serial rapist. The rapist,
Johnny 23, is played by Danny Trejo, who should stick to acting in Robert
Rodriguez movies. Even when he played a vampire in From Dusk Til Dawn, he
was allowed to let his charisma (or as much charisma as a mean scary
Mexican ex-convict can muster, no offense Danny) shine through. Here he's
just repulsive.
Tracking down these escapees from the ground is U.S. Marshal Vince Larkin
(John Cusack). He's the good cop. Forcibly partnered with Larkin is DEA
Agent Duncan Malloy. He's the bad cop, and he's played by Colm Meaney.
Huh? Colm Meaney? Likable, huggy-bear, "Chief O'Brien" Colm Meaney?
Considering that the casting agents on this film seemed to have every
found every unsavory character actor west of the Mississippi, what
possesed them to cast one of the most instantly likable character actors
working today as the cop at whom we're supposed to hiss? His sole
qualification for the role seems to be his ability to swear convincingly.
Fair enough. But as soon as he showed up in Con Air, his appearance
heralded by smarmy music, we started to have trouble suspending our
disbelief. We mean, c'mon! Colm Meaney would never be any less than a
concerned, good-hearted guy, and these people have him parking in the
handicapped spot.
The object of the film, of course, is to allow Cage to get in some serious
good-guy time, pretending to go along with the bad guys while looking out
for his buddies and saving the day. He manages to alert Larkin to the
escapees' actual destination, and then continues to foil the convicts'
plans even after they discover that he's working with the cops. Cage
himself set off our Fake Accent Detector with a southern drawl so bad that
one wonders how he could have been so good in Raising Arizona and so bad
in this movie.
The action junkies in our readership have been patiently waiting for us to
mention the stunts and fight scenes. There are plenty of them, but they
seem a bit watered-down, as a lot of American action movies seem in these
days of John Woo and Quentin Tarantino. It's neither gonzo enough (Woo)
nor is it particularly shocking (Tarantino). The gunfights have a routine
feel to them, and the various plane-crash sequences didn't get our
adrenaline pumping. There are a few good visual gags that result from the
carnage, but you've seen all this action before and done better elsewhere.
Perhaps the strangest thing is that the final conflict takes place on a
speeding fire truck after the titular plane has crashed. After a plane
crashes on the Vegas strip, did the film makers really think we'd be
excited to see what amounts to a car chase? Hint to future action
moviemakers: End your movie on a high note.
All through the film, we're hammered again and again with what a great guy
Cameron Poe is. He's loyal, chivalrous, a good parent (!), etc etc. All of
this is supposed to contrast against the backdrop of the scum of society
all around him. It's obvious that the moviemakers have a message for the
audience, but the clearest message to us was that we should have rented a
different movie.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews. http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo

Author
Simon Calloway
 Recently, I saw Nicolas Cage in City of Angels and Snake Eyes.  Now, neither
were great films, but Cage supplied two excellent performances in them.  So, I
went back and took a look at Cage's other films, most notably I saw The Rock
(again; I forget he is in that), and Con Air, both produced by Jerry
Bruckheimer.
 The Rock wasn't good.  I didn't like the mindless action scenes and
incoherency of the screenplay.  Now, Con Air is even worse.  A plethora of over
the top action sequences and ugly acting by Cage and such other wonderful
actors as Ving Rhames and John Malkovitch.
 Cage plays military man Cameron Poe.  When he accidentally kills a thug who
harrasses his wife, he is sent to prison for seven years.  His sentence is up,
so he, along with many other convicts, ride home in Con Air, a plane made
especially for rapists, killers, kidnappers, etc.  All these grease balls make
for some predictable mayham.
 A prisoner escapes him clutches, kills the pilots, and fly the plane to
Arizona.  All this makes for a mindnumbing blurr or a film.
Case No. 1: How did the con escape?  The film never fully explains.
Case No. 2: There just happens to be a con on board who knows how to fly.
Case No. 3: There happens to be a female security guard on the plane.  A
perfect match for the rapist who needs to have sex even during a plane crash.
 Con Air pretty much destroys all expectations of action films.  It is the
anti-Spielberg.

Author
Steve Kong
Con Air is the first production of Jerry Bruckheimer's without the late Don 
Simpson. Con Air also brings Nicolas Cage back to work with Bruckheimer again. 
Last summer's The Rock was their last film working together. So how does Con 
Air hold up to The Rock?
Nicolas Cage plays Cameron Poe, a man whose life story seems to be about being 
in the wrong place at the wrong time. On his way home from the Army, Poe meets 
with his newly pregnant wife Tricia (Monica Potter) in a bar. They kiss and 
they dance, but their dance is cut short by a group of rowdy men in the bar. 
Poe and his wife leave the bar, running to their car in the rain, as they 
arrive at their car they meet those rowdy men again. In a fight with the men, 
trying to protect his wife, Poe kills one of the men. Poe is sent to jail for 
murder. After serving eight years of his sentence, he is now ready to go on 
parole.  He is ready to meet his daughter for the first time.
Poe catches a ride home on an airplane full of convicted murders and rapists. 
He rides along with his cellmate who is being transferred and is badly in need 
of a needle to take his insulin. John Cusack, who is quickly becoming one of 
my most favourite actors, is US Marshal Vince Larkin, who is on ground 
overseeing the transfer of all these prisoners. As the plane takes off, Cyrus 
"The Virus" Grissom (John Malkovich) and Nathan "Diamond Dog" Jones (Ving 
Rhames), two really bad men, escape their cells and take over the flight, 
dubbing the flight Con Air. From this point on, we are supposed to suspend our 
disbelief and go along for the ride. For some movies it is easy to do this, 
especially since it is the summer movie season, but in Con Air it is difficult 
to swallow.
Con Air tries to go over the top, like last summer's The Rock, but rookie 
director Simon West is unable to create the same excitement in the action 
sequences as Michael Bay did in The Rock. He is unable to reach the same 
level. And the end result is a movie that does not work for this exact reason. 
 West is unable to create the action sequences that would have helped the 
audience to over come the implausibility of the film.
The ensemble cast gives a great performance except for a few. Colm Meaney 
gives more of an annoying performance as an angry DEA agent. Renoly, as Sally 
Can't Dance, really has no place in the film more than comic relief. And to 
that extent, it is poorly executed. Steve Buscemi, as Carland "The Marietta 
Mangler" Greene, who is describe as worse than the whole Manson family 
together, is in the film, but for the life of me, I cannot figure out why.
On the bright side the lead performers give solid performances. Nicolas Cage 
does well as Cameron Poe, though it takes a little time to adjust to his 
strange adopted accent in this film. "If you see muh waif, tell er ah love 
er," he tells US Marshal Vince Larkin. John Malkovich is genuinely scary as 
Cyrus the Virus. He portrays Cyrus as a dangerous and insane, yet very 
intelligent man. Ving Rhames, although not as strong a performance as in 
Mission: Impossible and Pulp Fiction still pulls off a great performance.  
John Cusack is the guy that is right, but is always doubted, and as US Marshal 
Vince Larkin, he shows his frustration.
Con Air tries really hard to be a loud summer action movie filled with 
explosions and action, and to an extent it is successful.  But it doesn't try 
hard enough and it has many shortcomings, including the hard to swallow story 
and some weak supporting performances.  If you really have two hours to burn, 
and those two hours happen to fall into a matinee show time, then catch Con 
Air.  If not, save your money, Con Air crashes and burns before it even takes 
off.  Maybe next time Jerry Bruckheimer.

