Title
Review for Beverly Hills Cop III (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by John Landis 
Written by Steven E. de Souza, based on characters created by
        Danilo Bach and Daniel Petrie Jr.
Cast: Eddie Murphy, Judge Reinhold Hector Elizondo, Theresa Randle,
      Bronson Pinchot, Timothy Carhart, John Saxon, and Alan Young (!)
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    103 minutes
     Second sequels suck.  No, not always, but they sure do
disappoint.  SUPERMAN III, GODFATHER III, ALIEN 3, LETHAL WEAPON 3,
and, now, proudly, shamelessly, BEVERLY HILLS COP III.
     Eddie Murphy is back as Axel Foley, that street-smart show-off who
can't seem to shy from Bevery Hills.  His target is the LA amusement
park Wonder World and Foley is hot on the heels of a murderer he met in
Detroit.  Giving him grief are the FBI and the BHPD, neither of whom
want Axel grease in their affairs.
     Seven years have passed since our last visit to the COP shop;
seven years of civil suits and bad press and all those things that have
officially nixed the notion of the Maverick Cop.  Can we *really*
believe that enforcement agencies would even *dream* of condoning
Axel's actions.  Of course not.
     As implausible as the premise plots, COP III works for a while.  The
pace is fast and the jokes are okay.  Murphy breezes through scenes
that are tame enough and lame enough to suggest that, maybe, hopefully,
bigger and better things are yet to come.
     Axel digs deeper into the ways and whys of Wonder World--courtesy
of a few too many unlocked doors--and the plot holes grow and grow and
grow until they swallow the film whole.
     Are we to believe, courtesy of a counterfeit subplot, that Axel
Foley can pull a digitized photo of himself out of thin air?  Or that
the "largest private police force in the country" doesn't have a soul
on their staff who can shoot straight?  Or that Axel and associates can
kill person after person without even batting an 'brow?
     The humor is sparse, but not absent.  A cute bit bags four
off-duty cartoon-characters playing poker under Wonder World.  And
there's a great scene where Murphy, dressed as an elephant (don't ask),
pushes a mouthy moppet into a fountain.
     For film fans, the director's trademark touches are few and
far-between.  If you *must* see the film, watch for a SWAT-team
send-up, a soul-music shoot-out, and, as usual, cameos from a drove of
directors including George Lucas, Joe Dante, John Singleton, and Barbet
Schroeder.
     Beyond Murphy's contractually efficient performance, Bronson
Pinchot has two scenes as Serge, now selling arms instead of art.
Judge Reinhold, back as Billy Rosewood, does a cute imitation of Jack
Webb.  And Hector Elizondo is agreeable as John Ashton's replacement
Jon Flint, the obligatory
family-man-character-with-nothing-else-to-do.
     The surprise find is former "Mr. Ed" second-banana Alan Young,
who plays Uncle Dave, designer and proprietor of Wonder World.  Leave
it Landis to inspire inspired casting.
LOOK:  Watch for a minor reference to George Pal's THE TIME MACHINE,
       which also starred Young.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Eddie Murphy, Judge Reinhold, Hector Elizondo, Theresa 
           Randle, Timothy Carhart, Alan Young, Bronson Pinchot
Director:  John Landis
Producers:  Mace Neufeid and Robert Rehme
Screenplay:  Steven E. de Souza
Music:  Nile Rodgers
Released by Paramount Pictures
     Like THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN and BOOMERANG before it, BEVERLY 
HILLS COP III is another attempt by Eddie Murphy to regain the popularity 
he once held during the early and mid-80s.  And, as was the case with 
those other two films, this isn't an inspiring comeback attempt.  Judging 
from the lines (or lack thereof) at the box office, Paramount may have 
difficulty recouping Murphy's reported $15 million salary.
     One wonders where the Eddie Murphy of 48 HOURS, TRADING PLACES, and 
BEVERLY HILLS COP has gone.  The irreverence is still there, but there's 
no verve or freshness.  Murphy's performance in this, the third 
installment of his popular gunplay-and-comedy series, is flat and 
mechanical.  Watching Axel Foley (Murphy) "mourn" the death of his boss 
(and close friend) would be enough to convince anyone who didn't know 
better that the man has no acting talent.
     The film starts in Detroit, with Axel and his team of cops raiding a 
chop shop and finding more than they bargained for.  Inside is a truck 
full of U.S. mint paper, and the men who have stolen this truck are armed 
to the teeth.  Axel's boss dies in his arms after being shot, and Axel 
vows revenge.
     The trail of the criminals leads to Southern California and the 
Wonderwold theme park.  After stopping by the Beverly Hills Police 
Department to obtain the aid of detectives Jon Flint (Hector Elizondo) 
and Billy Rosewood (Judge Reinhold), Axel heads off after his quarry.  
Ultimately, it's not as simple a task as merely finding the killer, 
however, since he turns out to be Ellis DeWald (Timothy Carhart) - an 
upstanding citizen and the head of Wonderworld's sizeable security force. 
Fortunately, Axel finds a pair of allies within the park - Janice 
(Theresa Randle, last seen opposite Wesley Snipes in SUGAR HILL) and  
Uncle Dave (Alan Young, best remembered as Wilbur from MR. ED). 
     All this is pretty unoriginal cops-and-robbers stuff, and that's 
basically what BEVERLY HILLS COP III is - routine.  The one or two 
"surprises" should be obvious to those who are even half-watching what's 
going on.  The comedy is mostly restricted to one-liners, some of which 
aren't funny.  And the action is uninspired, barely tapping the vast 
potential of an amusement park chase film.
     Bronson Pinchot returns as Serge, one of the most annoying 
personalities in any of Eddie Murphy's films.  While humorous in small 
doses, this character comes dangerously close to being overexposed.  At 
least the stuff with Serge's weapon, the "Annihilator 2000", is somewhat 
amusing, even if the parody is a little obvious.
     Look for cameos by filmmakers George Lucas (STAR WARS), Joe Dante 
(GREMLINS), and John Singleton (BOYZ 'N THE HOOD), as well as special 
effects master Ray Harryhausen.  None of these four have roles of any 
significance, but at least watching for them will give you something to 
do while slogging your way through the heart of this otherwise-
uninvolving film.
     BEVERLY HILLS COP 3 took a long time (7 years) to reach the screens, 
even though a sequel to number 2 was planned shortly after that movie's 
gross broke the $100 million mark.  In Murphy's own words, the project 
was on hold until a script was found that showed Axel as someone who 
isn't just "...wide-eyed and babbling and walking around Beverly Hills."  
Unfortunately, in adding maturity, too much spontaneity was taken away.  
It looks like Murphy is going to have to try again for that comeback.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Eddie Murphy, Judge Reinhold, Hector Elizondo, Timothy
Carhart, Theresa Randle, Bronson Pinchot.
Screenplay:  Steven E. de Souza.
Director:  John Landis.
     It's hard to believe that it's been ten years since the original
BEVERLY HILLS COP turned Eddie Murphy into the biggest star in
Hollywood, for two very different reasons.  On the one hand, it doesn't
seem like that long since I saw it in a theater for the first time.  On
the other hand, it seems like twice that long since Murphy has had a
hit.  It certainly must seem like an eternity to Murphy; he is proved
consistently unable in the last few years to recapture the COP audience
without returning to Beverly Hills.  So at something of a crossroads in
his career, he again dons the Detroit Lions jacket for BEVERLY HILLS
COP III.  And what a lifeless outing it is--slow, unfunny and lacking
even Murphy's cocky charm.
     COP III opens back in Detroit, where Axel Foley is in the process
of leading a raid on a stolen car chop shop.  The raid goes sour when
big guns turn out to be on the scene, and in the ensuing battle Axel's
boss is killed.  The killer's trail, naturally, leads back to
California, where Axel enlists the aid of old friend Billy Rosewood
(Judge Reinhold) and newcomer Det. Flint (Hector Elizondo).  Their
investigation leads to the WonderWorld amusement park, whose chief of
security Ellis DeWald (Timothy Carhart) is behind the dirty dealings.
Unfortunately, no one believes Axel except a park technician (Theresa
Randle) and WonderWorld patriarch Uncle Dave (Alan Young), leaving Axel
more or less alone to figure out what's rotten at WonderWorld.
     Give Steven E. de Souza credit for not deciding simply to rehash
BEVERLY HILLS COP.  COP III is more of a pure action film, which makes
it exactly the wrong kind of film for John Landis to direct.  Landis'
sense of pacing has always been suspect to say the least, tending
towards manic spurts interrupted by long, surrealistic comic passages,
and that package is on display here.  For no apparent reason, Landis
interrupts his establishing sequence in the chop shop to bring us a
production number featuring two corpulent gentlemen performing "Come
See About Me."  Later, in the middle of a chase, Axel stops to join a
group of costumed characters in a stage show.  COP III is filled with
decisions like these which bring the film to a grinding halt.  Bronson
Pinchot's scene-stealing Serge from COP I returns as a personal
security-device peddler in a scene which takes far too long to
introduce a single plot element.  Ditto for the scene in which we sit
through an entire park attraction, because we know it's going to show
up later.  There is no economy to the screenwriting or the direction,
and Landis has simply gotten too predictable in his shot selection.  In
one scene in a restaurant bar, I anticipated the conclusion of the
scene two minutes before it happened.
     It's also extremely unfortunate that in addition to abandoning the
COP I formula, de Souza has also decided to abandon the characters.  He
seems to have forgotten completely about Billy Rosewood's fascination
with big guns from COP II, missing a wonderful opportunity.  He also
seems to have forgotten that Axel is supposed to be smart; how else to
explain running from park security into a ride from which escape is not
extremely likely.  Perhaps to set up an action sequence.  Murphy gets
to fire a lot of bullets, but gets painfully few opportunities to show
that Axel's greatest weapon is his wits.
     Of course, it would have been difficult for any wit to come
through when Murphy sleepwalks through his performance.  Perhaps he
senses what the audience does, that a thirty-something Axel Foley isn't
nearly as interesting as a twenty-something Axel Foley.  What made COP
I click was Murphy as the streetwise loose cannon, aggravating uptight
veteran Taggart even while he was teaching him.  Now, Axel _is_ the
veteran, going about his business methodically and rarely thinking on
his feet.  There is some good action to be found in BEVERLY HILLS COP
III, particularly a rescue on a runaway park ride, and one very funny
sequence involving a multi-faceted gun.  But there is none of the
irreverent edge that made the young Murphy so appealing.  Maybe that's
what depressed me most about COP III:  considering the possibility that
we might never see that Eddie Murphy again.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I went into the third installment of Eddie Murphy's BEVERLY HILLS
COP saga with very low expectations, but I must admit that it was
better than I expected, I had a few good laughs, and it was nice
diversion.  On the other hand, I can not recommend it.
     There are some funny scenes.  Bronson Pinchot from the first
BEVERLY HILLS COP is back again with a small part.  This time he is
running a weapons boutique rather than an art gallery.  Pinchot's
boutique features the 3 Ps (protection, prestige, and pretty) and has
the slogan "why should you look ugly when you are trying to survive".
Pinchot's machine gun, CD player, TV, and microwave oven combination
and how Murphy uses it is the only really hilarious scene in the show.
     So what was wrong with it?  The director, John Landis, and lack of
energy.  I keep wanting to tell Murphy to go get some caffeine - lots
of it.  It was as if this was BEVERLY HILLS COP 15 and Eddie was now 80
years old playing Axel Foley one last time before Murphy retired from
acting.  There are some scenes in the show where Murphy is his old self
again, and they are excellent.  The director's pacing, the editing
(Dale Beldin), and the way the director had Murphy playing the role
were all sad.
     BEVERLY HILLS COP 3 runs long at 1:44.  It is rated R for bloody
violence and filthy language.  I guess it would be okay for teenagers.
I give the movie * 1/2 as they were some good parts, and I managed to
have an enjoyable time waiting for Murphy to wake up periodically and
act.
     Now for three pieces of trivia.  First, my whole family is in the
movie.  90% of it is set in Great America (called Wonderworld in the
movie).  We were there when they were filming the scene on the triple
looper ride (beats me what it is called).  If you look very carefully,
you can see 3 ants way down on the ground.  We ARE those ants!  We
could not see us, but I know we are there.  I will see us when I freeze
frame that laser disc next year.  Maybe you can find us.  Prizes are
possible to the first reported sighting.
     Second, they added many rides to Great America to make it look
more like an amusement park, and it was made by the people, Paramount,
that own the park!  It was fun the day we were there seeing all of the
imported rides that were used only in the movie.  A couple of the
fictional rides, I really wish they had.  The dinosaur ride looked
especially neat.
     Third, I have had dinner three times with Bronson Pinchot.  We
were staying on a remote Caribbean Island (Young Island off St.
Vincent) in 1986, and he was there by himself.  He was really funny in
person but kind of lonely.  One of his best stories was about the
filming of THE FLAMINGO KID.  It was set at a posh Long Island resort
in the summer.  Actually, to get the place, they had to film it all in
Long Island in November.  They nearly froze to death in their swimming
suits.  They had gofers on the set whose sole job was to hold big
towels around the stars until the director yelled action and then they
let them loose.  Because of the wind noise they had to dub most of the
speech later.  This was a problem because their speech pitch was
accentuated due to the cold and so they had trouble dubbing their own
words later.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
These days the lack of originality in Hollywood reflects
itself in the deluge of remakes. But, only a few years ago,
before Wes Craven publicly made fun of the practice, sequels
had been more popular among Hollywood producers. Sequels
also used to be popular among directors and movie stars
whose careers went south. The way to regain popularity and
prestige, they thought, was the use the same formulas,
characters and story lines that brought them success in the
first place. One of such celebrity was Eddie Murphy, black
comedian of 1980s whose career was in big decline during the
first part of this decade. In order to return to the
spotlight, he chose to resurrect the franchise created by
his most popular film, BEVERLY HILLS COP, 1984 action comedy
that had already spawned the sequel in 1987. Seven years
later, for the third instalment, he used the directorial
service of John Landis, another fading star, with whom he
successfully collaborated twice - in TRADING PLACES and
COMING TO AMERICA. This time, however, third time wasn't the
charm and BEVERLY HILLS III was failure. Eddie Murphy had to
wait few more years for real comeback.
Eddie Murphy here plays Axel Foley, fast-talking streetwise
Detroit policeman, who raids illegal chop shop. The routine
police action ends in tragedy, when the criminals kill
Foley's boss. Determined to bring the killers to justice,
Foley realises that their leader is Ellis De Wald (Timothy
Carhart). When it turns out that De Wald happens to be
security chief for Wonderland theme park in Los Angeles,
Foley goes back to Los Angeles. There, with the help of his
old friend, local policeman Rosewood (Judge Rheinhold),
Foley would clash with money counterfeit ring.
Ten years has passed since the original and times are
definitely different. In this decade, the contrast between
blue collar Detroit and yuppie Beverly Hills, which provided
a lot of gags in 1984 film, simply doesn't work.
Screenwriter Steven E. de Souza provides another conflict,
this time between the childish sillyness of the Good Guys
and business-like professionalism of the Bad Guys. Since
Foley belongs to the former, his character had to watch his
language, and the tone of the film in general is more
infantile. Unfortunately, this film still belongs to action
movie genre, and there is too much violence for little
children. Nice example is the humorous scene in the
beginning, which turns into standard Ramboesque bloodbath.
Unlike Donner with the LETHAL WEAPON series, Landis simply
can't balance the comedy with "regular" action, and the
result is a film that fails in both aspects. Action scenes
are sometimes interesting, but not too spectacular (at the
end, scenery of Wonderland is more fascinating than the
action itself); humour, on the other hand, falls flat. To
make even worse, some minor characters from 1984 film gets
unnecessary and sometimes irritating overexposure
(especially art expert turned into arms dealer, played by
Bronson Pinchot). In the end, although the film provided
some entertainment, viewers, at least critical ones, would
probably be happy to know that there aren't any plans for
BEVERLY HILLS IV.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
     Uh-oh.  The roman numerals are back.  I wonder what the next DIE
HARD sequel is going to have: 3 or III?  How about the next ALIEN
movie?  (Yes, I heard, they're making another one; but this was through
word of mouth, so my sources are not reliable).  Will that be ALIEN IV
or ALIEN to the fourth power or ALIENESESES?  Do people see my point
here?
     Money.  Most sequels coming out these days are *purely* for money.
I am sorry to say that, because some of these movies have characters
that I would love to see in different situations.  But BEVERLY HILLS
COP III was barely, if anything, close to a movie with my favorite
characters in different situations.  It had ANOTHER 48 HRS. written all
over it.
     Eddie Murphy is, as of late, trying to make a more mature name for
himself (or so it would seem).  I thought BOOMERANG was a response to a
huge guilt trip about BEVERLY HILLS COP II (I don't know how many times
he referred to women as bitches in that movie, but it was a lot).
ANOTHER 48 HRS. had all the elements of the first movie, but the
storyline was rather bland.  BEVERLY HILLS COP III suffers from the
same ailment.
     Murphy looks like he is trying to regain his 80's popularity and
gain a mature reputation at the same time.  This seems impossible to
me.  Part of the appeal of Murphy in the 80's (IMHO) was his
playfulness and immaturity.  He could make any situation hilarious.
Nowadays he just seems to watch as the world goes by.  The original
BEVERLY HILLS COP and 48 HRS. established his popularity as a vulgar
yet hilarious force of nature.  Now he appears drained.  It's too bad,
too.  Eddie Murphy always made me laugh.
     In BEVERLY HILLS COP III, we see sparks of the old Eddie: the
trademark smile, that characteristic laugh, a couple of good
one-liners.  But that's it.  COP II was loaded with this kind of stuff;
I believe it was what established Eddie as a comic force.  Axel Foley
was a clever cop; he could get in and out of almost anything.  In COP
III, there are no clever dodges, none of Eddie's hilarious assessments,
none of his snide remarks.  In COP II, Axel 'carried' in
multi-explosive sound-seeking projectiles into the Beverly Hills Gun
Club in order to gain access to the building.  I thought that whole
scene was hilarious.  In COP III, in order to get into Wonderworld, he
buys a ticket.  That's not Axel!  Where's the clever dodge?  In COP II,
a bartender tells Axel his coke will cost $7 (if I remember
correctly).  Axel says "I can get blown for seven dollars!"  When told
the price of admission for Wonderworld, he merely repeats the price.
What happend to the old Axel?  What happened to the old Eddie, for that
matter?
     I would consider COP III to be a really good dollar flick, but it
is not worth the full price of admission.  Keep trying Eddie; you're
getting closer, but this one didn't quite do the trick.
