Title
Review for Xich lo (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Martin Rich
Vietnam, in the context of films, is usually associated with the 
proliferation of Vietnam war films.  But 'Cyclo', and the same director's 
earlier 'The Scent of Green Papaya', portray a very different view of 
Vietnam.  Tran Anh Hung's films concentrate on everyday life in Vietnam, 
before (in the case of 'Papaya'), and since (in the case of 'Cyclo') the 
war.
Both films share the same acute observation of the dynamics of a family. 
Both share the same slow, deliberate, development of their themes.  Where 
'Papaya' was a gentle chronicle of the development of a family, 'Cyclo' 
shows an altogether les pleasant side of life.  Its central character is 
the driver of a rickshaw taxi, who is innocent and well-meaning but is 
gradually drawn into petty crime and corruption.  In tha background, the 
contrasts between the affluent, the poor, and the sleazy in present-day 
Vietnam are brutally portrayed.  The sound of the motorcycle engine that 
powers the rickshaw, runs in the background almost continuously, and 
helps to convey the noisy, dusty, feel of a city in the far East.
Despite the film's gentle pace, its message is planted firmly in the 
viewers' minds.  There is some violence, but, more powerful than the 
violence, there are scenes where characters look on impassively, at the 
most cold-blooded treatment of others.  It doesn't make comfortable 
watching, but does record how easily people can be brutalised.  Vietnam 
is developing now as a destination for tourism, and a country on the edge 
of the affluent Pacific Rim.  Far as 'Cyclo' is from the stuff of 
mainstream cinema, it is a salutary reminder that Vietnam remains a 
troubled land.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CYCLO (Xich lo) (director/writer: Tran Anh Hung; cinematographer: Benoit
Delhomme/ Laurence Tremolet; editor: Nicole Dedieu; cast: Le Van Loc
(Rickshaw Driver), Tony Leung-Chiu Wai (The Poet, A Pimp), Tran Nu Yen
Khe (Prostitute, older sister of the rickshaw driver), Le Kinh Huy
(Grandfather), Pham Ngoc Lieu (Little Sister), Nguyen Nhu Quynh (Madam),
Van Day Nguyen (Mr. Lullaby), Le Tuan Anh (Handcuff Man),
1995-Vietnam/France)
Cyclo was shot in modern Ho Chi Minh City (Saigon). It was directed and
written by Tran Anh Hung (The Scent of Green Papaya), as if he were a
tourist visiting hell, shocked by all the squalor he sees. He was born
in Vietnam and ever since he was 13, in 1975, he has lived in Paris. The
Vietnamese city he revisits is a demoralizing place, where poverty and
crass materialism go hand to hand. In this somber world, the director
chooses to let his characters be nameless, as they are given nicknames
derived from either their occupation or some description used to
identify them.
The 18-year-old cyclo driver (Le Van Loc) has the right face of despair
for this hellhole he was born into and can't escape from, not finding
much to smile about as he pedals all over this bustling town picking up
fares to help keep his family supplied with the bare necessities, and
returns at night to the small two-room open shack the family lives in,
in what seems to be an endless cycle of suffering.
The pedicab cyclo driver's mother died at childbirth and his father died
in a truck accident while he was young. Now everyone must work in this
family even if they are too old, too infirmed, or too young. His elderly
grandfather repairs tires, his very young sister shines shoes, and his
very special older sister (Tran Nu Yen Khe-the director's wife), a
beautiful and gentle young lady, is the matriarch of the family and
works as a water carrier in the marketplace.
This is a humanistic story told in a surrealist manner, about young men
who need their father's help, but all their fathers are either dead, or
abusive, or can't help them, and the boys are caught in a vicious circle
that they can't get out of. Their miserable lives have no good prospects
in sight and no good father-figure around to help them.
Poetry is the vehicle of choice for how the story is best transcribed
onscreen, since dialogue is almost non-existent. It is told as if time
doesn't exist, one event runs into another and everything seems jumbled.
Images of water and fire are used throughout the film for purposes of
symbolically cleansing the soul and destroying the impurities in it.
Paint is used as a contrast to blood. Crazy Son, the Madam's son, paints
his face yellow and gets Cyclo confused as to who he is, thinking that
he might be his father. When Cyclo is drugged out, he paints his face
blue and swallows some goldfish (whatever that symbolically means), and
the Madam confuses him for her son, forgiving him for everything, as she
sings lullabies to him.
In a film loaded with contrasts, the huge gap between most of the
population which is poor, is harshly contrasted with those who have
money to burn.
Innocence is being corrupted by the experienced, proving that nothing
remains pure in this city that steals one's life, one's poetry, and
one's spirit. It reduces the innocent to being left with no choice but
to be corrupted by the city or die in poverty. In one scene Cyclo is
listening to a gangster sing lullabies, while the gangster knifes to
death someone who is bound and gagged.
In another abstract scene, there is a crashed U.S. Army helicopter down
in the middle of a heavily trafficked Saigon street. Which signifies
that there is something despairing about the foreign influence in
Vietnam, but what that despair exactly means, is never clearly stated in
the context of the story.
The action starts when the boy's cyclo (pronounced cee-clo) is stolen by
a rival gang, and the family's main source of economic support is taken
away from them. He soon becomes part of a gang ruthlessly run by the
Madam, a crime boss played by Nguyen Nhu Quynh. She is the one who owned
the cyclo that was stolen from him and he now pays her back with his
servitude. He has forgotten his father's sound advice to self-improve,
so he looks to the gangster way of life to get out of his impoverished
state; he is only reminded that he is not following his father's advice
when he has strong dreams that his father seems to be trying to tell him
something is wrong with what he is doing.
What he is after now is power and revenge. He gets revenge when he
tosses a gasoline fire-bomb into the rival cyclo garage, the one that
stole his cyclo, and he later takes out the eye of one of its members,
by hitting him with a board. He willingly joins the Madam's gang, coming
under the caring tutelage of The Poet (Tony Leung), a small-time gang
leader for the Madam. He is soon carting drugs across town during the
New Year's festival, when the streets are jammed and the police are
stopping to search those who look suspicious. He also becomes part of
the gang's assassination squad and is given a gun to go with the
switchblade he was initially given by Mr. Lullaby. He wants power, and
believes that power comes from the gun he holds in his hand.
Not known to him, his virgin sister gets involved with a pimp, The Poet,
who is the leader of the same gang he joined. The Poet befriends him,
and his sensitivity is shown by the verses he recites off camera that
are coming from his heart. In his daily life, he hardly speaks. He is
linked to Cyclo by karma. He identifies with him and his choice to be a
gangster rather than be poor all his life. Also, The Poet is endeared to
Cyclo because the youngster still has his innocence intact. He, thereby,
tries to help him as best as he can.The Poet also shows that he is
capable of wordly love, as he loves Cyclo's sister and protects her,
even takes her to meet his mother and father. He somehow keeps her a
virgin by having her do all the kinky sex tricks that do not involve
touching, like peeing for a customer.
Whenever The Poet gets tense, his nose bleeds. Blood gain is used as a
symbol.
Tragedy strikes for her, when a wealthy customer, who is into handcuff
bondage, rapes her. When he pays the pimp off with extra money and
apologizes for what he did, this does not satisfy the pimp, who knifes
him to death in a stylized killing that is very graphic. Grossly unhappy
that his love is spoiled and that his life is in shambles and that his
father hates him -- the pimp burns his place down and fatally shoots
himself. For the Poet, losing one's innocence is tantamount to death.
This film is a visual masterpiece, capturing the frenetic pace of life
in the city and the faces of sorrow on the poor; it paints an
unsentimental picture of a place that is a living hell. But it is not a
masterpiece storywise, as its storyline was rambling, laying no specific
blame for what is happening on the local government or for that matter,
on anyone, only implying how rotten the Western influence is. Also, it
seemed to me, there were too many violent scenes, as the filmmaker seems
to revel in them without expounding on them. He seems to be expressing
an unclear reason for his rage through the use of his troubling images,
not letting up on the nightmare he sees before him, but also not saying
why he thinks the violence is inevitable.
This powerful film offers westerners a potent dosage of what life is
like in a third world country, a country most Americans only envision in
a depersonalized way, but the film still had too many gaps in its
storytelling and too many loose ends it left not fully developed.
Cyclo, as a person, should have been more flesh-and-blood like, rather
than used as merely a morbid symbolic example of the loss of innocence.
There was something there that just seemed to be elusive about the film,
the director just wouldn't let the viewer get into without imposing his
own personal barriers; he doesn't even want to give us their real names,
as if he thought, we would sully their hardships even more than it
already is. He mainly wants to shock our sensibilities, to have us look
plaintively at his native country like he does, even if he too is only a
tourist. There is nothing wrong with that in itself, but his social
designs could have been painted with clearer brush strokes.
The contrast between those who are gentle and those who are brutal, and
those who are dreamers and those who can't dream anymore, could have
been better utilized than to point out the obvious, of how wretched a
place this is and of how the gentle (innocent) have little chance of
succeeding.
Still, this is one powerful film, filled with relentless and disturbing
visualizations, whose poetic voice comes from the inside of the director
and is strong and boiling over with metaphorical emotion.
Cyclo was a deserved winner of a Golden Lion award for best film at the
Venice Film Festival.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CYCLO (XICH LO) is the second feature length film by director Tran
Anh Hung.  His first was the highly acclaimed and much gentler THE
SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA.  In certainly a change of pace, CYCLO is a
depressing, violent, claustrophobic, and confusing tale.  I tried hard
to like it, but had to give up in futility.  I will give it this, it is
a gritty film.
     CYCLO is set and was filmed in contemporary Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam.  It tells the story of a man, played by Le Van Loc, who works
as a cyclo - a bicycle with a small seat in front for carrying one or
more passengers plus assorted luggage, food, animals, you name it.  In
the movie he is known simply as The Cyclo.  As the director and
co-writer Hung says in the press kit, "for me the term refers equally
to the driver and his vehicle."
     The Cyclo leads a tragic life.  His mother died in childbirth and
his father was a cyclo who was killed at work in a traffic accident.
Early in the story a gang steals The Cyclo's cyclo, and he soon decides
if you can't beat 'em, join 'em.  He has a sister, known only as The
Sister (Tran Nu Yen-Khe), who is in love with her pimp, The Poet (Tony
Leung Chiu Wai).
     If the film's purpose is to shock us into how bad it is now in
Vietnam, then at least on that score it succeeds.  The violence shown
ranges from sadistic to worse.  People have funnels forced down their
throats, and they are almost drowned in water until they come close to
gagging themselves to death by throwing up.  Others take boards with
large nails in them and hit people's head until they are dead as the
blood spurts everywhere.  In another scene a person is horribly and
realistically burned with a Molotov cocktail.  This is making me
nauseous so I am going to stop giving examples.  You get the picture by
now.  As an aside, there are some extremely violence films that I have
loved, but here it is so gratuitous and excessive that it turned me
off.
     Even absent the gore, the story is a depressing one.  The Sister
is not just a prostitute, she is one that has to engage in shall we say
some unusual activities.  The cinematography (Benoit Delhomme and
Laurence Tremolet) is full of tight close-ups in highly confined
quarters.  It makes you want to go outside and get some fresh air it is
so claustrophobic.
     The script contains little dialog and like the recent Iranian
film, THE WHITE BALLOON, the lack of dialog is filled with the
overpowering sound of traffic noise.  What lines there are serve more
to confuse than enlighten.  Finally, the characters were so
unsympathetically drawn that you do care about what happens to any of
them which makes the massive violence seem all the more excessive.
     I must admit, I do like the dramatic music by Ton-That Tiet.  I
will give the director credit for being willing to experiment.  He
takes a lot of risks and fails miserably.
     CYCLO runs too long at 2:00.  It needs much more aggressive
editing than Nicole Dedieu and Claude Ronzeau give it.  The film is in
Vietnamese with English subtitles.  CYCLO is not rated, but would be at
least an R.  I would only let the most mature teenagers see it.  I hope
Tran Anh Hung returns to films like THE SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA in the
future and leaves the ultra violence movies to directors like Quentin
Tarantino who have a better sense of how to handle it.  I hated CYCLO,
but give it * for trying.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
