Title
Review for Fire Down Below (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Scott Renshaw
FIRE DOWN BELOW
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Steven Seagal, Marg Helgenberger, Harry Dean Stanton, Stephen
Lang, Brad Hunt, Kris Kristofferson.
Screenplay:  Jeb Stuart and Philip Morton.
Producers:  Julius R. Nasso and Steven Seagal.
Director:  Felix Enriquez Alcala.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  98 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In an uncertain world, there's something strangely reassuring about
the films of Steven Seagal.  The economy may rise and fall, but Seagal
will always dispatch all adversaries with the same vaguely bored smirk and
without a hair in his ponytail drifting out of place.  You can't depend on
political institutions, but you can depend on the fact that Seagal will
put together a wardrobe where nary a pastel nor a T-shirt will be found.
All else changes, but Seagal stays the same -- the same facial expression,
the same tone of voice for every emotion, the same humorless
self-importance.  He is stasis personified.
     There's not much new to say about FIRE DOWN BELOW, because there's
not much new to see.  Seagal plays a tough guy who dresses in black (for
what it's worth, his name is Jack Taggart).  His cause is righteous (a
nasty industrialist is dumping toxic waste in a rural Kentucky coal mine,
and Seagal is the E.P.A.'s resident Aikido master).  Bad guys get in the
way (almost invariably four or five at a time).  Bones end up broken
(almost invariably four or five at a time).
     And none of those bones ever belong to Seagal's character.  A Seagal
fight sequence is uniquely monotonous not just because the hero always
wins -- action heroes usually win -- but because no one ever lays a finger
on him.  I doubt Seagal will ever make a truly thrilling action thriller
(and yes, that includes UNDER SIEGE) because his ego could never permit
any doubt as to the outcome; his action scenes are like Harlem
Globetrotters games without the showmanship.  When he appears in one scene
in FIRE DOWN BELOW with a wee cut over his left eyebrow after outracing a
homicidal trucker, you wonder how much convincing it took before Seagal
allowed himself to bleed.
     It's that ego of his which makes so many Seagal films so wonderfully,
terribly predictable.  When he stops FIRE DOWN BELOW dead in its tracks to
give a mini-version of his ON DEADLY GROUND speech on environmental
responsibility, you know it's because he genuinely believes someone cares
what he thinks on the subject.  When he stops it yet again to show off
his down-home guitar stylings, you know it's because he just can't help
himself.  When he works with directors like Bruce Malmuth, Geoff Murphy,
John Gray and now Felix Enriquez Alcala -- a virtual Who's Who of "Who's
He?" -- you know it's because he's not about to take orders.  And when he
tries to work up some sensitive romantic chemistry with Marg Helgenberger,
you want to laugh out loud at the idea that he could love anyone as much
as he loves himself.
     Sure, you can always count on a few token surprises, most of them
completely ridiculous.  There's a needless and unpleasant subplot about
incestuous siblings -- nothing like dismantling Appalachian stereotypes --
and a few colorful bursts of conveniently fluorescent toxic goop.  There's
even Kris Kristofferson as the slimy head heavy, sharing a couple of
scenes and a squinting contest for the ages with our leading man.  Mostly,
however, there's more of the same fight-chase-explosion narrative
structure and automoton emoting which makes the latest Steven Seagal film
a natural sequel to the last Steven Seagal film.  There's nothing remotely
entertaining about FIRE DOWN BELOW, but there's something steadying about
Seagal's artistic intransigence.  He won't go deserting us to do Hamlet on
Broadway, or take a pay cut to work on an independent film.  In turbulent
times, you can almost take comfort in the knowledge that one man's name is
as good as a plot description.

Author
Steve Kong
I often ask myself after watching a Steven Seagal movie, "Why did I even
bother?" Seagal again uses his wooden acting abilities in Fire Down Below.
I'm not sure why Seagal has chosen recently to preach about nature in his
films, but as well intentioned it might be, it just does not belong in this
kind of action movie. In On Dangerous Ground he preached about offshore oil
drilling, in Fire Down Below he preaches about toxic dumping. To say the
least, the preaching is very distracting, and often leads to some silly
character building scenes that just don't work.
Is Fire Down Below entertaining and fun? Nope, it was a painful experience.
Thought there were some action scenes in Fire Down Below, including a fight
between a semi and a small truck, there was too much lag time between the
action. I've also noticed that as Seagal gets older the quicker the cuts
and closer the camera is during the fight scenes. The fight scenes in Fire
Down Below are a disappointment, using lighting fast cuts, unsteadycam, and
super close ups.
The plot is easy; a rich millionaire is dumping toxic chemicals into the
backwoods. He has his son out there "taking care" of EPA guys. Seagal is
the tough-as-nails EPA guy who, unlike the previous EPA guys, can take care
of himself, thank you. While there Seagal runs into a young woman, for whom
he falls in love with. Pretty thin as a plot, but what is expected of a
Seagal film?
This film is down right awful and no one should suffer the pain of it. I'm
sure Seagal has good intentions by putting these pro-Earth messages in his
films, but they just do not work. The film needs more action and less
talking. Seagal needs to learn inflection in his speech also. Under Siege
was probably Seagal's best film, I enjoyed that film a lot. Fire Down Below
does not come close to Under Siege. I remember why I bother to go see
Seagal films, he makes them in intervals long enough so that people forget
how awful his films really are. I hope that I remember next time a film
starring Seagal comes out. Miss this film, it's not worth your money or the
two hours you spend sitting through it.

Author
Homer Yen
 There was probably a good reason that the Warner Bros. studio chose
 not to allow critics to view this Steven Seagal film when it first
 opened.  And, after seeing this piece of toxic waste, I now know why.
 This movie is by far the worst offering that has hit the screen since
 possibly those Ernest movies years ago.  Fire Down Below centers its
 story on a little mining town in God's country, somewhere in eastern
 Kentucky.  It's beauty and natural goodness is being slowly destroyed
 by an uncaring mining magnate (Kris Kristopherson, who constantly
 looks like he wants to kill his agent for getting him this role).  It
 turns out that he's filling the mines throughout Kentucky with toxic
 waste for a tidy profit.  Seagal plays Jack Taggert, an aikido-versed,
 fighting machine, who is an agent with the EPA.  No...not the CIA nor
 the FBI nor the NSA.  It's the Environmental Protection Agency.   I
 had no idea that EPA agents were trained to be killers! Taggert is
 sent to find the perpetrators and to bring them to justice.
 Written by someone named Jeb, I could already envision the stereotypes
 of incestuous relationships, banjo-picking preachers, and
 dumb-as-nails rednecks.    But the script puts Seagal right smack dab
 in the middle of all of these scenarios as he tries to discreetly fit
 in.  Seagal's idea of a disguise is a long-length $1000 leather
 jacket.  But to get closer to the kinfolk, he will fix people's
 porches for free.  That's another great EPA asset - teaching agents
 how to fix porches.
 Slow and plodding, this project is a total mess.  The sometimes allure
 of watching Seagal is watching him outmaneuver enemies that outnumber
 and outgun him like in Under Seige.    Here, his bravado basically
 turns into bullyness.  Townsfolk who are foolish enough to challenge
 Seagal are quickly subdued.  Fight scenes are quick and senseless and
 offers no enjoyment value whatsoever.  And his soap box message wears
 thin within the first 15 minutes.  The most annoying moment comes when
 he barges into the middle of a Sunday church ceremony, gets behind the
 pulpit, and beseeches the townsfolk to take control of their lives and
 to help clean up the environment.  But the epitome of how
 moralistically mushy this film gets happens when the person
 responsible for the toxic dumping, Kristopherson, meets up with
 Seagal.  Kristopherson asks Seagal how much it will take for him to go
 away.  Seagal gallantly replies: "I'll leave when you take the poison
 from the streams and the earth."  I was expecting patriotic music to
 start blasting and a show of fireworks in the background.  This is
 truly nothing more than a pompous showcase for Seagal's righteousness
 and narcissistic arrogance.
 Seagal has been vanguard in trying to bring a new genre into the
 filmplace, that of the enviro-thriller (On Deadly Ground).  However,
 the message will never come across through poorly developed vehicles
 like this.  Still, I believe in preserving Mother Earth, so save your
 $5 and please donate it instead to some worthy environmentally
 conscious charity.

Author
James Sanford
           Steven, Steven, Steven. Your movies used to be fun to
watch.  ``Hard To Kill,'' ``Marked For Death,'' the first ``Under
Siege'': terrific stuff.
  But somewhere along the line Mr. Seagal changed and so did
his films.  It's not enough for them to be simple entertainment now;
these days, they have to carry foreboding messages about social
responsibility and ecology.
  They also have to carry Seagal himself, which is too much
for any movie to bear. Early in his career, Seagal seemed to have a
sense of humor about himself: Recently, he's become a vainglorious
joke.
Barbra Streisand is often accused of admiring herself too much
but she's got nothing on Seagal, whose latest epics devote substantial
portions of their footage to lovingly lit close-ups of their star.
  At least Streisand has reasonably reliable taste in scripts.
Seagal chooses projects like ``Fire Down Below,'' which, despite its
title, has nothing to do with Bob Seger or sailors on shore
leave. Unfortunately, it has nothing to do with entertainment either.
  Instead, ``Fire'' relies on the timeworn tale of
tight-lipped country folk hiding a dirty secret, in this case an
underground stockpile of toxic chemicals. Some of these poisons have
been leaking into the water supply, killing fish and giving some of
the young'uns powerful rashes.
  So EPA investigator Jack Taggart (guess who) goes undercover
in the rural hamlet of Jackson, Ky., as a minister's assistant. To
make sure he blends in with the locals, Jack packs a dazzling array of
expensive custom leather jackets, sporting everything from fringe to
candy-stripes, and to get maximum use from this wardrobe he changes
coats at least a couple of times a day.
  That's typical of the foolishness that runs throughout
``Fire Down Below,'' even behind the scenes. While Seagal poses and
preens, he warbles several country-fried tunes offscreen, and suffice
to say there won't be a run on the soundtrack album.
  Marg Helgenberger takes her best stab at playing Jack's love
interest, the kind of tormented backwoodsy recluse Helen Reddy used to
sing songs about. The stultifying aw-shucks courtship between the two
is like a nightmarish version of ``The Bridges of Madison County,''
and an incest subplot involving Helgenberger and her wild-eyed brother
(Stephen Lang) is laughably mishandled.
  A slumming Kris Kristofferson drops by a few times as a
generic corporate meanie, a sleazy casino owner who has a bedroom
adjacent to his business office. His redneck henchmen seem to exist
solely so that Jack can snap their bones and they can sing his praises
afterward, noting ``I've never been hit so hard in my life!'' and ``I
think he broke my jaw!''
  Like his earlier turkey ``On Deadly Ground,'' ``Fire Down
Below'' also makes time for Seagal to - quite literally - take the
pulpit and sermonize on the evil that rich people do to the
environment for the love of money.  The speech is so heavy-handed it
would make Jane Fonda squirm, and it somehow never mentions the
pollution wealthy Steven Seagal has dumped in our theaters in the form
of ``Fire Down Below.''

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Steven Seagal, Marg Helgenberger, Harry Dean Stanton,
      Kris Kristofferson, Stephen Lang, Levon Helm, Brad Hunt
Director: Felix Enriquez Alcala
Producers: Steven Seagal and Julius R. Nasso
Screenplay: Jeb Stuart and Philip Morton
Cinematography: Tom Houghton
Music: Nick Glennie-Smith
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     About the nicest thing I can say about a Steven Seagal film is that
the average offering from the man who personifies wooden acting is more
entertaining than sitting in traffic. FIRE DOWN BELOW, Seagal's latest
(which seems just like his next-to-latest), is just about average.  It
offers what Seagal fans have come to expect from their icon:  a healthy
dose of ego and a lot of fights in which no one ever lays a finger on
the star.  It's a known fact that the more violent a Seagal movie is,
the more enjoyable it is.  To that end, FIRE DOWN BELOW could have used
a few more fight scenes to cut down on such unimportant irritants as the
laughable attempts at plot and character development.
     To his usual arsenal of kicks, punches, and chops, Seagal adds a
new weapon:  the politically correct, pro-environment message (actually,
he pulled this one out of his bag of tricks for 1994's ON DEADLY GROUND,
which he directed).  The intent of this is apparently to bore his
enemies to death.  Let me say up front that I believe Seagal to be
totally sincere in his concern for the environment, but it strikes me
that preaching about it in an action film is not the best arena.  It's
not only a distraction, but it comes across as both sanctimonious and
hypocritical. (It's okay for Seagal to beat the crap out of anyone who
looks cross-eyed at him, but don't you dare dump that glowing green
stuff down a mine shaft!)
     Seagal plays Federal Agent Jack Taggart (Seagal by any other
name=85), an undercover operative who works for the EPA.  His guise -- a
pious itinerant carpenter (everyone laugh at the same time) who comes to
a small Kentucky town to repair roofs, porches, and steps free of
charge.  His mission -- to find the secret toxic waste dump in the
nearby coal mines and bring back a witness to testify about what's going
on.  His means -- any and all necessary, and the more violent, the
better.
     Within a few days of his arrival, Taggart's cover has effectively
been blown (it might have something to do with his treatment of local
law enforcement officials or the fact that he announced very loudly in
the middle of a crowded street that he's a Federal Agent), but that
doesn't stop him from relentlessly trying to shut down the operation of
the nasty, local bigwig (Kris Kristofferson, shifting his LONE STAR
personality into the corporate world).  Everyone with muscles appears to
want to beat Taggart's head in, but he dispatches them four or five at a
time (a few with single-digit IQs even come back for seconds).  There's
also an obligatory love interest, played with a distinct lack of
enthusiasm by Marg Helgenberger, and a dull sidekick who is listlessly
essayed by the normally-reliable Harry Dean Stanton.  Seagal must demand
that actors in his films discard any inherent talent so there's no
threat of stealing scenes from him.
     One curious thing about FIRE DOWN BELOW is that it initially seems
to want to refute the "dumb, hillbilly" stereotype that people often
associate with residents of the rural communities of West Virginia,
Tennessee, and Kentucky.  However, by including an incest subplot and
creating so many idiotic, cartoonish villains for Seagal to beat up, it
actually reinforces the unflattering image.  At one point, Taggart makes
a comment about possibly coming to live in the area.  I think we're
supposed to infer that he's in awe of the beauty of the Appalachians,
but it seems more likely that he has been seduced by the thought of so
many readily-available punching bags.
     Seagal fans will find that their hero is still in his usual form
(his form, like his expression, hasn't wavered since he debuted in ABOVE
THE LAW).  The action scenes are adequately directed (by Felix Enriquez
Alcala, a TV director making the crossover to feature films), and
there's a genuinely tense truck-and-car chase that is worth about 90
seconds of moderate excitement.  The rest of the film is all by-the-book
stuff, but that's what's expected whenever the name "Steven Seagal" tops
the marquee.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Steven Seagal, Marg Helgenberger, Harry Dean Stanton, Stephen
Lang, and Kris Kristofferson 
Written by Jeb Stuart and Philip Morton. Story by Jeb Stuart. 
Synopsis: 
To set up the situation, the first five minutes of this movie explain
that an evil mining corporation is illegally dumping radioactive waste
in the backwoods of Kentucky, and that EPA agent Jack Taggert (Steven
Seagal) is being sent to Kentucky to convince the scared local
townspeople to testify against the big bad company.  
The movie has two main plots: 1) Taggart attacks evil mining tycoon Orin
Hanner (Kris Kistofferson) and Hanner's thugs because they once killed a
fellow agent and friend of Taggert's, and; 2) Taggert courts a local
outcast named Sarah (Marg Helgenberger). He tries to charm the scared
townsfolk into testifying by giving them rides in his pickup truck,
repairing wooden porches, and making a speech during a church service. 
"Fire Down Below" features no big climactic battle, but does contain a
few skirmishes lasting a few seconds a piece, where big Taggert (Seagal)
gets to bully some undersized townfolk who are lackeys of the evil
corporation. 
Aikido content: Martial artist turned actor Steven Seagal is a real life
Aikido expert.  In most Seagal movies Seagal can usually be counted on
for at least a kote gaeshi outward wrist turn, a sankyo controlling
wristlock, and an irimi nage entering throw where he sidesteps forward
and to the left and then clotheslines the opponent with his free right
hand. In "Fire Down Below" Seagal manages at least a few sankyos and an
irimi nage throw, but 90% of the time he uses standby moves such as
front kicks to the groin and shoves. He does a new move - squeezing the
neck with the fingers - probably twice. The fight photography often
shows dark shots of people falling to the ground quickly and not getting
up. These 'instant victory' fight scenes seemed too short, easy, and
anticlimactic, so they didn't build any suspense or sense of impending
danger for upcoming scenes .
Opinion: A typical action movie such as Seagal's earlier movie 'Under
Siege' (1992) has short skirmishes building in suspense, leading to a
climactic final confrontation. "Fire Down Below" doesn't do this
(despite containing quite a few short scenes where good guy Taggert gets
to domineer and bully people he doesn't like), so "Fire Down Below"
appears to be more of an winded environmental drama than an accelerating
action flick. The end result is that this pro-ecology film feels like an
hour-long drama that has been stretched an extra 43 minutes to become a
movie. If you're into country music, you'll enjoy a lot of wonderful
cameos by celebrities such as Randy Travis and others in scenes where
Jack Taggert escorts his girlfriend around town.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Ah, the refreshing vapidity of a Steven Seagal movie.  In the best
brain cleaner since SPEED 2: CRUISE CONTROL, Mr. Squinty squares off
against an evil mining magnate (Kris Kristofferson) whose illegally
dumped toxic waste is killing fish, sickening children, and inflaming
the testosterone of every grown man this side of southeastern Kentucky.
The first hour is pretty bad, with Seagal's EPA agent attempting to
infiltrate a small mining town as a church sponsored handyman whose work
attire inexplicably includes designer black-leather jackets.  He tries
to blend in, making friends with the locals and only kicking their asses
when provoked.  (Obviously intending to *instruct* as well as entertain,
Seagal demonstrates the fine art of redneck whupping in a *variety* of
locations:  lumberyard, city street, etc.)  The second hour, however, is
where the *really* awful fun begins.  How about Marg Helgenberg's love-
interest, a spinster (!) outcast (!!) beekeeper (!!!) whose overprotec-
tive brother becomes increasingly psychotic?  Or the Bubba-falls-down
fight sequence, set in a pool hall, where ol' Stone Face's fists o' fury
are filmed in fast motion!?  Or, my favorite-- and the last in a long
line of canyon-spanning logic leaps-- Seagal taking his final shot at
the villain and then walking away, completely ignoring the accompanying
FBI agent who was shot in the gut a few second before!?  Hilarious.
With appearances by a bunch of country music folk, including Mark Col-
lie, Randy Travis, Patsy and Peggy Lynn, Travis Tritt, and Marty Stuart,
who picks along with Stevie in one scene.  And who was the guy that
walked away from the poker game?  He looked familiar, too.

Author
Louis Proyect
There is a genuine integrity to Steven Seagal's body of work. While
the critical establishment is finally giving Jackie Chan the acclaim
that he richly deserves as martial artist/film star, isn't it about
time that we recognize Seagal for the politically progressive
trail-blazer that he is? Make way, Oliver Stone, for a genuine
rebel--one who is at home delivering class-struggle speeches or karate
kicks to a villain's teeth.
In his latest film "Fire Down Below," Seagal plays Jack Taggart, an
EPA inspector who goes undercover in rural Kentucky to find out who
has killed his partner. His partner was investigating toxic spills.
His cover is as a volunteer church worker who repairs the porches of
congregation members. The pastor is played by Levon Helm, formerly of
the band called The Band.
It turns out that a most reactionary member of the bourgeoisie, Orin
Hanner (Kris Kristofferson), is being paid big money to hide toxic
waste in the hills and waters of the beautiful Appalachian
countryside, and the chemicals are killing fish and making children
sick. Orin Jr.(Brad Hunt) runs the day-to-day operations in the hills
while his dad sits in the corporate headquarters like an Appalachian
version of the rotten businessman J.R. Ewing on the old TV show
"Dallas". Now in his sixties, Kristofferson has adapted well to
villainous roles. He was outstanding as the sadist cop in John Sayles
"Lone Star" and equals that performance here. 
Orin Jr. sends out one goon squad after another to kill Seagal, but he
always manages to defeat them with well-placed kicks and punches. The
charm of watching Seagal in action has a lot to do with his growing
middle-aged paunch which many cinema fans can identify with. Seagal
wears long coats throughout the film which tastefully disguise his
love handles, but you can discern their contour if you look carefully.
Not only does he have lethal extremities, he is also cunning and
lethal behind the wheel. One of Hanner's thugs tries to run him off
the road, but Seagal dodges him at the edge of a cliff and the
would-be killer drives to his death. This is an action hero par
excellence: a combination of the Roadrunner, Bruce Lee and--best of
all--Big Bill Heywood.
As soon as he returns to town after the car chase, he walks into the
middle of a church service and mounts the pulpit. He tells the
congregation that there are rich people who are trying to poison them.
Their profits come at the expense of the town's children or the beauty
of the environment. It is time to stand up to these greedy businessmen
and fight for justice, says Seagal with a steely glint in his eye.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Steven Seagal, Marg Helgenberger, Harry Dean Stanton, Kris
Kristofferson, Stephen Lang, Levon Helm, Brad Hunt Director: Felix
Enriquez Alcala Screenplay: Jeb Stuart and Philip Morton
There is something pristine about Segal and his action heroes who remain
virtually invincible in harms way. He will occasionally be cut or
stabbed, but you'll never see too much blood on that well chiselled face
and solid torso. For some reason blood, dirt, sweat and bruises don't
hang well on Segal. Punishing injury is for the die hard Willis,
physical damage follows the kick boxing Van Damme, and multiple gun shot
wounds riddle after the robotic Swharzenegger. As for Segal it's not his
style to let the enemy throw too many close punches, let alone get his
expensive clothes dirty. For that reason, I like Segal because he has
redefined the meaning of a clean fight.
Unfortunately, there isn't anything unique about "Fire Down Below" that
hasn't already traversed down the road of previous Segal action
thrillers. He's a special agent once again, with a slick appearance and
familiar pony tail; well dressed and diet controlled since his last
siting with pot belly in the embarrassing "The Glimmer Man". Once again
the hero he creates is perfectly balanced, poetically just and an
effortless killer who defeats up to twenty men with guns in any given
situation. I have no qualms with this particular style of polished
action and safety margin thrills. The real let down for me was how very
ordinary this movie turned out.
I do not carry a keen love of pure special effects in movies, but in an
action flick, especially in a Segal action flick I would like to see
more than a couple of bins explode and objects burn. I would also like
to see Segal wearing something outside his usual dark overcoat and
leather jackets; especially in a small country town where he is supposed
to blend with the natives in order to carry out an investigation. Come
on Steven, how about some jeans, a pleat shirt and a cowboy hat? Too
risque or just trying to hide weight? You need to dress the part if you
want us to believe you have some carpentry skills. Just swinging the
hammer in clothing suitable for a "Planet Hollywood" presentation
doesn't quite cut the cheese.
On the unusual side of things, Segal has decided to include a love
interest for his hero notably absent in his most recent movies. He has
strangely chosen a frail, weedy looking creature (Marg Helgenberger) to
be the main contender. There is no question that Segal remains the
perfect gentleman in his movies and women naturally fall for that sort
of a thing. But it becomes hard to swallow when he comes across as a
Russian Mafia thug, whilst his love interest is mostly clothed in rags
and lives like a hermit. The only thing they have in common is her porch
needs fixing, he likes her cooking and they both collect honey. Maybe
that's enough for some relationships to work, but there certainly isn't
any chemistry under the stove.
So overall I was disappointed by this latest of Segal offerings. I guess
in my heart, I still carry that simple wish that he'll get back into
whites and rescue another battle cruiser from the claws of terrorists.
Somehow rescuing country bumpkins from the jaws of polluting
industrialists doesn't carry the same missed heartbeat of thrill and
ride.
