Title
Review for Barb Wire (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Kelvin Ha
BARB WIRE, Pamela Anderson Lee's first foray into films,
highlights the fact that her only talent lies in her silicone enhanced
assets. Being the only notable member of the cast, the camera lingers
lustily o n her body at every opportunity, making her character's
catch line, "don't call me babe," sound very ironic indeed. From the
very opening of the movie, we are treated to a striptease routine from
Anderson, ending in her hurling her stiletto smack between the eyes of
a lusty male who happened to call her babe. Throughout the movie,
there is ample footage of enormous breasts and cleavage, if not of
Anderson's, then at least of the female extras. This alone is enough
to retitle the movie BABE WIRE.
For a plot, BARB WIRE rehashes the CASABLANCA storyline. It is 2017,
the middle of the second American Civil War, and Barb Wire, a former
resistance fighter, runs a joint in Steel Harbour called Hammerhead
(!!). Known for attracting resistance fighters an d characters of all
sorts, the bar attracts the attention of the government forces who
appear dressed in Nazi-style uniforms. In between bashing up helpless
males and showing off her trademark breasts, Barb Wire has to help a
former lover and his wife get to the airport on the other side of the
town, past the government-controlled areas, and to freedom. Even the
airport looks like the one in CASABLANCA, except that the plane in the
background is a modern, private jet.
There are hardly any significant moments in this film, and one gets
the impression that it was designed for young teenagers familiar with
the Dark Horse comics version of "Barb Wire." If anything, one leaves
the film with the confirmation that Anderson di d not do her own
stunts. Who could fight and jump in a skimpy, strapless leather top,
and yet keep her breasts from spilling out? Only a stuntwoman. Not
Pamela Anderson Lee.


Author
Andrew Hicks
        Actually, I'm fairly sure the experience of having my flesh 
torn and mutilated by barbed wire would have been more positive than 
watching this movie. "Baywatch" babe Pamela Anderson Lee proves 
once and for all that she should keep her Double-D's on the small 
screen. At least there you don't have to pay to see her cleavage. 
And for those viewers out there who would only lay down money 
for this movie in hopes of seeing Pam topless, hate to burst your 
bubble, but there are no full-fledged nude scenes in BARB WIRE. 
        You wouldn't be reading this review right now if I had known 
that fact going in. I can't go back in time and reverse my mistake, but I 
can warn other horny teenage boys out there. They do tease us a 
few times with scenes where you almost see her topless but if she 
is nude, it's so quick you can't even tell for sure whether you're 
seeing her Andersons or not. A nipple hallucination sort of 
thing.
        BARB WIRE was adapted from a comic book, interesting 
because Pamela is probably the only woman who looks like a comic 
book character in real life, even wearing low-cut leather to do office 
work (businesswoman bondage wear) and having unreal body 
proportions. Yes, like the Mona Lisa, Pamela Anderson is a 
man-made beauty, probably in more senses than one. 
        She is a definite beauty, though, and looking at her is never 
an unpleasant experience. You'd just think the woman who began her 
career as a Playboy playmate wouldn't have any reservations about 
appearing nude in the movie, because it's obvious she wasn't pulling 
a Sharon Stone and trying to make people pay attention to her acting 
skills. I mean, she shows off more cleavage here than a jeweler's 
convention.
        The movie is set in the year 2017, "the worst year of my 
life," Pam says. ("The worst movie of the year," I say.) America is 
going through a second Civil War and Pamela is a nightclub owner 
in the only free city in the nation (Silicone Valley, I think). She also 
hires herself out as a bounty hunter when the price is right, posing 
as first a stripper and later as a prostitute.
        But don't call her "babe." She hates that, and reminds us of 
that fact way too many times. Imagine, a woman who does a trapeze 
strip tease in a bar while having a hose sprayed on her being referred 
to in such a sexist, demeaning term. A liberated woman like Pamela 
Anderson shouldn't have to hear words like "babe" during a strip 
tease, especially since that movie about the talking pig was such a 
success.
        The plot (ha-ha) revolves around a pair of contact lenses 
that allow their wearer to pass through the Congressional Directorate's 
retina scanners. In the words of one of the characters, they're "more 
than meets the eye." Reminds me of the "Transformers" cartoon, 
and I sure wished the movie could somehow be transformed into 
something decent, but that never happened. No, the movie just 
continued on its path of lame action scenes starring Pamela 
Van-Damme, big-busted kickboxer, and her resistance accomplices, 
ex-boyfriend Axel (Tamuera Morrison) and Cora (Victoria Rowell). 
Thank God they didn't name her Cora Reef. One bad character 
name is more than enough.
        Pamela originally doesn't take sides, giving some speech 
about she's only loyal to the money they pay her, but she changes 
her mind once the Congressional Bastards kill her blind brother, Jack 
Noseworthy of Bon Jovi "Always" video fame. I still don't know if 
BARB WIRE is a step up or step down for Noseworthy, but he 
definitely is nose worthy (even if he isn't sponge worthy). Pam gets 
ready to avenge his death by grabbing up an armful of semi-automatic 
weapons and strapping an ammunitions belt to her chest. It's not 
Rambo... it's Bimbo!
        Mark my words, BARB WIRE will be all over the Cinemax 
network in a year. It's got all the elements of the direct-to-video 
releases featured on HBO's bastard cousin, the cable channel I'd 
never watch if it didn't somehow come free. It's got the non-titillating 
scenes of voyeurism, laughable flashbacks, bad dialogue and action 
cliches out the wazzoo. There's even a narrator at the beginning 
setting up the movie's premise while the words scroll up the screen. 
Someone needs to tell Pamela the Wookie this ain't STAR WARS.
        If you've seen any action flick of the past fifteen years, 
you'll recognize plenty of lifted elements. BARB WIRE has the 
obligatory trucks flipping over, car crashes, explosions, broken 
glass and slow-motion shots of bodies falling hundreds of feet to 
their death. This is one of those automatic-pilot movies anyone 
could write or direct. BARB WIRE has only two things going for it... 
and I think you know what those two things are.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Pamela Anderson Lee, Temura Morrison, Victoria Rowell, Jack
Noseworthy, Xander Berkeley, Udo Kier Director: David Hogan Screenplay:
Chuck Pfarrer and Ilene Chaiken
She leaves a trail of dead men behind her. Hates to be called 혩babe',
which results in violent mood swings, more often than not resulting in
the male offender's untimely death. She struts, and stalks her prey with
the style of a night club stripper, and calls herself 혩Barb Wire' to
give her gimmick an edge.
The year is 2020 and we are in the midst of the second American Civil
War (Is there anything left to fight about?) A new breed of hero has
evolved - an ex-marine, very pre-pre-pre menstrual, angry woman, dumped
by her boyfriend, who has a lot on her mind, and a lot to prove to the
world (Hey, I thought that was G.I. Joe's set-up?).
What Ms. Barb Wire (Anderson Lee) needs to understand is that less
flesh, means more mystery; silicon belongs in computer chips, and not
part of the mammary glands; too much leather constitutes a sofa, not
clothing; a name like 혩Barb Wire' rusts easily, and belongs on the metal
scrap pile; and no, there won't be a long line of future sequels.
This 혩babe', (ooops, please don't shoot me) is history.

Author
Jason Overbeck
Barb Wire was written off on everyone's list before it came out.  Even
mine.  To be honest, I saw the film expecting cheesy laughs and extended
looks at Pamela Anderson's chest.  I was not disappointed on either of
the counts.
Barb Wire is a fun rip off/update/spoof of Casablanca (!) and it stars
Pamela Anderson as Barb.  In the opening scene she twists and turns
drinched in water - clothes (what there are of them) clinging to her
body.  I imagined all the teenage boys gasping, and nodding (this will
be a cool movie).  Then it follows the plot form of Casablanca, with
modern updates and camp thrown in.  If you are farmiliar with the '42
classic you will enjoy this film more than the regular viewer.
Chances are that if you've seen Casablanca and are reading this review
you are a somewhat sophisticated viewer, and you know trash when you see
it.  This film is trash, and I mean that as a compliment.  You may think
of Pauline Kael, who observed: "The movies are so rarely great art, that
if we can't appreciate great trash, there is little reason to go." 
Definatly little reason to go to a rip off/update/spoof of Casablanca
staring Pamela Anderson and Pamela Anderson's cleavage.  You don't go to
this film too make an artistic discovery.
I would love to recomend this movie but the ending is unfun and very
slow compaired to the high energy start.  I have a place in my heart for
films like this.  Something needs to be said of a film that tries to
overcome it's disadvantages with style and heart.  This comes close to
making it, and I do recomend the film to those who think it may be your
cup of tea.
For you who will want to see it, you will want to know the info about
the REAL reason to see this film.  I'll help you: This film has a
suprisingly small amount of nudity provided the fact Lee is the main
star.  We get many looks at her body in SKIN TIGHT, cleavage revealing
outfits and there is a scene of her fully nude, except for soap
bubbles.  There are also at least two scenes of her breasts.  If that
sounds like it will work for you ... rent it, but keep it hid from your
parents.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     It's not every day that we get to see a reworking of CASABLANCA,
much less one that (a.) is adapted from a comic book and (b.) stars
Pamela Anderson Lee.  Ms. Lee, a.k.a. "the Baywatch babe," a.k.a.
"you're looking rather buoyant this evening," plays the title character,
a bounty-hunting bar owner who lives in a (near) future where civil war
is being waged between the Nazi-looking Congressionals and the
underground Resistance.  They all come to Barb's place, though, because
she doesn't take sides.  That is, until a former lover-- and Resistance
alley-- steps out of the past and into her bar.  Sound familiar?
     There's more, of course, including a fat man who rides in a bucket
loader, a pair of contact lenses that fool retina scans, and, oh yeah, a
rocket-firing motorcycle.  (Trust me: it sounds more exciting than it
is.) BARB WIRE has a great "look," but director David Hogan doesn't
deliver a decent action sequence until the end.  And don't expect any
Bogarts or Bergmans, either; most of the cast appears to have been hired
for "assets" other than their acting abilities.  (Calm down guys, this
stuff doesn't even qualify as *soft*-core porn.  Just cleavage cleavage
cleavage and only the *occasional* peek behind curtains number one and
two.) No, there isn't much to this movie beyond the, uh, obvious, but if
you love CASABLANCA, and you can stomach Pamela Lee's hissed-through-
clinched-teeth line readings, then this may be the matinee for you.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Pamela Anderson Lee, Temura Morrison, Victoria Rowell, 
      Jack Noseworthy, Xander Berkeley, Udo Kier
Director: David Hogan
Producers: Brad Wyman, Mike Richardson, and Todd Moyer
Screenplay: Chuck Pfarrer and Ilene Chaiken
Cinematography: Rick Bota
Music: Michael Colombier
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     BARB WIRE has the cleavage of a Russ Meyer film without the jiggle.  
If someone was going to make a campy version of CASABLANCA, you'd think 
they'd at least have the decency to make it fun.  Unfortunately, other 
than a couple of very obvious, absurdly over-the-top scenes, this film 
is just plain boring.  Aside from observing Pamela Anderson Lee's 
apparent assets, the only reason to stay awake during BARB WIRE is to 
see how often it pilfers from the Bogart/Bergman classic.
     The characters and setting may be based on the Dark Horse comic 
book, but the plot is pure cyberpunk CASABLANCA.  It's 2017 (the worst 
year in the main character's life, as we're informed in a whispery 
voice-over), and the country is involved in the Second American Civil 
War.  There's only one free city left, Port Steel Harbor, and that's 
where Barb Wire (the "Rick" part, played by Pamela Anderson Lee) owns 
and operates the Hammerhead bar.  She's a declared neutral in an 
unaligned territory, accepting patronage from both the Nazi-like 
Congressional forces and the rebels trying to bring them down.  
     One day, a defecting government scientist in possession of critical 
resistance intelligence, Dr. Karina Devonshire (the "Victor Laszlo" 
part, played by Victoria Rowell), arrives at the Hammerhead in the 
company of a resistance fighter, Axel (the "Ilsa" part, played by ONCE 
WERE WARRIORS' Temura Morrison).  They need a way across the border into 
Canada, and think Barb may be able to help.  But there's a problem -- 
she and Axel were once lovers, and she's never forgiven him for 
abandoning her in Seattle.
     Most of the CASABLANCA characters are present (although half have 
undergone sex changes), and the story progresses in generally the same 
way (with a few fight scenes thrown in so that the leading lady can show 
off her athleticism, amongst other things).  It's curious that no one 
thought to credit CASABLANCA script writers Julius J. Epstein, Philip G. 
Epstein, and Howard Koch for at least "inspiring" the film.  Then again, 
for the sake of their reputations, maybe it's better this way.
     Despite being outfitted in leather and spike heels, Anderson Lee 
doesn't make for an appealing action star -- the silicon enhancements 
might have screen presence, but the star doesn't.  Okay, so she looks 
good on a motorcycle, but that's about it.  Her delivery of the 
requisite quips is awful, and her signature line ("Don't call me babe!") 
reminds one more of Kevin Kline's A FISH CALLED WANDA refrain ("Don't 
call me stupid!") than anything Clint or Arnold might ever have uttered.
     The film makers undoubtedly recognized that they were making a bad 
film.  Why else cast such an obviously-untalented actress in the lead 
role?  What they seemed to be banking on is that BARB WIRE would at 
least be fun, which it isn't.  The element of high camp that makes for 
enjoyable "good trash" isn't present.  Bad movies like this often 
generate small cult followings, and that's about the size of audience 
the picture deserves.  This BARB WIRE is rusty.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
An adaptation of the comic of the same name: It is the 2nd
American Civil War, with the rebels fighting the brutal
Congressionalists.  In the neutral city of Steel Harbour is a
club run by the mercenary Barb Wire (Anderson).  To the city come
the rebels Axel Hood (Morrison) and Cora D (Rowell), who need to
escape to neutral Canada, the Congressionalists hard on their
heels.  But Axel and Barb have a history together ...
... and where better to find a way out of the country than at
Rick's Cafe Americaine, where anything can be bought or sold,
even the corrupt Inspector Renault?  Yes, it's "Casablanca" but
this remake was aided by modern technology and a few search and
replace expressions:
   s/Casablanca/Steel Harbour/;
   s/Rick Blaine/Barb Wire/;
   s/Ilsa Lunt/Axel Hood/;
   s/Victor Lazlo/Dr Cora D/;
   s/the fat man/the fat man/;
   s/papers of transit/retinal lens/;
   s/the train from Paris/the helicopter from Seattle/;
   s/"As Time Goes By"/generic thrash/;
   s/piano-playing black sidekick/butler-like German sidekick/;
   s/Nazis/Congressionalists/;
   s/cult classic/nork fest/;
There are differences, such as the regrettable absence of
Ugarte.  (Was Pee-Wee Herman busy that week?)  Also regrettable
is the fact that Morrison affects an American accent instead of
his native New Zealand-ish: "Bub Ware!  You've gut to hulp us!".
Cora D is no Victor Lazlo, so it comes as no surprise that
Axel/Ilsa is helping her not for any leadership skills but for an
antidote she has coded in her DNA (an apparent side-effect being
atrophy of the charisma gland).  Steve Railsback, once a
promising actor, demonstrates his career has gone straight to
hell with his portrayal of the frothing Colonel Pryzer.  Quick
trivia: the bouncer at Barb's club is played by Tom "Tiny" Lister
Jr., who is also the President in "The Fifth Element".
The big surprise is everyone's favourite silicon based
lifeform, Pamela Anderson.  A walking cartoon character herself,
she shows a reasonable skill and style as an action star which is
used to effect in the first half of the film.  A four-colour
nightmare in leather and high-heels, her targets die as much from
her bullets and kicks as they do from amazement at the tensile
properties of modern fabrics.  Regrettably as the "Casablanca"
theme emerges, the energy starts to slowly leave the film.  An
even bigger blunder is the replacement of the end of "Casablanca"
with a generic action sequence, with Barb roaring offscreen on
her motorcycle as Axel goes mano a mano with the
Congressionalists.  (Picture Rick Blaine saying: "Ilsa, here's a
gun.  Go and pop some Nazis.  I'm just going to check down the
back of the club ...")
>From a modestly promising start, "Barb Wire" heads slowly off
course and into blandness.  Nonetheless it might make acceptable
if undemanding video fodder, and Anderson's next film may prove
interesting.  [*/misfire] and lime green as a fashion statement
on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]
