Title
Review for Suspiria (1977)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mike Watson
"Psycho meets the Exorcist with no holds barred".  A blurb like that
sounds like desperate publicity for some low budget, third rate
rip-off.  But no, this tacky plug comes from the poster for SUSPIRIA,
perhaps Italian horror director Dario Argento's most consistently
successful film.
What impresses most in re-watching this surrealistic, supernatural
thriller is that Argento's directorial flair and stylish visuals are
matched by a near-fully coherent narrative.  Screenplays have always
been his Achilles heel; confusing subplots, gaping holes, totally
illogical incidents and reactions.  No question: Argento has always
been a better director than a writer.  Fortunately, he gets the
plotting pretty well right with SUSPIRIA, taking his cue from a book
by Thomas De Quincey called "Suspiria de Profundis".  The film's
storyline suffers from no major lapses in logic, provided one can
accept the premise of a ballet school being a front for a coven of
witches.
Jessica Harper plays an American who travels to Germany to further her
studies in dance.  Arriving at the school late at night in driving
rain, she sees a girl leave and run into the storm in a clearly
distressed state.  What happens next - and I don't make the comparison
lightly - is a murder sequence that for intensity, shock value and
sheer directorial flair ranks alongside Alfred Hitchcock's infamous
shower scene in PSYCHO.  It's quite possibly a homage to Hitchcock,
but with its baroque sets, graphic gore and brilliantly chaotic
musical accompaniment by the Gothic rock group Goblin, this stunning
sequence remains very much Argento's own.
Though nothing else quite equals the intensity of SUSPIRIA'S opening
15 minutes, the film continues to be never anything less than
engrossing as Harper begins her own investigations and slowly comes to
realise this is no ordinary ballet school.  We meet an assortment of
slightly sinister characters, most notably the head ballet teacher
played by Alida Valli in another one of those delicious
sour-old-matriarch-from-hell roles she does so well.  Several more
violent murders ensue, including a startling scene in a deserted
square where a blind man is...well, I wouldn't want to spoil things
now, would I?  And the film's climax, staged amid secret corridors and
hidden rooms, has a Gothic ghoulishness that's most impressive.
The English language versions of most Argento movies usually suffer
trimming, and not just for the violence - DEEP RED and PHENOMENA, for
example, have been appallingly hacked about.  Fortunately, the cuts to
SUSPIRIA (about 7 minutes in this version) have not adversely affected
the film.  The dubbing of the Italian actors into English is quite
competently done, too, excepting one appalling and unintentionally
hilarious effort with a conversation between Harper and a professor
about the history of witchcraft in the region.
And the soundtrack?  It is interesting to imagine what power the film
would have lost if it had been scored by someone else.  As it stands,
the use of Goblin's music in SUSPIRIA is outstanding.  Apparently,
Argento played the soundtrack on location while filming so the actors
could hear the music as they acted out their parts.  A stereo video
player adds greatly to the viewer's overall experience.  Even better,
see SUSPIRIA in a cinema, where you'll get the added bonus of
widescreen.
And the colours!  Deep reds, eerie blues, a superb use of shadow and
contrast.  The cinematography of  Luciano Tovoli, whose more recent
credits include REVERSAL OF FORTUNE and SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, is
uniformly superb.  A nod also must go to production designer Giuseppe
Bassan for his wonderful baroque interiors.  These kinds of settings
are crucial to the atmosphere of Argento's more surreal excursions,
the other most notable example being INFERNO (1980) on which Bassan
also worked.
SUSPIRIA is the film that broke Dario Argento into the major league of
European directors, and it is fully deserving of its cult status.  The
gore is at times a little excessive and overstated - that's always
been one of Argento's shortcomings - but overall this is a
fascinating, compelling example of Italian horror.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Ranks with HALLOWEEN and PSYCHO as one of the most viscerally
terrifying pieces of moviemaking ever. An artful and visually sumptuous
scare.
For all of his other shortcomings, Dario Argento has made some of the
best-looking horror movies in existence. And some of the most mortifying.
SUSPIRIA is the creme de la creme of his career, a *really* scary story
that will give even sophisticated audiences a good jolt.
Jessica Harper stars as Susie Banyon, a ballet student who has gone to a
special conservatory in Austria to study dance. The movie sets her up
quickly and efficiently: she's not a genius, but she has a kind of taciturn
stubborness about her that's endearing, and will help see her through the
more ghastly moments in the movie. The night she arrives, it's raining and
thundering (of course), and she blunders into a student who's running out
of the conservatory. She half-hears her shout out something, but it's lost
in the wind. The next night that girl is murdered horribly, in a scene
which had many of the seasoned horror fans around me raking the fabric off
of the couch arms. (The brawny arms of the killer, by the way, are the
director's -- a consistent visual device of his which he refuses to discuss
in interviews. Hmm.)
At the conservatory, Harper is instantly surrounded by all manner of
eldritch characters. Some are a lot less innocent than others, of course,
and the way Harper pieces together what's *really* going on behind the
walls (literally) is ingenious. I will not reveal the deeper aspects of the
plot, even though it's not too difficult to figure out. It's the tone and
mood of the movie that matters more in this case, both of which are superb.
Be warned that SUSPIRA delivers some incredibly gruesome moments. One scene
has one of the girls falling into a pit of barbed wire and being slashed
horribly -- and then having her throat slit as she's trying to climb out.
Another scene features an unbelievable number of maggots coming through the
walls and ceiling. (The last one is especially memorable because the
explanation turns out to be relatively mundane!)
Technically, the film is excellent. This is a beautiful movie -- the screen
fills with bright, garish colors (mostly red, of course), and the set
design is eccentric and striking. I watched the uncut US laserdisc edition
from Image, which is now regrettably out of print, but is letterboxed and
features the full-length version of the movie plus two trailers. If you can
find the uncut edition, watch it in lieu of all others. On an empty
stomach.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Dario Argento
Writers: Dario Argento and Daria Nicolodi
Starring: Jessica Harper, Stefania Casini, Alida Valli, Miguel Bosé,
Barbara Magnolfi, Flavio Bucci, Barbara Magnolfi, Sussana Javicoli, Eva
Axén, Joan Bennett, Rudolf Schündler, Udo Kier
I've seen "Suspiria" thrice in my life and during the most recent
viewing, I noticed there's a story there.  This could easily be my main
point to be made against it, but "Suspiria" is so damn-well made that it
is practically forgivable.  In fact, one actually wonders if the point
of the film is to diss all of the so-called "qualities" of story and
characterization in favor of a film that is undeniably and totally about
style and very little substance.  It's as if the film has dropped all
concept of storytelling just so it can create pure atmosphere.  This
isn't always the most admirable trait, but for this film, it just
really, really works.
"Suspiria" was made in 1977 and seems to be the response by Italian
horror director Dario Argento to contemporary American horror films like
"Rosemary's Baby," "The Exorcist," and "The Omen," three films that
dealt more with ideas of horror than actual horror experiences.  Those
three films were extremely successful, but all forgot that part of
making a horror film is shocking and scaring the audience with scenes
and events that are terrifying.  As a response, Argento probably
couldn't have made a better film.
As I said, there's a story here, but it's almost arbitrary (and
rightfully so).  Something about an American dancer named Suzy Bannion
(Jessica Harper) who comes to Austria to go to an elite Ballet school,
but discovers that the school holds a dark, ancient secret.  What it is
has to do with is a coven of witches, I think, but to be honest, it
really doesn't matter.  The second-to-last thing "Suspiria" is about is
story.  The last thing is characterization.
The reason for anyone to watch this film is because it is absolutely and
utterly terrifying.  Argento, always the better director than writer,
has crafted a film here that leans almost totally on the former aspect,
and is thus part criticism of then-modern American horror films, but
more of an excercise in terror than anything else.  From the first
moments, when the credits begin and the music by the Goth-band Goblin
explodes onto the soundtrack, Argento creates an atmosphere of sheer
nervousness.  Then the redundant but nerve-wrecking signature tune from
the score starts up, like a child's tune played over and over again,
getting more unnerrving every time it's played, and the films really
opens.
The first 15 minutes deal with introducing Suzy, who's head-strong but
shy in a way that's likable, and showing us her situation.  She arrives
at the airport.  She tries to get a taxi.  She gets it and arrives there
only to see a woman run out, screaming something that goes practically
unheard by Suzy, then runs off into the woods.  Suzy tries to get into
the school, but they won't let her, so she gets back in her taxi and
drives off.  Then the girl who ran out is viciously murdered while
resting a at a friends'.  This is all done in a straight segment of pure
chills, during a stormy night, with low, ominous lighting, and with the
score playing thunderously throughout.
These first 15 minutes are so good at setting up the mood, tone, and
general feel of the film that it almost doesn't live up to it.  But we
see more anyway, as Suzy finally does get into the school, meets some
friends (notably one who's been there long enough that she's become a
bit paranoid), and Suzy begins to feel there's something evil going on
in the school.  People are being murdered or disappearing mysteriously.
And Suzy begins to pluckishly explore until she finds out everything she
needs to know.
It'd all be rather corny and laughable if played straight, but Argento
saves it by the way he crafts it.  His sets are baroque and
nightmarish.  His cinemtography is gorgeous, especially in widescreen
where you can see the vastness of what has been shot.  The colors are
freakish and beautiful, and his lighting could not be better.  In short,
this is one of the best looking films of all time, right up there with
such classics as Peter Greenaway's "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife, and
Her Lover" and Terry Gilliam's "Brazil."  I'm a supreme advocate of
Black and White photography above color photography, but seeing a film
like this almost makes me change my mind.
One could argue that this is all rather fake, and it is - that's the
point.  With "Suspiria," Argento has tried to remove all realism and
create a totally artificial reality, in an effort to create a world that
is so different from everything that exists now that it's creepy.
"Suspiria" is a masterpiece of set design, cinematography, lighting, and
musical scoring, each overwrought to the point that it's not at all
real.  This is a world that exists in a twisted dimension.  With this in
place, Argento plays on real fears we have, like not being able to
negotiate our way out of a deadly situation, being alone in the dark
with the unknown, and finding out so much that what we know can kill us.
He illustrates that with several incredible set pieces which feature
sequences that are so drawn-out for terror that Hitchcock would have an
orgasm.  One scene in particular, including a man in a deserted square,
is long and redundant and even anticlimactic, but when watching it is
engrossing, hypnotic, and gradually frightening.  These aren't cheap
thrills Argento is obsessed with, but rather the experience of really
being scared that he nails the way no other director has since "Psycho."
Matched with this is the shock value, where he really pushes the
envelope.  One scene features a woman who is attacked, stabbed
repeatedly, then tossed out a glass tile and hung.  Another features a
woman who tumbles into a pit of barbed wire then slashed in the throat
by an unseen assailant.  And most disgustingly, thousands upon thousands
upon thousands of maggotts are discovered in one scene to be seemingly
everywhere (and with a laughable reason).
Who's the killer?  What's the dark secret?  These aren't totally
revealed, only hinted at.  And it's superfluous to answer those
questions, since the entire point of making this film is being scared of
what's out there but not able to be seen.  But if there are any negative
points to be made, it's that the film never really feels totally
complete by the end.  By the finale, we've learned very little, and
that's all fine, but there still needs to be more.  It ends as if it
just ran out of ideas, and even if it does deliver what it needed to, it
doesn't really feel like it should be over.  Add a bit of distaste for
dragging towards the middle, and you have a valid reason why this isn't
the four-star film it very well could have been.
Nevertheless, "Suspiria" remains one of the most frightening films to
ever be made, mostly because it has a director who isn't afraid to
really overdramaticize his subject.  What Argento has created here is an
experience which grabs the audience from their seats, sucks them into
the experience, and takes their breath away just by the way it looks and
feels, as if it realizes that a film does not have to be about story and
characters but rather about creating an experience.  Further proof that
this is a valid concept is by watching one of the films this is usually
compared to, "Psycho."  Is "Psycho" really about a guy who kills people
dressed as his dead mom or is it about those long drawn-out sequences
where we're glued to the screen by the way it pushes the envelope?  If
there's a difference between "Suspiria" and "Psycho," it's that "Psycho"
does have a great story behind it, one that we can follow when there's
not frightening shit going on.  But nevertheless, "Suspiria" delivers
just by the way it has been conceived, and well enough that even I, ol'
jaded I, was pretty freaked out, not even though I didn't know what was
going on, but rather because.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
