Title
Review for First Knight (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mathew Tschirgi
This movie does not follow the original King Arthur legends at all.  Yet a 
movie that did would probably not be as appealing to audiences- for instance 
Lancelot is supposed to be rather ugly.  So this change in plot could be 
over-seen if the movie was fantastic.  FIRST KNIGHT is not.  It has its 
moments, but fails to reach the epic proportions it needs to reach to succeed. 
Still, if a combination of sword-fights, Sean Connery, and love scenes sounds 
appealing- watch it.
The plot involves Malagant (similar to the character Mordred from the 
legends) causing havoc all over Camelot's neighboring cities.  Meanwhile a 
promising adventurer named Lancelot manages to save Princess Guinevere's life. 
 In exchange for this, Lancelot becomes a famed knight of the Round Table.  
Yet Guinevere and Lancelot fall in love, causing complications...
Sean Connery does a fine job as an older King Arthur.  Richard Gere as 
Lancelot is passable- but not great.  There is a neat scene where Lancelot 
weaves his way in and out of a gauntlet during a festival.  The music works, 
but the fact the Merlin is not in here at all is disturbing...

Author
Chuck Dowling
     I remember hearing the King Arthur legend as a kid.  The one thing
I remember most was Merlin the magician.  Maybe I am ignorant to the
timeline of the tales of King Arthur and his men, but Merlin should
have been in FIRST KNIGHT.  He could have given poor Richard Gere an
accent, a new expression for Julia Ormond, and a way out for Sean
Connery.
     Seriously, just picture this movie with Merlin's character, if
only to lighten the tone.  You cast Alan Arkin in the part, have him
doing various wacky things throughout, and then at least you have some
entertaining moments, something that FIRST KNIGHT is sorely lacking.
     Basically what we've got here with FIRST KNIGHT is "Legends of
the Fall: The Armor Years".  I didn't care for LEGENDS OF THE FALL
(hmmm, how odd that Julia Ormond was in both) and that's all this movie
reminded me of.  I hate it in movies when one person loves another
person, yet that person loves another just a wee bit more, even though
there's nothing wrong with the first person.  That kind of conflict
doesn't entertain me.
     I also have yet to enjoy Richard Gere in any movie.  After
checking his filmography, I realized that out of all of the films he
has done, only INTERNAL AFFAIRS is halfway decent.  All the rest are
exactly the same.  In FIRST KNIGHT, he wanders through his performance
with an American accent, and a face that suggests that he might either
cry or kill someone at any moment.
     Overall, I will just say that FIRST KNIGHT is slow, predictable,
and at times, laughable.  Makes you wonder if director Jerry Zucker of
AIRPLANE! and THE NAKED GUN fame filmed two movies at once.  This one,
and a parody of it and at times some footage from the latter slipped
into this one.

Author
Ed Powell
     First, go to your local library and check out LE MORTE D'ARTHUR.
It's a long, boring read, but live with it.
     This film is an interesting twist on the Arthurian legends, and
well worth the time to go see it.  The story centers around two
themes: first and foremost, the cat and mouse game that Launcelot
(Richard Gere) and Guinevere (Julia Ormond) play.  The second, to a
lesser degree but serves its purpose of making the film exciting, is
the desire of Prince Maligent (Ben Cross) to take over the kingdom of
Camelot, ruled by (g'won ... have a guess) King Arthur (Sean Connery).
     While the story is not completely true to the legends (at least
the legends I have read), it is gripping and wonderful.
     The dialogue and overall writing of the film was above average.
The writers spared us the overload of sappy poetic speech:  Shakespeare
it ain't.  From the dialogue, the audience gets a feel of how life
really was back in those times.  It did have its poetic lines, but it
does not mar the film.
     Acting wise, Sean Connery was excellent ... as ever.  I cannot,
however, figure out how or why the King of *England* had a SCOTTISH
ACCENT!!!  FROM PLAYING 15th CENTURY SPANIARDS TO RUSSIAN SUBMARINE
COMMANDERS HE STILL HAS THE SAME ACCENT!!!
     Where was I?  Oh, yes.  The rest of the cast played their roles
with superior believability.  The battle sequences were well thought
out, and the warriors fought with realism.
     The design of the film worked well.  All the props, costumes, and
architectural design were what was expected of that time period.
     There were very few visual effects in this film.  There were a few
matte shots for the exterior of Camelot, and while they were stunning,
you could tell that they were matte shots.
     And we come to the direction of the film, which I can sum up in
one word: EXCELLENT!!!  Jerry Zucker made the battle sequences
edge-of-your-seat thrilling, the end of the film emotional (I managed
to blink back the tears ... no, I'm not a fem), and made me forget that I
was in a cramped multiplex for two hours.
     Should you bring your family to this film?  This reviewer says:
perhaps.  This is not a picture for young children, but your teenagers
might like it.  No obscenities, but there are quite a few shots of
villages being burnt and people being slain.
     Overall, this film is one of the best I've seen this year.  It
well deserves being nominated for Best Picture this year.  Go see this
movie by yourself, or go see it with a date.  But by any means ... GO SEE
THIS FILM!!!
Produced by Jerry Zucker and Bill Nicholson, directed by Jerry Zucker.  
A Columbia Pictures release.

Author
Darrell Rudmann
     "Another King Arthur story?" I caught myself thinking, sitting in
the theatre waiting for the sneak preview to begin.  After being forced
to sit through hours of medieval films that my brother, a medieval
history freak and SCA member, made me watch through childhood, my
excitement of seeing this film was to say the least, lacking.  What
could FIRST KNIGHT add to the story of King Arthur that other stories
hadn't already done?  (And Richard Gere as Lancelot?  What the hell's
that all about?)
     Surprisingly, the entire film works very well (Gere does a fine
job) and adds much to existing King Arthur films.  It keeps the
sweeping scale of Excalibur, but focuses on the tight circle of the
three main characters.  Besides interesting choreography and sharp
action scenes, FIRST KNIGHT delves into the characters of Lancelot,
Lady Guenivere, and King Arthur farther than any other Camelot film
that comes to mind.  Richard Gere plays the enigmatic Lancelot, a
freelance swordfighter of sorts, who's fierce independence is tamed
only by his passionate interest for Lady Guenivere, played by Julia
Ormond.  Of course, before meeting Lancelot, she has promised her hand
in marriage to the reverent King of Camelot, Arthur, portrayed by Sean
Connery in a kind of role that he does best.  The two men clash, both
on the battlefield and off, resulting in a refreshingly intimate look
at the people behind the legend of Camelot.
     Unlike most action scenes nowadays, the fights were actually
entertaining and interesting to watch!  Large sets were employed to
give the viewer a true sense of being in the film--for example, a
large Round Table room was made complete with four walls, allowing for
camera shots that pan the entire room, instead of the usual "film a
corner here, film a corner there."  The film uses a number of night
shots, which are difficult to film but work wonderfully.  King Arthur's
troops, in silver armor, ambush another army in nothing but the
moonlight, in one scene.  The shiny reflections of the armor create an
unbelievable sea of twinkling light.  Also, look for the recreation of
the Gauntlet.
     This kind of film-making reminds me of other strong films like A
FEW GOOD MEN.  Strong acting, clean writing and directing produce a
story that is hard not to like.  I recommend this film to King Arthur
buffs and families alike.  Although not appropriate for small children,
the film is exciting and enjoyable, and does not employ foul language,
any nudity or unnecessary sexuality, nor any gore in the fighting
scenes.  Sounds impossible?  Watch it and see.  In wide release July
7th.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Richard Gere, Julia Ormond, Ben Cross, 
      Liam Cunningham 
Director: Jerry Zucker 
Producers: Hunt Lowry and Jerry Zucker 
Screenplay: Lorne Cameron, David Hoselton, and William Nicholson 
Cinematography: Adam Greenberg 
Music: Jerry Goldsmith 
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures 
     FIRST KNIGHT is Jerry Zucker's re-invention of a segment of the 
Arthurian legend ("re-interpretation" would be too light a word to 
describe the wholesale changes made to the Vulgate Cycle).  What we get 
here, however, is often unintentionally closer to MONTY PYTHON AND THE 
HOLY GRAIL's silliness than to EXCALIBUR's melodramatic grandeur.  Bad 
acting, dumb dialogue, and confusing cinematography abound, creating one 
of the most shoddy Camelot stories to date.  What makes FIRST KNIGHT 
seem even worse is that it's up against the vastly superior BRAVEHEART, 
a romantic adventure in very much the same vein, although formed from an 
entirely different mould. 
     In FIRST KNIGHT, we're introduced to King Arthur of Camelot (Sean 
Connery), his intended bride Guinevere (Julia Ormond), and the valiant 
Sir Lancelot (Richard Gere), who apparently is hot for the queen-to-be 
(or so the script tells us -- you couldn't tell by Gere's acting).  
Conspicuous by their absence, however, are the likes of Sir Galahad, 
Morgan le Fay, the Holy Grail, Merlin, Excalibur, and Mordred.  The 
villain of this piece is Malagant (Ben Cross), an ex-knight of the Round 
Table who's out to take control of Arthur's kingdom.  Add to this an 
idiotic Hollywood ending, and FIRST KNIGHT turns out to be a mess of the 
first order. 
     Sean Connery is perfect for the King Arthur role.  Too bad he isn't 
given more to do than stand around looking regal.  In fact, the film is 
about one-quarter over before he makes his first appearance.  Julia 
Ormond, who was so impressive in LEGENDS OF THE FALL, is underwhelming 
here, constantly wringing her hands over the dilemma of who she loves 
most.  Then there's Richard Gere, terribly miscast as Lancelot.  In 
fact, it's hard to imagine a less likely figure in the part of this 
legendary hero, uttering such pretentious lines as "I never believed in 
anything before, but now I believe in Camelot."  At least he spares us 
an attempt at a bogus British accent. 
     There are the requisite battle sequences which feature huge armies 
clashing on an open field.  Filmed with all the coherence of an MTV 
video, these are prime examples of how not to shoot this sort of scene.  
Maybe Zucker should have consulted Mel Gibson before embarking on this 
project.  The sustained tension of BRAVEHEART's battles is in marked 
contrast to the boredom generated by FIRST KNIGHT's. 
     When all is said and done, there's still at least one amazing thing 
about FIRST KNIGHT:  after being kidnapped, dragged through a forest, 
imprisoned, rescued, and nearly drowned, Guinevere's lipstick is 
perfectly intact.  That this bit of minutia sticks out so clearly speaks 
volumes about the dullness of this supposed adventure film.  When it 
comes to potential summer blockbusters, FIRST KNIGHT ends up close to 
last. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
