Title
Review for Top Hat (1935)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
"Top Hat" was one of ten films that Fred Astaire
and Ginger Rogers made together, and is probably
the most famous of those films.  It was nominated
for Best Picture, and features songs by Irving
Berlin.
The plot has dancer Astaire working on a show
with producer Edward Everett Horton.  He romances
Ginger Rogers, who plays hard to get, mostly
because she thinks that he is Horton, who is
already married to Helen Broderick.  Astaire's
rival for Rogers is Erik Rhodes, who plays a
comic relief character, the pompous fashion
designer Beddini.
Astaire's vehicles are praised primarily for the
dance numbers.  Certainly, Astaire can glide
across a dance floor, and he can tap dance and
choreograph a production number.  It is apparent
that much effort has gone into his performance.
He knows how to sing, although his voice is nothing
special, and the songs have been painstakingly
composed, although bland from being stripped of
anything that anyone would find objectionable.
One of the dance numbers has Astaire shooting
a row of dancers with his cane.  Originality
like this is much more interesting to me than
watching Astaire flail his arms and tap dance,
which Bugs Bunny can do with more flair.
But most of the movie is dialogue, and if you
are renting the film for the dancing you will
need to do plenty of fast-forwarding.  The script
is average, with the plot based on a misunderstanding,
as if taken from an episode of "Three's Company".
The character with a thick foreign accent, Beddini,
is also the biggest jerk in the film.  Normally
this "co-incidence" would bother me, but I have to
admit that he is my favorite character in the film.
Director Mark Sandrich should have given him more
scenes.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TOP HAT (director: Mark Sandrich; screenwriter: Dwight Taylor/Alexander
Faragó  (play); cinematographer: David Abel; editor: William Hamilton;
cast: Fred Astaire (Jerry Travers), Ginger Rogers (Dale Tremont), Edward
Everett Horton (Horace Hardwick), Helen Broderick (Madge Hardwick), Erik
Rhodes (Alberto Beddini), Eric Blore (Bates), Lucille Ball (Florist);
Runtime: 101; RKO; 1935)
Almost completely similar in story line to Fred n' Ginger's 1934 The Gay
Divorcee. This one is the fourth of ten films the dynamic musical duo
made together, and is their quintessential film. A popular Irving Berlin
score, which includes "Cheek to Cheek," "Fancy Free,""No Strings,"
"Isn't it a Lovely Day to be Caught in the Rain", "Top Hat, White Tie,
and Tails (where he innovatively uses his cane to "mow down" a chorus
lineup of dancers)," and the graceful Hermes Pan dance numbers and art
direction, help make this a memorable musical. The comedy between
numbers is provided by a plot that calls for a misunderstanding of
identities, as Ginger thinks Fred is married to her best friend and
therefore rebuffs his advances until she finds out his true identity in
the nick of time. The magic in the film did not come from the light
comedy and the overworked romantic situation, which was mindful of a
French farce, but from the sexy chemistry caught on the screen between
the two and the way they looked natural dancing together. The only song
she sings is "Piccolino," which comes at the end, and fits in with the
Venice scenery of gondoliers. Filmed during the heart of the Depression,
the film makes it a point to show how extravagant the rich lived, with
not a care in the world for money. There is a display of luxury hotels
and a Venice done up as an Art Deco scene, and, of course, there is
Ginger's famous feather dress and all the other ostentatious costumes
and top hats worn.
Jerry Travers (Fred Astaire), a famous Broadway dancer is making his
London debut. He is waiting to be picked up by the producer of the
London dance revue, Horace Hardwick (Edward Everett Horton), at the
stuffy Thackery Club, where silence is golden. Annoying the club members
by just ruffling his newspaper, Horace at last rescues him and takes him
to his hotel room. Feeling exuberant, Jerry tap dances late at night and
Dale Tremont (Ginger Rogers) who is in the room below is annoyed that
the dancing keeps her from falling asleep. She complains to Jerry and he
flirts, but she walks away and plays hard to get after talking to the
hotel people and finding out that the room belongs to Horace Hardwick.
What further annoys her, is that she's friends with Horace's wife Madge
(Helen Broderick), whom she is scheduled to meet in Venice soon, and
feels terrible that her husband is such a womanizer.
Jerry, meanwhile, has fallen in love and spends most of the film
figuring out schemes to be with her, but all the schemes go bust because
of the mistaken identity. When he isn't scheming, he goes into the
various song and dance numbers, some solo, some with her, and there's
lots of verbal sparring to keep the film highly energized.
Around as an eccentric character in the mix, is the egotistical dress
designer Alberto Beddini (Erik Rhodes), who speaks with a heavy foreign
accent and has a business arrangement with the fashion model Dale, where
she wears his dresses and he pays her expenses. He also has romantic
designs on her.
Bates (Eric Blore) is the valet for Horace and is the other resident
eccentric, the one with a caustic wit, who is sent on assignment to tail
Dale and report back if she's a scheming woman, as Horace is afraid that
a scandal will ruin the show.
The film's showdown takes place in Venice, which is an artificially
staged version of that great city, where Madge is staying in this
opulent but gaudy Art Deco hotel, waiting to play matchmaker and
introduce Jerry to Dale. But her plans go afoul when Dale thinks it is
her husband who is chasing after her. Horace is kept from being together
with his wife and Dale in Venice by every plot device that could be
mustered, which keeps the misunderstanding going to the very end.
This catchy romantic farce should hit the mood of those in need of
lighthearted escapism to cheer them up; and with its show stopping
musical routines, it has reached the status of being a film classic. It
seems to be one of those films that doesn't get dated, and that glorious
climax of "Cheek To Cheek," with Fred and Ginger dancing as lovers,
should lighten the hearts of those movie romantics out there. This
sweeping musical, filmed in B&W, is delightful whether on video -- or if
one is lucky enough to see it in on widescreen at a retrospective
theater showing, then all the better.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Max Scheinin
Released 1935, should be rereleased very soon
A Mark Sandrich film, "Top Hat".
Starring Fred Astaire, Ginger Rogers, Erik Rhodes, Helen Broderick, Edward
Everett Horton, Eric Blore, Lucille Ball
Rating: ****
Top Hat, a superb Astaire-Rogers musical of the 30s is pretty damn hard to
resist. I recently saw it on video and reveled in the singing and dancing,
wonderful music and glorious acting. It's a sublime film, a real bliss-out.
I'm suprised that with revivals of old films pouring in as they are,
hollywood executives haven't came around to musicals, and in particular,
Astaire and Rogers musicals. The sets are really teriffic, and I can tell
that a big screen viewing would be in order. For now we can to make do
re-watching this just plain wonderful  gloriously realized old-fashioned
film on video. My enthusiam is un-limited. Why? Sure, it's terrific fun to
watch and sure, the acting is great and sure it's just...well...a great
film, but why are you so enthusiastic? Because Top Hat sets standards for
itself, says it will live up to those standards and does. That may seem
like a silly reason to give a film a great review, but it's not really;
Batman And Robin ( for example ) said it was going to be slick big spirited
fun with terrific F/X. It wasn't. It fell flat on it's face as soon as the
credits were over. What makes a great movie? Ambition, fun and high
standards mixed well, with a dollop of talent. Top Hat has all those
things, which is why it is such a classic and deserves to be. It's a
reccemonded rental.
Top Hat runs 1:37, and every minute is heaven. It is not rated but would be
a solid G and is totally appropriate for everyone. It's good family
viewing. See it. Because of it's sense of good solid fun and slick
performances, plus great music and the fact that it is really well made I
am giving it all big ****. See it.          
