Title
Review for Clan of the Cave Bear, The (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Justin Felix
THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR (1986)
A "Turkey of the Week" film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1998 Justin Felix.  
These reviews are archived at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix
Screenplay by John Sayles.  
Based on the novel by Jean M. Auel.  
Directed by Michael Chapman.  
Starring Daryl Hannah, Pamela Reed, James Remar.  
Rated R (contains nudity and violence)  98 mins.  
Synopsis:  Cro-Magnon Ayla loses her mother to an earthquake and escapes
certain death by a lion.  Reluctantly rescued by a Neanderthal clan who
likes to have sex doggy-style, Ayla grows up to become a blond, feminist
supermodel who challenges the Neanderthal patriarchy by throwing rocks and
giving birth without a mate.  
Comments:  Allow me to state for the record that I find Daryl Hannah an
appealing presence in movies.  She proved quite charming as the intelligent
astronomer in the romantic comedy ROXANNE and equally creepy as Pris in the
sci-fi classic BLADE RUNNER.  THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR clearly tries to
capitalize on Hannah as a selling point: the poster art bears a striking
closeup of Hannah in tribal paint and the video box prominently features
her name in lettering the same size as the title.  Not even her starring
role in this turkey, unfortunately, can save it from being an unbelievable
exercise in cheese.  It's so uniquely bad (a film dealing with prehistoric
man that actually tries, and miserably fails, to be serious) that it's
oddly fascinating.  The ridiculous attempt at drama here leaves the
audience somehow transfixed, wanting to see how this dud plays out.  
THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR is based upon a popular novel by Jean M. Auel.
To this day, the book possesses a loyal cult following.  I remember a dear
friend of mine had a dog-eared copy of the novel she had read as a child
with all the so-called dirty parts blacked out with marker by her
grandmother.  I have never read this book, but I sure hope it's 10,000
times better than its film adaptation.  If not, then I'm at a complete loss
to explain its popularity.  
THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR immediately opens with a comically absurd scene.
A young Ayla, looking much like Drew Barrymore in E.T., tramps about in the
woods.  With her cute little ponytails and fur wrapped about her, the
audience's expectations of a convincing portrayal of prehistory are
immediately shattered.  What follows is a laughably choreographed sequence
in which an earthquake swallows up Ayla's mother (a blonde with fur
pants...er, leggings).  Tearful Ayla looks on as the cameraman shakes the
camera...well, as the earthquake slowly recedes.  A hungry lion becomes
interested in her for lunch, but the screaming six-year-old manages to
outrun the king of the wild and find a safe haven.  I won't detail the
story any further; this seems enough to illustrate my point.  This movie is
really stupid.  It never even gives the audience a chance to suspend their
disbelief.  Also, the obvious comparison between the appearance of
Cro-Magnon man in prehistory and the rise of feminism in our century is
about as subtle as burning a Wonderbra in front of Charlton Heston.  The
movie doesn't just suggest this message; it whacks the message into the
audience with a two-by-four.  A blond, gorgeous woman challenges the social
laws of a bunch of people in gaudy brown wigs.  She's of the "new people";
they're of the "old people" with "the memories."  Yep.  We get it.  We get
it.  
THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR apparently received an Academy Award nomination
for best make-up, which surprises me.  The movie depends upon a lot of
make-up obviously, but much of it is unconvincing.  As stated before, Daryl
Hannah is Daryl Hannah here; she looks like she just stepped out of the
shower all the time.  The rest of the characters have dark make-up of some
sort smeared over them to look like dirt.  The face-painting that's
occasionally seen is perhaps the only notable work here in my mind.  
This movie also suffers from its new age trappings.  Maybe the music
sounded a lot more fresh or original during 1985, but now it sounds dated
and cliched, like poorly conceived elevator music.  Add to this the film's
faux-mysticism, including spirit animals and dream visions, and a narrator
who sounds like a psychic you'd expect to hear on a 1-900 number, and you
get a movie that has serious problems being serious.  
THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR is rated R, though it's probably one of the most
inoffensive offensive films I've seen in quite a while.  It contains
several scenes of sex sans nudity.  The violence mostly consists of hunting
scenes.  The funniest moment of the movie occurs when a Neanderthal in love
with Ayla attempts to rescue her from a ferocious bear.  The bear bites his
head off and the audience sees it rolling about.  Although this may sound
gratuitous, I'm sure, it's so cheesy that it probably won't bother most
people.  
THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR is a bad movie.  However, as I wrote at the
beginning of this review, it does have the distinction of originality.
Typically when I think of bottom-of-the-barrel films dealing with early
man, fantasy movies involving dinosaurs (who did not exist at the same time
as man) and Raquel Welch come to mind.  THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR tries so
hard to be serious that, though it's so bad, the audience is still
interested by the unique setting and characters of the movie (which is why
I awarded this turkey two stars).  I have to think that fans of the book
would be disappointed with this film version; however, I'm only basing this
observation on the fact that the book is almost invariably better than the
movie.  I shudder to think that it could be otherwise...

Author
Shane Burridge 
Not even writer John Sayles could save this version of Jean Auel's overblown 
prehistoric soap opera, but at least he knew well enough not to direct it.  
Film covers the events of the first volume of Auel's saga, which grew ever 
more ridiculous by the book, but doesn't distinguish itself from many other 
cave-people movies.  As always, there is one member of the tribe that is a 
little smarter than the others who ends up ostracized or outcast.  In this 
case, it's Ayla (Daryl Hannah), a Cro-Magnon who is adopted by a tribe of 
Neanderthals while a young girl.  She takes up with the tribe's shaman and 
medicine woman, and learns to fend for herself.  Much of this is to the 
consternation of the uptight chief's son Broud, next in line for leadership 
of the tribe and in need of  a good does of primal scream therapy.  Story's 
idea of one Cro-Magnon co-existing with Neanderthals is a promising one, set 
as it is within a fascinating nexus of human history (the Neanderthals rely 
on race memory, while Ayla is able to learn new concepts as they arise).  
Unfortunately, there is outwardly too little that separates Ayla from the 
tribe.  Sure, she's blonde and statuesque, but she's also Daryl Hannah, so 
naturally she's going to stand out regardless of who she's with , and 
especially in a cast of non-star players (look out for a young, pre-BAYWATCH 
Nicole Eggert as the teenage incarnation of Ayla).
The film's major failing point is that it's simply not authentic enough 
(despite Auel's intensively-researched source material and the technical 
credit 'Primitive Skill Training'!)):  The cave dwellers of CLAN end up 
being nothing more than a bunch of actors in fluffy wigs, Hannah's teeth are 
too perfect, and the film overlooks the inconvenient fact that the average 
lifespan of a caveman was 18.  Instead of filming it in beautiful British 
Columbia, the film-makers could have opted for a grittier look.  Rather than 
pitch for a PG audience, they could have presented the living conditions of 
the primitives in a harsher light, with nature red in tooth and claw (Bart 
the bear, who was terrifically ferocious in THE EDGE, once again gives the 
best performance in the movie).  CLAN seems like a catalogue of second-best 
decisions, but it could have been worse, and the film-makers did at least 
get one thing right: they elected to tell their story through subtitles and 
voice-over narration rather than have the actors grunt their way through the 
dialogue.  And it does improve on the book in one respect - it only takes an 
hour and a half to get through.  Still, Jean Jacques-Annaud covered the same 
ground with more integrity in QUEST FOR FIRE, and if you pitted the two 
tribes from those films together, it would be a pretty safe bet that the 
CLAN group would have the living coprolite beaten out of them.

