Title
Review for Jawbreaker (1999)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Greg King
JAWBREAKER (M).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: Darren Stein
Stars: Rose McGowan, Rebecca Gayheart, Judy Greer, Julie Benz, Chad 
Christ, Carol Kane, Pam Grier, Ethan Erickson, Marilyn Manson, Jeff
Conaway, William Katt, P J Soles, Charlotte Roldan
Running time: 86 minutes.
This black comedy about murder, makeovers, rock 'n' roll and
high school politics is like a B-grade version of Heathers, albeit
with a mile wide mean streak.  First time writer/director Darren Stein
takes the essential formula of those old John Hughes teen comedies and
crosses it with liberal touches of Carrie.
          Courtney Shane (Rose McGowan, from Scream, etc) is the bitch
queen of Reagan High.  A selfish user without a conscience, Courtney
is the undisputed leader of an elite pack who rule the school fashions
and in-set.  Courtney has her sights set on becoming prom queen when
things begin to go wrong.  A birthday prank backfires, leaving the
pretty and popular Liz Purr dead.
Courtney immediately takes charge, arranging it to look like
Liz was the victim of a perverted sex fiend.  Unfortunately, her plan
is accidentally discovered by Fern (newcomer Judy Greer), the dowdy,
unprepossessing school misfit, who has idolised Liz from afar.
Courtney buys her silence by promising to make her beautiful, popular
and accepted as one of the in-crowd.  But soon, Courtney realises that
she has unleashed a Frankenstein.  Fern, who has been given the exotic
name Vylette, rivals Courtney for the title of the queen bitch in
school.
Meanwhile, Courtney's friend Julie (Rebecca Gayheart, from
Urban Legend, etc) has a crisis of conscience over the death of Liz.
Courtney quickly dumps her, ostracising her.  In desperation she turns
to Zach (an Ethan Hawke look-alike Chad Christ), another outcast who
heads the school drama group.  Together they plot to bring down
Courtney and expose her during her moment of triumph on prom night.
The performances of the primarily youthful cast are adequate
to the demands of the material.  Veteran Carol Kane lends her presence
to the role of Miss Sherman, the school's mousy principal, while
sultry Pam Grier (Jackie Brown, etc) is wasted as a tough detective
who is investigating the brutal murder.  Bizarre rock star Marilyn
Manson (who is also McGowan's boyfriend) contributes a weird cameo as
a sleazy bar patron.  Jeff Conaway, from Grease, etc, also contributes
a brief cameo that captures the deliberately irreverent flavour of
this teen comedy/horror drama.
Jawbreaker explores themes of friendship, loyalty, and those
social and political cliques that make adolescence a nightmare for
those who don't fit in.  Stein has drawn upon his own experiences as
an outcast at high school for the background of Jawbreaker, which
contains many familiar clichés of screen high school dramas.  While
it is moderately entertaining, the film ultimately brings little that
is fresh or original to a tired formula.  Like the intimidating candy
of the title, Jawbreaker is a little hard to swallow.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Darren Stein's "Jawbreaker" is a mishmash of a bunch of different
movies, including "Heathers", "Clueless" and "Very Bad Things". So why
can't it add up to the sum of its parts? "Jawbreaker" is the story of
a birthday prank gone wrong, when three girls fatally choke their
friend with a jawbreaker. The three most popualr girls in school must
then try to cover up their murder. However, instead of focusing on the
case at hand, "Jawbreaker" needlessly tries to become a lesson in high
school politics, and the characters carry on a lifestyle of excess(not
unlike the characters in "Very Bad Things"). At times, "Jawbreaker" is
sharp, but mostly it comes off as glib, derivative and
uninviting. Needless to say, Rose McGowan is dead-on as the head bitch
and Pam Grier is forceful as Detective Vera Cruz. "Jawbreaker" didn't
really hit any mass audience in theatres, and no mass audience should
seek it out on video.
Note: I know where Darren Stein went to high school, and it doesn't
seem to me that he could have got many of his ideas from there.
a video capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Dustin Putman
Tri-Star; rated R (language, sexual situations, violence); 87 minutes
Cast: Rose McGowan, Rebecca Gayheart, Judy Greer, Julie Benz, Chad Christ,
Ethan Erickson, Carol Kane, Pam Grier, Tatyana M. Ali.
Jawbreaker is the very definition of a "rip-off."  This uninspired teen comedy
takes equal parts Carrie (1976), Heathers (1989) and Clueless (1995) and mixes
in all the necessary teen movie clichés.  Along the way writer/director Darren
Stein forgets to give the film a life of its own.
The film opens with a voice over from geeky Fern Mayo (Judy Greer) about the
four most popular girls at Reagan High: Courtney Shayne (Rose McGowan) who can
basically be summed up as Satan in heels, Julie Freeman (Rebecca Gayheart) a
good girl with the face of a supermodel, Marcie Fox (Julie Benz) a dim-witted
blonde who demands that people call her "Foxy", and Liz Purr (Charlotte
Roldan) an angel in disguise.  Liz is everyone's favorite because she's both
beautiful and kind.
Liz is about to turn 17 and, as a prank, Courtney convinces the other girls to
help her in kidnapping Liz on her birthday morning.  In order to keep Liz from
making any noise Courtney stuffs a jawbreaker into her mouth before they gag
her.  They then stuff Liz in the trunk of Courtney's car but when they open it
later, Polaroid camera waiting to capture the moment, their lives will never
be the same: poor Liz has swallowed the jawbreaker and choked to death with it
lodged in her throat (the audience is treated to a few too many graphic looks
at Liz's dead body).
Courtney, thinking fast, decides to pass the death off as a rape/murder and
Marcie and a reluctant Julie assist her.  Things get complicated when Fern
discovers what the three girls are up to.  In order to keep her quiet Courtney
comes up with another plan and transforms geeky Fern into "Vylette", hoping
that she will also help to replace Liz in the minds of the devastated
students.
Up until about this point the film is effective enough.  However, an
investigation begins into Liz's death and the film becomes excessively dull.
The recently rediscovered talents of Pam Grier are thoroughly wasted in the
role of Detective Vera Cruz and the film is downright insipid in its treatment
of both the characters and the audience during this long middle stretch.
Courtney's plan to frame a sleazy guy (Marilyn Manson, in a brief cameo) is
never believable for a second.
Meanwhile, the audience is stuck watching a string of random events which fail
to develop the characters or add anything of interest to the plot.  Julie
leaves the group and begins a lame romance with aspiring actor Zack (Chad
Christ).  He apparently gives her the courage to turn on Courtney but the way
things develop only make Julie look stupid.  Fern's rise to popularity is
equally lame.  
We do get the best scene in the film (the only one with a spark of
originality) during this section.  It's a smart and subversive bit where
Courtney gets the high school's resident jock stud Dane (Ethan Erickson) to
demonstrate, using a popsicle, exactly what he would like for her to do to
him.  It at least provides us with a look at Courtney's personality but the
way the scene finishes doesn't make any sense.
Stein is very conscious of the teen movie tradition he is working in and not
only freely borrows major plot elements but also includes direct
acknowledgment of this with some stunt casting.  William Katt and P.J. Soles
(students in Carrie) are Liz's distraught parents, Jeff Conaway (from Grease
(1978)) is Julie's creepy single dad and Carol Kane (the frightened babysitter
in When a Stranger Calls (1979)) camps it up as principal Miss Sherman.
At times Jawbreaker feels simply like Teen Cinema's Greatest Hits but the
audience is cheated with watered down interpretations of the best this genre
has to offer. 
The only notable aspect of Jawbreaker is the incredibly stylish look.  The
costume design by Vickie Brinkford and the production design by Jerry Fleming
are both bright and vivid.  They were apparently instructed to work from the
color palette of a jawbreaker and the screen is always splashed with bits of
vibrant color.  Director of photography Amy Vicent, who beautifully lensed
Eve's Bayou (1997), does a remarkable job here as well.  Shot composition and
camera movement is consistently impressive.
Performances are mostly sub-par with McGowan providing only a few good moments
(compared with her excellent work in The Doom Generation (1995) and Scream
(1996)) and Gayheart making the biggest impression due to the sweet nature of
her character and her obvious beauty.  None of the actors look as if they have
set foot inside a high school within the last five years with the exception of
actress/singer Tatyana Ali, who has a small role as a cheerleader.  The male
cast all resemble male models and are credited with names like "Auto Stud,"
"College Stud," and "High School Stud #2."
The soundtrack is decent and Imperial Teen's catchy "Yoo Hoo" makes a bigger
impression than any other aspect of the film.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia TriStar Pictures
 Director:  Darren Stein
 Writer:  Darren Stein
 Cast: Rose McGowan, Rebecca Gayheart, Julie Benz, Judy
Evans Greer, Chad Christ, Charlotte Roldan, Pam Grier,
Carol Kane, Tatyana Ali, Ethan Erickson
   Columbia Picture is hitting the high-school and children's
market hard this year.  Movies that the core teen audience
can look forward to include "Dick," about two women students
who wander off during a class trip to the White House, meet
President Richard Nixon, and end up as the official walkers of
his dog, Checkers.  Yet another is "Idle Hands," a comedy-
horror movie that details the terror and fun that occurs when
the Devil possesses the right hand of a clueless 17-year-old
slacker.  Why should we look forward to these without
knowing more about them? Simply because they sound
original, an advantage notably missing from the typical
offering of the genre.  Which brings us to Columbia/TriStar's
"Jawbreakers," unoriginal and almost admittedly so, as its
writer-director, Darren Stein, heralds his mission to relive the
teen movies of his own high-school days and put together a
story which is a collage of their themes.
   "Jawbreaker" is the sort of film that allows movie buffs to
take pride in their ability to recognize scenes appropriated
from previous works.  You should be able without much
difficulty to pick out motifs from "Carrie," "Grease," and
"Clueless," and even "Frankenstein" is evoked by Mr. Stein's
imagination.  But the film--which calls itself a satirical horror-
comedy, is not particularly funny, nor does it display much of
the standard horror routines.  There are no scary, false-alarm
scenes of people coming at you from behind but turn out to
be friends.  Nobody is slashed or beheaded and not a single
girl or boy turns into an octopus or even a lowly slug. 
Though the movie features a strong performance by Rose
McGowan in the role of the tightly controlled and attractive
Courtney Shayne, it is no more involving or imaginative than
fare that can be picked up on the tube--a seven o'clock
feature film, perhaps.
   The eponymous jawbreaker is its main metaphor.  A
jawbreaker is a hunk of round candy that's sweet on the
outside but, if chewed up, will disjoin your jaw and allow your
dentist to put a down payment on a new Porsche.  Director
Stein aims to portray the most popular girl in school as one
who is easy to look out but watch out: she has nerves of
steel and will have you for breakfast with her diet-conscious
fat-free yogurt toasted English.  (In this regard, the
jawbreaker is the diametrical opposite of the sabra, or prickly
pear, which is tough as nails on the outside but dulcet within.)
   The story centers on Courtney (Rose McGowan), a high-
school senior who would be a shoo-in for prom queen in the
upcoming dance were it not for the thoroughly sweet and
beautiful Liz Purr (Charlotte Roldan), who is considered the
cat's meow.  Courtney conspires with her dense friend Marcie
Fox (Julie Benz--who looks like a young Sally Kellerman) and
her hesitant pal Julie (Rebecca Gayheart) to kidnap Liz on
her 17th birthday and stuff her with pancakes.  She and her
pals break into Liz's home, stuff a jawbreaker into her mouth,
gag her, and pile her into the trunk of a car, but when they
open the back of the auto after arriving at the pancake
house, they discover that Liz is dead of asphyxiation.  When
the wallflowerish school nerd, Fern Mayo (Judy Evans Greer)
Greer), catches the trio trying to make Liz appear the victim
of a rape-murderer, she is bribed into silence by a beauty
makeover, which transforms her into a virtual princess named
Vylette.  
   Customs of the high-school girls are ribbed together with
the character of the principal and some teachers, however
ineffectively.  A quick scene of the cooking class (where one
girl breaks open a bloody egg described by an onlooker as a
stillborn) is not amusing and of anatomy class hardly rib-
tickling.  As principal Miss Sherman, Carol Kane is not in the
same class as her counterpart in "Grease."  While Courtney--
who is to meet her comeuppance at the school prom--
thankfully does not possess the telekinetic powers whose
excesses sank both the movie and the Broadway musical
"Carrie," her character displays not even a modicum of
originality. Nor does her dialogue contain any of the wit that
can easily be found in a humdrum tale by Stephen King.  You
can be beautiful and sweet, you can be gorgeous and a bitch. 
And the class caterpillar can turn into a vain butterfly.  But
then we always knew that.

Author
Tom Ripley
There's a scene early on in "Jawbreaker" where a character utters the
unintentionally prophetic line, "That is *so* not funny".  How right
she was.  This pathetic tale of three high-schoolers who accidentally
kill their best friend in a birthday kidnapping prank gone horribly
awry is never even remotely funny.  Or fun.
Or original.  Not content with the too-obvious "Heathers" heisting,
the filmmakers proceed to lift freely from a staggering variety of
sources, including "Carrie", "Bride of Frankenstein", "Blue Velvet",
and even Shaw's Pygmalion, itself recently remade as "She's All That".
"Jawbreaker" is a pastiche, and not even an enjoyable one.  I find it
extremely telling that the most engaging part of the film is the
credit sequence, a jawbreaker factory montage inexplicably backed by
Veruca Salt's "Volcano Girls"; serving as a blueprint for the rest of
the film, the song has absolutely nothing to do with the footage we're
watching.  Just close your eyes and pretend you're listening to an
alt-rock station; you won't be missing anything.
The blame for a mess this big has to be spread around among the
principals.  Rebecca Gayheart, following roles in "Scream 2" and
"Urban Legend", should have known better than to take yet another role
in yet another teen body count movie.  Pam Grier has totally wasted
any credibility she might have gotten from her role in Quentin
Tarantino's "Jackie Brown".  And Rose McGowan should just quit acting.
She has no charisma, no presence, and no acting skills other than
rolling her eyes and looking disaffected.  McGowan manages to be
upstaged by her real-life boyfriend, rocker Marilyn Manson, whose
fifteen second role here is far more interesting than anything any of
the "real" actors are doing.  Manson, sans trademark makeup & contact
lenses, and with an obviously fake moustache, looks eerily like
Nicholas Cage; who woulda thunk it?
That crack about direction by committee wasn't merely a pithy
sound-bite.  Stylistically, thematically & narratively, "Jawbreaker"
is all over the map, varying wildly in tone & content from scene to
scene.  Though credited solely to writer/director Darren Stein, one
gets the feeling that no two scenes here were actually guided by the
same hands.  If Stein was indeed responsible for the whole of this
atrocity, someone needs to get the man some drugs, pronto.  Prozac,
lithium, kava, ritalin, something, anything.  He's quite obviously in
desperate need of chemical help.
"Jawbreaker" is a monumental waste of effort and resources, and quite
likely one of the single worst films I've ever seen.  To call
"Jawbreaker" garbage would be to insult garbage.  Bad flicks for the
rest of the year are safe; I've already got my pick for worst film of
'99.
"Jawbreaker" runs approximately 90 minutes, though it feels longer
than "Titanic", and is rated R for language, sexual situations and
graphic violence.  Not recommended for kids, teens, or anyone else.
(Reviews available by email; send a message with "subscribe" in the
header to prisoner7@usa.net.)

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Jawbreaker is the tale of what can happen when innocent birthday pranks can go
wrong.  At Reagan High, four girls are sitting on top of the world.  Courtney,
played by Rose McGowan, is the meanest girl in the school.  Everyone hates her,
but everyone wishes they had her popularity.  She is the leader of the four
girls.  Julie, played by Rebecca Gayheart, Liz Purr, played by Charlotte
Roldan, and Marcie, played by Julie Benz are the other three in the group.  It
is Liz's seventeenth birthday, and Julie, Courtney, and Marcie decide to play a
prank on her.  They wake her up in scary outfits, shove a jawbreaker in her
mouth and put tape over it to make her be quiet, and shove her in the trunk of
their car.  After awhile, they check up on her and she is dead, the jawbreaker
caught in her throat.  The girls cannot believe what has happened.  Courtney
wants to cover it up, and just act like she is sick, but Julie knows the right
thing to do.  The first ten minutes where these events occur were very
interesting, and showed a lot of potential towards a great movie, but it
started to fade off.
The girls decide to put Liz back in bed, and make it look like some man killed
her.  Julie is totally against them.  Now, the girls have run into a problem. 
Fern, the most unpopular girl in the school witnessed the event of them trying
to cover it up.  Courtney makes a deal.  She will turn Fern into one of the
popular girls if she will keep her mouth shut.  Everything is different now at
Reagan High.  Julie has dropped out of the popular group, and she really wants
to tell the police what happened.  Besides, she didn't do much anyway.  From
here, Rebecca Gayheart is not seen very much in the film, and that is a big
disappointment.  Her acting skills were the best among the large cast, and she
could have added to the film.  When Rebecca's character does show up, the film
starts to pick up and get more interesting.
Fern's new alias is Vylette, and everyone admires her.  She is even more
popular than Courtney and she doesn't think this is right.  Vylette is
extremely annoying and Judy Greer delivers a terrible, annoying, overdone
acting performance.  If it wasn't for the character of Vylette, the film could
have been a lot better.  Julie tries to turn Vylette back to the good side, but
is unsuccessful, because now Vylette doesn't want to do the right thing and
tell the truth to the police.  Julie Benz also gave a horrid performance, and
was almost as annoying as the character of Vylette.  Rose McGowan was good, but
not as good as she was as "Tatum", in 1996's Scream. Her role was annoying, but
in a good way.  She was extremely mean, and she was the type of character that
was neat, but you downright hated her.
Throughout the film, it gets way off track and drifts a lot.  We get way off of
the topic of the jawbreaker incident, and get into things that don't have
anything to do with the actual film.  The beginning and ending are great, it's
just the middle that needed a lot of help.  During the body of the movie, it
seemed to be the same thing for about an hour.  Nothing interesting happened,
and the same, extremely annoying song plays over and over again.  Don't get me
wrong, Jawbreaker wasn't a bad film, but it certainly wasn't very good.  It
isn't very funny either.  It tries to use the type of humor used in Clueless,
but it doesn't succeed at all.  There are only a few amusing sequences, but
they die off quickly.  A nice performance that was in the film was Officer Vera
Cruz, played by the popular Pam Grier.  She was the detective trying to crack
the case of the jawbreaker.  
The Bottom Line- Benz and Greer should have taken a lesson from the pros-
McGowan and Gayheart.   

Author
Jamie Peck
JAWBREAKER
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
To further the comparison quotient, sections of the movie also veer 
dangerously close to "Clueless" and "Very Bad Things," which is ironic 
because it _is_ clueless and chock full of very bad things. Said 
deplorable act opens the film, as three members (Rose McGowan, Rebecca 
Gayheart and Julie Benz) of the afore-mentioned popular quartet surprise 
the fourth (Charlotte Roldan) on the morning of her birthday: they don 
disguises, jostle her from bed, stuff the titular candy in her mouth to 
keep her quiet, and toss her in the trunk of a car. Their intent is to 
take her out for a celebratory pancake breakfast, but the confection 
melts, and she's DOA at the IHOP. Like, whoops. 
McGowan's fearless, nasty group leader Courtney, described by somebody 
as "Satan in heels," decides to make the crime scene resemble an assault 
by a male rapist, but their cover is promptly blown by class nerd Fern 
(Judy Evans Greer). What's a psychopathic senior sexpot to do? Why, 
welcome her to the "family," of course. Courtney allows Fern to take the 
unintentional victim's place in their posse in exchange for her silence, 
and the dull meek-into-monstrous makeover subplot that follows isn't the 
slightest bit interesting. Nor is the time devoted to the defection of 
Gayheart's conflicted Julie. She turns out to have a conscience. Not 
good. 
Given "Jawbreaker"'s visual flair and deliciously mordant set-up, this 
material could have been steered into flashy, funny "I Know What You Did 
Last Marking Period" territory. But after a satisfyingly loopy first 
quarter, it's clear that this "Jawbreaker"'s center is purely sour. Once 
the body is discovered, Pam Grier shows up as a detective determined to 
crack the case, and the movie discards any humorous sensibilities it 
might have maintained up until that point for unbelievable plot holes 
and unacceptable plot twists. But if Grier seems to have come from 
another film, McGowan deserves one. Her dynamite performance as a cold, 
calculating rhymes-with-witch keeps this mess watchable. 
Much of the problem seems to stem from director Darren Stein's sloppy 
screenplay. The rules for successful dark humor state to either ground 
it in disturbing reality or drench it with cartoony meanness. It's 
immensely difficult to cater to both extremes, and that's precisely what 
"Jawbreaker" tries - and fails - to do. Take, for example, the final 
sequence, which is set at the big prom and contains obvious allusions to 
"Carrie." Are we supposed to laugh at what happens? If so, that violates 
the movie's more authentic elements and lets several characters off the 
hook just to finalize things on a cutesy, fantasy-oriented note. No 
wonder "Jawbreaker" ends up being hard to swallow.

Author
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
  In Jawbreaker, the braindead teen angst comedy from writer/director Darren
Stein, a Heathers-like clique of popular high school girls led by the venomous
Courtney (Rose McGowan) accidentally asphyxiate one of their own while
kidnapping her as a birthday prank. They decide, as teens sometimes will, to
return the dead friend to her bedroom and make it look like she was raped. The
scheme gets complicated when the timid, socially retarded school misfit Fern
Mayo (a cartoonish Carrie lookalike in a fright wig) discovers their plot.
Courtney makes Fern an offer she can't refuse: if Fern doesn't tell anyone that
the nice popular girl she has a crush on has been murdered, Courtney will give
Fern a makeover to make her popular. The audience is not given any compelling
evidence that any human being would go for this ludicrous deal. But hey, says
Stein, they're only teens. What do they want, believable characters and
situations? Sheesh.
  Jawbreaker is one of the best examples ever of a high school movie that seems
to come from filmmakers who never went to high school, but instead watched a
lot of movies about it. Unlike the earlier dark teen angst films that it
blatantly apes (mainly Heathers and Carrie), it seems completely clueless about
what is funny and terrifying about being a teenager. Stein clumsily imitates
superficial aspects of those films without ever capturing their satirical
accuracy, their emotion, their storytelling or their characterization. You
don't believe in these characters or what happens to them and you can't be sure
how you're supposed to feel about them. All you know is that whatever it is,
you don't feel it.
  Heathers is powerful because it has protagonists we relate to and villains we
know in the real world, and it slashes at them with a dark, morbid wit. Stein
goes for the morbid and leaves out the wit. His villains remind us of the
villains in the other films more than they remind us of the real people those
films remind us of. But even as super villains they're not as successful.
McGowan's most-popular-girl-in-school is a "megabitch," but she doesn't have
any of the enjoyable wickedness of Shannen Doherty's Heather. Daniel Waters'
memorable Heathers dialogue is full of invented slang ("What is your damage,
Heather?"), clever insults ("Grow up, Heather - bulimia is so '87", "Football
season is over. Kurt and Ram had nothing left to offer this school but date
rapes and AIDS jokes") and occasional surprising vulgarities ("Well fuck me
gently with a chainsaw!", "Why are you pulling my dick, Veronica?"). Stein
isn't that funny - he tries to give the dialogue a crispness by sandwiching
'fucking's between phrases ("Peachy fucking keen") but it just comes off as
pale imitation.
  Heathers doesn't just take a big bite out of high school life, chew it up and
spit it out on the floor. It knows its targets and attacks them with precision.
It paints a vivid portrait of a world of cruel teenagers and parents whose
understanding of their kids' problems comes from clueless local news reports. A
world of macho dads who bury their sons in football helmets, flakey hippie
teachers who try to heal the school with "The New Happiness" banners, a
preacher who sees the word "eskimo" underlined in a dead girl's copy of Moby
Dick and says, "Let's hope she's rubbing noses with Jesus!" Part of the
believability is in the little, knowing details - the jock with the Sports
Illustrated football phone, the reference to the 8th grade boyfriend who's into
mythology, the college party goons with the Sharper Image poster on their wall.
  Jawbreaker doesn't have knowing details, because it doesn't know shit. It
presents a crude Pee-Chee doodle of high school culture - you really never get
a feel for the inhabitants of the school or the "cruel politics" of their
world. In fact, you hardly get to know the characters, or the movie itself.
It's a short movie, just over 90 minutes, but it's loaded with flashbacks to
earlier scenes, as if you might have forgotten. It's like an hour long TV
special with commercials. It never really feels like characters or scenes, just
actresses rushing through plot points. 
  Most of the minor characters use an atrocious, sub-Troma style of comedy
acting to deliver lines like "Oh my god! That is soooo cool!" - the kind of
satirical dialogue that was cutting edge in a certain region of California when
these characters were in kindergarten. Today it's not an observation, it's an
echo of a cliché of an out of date observation. There is even a football player
character who seems to be modeled after Kurt from Heathers. Both characters
look way too old to be in high school, and both have 1987 hairdos. The do is
most distracting in the 1999 movie. This character might have seemed a little
out of date when I was in high school, but in a contemporary movie he's
ridiculous.
  Along with the unbelievable high school world comes unbelievable behavior.
You don't believe Julie (Rebecca Gayheart) when she stops hanging out with her
popular, murderer friend and for some reason has to start dressing down. And
you really don't believe Fern's transformation into the popular Vylette. She
goes from mousy, mumbling Carrie White to cocky, talkative valley girl
superbitch (at one point looking like Princess Diana as Amber from Clueless)
and back to shy misfit, without convincing evolution or motivation. You are
never given any reason to relate to her as she covers up the murder in exchange
for fashion tips, but at the end, when she abruptly joins the good guys, it
seems you are supposed to forgive her.
  Heathers isn't a perfect film - its cheesy keyboard scoring has always grated
on my nerves, and many people are driven crazy by Christian Slater's whole Jack
Nicholson shtick. But it helped me get through high school because it so
perfectly reflected how I saw the world at that age. It made me feel like I
wasn't alone. I can't imagine that teens will relate as strongly to Jawbreaker.
Like most of the recent slew of teen movies, it has a weird view of popular
kids vs. social outcasts that doesn't come very close to jibing with reality.
When Fern gets made over as Vylette, the whole school talks about her and
follows her around and applauds her arrival at school as if she were a rock
star. When they find out that she is actually Fern, the quiet girl with the
fake looking wig, they are disappointed and angry, they mob her and chant at
her and hit her until she is bloodied and unconscious and laying on the floor
wrapped in xeroxed photos of her old yearbook photo. It's difficult to relate
to this kind of scene because throughout the horrible history of high school
humiliations on this planet, nothing even remotely similar to this has ever
happened. We can't believe in her rise or her fall - I mean, would anyone
really care? At worst, they'd stop talking to her.
  The obvious model for Jawbreaker, besides Heathers, is Carrie. And as
mentioned earlier, Fern is obviously meant to look like Carrie. But Carrie is a
believable outcast. She doesn't fit in because her mom is a crazy, abusive
zealot; girls pelt her with tampons and pig's blood because she has her period
in the gym shower and doesn't know what's happening to her. They don't
understand Carrie and they hate her for it. But Fern's biggest sin is looking
like Carrie. She's quiet and she's awkward, but she's just not pelting
material.
  There is one enjoyable homage to Carrie: the parents of the dead girl (seen
only for a few seconds) are played by William Kat and PJ Soles. So it's really
piling it on too thick later in the film when a character suggests going to
prom and Fern says, "Oh yeah, why don't we stop by the slaughterhouse and pick
up some pig's blood?" And then it really goes over the line when the climax is
modeled after De Palma's classic bucket of blood sequence, but without the
virtuoso technique or the suspense or the blood or the telekinetic aftermath.
  (There's also what seems to be a Blue Velvet reference - Fern smells a rose
and is horrified when an ugly centipede crawls out of it - but I'm not sure
why.)
  One of the more preposterous scenes has Julie casually telling her new
boyfriend about the murder - only as background information to explain
Vylette's makeover. Suddenly the conversation shifts to righteousness and
"You've got to do something!" and Stein seems to expect us to relate to Julie. 
  Julie decides to turn in Courtney, so she meets with the detective
investigating the case (Pam Grier, who is so likable that I could almost buy a
line like, "Some of the sweetest candies are as sour as death inside" before I
thought, "Wait a minute, Pam, why are you saying these lines? You escaped the
world of Steven Seagal movies for this?"). The detective reveals that there is
a man being held as a suspect in the murder, Julie figures out that Courtney is
framing a stranger, and inexplicably she leaves without telling the detective
the truth. (The suspect is played, briefly, by McGowan's offscreen fiancee,
Marilyn Manson, who looks funny in a mustache. His tiny walk-on must have had
something cut; early publicity was hyping up a "shocking sex act" which as far
as I could tell never materialized. If he ever breaks up with McGowan his
buddies will surely give him shit for being whipped into appearing in such a
lame attempt at a hard-edged black comedy.)
  Later, when Julie finds a recording of Courtney confessing to the murder, she
doesn't bring it to Grier because the plot requires her to instead perform an
uninspired prom prank - the old "play a recording of the villain saying
something self-incriminating while she is making a speech" routine. Of course,
in the world of bad movies, playing the recording over the PA system involves a
complex under-the-clock rewiring rather than just commandeering a microphone.
Worse, the consequences of being proven a murderer in front of an audience are
more like what you'd expect as punishment for a bad standup routine - everyone
calls Courtney a bitch and throws flowers at her. I don't think this is
supposed to be a swipe at the superficiality of high school culture. It's just
another scene that develops Stein's weak motifs at the expense of story and
character. And by this point the film has completely abandoned things like
Fern's opening narration and the implication that she is a lesbian. Shit, says
Stein, these kids grew up on MTV - they won't remember what I showed them 90
minutes ago.
  Jawbreaker is more insidious than other bad teen movies of the '90s because
it purports to be anti-establishment. Whereas Can't Hardly Wait and She's All
That really believed in the teen institutions of Prom Queen and Class President
and Cute Couple and Thrower of Parties, Jawbreaker tries to cast those things
in a wicked light and stand up for the outcasts. But it's empty and out of
touch. It doesn't even pretend that the outcasts are any less hollow than the
cheerleaders. 
  In Scream, Skeet Ulrich reminded everyone of Johnny Depp. Now the actor who
plays Julie's new boyfriend reminds me of Skeet Ulrich. He's a good analogy for
Jawbreaker: a second generation copy of an American original. (Don't apply the
analogy to Christian Slater's Jack Nicholson imitation in Heathers, though -
that would be uh cheating or something.)
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Author
Steve Rhodes
The "Fab 4" of Ronald Reagan High are four stuck-up girls, played by 
Rose McGowan, Rebecca Gayheart, Julie Benz and Charlotte Roldan, who 
overdress like 4 Posh Spice wannabes.  Their daily ritual is to parade 
up and down the school halls like royalty, and their constant reflex 
action is to grab their compacts so they can check their make-up and 
powder their cheeks.  Under no circumstances will they ever let 
themselves be seen eating in public.
In writer and director Darren Stein's JAWBREAKER, it isn't as funny as 
it sounds.  In fact, it isn't funny at all.  Stein has taken the black 
comedy of a teen movie like HEATHERS and stripped it of any 
intelligence, wit or charm.  His actresses toss off their lines so fast 
that they don't have time to add any emotion.  And all of his female 
characters have considerably more lipstick than brains.
The setup for the movie has one of the Fab 4, Liz, who is referred to as 
"the Princess Di of Reagan High," be killed when a prank by the other 3 
goes wrong.  The Princess Di reference is in bad taste, as is much of 
the movie.  Granted, bad taste can sometimes be funny, but the mere 
presence of bad taste doesn't guarantee it.
Liz's girlfriends stick a jawbreaker that is literally larger than a 
golf ball in her mouth, tape her mouth shut, and stick her bound body in 
the trunk of a car.  When they open the trunk later, Liz is dead.  They 
eventually put her blue and bruised body into a sexual position and make 
it look like Liz was the victim of a brutal rape.  These realistic and 
disgusting scenes of a dead, seminude teen have a pornographic feeling 
that is hard to forget and will likely turn the stomach of many a 
viewer.
The film's dialog not only isn't funny, it's trite.  One nerdy young 
girl introduces herself with "My name is Fern Mayo, as in hold the 
mayo."  When Fern discovers what has happened, the Fab 3 make her an 
offer she can't refuse -- make-up! They cake it on her and welcome her 
to the clan.   
The parents in the movie brag about learning parenting skills from 
watching Oprah.  The teachers fare no better, especially in the 
ridiculous lines they are given.  "Miss Shayne, please cover your 
bosom," one young teacher, who has been made up to look old and ugly, 
says without any conviction.  "This is a learning institution, not a 
brothel."
Besides the obvious question of why this movie was ever made, there is 
one other question that I'd like to ask the director.  Why do you have a 
phone number start with 555 if you going to cover the rest of the number 
anyway?
In a cameo, Pam Grier plays Detective Vera Cruz, who investigates Liz's 
murder.  As she interrogates the other people, she stares at them like 
they are all idiots, proving that she is the only one that gets it.  I 
am sure that if the hard nosed Detective Cruz were to see this movie, 
she'd walk out after about 5 minutes, and you'd be well advised to do 
the same if you should happen to find yourself in a theater showing it.
JAWBREAKER runs 1:27. It is rated R for violence, gore, profanity and 
sex. I would advise everyone to avoid it, but if teenagers go they 
should be older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Matt Williams
The high school comedy seems to be a hot genre of the moment.  With
She's All That and Varsity Blues behind us, and several more set for
release later in the year, the teen comedy seems to be experiencing its
own Renaissance.  However, you wouldn't know it from the quality of the
latest entry:  Jawbreaker. This shockingly bitter candy definitely has a
sour center.
The most popular, and most feared, clique at Reagan High School have an
unexpected dilemma.  They have accidentally killed one of their own, the
"teen dream", Liz Purr (Charlotte Roldan), choked on a giant jawbreaker
during a kidnapping prank for her 17th birthday. Now the three surviving
girls must decide what to do.  It takes little time at all for the
group's leader, Courtney (Rose McGowan), to decide to cover it up.
The ditzy Marcie (Julie Benz) is game to go along, but the clique's
final member, Julie (Rebecca Gayheart), has a guilty conscience.  To
make things worse, another student, the hopelessly geeky Fern Mayo (Judy
Evans Greer) accidentally discovers the truth.  The girls' cover is
surely blown...
Not so fast.  Thinking quickly, Courtney offers Fern a
once-in-a-lifetime chance.  After a quick makeover, Fern is transformed
into Vylette, the beautiful "new girl" at school, and a full-fledged
member of the popular crowd.  Does this mean that popularity is the key
to getting away with murder?  Or will this finely honed plan crack over
time?
Jawbreaker is obviously attempting to be the Heathers of its generation,
and failing miserably, I might add.  It manages to capture the mix of
murder and teen social observations, but misses three crucial elements:
sharp dialogue, witty characters and the much-needed humor.
It is possible that Jawbreaker might have succeeded in being (darkly)
humorous if it wasn't shackled to its dead-weight plot.  The film's most
innovative twist is the makeover of Fern Mayo.  At this point,
Jawbreaker seems poised to spin wildly into the uncharted depths.  But
then,  all of a sudden, the innovation stops.  The film becomes mired in
the murder-and-cover-up plotting, which quickly saps what little life
and energy there was right out of the film.
In the film, Rose McGowan fares the best.  As the manipulative clique
leader, she truly dominates every scene she's in (not a difficult feat
in a crowd such as this, however).  It's a character crying out for a
better movie (or at least another decently drawn character with which to
interact.)
Jawbreaker doesn't quite know how to handle its semi-likable characters:
Fern and Julie.  Either one could effectively end the movie at any time
by simply revealing what she knows.  The lengths to which the film goes
to prolong the plot have the unintentional effect of distancing us from
these characters.  As their motives become murky and unclear, the film
finally falls to the point that it doesn't really matter who wins or
loses, since all sides have become equally detestable.
"Detestable" is a good word to describe the film, Jawbreaker.  It's
certain that, like the murder weapon described in the film's title,
Jawbreaker will be triggering more than one gag reflex in the audience.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
MosseHood
   Ok, ladies and gents: when you buy tickets for this movie, you know
it's going to be bad. Does anybody really have to be a rocket
scientist to figure that out?
   So why does every reviewer insist on bashing this movie? Sure, it's
bad, it's ridiculous, and it's tasteless. But has everyone forgotten
the most important thing about movies: fun?
   Jawbreaker may not reach enough status to be a cult classic, but
it's one of those movies where you can sit down and laugh at
it-whether you're laughing with the movie or at it.
   Rose McGowan is Courtney, the most snotty, uncaring, popular girl
in school with gorgeous black hair and a killer wardrobe and fashion
tips (you can NEVER eat at lunch). One the morning of their best
friend's 17th birthday, Courtney and her friends "Foxy" (Julie Benz)
and Julie (Rebecca Gayheart) decide to play a little birthday prank on
sweet Liz-in the process, she chokes to death on a jawbreaker used to
keep her from screaming.
   Cue the mayhem; while trying to make it look like a rape in her own
bedroom, complete school loser Fern Mayo (Judy Evans Greer) overhears
and sees some things she shouldn't. So in turn for her keeping quiet,
Courtney makes her popular. Julie can't take this and leaves the
group.
   And the "battle of the babes" (as described in the commercials)
erupts: Julie vs the popular 3, Fern vs Courtney & Foxy, Julie & Fern
vs Foxy & Courtney, and so on...
   Rebecca Gayheart will suffer the most from this diaster; after an
unmemorable role in Scream 2, and a horribly acted role in the
terrible Urban Legend, her career seems to be declining year by
year. She has charisma and some talent, but she has wasted it in teen
movies that take her no where. Rose McGowan, in a rare screen role (as
opposed to straight to video release) is good as her usual snappy,
vixen self, and Greer and Benz, who were probably hoping to make a
career jumpstart, fail.
   Pam Grier, although wasting her talent as well, is actually a
perfect cast as the very silly, all leather wearing tough as nails
detective.
   All in all, the movie was fun at some points, with funny tiffs and
battles between the "babes," but the one good thing you'll get from
this film is fashion tips.  Grade: C

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Darren Stein.
Cast: Rose McGowan, Rebecca Gayheart, Judy Greer, Julie Benz, Chad 
Christ, Carol Kane, Pam Grier, Ethan Erickson, Charlotte Roldan, Tatyana 
Ali, P.J. Soles, William Katt.
1999 - 86 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and a gruesome depiction of a 
dead body).
Reviewed February 23, 1999.
"Jawbreaker," Darren Stein's auspicious sophomore directing effort (his 
debut feature, "Sparklers," is due out later this spring), is a wicked 
and darkly comic tale of accidental murder and then (partial) 
redemption. To get the comparison out of the way, yes, "Jawbreaker" owes 
quite a bit to the 1989 high school black comedy, "Heathers," and I 
can't really imagine this film being made if that one didn't already 
exist. I will also admit that "Heathers," on the whole, is a marginally 
superior film, because its themes and "message" were presented in a more 
fashionable and effective way, but "Jawbreaker" is certainly more 
visually stylish.
"Jawbreaker" starts off with a brief slow-motion shot of the "Fearsome 
Four," four beautiful and wildly popular young women, walking down a 
high school hallway as they are introduced, played appropriately to the 
rock song, "Yoo Hoo," by Imperial Teen. There's the leader and ice 
queen, Courtney (Rose McGowan), the ditzy follower, Marcie (Julie Benz), 
the slightly reluctant Julie (Rebecca Gayheart), and the sweet Liz Purr 
(Charlotte Roldan), who is kind to everyone, an "angel," if you will. 
Immediately afterwards, Courtney, Marcie, and Julie, garbed in masks, 
set out to play a birthday prank on Liz by tying her up, gagging her by 
stuffing a large jawbreaker into her mouth, and throwing her in the 
trunk of their car. While stopping for breakfast at a cafe, they are 
shocked to discover that poor Liz has accidentally swallowed and 
asphyxiated on the jawbreaker. Desperate to cover everything up, 
Courtney, the cool cat (or lion), grasps a plan: carry Liz back up to 
her bedroom and stage what will appear to look like a violent and kinky 
rape by an unknown assailant. Unfortunately, while still at Liz's house, 
the three are paid an unwelcome visit by the geeky and unattractive, but 
kind-hearted Fern Mayo (Judy Greer), who has come to drop off Liz's 
homework assignments. Thinking quick, Courtney proposes an offer Fern 
can't refuse: she will elect Fern into their elite clique, give her a 
make-over, and turn her into "Vylette." But as "Vylette" grows more and 
more corrupt and bitchy, Julie, who has had a guilty conscience the 
whole time, decides she wants out of the group, grabbing a romantic, 
suave new boyfriend (Chad Christ) who is in the drama club, and begins 
to wrestle with what she should do: tell the truth about Courtney, or 
risk getting into trouble herself since she was, after all, an 
accomplice to the crime.
Although "Jawbreaker" may bill itself as a dark comedy, and there are a 
few small laughs, I found the film to be a little bit more serious, 
particularly in dealing with the surprisingly complex (for this type of 
film, anyway) character of Julie, played by Rebecca Gayheart in the 
film's best performance, as a young woman who finds herself ultimately 
shunned by her so-called "friends" when she begins to show normal human 
emotions, such as guilt and tenderness. Equipped with the second best 
character in the picture, and the other one that goes through several 
physical and emotional changes, is that of Fern, played by Judy Greer. 
Fern is a good-natured person in her soul, but can't helped but 
practically be brainwashed by the bitchy, heartless Courtney, who often 
reminds her that she "made her." There is a warm, touching scene between 
the two early on when Julie calls up "Vylette" and brings up an old, 
fond childhood memory of how they were friends in the 4th grade and went 
to each other's slumber parties. "It's funny how time changes people," 
says Julie. "Time doesn't change people," replies Fern. "People change 
people." 
In the other central roles, Rose McGowan is perfectly cast as the 
unredeemable Courtney who (slight spoiler alert ahead) gets her just 
desserts in the satisfying climax at the prom, a la "Carrie," cleverly 
set to the tune of "Young at Heart," by Frank Sinatra. Meanwhile, Julie 
Benz really doesn't make much of an impression at all as Marcie, and 
also seemingly doesn't play a very important role in the goings-on. In 
the supporting roles, Chad Christ, as Zach, Julie's new boyfriend, is 
the splitting image of Ethan Hawke, right down to the whiskers on his 
chin; Pam Grier is admittedly wasted as the detective on the case (this 
is certainly not a step up from her meaty role in 1997's "Jackie Brown); 
and Carol Kane is fetching as always, but underused, as the school 
principal, Mrs. Sherwood. Making cameos are Marilyn Manson (::gasp!:: 
without makeup!) as a man Courtney picks up in a bar, while P.J. Soles 
and William Katt (who both starred, coincidentally enough, in "Carrie") 
make virtual walk-ons as Liz's parents who return from a trip to find 
their daughter dead.
"Jawbreaker" has one highly strong asset, and that is the underlying 
subject of redemption, both of Julie and Fern, and I appreciated that 
they were given the time to be developed so that I understood exactly 
what each one was going through. In high school, teenagers really do 
hang out with a certain type of clique or group, as cliched as it may 
sound, and I am sure some have been swayed and peer pressured into being 
someone that they truly aren't. That, in my opinion, is what 
"Jawbreaker" is all about. I hasten to add, however, that this same 
exact theme was grudgingly already explored in a similar manner in 
"Heathers," and so "Jawbreaker" doesn't necessarily have anything fresh 
to say. Both films followed the same exact pattern, and pretty much the 
same story, right down to the murder aspect and clique of four popular 
girls. Although not at all up to the former's level, "Jawbreaker" is 
still an entertaining and smart film, and in a time when something as 
banal as "She's All That" is also playing in theaters, "Jawbreaker" is 
something of a slight godsend. 

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Rose McGowan, Rebecca Gayheart, Julie Benz, Judy Greer, William
Katt, Jeff Conaway,
Carol Kane, Pam Grier, Marilyn Manson
Written and Directed by: Darren Stein
Running Time: 87 minutes
Three of Reagan High School's elite females kidnap their friend on her
birthday (more specifically, they break into her room as she's
sleeping, stuff a jawbreaker in her mouth, cover her mouth with tape,
tie her up, and throw her in the trunk of their car.  Not
surprisingly, she ends up choking to death on the jawbreaker.  Time
for comedy!
One of the girls in the clique expresses concern over the death of
their friend and what they've done to cause it, so the other two
quickly oust her from the group and alienate her at school.  Then,
after another girl overhears them confess to killing their friend, in
exchange for her silence they give her a makeover and invite her to
join their group.  This is pretty much all that happens in Jawbreaker.
The film's opening three minutes or so which set the film in motion
are the only noteworthy events here.  None of the lead characters are
interesting in the slightest, and the supporting cast (who would have
been interesting) is wasted beyond belief.  Pam Grier is on hand to
play a gritty police detective investigating the murder case, but
ultimately she has absolutely no bearing on anything.  William Katt
(TV's The Greatest American Hero, House) plays the father of the dead
girl, and he has all of about three seconds of screen time.  Honestly,
do you still get paid if you just wander into a movie and not say a
word?
The only moment in the film that even remotely made me smile lasts
about one minute.  It involves Jeff Conaway as the father of one of
the girls, who tries to bond with his snotty daughter by recalling how
she used to listen to Tiffany records.
Believe me, I'm all for a well done dark comedy.  But Jawbreaker makes
no attempts at humor whatsoever, dark or otherwise (unless you count
cartoony sound effects which are included in many of the film's
scenes).  It's just up there on the screen.  You'd like to think that
you don't know exactly where the film is going, but you will, trust
me.  You'll be hoping that at some point, maybe the film will get
intelligent, maybe do something different, maybe have someone turn the
tables on these uppity girls.  But that won't be happening until the
film's finale, which is an abrupt, contrived, ridiculous mess.
Basically, Jawbreaker is Heathers '99.  All I could think about as I
watched this film were things I liked about Heathers.  And I hated
Heathers.  So what does that tell you?  [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.

Author
Tom Ripley
There's a scene early on in "Jawbreaker" where a character utters the
unintentionally prophetic line, "That is *so* not funny".  How right
she was.  This pathetic tale of three high-schoolers who accidentally
kill their best friend in a birthday kidnapping prank gone horribly
awry is never even remotely funny.  Or fun.
Or original.  Not content with the too-obvious "Heathers" heisting,
the filmmakers proceed to lift freely from a staggering variety of
sources, including "Carrie", "Bride of Frankenstein", "Blue Velvet",
and even Shaw's Pygmalion, itself recently remade as "She's All That".
"Jawbreaker" is a pastiche, and not even an enjoyable one.  I find it
extremely telling that the most engaging part of the film is the
credit sequence, a jawbreaker factory montage inexplicably backed by
Veruca Salt's "Volcano Girls"; serving as a blueprint for the rest of
the film, the song has absolutely nothing to do with the footage we're
watching.  Just close your eyes and pretend you're listening to an
alt-rock station; you won't be missing anything.
The blame for a mess this big has to be spread around among the
principals.  Rebecca Gayheart, following roles in "Scream 2" and
"Urban Legend", should have known better than to take yet another role
in yet another teen body count movie.  Pam Grier has totally wasted
any credibility she might have gotten from her role in Quentin
Tarantino's "Jackie Brown".  And Rose McGowan should just quit acting.
She has no charisma, no presence, and no acting skills other than
rolling her eyes and looking disaffected.  McGowan manages to be
upstaged by her real-life boyfriend, rocker Marilyn Manson, whose
fifteen second role here is far more interesting than anything any of
the "real" actors are doing.  Manson, sans trademark makeup & contact
lenses, and with an obviously fake moustache, looks eerily like
Nicholas Cage; who woulda thunk it?
That crack about direction by committee wasn't merely a pithy
sound-bite.  Stylistically, thematically & narratively, "Jawbreaker"
is all over the map, varying wildly in tone & content from scene to
scene.  Though credited solely to writer/director Darren Stein, one
gets the feeling that no two scenes here were actually guided by the
same hands.  If Stein was indeed responsible for the whole of this
atrocity, someone needs to get the man some drugs, pronto.  Prozac,
lithium, kava, ritalin, something, anything.  He's quite obviously in
desperate need of chemical help.
"Jawbreaker" is a monumental waste of effort and resources, and quite
likely one of the single worst films I've ever seen.  To call
"Jawbreaker" garbage would be to insult garbage.  Bad flicks for the
rest of the year are safe; I've already got my pick for worst film of
'99.
"Jawbreaker" runs approximately 90 minutes, though it feels longer
than "Titanic", and is rated R for language, sexual situations and
graphic violence.  Not recommended for kids, teens, or anyone else.
(Reviews available by email; send a message with "subscribe" in the
header to prisoner7@usa.net.)

Author
Michael Dequina
Glam gals Courtney Shayne (Rose McGowan), Julie Freeman (Rebecca
Gayheart), Marcie Fox (Julie Benz) and Liz Purr (Charlotte Roldan) make
up _the_ clique at Reagan High.  That is, until a birthday prank goes
fatally wrong, and Liz's slot is left open.  Enter Fern Mayo (Judy Evans
Greer), the geekiest girl in school.  After Fern finds out the truth
about what happened to Liz, ringleader Courtney offers the social outcast
a makeover and popularity beyond her wildest dreams--in exchange for her
silence.  Hence the barely noticed disappearance of Fern and the
much-noticed arrival of the one-named Vylette, a blonde, self-proclaimed
bitch who threatens Courtney's crown as the school's "it" girl.
As Julie so eloquently tells Courtney regarding Liz's jawbreaker-induced
death, "You can't hide the truth with a makeover!"  The same can be said
of writer-director Darren Stein's black comedy, which is a mishmash of
elements from _Heathers_, _Clueless_, and _Very_Bad_Things_.  But its
derivative nature aside, _Jawbreaker_ is a darkly fun romp, thanks to
Stein's witty script and stylishly energetic direction (Fern's
Frankenstein-like transformation into Vylette is a nicely surreal touch)
and, especially, McGowan's deliciously wicked turn as the ruthless ice
queen Courtney.  (opens February 19)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]

Author
John Sylva
http://twowebmasters.cjb.net   (COMING SOON!)
>From writer and director Darren Stein comes Jawbreaker, the poorly told tale of
what can happen when an innocent birthday prank goes wrong.  At Reagan High,
four girls are sitting on top of the world.  Courtney Shane, played by Rose
McGowan, holds the title of meanest, most disrespectful soul in the school. 
Everyone hates her, but everyone envies her due to her popularity.  Courtney is
the "leader" of her clique, which also includes Julie, played by Rebecca
Gayheart, Liz Purr, played by Charlotte Roldan, and Marcie, played by Julie
Benz are the other three in the group.  It is Liz's seventeenth birthday, and
Julie, Courtney, and Marcie concur that they will play a seemingly innocent
prank on her, but the prank results in the death of Liz.
Just like stupid teens in any teen directed film such as this one, the foursome
decide to cover up the death to make it look like a murder committed by someone
else.  And also just like in other teen directed movies, one of the four don't
agree with hiding it, this time that character being Julie.  And finally, just
like in other teen movies, there is a witness outside the group trying to hide
the truth.  This time that character being Fern Mayo (Judy Greer), who is
subject to many cracks from Courtney's group, as well as the entire school. 
>From here, Jawbreaker turns into a predictable tale of revenge, bad morals, and
at least trying to do the right thing.
Not only is the script weak, on a whole the acting is horrid thanks to a large
amount of the main cast.  Judy Greer is undeniably awful as her one
dimensional, annoying character, as she overacts every line she has.  Also on
the bad side of acting is Julie Benz, almost falling to the annoying factor
that Greer delivers.
On the positive side of acting, Rose McGowan performs well here, but doesn't
match her wickedly clever performance as "Tatum", in 1996's Scream. McGowan's
role is annoying, but this only adds to the film.  She is wickedly mean, and
even though she a well-written character, you downright hate her.  Faring even
better than McGowan is Rebecca Gayheart, who is always exceptionally believable
as her roles.  When the script feeds her a one or two dimensional character,
she turns it into three, always putting strong emotion and power into her
roles.  Gayheart isn't given as much to do here as she was in 1998's Urban
Legend, but you can still get a strong taste of her acting skills in
Jawbreaker.
Jawbreaker drifts and mianders different sub plots throughout, hardly throwing
anything for the viewer to get absorbed in.  We get way off of the topic of the
jawbreaker incident, and get into things that don't have anything to do with
the actual film.  The beginning and ending are strong, it's just the middle
that needs a lot of help.  During the body of the movie, it is undeniably
repetitive, never progressing towards a conclusion.  Nothing to grab the
viewer's interest is around, and the same, extremely annoying song plays over
and over again. 
Jawbreaker tries to get off on the same time of humor used in the 1995 film
Clueless, but falls flat.  The few gags that actually work die off quickly and
die off with a bang.  All in all, a horrible disappointment.  
The Bottom Line: The tagline reads, "Even the sweetest candies are sour as
death inside."  Yes, that is too true.  No matter how good this film may have
looked, it fails to deliver.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "JAWBREAKER" (Columbia/Tri Star: Sony Entertain=
ment)
  If you remember "Heathers," "Grease," or even "Carrie,"
you'll recognize elements of all three in this high-school reworked
satire. Rebecca Gayheart, Rose McGowan, Charlotte Roldan, and Julie
Benz are the four most beautiful and popular girls at Reagan High. And
they know it. As the ruling clique, they're bitches. Their
disinterested demeanor and cold stares intimidate the weak but their
sex appeal is undeniable. The plot revolves around what happens when
Rebecca, Rose, and Julie decide to pull a prank on Charlotte's 17th
birthday. Sneaking into her room in the morning, they stuff a
jawbreaker in her mouth and gag her so she can't spit it out. Then
they kidnap her and stuff her into the trunk of their car. But when
they decide to set her free to gorge on a pancake breakfast, they
discover she's dead, having choked on the jawbreaker. Terrified, they
decide to take the body back to her home and make it look like she was
strangled during some kinky sex. But there's a witness to the
crime. It's Judy Evans Greer, the class nerd who is bribed into
silence by a beauty make-over and instant social status among her
peers. Then a persistent detective, Pam Grier, arrives to investigate
the case. What "Jawbreaker" has in its favor is that it cost only $3
million and today's teen market is hot - and Rose McGowan's real-life
boy-friend, Marilyn Manson, has a cameo as her lover. The film's
weakness lies in writer-director Darren Stein's shallow, uneven
execution. He was obviously going for a Faustian tale of corruption
and redemption, even paying homage to "Carrie" in casting P.J. Soles
and William Katt as Charlotte's parents, but this black comedy is just
too derivative. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jawbreaker" is
a stylish but sophomoric 6 - aimed at high school movie-goers.
