Title
Review for Full Metal Jacket (1987)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Long Che Chan
The fact that Full Metal Jacket, Stanley Kubrick's Vietnam War movie,
was filmed entirely on soundstages in England has been advertised by
many critics as if it were a quality of the film.  It certainly is a
different way of working out locations.  Full Metal Jacket abandons the
Oliver Stone war epic and opts for a clumsy string of ‘Nam vignettes.
Sadly, unique approaches cannot salvage a dead movie, which is what I
think Full Metal Jacket is.  Labeled the cinema's "master" by countless
film fans, historians, and filmmakers, Stanley Kubrick has made a few
masterpieces: 2001: A Space Odyssey, his galactic opera, and Dr.
Strangelove, his festival of Cold War caricatures.  These films were
brilliant because they discussed things that were valuable or poked fun
at certain issues in frightening ways.  Full Metal Jacket has been
hailed in many arenas as the definitive war film which surprises me
because the movie, a two-part epic wanna-be, and its isolated anecdotes,
though slightly amusing, are either war clichés or seemingly fabricated
horror shows of hilarity.  Is this what the Vietnam War was about?
Full Metal Jacket (the title refers to ammunition) seems to house two
short films.  Both have the film's central hero, a private nicknamed
Joker (Matthew Modine), but they seem unrelated.  The first segment of
the film depicts the horrors of basic training.  Several marine recruits
are at the South Carolina bootcamp which is dominated by the instructor
from hell, Sgt. Hartman (Lee Ermey).  He verbally and physically abuses
the men (he calls them "ladies" and "maggots"), shooting insanely rude
remarks like bullets, violating them, and forcing them to violate
themselves and their beliefs.  Hartman finds a pet victim in a heavy
klutz named Leonard or, as he is renamed, Gomer Pyle (Vincent
D'Onofrio).   While the film's focal point, Pvt. Joker, struggles to
help Pyle in this netherworld, the entire camp gets punished for every
frequent mistake Pyle makes.
This boot camp segment is nothing more than a march of characters as
empty of humanity as the caricatures in Strangelove.  Kubrick keeps
shoving his theme of dehumanization down our throats throughout the film
but, with dehumanization, there must be humanity first and this film's
characters are not of flesh and blood but are 2-D and, as far as I'm
concerned, are corpses.  If we are supposed to sympathize with these men
who are quickly being molded and brainwashed into becoming killing
machines, we must know and witness that they have human qualities that
are worth saving from this corruption.  The strange thing is that all
the time America thought it was going to help Vietnam purge itself of
Communism, it was contaminating its own people by replacing their souls
with robotic, murderous ones.
People say that Lee Ermey and Vincent D'Onofrio give searing
performances.  If they are supposed to show any range of emotion, they
have not done so.  Ermey's and D'Onofrio's may be the most interesting
characters in the entire movie, and the two play their monotone roles
with relative force, but there is nothing here but clown acts.  There is
not one streak of life in any of these characters, which is both
yawn-inducing and may mislead some to think this film is
thought-provoking stuff.  The first segment is a cartoon with that
sinister look of murder borrowed from Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange.  It
is bitterly hilarious, but with little to say on the effects of war or
dehumanization.
The film's second segment cannot claim to be as entertaining.  At least
the first part of Full Metal Jacket was absorbing and we got a sense of
what the director was hinting at.  In the second portion, everything
falls apart.  Even the few building blocks on violence and terror that
the first part provided dissolve under the sheer lack of direction of
the film's message.  We meet up again with Pvt. Joker who is now a
journalist for the magazine Stars & Stripes.  He follows a platoon to
get their insights and becomes an unwilling part of a cat-and-mouse
showdown between a Vietnamese sniper and the quickly dying men in the
group.
There are some interesting scenes in this segment: one in which a
television crew slowly pans across soldier-infested grounds.  This scene
serves no purpose.  Another scene has the same crew interviewing men at
war.  The men are self-conscious in front of the camera and talk about
their ideas on Vietnam and the war they're fighting.  That scene too has
no purpose.
It is especially discouraging that the film's hero, Pvt. Joker, is
without motivation, evident interest, or insights into the war.  He just
seems to be a piece of garbage floating around in the wind.  All the
characters seem this way.  Full Metal Jacket is clueless: the Vietnamese
population is represented by two prostitutes who come around as easily
bought items for American soldiers.  The men bargain with the hookers'
managers and the prostitutes satisfy their low-paying customers.  The
only other significant Vietnamese character is the female sniper in the
climactic scene.  She is shot and Pvt. Joker must choose whether he
wants to put her out of her misery or let her lie there to rot.  She
yelps, "Shoot me" endlessly in this rather painful scene.
Kubrick's vision of Vietnam is a world of sameness.  I do not mock
Kubrick's desire to film Jacket on British soundstages for location is
of little importance with a good movie and a good production designer
waiting in the wings, but the film has a gross artificial aura.  We see
the same environment throughout the second half of the movie: the
imported palm trees, the constructed ruined buildings.  Kubrick has a
lack of vision for Full Metal Jacket, both visually and, worst of all,
thematically.  The director is a man of great passion for films and we
know he tried on this film.  However, rather than having the truth of
the stupidity of war float to the surface, he lets all truth sink to the
bottom.
There is nothing new to be learned from this movie.  The first segment
shifts to the next with such disregard for continuity that you're
positive the second part belongs to a totally different film.  People
will say that Kubrick leaves Full Metal Jacket open for discussion and
one's own opinions, but there is nothing here upon which to base
opinions.  Some of the movie is enjoyable but, as a moralistic tale,
Full Metal Jacket is unique, but puny and primitive.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Well, the Vietnam War film seems to be with us at last.  While the war
went on and for a good while afterward it seemed a taboo subject.  People,
and in particular film backers, did not want to make films about so downbeat
a subject.  With the passing of time some of the wounds have healed and we
have some gung-ho Vietnam films.  The RAMBOs and MISSING IN ACTIONs made it
entertaining (if unrealistic) as the John Wayne films a generation earlier
did for World War II.  Now serious Vietnam films are being made.  We had
DEER HUNTER, APOCALYPSE NOW, THE KILLING FIELDS, and PLATOON.  Kubrick's
latest film is FULL METAL JACKET.
     The film is the history of a Marine known only as Lt. Joker (played by
Matthew Modine).  The story is the memories of Joker from the war and, like
memories, it is episodic.  The first 3/4-hour of the film is the story of
Joker's boot camp experience on Paris Island.  90% of the words you hear
during this story are yelled by Joker's drill instructor.  From there we
follow John's early Vietnam career in some shorter episodes, then the film
ends in another long story.  Joker becomes a correspondent for the only
newspaper the brass respects, the military's own STARS AND STRIPES.  By their
own admission, all they publish is good-news war news and stories about
soldiers giving half their income to down-trodden Vietnamese.  The war, and
in particular the Tet Offensive, is seen from his ironic viewpoint.  While
the film is not as exaggerated as DR. STRANGELOVE, it always has a tragic
and usually a comic undertone.  The film starts bitter and funny like DR.
STRANGELOVE and slowly transforms to sad and bitter like PATHS OF GLORY.
Those are Kubrick's two best films and FULL METAL JACKET could well come to
be accepted by many as his third best.
     FULL METAL JACKET is not the Vietnam War the grunts saw.  That was
PLATOON.  It isn't the war the Cambodians saw.  That was THE KILLING FIELDS.
The Vietnam War the middle-aged right wing saw was THE GREEN BERETS.  If I
ever figure out from whose viewpoint the was was seen in THE DEER HUNTER or
APOCALYPSE NOW, I'll let you know.  FULL METAL JACKET is the Vietnam War
that the college kids who didn't go (and a few who did) saw.  As such it has
some truths, some distortions, and more than a little nostalgia value.  Rate
it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Full Metal Jacket (R, 1986)
Directed by Stanley Kubrick. Written by Kubrick, Michael Kerr, and Gustav
Hasford. Starring Matthew Modine, Vincent D'Onofrio, Lee Ermey.
        Stanley Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket  is a bit disconnected at times,
but its investigation into the training and battle experience of American
soldiers sent to Vietnam is so unrelentingly dark and intense that it still
makes for a noteworthy "Vietnam movie." It begins as a group of Marine
recruits report to training camp, where they are subjected to all manners of
humiliation by a drill sergeant (Lee Ermey) who tells them, in ridiculous
macho lectures that are funny to everyone except himself, that "Marines are
not allowed to die without permission!" and that God likes Marines, "because
we kill every man we see - it keeps heaven well-stocked!"
        But Full Metal Jacket  is hardly a retread of Kubrick's previous
black-comic military satire, Dr. Strangelove;  it soon takes on a very bleak,
tragic tone as one recruit, Private "Gomer Pyle" (Vincent D'Onofrio) becomes
the target of Ermey's most vicious abuse. Mentally and physically incompetent,
Pyle fails at almost every test and constantly makes dumb mistakes. The
sergeant decides that the other recruits will be punished every time Pyle
flubs up, and soon comes the inevitable incident in which the other recruits
awake in the middle of the night and beat the helpless Pyle with rolled-up
socks. The training is dehumanizing at every turn; the sergeant, when not
forcing his trainees to recite vulgar adolescent chants about Eskimo women and
such, often announces proudly and repeatedly that these soldiers will soon be
"in a world of shit" when they go to Vietnam and that his intention is to make
them into killers.
        After this story reaches a harrowing conclusion in which Pyle finally
cracks, the film then follows another of the recruits, Private Joker (Matthew
Modine), on his tour of duty in Vietnam as he works first as a military
journalist and then joins a combat unit. The journalism segment is a little
slow and not particularly enlightening at first. When Joker goes to cover some
actual fighting and later joins up with a unit, however, the film's powerful
and unsettling portrait of cruelty and corruption returns in full force. Most
of the soldiers either seem to have sunk into unashamed disrespect for human
life (one of them wonders what they will do when the war is over since they
"won't have gooks to shoot" any more) or simply aren't intelligent enough to
grasp the implications of what they are doing (another, when asked to comment
on the war, says in all earnestness, "They don't even have horses in Vietnam.
I mean, how f***ed up is that?").
        Joker, by contrast, seems to be perceptive enough to realize what is
happening to him and his colleagues, but he is mostly powerless to do anything
about it. Instead, he is reduced to making cheap, cynical remarks, most of
which fly over everyone else's head, such as when he states, "I came to
Vietnam to interact with different people from an exotic culture, and kill
them." And the battle scene at the end, in which Joker and some other Marines
are forced to sit by helplessly as a sniper inflicts a slow and painful death
by repeated shooting on two of their fellow soldiers, is one of the most
tragic moments of cinema I have seen in recent memory.  When they finally
catch up with (and shoot) the sniper, they are confronted with the choice of
letting the sniper die that same slow and painful death or administering a
mercy killing; nowhere else in the film is the contrast between Joker's
lingering humanity and the cold brutality of the other soldiers better portrayed.
        Full Metal Jacket  would have been perfectly effective, then, as an
appropriately loosely structured "slice of life" from the Vietnam War, but
unfortunately Kubrick doesn't choose to end it that way. Instead, he ends with
a voiceover narration from Joker with some observations about violence and
survival. It's as if, after two perfectly crafted hours of unrelentingly dark
psychology, the film decided it had a "point" to make after all; this sudden
change of direction is enough to bounce the film down from what would have
been an A or even an A+ in my book to an A-. It seems unfair to downgrade it
so much for one flawed minute of film, but when it's the last minute, it does
make a difference. Other than that misstep, however, Full Metal Jacket  is a
remarkable piece of cinema that deserves a place with the other classic
"Vietnam movies."

Author
Craig Good
     Stanly Kubrick hasn't made a movie since THE SHINING, making FULL METAL
JACKET one of the most anticipated films of the year.  It would be a mistake to
call it a "me too" follow-up to PLATOON, but comparisons between the two films
are going to be unavoidable.  What they share in common, along with APOCALYPSE
NOW, is the very real sensation that you have just lived through something.
There are images and emotions that will stick with you for the rest of your
life.
     FULL METAL JACKET is a filmic experience.  A skilled director communicates
ideas which cannot be conveyed in any other medium.  This is not a narrative
film so much as an intense slice-of-life work.  FULL METAL JACKET sets itself
apart from other Vietnam films from the very start as the characters and the
audience are first put through boot camp.  Dark humor and the patent absurdity
of the filthy-mouthed Gunnery Sergeant make for lots of laughs.  But the film
takes sudden turns into the deadly serious nature of the job at hand.  As cruel
as the basic training appears, you can see it getting results.  I was exhausted
by the graduation scene, and I now understand better than ever before just how
those deep bonds of brotherhood are forged between soldiers.
     The action switches to Vietnam at the time of the Tet Offensive.  Our
protagonist, played by Mathew Modine, is working for the STARS AND STRIPES
newspaper.  He itches to see some action at the front.  Then the VC bring some
action right to the front gate of his base at Da Nang.  We follow him into the
most convincing and frightening war-torn city I've ever seen.  The climactic
scene is not the usual "big battle" (a temptation that befell even PLATOON),
but a chilling encounter with a sniper.  Throughout the film I felt the
helplessness of the characters who were swept up in a war they tried to
understand but could not.
     More than any war film I can recall, FULL METAL JACKET shows how truly
complex war can be, and how one could arrive at the conclusion that the only
way to avoid a moral dilemma is to become amoral.  It is a wringing emotional
experience tempered by Kubrick's black humor and unerring eye for detail.  Make
no mistake, this is a rough film with verbal obscenities and blood by the
bucketload.  I am usually insulted and offended by screenplays which attempt to
cover bankrupt dialogue with four-letter words, but this is the film where such
language is mandatory.  The script was written with a good ear for the slang of
the time and place.  Get a sitter for the kids and head for the theatre.

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1987, R, 117 minutes [1 hour, 47 minutes]
[drama/war]
starring: Matthew Modine (Private Joker), R. Lee Ermey (Sergeant Hartman),
Vince D'Onofrio (Leonard), Kevyn Major Howard (Rafterman), written by Stanley
Kubrick, Michael Herr, Gustave Hasford, produced and directed by Stanley
Kubrick, based on the novel by Gustave Hasford.
It's hard to believe war exists. Most of us don't understand it's such an
insane way of solving problems, and that is what "Full Metal Jacket" tries to
comprehend for us. Unlike most films about Vietnam, this one only focuses on
the soldiers and their roles as pawns.
The film "stars" Matthew Modine as Private Joker, a typical slacker who
joined the Marines because he had nothing else to do with his life (I say
"stars" because all of the characters have few lines and are all treated as
numbers - which is the purpose of the film). 
Unlike most war films, this one actually takes the time to show soldiers
going through boot camp. Here we meet some interesting characters here such
as Sergeant Hartman (Ermey), an extremely strict drill sergeant who is easy
to hate. There is also Leonard, AKA "Gomer Pyle" (D'Onofrio), a fat, cowardly
fellow  who tries his hardest to succeed, but is constantly punished by
Hartman because he can't cut it. The chemistry between the two is interesting
and often hysterically funny.
The setting shifts rather quickly after the first half hour or so, moving
from the rookies in boot camp, to their individual platoons in Vietnam. When
we see soldiers going off to battle we have no idea who they are and don't
feel sorry when one of them dies. Kubrick doesn't let you to get too attached
to his characters, as the focus constantly shifts between many different
characters, although always coming back to Private Joker. 
There is really no plot to this film, it is just the atmosphere of war,
showing how hellish and insane it is. The soldiers have not been with women
in a long time, and they act like typical chauvinists, but here it seems
justifiable. Paying $10 for a prostitute is normal there. Being woken at all
hours to fight battles with gunfire raining down upon them does not seem that
strange either. 
Hating the Vietnamese for no reason is the general consensus among the
soldiers. They subliminally define their hatred as they converse about how
the Vietnamese don't appreciate them at all, so why are they even there?
Freedom? Freedom for who?
Kubrick's films say something about our own society by taking us to totally
different ones. With "Full Metal Jacket" we go through something that
actually happened in our own reality but it seems just as surrealistic as
"2001." 
(4/11/96) (1/29/97) (6/13/97) [also by Kubrick: "A Clockwork Orange," "Dr.
Strangelove," "Spartacus," "2001: A Space Odyssey"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Matthew Modine (Private Joker), Adam Baldwin (Animal Mother),
Vincent D'Onofrio (Private Leonard 'Gomer Pyle'), R. Lee Ermey (Sgt.
Hartman), Dorian Harewood (Eightball), Arliss Howard (Cowboy)
DIRECTOR: Stanley Kubrick
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language and violence
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1987
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Adapted Screenplay (Kubrick, Michael Herr,
and Gustav Hasford)
FULL METAL JACKET, very much like every other hard-hitting film about the
Vietnam War, is an shocking, emotional depiction of the war that effected
almost everyone in America.  This film is more like PLATOON than
any other in the way that it chronicles the struggles of a young man
(Private Joker, played by Matthew Modine) during his tour in the Vietnam
War.  However, FULL METAL JACKET gives the audience an insight into combat
life very rarely seen before: boot camp.  These sequences are considered
to be the best part in this three act film, even though I found the later
portions to be equally stunning.
As in PLATOON, FULL METAL JACKET gets off to a quick start.  The opening
sequence is the initiation for the recruits, which is getting their heads
shaved.  From there, they find themselves standing at attention and
receiving their orders from the extremely hard and punishing Sergeant
Hartman, played extremely well by the former drill instructor R. Lee
Ermey.  Apparently, the solution was found for the perfect man to play a
drill instructor in the movies, because Ermey depicts his character
extremely well and will make you thank whomever that you were never
subjected to such horrible situations.
Private Joker gets off on the wrong foot with the Sergeant, as does the
large bodied Private Leonard Lawrence (Vincent D'Onofrio), whom is dubbed
'Gomer Pyle' by Sgt. Hartman.  The film is continually narrated by Private
Joker, in which he explains his visions on what is going on.  The entire
corps, although repeatedly hammered by Sgt. Hartman, continues on.
Private Pyle, however, seems to be the rag doll for the drill instructor.
He continually absorbs the worst punishment and humiliation, and it
basically does not stop.  That is, until Sgt. Hartman comes up with a new
plan.  He will punish the rest of the soon-to-be-Marines for Pyle's
goof-ups, even after Joker was assigned to help him out in the best way he
can.  Pyle then receives punishment from his fellow recruits, and things
take a turn for the worst.  Pyle proves that not everyone is emotionally,
physically, and mentally cut out for the life of a Marine.
After graduation, Joker is sent over to the height of the action in order
to document the war, which is his service.  He is not a member of the
infantry, and it is unclear if he will ever actually find himself in
combat.  When he sets out on a documenting mission, this question becomes
very clear from the start.  Joker joins up with a platoon, along with
his hometown friend Cowboy (Arliss Howard), and follows their everyday
actions, interviewing and filmming them along the way.  He also soon finds
himself in a position in which he must fight, or die.
Again, as in the tradition of Vietnam War films, FULL METAL JACKET can be
debated as to whether it is an anti-war film or not.  A few of the more
powerful scenes toward the end will leave you to decide.  FULL METAL
JACKET succeeds extremely well in documenting the life of a young man in
Vietnam, as have others in the past.  This film, in different ways, also
can be viewed as more powerful than others.  That, again, is up for debate
and depends on your opinion.  One thing is for sure, however; no one ever
wants to experience the absolute Hell that these soldiers are subjected
to.  Unfortunately, many did.


Author
Brian Koller
Another Vietnam War movie?  What can be said about the Vietnam War
that hasn't been said already?  "Full Metal Jacket" answers that
question, and demonstrates that there is always room for a
great film, even if the genre has already been thoroughly explored.
"Full Metal Jacket" is really two different films, with Matthew
Modine's everyman character bridging the gap.  The first half
has several dozen marine recruits undergoing basic training,
under constant verbal and physical abuse from a tough-as-nails
drill sergeant (R. Lee Ermey, who should have won Best Supporting
Actor, even if he was a marine drill sergeant in real life).
His favorite target is fat, slow recruit nicknamed Gomer Pyle
(Vincent D'Onofrio).  Those who are considering joining the 
marines should see this film.  It may change their mind!
Only three mild criticisms about the first half, which is
superior to the second half.  Out of the large number of
marine recruits, only four (Joker, Snowball, Pyle and Cowboy)
have speaking parts.  Did the writers think we would get
confused with too many characters, or was the producer
unwilling to pay extras to speak?  Also, Modine frequently
does a John Wayne impersonation, which is not very good!
Finally, Pyle has a weird character turn that doesn't seem
likely despite all the abuse and brainwashing he has received.
The second half of the film has Modine in Vietnam, covering the
war first as a journalist and then as a soldier.  The early
scenes of this second half are outstanding, but when Modine
finally sees action the film declines slightly, though still
excellent.  War is hell, but in this case not quite as
interesting.
One observation is that the American soldiers have great
respect for the North Vietnam soldiers, but contempt and
bitterness towards the people of South Vietnam.  This may
be due to its corruption, depicted through extended scenes
of negotiations with prostitutes, or the notion that
South Vietnam was not grateful for the "assistance" of
Uncle Sam.  Actually, given scenes of a soldier in a helicopter
machine-gunning every Vietnamese he sees, of any age or gender,
it is clear why the South Vietnamese weren't so grateful!
Not the greatest war movie ever (I still favor "All Quiet on
the Western Front") but probably one of the best Vietnam 
movies ("Apocalypse Now" was overlong and lacked necessary 
focus.) and the best basic training movie.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Stuart Cracraft
     FULL METAL JACKET is a disappointment.  After a rabble-rousing first 5-10
minutes, the absurdly funny drill sergeant becomes repetitive and boring.  The
portrayal of a young, overweight recruit's difficulty in fitting in is
interesting at first, but by the time all his comrades beat him senseless with
towels-wrapped-with-soap, it becomes quite clear what Kubrick is trying to tell
us about life and people.  This viewpoint is strongly echoed in the last few
minutes of the film (see below).
     The fat recruit goes nuts (who blames him?), and drills his drill sergeant
with a .22 caliber, and then drills himself.  What do we learn?  A mercilessly-
persecuted human finally takes the ultimate trip, a murder-suicide.  Is this
surprising or revealing of human nature?
     The critical scene in this movie occurs in a large, abandoned structure
which hides a sniper.  The sniper gradually picks off the platoon's members
one-by-one as they enter.  Finally ensnared, the sniper reveals herself as a
pretty, young Vietnamese girl, who begs the platoon members to kill her.  The
young Vietnamese girl I saw this movie with commented: "They show all the bad
things about Vietnam, and little of the good."
     Kubrick's vision of war and humanity is certainly strongly anti-war, but
as usual with Kubrick, it may be anti-human too.  Kubrick has never directed
people well, save for LOLITA and the movies before it.  Ever since LOLITA, his
movies have painted humanity as a depraved, scared bunch of individuals
unwilling to stand firm and take responsibility.  If Kubrick could once portray
an individual showing the self-same responsibility that Kubrick himself shows
in molding his own movies to perfection, then we would know what the heights of
human endeavor could achieve.  We await such a character in Kubrick's movies.
