Title
Review for Beautician and the Beast, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Like most television performers venturing into feature films, Fran
Drescher chose a first starring vehicle which would be comfortable in its
familiarity.  THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST finds Drescher, TV's "The 
Nanny," playing...well, a nanny.  Not much of a stretch, it would seem,
until you take into account the fact that Drescher isn't just playing a
nanny in this case -- she's stepping into the shoes of the quintessential
representation of screen nanny-dom, Julie Andrews.  You see, THE
BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST may be part variation on "Beauty and the Beast"
and part variation on the old "fish-out-of-water" comedy, but at its core
it is something else.  THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST is really THE SOUND OF
MUSIC remade, with a nasal New Yawka instead of a novitiate.
     That may not sound terribly appealing, and indeed the extent to which
you will enjoy THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST may depend on how much of
Drescher you can take in one sitting.  She plays Joy Miller, a New York
beautician teaching night school and living with her parents (Michael
Lerner and Phyllis Newman) while she waits for the perfect job and the
perfect man to come along.  She has a chance for both when she ends up on
the front page of the New York Post for saving several lab animals from a
classroom fire, and that headline brings her to the attention of Boris
Pochenko (Timothy Dalton), the despotic "president" of the tiny Eastern
European nation of Slovetzia.  Pochenko wants his children to be prepared
for the New World Order, and believes they need a Western teacher for that
to happen.  Unfortunately, Pochenko believes Joy is an actual
schoolteacher, a misconception Joy is in no hurry to dispel along with the 
$40,000 a year she is receiving.
     THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST is a slight, meandering little film
which is hard to get a handle on.  Todd Graff's script goes most of the
expected places, creating conflict between the controlling Boris and the
uncontrollable Joy and providing stock characters like a good advisor (Ian
McNeice) to take Joy's side and a bad advisor (Patrick Malahide) to make
the soon-to-be-reformed Boris look better by comparison.  He also tosses
in obscure references (how many audience members are going to remember
NORMA RAE?) and scatters his multiple sub-plots all over the pace to be
picked up whenever time permits.  The plot drifts from Joy's street-wise
counsel to each of Boris's children to preparations for the arrival of
potential foreign investors, never really lingering anywhere long enough
for the events to be of anything but casual interest.  Director Ken Kwapis
doesn't develop any kind of comic rhythm in BEAUTICIAN, allowing many of
the thin gags to stand alone.  He and Graff know how the film is supposed
to begin and how it is supposed to end; it is the vast middle which
provides the problem as they search for some kind of structure in which to
place their characters.
     I suppose one alternative to creating a structure is swiping one,
hence the extended riff on THE SOUND OF MUSIC.  The similarities could
almost be represented by one of those tables with the two films as the
headings.  In THE SOUND OF MUSIC, Maria leaves the Mother Superior in
search of something wonderful; in BEAUTICIAN, Joy leaves her superior
mother.  In THE SOUND OF MUSIC, Maria goes to work for a domineering
military man and takes responsibility for his brood of children; ditto in
BEAUTICIAN.  In THE SOUND OF MUSIC, eldest daughter Liesl has a
surreptitious romance with a young man whose politics clash with those of
her father; eldest daughter Katrina (Lisa Jakub) has the same problem in
BEAUTICIAN.  By the time Boris and Joy realize their love for one another
while dancing at a grand party (sound familiar?), I would not have been
surprised to hear Timothy Dalton break into a chorus of "Edelweiss"
     At least THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST ends where THE SOUND OF MUSIC
should have ended, with the kiss before all the political upheaval.  The
romance in the film is actually fairly appealing, thanks largely to the
entertaining work of Timothy Dalton.  He has a gruff, goofy charm as the
Stalin-esque dictator who grows warm and cuddly, giving spark to Boris'
sudden desire to become a populist even if it doesn't make much sense.  He
also shares a nice chemistry with Drescher whenever she tones down the
attitude for a quieter moment, but quiet is a relative consideration where
Drescher is concerned.  It may seem a bit unfair to knock her for that
grating squeal which can reach dog-whistle pitch when she raises her
voice; after all, it isn't as though she chose it.  There is also no
question that it can be distracting, even if it is her calling card and
gives her an edge many female comics could use more of.  If you can get
past the Drescher Drone, you might be able to ride along on the
feather-light romantic comedy of THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST.  When the
sound of the leading lady is hardly the sound of music, however, that kind
of enjoyment may not be as simple as do-re-mi.

Author
Ben Hoffman
The truth is I was not expecting the movie to be as good as it was.  I
can only take Fran Drescher (TV's "Nanny") for short bits. Whether it
was Drescher or the director who slowed her down, it was all for the
good and is largely responsible for the film being charming and funny.
In a way some of the situations are reminiscent of The King and I, even
to some of the comic posturing by the heartily disliked dictator, Boris
Pochenko (Timothy Dalton), of the mythical Eastern European country of
Slovetzia. . . . except that the humor here is different than in The
King and I but frequently and surprisingly every bit as funny.
Joy Miller (Drescher) is a beautician and beauty teacher in the Borough
of Queens, New York City.   But Joy is sure that one day she will get
the break she deserves and, surprise (!) it comes in the shape of
Ambassador Grushinsky (Ian McNeice) from Slovetzia who is looking for a
teacher.  The dictator Pochenko, known in his country as The Beast  is
looking to change his image.  He wants to be liked.  How better than to
engage a teacher to begin to mold his family and then him?    The
emissary knows that Fran is a teacher but he is unaware that her
teaching consists of beauty hints.
Arriving in Slovezia, she is taken with the palatial luxury as well as
its ruler.  Follows some revolutionary intrigue, arrests, etc. and Fran
has to teach Pochenko something about free speech and democracy.  All,
you will be happy to hear, turns out well.  That it entertains all the
way is another plus. Special mention should be made of teenager Lisa
Jakub who is a deadringer for Isabella Rossellini.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Fran Drescher, Timothy Dalton, Ian McNeice, Patrick Malahide, 
      Lisa Jakub, Adam Lavorgna, Heather DeLoach, Michael Lerner, 
      Phyllis Newman
Director: Ken Kwapis
Producers: Howard W. Koch Jr., Todd Graff
Screenplay: Todd Graff 
Cinematography: Peter Lyons Collister
Music: Cliff Eidelman
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST is one of those movies that tries so 
hard to be cute and romantic that it becomes sickeningly offensive.  
While the film probably holds some limited appeal for undemanding pre-
teen girls, that's about the most positive thing I have to say about it.  
There's little evidence of originality, inventiveness, or freshness in 
this trite production.  Even if you accept that it's intended to be a 
song-less satire (rather than a rip-off) of THE SOUND OF MUSIC, it still 
comes across as flat.  
     The story attempts to cram as many cliches as possible into an 
abysmal package.  Fran Drescher plays Joy Miller, a Queens beautician 
who is mistaken for a top-flight teacher by an emissary (Ian McNeice) 
from a tiny Eastern European country.  Faster than you can say 
"Karamazov", she has accepted a $40,000 job to tutor the local 
dictator's children.  She crosses the Atlantic and meets her four new 
charges:  two teenagers (Lisa Jakub, Adam Lavorgna), one pre-teen 
(Heather DeLoach), and one toddler.  Then there's the Stalin-like 
dictator himself, Boris Pochenko (Timothy Dalton), who spends his time 
muttering nasty things like this about running his country:  "It's not 
all making war and smashing dissidents."  So Joy sets out to smooth 
Boris' rough edges, improve his relationship with his kids, and make him 
a kinder, gentler beast.  In the process, of course, she falls in love.
     Being forced to listen to Fran Drescher's New Yawk accent for more 
than ninety minutes is enough to drive anyone to distraction, so, in an 
apparent attempt to camouflage how bad she sounds, the film makers 
decided to give all their actors horrible accents.  Since the bulk of 
the film takes place in Slovetzia, a fictional former Soviet country, 
everyone has adopted an "appropriate" accent.  Of course, they all speak 
English, even though there's a throwaway reference to that not being the 
native language.  It seems that even the poor, downtrodden peasants have 
mastered this second language.
     Generally, I enjoy romantic comedies, even when they're hopelessly 
mired in formulas.  However, for a movie of this sort to work its 
particular brand of magic, it has to possess intelligence or appeal, 
neither of which characterizes THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST.  At the 
outset, with a brief, clever animated sequence, the film seems to want 
to be different, but it isn't long before it has settled into a 
painfully bad rut.  Todd Graff's script is television-quality writing at 
its worst, and the direction by Ken Kwapis, who made the better DUNSTON 
CHECKS IN (who would have ever thought I might use the word "better" to 
describe that film?), does justice to the screenplay's pedestrian 
nature.
     As a vehicle for Fran Drescher, THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST fails 
to highlight her supposedly luminous personality.  Her Joy is 
consistently abrasive, although I suppose that's supposed to be part of 
Drescher's dubious "charm."  Timothy Dalton is out of place and looks 
it.  Right now, he must be wondering what Pierce Brosnan has that he 
doesn't.  Lisa Jakub (who bears a striking resemblance to a young Irene 
Jacob), last seen as a virtual walk-on in INDEPENDENCE DAY, gets the 
thankless role of the daughter-in-love-with-a-rebel.  Ian McNeice is the 
comic foil and Patrick Malahide is the dictator's evil Prime Minister.
     There are ways to get through the film, such as analyzing 
continuity errors (watch the moving foam on McNeice's face and clothing 
after he gets sprayed), checking how often the various actors' accents 
slip, and wondering how much Blockbuster Video paid for an outrageous 
product placement.  Somehow, however, I don't imagine that's how the 
film makers envisioned us spending the movie's running length.  
Unfortunately, it's about the only reasonable alternative to getting up 
and walking out.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST (97) ** 1/5.  Directed by Ken Kwapis. Written
by Todd Graff. Photography, Peter Lyons Collister. Editing, Jon Poll. Music
by Cliff Eidelman. Production design, Rusty Smith. Produced by Howard W.
(Hawk) Koch Jr. & Graff. Cast: Fran Drescher (Joy Miller), Timothy Dalton
(Boris Pochenko), Ian McNeice (Grushinsky), Lisa Jakub (Katrina), et al. A
Paramount release. 100 minutes. PG.
Fran Drescher ("The Nanny"), an acquired taste, sounds like a flight of
migrating geese. Timothy Dalton is a very good, appealing actor whose
handsomeness improves with age (he is 50). He ought to be in more, major
movies. Here he reacts rather than act.
She plays Joy from Queens, teaches "science" at a school, meaning
hairdressing, make-up, pedicure and the like. A fire starts in the science
lab, she rescues various animals including a python (this is the first of
several not followed up potential gags or twists). The heroine makes
tabloid headlines.
He plays Boris Pochenko, the President-for-life of Slovetzia, a
postage-stamp-size country of eastern Europe that can be located on the map
only with a magnifying glass, if you look at (forgive me, Alfred) the North
by Northwest of Romania. A former Communist dictatorship the nation is now
a non-Communist dictatorship under Pochenko. Belatedly realizing that help
from the West calls for some westernization, and that charity begins at
home, the widowed President sends one of his yes-men to America to recruit
a teacher for his four children.
Ian McNeice,the best performer in the movie, is envoy Grushinsky, who,
misled by the headlines, takes Joy for a bone fide educator. (You should
always read the fine print). Realizing his mistake he still offers Joy the
tutoring job. Flown to Slovetzia, the beautician muddles through in her
teaching, charms the kids, tells it like it is, remains unflappable, takes
charge of everything and antagonizes the dictator. Any viewer with a mental
age over 6 knows that romance and democracy will blossom.
"B & B" is, in a sense, a far removed poor man's Frank Capra movie of the
post-modern persuasion: humble people or mavericks can make big changes in
others and in society. Joy is an American, therefore America is best. Joy
shows common sense, American common sense. There's a speechifying
opposition to Boris by young people who meet in a discotheque's
not-so-hidden back room. The music and counterculture are American,
therefore America is best.
Even by the pliable parameters of fantasy, the film is indigent in
imagination and rich in impossibilities. Everyone in Slovetzia speaks
English, from the nomenclatura to the kitchen help. The President's kids
look and sound American, in spite of the older boy   unsuccessful
attempting a Slavic accent.
Forget about logic and continuity. A subplot about the elder daughter and
her anti-Boris boyfriend is padding that gets nowhere. Elsewhere,before an
official ball begins, Joy and Boris start dancing to the violin of the
first musician who gets there. Next arrives the accordionist, but there are
no accordion sounds. Then the piano joins in, but it is followed --not
preceded-- by the entrance of the pianist. The early soundtrack  has a nice
soupcon of klezmer music, then the score becomes generic.
The whole thing is rather sloppily put together and very uneven as a
comedy. Most jokes and gags are not witty or humorous, nor do they give us
broad slapstick as in Marx Brothers films or the British combination of
broad and cool comedy -- as in the Ruritanian  (i.e. set in an imaginary
country) "The Mouse That Roared," "The Mouse on the Moon," "Romanoff and
Juliet" and others. Joy's slide-show jokes on Jesse Helms and Newt Gingrich
are not just lame, they have no legs.
Joy herself is a living joke, a Jewish-American Non-Princess who enriches
the language with Yiddishisms and assaults the eyes with tacky, blatantly
colored clothes that could bring back memories of toreador pants in
spandex.
The emblem of Slovetzia is a boar. It would be tempting to declare that the
film is more bore than boar, but this would be unfair since some bits
between lulls do make you chuckle or laugh. Like Joy's possessive mother
who carries her daughter's umbilical cord in her purse. Like the local
encyclopedia's entry for General Boris Pachenko who "in 1991 organized and
coordinated Operation Desert Storm." Like the arbitrary, sudden and funny
Evita-on-the-balcony spoof.
Less succesful is Joys insistence to have Boris take her to a sweatshop
factory so that he can get in touch with his people. To an artificial
chorus-from-nowhere rendering of the Communist anthem "The Internationale,"
the President  awkwardly schmoozes, Joy does a too brief, too vague
imitation of Sally Field on a platform in "Norma Rae" demanding
unionization
The President is like Uncle Josef Stalin  in hair, mustache, uniforms and
accouterments. Joy de-Stalinizes him with her homespun wisdom, her appeals
for better parenthood, her haircutting skills, her unexpectedly esthetic
advice for civilian suits. Dalton gets his morals fixed and his good looks
back, but he does not grab you, he never seems to have any kind of brains.
Ethnic jokes can get tedious or produce gems. Woody Allen's "The biggest
sin in my family is to buy retail" or Lainie Kazan's Jewish mother
receiving Peter O'Toole in  "My Favorite Year" are clever comic
contributions. In "B & B" there's little dialogue to remember. Still, near
the end there's a good line. Back in Queens, Joy is horrified at what her
mother gave her pet chicken: "You fed the chicken chicken?"  There is, too,
a remembrance of a high school musical version of "Rosemary's Baby." "I
love you, but don't keep me waitin' / This embryo belongs to Satan."
By now it is official that Hollywood is again relying heavily on female
audiences, making "women's pictures," and/or working in femme-appealing
elements even in action and disaster films as well as in a hybrid comedy
like "B &B."
I say "hybrid" because the movie falls partly into the venerable, escapist
Ruritanian category. The name comes from writer Anthony Hope who set his
romance-adventure story  "The Prisoner of Zenda" (1894) in the imaginary
country of Ruritania. Whether called Freedonia, Romanza, or Slovetzia, most
of those kingdoms or duchies were located within the old Austro-Hungarian
Empire, often in Romania --whose Transylvania also gave us Count Dracula.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "You could be such a pleasant person if you had a tiny edit
button," says Slovetzian President Boris Pochenko to his children's new
teacher Joy Miller.  You see, Fran Drescher plays Joy Miller, and
Drescher drones on forever with her nasal voice.  If you haven't heard
her before, think of someone grating their fingers across a blackboard.
Even with her harsh good looks and tacky clothes, she still manages to
win our hearts with her incessant cheerfulness.  Drescher's straight
man is Timothy Dalton as the President who has been called "Stalin
without the charm."
     As THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST opens, Joy Miller is teaching her
night school class in beauty culture.  She tells her attentive
cosmetology students that their motto is: "flashy, not trashy."  One of
the more delicious parts of the film lies in the selection of costumes.
Designer Barbara Tfank's outfits are a panoply of contrastingly bad
color choices.  There are courses to teach people how to chose their
proper colors.  Joy and her relatives and friends seem to have failed
the course.  Typical is Joy's outfit of tight lavender stretch pants
with a lime green sweater top and matching headband.
     Through a mix-up, Joy comes to teach President Pochenko's children
at his palace in Slovetzia.  ("So tell me," asks Joy, "What can you get
for a place like this?  I mean in this neighborhood.")  After being
egged in the presidential limousine and seeing the frowns on all of the
citizens' brows, she asks Prime Minister Kleist (Patrick Malahide) what
causes everyone's disquiet.  "In Slovetzia, hard work today, happiness
tomorrow," he sternly explains.
     After a disgusting breakfast of the local delicacy of blood
sausage and clotted cream, she starts her task of enlightening the
President's children.  Just like the Von Trapp family kids in THE SOUND
OF MUSIC, the Pochenko children are a large and mixed group of ages and
emotions.
     Possessing little acquaintance with academic subjects, Joy sticks
to what she knows.  She teaches the kids geography and math by
calculating frequent flyer miles.  Her science lesson includes coloring
shoes to match the handbag.  Literature consists of having the kids
watch a WEST SIDE STORY tape to make Shakespeare more accessible.
Always watching out for their well-being, she cautions them as they go
outside, "put on your sun block because it's rays today; raisins
tomorrow."
     In this comical fairy tale, she will fall in love with the prince.
Okay, he is a president, but he lives in a palace and doesn't seem
eager to schedule any elections.  She makes friends with his subjects
and gets him to lighten up a bit and meet the peasants.  The two best
scenes in the show involve the people of the country.  In one, Joy
sneaks out on the presidential balcony and raises her arms, Eva Peron
style, to the yelling masses huddled below.  In the other, as the
strains of the Communist anthem "The Internationale" plays, the
President goes into a gray factory lit by the sparks of a welding
torch.  He will liberate these and other oppressed workers of his
country to the consternation of his Prime Minister.
     Most of the film is a sweet little picture.  There is a
unnecessary subplot about the eldest of the President's girls being in
love with a revolutionary who wants to overthrow her father.  Whenever
this part takes center stage, the show bogs down.  It does, however,
engender one of the story's funnier lines.  "In our country we can
marry who we want," explains Joy.  "I decided on John Kennedy Jr., and
while he's in denial, I'll travel."
     The film goes on ten to fifteen minutes past its natural ending
point.  Writers should know when to quit.  Still, I left with a nice
grin.  Not a memorable show, but at least a funny diversion.
     THE BEAUTICIAN AND THE BEAST runs too long at 1:58.  It is rated
PG for some mild language.  It would be acceptable for kids of any age,
but I suspect they will need to be nine or so to understand most of the
humor.  I give it thumbs up and ** 1/2.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Fran Drescher, Timothy Dalton, Ian McNeice, Patrick Malahide, Lisa
Jakub, Adam Lavorgna, Heather DeLoach, Michael Lerner, Phyllis Newman
Director: Ken Kwapis Screenplay: Todd Graf
"The hills are alive with the sound of ...'
What's that awful noise? Oh my goodness .. It's THE NANNY!
My grandmother is a big fan of Fran Drescher, and "The Nanny". So we
went to see this movie, and what we essentially saw was - well - another
two hour episode of "The Nanny"; but without the strong supports of
Niles and Miss Babcock.
She's a beautician (what's new); is hired by the wealthy dictator of a
eastern European country (Dalton) to look after his children. Sound
familiar? Unfortunately, there isn't any singing nuns or hostile Nazi's
to help make the plot more exciting.
Nevertheless, Fran Drescher has decided to stick with what she knows
best - big hair, make-up, high heels and unorthodox child rearing.
Comment: For die hard fans of "The Nanny'.
