Title
Review for Green Card (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
Typical Peter Weir film.  It tells you a story, and gives you an ending
which  is not satisfying, but forces you to make a decision as to what the
characters will or will not do.
I suppose in life, we all need to make those decisions, and more often than
not we do not.  So the director decides it in a certain direction, and we
are left with a decision of our own.  How would we have done it?
This is a film about immigration laws in America.  And how people think
about America.  For almost everyone through out this world, that does not
have the means to come to America, the chance and choice is more than one
can resist, and they will do almost anything to get it done.
Gerard Depardieu is a failed musician who wants to come to America.  Because
he
is rather well known in France, and he has been denied an entry visa before
due to a drug related past.  He buys a fake passport, and makes his way into
New York illegally.  There, the hounds take over.  It is big business, which
also has some connections to the Mafia ( the foreigners are signed to pay
the  Mafia their first two or three, or ONE month's pay if they find work,
or else.) and the only solution is for a marriage that will work.  Given the
language,  and cultural barriers, the chance of these marriages making it,
are nill, and  the Immigration Department attempts to nail as many of them
as they can.  Like the film, many stories are made, much cross reference is
done, and much acting is also studied, in order to keep the authorities at
bay.  But the
people who are usually involved in these situations are not often
intelligent enough, or  capable enough to do it.  After all they came to
America on a dream and a  prayer, and their lifetime savings.
Gerard's marriage is arranged to a nice girl, that really does not know what
she is getting into.  In all reality, she has a rather vacuous relationship
going with another guy, whom she has to get rid off in order to keep the
authorities off Gerard's back.  All's well, and so far so good, as she
begins discovering this guy.  He impresses an audience of upper class New
York'ers with his piano playing and a song ( the film never clarifies
whether he is actually a musician or not,  he lies so much and has to fess
up to the girl later ) that is weird, and could only be appreciated by a
snooty audience.  But it isn't enough.  He is messed up in his head.  He has
lived the life of  a libertine in Paris, and now, if he wants to stay, he
needs to give up his old ways in order to make it here.  He fails, not on
his libertine ways, but on his lack of concentration, another hint that this
is the reason why he is not a better musician, or better known as a
musician.
As he fails, one of his tests with the immigration officials, he is arrested
and then sent back to Paris.  And the girl, is left there.  Will she go to
Paris, now that she likes him, but has no idea of who he is, or where to
find him, or is the whole thing just another adolescent flash in the pan
relationship, where the girl is the loser.  She had gotten rid of her
previous boyfriend, and now she loses the one she was just learning to
appreciate. Given the unsatisfying conclusion, the answer lies in the
adolescent idea.
Depardieu, as the Frenchman, trying to make it to America is good, because
he can play himself, and we wouldn't know any better.  Andy MacDowall is,
however, very nice, and has a certain easiness through out that helps the
film along. It is a Peter Weir trademark to have a strong female lead role,
carry the story.  With the exception of only one of his films ( THE LAST
WAVE ) the women usually are the difference between the solution or the lack
of one.  In this story, she is young, and doesn't know herself well enough,
but she has the  intelligence to follow through and try to make things work,
only when she  finds herself finally, attracted to this stranger which has
been brought to
her life.
And by the way, she will not get paid the $2,000.00 dollars promised at the
start, because it didn't work out.
This type of situation is very common in all of the world's major cities,
and has been a gray area where many have been caught for the right reasons,
and  many have gotten away with it for the wrong reasons.  The solution is
to let people in with open arms.  The problem is that this is not really
feasible,  or viable in any way.  The logistics are too dangerous, and not
very good.

Author
Mark Kosten
     Peter Weir (last seen directing DEAD POETS SOCIETY) brings
together Gerard Depardieu (probably the most popular actor in France)
and Andie MacDowell (from SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE) in this
Australian/French co-production.  It is set in New York and is
essentially a love story.   Depardieu plays George, who manages to stay
legally in the U.S. and obtain a green card by a convenience marriage
to Bronte (MacDowell).  They part after the marriage but some time later
have to spend some days together to learn about each other because the
INS (Immigration and Naturalization Service) is checking up on them.
Naturally they start off disliking each other because they are so
different.  The rest is fairly obvious, and, despite the predictable and
unoriginal story, a delight to watch.
     The film has a light and relaxed touch, aided immeasurably by
Depardieu's lightness of acting, especially body language, despite his
bulk.  You find yourself being carried along with a smile on your face
as the two principal characters argue, reveal their pasts and foibles
and begin to fall in love.  The music is terrific, which is a mixture of
classical, particularly the well-suited Mozart, and modern
electronic/new age.  At one point, when George and Bronte are in their
separate beds, but thinking of each other, the original music (by Hans
Zimmer) is almost entirely responsible for the emotional charge of the
scene.  Indeed, music plays an important role in the story, culminating
in George's dilemma at showing off non-existent composing skills at a
party, which is brilliantly solved.
     The dialogue is okay and minor characters are underwritten, both
typical Weir problems.  The scenes with Bronte's father and George in
particular seem unfinished.
     Overall, a very enjoyable film.  I strongly recommend GREEN CARD.
Dr Mark Kosten,        phone: +61 3 479-2767
Computer Centre,       AARNet (internet): ccmk@lure.latrobe.edu.au
La Trobe University,   X.25 (PSI): 05052347300000::ccmk
Bundoora, 3083
Australia
