Title
Review for Funeral, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In 1936 the Tempio brothers are three small-time criminal
enforcers, first generation immigrants from Italy. Ray (played by
Christopher Walken) is by default the patriarch of the family and
controls the others with a heavy hand.  He is quiet and introspective.
Chez (Chris Penn) is volatile and given to short emotional bursts.  The
youngest was Johnny (Vincent Gallo) who developed a social conscience
and was leaning toward the Communists whose meetings he had visited.  I
say "was" since as the film opens Johnny is being brought into the
house of his brother Ray in a coffin.  Johnny has been murdered and Ray
knows that it is his job to track down the murderer.  This is not
directly for revenge, but because in the philosophy he has been taught
the killer has to eliminate anyone who might be coming after him in
vengeance.  These are the Old Country values that at the age of
thirteen back in Italy Ray was told he must learn to run the family
when his father died.  His responsibilities at that young age included
the cold-blooded execution of a family enemy.  So Ray and Chez must
find out who killed their twenty-two-year-old younger brother.  The
story is told in present action and in extended flashbacks.  The
screenplay by Nicholas St. John delves into the forging of the violent
family with scenes from Ray's childhood and the action in the month or
so leading up to the killing of Johnny.  It also shows how the violence
of the family poisons each remaining brother's family life.  Ray is
married to Jeanette (Annabella Sciorra), as intelligent as her husband
and just as assertive.  She rages against the pain while Chez's wife
Clara (Isabella Rossellini) quietly bears all.  THE FUNERAL is like a
de-romanticized THE GODFATHER on a smaller scale, and often with more
believable conflict and more realistic dialogue.
     Perhaps the biggest surprise of the film was Vincent Gallo's
performance. He plays with a certain tension just beneath the surface
and has a lively performance style and an unforgettable--not to say
"homely"--face. The face and style remind one of the early performances
of John Turturro.  Director Abel Ferrara probably has some of the best
performances of any of his films in THE FUNERAL.  He has overcome some
of the self-indulgent over-acting in films like MS. 45.  Some of the
most effective performances come from the actresses playing the two
wives, Annabella Sciorra and Isabella Rossellini, reacting differently
as they see their lives unraveling as their husbands are pulled into
the events that follow the killing.  Only Christopher Walken, in the
top-billed role, seems a trifle too reserved for the proceedings.
     Nicholas St. John's screenplay has some nice touches.  Each of the
brothers has his own style of idealism and his feeling of how things
ought to be.  These interpretations are based in large part on each's
views of Catholicism and each's responsibility to the family.  Ferrara
has a penchant for melodrama and this film has it, though it has always
been hard to do a gangster films without a least some melodrama.
Ferrara is a sort of outsider as a filmmaker.  He was not aiming at
making one of the great gangster classics, he just wanted to tell a
superficially simple story and create some characters of some depth.
This is not an ambitious film, but there certainly are some nice
touches.  I would give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Vince Waldron
The Funeral finds B-movie director turned indie auteur Abel Ferrara
returning to the gangster film, the genre that provided the setting for
his barely-noticed 1990 B-movie masterwork, "King of New York."  But
despite the presence of Christopher Walken at the center of both films,
Ferrara's latest meditation on murder, morality and the nature of sin
bears a much stronger kinship to the director's more recent philosophical
tracts, "The Addiction" and "Bad Lieutenant,"  And, much as I admire the
director's efforts to tackle the spiritual and moral underpinnings that
lie beneath the surface of such durable staples of the B-movie maker's
palatte as gangster films, vampire movies and urban cop melodramas, I'm
sorry to observe that thus far I've found the director's genre-bending
experiments an uneasy mix, burdened by far too much self-conscious talk
and not nearly enough character-driven action.   
Which is shame, since Ferrara demonstrates as sure a grasp of pulp
character and convention as any American director since Sam Fuller,
another director who rarely shied from exploring the multiple layers of
his pulp subject matter, though rarely at the expense of its relentless
momentum.  But in age when so many independent film makers seem content to
set their sights no higher than emulating the flash and fire of Quentin
Tarantino, I suppose I can hardly complain when a director of Ferrara's
talent and ambition chooses to pattern himself after Robert Bresson.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

FUNERAL, THE (director: Abel Ferrara; screenwriter: Nicholas St. John;
cinematographer: Ken Kelsch; editors: Bill Pankow/Mayin Lo; cast:
Christopher Walken (Ray Tempio), Chris Penn (Chez Tempio), Vincent Gallo
(Johnny Tempio), Isabella Rossellini (Clara Tempio), Annabella Sciorra
(Jean Tempio), Benicio del Toro (Gaspare), Gretchen Mol (Helen), John
Ventimiglia (Sali), Victor Argo (Julius), Paul Hipp (Ghouly); Runtime:
99; 1996)
"The Funeral'' is a thinking man's "Godfather," where the gangster
brothers try to analyze their motives in simplistic intellectual terms
as they try to understand why their lives are so twisted. The film is
set in the late 1930s in New York, as it opens with the slain youngest
Tempio brother, the 22-year-old Johnny (Gallo), being shown in a casket
in his older brother's house. Ray (Walken), as the eldest, is the
methodical leader, who is always serenely calculating in his approach to
life, accepting the fact that he is already doomed to rot in hell and
that there is nothing that he can do about it. Chez (Penn), the
bartender brother with the hot-temper, who gets hysterical by the side
of the coffin and has to be calmed by Ray, has severe mood swings and
acts at times as if he were mentally unbalanced.
The women of the brothers act with quiet dignity and will be the
counterpoints to the evil men: Jean (Annabella) is the religious wife of
Ray, who proudly says she reads books and went two years to college
before she married him and raised their two kids. Clara (Rossellini) is
the loving wife of Chez, who always looks for the good qualities in her
violent husband. Helen (Mol) is the girlfriend of the womanizing Johnny,
who says little but acts as if she really cares that Johnny got shot.
The family is more complex than a mob family has a right to be, and the
philosophical lines they spout, in this slow-moving, almost actionless
film for this genre, sometimes seems bizarre but has a strange pull to
it, one that keeps you wondering what's going on with these dangerous
criminals, as their lives begin to unravel during the funeral.
Ferrara employs a puzzling flashback style to the film, which begins to
use flashbacks upon viewing Johnny's body, covering the recent events
that led up to his death. It also goes back to Ray's childhood, and
shows how he had little choice but to follow in his father's gangster
footsteps, as he is asked at thirteen to prove his manhood by executing
a man his father says needs to be taught a lesson. This family is doomed
a priest tells them, unless they change their ways and learn how to pray
to God. They seem to twist the religious experiences and rituals around,
to fit morbidly into their way of life.
Revenge is on the mind of Ray, as he ignores his wife's pleas to forget
about his brother's killing. But, before he gets his revenge, he wants
to know what happened to Johnny. In the flashback, we see Johnny
attending a communist meeting, where he works for the commies by
intimidating the bosses and hijacking their trucks and stirring up
unrest over the workers being fired. The only difference between him and
his brothers, is that he sympathizes with the workers, while they will
work for whomever pays them the most.
Johnny's taste in women is shown to be strange, as he is seen in a
whorehouse choosing a fat, elderly, overweight madam, rather than one of
the good-looking prostitutes.
Chez also has his quirks. He feels genuinely sorry for a young
prostitute, and offers to give her $5 to walk away from this life and
save her soul, but she greedily asks for $10 and he  gives her $20,
telling her she will be a prostitute the rest of her life, that she has
just sold her soul. He, thereby, has rough sex with her, as he has lost
interest in saving her life.
In the obscure flashbacks, we learn of another mobster the brothers have
business connections with, Gaspare (Benicio). He killed Johnny's
womanizing friend Ghouly (Hipp), over a macho insult in Chez's bar. He
has hired the brothers to protect one of the bosses, as Johnny resisted
the idea of working for the bosses and openly stated this, telling his
brothers they sold their soul to get that contract. On top of that,
Johnny is screwing Gaspare's wife three times a week. So, naturally, Ray
suspects that Gaspare had Johnny whacked and his men bring him over for
questioning, as he stands over him with an ax. He soon realizes that
Gaspare couldn't have done it, but his criminal instincts tell him to
kill him anyway, that the man would never forget this insult if he
spared him.
The film refuses to have a traditional type of gangster payback, as the
one who killed Johnny is stuffed in a freezer by Ray's men, until Ray
arrives to question him. The youngster is a mechanic and claims that
Johnny raped his girlfriend, but Ray is not satisfied with that answer
and before killing him, he has a driving need to find out the truth.
This is the most powerful scene in the film and it is brilliantly
accomplished.
But the film can't end on that prosaic note, this film is heading down a
more philosophical and Catholic path, as the end is so unexpected and
makes so little sense, no matter how you try to explain it, that we can
only guess what the director means. The picture works despite the
bizarre ending, because it is gritty and seems real, in the sense that
so many families are dysfunctional in America, that there is no reason
why a long-standing mob family shouldn't also be plagued with family
problems.
Chris Penn's performance earned him the "Best Supporting Actor" award at
the 1996 Venice Film Festival and the film won the special jury prize.
But I didn't think he was something special, as much as he gave the film
energy. The Gallo character, despite a lot of attention placed on it, is
never uncovered, and his performance only seemed adequate. He has a
great line, though, where he says, "Life is pointless without the
movies." I thought the glue to this film, was Walken's mesmerizing
performance, who is able to say with a straight face, that the flaw in a
criminal's character, is that he is not trustworthy. He and his wife are
the only characters that I really felt for, who seemed to be touching
something deep down and bringing it up for examination. Annabella
Sciorra descries her life, wallowing in Catholic guilt, saying that
these criminals should not be glorified, they have never risen above
their heartless and limited upbringing. That is the message Ferrara
brings with this anti-gangster gangster film, who digresses to talk
about other topics such as capitalism and sexual kinkiness, but only in
a cursory way. The film has a black humor to it and a dark side that is
darker than the typical 1940 noir films were. The emotions here are
allowed to run over the screen and, all the diversions to the plot and
even the plot itself, are not as important as delving into the emotional
make up of the lead characters. It is an engrossing film, one of the
better gangster films, even though it is flawed by the director's
inability to stay in focus and maintain a coherent narrative.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
     With the Mafia genre having run its course, director Abel Ferrara
attempts to revive it with a bit of revisionist history.  Everyone
knows what happens in mobster films.  Fast tempered guys get angry and
shoot the competition.  No longer.
     In Ferrara's THE FUNERAL, the gangsters are stoics.  When problems
arise, they seek out the meditative environment of a dark room so they
can silently brood.  From when-in-doubt-shoot, we have gone to
let's-ponder.  Don't worry, you will not be disappointed.  After
seeking and not finding inner peace, the crooks do return to kill their
prey in suitably gory fashion.  To add a twist, the gangsters' business
is full of political overtones with a range from Republicans to
Communists.
     Although you would swear that THE FUNERAL was by a Swedish
director, Ferrara is actually the one who gave the world the extremely
violent, but highly regarded BAD LIEUTENANT and my personal favorite of
his, the 1993 remake of BODY SNATCHERS.  The only way I can figure it
is that Ferrara must have spent a lot time recently watching old Ingmar
Bergman films.  Consider THE FUNERAL his homage to the great master.
     Set in New York in the labor unrest of the 30s, THE FUNERAL starts
after the funeral of one of the three Tempio brothers.  Communist
sympathizer Johnny Tempio (Vincent Gallo) has died and all of his
relatives have come to mourn.  Unstable brother Chez (Chris Penn) does
not take his brother's death well and wants to know who did it.
Unpredictable brother Ray (Christopher Walken) is quiet and morose.
The film then switches to the past and brings the viewer back up to and
past the funeral.
     Although it is a color film, its color palette contains mainly
shades of black.  The cinematography by Ken Kelsch is dark and gloomy.
Everything is in shadows.  The sets by Charles Lagola are equally
somber with dark woods and sleek, long black automobiles.  Joe Delia's
music is serious and melancholic with solo violins.
     "It is only a criminal that can lead our country," tells the union
rabble-rouser (Edie Falco) under his Communist party banner.  (I will
reject making any reference here to our current political landscape.)
Johnny is impressed and falls under the orator's spell.
     Soon the brothers have cut a deal with the union bosses since the
money is good.  When another mobster, Gaspare Spoglia (Benicio Del
Toro), shows up with the businessman being picketed by the unions they
are helping, they switch sides.  After a pseudo-intellectual discussion
of the economic implication of strikes, Ray says learnedly, "We
understand the problems of the economy also."  The businessman offers
more cash than the unions so Ray follows the money.
     The show is full of film references.  Johnny tells his friend
that, "I would say life is pretty pointless, wouldn't you, without the
movies?"  Later they come out of a theater where the next film will be
KISS KISS BANG BANG.  This is an accolade to the great film critic
Pauline Kael and her famous quote "The words KISS KISS BANG BANG, which
I saw on an Italian movie poster, are perhaps the briefest statement
imaginable of the basic appeal of movies.  This appeal is what attracts
us, and ultimately what makes us despair when we begin to understand
how seldom movies are more than this."
     The acting is interesting even if full of stereotypes.  Del Toro
is ultrasmooth and confident.  Walken is, well, Walken.  Gallo is slimy
and disrespectful.  The most complex and complete performance is given
by Penn.  His is the only one that is believable.  It is easy to miss
much of Nicholas St. John's sparse script due to the tendency of the
actors to whisper and mumble.
     In contrast to the men's evil, their women are shown as
downtrodden angels.  "Aren't you ashamed of yourself," inquires Ray's
wife Jean (Annabella Sciorra).  But he explains his actions away with,
"I'm not ashamed of nothing.  I didn't make the world."  Later Jean
tells Chez's wife Clara (Isabella Rossellini) that "They're criminals,
and there's absolutely nothing romantic about it."
     I love the part of the press kit discussing Ferrara: "One of the
most idiosyncratic filmmakers of our time, Ferrar's films combine high
art and low down sleaze to create an unflinching, in-your-face
depiction of the moral mayhem of modern life."  This is an apt
description of BAD LIEUTENANT, but is off the mark for THE FUNERAL.
THE FUNERAL is a slow moving and cerebral film interrupted briefly for
the obligatory violent sequences.  Its style does have a certain
attraction and the acting is good.  Whether that is sufficient to
compel audiences to see it remains problematic.
     THE FUNERAL runs 1:38.  It is rated R for nudity, explicit sex,
strong language, and periodic, realistic, but not gratuitous violence.
If teenagers go, they should be mature.  The show is a tough call for
me since as much as I admire the risk taking, there is just not enough
there for me to be able to recommend it.  It gets ** in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 11/1/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:38
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, nudity, sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     Gangster stories have been a source of inspiration for film makers 
as diverse as Barry Levinson and Quentin Tarantino, so it's no surprise 
that Abel Ferrara, the "low budget Martin Scorsese" has thrown himself 
into the genre with his latest effort, THE FUNERAL.  Those who think 
they detect distant echoes of MEAN STREETS and THE GODFATHER are not 
deluded; THE FUNERAL owes a debt to those, and other, features, but, by 
using his inimitably dark style, Ferrara manages to make this material 
his own.
     That's not to say that THE FUNERAL is on the same level as either 
of the aforementioned films, or even that it's an unqualified success.  
In fact, there are plenty of things wrong with this movie, but it does 
hold together better than any of the director's previous films, 
including the uncompromising, bloody, and controversial BAD LIEUTENANT.  
THE FUNERAL likely won't appeal to mainstream audiences -- it's clearly 
an "art film" -- but it is arguably Ferrara's most accessible movie to 
date, and is certainly better-grounded than his bizarre, black-and-white 
vampire tale, THE ADDICTION.
     It's the late 1930s in New York City, and two men, Ray Tempio 
(Christopher Walken) and Chez Tempio (Chris Penn), are burying their 
younger brother, Johnny (Vincent Gallo).  Johnny's demise came as the 
result of three bullets to the chest, but he didn't name his assailant 
before slipping into a coma.  That doesn't stop Ray, a petty gangster, 
from thirsting for revenge.  Despite the pleas of his wife, Jeanette 
(Anabella Sciorra), he's determined to find Johnny's killer and exact 
retribution, and he has a pretty good idea who he's looking for.  
Meanwhile, Chez, who has always been prone to bouts of uncontrollable 
violence, teeters on the edge of sanity, and even his wife, Clara 
(Isabella Rossellini), has trouble calming him.
     THE FUNERAL takes place during two time periods:  the day of the 
funeral and the recent past, when Johnny is still alive.  The story 
unfolds in a fragmentary fashion, and the lack of effective transitions 
can leave the viewer disoriented.  (Is this scene a flashback or not?)  
Certain plot details are left half-explained, which can lead to 
frustration if you try to piece everything together.  Apparently, rather 
than telling the complete story, Ferrara is content with providing 
select glimpses of the events that lead to Johnny's death.  
     On some levels, the ending is a stroke of brilliance; on others, 
it's disappointing.  I appreciate the black, bitter irony that Ferrara 
is bringing to the fore here, but the critical action seems poorly 
motivated.  Foreshadowing doesn't absolve a film maker of the need to 
build naturally to a crisis, but in THE FUNERAL, certain aspects of the 
climax feel forced.  It's as if Ferrara and screenwriter Nicholas St. 
John devised a great ending that isn't well-supported by the script, 
then manipulated characters and circumstances to attain the desired 
results.  The concluding scene is a powerful way to punctuate the film, 
but it seems more contrived than plausible.
     Ferrara has gotten a top-rate cast to work for him at cut rate 
prices, and the consistently high level of acting keeps THE FUNERAL from 
descending to the level of B movies.  Christopher Walken, who is always 
at his best playing gangster types, gives an intense, but surprisingly 
subdued, interpretation of Ray.  Vincent Gallo (PALOOKAVILLE), despite 
spending half the film lying on his back in a coffin, is solid as 
Johnny, who would rather be involved in organized labor than organized 
crime.  The standout performance, however, belongs to Chris Penn, whose 
manic, no-holds-barred portrayal of Chez is reminiscent of the work 
Harvey Keitel did in BAD LIEUTENANT. 
     As is usual for a Ferrara film, everything is gloomy and dark.  
Most of the scenes take place either at night or in windowless rooms, 
and moments of comic relief are as infrequent as brightly-lit sequences.  
In fact, it's the pervasive, and sometimes oppressive, grimness of his 
movies that has earned Ferrara comparisons to Scorsese.  Stylistic 
issues aside, however, Ferrara is still far behind when it comes to plot 
and character.  THE FUNERAL effectively highlights the forces tearing at 
the fabric of a deeply dysfunctional family, but it lacks the complexity 
that separates movies from masterpieces.  As a result, THE FUNERAL is a 
solid accomplishment, but not a standout achievement.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Bryant Frazer
"Carry this with you," Ray Tempio's father tells him, handing
him the empty casing of a bullet that the boy has just used
to kill a man. "Nothing will cost you more." At his father's
urging, young Ray executed an enemy of his family. If you
show mercy to your enemies, he's told, they will come back to
kill you.
Ray has carried those words with him through his formative
and adult years, even though they may be a reflection of the
kind of philosophy that led his father to suicide. Still,
it's the philosophy he knows -- part of the worldview he's
locked into. The scene comes in a flashback early in Abel
Ferrara's Depression-era gangster movie, The Funeral. Fans of
Ferrara's earlier work -- which includes King of New York,
Bad Lieutenant and last year's wacked-out vampire allegory,
The Addiction -- should know what to expect, but many others
may be baffled by this oddball crime drama cum murder mystery
cum philosophical treatise. Ferrara's heady moral brew is an
aquired taste: bitter, yet rare and satisfying.
Christopher Walken, Chris Penn, and Vincent Gallo are Ray,
Chez, and Johnny Tempio. The latter brother is laid out dead
in a coffin as the movie begins, three bullet holes in his
chest. Ray, who presides over the funereal household with an
eerie majesty, is bent on vengeance. Chez, a loose cannon, is
just angry. Watch carefully -- Ferrara switches into
flashback without warning, so viewers are advised to keep on
their toes.
We learn more about Johnny -- he was a budding Communist
whose ideals gave him keen interest in his racketeering
family's influence on labor unions. He was a brash loudmouth
who fed his hubris by dating the wife of rival Gaspare
Spoglia (Benicio del Toro). But most of all, he was a Tempio,
and that means Ray is out for blood. Ray's henchmen round up
and question Gaspare, the most likely culprit. But as Ray
investigates deeper, he's confronted with the possibility
that Johnny may have gotten just what was coming to him. And
what then?
The women have had their fill of violence and vengeance.
Ray's wife Jeanette (Anabella Sciorra) confides to Johnny's
fiance (Gretchen Mol) that she's lucky she won't wind up
married to "one of them," and keeps a figure of Saint Agnes
next to the bed, as a reminder of "what happens to you when
you say no." Lancome spokesmodel Isabella Rossellini looks
startlingly world weary as Chez's beleagured wife, and she
has her own saint on the table -- the patroness of treatment
for the insane.
Indeed, it's the very real tribulations of these women that
help keep the testosterone-enhanced performances of Walken
and Penn in check. The Funeral never takes the easy tack of
glamorizing its gangsters, and Sciorra's strong-minded
performance is a tough and unsentimental reminder of how
lives are torn apart by sacred bonds turned unholy.
Ferrara gives her plenty of screen space, since she's got a
pair of scenery-chewing performances to compete with. Walken
is, as ever, giddily hammish. He's intense and scary and very
serious about the role, but there's an element of high comedy
buried underneath the facade. Walken is such a good actor
than even though he's unmistakably aware of how crazy his
character is, he plays it with an unwavering passion even as
he tumbles over the top.
Still, the real kudos must go to Penn, who's stuck exercising
mostly his aptitude for ugliness. I've had my fill of the
abusive male as a character type, but Penn really helps us
understand this one. Ferrara never asks us to excuse Chez's
behavior toward women -- Chez treats his wife poorly and with
little passion; he first rebukes, then forces himself on a
young prostitute who can't comprehend his sudden moralizing
-- but he does remember to show us why this man has a wife
and friends in the first place. In one of the movie's best
and truest scenes, Chez belts out a pop tune, surrounded by
friends and associates at his bar. The exuberant magnetism
Penn summons is undeniable, and a great testament to his
still-underrated talents.
The Funeral isn't all so well-balanced. Ever since Bad
Lieutenant, I've wished Ferrara and longtime collaborator
Nicholas St. John could find a way to better weave their more
didactic concerns into the fabric of the film. As it is, the
film stops dead several times so that the characters can have
conversations that delve into moral responsibility and the
teachings of Catholicism. These are almost Godardian moments,
where the audience is suddenly jerked out of the movie's
fiction-world to be lectured. I also have severe reservations
about the very ending of the picture, which is a big, gaudy
exclamation point at the end of an otherwise well-constructed
story. It may be the logical extension of Chez's tortured
existence, but it's an extension that we could well have
imagined without seeing it actually played out on-screen.
Ferrara got his start making deliciously nasty exploitation
flicks that left nothing much to the imagination (Driller
Killer, Ms. 45). He's now working in a different milieu, and
it's one that he hasn't necessarily come to terms with.
Still, the low-key style he has pioneered over his body of
work, unpleasant and unrelenting, seems to me a more
significant and consistent exploration of modern America's
dark side than anything that's been tried recently. His
accomplishments dwarf the much flashier series of film noir
retreads we've been subjected to, films which simply
fetishize their subject matter rather than exploring it.
Whatever else Ferrara may be, he's an explorer, and The
Funeral may be as good a point as any for a willing neophyte
to join the expedition.
