Title
Review for Sanshô dayű (1954)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
In 9th century Japan, a district governor is sent into exile.  His
family is later kidnapped and sold into slavery.  After many years in
slavery, the son escapes to search for his father, and seeks revenge on
the cruel bailiff who held him in slavery.  An epic drama, with a strong
anti-slavery message.
Japan (English subtitles), black-and-white, 1954, 125 minutes.
Director: Kenji Mizoguchi.
     The story begins with the exile of the governor of Tango district.
He is being exiled because he didn't follow orders; orders that he
believed were too harsh and harmful to the peasants.  A few years later
his wife and family are on their way to visit him.  However, they are
kidnapped and sold into slavery.  The mother is sold to a brothel on a
distant island, and the children are sold to the estate of Sansho, the
local bailiff.
     The estate Sansho manages is very large, with many slaves, who are
controlled via brute force and extreme cruelty.  Years pass, and the
children (brother and sister) grow up as slaves.  The boy grows into a
strong young man, favored by the bailiff for his hard work and devotion.
One day an opportunity arises to escape.  The son takes advantage of the
opportunity, and goes to the Prime Minister's residence, seeking justice
and information on his father...
     This film is considered by some to be one of the classics of world
cinema.  It has also been compared to the classic Greek tragedies.  Now
that I have had an opportunity to see it, I can report that these are
accurate and reasonable assessments of the film.  This is a very good
film indeed.  The story line is very compact, and is written very well.
The production values are very high, and the acting is excellent.
     The story is quite interesting, and the film has a number of good
messages.  One of these is loyalty, as the little boy learns his
father's philosophy, rejects it when he is a young adult, then reaffirms
the philosophy when he realizes the cruelty of his situation.  However,
the principal message is anti-slavery, which is the driving force in the
story.  Sansho is a very cruel bailiff, though he won't kill slaves
(they are too valuable); instead he has them branded and beaten.
     This film is indeed a classic, and I recommend it to a general
audience.  It's worth seeing if you have the opportunity.
Distribution: Screened at the Pacific Film Archive in Berkeley, CA.  The
print was from the Archive's collection of Japanese films.  The owner of
the film copyright is Films Inc.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
