Title
Review for Orlando (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Pedro Sena
This may not be one of the best films ever done.  And it may never go very
far in its making.  But it is a piece of work dedicated to writers and
artists that are considered a veritable underground to the currents that are
well known.
Be it the novel by the writer Virginia Wolff, which is a rambling notion
about love and its many moods, or be it the people involved in this
production, everyone involved in it, is a small artists in his/her own
right.
>From the excellent music through out, by some of the best underground
musicians around, to the outstanding showcase of costumes ( had an Oscar
nomination ), this film only suffers in that the story is not a conventional
affair, that we have DEEMED, and now DEMAND, that every movie have.  It is a
series of vignettes, all relating to Orlando in his/her various lifetimes
 from 1610 to the late 1800's ).  Let's just say that it is a slight study
of how the Romantic part of our love came and went.  And how it was
destroyed by a vision, or a desire.
Orlando is, at best, a fictitious personage, embodied to live through
various feelings, like rejection, love, until it comes across a  sensible
definition, and understanding of what love means.  And the film, like the
novel, doesn't care WHAT we think.  It just moves to the next time period.
The music changes, the costumes change,
and the character adapts to the new time frame.  And fails again.
In between there are the many notions that have ruined ten billion love
affairs.  The parentage, the romantic notions, the idealistic visions ( the
American specially ), the politics, you name it, it's all here.
The sad thing is that this film can never be considered good, unless you are
a literary minded person, who might just appreciate what SHOULD be
considered, an experiment in the exercise of writing. And an experiment in
the exercise of love as well.  How does the same person/character behave in
different times, which is a nice -- but impossible -- idea to work with.  A
modern sensibility with the romantic notions of the young American going to
fight for "freedom" would be considered a "copout" nowadays.  I much think
that
Virginia Wolff attempted to do this.
Sally Potter's film is faithful to the original writer in every sense.  It
does not give excuses.  It presents what it feels it has to, without
compromising the periodic needs.  With Tilda Swinton playing the main
character, with a face that is ready for love, but dispassionate all the
same.  A face that is stuck in the ideal, rather than the real.
Kudos should be given to the use of the music in this film.  There are some
Extremelly well thought out music pieces, and by people that have been
around a long time in the underground of the music scene in England.  And
for once, their music gets a chance to be noticed, and appreciated.  Sally
Potter also did much of the
music, thereby showing a multi talent.  I just wonder if too much of her
went into it, when she could have let others do it, and she might have
concentrated on making a film that we all in the film viewing community
could enjoy.  As it is, it is a very nice film, but a real freak of the
nature of film.
Thinking person's film.  Should qualify as ANTI-FILM of the year.

Author
Max Hoffmann
Seen: Sat 5/9/93, SF's Castro Theatre, SF Film Festival
Rating: 13 (yes!) (on a scale of 1->10)
     A Gift!  A transforming Experience!  "If there's only one film you
see this year...."  A must see.  Waiting for this one to come on video
instead of viewing it in Kine's temple might be justifiable grounds
for the death penalty!
     Director Sally Potter received the SF's film festival's first
bestowing of Satyajit Ray Lifetime achievement award (named after the
great Bengali filmmaker).  Potter has taken what many thought to be an
unfilmable work of Virginia Woolf, and created what is destined to be an
enduring classic, illuminated with the radiant presence of Tilda
Swinton (EDWARD II, CARVAGGIO) in the lead.  The film stretches the
envelope that defines our arbitrary definitions of masculinity and
femininity.  A perfect union of sound and image, the film boasts an
amazing soundtrack.  Potter has also made an additional gift to the
film world with the inclusion of a compelling, though brief,
performance by Quentin Crisp; a fitting cap to his wonderfully
chequered career.
     General distribution in North America coming soon.  The film
caused a major stir at both the Venice and Toronto film festivals.
(Currently showing on screens in the UK.)
     In her brief Q/A session after the film and award ceremony (my
quotes drawn to best of memory), Potter said she was drawn to this
story of eternal youth and immortality "because of the twin plagues of
AIDS and nuclear annihilation that we live under.  After losing so many
friends to AIDS and seeing the staggering loss of their voices, this
film had to be made."  Potter also affirmed her conviction "to create
the same spiritual insights and transformations with cinema that
masters like Mozart created with music."  Upon viewing this film, you
will agree that she has achieved that goal.  Before seeing this film,
you might be tempted to label Potter as a great "woman" film director.
With this work, she has shed the triviality of gender.  She is one of
the world's greated film directors.  Period.
     Sally Potter has reaffirmed my hope that we need not always look
to the past for enduring cinema.  That films as great as the German
silents of the 20s, as great as the works of Orson Welles are still
being created.
     In the rest of the review I quote directly from B. Ruby Rich's
program notes:
     "...ORLANDO is based upon the Virginia Woolf volume of the same
name and tells the picaresque tale of a young man who lives through
four centuries in rather unusual circumstances.  He progresses at first
in keeping with his upper-class origins, taking immortality in stride,
until one day he wakes up, magically transformed into a woman.  And so
it goes: s/he continues on from the Victorian age to the present,
exploring along the way questions of courtliness and beastliness, war
and peace, politics and property, past and future -- and gender.
     "ORLANDO's narrative progression is, if anything, post-modern.
Lush operatic music surges on the soundtrack, the camera sweeps us off
our feet, wry intertitles march us through history, and the
incandescent Tilda Swinton (EDWARD II) marches us through genders in
her embodiment of Orlando through the ages.  No wonder audiences love
it.  Potter admits to being influenced by Soviet cinema (ORLANDO's
cameraman Alexei Rodionov is Russian) and by Michael Powell (the great
British director who championed her cause in the years before his
death) but certainly Satyajit Ray could shine in her firmament of
influences as well, for he would have recognized the beauty created
here and the valor of its execution."

Author
David N. Butterworth
     In ORLANDO, a 17th Century nobleman journeys four hundred years,
from the courts of Elizabethan England through the battlefields of
World War I, and along the way perceptions of gender, status and
longevity are turned on their head.
     As conceived and presented by British director Sally Potter,
ORLANDO is a charmingly outrageous yarn.  Based on Virginia Woolf's
1928 novel, it's a lavish period piece that questions the differences
between men and women in a context that is absolutely disarming.
Potter's handling of this material is remarkably assured, rivaling that
of established countrymen Peter Greenaway and Derek Jarman, directors
recognized for their sumptuous and unconventional costume dramas.
     Orlando, played by actress Tilda Swinton, is bequeathed a country
estate by the elderly Queen Elizabeth I on the condition that he (yes,
he) never grow old.  Quentin Crisp, the "uncrowned queen of England"
according to Potter, plays Elizabeth in a stroke of casting genius.  A
deliciously kinky ambiance suffuses a scene in which Swinton,
portraying a handsome youth, is coddled by Crisp, playing an aging
matriarch.
     After the queen dies, Orlando romances a pouty young Cossack named
Sasha, played by Charlotte Valandrey, for whom he claims he'd "hunt
wolves instead of rabbits, drink vodka instead of whisky."  The skating
sequence on a frozen, misty river Thames is astonishing; these
Muscovites "smear themselves with candle wax to keep warm," and wear
tall, tall hats.
     Next the Lord Orlando has a disastrous brush with poetry, entering
into philosophical debates with the Michael Palin-esque Mr. Greene
(playwright Heathcote Williams in an amusing self-parody).  "Society is
full of dangerous individuals--wits and poets," Orlando is warned, but
he fancies himself a writer nonetheless.
     And then this worldly young man is given an ambassadorial
appointment in a far-off Eastern land where, repelled by the inhumanity
of war, he conveniently switches gender.  Standing naked in front of a
full-length mirror Orlando observes, "Same person, just a different
sex."  Upon her return to England, she finds her former friend, the
fatherly Archduke Harry (John Wood), exhibiting designs on her
new-found femininity.  Unfazed by her dramatic transformation, Harry
refers to her as "the pink, the pearl and the perfection of her sex."
     It is true that Swinton is stunning as Orlando, even as a boy.
She dominates every scene she's in (and she's in virtually every
frame).  Potter takes every opportunity to photograph Swinton's
porcelain features against exquisite backdrops of silk and lace and
finery, her striking red hair set against a reddening fire, deep rich
tapestries and fields of golden corn.
     ORLANDO is a very sensuous film, a feast for eyes and ears.
Alexei Rodionov's gorgeous cinematography is the stuff of epic fantasy,
as is Ben Van Os' staggering production design.  And the haunting
modern score, co-written by Potter and David Motion, contributes a
vibrant inner energy.  In addition, Potter employs some creative visual
techniques, especially during some of ORLANDO's more literary passages,
slowly panning from side to side with a languorous, fluid motion that
enhances the narrative.  She also has Swinton make occasional wry
asides to the camera--"the treachery of women," Orlando comments when
betrayed by one and later, for comic effect, "the treachery of men."
     Billy Zane, who's given top billing with Swinton, makes little
more than a cameo appearance towards the end of the film as
Shelmerdine, a dashing, long-haired Daniel Day-Lewis type whose
smoldering passion sweeps Orlando off her feet.  Their brief affaire de
coeur is fresh and invigorating in contrast to Orlando's recent dolor,
confirming her contention that "Nothing thicker than a knife's blade
separates melancholy from happiness."
     Potter has said she was drawn to the story because it paralleled
her belief that, deep down, it's only conditioning that separates the
sexes.  Whether or not that's an opinion you favor, there's much more
to this film than polemics.  ORLANDO cleverly juggles issues of
identity and sexual ambiguity in an enchanting story that is totally
preposterous yet, "because this is England, no-one tends to notice."


Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This is a critically acclaimed
     adaptation of the novel by Virginia Woolf, but while it is
     visually beautiful, the story is empty.  This is a story
     about someone who has lived for ten times my age through
     fascinating periods of history--lived for some period as a
     man and some as a woman--yet who seems to have learned
     nothing beyond the superficial and has none but the blandest
     insights to share.  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
     It has been said that youth is wasted on the wrong people.  In ORLANDO
we see eternal youth wasted on absolutely the wrong person.  We are led to
believe that Orlando is immortal due to a promise he made to Queen Elizabeth
that he would remain forever young, and his later conversion to a female is
due to some unknown mystical process (perhaps similar to the process Gregor
Samsa encountered).  Actually, this film supports the interpretation that
Orlando is so slightly invested in living at all that s/he never uses up the
life he was born with.  Orlando is barely alive at all, much less male or
female, so shifting from one to the other seems hardly surprising.  Tilda
Swinton manages this feat of seeming barely alive with a face that is
drained of color and nearly impassive.  Her reactions are entirely performed
by widening or narrowing her eyes while leaving the rest of her face
deadpan--the same acting technique that Bud Cort used in much of HAROLD AND
MAUDE.  In face, it can be an effective technique that leaves the audience
to read their own interpretation into the expression.
     The story is, of course, that the handsome Orlando is a favorite of a
near-death Elizabeth I.  The aging queen is played by Quentin Crisp in what
is apparently a casting pun.  In short episodes Orlando has an ill-fated
love affair with a visiting Russian noblewoman and an ambassadorship to
someplace in Central Asia.  He then falls into a coma and wakes up a woman.
"Same person; no difference at all, just a different sex," she tells the
audience after having almost no reaction to her gender flip-flop.  It does,
however, raise her consciousness on women's issues.  I will not ruin the
story and tell how it ends except to say it is not really a story, nor does
it have an end.  It does, however, take Orlando to a time in the 1990s--or
certainly in the last quarter of this century--must require some license in
adapting Virginia Woolf's 1928 novel.
     ORLANDO is a novel adaptation for the 1990s.  The visual imagery far
outstrips the plot.  The film has superb camerawork and terrific costume
designs.  Tilda Swinton is often upstaged by her own clothing, which is as
over-stated as her performance is under-stated.  The film is really not a
lot more than a series of historical tableaux.  It is like walking through a
museum of British dress of the last four centuries.
     This film has been very popular with critics, and perhaps I was looking
for another film, but the absurdity of the story bothered me.  Not the
fantasy premise of the deathless person moving through the ages or even the
changing of sex, but for the idea that Orlando could have lived so long and
apparently remained so vapid and lacking in insight.  This is apparently a
person who takes a long, long, long time to learn anything.  Twice she is in
love relationships.  They are very parallel relationships, or even the same
relationship, that she goes through once as a man and once as a woman.  Yet
there is no sign that she recognizes the situation and she says nothing
insightful about it at all.
     ORLANDO is a short ninety-three minutes.  Some scenes seem to go on too
long and when it is over one feels that not much has happened.  When it was
over I had the distinct feeling that neither I nor Orlando had learned much
from the extraordinary experience.  I rate this one a 0 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 7.9 out of 10 (B, **1/2 out of ****)
Starring:  Tilda Swinton, Charlotte Valandrey, Lothaire Bluteau, 
           Quentin Crisp, Billy Zane
Director:  Sally Potter
Producer:  Christopher Sheppard
Screenplay:  Sally Potter from the novel by Virginia Woolf
Music:  David Motion and Sally Potter
Released by Sony Pictures Classics
     The year is 1600 and the country is England.  Orlando (Tilda
Swinton) is a young nobleman who has found favor with Queen Elizabeth I
(Quentin Crisp).  As a result of his relationship as the "son" of her
old age, Orlando is granted the deed to a sizable piece of property.
Ten years later, following the death of his father, Orlando falls in
love with a beautiful Russian princess (Charlotte Valandrey).  After
that relationship ends in tragedy, and following a brief-but-disastrous
flirtation with poetry, Orlando becomes an ambassador to central Asia.
It is now the 18th century and Orlando has lived more than one-hundred
years without showing a day's aging.  But the most remarkable event of
his life--his sudden and unexpected transformation into a woman--is yet
to come.
     ORLANDO is a movie thin on story but thick on elegance and style.
Characters and settings, as well as a brief-but-lavish tour through 400
years of history, take precedence over plot.  Even on its own terms,
the storyline of this film is weak and riddled with contrivances,
questions, and problems.  Writer Sally Potter, adapting from Virginia
Woolf's novel, takes the approach that the narrative is essentially
irrelevant.  Its purpose is to allow explorations of Orlando as he/she
develops over the years, and of the ever-changing attitudes of
society.
     Those that want a detailed examination of how a person copes with
unusual longevity won't find it here.  In fact, other than a throw-away
line by Queen Elizabeth (in which she bestows land upon Orlando under
the condition that he not grow old and wrinkled like her), there is no
explanation given for why the title character neither ages nor dies.
This is taken as a given; one of the many plot points glossed over.
     Another thing that is more-or-less ignored is the mechanism by
which Orlando changes sex.  After a long sleep following a battle in
which he refuses to kill, Orlando wakes up one morning as a woman.  Her
reaction is simple--"Same person ... different sex" and she evidences
little or no surprise at the sudden and unexpected transformation.
     Little issue is made of how other characters react to Orlando's
femaleness.  With the exception of Archduke Harry (John Wood), no one
makes a big deal out of it, although the English courts remove
Orlando's property since a woman cannot legally inherit land.  As one
man comments when the Victorian courts can't determine whether Orlando
is dead or a woman, "They're pretty much the same thing."
     One constant source of interest in ORLANDO is watching how English
society and customs change over the centuries.  After Orlando's
transformation, it's fascinating to watch the size of her gown as it
shrinks from its mammoth proportions of the 1700s to the more "natural"
garb of the present day.  This is only a subtle indication of how women
come to be regarded more as people than property.
     Other than Orlando, there is no character that is around for more
than about 15 or 20 minutes.  Billy Zane, who plays the American
adventurer Shelmerdine, shares billing with lead actress Tilda Swinton,
but is on-screen for only a handful of scenes.  The same is true of
all the other co-stars.
     Swinton gives a masterful performance, displaying amazing range as
both a man and a woman.  Even though her decidedly-feminine appearance
hurts the audience's ability to accept Orlando as a man, the manner in
which Swinton speaks and acts during that part of the film are
masculine.  She is more believable after the transformation, but that's
mainly because her looks now match her mannerisms.
     Sharing the opposite-gender playing with Tilda Swinton is actor
Quentin Crisp, who plays Queen Elizabeth I.  There's no difficulty
accepting Crisp as the wrinkled old queen.  Perhaps this, in addition
to other recent males-playing-females, indicate that, given the right
physical appearance, it's easier to make up a man like a woman than the
other way around.
     Those that go to ORLANDO expecting a tightly-constructed plot will
leave with deflated expectations.  The power of this movie is far
removed from any of the many contrivances centered around the emaciated
storyline.  See ORLANDO for its fabulous costumes, fascinating look at
changing eras, and impressive performance by Tilda Swinton.  Viewing
this film for other reasons will almost certainly lead to a negative
impression.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
