Title
Review for North Dallas Forty (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
     Peter Gent's best selling novel about dirty dealings within a fictional
National Football League team was turned into a borderline satire for the big
screen in 1979 and it's title was 'North Dallas Forty'. Frank Yablans, the
film's producer, also scripted from Gent's novel and depicted its focus
primarily on a star wide receiver (Nick Nolte in one of his finest
performances) and his relationship with the team's front office, star
quarterback, the women in his life anda large part of the movie showcases his
performance on the football field.  
     Nolte's character is probably just as unattractive as most of the other
characters in this film yet there seems to be a dose of moral integrity
within his character placing him above the rest of the cast.  The only
exception to this is the team's star quarterback (Mac Davis) who turns in a
fine performance and proved he's more than just a country and western singer.
     The football team showcased in 'North Dallas Forty' is primarily made up
of macho misfits and a few wise cracking no-talents who are promptly dealt
with by the team's coach (G.D. Spradlin) who is obsessed with winning a
championship.  The team's owner (Steve Forrest), his little brother (Dabney
Coleman) and a team co-ordinator (Charles Durning) are all embroiled in the
business end and politics of the game and have no tolerance for those players
who won't "play ball" OFF the field.
     The spirit of competitive action is predominant throughout 'North Dallas
Forty' and its rough edge is indicative of one of the world's most physically
demanding sports.  There are plenty of scenes on the gridiron showcasing the
dirty play that was most dominating in the 1970's and the NFL has cleaned up
its act greatly in the last 20 years and some of it may have been influenced
by this film.  Truly a stunning and realistic presentation of gritty
characters and explosive personalities and definitely not a film for the
faint of heart.  Directed with hard hitting drive by Canadian born filmmaker
Ted Kotchoff.   
