Title
Review for Heaven's Prisoners (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Moviegoers should be experimental, but not downright foolish.  I
knew I was taking a significant risk by trying another movie with Alec
Baldwin in it, but when I saw Eric Roberts name on HEAVEN'S PRISONERS'
opening credits as well, pain hit, and I realized what trouble I was
in.
     Baldwin's last flick, THE JUROR, was a major bomb and most of his
other recent films have been equally unsuccessful.  Don't get me wrong,
both actors possess great talent, but it is coupled with a death wish
when it comes to finding scripts and with an excessive ego that leads
to heavy overacting.  Eric Roberts hasn't given a good performance
since 1983 in his brilliant STAR 80.  Alec Baldwin has had a disastrous
career, but with flashes of brilliant film making as in GLENGARRY GLEN
ROSS, MIAMI BLUES, and THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.
     I tried, I promise I tried to like this show.  Liking a script
(Scott Frank and Harley Peyton based on a book by James Lee Burke) that
is so bad, as I will shortly demonstrate, that you want to laugh at it
rather than with it is not easy.  The directing by Phil Joanou is to
create great atmosphere, which he does, and hope for the best.  These
actors are not the sort you turn loose on their own.  They need a firm
hand, which he never provides.
     Let me see if I can give you a feel for this turkey.  Ex-cop and
three year sober alcoholic Dave Robicheaux (Alec Baldwin) is in the
confessional.  He starts the movie by confessing, "I want a drink.  I
want a drink all the time."  In the next scene he and his wife Annie
(Kelly Lynch) are on their boat when a plane crashes in the water next
to them.  Dave is a hero and rescues the only survivor, a young
Salvadoran girl (Samantha Lagpacan).  It seems the girl is an illegal
alien, but also in the plane is drug runner and DEA informant.  They
take the girl to a hospital and claim she is her daughter.  The nuns
there find it curious that their daughter speaks only Spanish whereas
they only know English.
     By inquiring around about the circumstances of the plane crash,
Dave gets in big trouble with the local bad guy, his fellow high school
student, Bubba Rocque (Eric Roberts).  Dave explains how tough Bubba
was in high school.  "He was one of those guys who were eating light
bulbs and pushing thumbtacks into their kneecaps."  Sure.  Dave is a
wonder with words.  He threatens a bartender named Larry with, "Your
face looks like a good toilet bowl brush."  That would sure scare me if
I didn't break out in uncontrollable laughter first.  Later he really
frightens poor Larry with, "If I were you, I'd find another ZIP code."
Whew.  See what I mean about this sizzling dialog?
     It isn't only Dave that gets to say these stupid things.  When an
overdrawn evil character threatens his wife while Dave is out, Dave
asks her, "What'd the guy look like?"  She stares at him replying, "He
looked like a big bad guy."  Well, that would certainly make the police
lineup go faster.  Oh yes, all of the leads can never make up their
minds about their accents which fade in and out like the tide.
     Break your ear plugs if you come.  There are lots of explosions
and general loud sounds as people get shot at and beat up in about
every other scene.  Usually, when they fall, they crash into a door or
some such large object.  The film is needlessly gory, but the biggest
sadist is editor William Steinkamp who lets the show go on for what
seems forever.  I was ready to walk out, but the show at been going on
for almost an hour and a half, so I decided to stay in deference to my
wife who was not visibly as bored as I was.  I was shocked to find the
film go on for almost another hour past that.  If the devil possesses
your body and forces you to enter the theater, walk out at your first
opportunity.
     One final good note, the atmosphere of the Louisiana bayous is
great.  The natural sets (John Stoddart) and the dreamy cinematography
(Harris Savides) with streams with hazy light is beautiful.
     HEAVEN'S PRISONERS supposedly runs 2:10, but I think it may have
been longer.  It is rated R for some nudity, some bad language, and
lots of violence.  It would be okay for most teenagers.  Be wary of any
movie that is not screened in advance to the local critics as this one
was not.  This usually means that the studios know they have a dog on
there hands and are hoping that people will come on the basis of the
stars' names alone.  Based on the large size of my audience, this seems
an effective strategy.  Do not come anywhere near this disaster.  I
give the film 1/2 of a star, but only for the atmosphere.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This talky, terribly-plotted thriller stars Alec Baldwin as Dave
Robicheaux, an ex-New Orleans cop who gets ensnared in a murder- mystery
after a light-plane crashes into the bayou beside his fishing boat.  He
and his wife Annie (Kelly Lynch) rescue a little Salvadorian girl
(Samantha Lagpacan) from the wreckage and that's when the trouble
begins.  The other major players include a local drug lord (Eric
Roberts), his scheming wife (Teri Hatcher), a soused stripper (Mary
Stuart Masterson), and a shady DEA agent (Vondie Curtis Hall).  Everyone
knows everyone else and it makes for a collective that's curious but
never compelling.
     Based on the book by James Lee Burke, HEAVEN'S PRISONERS is so
badly plotted that entire *scenes* seem to be missing.  Early on, we
have no idea of why Dave and Annie keep the child to themselves.  Nor
how they eluded both the Coast Guard and the FAA.  Later, Dave is
reunited with a drug-abuser who appears seemingly clean and sober and
without any explanation.  Huh?  The whole movie is like this, perhaps
the result of some unkind cuts that happened during the eighteen months
that the film sat on the shelf.  Whatever the reason, somebody should
tell director Phil Joanou (FINAL ANALYSIS) to recut this mess.  In its
present form, HEAVEN'S PRISONERS runs only two hours plus change, but it
feels like four. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Gerald Tan
Directed by: Phil Joanou
Written by: Harley Peyton and Scott Frank based on
the book by James Lee Burke
Cast: Alec Baldwin (Dave Robicheaux), Mary Stuart Masterson
(Robin Gaddis), Kelly Lynch (Annie Robicheaux), Teri Hatcher
(Claudette Rocque),  Eric Roberts (Bubba Rocque)
Produced by: New Line CInema and Savoy Pictures
Running Time: 132 minutes
Rating: * out of *****
First and foremost I think this movie comes to grief at the hands of the
PG rating it's been given.  For those of us who haven't read the James
Lee Burke novel that HEAVEN'S PRISONERS is based on, do not rabidly
go out and buy tickets to movies featuring the combined talents of Alec
Baldwin and Eric Roberts, feel vaguely depressed by the notion of swamps,
gangsters with Louisiana accents, plots, sub-plots, more plots, and well,
really just want to see Teri Hatcher naked, this is one movie you're
going to worry the price of admission over.  Hopeful still?  Well, let me
share my moment of sheer panic, and then the cold enervation of the big
let-down when a semi-robed Hatcher purrs to Alec Baldwin, "What do you
think of my butterfly?".  Butterfly?, I asked myself, What butterfly?!
And then it hit me... the scene had been SNIPPED!  DAMN YOU, GODLESS PG
RATING, SHOW US HER BUTTERFLY!!  WE WANT TO SEE THE
GODDAMN BUTTERFLY!!! So... no naked Teri Hatcher.  Forget about that.
Okay?  Now...
HEAVEN'S PRISONERS is about ex-alchoholic ex-cop Dave Robicheaux
(Alec Baldwin) who's trying to discover life anew running a bait shop and
boat hire business with his loving, down-to-earth wife Annie (Kelly 
Lynch).
Everything dull, but hunky dory until a plane carrying illegal immigrants
crashes almost ontop of the couple while they're on their boat.  The
plane nosedives into the water and sinks, but from its wreckage
Robicheaux rescues a little pixie-faced Salvadoran girl whom he and his
wife immediately decide to adopt.  What they don't realise is that the
plane's pilot was also a drug dealer, and that the plane had been
sabotaged by the latter's erstwhile colleagues.  When Robicheaux
discovers this, he predictably, against the advice of his wife, a
well-meaning DEA agent, and two gangsters who rough him up, begins
'poking his nose where it don't belong', we know that the man deserves
all the misery he's going to get.
The question now is whether or not you want to be dragged along for the
ride through a tedious, meandering yet utterly suspenseless plot with an
unlovable hero as your guide.  As Dave Robicheaux, Alec Baldwin is fat...
no seriously, this is not the svelte, thinking man's hero of THE HUNT FOR
RED OCTOBER, it is an out-of-shape guy who doesn't look too good in a
roof-top chasing scene.  He's also unconvincing in the movie's dramatic
moments, acting with what as far as I can tell is a Steven Segal-like
economy of expression.  Three-quarters of the way through the show, while
you're probably waiting for the next scene in a bar where Robicheaux
contemplates succumbing to the temptation of the whiskey bottle, getting
drunk and beating up someone or getting beaten up, you'll want to beat on
him a little yourself.
On the other hand, Mary Stuart Masterson (SOME KIND OF WONDERFUL,
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES, BENNY & JOON) cast as a down-and-out
stripper who has her fingers broken is quite a breath of fresh air, with 
just
the right mix of cynicism, warmth, insecurity and humour to be the 
movie's
only endearing character.  Eric Roberts as Bubba Rocque, always 
believable
as the woman-abusing bad guy who knows how to box (see FINAL ANALYSIS,
coincidentally also directed by Phil Joanou) is believable here as the
woman-abusing bad guy who knows how to box.  And lest we forget Teri
Hatcher's role in all this, this being her rather well-publicised paid
vacation from playing Lois Lane on TV's "Adventures of Lois & Clark"...
she is totally ridiculous as Rocque's manipulative and seductive Cajun
wife, coming across as devious as a mildly disgruntled au pair who's
trying to get back at an employer who hasn't been giving her enough days
off.  It's probably safe to say that her day job beckons.  And at the end
of our day, none of this is really worth 2 hrs and 12 minutes of our
personal misery.
 THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
Michael Redman
Dave Robicheaux (Alec Baldwin) is an ex-New Orleans cop and an ex-hard drinker
who has turned his life around. Nowadays ole Dave has devoted himself to
selling bait and fishing in a secluded bayou. Until, that is, a plane loaded
with illegal aliens and a drug ring underling explodes over his boat and
crashes into his own personal swampy Shangri La.
Robicheaux and wife Annie (Kelly Lynch) rescue a young Salvadoran girl from
the submerged plane and, obeying the universal law of `finders keepers',
decide to raise her as their own. Not unexpectedly, the crime connection
complicates matters.
Our hero goes after the bad guys. Then the bad guys go after him. Then he goes
after the bad guys again. And on and on.
Slipping back into the tough guy role under the guise of protecting his
family, Baldwin shoots and beats up a bunch of evil-doers while getting
pummeled. "Die Hard 3: Nawlins Swamp Boogie".
New Orleans is a natural for a film site. It would be difficult to direct a
film in that city without including fascinating locales and colorful locals.
Just point a camera down any street and you have a movie.
Baldwin does ok with his role, but is outshined by his co-stars. From
Robicheaux's past, Mary Stuart Masterson is a hard-drinking (there seem to be
a lot of those in the Crescent City) stripper (likewise) on the run (ditto) in
love with him. Never without her thermos of gin, Teri Hatcher of Lois Lane
fame plays the scheming wife of a drug lord. In true New Orleans style, all
the women beat the heat by wearing as little as possible, sometimes less.
Baldwin, though, keeps his pants on during the entire film.
Eric Roberts as Bubba Rocque steals the show. Rocque is Robicheaux's childhood
buddy turned southern crime boss who may or may not be plotting to kill
everyone while the two pals sip drinks on the lawn of his plantation. Roberts
may be guilty of quirky over-acting, but you can't take your eyes off him. He
fills the screen with a huge presence.
Let's see: Hollywood heartthrob, sex, violence, alcohol, drugs, guns, blood,
New Orleans in the hot sweaty summer, beautiful naked women. I think you got
one of your summer blockbusters right here.
[This appeared in the 5/22/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Alec Baldwin, Mary Stuart Masterson, Kelly Lynch, Teri Hatcher,
Eric Roberts, Vondie Curtis-Hall, Samantha Lagpacan Director: Phil
Joanou Screenplay: Harley Peyton and Scott Frank based on the novel by
James Lee Burke
Does anybody know why this movie is called Heaven's Prisoners? The only
connection I can make is the fact that the wife gets shot and maybe goes
to Heaven. Have I missed an important point somewhere in this movie? Or
is 'Heaven' the name of the place where they live?
I had great difficulty understanding this complex (=confusing) movie
about a plane crash; a rescued 'please adopt me because I'm so cute'
Spanish girl; a flask carrying, smooth talking, 'sleep with me' tattooed
vixen; a lonely-hearts, 'love me or leave me' stripper; a 'kill me in
the first fifteen minutes', bullet-riddled wife; a 'have you been
sleeping with my wife - I'm going to punch you anyway' childhood friend;
some angry drug dealers and a vengeful ex-dick?
This movie based on a novel written by James Lee Burke, feels as though
the director has decided to randomly rip pages from the book, before
pasting it's remains to create a movie. I have never felt this
disjointed or confused about anything, except for the time I dislocated
my shoulder playing basketball, then lapsed into temporary bliss when
the pethidine kicked in.
The cast is no better. Kelly Lynch is terminated before she can
demonstrate any signs of emotion. Terri Hatcher gets to pout and show
all of her emotions from A to C, and unfortunately isn't disposed of
sooner. Mary Stuart Masterson who normally plays the 'girl next door',
is wasted as a stripper who never shows her wares; and Eric Roberts
'Bubba', looks like he's just attended Whoopi Goldberg's school on hair
braiding skills. The only person with any admirable talent is Baldwin
who plays the tortured, emotionally wrecked husband much better than he
does the vengeful ex-detective. Here take a tissue Alec you deserve it.
There's also a plentiful supply of sultry, sassy, southerners with great
slurring accents. Who don't walk, but strut; don't perspire but sweat.
Who settle misunderstandings the old fashioned way (with fists). Where
strippers are known synonymously as whores, and unfaithful wives are
executed by trigger happy husbands; and it's called 'Heaven's
Prisoners'???
Comment: How about 'Straight To Hell. Don't Collect $200, and Don't Pass
Go'?
Monopoly (British Version) Feel scale:
0% *OLD KENT* / Trafalgar Square / Mayfair 100%

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Alec Baldwin, Mary Stuart Masterson, Kelly Lynch, Teri Hatcher, 
      Eric Roberts, Vondie Curtis-Hall, Samantha Lagpacan
Director: Phil Joanou
Producers: Leslie Greif, Andre E. Morgan, and Albert S. Ruddy
Screenplay: Harley Peyton and Scott Frank based on the novel by 
      James Lee Burke
Cinematography: Harris Savides
Music: George Fenton
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema/Savoy Pictures
     HEAVEN'S PRISONERS tries very hard not to admit what it really is.  
By throwing a tangled web of incoherent subplots into the mix, 
screenwriters Harley Peyton and Scott Frank (GET SHORTY), adapting James 
Lee Burke's novel, have cleverly concealed the fact that this movie is 
actually a revenge thriller.  Unfortunately, this camouflage has 
resulted in an overlong, convoluted story that's of limited 
entertainment value.  Had director Phil Joanou (FINAL ANALYSIS) 
attempted something in the more straightforward style of DEATH WISH, his 
picture might have worked better.  It certainly wouldn't have dragged on 
for more than two hours.
     It's inevitable that, in any movie featuring an alcoholic ex-cop 
who starts the film on the wagon, there will be some point when he takes 
a drink.  This is just one of many cliches employed by HEAVEN'S 
PRISONERS.  The ex-cop is Dave Robicheaux (Alec Baldwin), a one-time 
lieutenant on the New Orleans Police Force who got burned out, and, 
accompanied by his loyal, loving wife, Annie (Kelly Lynch), retired to 
the bayous, where he operates a bait shop.  Dave's new, laid-back life 
agrees with him -- he looks good and feels great, even if he 
occasionally gets a craving to down a beer.
     One day, Dave and Annie are out on a lake when a single-engine 
plane crashes into the nearby water.  Dave investigates the accident 
site, where he rescues the sole survivor, a Spanish-speaking little 
girl.  Through a series of rather hard-to-swallow plot contrivances, the 
child, named Alafair (Samantha Lagpacan), comes to live with the 
Robicheauxes as an unofficially adopted daughter.  But Alafair has a 
dangerous pedigree.  Suddenly, Dave and Annie are receiving some ominous 
visitors -- hitmen, drug lords, and DEA agents.  All of them have one 
message:  keep your nose out of our business.  Of course, these warnings 
pique Dave's curiosity.  He stops by to see Robin Gaddis (Mary Stuart 
Masterson), a strung-out stripper friend with knowledge and contacts, 
then drops in on a former schoolmate-turned-crime kingpin, Bubba Rocque 
(Eric Roberts), and his slutty wife, Claudette (Teri Hatcher).  For 
Dave, the price of these visits is steep and bloody.
     There's a lot going on in HEAVEN'S PRISONERS, but most of it 
amounts to very little.  The entire background story, which involves 
dead Federal agents, dueling crime lords, unfaithful wives, and all 
sorts of unsavory dealings, becomes window dressing for Dave's 
vengeance.  He goes after one bad guy after another, and, no matter how 
many he kills, there always seems to be someone else.  All this leads to 
an ending that, after one-hundred thirty-plus minutes of watching and 
waiting, is a big letdown.
     Although the characters are all flat stereotypes, that's no excuse 
for some of the bad acting.  Alec Baldwin has a narrow range in which he 
can be effective; HEAVEN'S PRISONERS frequently makes dramatic demands 
upon him that he is unwilling or unable to fulfill.  The result is an 
uninteresting, occasionally-overwrought performance.  Kelly Lynch is 
dull as the dutiful wife.  Mary Stuart Masterson, who normally is solid, 
fails to convince as a "bad girl" (much like in the movie of that 
title).  Teri Hatcher (of TV's LOIS AND CLARK fame) plays a superficial 
femme fatale whose Southern accent is as on-and-off as her clothing.  
Only a delightful Eric Roberts and Vondie Curtis-Hall (as a DEA agent) 
can boast any credibility.
     Presumably, HEAVEN'S PRISONERS is an attempt to elevate the revenge 
genre to an newer, more interesting level by including themes of 
redemption and responsibility.  The problem is that retribution in the 
movies is a vicious, nasty business, and all the extraneous plot 
elements needlessly encumber the story.  Co-writer Scott Frank, who 
penned MALICE (with Aaron Sorkin) and DEAD AGAIN, is known for twisty 
scripts, but this one loses itself in the maze.  There are too many 
characters working with too little new material.  In fact, this movie is 
so long-winded and repetitious that there are times when viewers of 
HEAVEN'S PRISONERS will feel like they're serving a sentence.
