Title
Review for Home Alone 3 (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Alex D. Linz, Olek Krupa, David Thornton, Lenny von Dohlen, Rya
Kihlstedt, Haviland Morris, Marian Seldes, Scarlett Johansson, Seth
Smith, Kevin Kilner
Director: Raja Gosnell
Screenplay: John Hughes
I dislike HOME ALONE and the mention of the name McCauley Culkin, will
result in a shrill scream of displeasure. However, HOME ALONE without
Culkin, is like having Christmas without the Christmas tree. In the
first episode I sympathised with the neighbourhood burglars (Joe Peschi
and Daniel Stern), and wished the house would collapse on the overly
cute Culkin - who deserves a taste of his own medicine. The second
episode LOST IN NEW YORK, overly wallowed in sentimentality, which is
much the same as wading in your own puke.
Despite my intense dislike for these movies, when I think of HOME ALONE,
I also think of a White Christmas. In the latest instalment of HA 3,
it's Christmas again, but the warm fuzzy feeling of stockings above the
fireplace isn't there anymore. Maybe it's because the kid, alone at home
with pox (Alex Linz), is more bratty than cute. One of Macaulay Culkin's
greatest assets was getting away with blue murder and retaining the
charm of a cherub. Unfortunately, Alex Linz just looks like a kid who
enjoys playing pranks on people.
John Hugues, the brains behind the successful first two episodes, has
decided not to stray far from the formula that made HOME ALONE a
success. The minor variations come in the form of four international
spies (Olek Krupa, David Thornton, Lenny von Dohlen, and Rya Kihlstedt),
trying to recover a computer chip that ends up in the Pruitt household.
This sets up the once-done-too-often final scene, where the kid has a
field day bodily injuring and mocking the intelligence of adults. With a
variety of diabolical contraptions, likely to have originated from a
Nazi torture chamber, Alex punishes the four spies for invading his
turf. If you like to watch ball breaking, head cracking, fart smelling,
bum aching, electrocuting humour, then you have found it in HOME ALONE
3.
This movie does not compare well with the original HOME ALONE. If you
didn't like the original to begin, then there is no room for this movie
in your life. In HA3, the plot seems slower, the action sequences
laboured and the plot contrived - as if writer John Hugues were fishing
for trout in a dry stream.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Walter Frith
     The amusing thing about a sequel to a sequel is that the formula
usually wears off by the time you get to it.  As I was watching 'Home Alone
3' I was surprised at how much charm it had and the harmless fun of a family
film had struck the kid in me.  Macaulay Culkin, Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern
are nowhere to be found in this movie and this one has no connection in
relation to the previous two films.  Although set in a wealthy neighbourhood
in a Chicago suburb like the first two chapters, this third chapter to the
series offers a plot with international intrigue.
     A computer chip vital to the development of U.S. Air Force technology
has the potential of falling into the wrong hands and miraculously, the chip
falls into the innocent hands of a little boy (Alex D. Linz) who doesn't
know what he has until late in the movie.  Four  criminals working to
smuggle the chip to the eventual buyer trace its whereabouts to Linz's
neighbourhood and come in direct contact with his house and the attempted
recovery of the chip is under way.  Naturally, you can guess the rest.
Booby traps abound as Linz sets the usual pratfalls in motion complete with
dispensing as much pain as the villains deserve.
     Some scenes are obviously a flagrant misconception of how things work.
There's a scene where an FBI field office in another city finds out that the
chip may be in Chicago and they leave on the first plane out.  Uh, why not
make a simple phone call to the Chicago office and let them take over.
Since no one believes Linz in his claim of burglars searching the homes in
the neighbourhood, he straps a video camera to his remote controlled truck
toy and catches the burglars red handed and the truck does things in motion
that are totally unbelievable.  It pushes open a steel gate, runs over a
person and jumps across an alley in daredevil style.  Kids will love it but
adults less cynical of breaking suspension of disbelief rules in the name of
making children laugh will enjoy genuine laughs and overlook the flaws.
     Scripted by John Hughes who wrote and directed the first two and
directed by Raja Gosnell who served as editor on the first two films, the
two of them collaborate here for an installment in the series that hopefully
will be the last one and they should quit while they're ahead and not push
their luck too far.  They got away with this copy cat of the first two films
but manage to make it work based on the charm of a new child hero so
likable, you'll want to take him home with you after the movie.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Though I was prepared and, perhaps, even hoping for something far,
far, *far* worse, the year's most dreaded sequel, HOME ALONE 3, is sur-
prisingly inoffensive.  Series writer/producer John Hughes has reworked
the wish-fulfillment franchise into an agreeable (albeit juvenile) var-
iation on the Boy Who Cried Wolf.  Alex D. Linz (ONE FINE DAY) is the
new kid on the block, with a new family and a new predicament:  he's
home alone with the Pox, has unwitting possession of a military micro-
chip, and is increasingly disbelieved by both his parents and the
police, each time he reports a burglar in a different neighboring home.
So what's a kid to do, when a quartet of Euro-criminals comes a-callin'?
Why, booby-trap the house, of course.  As expected, the final reel is
yet another trademark Hughes medley of falling objects, colliding bod-
ies, crotch blows, head bumps, and, of course, the obligatory electro-
cutions.  Plural.  Some of the bits are funny, but not tear-inducing,
the way they were in the first (and second) go-around.  (Every *kid* in
the theater laughed heartily, however.  And, oh, did they love that
radio-controlled car...) The bad guys (and one girl) take their lumps
with aplomb, but it's hard not to miss the simpler charms of Daniel
Stern and Joe Pesci.  Or the brighter colors and softer music that
sugar-coated the first films.  The kid's a natural, though.  Directed by
Raja R. Gosnell, who edited both HOME ALONE and HOME ALONE 2: LOST IN
NEW YORK.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When the stars of a movie series are dropped from the latest
installment, one has to wonder whether the concept can survive.  Could
ALIEN: RESURRECTION have been successful if science and creative script
writing could not have brought Sigourney Weaver back from the dead?
Could you imagine a DIE HARD series without America's favorite
everyman, macho hero, Bruce Willis?  And could anyone but Harrison Ford
play Indiana Jones or Jack Ryan?  (Okay, okay, so Alec Baldwin was
actually the first Jack Ryan.)
     Not only is HOME ALONE's star, Macaulay Culkin, missing from the
latest episode, HOME ALONE 3, but so are the original parents
(Catherine O'Hara and John Heard) and the villains (Joe Pesci and
Daniel Stern).  The common thread between the three HOME ALONE films is
the prolific writer and producer John Hughes of FLUBBER, FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF, and numerous other kids' movies.  There is only one
other common element.  The handsome cinematography on all three HOME
ALONE movies comes from the lens of the talented Julio Macat.
     HOME ALONE 3 is tailor-made for younger audiences that find comic
mayhem so funny.  With cute Alex D.  Linz, who was so sweet last
Christmas in ONE FINE DAY, playing the lead, Alex Pruitt, it is easy
for the kids to identify with the show's hero.  (One minor quibble.
The boys we took talked during the show only once when Alex claimed to
be 8, which is about their ages.  "He's not 8," they said.  I am not
sure of the actor's age, but he does seem younger which probably adds
to the breadth of the demographics of the kids for whom the show will
appeal.)
     The story starts in Hong Kong and then shifts to "Silicon Valley,
Ca," where my family and I live.  We get to see a non-existent Silicon
Valley river and a large complex with high-tech security worthy of the
CIA.  Although not at all like the real McCoy, it is still an
impressive piece of real estate.  From there spies, played by Rya
Kihlstedt, Olek Krupa, David Thornton and Lenny von Dohlen, steal a
single military chip so powerful that the entire Southeast Asian region
can be controlled with it.  They hide the chip in a remote control car
which -- you guessed it -- ends up by mistake with little Alex.
     Alex lives in a lovely, snow encrusted Chicago suburb, in which
every house is a Tudor mansion.  The spies come to his placid enclave
to retrieve their pilfered goods.
     A wise-beyond-his-years Alex, playing a character with shades of
his one from ONE FINE DAY, can quote the "Family Leave Act" to his hard
working mother, played by Haviland Morris.  Neither parent has a
traditional 9-to-5 job and both spend a lot of time with him, which is
good.  On the other hand, they see no problem in leaving him at home
alone, which isn't.  As his mother explains, he has her Fax number,
beeper number and office phone number, and she will stay in touch with
him every half-hour via Email.
     Adorable Alex has a smile that dazzles the audience with its
innocence but with just the right touch of hidden devilishness.  The
crooks are no match for him with his telescope and his wide variety of
homemade and ingenious gadgets.
     "I guess you have to be 35 before anyone around here pays any
attention to you," Alex tells the town's chief of police after Alex's
second "false alarm" reporting a burglar.  Since no one else will
believe him, he decides to booby trap his own house to thwart the bad
guys.  The last half of the story deals with the damage his
contraptions inflict upon them and the house.
     Several of his techniques are quite funny with the best involving
a video camera atop the remote control car that houses the infamous
stolen chip.  As the car blasts through the neighborhood hedges, the
spies follow in hot pursuit.  As funny as some of the scenes are, their
repetition will probably begin to drive most adults a bit crazy.  For
their intended audience, they are just what is needed to keep the
youngsters in stitches.  Plus, there's also a smart-aleck and quite
loquacious parrot and an adorable white rat.
     "Little boys do have good imaginations, don't they?"  says spy
Alice Ribbons (Kihlstedt).  True, but the film itself needed more
imagination and less repetition if it wanted to involve the adults in
the audience.
     HOME ALONE 3 runs 1:38.  It is rated PG cartoonish violence and a
few mild expletives.  The movie would be fine for all ages.
     My son Jeffrey, age 8, said he gave the movie a 10 out of 10, and
"if you think you've seen everything, you ain't seen nothing yet."  His
friend Matthew, age 9, said that he thought the film was suspenseful,
exciting, and "double-or-nothing cool."  His other friend Noveed, also
9, said it was a good story, but that he didn't like the movie too much
because the parts with all the booby traps grossed him out.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Alex D. Linz, Olek Krupa, David Thornton, Lenny von Dohlen, 
      Rya Kihlstedt, Haviland Morris, Marian Seldes, Scarlett Johansson, 
      Seth Smith, Kevin Kilner
Director: Raja Gosnell
Producers: John Hughes and Hilton Green
Screenplay: John Hughes
Cinematography: Julio Macat
Music: Nick Glennie-Smith
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     Talk about beating a dead horse!  When HOME ALONE was released in 
1990, it was a breath of fresh air, and the final box office tally 
indicated how much audiences appreciated a genuinely-funny family film.  
The unexpectedly high gross guaranteed a sequel, so, two years later, we 
were subjected to HOME ALONE 2, which might as well have been called 
CLONE ALONE for all of the originality it exhibited.  For John Hughes, 
two HOME ALONE movies weren't enough – he began recycling the same kinds 
of villains and situations in almost every movie he was involved with, 
including a pathetic box office bomb called BABY'S DAY OUT, last year's 
live-action 101 DALMATIANS, and this year's FLUBBER.  Now, inexplicably, 
Hughes has exhumed not only these worn-out plot elements, but the "HOME 
ALONE" name as well.  The result – 1997's worst sequel (edging out SPEED 
2 and BATMAN AND ROBIN), HOME ALONE 3.
     By changing the characters, Hughes (who wrote and co-produced the 
film), along with his co-conspirator, director Raja Gosnell, has 
attempted to inject new life into a series that is way past the point of 
cardiac arrest.  The new kid, Alex Pruitt, is played by Alex D. Linz 
(ONE FINE DAY), and the only thing he has going for him is terminal 
cuteness.  He's not half as interesting as Macaulay Culkin once was.  
The villains, pale copies of Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern, are even less 
engaging than the pair of idiots in FLUBBER.  In HOME ALONE 3, there are 
four of them (Olek Krupa, David Thornton, Lenny von Dohlen, and Rya 
Kihlstedt), but all that means is an opportunity for twice as many 
pratfalls.
     This time, the kid isn't left home alone because his parents have 
gone on a trip.  Instead, he has developed a bad case of chicken pox, so 
he can't go to school.  His dad (Kevin Kilner) is away on business and 
his mom (Haviland Morris) has to run errands, so, for the most part, 
he's all by himself during the day.  Through a series of coincidences 
too irritating to relate, a top secret U.S. Air Force integrated circuit 
comes into his possession.  It's wanted by a gang of four international 
crooks who intend to break into Alex's home to retrieve it.  The eight-
year old, who is wise beyond his years, booby traps the house with all 
sorts of Rube Goldberg-type devices designed to humiliate and 
incapacitate the villains.
     The movie's climax takes place during a raging snowstorm – only 
none of the falling flakes looks remotely believable.  Previously, the 
most counterfeit-looking snow effects I can remember were in STAR TREK 
III.  These are far worse.  In fact, the production values are so shoddy 
that there are some scenes in the midst of this near-blizzard when a 
shining sun can be seen.  If IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE could generate real-
looking snow back in the 1940s, why can't HOME ALONE 3, which has a 
significantly larger budget and '90s technology at its disposal?
     There has been an ongoing debate regarding the appropriateness of 
live-action cartoon violence for young children.  HOME ALONE 3 will add 
fuel to the fire.  It's one thing to see Wyle E. Coyote flattened by a 
10 ton Acme weight, but quite another to watch a running lawn mower fall 
on Lenny von Dohlen.  Adults and even older children will recognize that 
this is obviously fake and intended to be humorous, but what about five 
and six-year olds?  The level of violence in HOME ALONE 3 is extreme – 
many of Alex's schemes are nasty enough to kill.  But, because this is a 
"family film," no one dies, despite being electrocuted, falling thirty 
feet, and getting smacked on the head by a barbell.  
     Not only is HOME ALONE 3 unnecessary, but it's offensive.  It's an 
exercise in tediousness, and there isn't a genuine laugh to be found 
from the beginning to the end (unless, by some strange quirk of fate, 
you have missed every 1990s movie associated with John Hughes, and thus 
haven't seen this stuff before).  I can't imagine anyone with a 
reasonable attention span being more than momentarily distracted by this 
pointless adventure.  Maybe that's why the only ones laughing at the 
screening I attended were still in their thumb-sucking years.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
James Sanford
HOME ALONE 3
(Twentieth-Century Fox)
Directed by Raja Gosnell
 Less a sequel than a haphazard remake of the original "Home Alone," "Home
Alone 3" is a shining example of desperate studio executives trying to
squeeze a few more drops out of a dying cash-cow. It's also further
proof --as if any were needed-- that John Hughes-scripted movies are now a
thing to be feared instead of anticipated, as they might have been ten years
ago during his "Breakfast Club"/"Planes, Trains and Automobiles"/"Pretty in
Pink" heyday.
 At least the producers had the good sense to retire the ungracefully aging
Macaulay Culkin, whose performances in his most recent films (such as the
acclaimed "Getting Even With Dad" and the unjustly-snubbed-by-Oscar "Richie
Rich") smacked of smug self-indulgence. Unfortunately, the filmmakers have
not found a young actor with the comic timing of the younger, less affected
Culkin: Alex D. Linz, who takes the lead in this installment, seems like one
of those little dolls who's been told far too many times exactly how
adorable he is. There's a fine line between precocious and precious, and
young Mr. Linz continually errs on the side of  cutesy-poo.
 In fact, there's nothing adorable about "Home Alone 3" at all, despite
Hughes' dumping of a load of gooey sentimentality into the midst of the
proceedings, as beguiling moppet Alex (Linz) defrosts the glacial heart of a
bitter old neighbor. The spies-chasing-microchip plot is nothing more than a
facile excuse for a second act that's stuffed to the gills with poorly
executed slapstick that director Raja Gosnell obviously has no feel for. Say
what you will about the first two "Home Alone"s, but at least they were
professionally made entertainments; this one seems to have been shot and
pasted together by the least-promising students in a community-college film
class. Despite the title, the real story that's being continued here is
Hughes', and it's a depressing tale of a once-bright talent stuck in a
continuing downward spiral.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The obvious question associated with the creation of HOME ALONE 3 is
"why," though not for the obvious reasons.  You'd certainly expect a third
installment from a series where the first two racked up a collective $457
million, even if the star of those two films has been spending more time
lately in court than on screen.  It's just that HOME ALONE guru John
Hughes has been doing a perfectly serviceable job of re-cycling that
successful formula without using the HOME ALONE name.  BABY'S DAY OUT, 101
DALMATIANS and FLUBBER have managed to turn pratfalls, scatology and groin
injuries into cash without conjuring up the yelping visage of Macaulay
Culkin.  Why start now?
     Why indeed, especially if you're going to fumble the formula the way
HOME ALONE 3 does.  The required elements appear to be in place -- a
youngster (Alex D. Linz as Alex Pruitt), absentee parents, a snow-covered
Midwestern suburb, nefarious intruders, several severe bodily injuries
and property damage in the six-figure range -- but everything feels just
slightly askew.  The little boy, rather than being a mischievous imp, is a
minor scientific genius and all-around upstanding citizen.  Goofy
antagonists Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern have been replaced by Olek Krupa,
Rya Kihlstedt, Lenny Von Dohlen and David Thornton as international
criminals looking for a stolen missile guidance chip in Alex's possession,
characters a bit too chilly and sinister to be fun.  And the direction by
Raja Gosnell, taking over for Chris Columbus, drags the pace so badly
during the first hour that kids may be snoring long before they chuckle
for the first time.
     Now, no one has ever accused me of championing John Hughes' modus
operandi in the 90s, when he lost all interest in films for viewers over
the age of 10.  In fact, I'm pretty sure it's one of the Biblical signs of
the end-times.  But let's face it -- the formula works.  Hughes has made
the live-action Warner Bros. cartoon his personal dominion; HOME ALONE is
basically a Road Runner/Coyote adventure where the Road Runner has finally
gotten his hands on the Acme catalog.  HOME ALONE 3 includes all of
Hughes' most annoying habits -- cloying sentimentality, utter disdain for
adults, crotch-level comedy -- with little of the mitigating
frivolousness.  The Road Runner turns into a Rhodes scholar, Wile E.
Coyote into a James Bond villain, and the trip-hammer pacing something
more suited to Merchant Ivory than Chuck Jones.
     Of course, I can't recall a Merchant Ivory film which included so
many different things dropped on people's heads.  The villains in HOME
ALONE 3 are brained from above with books, barbells, decorative flower
pots, a lawn mower, lumber and human excrement, among other things, which
Nick Glennie-Smith's relentlessly whimsical score reminds us is jolly good
fun.  Certainly all the mayhem will keep the kids giggling, assuming you
rouse them from their naps, but there are so many different ways to see
exactly the same material with more energy and at significantly less cost.
John Hughes has done himself in by turning out a HOME ALONE 3 which can't
keep up with HOME ALONE, HOME ALONE 2, or the dozen other de facto sequels
which didn't happen to bear the HOME ALONE name.
