Title
Review for Quiet Room, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
FilmFan16@aol.com
"The Quiet Room," is an exceptional, if not perfect, Australian drama 
that gets farther into the inner workings of a child's mind than any 
other film I've ever seen. It is an ideal picture for parents (who just 
might learn something about their children), teenagers (who will nod in 
recognition at its accuracy), and high school and college classes 
studying children.
The film is told exclusively, and never sways, from the central 
character's point-of-view, a seven-year-old girl (Chloe Ferguson) who, 
by choice, has completely stopped vocally talking with her parents, who 
are clearly having marital troubles. Since she does not talk, and yet 
she is the main character, we hear all of her thoughts and feelings at 
any given time. And, we sense, if her parents understood her a little 
better, they would realize that she doesn't need to talk to express 
herself.
"The Quiet Room," with the constant voice-over by the little girl, 
expressing the thoughts in her mind, are constantly so right-on-target, 
that director Rolf de Heer should be applauded for the obvious knowledge 
and maturity that he brings to this emotional story. Admittedly, the 
narration sometimes overstays its welcome in certain scenes, but when 
you think about it, this is completely acceptable. All people, not just 
children, have endless thoughts always floating around in their head, 
and to stop the little girl from expressing herself would be like 
telling her she can't use her mind anymore.
Not enough praise could possibly be given to Chloe Ferguson, as the 
young girl, who, second to three-year-old Victoire Thivisol (1997's, 
"Ponette"), gives the best motion picture performance I can remember 
from someone under ten years of age. You can never catch Ferguson acting 
because she is so very good, and by the film's end, I really was 
beginning to acknowledge her character as a actual person.
If, "The Quiet Room," ever steps wrong, it is in the conclusion, in 
which everything is somewhat solved. It is not that it is necessarily a 
disappointing ending, but I think I probably would have changed the 
penultimate moments to make them feel as accurate as everything that had 
come before.
Nonetheless, "The Quiet Room," is, for once, a serious film on the 
subject of a young child. We do not get many films of this nature, and 
when we do, they more often than not get many of the little details 
wrong. The character of the young girl in this film, on the other hand, 
is so truthful that she really does, in the viewer's mind, at least, 
become a real human being, as if it was a documentary we were watching. 
"The Quiet Room," may be a fictional film, but what it says is not 
"fictional" at all. Children go through the exact same things that this 
young girl goes through, and the points that this film has to make 
speaks volumes about them.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Jon Lerma
The Quiet room is a great film.  It is about a little girl who retreats
into herself to help cope with her parents squabing(fightin with words i
mean).  If you dont mind watchin a film comprised mosltly of dialogue(
by way of voicover) and dig sentamentality and all that and just can sit
through a whole movie without gettin up and shite go see this movie its
real good.
Now this is where i get real nitty gritty.  First off the movies acting
is strong and subdued.  I read that the actress playing the little girl
is a non pro but her performance is good and actually lends to the
enjoyment(ie. it does not bother like watching those dreadful soap kids
go "Mommy i miss Greg!").  The rest of the cast(which is small mom dad
carpet cleaners lady and babysitter) also give performances which
although will not garantee oscar(and why not jus cause there is no gut
wrenchin cry scenes oh wait there are then oscar here we come) they more
than live up to the script and never hinder the movie in any way.
Okay now for what i really think.  The cinematography(sic) was awesome.
The camera pans and shots just have to be seen not to flashy and all but
still very nonhooptyclandestinecool.  The colors the colors. they just
rock out. A great thing of this movie is how there is humor( in the form
of the girls little mind quips of observation) and it really helps to
balence out the obvious sobriety and sadness of this film.  
HAPPY ENDING ALERT: okay why did i put this well i dont know for some
strange reason some people hate happy endings i love them but anyways
this film has a sort of happy ending so ...
Other reviews Ive read have given that the girl is a little too world
weary or insightful that we do not know why the parents are fighting and
blah blah blah....
For the record i thought the girls thoughts were believable and
although they seemed insightful they were really just dead on
observations that rang true and her conclusions had no special beyond
her years insight she in short thinks like a child not an adult.  I also
felt that the arguments of the parents came off really well never over
really big things(ie "you drink too mich george" or " are you cheatin on
me martha") but rather start over the ridiculous, which in my experience
is how it happens.
The only flaws is that it does run long towards the end in some parts
in that without patience the film tends to drag.  Not the whole end of
the film mind you just certain parts but if you wait a bit the film
resumes its greatness.  There is no solid narrative and the end is only
apparent once your there so that might be a reason for the feeling of
longness.  
So go see this film.  I really have no touchstones of other similar
films( at least non come to mind) except like mabye 'radio flyer' with a
style hint of 'the young poisoners handbook' which is really unfair to
this film(not a downer to those films though i loved those two also).
  
NOTE: This was my first review hope it wasnt to dreadful or longwinded
or whatever....
