Title
Review for Apur Sansar (1959)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Murali Krishnan
[2.5/4.0]  (dialog in Bengali, English subtitles)
This film, with the English title "The World of Apu", is the final
episode of Satyajit Ray's "Apu Trilogy".
At the end of the narrative of "Aparajito", Apu is left alone in the
world. At the beginning of this story, a few years have passed, but
his fortunes have not much improved. Apu (Soumitra Chatterjee) is
forced to leave college due to the lack of money. Still, his spirit
is not broken. Apu accepts that his life is destined to have hardship,
but that his only recourse is to live it as fully as he can. It is
difficult for him to find a job, so he does private tutoring and
spends the rest of his time working on a novel. He decides to join a
friend, Pulu (Swapan Mukherjee), on a trip to the countryside to
attend the wedding of Pulu's cousin, Aparna (Sarmila Tagore). In a
strange twist of fate, the bridegroom is struck insane so the wedding
must be scrapped. The only way to salvage Aparna's honor is to find a
replacement bridegroom so the wedding can take place. Apu does the
noble thing and marries Aparna. He is not sure that she can be happy
going from a life without need with her parents to a life of poverty
with him, but Aparna makes the best of her fate and thrives in her new
life. Apu is a new man now that he is focussed on married life and he
and Aparna fall deeply in love. Once again, tragedy befalls Apu when
Aparna dies in childbirth. This leave Apu a broken man. Apu then
abandons all parts of his life, including his new son, Kajal, and
embarks on a journey of introspection, hoping to find peace.
Whereas the first two chapters of the trilogy succeed because they
build drama from subtlety, this film is disappointing in its rejection
of that technique. Instead it opts to use melodramatic turns to drive
the story, and force the narrative through wrenching contortions. The
idea that a stranger would step in and rescue an abandoned bride at
her wedding is a standard plot device of Indian cinema. It is slightly
unfair to penalize this film for the years of formulaic overuse in
films that followed it, but still this is a jarring departure from the
simple universal truths of the human condition that the first two films
dealt with. The change in style is so unsettling that the character of
Apu presented here seems a stranger, disconnected from the character
from the previous films.
The pace of the film is exceptionally slow, and while this worked well
in "Pather Panchali", it is a detriment in this film. Obviously the
intent was to show the depths of mourning and levels of introspection
that Apu goes through, but the consequence is the assertion that Apu
grieves over his latest tragedy on a scale that dwarfs the previous
tragedies he had experienced. Perhaps the message being made is that
the dependence on romantic love is far greater than on familial love.
Perhaps it is that tragedies affect adults more than they can affect
children. Neither statement feels credible. One would have expected
that the hardships of his early life would have given Apu some amount
of inoculation for the difficulties of adulthood. Apu actually appears
self indulgent when his reaction to tragedy is compared to how his
mother reacted to similar, if not greater, tragedy.
The wonderful music that backed the other films is surprisingly absent
in this one, outside of a few scenes of Apu playing the flute (a talent
Apu apparently picked up between the previous installment of the story
and this one). Another disappointment is the performance of Soumitra
Chatterjee, which is often overdone, and does not smoothly communicate
the transformations undergone by the character. No other characters are
given much examination.
To be fair, this is a very ambitious film that attempts to deal with
the heavy topics of human emotions. The visual imagery is beautiful
and evocative. It is unlucky in that it is judged by the high standards
set by the masterpieces that preceded it.
Moderately recommended. Although this is not such a bad film on its own,
it is definitely a disappointment after the first two magnificent parts
of the trilogy. The poignancy of those films is replaced here with
melodrama, sometimes overwrought. In fact, nothing from the first two
films needs to be known to understand this one, so it might be best to
see this one first, and then subsequently enjoy the brilliance of the
others.
--== Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/ ==--
---Share what you know. Learn what you don't.---

Author
James Berardinelli
India, 1959
U.S. Re-Release Date: widely variable, limited distribution
Running Length: 1:46
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
Cast: Soumitra Chatterjee, Sharmila Tagore, Alok Chakravarty, 
      Swapan Mukherjee, Dhiresh Majumdar, Sefalika Devi
Director: Satyajit Ray
Producer: Satyajit Ray
Screenplay: Satyajit Ray, based on the novel APARAJITA by 
      Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay
Cinematography: Subrata Mitra
Music: Ravi Shankar
U.S. Distributor: Merchant-Ivory/Sony Pictures Classics
In Bengali with subtitles
     APUR SANSAR concludes one of the greatest film series of all time, 
Satyajit Ray's APU TRILOGY, which chronicles the life of one Bengali boy 
as he traverses the road from childhood through adolescence to maturity.  
Ray, a masterfully accomplished director, is at the height of his powers 
with this film, one of the most equally wrenching, uplifting, and 
cathartic motion pictures I have experienced.  Following 1955's PATHER 
PANCHALI and 1956's APARAJITO, this 1959 feature provides the perfect 
culmination to an unforgettable saga.
     It's possible to review APUR SANSAR without mentioning the other 
films in the trilogy, because Ray has constructed this movie so that its 
full power can be felt by anyone  unfamiliar with what preceded it.  
Nevertheless, for those who accompanied the writer/director as he 
charted the emotional and spiritual odyssey of Apu's early life, APUR 
SANSAR provides a fitting final chapter.  Not only are we afforded the 
opportunity to observe the kind of man the protagonist has ultimately 
become, but we see how his cumulative experience coalesces to influence 
the most monumental decision of his life.
     APUR SANSAR is carefully divided into three acts.  In the first, we 
are introduced to the adult Apu (Soumitra Chatterjee), a struggling 
writer living in a Calcutta apartment during the 1930s.  Apu is alone in 
the world, having already lost his sister (PATHER PANCHALI) and father 
and mother (APARAJITO).  He's three months behind in his rent, so, to 
meet his landlord's demands, he is forced to sell some of his precious 
books.  Jobs are scarce, and Apu can't find one that suits him.  One 
day, his old school friend, Pulu (Swapan Mukherjee), arrives to invite 
him to a wedding in the village of Khulna.  Apu, who doesn't have 
anything else to do, agrees to come.  On the day of the marriage, 
however, the groom develops unexpected mental problems, and the bride, 
Aparna (Sharmila Tagore), is left alone and unmarried.  Her 
superstitious family believes that if a wedding does not take place at 
the appointed hour, she will be cursed forever.  To save her, Apu is 
recruited as a "substitute bridegroom."
     The second act, which has an almost-playful tone, details Apu and 
Aparna's married life -- how they initially come together as strangers 
then grow to love and understand one another.  In slightly more than 
thirty minutes, Ray brings to life an unforced, deeply moving romance.  
Apu and Aparna's gentle relationship is punctuated by bursts of pathos 
and comedy, but their union is so effectively crafted that it's easy for 
the viewer to lose him- or herself in the simple beauty of Ray's world.
     Alas, the happiness doesn't last forever.  The third, defining act 
of the film hinges on tragedy and its aftermath.  Aparna dies giving 
birth to a son, and a devastated Apu abandons his baby for a nomadic 
lifestyle filled with hopelessness and self-recrimination.  Only in the 
final scenes of APUR SANSAR is the protagonist offered an opportunity at 
redemption, and we aren't sure until the last shot whether or not he 
will accept it.
     The "tragic love story" is a timeless motion picture staple, but 
few, if any, express emotional truth with the simple, heartbreaking 
eloquence of APUR SANSAR.  Although the best stories of this sort (such 
as Richard Attenborough's SHADOWLANDS) typically have moments when they 
ring false, this movie is free of such missteps.  Ray's considerable 
skills as a film maker are at their pinnacle, and the result is 
unforgettable.
     The acting, as is usually the case in a Ray film, is of the highest 
caliber.  Soumitra Chatterjee, who was to become a "regular" in the 
director's films, gives a fine, multi-dimensional portrayal; it's easy 
to believe that he's the same Apu that we got to know in the other two 
films.  The void created by the absence of Karuna Bannerjee, who 
anchored both PATHER PANCHALI and APARJITO as Apu's mother, is filled by 
the exquisite Sharmila Tagore, who, like Chatterjee, would appear in 
future Ray films (as well as MISSISSIPPI MASALA).
     The greatness of the APU TRILOGY lies not only in its intimate 
understanding of the intricacies of human nature, but the artistry with 
which it expresses those truths.  Each of the films is filled with 
wondrous images, and watching Apu's life unfold is like gazing through a 
window into a rare and unique world.  And, even though the trilogy 
includes much tragedy, Ray gives birth to hope from each despair, and a 
measure of joy from every sadness.  After all, life is like that, and 
the APU TRILOGY reflects the universality of the human experience.  
     I saw APUR SANSAR in a full theater, and, after the end credits had 
rolled, everyone reluctantly rose from their seats to file towards the 
exit.  An unusual silence enveloped the crowd of 150.  There was no 
discussion or aimless chatter, just the quiet, communal introspection of 
a lingering experience.  I can think of no better illustration of this 
film's power and impact.  The APU TRILOGY is a true masterpiece, and 
APUR SANSAR is its crown jewel.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
