Title
Review for Amant, L' (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE LOVER (L' AMANT) (1991) is an English language film set in
1929 French Indo-China (Vietnam).  It is a highly atmospheric and, some
would say, erotic tale of two sad and lonely people.  The message of
the film appears to be that we are trapped and life is hopeless.
     Based on the semi-autobiographical novel by Maugerite Dumas, the
film tells the tale of a 15 1/2 year girl.  The girl (Jane March) is
called only "the young girl" by the narrator known as "the writer"
(Yvonne Wingerter in the beginning and Raymonde Heudeline in the end).
The girl leaves her home to go to a boarding school.  While on the
ferry she meets a lonely and depressed rich man known as "the Chinaman"
(Tony Leung Ka Fai).  He offers to driver her to her boarding school in
his large limo.
     Although the Chinaman is filthy rich, only 31 years old, and
handsome enough to be a fashion model, he has little confidence and
looks so sad you think he is about slash his wrists at any moment.  The
young girl seems suffering from clinical depression as well.  When the
man says it is his fault, she corrects him, saying, "It's me.  I am
always a little sad.  I'm like my mother."  Actually, everyone in the
movie seemed to suffer from major depression.
     In an attempt, I guess, to find meaning in their life, the two
protagonists spend over half of the movie with their clothes off and
most of this time is spent doing sex.  The sex is certainly not erotic
and is mainly exhausting.  They don't seem to enjoy any of it and
watching them do it is about as much fun as watching athletes doing one
wind sprint after another to get in shape for a track meet.  I saw the
videotape version where scenes deleted so that could get an R rating
were added back in.  I suspect the movie was better in the released
theatrical version.
     Jane March, whose only other film was COLOR OF NIGHT, shows little
acting ability.  COLOR OF NIGHT was number one on my worst films of
1994 list, and she showed a lack of talent in that movie as well.  Tony
Leung Ka Fai shows promise, but the maudlin script (Jean-Jacques Annaud
and Gerard Brach) with which he has to deal left he little room to
maneuver.  The worst part of the dialog is given to the writer.  She
has to say one pedantic line after another, and overall, the narrator's
part is just too wordy.  Director Jean-Jacques Annaud has the actors
pause frequently in their dialog so the audience can fully ponder the
drivel they have just uttered.
     Actually, the best part of the movie is some wonderful
cinematography (Robert Fraisse) that has a sepia tone look to it.  This
is complimented by sets (Thanh At Hoang) of great and natural beauty.
The lushness of the jungle and especially of the rivers is complimented
by buildings of old brown stone.  The film transports you to a long ago
era and makes you feel as if you are there.  Now if you could just get
rid of those actors and actresses populating the scenery, ...
     THE LOVER runs 1:50.  It is rated R for non-stop sex and nudity.
There is no violence.  The film would be fine for most teenagers.
Although I can not recommend this depressing film, I did like some of
the technical aspects so I am giving it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A test case for why there will be no follow-up to LAST TANGO IN
PARIS.
THE LOVER is a deeply confused movie that does not know what it wants to
do, and what it does do, it doesn't understand. We don't see what's
critical to the story, and everything we do see feels like it's from
another, more interesting movie. It's a superficially pretty film that, if
made by an American director, might have just been rendered as soft-core
porn and left at that, gaining the benefit of unpretentiousness.
Marguerite Duras wrote the allegedly autobiographical novel from which the
movie is drawn, but it might as well have been Xaviera Hollander, from the
total lack of depth of character that the movie displays. The story is
simple, the stuff of anonymous highbrow porn: Two strangers who make a pact
not to know too much about each other, separated by barriers of culture and
class, have piles of sex.
The woman of the two is played by Jane March, a young French girl living in
Indochina. The man is Tony Leung, a rich Chinese fellow who is almost twice
as old as she is. Their meeting is rendered in the same kind of non-verbal
way as in (better) movies like DAMAGE: they see each other, and somehow,
they are thunderstruck. They rent a room in the Chinese quarter and, like I
said before, have piles of sex.
What's infuriating about the movie is that it does not confront any of this
on its own terms. LAST TANGO IN PARIS and DAMAGE had the nerve to do that;
so did Fassbinder's searing ALI: FEAR EATS THE SOUL. THE LOVER winds up
splitting into two schizophrenic halves. In one, the young girl hates
school, has to deal with her priggish parents, has a semi-sexual
relationship with another (female) classmate, etc. In the other, the two
lovers have piles of sex. If I sound like I'm being repetitious, then
perhaps you're getting the point. The movie quickly settles into a pattern:
sex, strained dialogue, the girl's hateful life, more sex. Soon we're
checking to see if our watches have stopped.
Worse, the first half of the movie is far more fierce and interesting than
the second half. I wanted to know more about her classmate, with whom she
has several spellbinding scenes. I wanted to see more about how she dealt
with her mother and father. And -- but I hate to say this because it's
asking too much from a movie like this -- I wanted to know about what these
two lovers were really thinking, feeling, trying to find out about each
other when they rented that little room. The movie has no ideas about
erotic attraction between people, just prettiness: it's a vapid
intellectual's version of a PENTHOUSE centerspread.
The movie's conclusion is enraging, because it does not have one. It simply
terminates the main story, and then tacks on a prefab conclusion that ALSO
terminates prematurely. This is a movie about deep human enigmas that's
made by total babes in the woods.
