Title
Review for Feast of July (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
     When you see a lousy movie, it's usually fun to be able to mock it
afterwards.  This way, you at least get a little satisfaction from the
otherwise complete waste of time and money.
     FEAST OF JULY is a lousy movie, but it allows no such opportunity. 
>From the first frame to the end, this film is nothing but sheer *boredom,*
an Art Movie that wants to be oh-so-classy and ends up not even
approaching a "feast," but rather becoming more fodder for the cinematic
gristmill.
     The story is a simple plot of a brooding "mystery woman," Bella
(Embeth Davidtz), trying to track down her ex-lover in 1880s England. 
Along the way about 3 other guys fall for her, most notably a guy named
Con (Ben Chaplin), who convinces Bella to marry him.  Again, the story is
very simple, but the film is so convoluted as to make this plotline
indiscernible for the first 40 minutes, most of which is consumed with odd
discussions of shoes and hats, bad dancing, and Bella falling down a lot.
     There is so much wrong with FEAST OF JULY that I don't know where to
begin.  The acting is atrocious, especially Davidtz (who previously shone
so brightly in SCHINDLER'S LIST), here doing nothing but wandering around
in a daze.  The direction is also bad (this is Christopher Menaul's first
feature), as is the editing.  Worst of all is the screenplay by
Christopher Neame, which merits marks only when a few of the many
obnoxious characters are killed off.  The film does start to get a tad
interesting in its final reel, but it is way to little, far too late.
     This movie is billed as "a Merchant Ivory Production," but don't be
misled.  Ismail Merchant executive produced (read:  did nothing) on this
picture, and Ivory is nowhere to be found.  (The Merchant Ivory *company*
produced the picture, not the filmmakers.)  Their flair is difficult to
copy, and FEAST OF JULY proves it.
     In a nutshell, FEAST OF JULY is an extraordinarily difficult to
follow film, full of talky, dull melodrama and the glamorization of
"proper" 19th century sensibilities.  Puh-leeze.  The press notes call
this film "unforgettable."  I'm glad they reminded me.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FEAST OF JULY is a movie based on an H. E. Bates novel.  For those
of us who have read his books or seen any of the wonderful Masterpiece
Theater adaptations on TV ("Love for Lydia", "Country Matters", etc.),
we know right away that something special is about occur when we see
Bates name.  He is a master storyteller with a gift for getting deep
into the inner spirit of people.  His stories are usually tragedies
where the protagonists strive gallantly in elusive quests for
happiness.  His stories are quiet ones with much depth and heavy
characterizations.  They tear at your heart.
     The movie FEAST OF JULY ranks among the best of the Bates movies
and mini-series.  First time movie director Christopher Menaul (who did
the great "Prime Suspect I" on TV) does a brilliant job of moving Bates
to the big screen without removing any of the small aspects that makes
Bates's works so special.  It would have been a temptation to try to
jazz up the script with more dialog or to direct the actors to be more
lively, but he showed great control and confidence in his material.  He
knew that he had a strong cast, and he could rely on the story and on
facial expressions and body language to tell much of the tale.  Bates
teaches us all about the human spirit, and Menaul trusted his audience
not to get bored, but to pay attention and get wrapped up in an
entrancing story.
     As the movie opens, it is the late 1800s, and Bella Ford (Embeth
Davidtz) is pregnant and is in a personal forced march across a bleak
English countryside in bad weather.  She stops in a hut where blood
starts pouring out from under where she has fallen exhausted.  She is
having an extremely realistic miscarriage.  From the first scene our
hearts go out for her.  With a single image the director and some great
acting have already captured our heart.  I rarely want to cry three
minutes into a show as I did then.
     Bella comes to a town looking for Arch Wilson (Greg Wise) who told
her he was going to marry her but vanished getting her pregnant.  He is
not to be found, but the father, Ben (Tom Bell), of the Wainwright
family takes pity on her and takes her in their home to live for a
while.  The mother (Gemma Jones) gives Bella her daughter's clothes
since the daughter died of a fever three years ago.  The sons, Jedd
(James Purefoy), Con (Ben Chaplin), and Matty (Kenneth Anderson), are
all in their 20s like Bella.  They think she is pretty, and slowly
there develops a rivalry among them for her attention.  This rivalry
plus Bella's continuing search for Arch Wilson is the heart of the
tale.  Although it was a novel, it feels like a short story since it
has such simplicity and yet great intensity.
     Even the little parts of the story are special.  Matty is a shoe
maker and thinks he is one of the best in England.  He brags to Bella
that he once made the smallest shoes ever made in England.  They were
for a midget who performed on stage.  His plight is that, with the
industrial revolution, shoes are made by machines faster and cheaper
than he can craft them by hand.  He feels that he must leave his little
village and move to London since only there will they be able to afford
custom made shoes.  He is melancholy and yet resigned to his fate as he
explains it to Bella.
     The sets appear to be extremely accurate recreations of the
period.  Quite compelling.  The cinematography by Peter Sova is
incredible.  Where do I begin with so many examples?  Let me cite just
two.  In the fog scenes, the characters move through the fog like sad
black ghosts as only their outline shows.  In the scene of the lighting
of the gas lamps on the street at night and of the dinners lit only by
oil lamps, the pictures are realistically dark and yet possess a warm
glow as if it is a metaphor of the attempt for inner peace of all of
the characters.
     All of the actors and actresses delivery terrific performances.
It is hard to single out any since it is an ensemble piece of acting.
I guess Embeth Davidtz is my favorite, but all were so good.  With only
a few lines, Gemma Jones steals most of the scenes she is in.  You may
remember her as the Duchess in "The Duchess of Duke Street."
     The dialog as written by Bates and as carefully and lovingly
adapted for the screen by Christopher Neame, is sparse and yet
carefully constructed for maximum effect.  Each of the characters is
special in some way.  Con, for example, is somewhat of a simpleton who
loves penguins.  He is extremely gentle with them and feeds them daily.
In the human world, he is awkward.  He can not dance and has trouble
controlling his emotions.  Finally, the ending of the movie is
excellent and left me gripping the chair as the credits started to
roll.
     FEAST OF JULY runs 1:58 and never drags.  It is rated R for sex
and violence.  It would be excellent for teenagers of all ages to see
it.  I highly recommend this heart wrenching tragedy to you, and I give
it *** 1/2.  With a little stronger middle, it could have gotten my top
rating.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     When you see the words "A Merchant Ivory Production," you can be
forgiven if you expect the very best in filmmaking.  Remember A ROOM
WITH A VIEW and HOWARD'S END, among others?  It is therefore with
regret that I have to report that FEAST OF JULY does not live up to
their usual work.
     The film opens with Bella Ford (Embeth Davidtz whom you will
remember from SCHINDLER'S LIST) trudging across a barren wasteland in
England.  This scene should have been edited to half its length.  Bella
falls or sits down and suddenly there is blood as she gives birth to a
dead baby.  Bella buries the child and continues walking, searching for
the whereabouts of Arch Wilson (Greg Wise), who after fathering the
child, abandons Bella.
     When Bella finally makes it into town, the man who lights the
street lamps (Ben Wainwright) sees her, and invites her to stay with
his wife (Gemma Jones) and their three handsome sons, Jedd (James
Purefoy), Matty (Kenneth Anderson), and Con (Ben Chaplin).  As one
would guess, the three sons are immediately enchanted by Bella and are
determined she will be theirs.  When harvest time arrives they sit down
to the Feast of July; hence, the title.
     Just as Bella finally chooses Con to be her fiance, tragedy
strikes the family with the arrival of Wilson, the man who had
abandoned Bella.
     What detracted greatly from the film was the ending.  Somehow Paul
Bradley, the screenplay writer, or perhaps it was Ms. Davidtz, failed
to elicit any sympathy for Bella.  Without the sympathy the film ends
on a bad note.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Embeth Davidz, Tom Bell, Gemma Jones, Ben Chaplin, James Purefoy,
      Kenneth Anderson, Greg Wise
Director: Christopher Menaul
Producers: Henry Herbert and Christopher Neame
Screenplay: Christopher Neame based on the novel by H. E. Bates
Cinematography: Peter Sova
Music: Zbigniew Preisner
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     FEAST OF JULY, which arrives under the Merchant/Ivory umbrella
(Ismail Merchant having served as executive producer), is much like a
big screen version of a double-length MASTERPIECE THEATER episode.  By
turns tragic and beautiful, but always atmospheric, this adaptation H.E.
Bates' novel focuses on the dark side of love and the grotesque capacity
for violence hidden deep within the meekest human being.
     The film opens with a pregnant young woman, Bella Ford (Embeth
Davidz), struggling across the windswept countryside of late Victorian
England.  Unmarried and alone, she is undergoing a 30-mile journey to
find the father of her unborn child.  By the time she reaches the town
where he claims to live (but in fact doesn't), she has miscarried.
Exhausted and weak, she is taken in by a kindly local family, and soon
becomes a member of the household.  The sons--Con (Ben Chaplin), Jedd
(James Purefoy), and Matty (Kenneth Anderson)--vie with each other for
her attention, and, on one occasion, this sibling rivalry turns violent.
For her part, Bella is attracted to all three, although one eventually
rises above the others in her estimation.  But he must compete with
Bella's memories of her lost love, a scoundrel who suddenly re-appears.
     There's no doubt that FEAST OF JULY is, at heart, a tragic
melodrama.  But, at least in its appraisal of human nature, it aspires
to something greater.  Despite the trappings of civilization, man is
still an animal, and even the gentlest of people can be driven by
uncontrollable passions to do terrible things.  Reason has never been
able to master love, and FEAST OF JULY illustrates the devastating
results of one moment's irrational blindness.  For, in this sort of
fiction, if not always in real life, crime has consequences.
     While Embeth Davidz doesn't give the same degree of wrenching
performance she delivered as Helen Hirsch in SCHINDLER'S LIST, she is
nevertheless effective as the figure at the focus of FEAST OF JULY's
events.  Like Patricia Arquette in ETHAN FROME, Davidz doesn't initially
seem right for the part, but it doesn't take much screen time for her to
change the viewer's opinion.  In her understated portrayal, we see an
eloquent expression of desperation.
     As is almost always the case in British productions, the sense of
atmosphere is masterful.  Director Christopher Menaul (PRIME SUSPECT)
has used all the tools at his disposal, including rich cinematography by
Peter Sova and a haunting score by longtime Kieslowski collaborator
Zbigniew Preisner, to craft a realistic portrait of a private tragedy.
Even though the circumstances are outdated, the emotional core of FEAST
OF JULY is timeless.
     Joy is a scarce commodity in this film, and there's little
opportunity for comic relief to lighten the tension.  FEAST OF JULY is
not for those seeking an uplifting motion picture experience.  As
accomplished as Menaul's technique is, the film is a real
downer--tissues are a recommended accessory.  The main dish served up
at this particular FEAST is raw emotion.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
