Title
Review for Now, Voyager (1942)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Now, Voyager" is a very good romance film.
The script, cast and direction is excellent,
and if the story is a bit dramatic at times,
it does succeed in maintaining interest.
It is probably true that women will enjoy
the film more than men, but "Now, Voyager"
is good enough to merit viewing by anyone.
Bette Davis plays the emotionally repressed
daughter of a wealthy elderly matriarch
(Gladys Cooper).  Cooper's cruelty and strict
upbringing results in Davis going to a sanitarium.
Separated from her mother and treated by a doctor
(Claude Rains), Davis begins an integration into the
real world, soon starting a romance with
unhappily married Paul Henreid.  Davis suddenly
becomes extroverted and popular.
Davis returns home, and begins a battle of wills
with her mother, who wants her to return to her
role as servant and repressed spinster.  Davis
romances wealthy socialite John Loder, but of
course is still in love with Henreid.  Later, she
practically adopts Henreid's withdrawn daughter
(Janis Wilson), whom she identifies with.
"Now, Voyager" has some flaws.  Davis' character
is supposed to be overweight in the first part of
the film, but she is her usual rail-thin self.
Davis' off-camera transformation from sulking loner
to glib socialite comes too quickly and easily.
The mother's sudden death from an argument with
Davis is a plot contrivance.  She is emotionally
too thick-skinned to be devastated by anything
that Davis would say.
Still, "Now, Voyager" (the title comes from a Walt
Whitman poem) is a very good movie.  Davis is
very good, and it helps that her character has
depth and, unlike many of her later film roles,
does not have "evil" characteristics.  Wilson is
excellent as the troubled daughter, and Rains makes
the most of his minor supporting role.  Davis and
Cooper were nominated for Academy Awards.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
