Title
Review for Seven Years in Tibet (1997)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
James Sanford
SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET
Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud
Starring Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, Jumyang Wangchuk, B.D. Wong and Lhakpa
Tsamchoe
 Hello Dalai!
 After numerous visits from the Dalai Lama and several high-profile,
celebrity-packed fundraisers for Tibetan freedom-fighters, it was only a
matter of time before Hollywood discovered a way to package Buddhism, and
now the time has come with "Seven Years In Tibet," focusing on the
relationship between Austrian Heinrich Harrer and the young Dalai Lama.
 At least that was the original idea. But with the casting of Brad Pitt as
the controversial Harrer "Seven Years" has become a movie that has a lot
more to do with Pitt's relationship to the audience, as the Dalai Lama,
Tibet and the Chinese occupation are just so much exotic background scenery.
It's not all Pitt's fault: A project like this could never have gotten
backing without a substantial star attached to it, and once you've signed a
major talent you're obligated to use him to get your money's worth.
 And how exactly do you use Pitt? You make sure he has plenty of chances to
flash his blinding smile. You throw in extraneous scenes with a lovely
Tibetan tailor (Lhakpa Tsamchoe) who orders him to strip so that she can
take his measurements. You make sure the lighting crew always surrounds our
man with a soft golden glow that makes his incredibly blond hair glisten.
 What you don't do is ask Pitt to attempt an accent, although he tries
mightily hard to pull one off here. Nor should you ask him to pretend to
look slovenly: Even in the scenes in which Harrer is supposed to look like
he's at death's doorway after struggling through the Himalayas, Pitt's
natural beauty betrays him in the same way Michelle Pfeiffer couldn't
convince anyone she was a plain-Jane in "Frankie & Johnny." (Interestingly,
both "Seven Years" and "Frankie" share the same recurring musical theme,
Debussey's "Clair de Lune.")
 Director Jean-Jacques Annaud's strength is composing gorgeous scenic
vistas---he's best known for movies like "The Bear" and "Quest For
Fire"---so it's hardly a shock that he first half of "Seven Years" is
preoccupied with Harrer's attempt to scale Nanga Parbet, a mountain in the
Himalayas that the Nazis would like Harrer to plant their flag at the summit
of. When that conquest is interrupted by the start of WWII and Harrer and
his partner Peter Aufschnaiter (David Thewlis, another actor with a serious
allergy to accents) are thrown into a prison camp, the story proceeds to
depict their undramatic escape and their flight through Tibet, another
opportunity for Annaud to set up picturesque shots of snow-covered slopes
and rolling green valleys.
 By the start of the film's second hour, the two have sought sanctuary in
the Holy City of Lhasa, home of the Dalai Lama (Jumyang Wangchuk). At this
point, "Seven Years" finally turns into something more than a lush
travelogue: Unfortunately, what it becomes turns out to resemble a
non-musical version of "The King & I," with Harrer educating the Dalai Lama
in the ways of the West and receiving spiritual rejuvenation in return. Most
filmmakers would have seized on this material as a chance to make the
principles of Buddhism accessible to the masses, but Annaud and screenwriter
Becky Johnston seem more interested in oggling the rituals than in trying to
explain their significance. Their view of the Tibetans isn't much more
sophisticated than James Hilton's depiction of the inhabitants of Shangri-La
in "Lost Horizon": They're mostly serene mystics, aside from a scheming
secretary (B.D. Wong) who sells out Tibet to the Chinese invaders.
 "Do you think that someday people will look at Tibet on the movie screen
and wonder what happened to us?" asks the Dalai Lama of Harrer in one of
Johnston's more obvious lines. Thanks to the presence of Pitt, it's not
inconceivable that millions worldwide will indeed flock to "Seven Years" to
learn something about the occupation of Tibet. Unfortunately, this pretty
but shallow primer raises a lot more questions than it can hope to answer.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film".
The Dalai Lama and his people were driven from their homeland by the 
Chinese more than 50 years ago. Over one million Tibetans were killed and 
6000 monasteries were destroyed.  Decades later, the Dalai Lama continues 
to lead in exile, trying to convince the Chinese government to allow his 
people to return home and live in peace and freedom. The story of these 
noble people deserves to be told, and Hollywood has decided that the best 
way to tell it is, of course, through the eyes of a white male movie star.
"Seven Years In Tibet" is the first of two movies about the Dalai Lama 
due this year. This one is loosely based on the memoirs by Heinrich 
Hammer, whose book proved so popular that it has remained constantly in 
print since its debut in 1953. Brad Pitt plays Hammer, a self-absorbed, 
foul-tempered Austrian who deserts his pregnant wife to go to India and 
climb the Himalayas. Hammer was a Nazi, a fact that is noted, but 
downplayed, in the movie. Conquering the Himalayas was an obsession with 
his people, a point of national pride. While recovering from their first 
failed attempt to scale the mountain, war is officially declared and 
Hammer's group is quickly arrested and tossed into a prison camp. There, 
Hammer receives a "Dear John" letter from his wife, who informs him that 
his son will be taught to view her new husband as his father. Between 
escape attempts, Hammer obsesses about his unseen son, composing letters 
to the child and anticipating a life with him after the war. Eventually, 
Hammer escapes with a group of fellow prisoners, ditches them, and heads 
for Tibet, reluctantly accompanied by Peter Aufschnaiter (David Thewlis), 
a member of his original climbing party. 
Entry into Tibet by foreigners was illegal at the time, but the men bluff 
their way in, and end up entering the forbidden city Lhasa, the home of 
the Dalai Lama. The young leader is a curious child, using a telescope to 
peep at events outside his window. He spies Hammer, summons him to his 
home, and finally, the movie kicks into gear.
The portrait of the Dalai Lama and his people are what "Seven Years In 
Tibet" is really about. While Hammer's story is technically the focal 
point, it is the least interesting part of the film and also the most 
predictable. Think about it. The man is a ruthless, aloof Nazi. When his 
heart finally begins to thaw, he fixates on the son he has lost. Then he 
meets the Dalai Lama, a wide-eyed young boy. Any doubt where Hammer's 
story is headed? 
To Brad Pitt's credit, he does all he can with the role. His accent is 
fine, as is his performance. But after the Dalai Lama enters the film, 
Hammer's personal travails fade into the background. His budding 
friendship with the Dalai Lama, however, provides the film's most 
glistening moments. Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk plays the Dalai Lamai for 
most of the film, and he is an exceptional young actor. His eyes light 
with the joy of a child, but when called to address his people, his voice 
resonates with a sense of wisdom that reinforces Tibetan belief that he 
is their reincarnated spiritual leader. There is a great deal of protocol 
involved in dealing with the Dalai Lama, but when the two are alone, 
decorum is discarded as the boy uses Hammer as his window on the world. 
The most engaging parts of the film involve the Dalai Lama's endless 
questions about everything from movies to the legend of Jack The Ripper. 
The interactions between Pitt and Wangchuk are credible and delightful. 
When Mao takes power, one of his first acts is to "reunite" China. The 
Tibetans react by declaring their autonomy and, very respectfully, 
evicting all Chinese officials from their land. When war looms on the 
horizon, we witness the sad spectacle of a peace-loving people preparing 
to do battle. The tragic finale underscores the importance of the Tibetan 
people's valiant ongoing struggle.
At well over two hours, "Seven Years In Tibet" is too long. It takes an 
hour just to get Hammer to Lhasa, and the film would have been more 
effective if they had cut to the chase quicker. Regardless of its 
structural problems, however, the film is stately, beautiful to look at, 
and tells an important story. It's a shame that Hollywood felt compelled 
to tell it through the eyes of a white male movie star, but at least they 
told it.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET ***  Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud. Written by Becky
Johnston, based on the book by Heinrich Harrer. Photography, Robert
Fraisse. Editing, Noelle Boisson. Production design, At Hoang. Music,John
Williams. Cello solos by Yo-Yo Ma.Produced by Annaud, John H. Williams and
Iain Smith. Cast: Brad Pitt (Heinrich Harrer), David Thewlis (Peter
Aufschnaiter), B.D. Wong (Ngawang Jigme), Mako (Kungo Tsarong), Danny
Denzongpa (Regent), Victor Wong (Chinese "Amban"), Ingeborga Dapkunaite
(Ingrid Harrer), Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk (Dalai Lama at 14), Lhakpa
Tsamchoe (Pema Lhaki) and Jetsun Pema (Great Mother). A Tri-Star release.
134 min. PG-13.
Tibet is where James Hilton set his famous, utopian novel "Lost Horizon"
(1933), later a most popular film  (1937) by Frank Capra. A plane carrying
a small group (motley, of course) of westerners crashes in the Himalayas.
The survivors end up in Shangri-La, a paradise in a hidden valley where
calm and wisdom reign, and some people just never age. The term Shangri-La
has entered most languages. Franklin Roosevelt established the presidential
retreat called Shangri-La in 1942. It became Camp David in 1953.
"Seven Years in Tibet" is based on the autobiographical 1953 best-seller by
Heinrich Harrer. The ghost of Shangri-La hovers over much of  the movie,
although this is no fantasy. The most visible symptom is that protagonist
Harrer, who spends 12 years in the region (seven of them in Tibet proper),
doesn't seem to age at all.
Brad Pitt plays Harrer, an Austrian champion alpinist. In the Fall of 1939
he is at the Vienna train station, leaving for the Himalayas, hoping to be
the first to climb Nanga Parbat, one of the highest peaks (26,660 feet ;
Everest rises to 29, 028).  By that time Austria had been annexed by
Hitler's Third Reich, to the great joy of far too many Austrians. This was
the notorious "Anschluss" (Union) that had been preceded in 1934 by
Austrian Nazis murdering the Chancellor, Engelbert Dollfuss.
The Nazis give Harrer a send-off with honors, complete with Nazi flag.
Harrer seems indifferent to the fuss --if not impatient. His marriage is
rocky as his pregnant wife feels abandoned. Heinrich also reacts dourly to
fellow Austrian guide Peter Aufschnaiter (David Thewlis) who may have been
appointed by the regime (but this, like other details, is unclear).
Next comes some spectacular climbing. The two Austrians do not get along
because Heinrich takes too many foolhardy (read also "ego-boosting")
chances and is arrogant. Soon however, in September 1939, Germany and
England are at war. The British intern the climbers in a POW camp.
Over the years, lone wolf Heinrich tries to escape four times. After
joining a group attempt he immediately leaves his companions to make his
way to northern India. Getting very close to Tibet, he runs into Peter. The
Wandering Aryans, ever bickering and antagonistic, trek for about two
years-- the time-frame is imprecise. The twosome are prevented by Tibetans
from entering the country but after more adventures they manage to sneak
into the holy city of Lhasa where they are exempted from the
"no-foreigners" rule.
All this has interest, suspense, unforced colorfulness and spectacular
landscapes. But time and space are so episodic that what we see feels like
excerpts from a 4-hour movie. We're left with many other questions too.
Among them: how did the men survive their horrible hardships in the
mountainous wilderness?  why hadn't their scavenger-type diet not given
them scurvy or vermin given them diseases?  how is it that when they reach
Lhasa, after their first baths and shaves in years, they can look so fresh,
hale and hearty?
The companions find an entirely new mode of life in Tibet, gradually blend
in as much as outsiders could. There is even a flirtation with a handsome
lady-tailor, whom Peter later marries. While the Austrians fit in, the
movie is careful not to indulge in travelogue picturesqueness or get
carried away by the spirituality of the Tibetan religion. Yet the people,
their ways of thinking and their beliefs certainly affect the Austrians.
A major influence on Heinrich will come later from his relationship with
the Dalai Lama, who is first shown as a child, then in various stages of
growth.  When the boy is about 12, his mother (played by the sister of the
real Dalai Lama!) asks Heinrich to tutor him. His Holiness is bright,
witty, enormously curious about Western ways and other matters, and utterly
charming.
In spite of much protocol, the growing friendship between Heinrich and his
pupil leads to warm informality when the two are alone, in what are
arguably the best sections of the movie, especially as these do not veer
into sentimentality. Weighing heavily too is the fact that while Heinrich
was a POW, he had received a letter from his wife, announcing that she had
had his baby, was divorcing him and remarrying. After the European war
ended, Heinrich kept sending letters to his son until the latter replied:
"You are not my father. Please stop writing me letters."
For the steadily mellowing Heinrich, the transition to considering the
young Dalai Lama as a kind of surrogate son was natural, but again this is
not Hollywoodishly underlined. The Austrian teaches his fast-learning
charge a great deal, from geography and English to the West in general.  In
wonderfully mundane touches, he even fixes an old car, an old radio,  and
since his pupil is a film fan and collector, he creates a movie-house for
the public. (I wonder where and how Heinrich acquired all those talents).
World War II comes to an end. The Chinese under Mao want to absorb Tibet.
Theirs is an enormous army, while the Tibetan forces are pathetically
minuscule. The rest is history. China invades, causes one million (if not
more) Tibetan deaths, destroys 6,000 lamaseries. Particularly interesting
is the parallel between the Nazis and the Communists, a connection probably
not lost on Heinrich but not hammered. The war scenes are impressive.
Finally Heinrich returns to Vienna in 1951, where he makes his peace with
his boy.
Throughout, without engaging in depth into character studies, the film
follows the changes in Heinrich. These were true changes, but it is
simplistic to speak of redemption. The script does not confuse the road to
Lhasa with the road to Damascus. The first part's Heinrich is
self-centered, vainglorious, not the most caring of husbands or comrades,
but the film does not make him a brute or a villain. The problem with
Heinrich actually came up after  the movie had been shot, when in the
summer of 1997, the German "Stern Magazine" revealed that he had been a
member of the Nazi Party, of the SA and the SS. This led to a quick
post-production addition. The evolving Heinrich does a brief voice-over of
"mea culpa" : "My bad deeds are purified. I've done so many things I
regret."
That he was in the Nazi party is to be expected. Hardly any major figures
(especially athletes) were not or could get out of being members. The SA/SS
business is far more disturbing, but then it could be argued that it makes
Harrer's transformation all the stronger.
To shoot the picture in Tibet was out of the question. To film in India (as
originally planned) turned out to be impossible for a variety of reasons.
But French director Annaud has tackled difficult, original and demanding
subjects such as the Oscar-winning colonialist satire "Black and White in
Color," the prehistoric "Quest for Fire," "The Bear," "The Lover," "The
Name of the Rose."
For "Seven Years" he and his people had to fake their locations in the
Argentinian Andes, of lower elevation and different nature. They achieved
this splendidly, and in the face of huge logistic problems. Real Tibetans
(and yaks) were imported in great numbers.
The French Vietnamese production designer At Hoang recreated Tibet
painstakingly and convincingly. The stand-in for Nanga Parbat was in
Canada's British Columbia. The film's look is so beautiful that one can
sense the painfulness of the editing process, where so much fine footage
has to be sacrificed, discarded.
Technically ambitious, the movie does not get artificially heavy with the
moral progress of its protagonists yet does sketches it out sufficiently
and tellingly. The Austrians and  especially most Tibetans are shown
without big epic touches but rather with affectionate,  realistic
understanding, There are many humorous bits too. The Tibetans' clapping of
hands does not mean applause but chasing away evil spirits; sticking out
their tongues means "welcome"; building must proceed without harming any
living beings, worms included; and more.
All performances are very good, with the Dalai Lamas, from ages 4 to 14,
stealing the show.  American heartthrob Brad Pit and British actor's actor
David Thewlis play soberly, do not engage in unnecessary theatrics. Their
well-rehearsed Teutonic accents are above-average in quality and
consistency, but they will not fool listeners who have an ear trained in
foreign languages.
About the vanquishing of the Himalayas. The British concentrated on
Everest, the Americans on K2, and the Germans on  Nanga Parbat and
Kanchenjunga. In 1953, Austrian climber Hermann Buhl, of the Austro-German
team led by Karl Maria Herrligkoffer, reached the summit of Nanga Parbat.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As a travelogue of a vast and magical kingdom, SEVEN YEARS IN
TIBET lives up to its billing.  Unfortunately, as a story, it flags
much more often than it inspires.  Although it hits many of the
highlights of recent Tibetan history, the vacuousness of Becky
Johnston's script, based on Heinrich Harrer's autobiographical book,
leaves one strangely unmoved.  In good Hollywood fashion, the movie has
a twin so perhaps the other Tibetan film this year will prove to have
more substance.
     Besides the snow capped Tibetan mountains, viewers have sandy
topped Brad Pitt to stare at.  With a sometimes all too cute Austrian
accent, he delivers as much as can be expected in such an
underdeveloped and overlong production.
     As Austrian mountain climber Heinrich Harrer, Pitt plays a
self-absorbed character who in 1939 leaves his very pregnant wife to
scale a Himalayan mountain.  It was a matter of German pride Heinrich
points out since several climbers had already died in failed attempts
to make it to the summit.  Peter Aufschnaiter, the expedition leader,
grows tired of Heinrich's bravado when it threatens the group's
success.  David Thewlis from BLACK BEAUTY plays Peter with precision
but little emotion.  The genuinely harrowing visuals of their climbs
provide the few completely captivating moments of the film.
     On the way down the mountain, Heinrich and Peter along with the
other members of the expedition are captured by the British and made
prisoners of war.  Heinrich spends the next few years becoming the joke
of the prison camp as he tries again and again to escape but with no
success.  As an apolitical figure, Heinrich is non-plussed.  "I have
nothing to do with your silly war," he tells his captors.  (The recent
revelations that Heinrich was a storm trooper and a member of Hitler's
SS may cause some viewers to flinch at his protests of political
innocence.)
     As Heinrich rots in prison, his wife sends him divorce papers to
sign.  His letters from prison to his son represent the film's escape
from its otherwise prosaic language.  Lyrically poetic, his letters
contain powerful passages.  In one he describes the Himalayas as "a
place rich with all the strange beauty of your nighttime dreams."
     About halfway through the movie, Heinrich and Peter finally escape
and eventually find themselves in the home of the Dalai Lama.  The
Dalai Lama, played as an inquisitive teenager by Jamyang Wang Chuck,
thinks Heinrich is really cool and pumps him for info about topics
ranging from Molotov cocktails to Jack the Ripper.  These excessively
cute scenes dominate the story's latter half, and the almost total
destruction of Tibet seems, in contrast, almost tacked on as an
afterthought.
     Except for the mountain climbing sequences, French Director
Jean-Jacques Annaud (THE BEAR) has as much trouble with the action
sequences as the more intimate moments.  The film's few minutes of war
footage are filmed by Robert Fraisse in a blur with the rapid pans of a
purposely shaky, handheld camera.  The effect of this choreography
leaves the audience more confused than moved.
     Most movies have a part where suspension of disbelief is
essential.  Here it comes when the only beautiful woman in the city
chooses the homely Thewlis over the body beautiful Pitt.
     The story is not without its humor as when the workers stop
construction of the Dalai Lama's movie palace.  A perplexed Heinrich,
who is in charge of the project, finds out the reason.  The workers
have discovered worms in the soil that might be killed by the digging.
"In a past life this worm could have been your mother," the worker
explains.
     "Your shame will be your torture, and your torture will be your
life," Heinrich tells a Tibetan traitor.  "I wish it long."  The film's
epic length is the audience's torture.  One gentlemen in ours snored
loudly in a soporific protest of the film's languid pace.
     The show has no ending.  In the last twenty minutes it winds down
slowly like a tape player with a dying battery.
     "Do you think someday people will get Tibet on their movie screens
and wonder what happened to us?" asks the Dalai Lama at one point in
the story.  It was a sadly prophetic question that hopefully the other
Tibetan film this year will be able to address much better than this
mediocre one.
     SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET runs 2:19.  It is rated PG-13 for war
violence and mature themes.  The film would fine for kids nine and up,
but will probably bore those under 13.  I loved the film's grandeur,
but found the text too insubstantial to be able to recommend the
picture.  I give the film ** for the picturesque images.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
It doesn't really bother me when films take poetic license with true
stories and twist them somewhat to fit the needs of entertainment.
'Amadeus', 'Mississippi Burning', 'Nixon' and other films have tinkered
somewhat with history but still were great films made by talented
people.  'Seven Years in Tibet' probably would have made a better
foreign language film but it still receives a passing grade for its
story of bonding and bringing together two alien cultures that shows the
world can be made a better place through understanding at a time when
the world was on the brink of its darkest time in history.
Brad Pitt does well in an 'accent' role as Austrian mountain climber
Heinrich Harrer who meets the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of
Tibet.  Director Jean-Jacques Annaud ('Quest for Fire', 'The Name of the
Rose', 'The Lover', 'The Bear') is a director of extremely withdrawn
proportions.  His films are cold and devalue the underlying point of
emotion but he finds a niche for this film and makes it pay off well but
the film is no classic.  It's well made and is more of a "memorable
scene here and there" type of movie.  In Vienna, 1939, Heinrich Harrer
is about to embark on the Himalayan peak of Nanga Parbat.  He and his
team are taken prisoner by the British (World War II has just broken
out) and Pitt later escapes and comes in contact with the Dalai Lama.
Unfortunately, the way the movie introduces us to Harrer and his
capture, occupies the first half of the film when something like this
could have been told in about 40 minutes.
Harrer begins to tell the Dalai Lama (Jamyang Wangchuk) about his
world.  The young man is fascinated by it all and wants to understand as
much of it as he can.  The film is written by Becky Johnston based on
the book by Heinrich Harre and the film's most outstanding trait is the
cinematography by Robert Fraisse.
I don't know how Hollywood manages to do it and many times make it a
success, but they always put many films on a collision course with each
other.  In 1984 we had the three "save the farm movies" --- 'Country',
'The River' and 'Places in the Heart' right up to 1997 where we had two
erupting volcano movies like 'Dante's Peak' and 'Volcano' to 1998 with
two giant meteor movies like 'Deep Impact' and 'Armageddon'.  Martin
Scorsese's 'Kundun', also released in 1997 with 'Seven Years in Tibet'
is a much better film about the Dalai Lama in terms of technical
aspects.  In fairness, because the Dalai Lama was in many ways a
character in history that was hard in getting to know, both films about
him in 1997 tried but came up just short of capturing more than just the
superficial side of the man.  Perhaps that's a good thing as many films
are better left to the imagination when you leave the theatre or pop the
cassette out of your VCR.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
For browsers without java enhancement or if you experience problems with
the above link, go to:
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/mainpage.htm

Author
Steve Kong
I'll start out by saying Seven Years in Tibet is one of the best looking
films of this year. Seven Years in Tibet and the recent The Matchmaker
(starring Janeane Garafalo) are on the top of my list as great looking
films of 1997. Cinematographer, Robert Fraisse, should be noted for the
beautifully shot Seven Years in Tibet.
Seven Years in Tibet is based on the autobiographical book by the same
name, written by Heinrich Herrer. Though the previews seem to give the
sense that the movie follows the friendship between Herrer and the Dalai
Lama, that only happens during the last half of the film. As the film
starts we learn that, the Austrian, Herrer (Brad Pitt) is invited by the
Nazi government to be part of an expedition to climb the Nanga Parbat, one
of the tallest mountains in the Himalayas. With his leaving for the
expedition he leaves behind his pregnant wife. Herrer befriends the leader
of the expedition, Peter Aufschnaiter (David Thewlis), the friendship is
built through their many hardships together.
The expedition comes to a halt and the team goes back down the mountain to
find that they are being detained as prisoners of war. Herrer tries many
times to escape the prison, but is unsuccessful. He finally escapes with
the help of Aufschnaiter and they trek through the mountains of India to
arrive at the Tibetan holy city Lhasa. The residents quickly accept them,
which is not an easy thing because foreigners at the time were looked upon
badly. It is here that Herrer befriends the Dalai Lama who is portrayed by
newcomer Jamyang Wangchuk.
The best performance in Seven Years is by the newcomer Jamyang Wangchuk.
His performance as the Dalai Lama is absolutely excellent. Pitt does not
fare so well though. He doesn't do badly in the film, but his performance
was mediocre at best. One big flaw was his disappearing and reappearing
accent. Thewlis does well as Aufschnaiter; the last time I saw Thewlis was
in Dragon Heart where he portrayed a wimpy prince.
Worth mentioning is the score by John Williams. Though not one of his
stronger scores, it is a good score to the film. Also worth mentioning are
the beautiful set design by At Hoang and costume design by Enrico Sabatini.
 But, again, the biggest thing going for Seven Years is the cinematography
by Fraisse.
The movie does run a bit long; the analogy that I would put for the film is
"a long long drive through a beautiful place." Director Jean-Jacques Annaud
and screenwriter Becky Johnson seem to add the last quarter of the film to
lengthen it a bit, which, though very informative about what the Chinese
did to the Tibetans, causes the audience to lose focus on the story of
Herrer. The film is a redemption story about Herrer, who starts out as an
arrogant self-righteous man, but in the end learns his wrongs and changes.
Seven Years in Tibet is a long film that is entertaining and informative. I
enjoyed the cinematography the most in this film. Jamyang Wangchuk is the
real star of the film and this film should be seen for his performance. 

Author
Ben Hoffman
At the time the movie was being made, the filmmakers were unaware
that Heinrich Harrer, had been a member of the Nazi Party; in 1933
he joined the SA (Sturmabtelung) and then the SS (Schutzstaffel) in
1938.   This was revealed  by STERN Magazine after principal
photography had been completed.   When the film- makers learned the
news they added some voice-overs mentioning Harrer's  Nazi
connection.
Harrer (Brad Pitt) was a famous mountain climber.    When asked
about his Nazi association, he claimed that it was to enable him to
have more freedom to travel and engage in mountaineering.   For the
movie's sake, let us assume that it is true.  From what the film
tells of his character, it is likely that what he said is true.
It is known that Harrer was interested only in himself and in any
glory that would accrue to him from his expeditions.   In fact, he
left his wife who was in the last months of pregnancy, giving us a
good idea of how self-centered he was.   As the film opens, he and a
fellow-Austrian,  Peter  Aufschnaiter (David Thewlis) are leaving
Austria to set out to climb one of the highest peaks in the
Himalayas, Nanga Parbat.
When WWII breaks out, he and Peter are captured by the British and
put in a prisoner of war camp from which they later escape.   After
two years of impossible trekking in snowy mountains and through
India they arrive in a land that is very strange to them: Tibet.
This was a time of much trouble in Tibet, their ongoing rebellion
against China's rule.   The filming site was actually in the Andes,
in the Chile-Argentine borders where there were lots of mountains
and snow, both very much needed.
The film shows the change that takes place in Harrer when he meets
the young Dalai Lama whom he teaches about the Western world.  At
this time the Dalai Lama was a mere 14-years-old.  As he grew to
adulthood, he and Harrer, according to Harrer's book on which the
film is based, became fast friends until the present.   By film's
end, Harrer is a changed person from what he was when he left
Austria and his wife.
The crawl at film's end tells us that China, determined not to let
Tibet secede, was responsible for the death of a million Tibetans
as well as for the destruction of many thousands of monasteries.
Little wonder that China has banned the film from being shown in
China.
Beautifully filmed and acted, this is a superb movie.  In addition,
the photography is awe inspiring in its breath.    And bringing the
camera down to earth we are shown the beautiful Tibetan people
lovingly photographed by Robert Fraisse.
Brad Pitt, with a great Austrian accent does a magnificent job as
does David Thewlis. Others, in supporting roles, are B D Wong, Mako,
Danny Denzongpa, Victor Wong. Ingeborga Dapkunaite, Jamyang Jamtsho
Wangchuk, Lhakpa Tsamchoe and Jetsun Pema.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, Jamyang Wangchuk, Lhakpa Tsamchoe, B.D.
Wong, Mako, Danny Denzongpa, Victor Wong, Ingeborga Dapkunaite Director:
Jean-Jacques Annaud Screenplay: Becky Johnson based on the novel by
Heinrich Harrer
In that distant far off 全hangri-La' known as Lhasa,
Lived a monk with a music box known as the Dalai Lama.
He carried a love for worms and picture theatres,
And a thirst for knowledge about how the world works around us.
>From the midst of troubled Europe on the brink of worldly war,
Journeyed a fair hair adventurer with wife and child unwanted.
Escaping the strife of Nazi patriotism, angry and bitter,
Come to conquer a Himalayan mountain with virgin snow uncharted.
An Avalanche stops this most noteworthy climb,
And flings the man into a British prison bind.
Escape he does to roam the winter wild,
Short on food, with scarcely little water.
With frost bitten feet and bruised from bandit bashings,
This lost soul somehow finds his way to 全hangri-La'.
Starved and hungered,
Made to feed on the scraps of dogs,
Pity falls on those in greatest need.
Favour finds its way to the highest seat,
With shelter and clothes made to fit this European man in deed.
Love finds its way in the strangest place,
Whether tinker, tailor, soldier, spy,
I think love falls on the one with the prettiest eyes.
Behold two men in love and only one object of affection,
Methinks the winner is not the one with the fairest complexion.
Friendship grows from the roughest ground,
This young man shunned once to often in love,
Finds a friend in the young Dalai of Lamas.
So from this strange company of men,
One finds healing and the other information.
So I wish this tale could have a happy end,
But alas the Opera continues as China forces Tibet to be her concubine.
So methinks it's time for a formal separation,
But I think I had better leave this issue in the hands of the United
Nations.

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET is great, in both senses of the
word. Much of the movie takes place in the Himalayas; the setting and
the cinematography are spectacular. Even those who dislike this movie
must admit that. 
But not all of SEVEN YEARS takes place on a mountain. Most of the movie
follows Heinrich Harrer (Brad Pitt) in his dealings with other people.
In fact, if this epic movie has one center, it is Harrer, and on those
terms, this movie is excellent. 
Some critics have complained that there's "too much Brad Pitt, not
enough Dalai Lama." Others criticize the Western condescension of
Eastern culture. The latter comment is a valid complaint, and it is
perhaps the reason this movie doesn't deserve four stars. The former,
though, fails to take the movie on its own terms. This movie tells the
story Heinrich Harrer's life and emotional growth. In that life, the
Dalai Lama is a supporting character. 
The movie opens with "Harry" leaving his pregnant wife in Austria and
setting off to climb Nanga Parbet, a mountain in the Himalayas that his
country has presumptuously adopted as its own. His wife begs him to stay
but, annoyed, he coldly rejects her. At the station, official German
well-wishers are excited for Harry's attempt on Nanga Parbet, and they
give him a Nazi flag to plant on its summit. Coldly, again, he takes
their flag, and it is never seen again. His reasons for leaving Austria
are purely selfish. Neither fatherhood nor fatherland matters to him. 
On their first attempt on Nanga Parbet, Harry's party is beaten by the
weather and has to turn around. They get down to the camp and find
themselves prisoners of war. War has broken out between Britain and
Germany - and by association, India and Austria. 
Harry doesn't take to prison well, and makes several escape attempts
(reminiscent of Steve "The Cooler King" McQueen's role in THE GREAT
ESCAPE). A bitter but resigned "Dear John" letter from his wife, and his
comrades' enthusiasm, inspire one last bold escape attempt. Most of the
prisoners do escape, and most of them are recaptured, but not Harry and
Peter Aufschneiter (David Thewlis). 
The pair make their way out of the unfriendly territory of India and
into neigboring Tibet, but they find they are no more welcome here than
they were in India. They decide to stick together in spite of the
friction between them, and they spend quite a while wandering through
the Himalayas - long enough for them to grow long beards and dark,
leathery suntans. 
Since his wife gave up on him and the world is at war, Harry now has no
reason to go home. In fact, his life has very little purpose at all.
Wandering the beautiful land and encountering its spiritual people, he
begins to fill this void in his life with the Himalayas. 
The movie tells us that Tibetans walk long journeys to pray at distant
altars to atone for past wrongdoings. The longer the walk, the greater
the atonement. It is clear that, deliberate or not, the walking is
clearing Harry's head and his spirit. Harry is beginning to understand
his flaws and internally atone for them. 
But atoning for past sins is only part of Harry's epic journey. Changing
the current and future man is the other half.  
Eventually, driven toward the protection of civilization by bandits,
Harry and Peter find themselves in a caravan entering the forbidden city
of Lhasa, Tibet, where Westerners are not allowed. Once inside, Harry is
caught stealing something to eat (from a dog, no less), but the dog's
owner is kind and invites them to stay. A little influence with the
local politicaians, and Harry and Peter are welcomed into Tibetan
society. 
Harry is invited to an audience with the Dalai Lama (played by three
actors, though mostly by Jamyang Wang Chuck), a young boy who has a
sinful appetite for news and facts from the outside world. Harry handles
the formality of speaking to a Dalai Lama awkwardly, but the boy takes
to him and invites him to become a tutor, of sorts. 
This is where critics complain about Western condescension of Tibetan
culture. It IS presumptuous to take the customs of a different culture
lightly. And it's not just Pitt's character that presumes - Annaud
himself is guilty. He includes a scene, played up for comedy, of
Tibetans treating earthworms very reverently. Ha ha! Those silly
Tibetans! 
Harry has atoned for his past failures, but he still has room for
emotional growth. For example, when his best friend gets married, he
resents their happiness; he is jealous. The last third of the movie
shows Harry teaching the young Dalai Lama and immersing himself in work.
These responsibilities help him grow and genuinely change for the
better. 
I admit I am not a very good judge of acting. And because so many people
talk of Brad Pitt as a filmic object, it's hard to decide if what's
effective is his presence or his performance. Either way, I found his
portrayal of Henry to be very effective; his character genuinely grew
from beginning to end. The change was subtle, but it was there. (And,
hey, he managed to keep his accent all the way through.) 
The other performance that really stood out (for me) was that of Jamyang
Wang Chuck as the 14-year-old Dalai Lama, whose innocence, curiosity,
and wisdom were not marred by bad-child-actor syndrome. 
But maybe the best thing about SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET is the spectacular
setting and cinematography. Even if that were all this movie had in its
favor, it might deserve a recommendation. Luckily, there is more than
just pretty pictures, and this movie is well recommended, but be
prepared to forgive it its Western perspective.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     For millennia Tibet has been protected from intrusion by the
tallest guards in the world, the Himalayan Mountains.  There in the 7th
Century A.D. a culture all but unremembered first mixed with Chinese
culture. Until relatively recent history it was a culture that was so
isolated that it could go its own way and not be very much influenced
by any other culture in the world.  SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET tells the true
story of two Austrian climbers who happened to be in Tibet during its
years of fastest change, probably the only Europeans in the country at
the time.
     In Austria of 1939 lives Heinrich Harrer (played by Brad Pitt), a
world-renowned Olympic athlete, a member of the Nazi Party as a matter
of style, and a totally selfish boy-man.  He abandons his pregnant
wife--who is nearly due to give birth--over her objection and he goes
on a four-month climbing expedition in the Himalayas.  His first shock
is to discover that the expedition will be led by an awkward-looking
climber, Peter Aufschnaiter (David Thewlis).
     Harrer determines to undermine the ungainly man's authority and to
make himself the star of the expedition for the press.  His little
battle only gets him into trouble, first of the sides of the mountain
to be climbed, then when war breaks out in Europe the troop of climbers
are captured by the British in India and imprisoned in a POW camp.
Harrer fights a two-front war against the British imprisoning him and
against Aufschnaiter's authority.  Eventually Harrer and Aufschnaiter
escape from the camp, lead the British a chase through India, and flee
across the border into Tibet, a country officially closed to
foreigners.  The two lie their way into the capital city of Lhasa, a
beautiful mountainside city forbidden to any non-Tibetans.  After some
time there dealing with the bureaucracy of monks, Harrer is given
counsel with the Dalai Lama.  The great lama, still a young boy, finds
he likes the brash German.  Harrer becomes a friend, confidant, and
teacher to the boy.  The warm relationship between the two forms the
core of the film.  But their relationship is cut off when the country
is virtually stolen by invading Chinese Communist troops.
     There has been discussion on whether this was a good role for Brad
Pitt or not.  As the supercilious Heinrich who finds his humanity by
loving Tibet, Pitt was fairly believable.  I had the feeling that if I
had never seen him before I would not have thought twice about whether
this part was right for him.  In fact associations with previous films
were about the only thing that got in the way of the credibility of the
story. We have people like Victor Wong of THE JOY LUCK CLUB and BIG
TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA; Mako of CONAN THE BARBARIAN; and B. D. Wong,
whom we saw around the incubator in JURASSIC PARK and flitting around
in FATHER OF THE BRIDE.  It almost makes the film seem less Asian to
see these actors present.  David Thewlis has turned in one good
performance after another over the last four years since he stood out
in Mike Leigh's NAKED.  The Dalai Lama, played by three boys of varying
age, seems not so much a font of wisdom as an unending source of simple
straightforward curiosity, mostly about Western culture.  Jetsun Pema,
who plays the Dalai Lama's mother is in reality the Dalai Lama's
sister.  The film is directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud, who directed THE
NAME OF THE ROSE and THE BEAR.  As with the former, the setting is main
attraction of the film.
     One disappoint of the film is that the actual time covered in
Tibet is shortened by a long introductory section.  The screenplay by
Becky Johnston spends nearly half of the film just getting Harrer and
Aufschnaiter to Lhasa so that the story from that point forward seems
rushed.  Most of the adventure, however, is in the first hour, with
some harrowing scenes of mountain climbing.  The stories of escapes,
bound by the truth, seem almost cliched.  John Williams spices the
score with eerie Tibetan music.  I rate the film a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET
(Tri-Star)
Starring:  Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, B. D. Wong, Jamyang Wangchuk.
Screenplay:  Becky Johnston, based on the memoir by Heinrich Harrer.
Producers:  Jean-Jacques Annaud, John H. Williams and Iain Smith.
Director:  Jean-Jacques Annaud.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, violence, profanity)
Running Time:  137 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     If you accept Hollywood's version of things, history -- particularly
the uglier parts of history -- is what happens while white people are
watching.  It's not terribly surprising, since studios generally balk at
anything remotely depressing; fears can be allayed if an established
Anglo actor anchors such projects.  So we end up with revolution in South
America through the eyes of James Woods in SALVADOR, the plight of Native
Americans as seen by Kevin Costner in DANCES WITH WOLVES, upheaval in
Burma as it affects Patricia Arquette in BEYOND RANGOON...not one of them
a terrible film, but each one compromised by the sense that we couldn't be
trusted to identify with a dark face.  In fact, these stories aren't even
about the culture involved.  They're "the story of one man's/woman's
awakening set against the backdrop of..."
     ...in this case, Tibet.  SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET is the story of
Heinrich Harrer (Brad Pitt), an arrogant Austrian mountaineer who leaves
his preganat wife at home on the eve of World War II to scale the
Himalayan peak of Nanga Parbat.  Unfortunately, the expedition meets an
abrupt end when the climbers are taken as prisoners of war by the British
when war is officially declared.  Eventually Heinrich escapes along with
fellow Austrian Peter Aufschneiter (David Thewlis), and the two men try to
make their way from India through Tibet to Axis-friendly China.  In Tibet
they find an isolated, alien culture which only gradually comes to accept
them.  Particularly accepting is the 14-year-old Dalai Lama himself
(Jamyang Wangchuk), who becomes fascinated with Heinrich's knowledge of
the outside world and makes him a trusted advisor.  Heinrich, in turn,
becomes devoted to the young spiritual leader, joining the Tibetan people
in facing the threat which comes after the Communist victory in China.
     There is a lot to like about individual moments, technical skill and
overall atmosphere in SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET.  An early mountain-climbing
sequence is tense and restrained, the location photography is spectacular,
and the performances of Thewlis and Wangchuk (enchanting as the wise yet
playful Dalai Lama) are solid and appealing.  The relationship between
Heinrich and the Dalai Lama is the most effective element in the film,
smartly rendered by Becky Johnston's script.  It takes a while for SEVEN
YEARS to reach that relationship, but it's well-developed once it becomes
the film's focus.
     It's often hard to see that focus, however, because SEVEN YEARS IN
TIBET is an epic which feels like it's rushing frantically from place to
place.  There's a lot of ground to cover in Harrer's story, probably more
than 135 minutes can cover, but that's all we get.  The Nanga Parbat
expedition abruptly crashes into the POW camp sequences, which crash into
a montage of wandering through the mountains, which collides with a
capture by bandits, which trickles into the first arrival in Lhasa.
Months pass in the space between voice-overs, leaving gaps in the
development of the story's force.  Rather than finding the solid narrative
through-line and sticking with it, the script hunts and pecks for dramatic
events over a decade of time.
     Of course, SEVEN YEARS' narrative through-line is the emotional and
spiritual growth of Harrer, so it's hard to say whether that would have
been an improvement.  It's not that Pitt does a bad job as Harrer, though
his Austrian accent wanders from here to there.  In fact, he does a fine
job of making Harrer more than just a cocky rascal; he's thoroughly
self-absorbed to the point of needing a good spanking.  But Pitt could
give the performance of a lifetime, and we'd still be left with a film
which doesn't seem to have its priorities straight.  It's true that even a
sweeping story needs a protagonist to give broad-scale suffering a human
face, but that face doesn't have to be topped by a head of blond hair. 
If SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET had not attempted to be more than the biography of
an interesting man, I might have enjoyed it much more.  Instead, its
attempts to be a "message" film end up delivering the wrong messages. 
While the Chinese conquest of Tibet warrants about five minutes of screen
time in SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET, Harrer's project building a movie theater
for the Dalai Lama gets twice that.  It's ironic, in a way:  even within
the film, the media of the West threaten to overwhelm another culture.

Author
Jamie Peck
TriStar / 2:11 / 1997 / PG-13 (brief language, scenes of violence)
Cast: Brad Pitt; David Thewlis; B.D. Wong; Mako; Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk; 
Lhakpa Tsamchoe
Director: Jean-Jacques Annaud 
Screenplay: Becky Johnston 
"Seven Years in Tibet" is a very long movie that centers around the Dalai 
Lama, but Richard Gere shouldn't be the only person happy as they exit the 
theater. This surprisingly strong, beautifully shot adaptation of Austrian 
mountaineer Heinrich Harrer's autobiographical exploits in the Far East is far 
better than what it looks like -- a ponderously dull starring vehicle for Brad 
Pitt (who plays Harrer). At first, "Seven Years in Tibet" is about as 
spiritual as Pitt's nifty bleached-blonde locks, but after a bumpy start, 
things really do move to a higher plain. 
"Seven Years in Tibet" picks up Harrer's tale in 1939, when he vainly leaves 
his pregnant wife behind and sets off with companion Peter Aufschnaiter (David 
Thewlis) to climb Nanga Parbat, one of the highest mountains in the Himalayas. 
After an ugly run in with British officers, Harrer and Aufschnaiter become 
prisoners of war, and it is there where the former receives a Dear John from 
his spouse. The letter informs Harrer that she has taken up with another man 
and the son she has given birth to will look upon him as a father. 
Harrer and Aufschnaiter eventually escape and talk their way into Lhasa, 
Tibet, the holy city where the Dalai Lama (Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk) resides. 
The 14-year-old Dalai Lama is an inquisitive young boy who spies Harrer from a 
distance and immediately recruits the foreigner to tell him about such 
subjects as Jack the Ripper, elevators and cocktails. The two form a bond that 
parallels Harrer's non-existent relationship with his own child and carries 
over into turmoil when the Chinese army invades Tibet. 
Before production was completed, a German magazine revealed that Harrer had 
Nazi ties, and a couple of lines were added relating to this fact. There's 
been a fuss as of recent that "Seven Years in Tibet" is too sanitary a 
portrait, but the film succeeds at detailing his own transformation of the 
heart and purification of the mind, regardless of whether or not it's true. 
The filmmakers' responsibility lies with making a good film, not sticking to 
every single fact. And Pitt is pretty earnest in the role. Dealing with a 
shaky Austrian accent, he appears a bit brittle in the first couple of scenes, 
but it's a testament to his likability that he fast grows on you. The setup to 
Harrer's plight is a little funky as well, but Pitt and the story seem to find 
and compliment each other quick. 
The core of Harrer's journey from selfishness to selflessness is in his tie 
with the Dalai Lama, and the numerous sequences detailing this are strong and 
distinguished. Pitt and Wangchuk, a fine young actor making a stellar film 
debut, have wonderful chemistry, and the actors' on-screen connection glows 
with more magnetism than most movies use in their depiction of married 
couples. When a pre-closing credits epilogue tells us that the two men are 
still friends to this day, it's not a surprise -- their relationship is 
portrayed with enough powerful realism that you expect it to last for a very 
long time. 
Even if "Seven Years in Tibet" had botched its story, it still would be a 
technical marvel. Director Jean-Jacques Annaud presents some incredible 
sights, and the spectacular scenery practically becomes a character in its own 
right. Occupying the breathtaking views is a robust supporting cast that 
includes those with experienced class (Thewlis and Mako) to those fresh and 
flawless (gorgeous Lhakpa Tsamchoe, as the object of Harrer and Aufschnaiter's 
competing affection). John Williams' score is exotic and Enrico Sabbatini's 
costumes are wondrous. At almost two-and-a-quarter hours, a lesser "Seven 
Years in Tibet" could have felt like seven years in the movie theater. But 
thankfully, it's not and it doesn't. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, Jamyang Wangchuk, Lhakpa Tsamchoe, 
      B.D. Wong, Mako, Danny Denzongpa, Victor Wong, 
      Ingeborga Dapkunaite
Director: Jean-Jacques Annaud
Producers: Jean-Jacques Annaud, John H. Williams, Iain Smith
Screenplay: Becky Johnson based on the novel by Heinrich Harrer
Cinematography: Robert Fraisse
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Hollywood has a habit of producing multiple films about the same 
topic in a short span of time.  The tale of the Dalai Lama is the latest 
example of this, following in the wake of such recent double-dip 
subjects as Christopher Columbus (CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS: THE DISCOVERY, 
1492: CONQUEST OF PARADISE), Wyatt Earp (TOMBSTONE, WYATT EARP), 
volcanic disasters (DANTE'S PEAK, VOLCANO), and Prefontaine (PREFONTAINE 
and the soon-to-be-released PRE).  So SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET, Jean-Jacques 
Annaud's adaptation of Heinrich Harrer's 1953 autobiographical work, 
isn't the only 1997 film to cash in on the new wave of Buddhism.  Martin 
Scorsese's KUNDUN, a look at the life of the Dalai Lama before he went 
into exile, is due out on Christmas day.  Both films have significant 
historical and thematic overlaps.
     The focus of SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET isn't the spiritual leader of 
Tibet, but the Austrian who would become his tutor and friend.  In 1939, 
Heinrich Harrer (Brad Pitt) is a Nazi golden boy.  An Olympic medalist 
and mountain climbing champion, Harrer is invited to be a part of a 
German expedition to the top of Nanga Parbat, one of the tallest 
mountains in the Himalayas.  The summit is never attained, however, 
because the group's leader, Peter Aufschnaiter (David Thewlis) calls a 
halt after a close call with an avalanche.  When the climbers return to 
their camp at the mountain's base, they are arrested by British soldiers 
and interred in a prisoner of war camp.  
     After numerous unsuccessful escape attempts, Harrer finally gets 
out, and, along with Aufschnaiter, makes his way through the mountains 
of India into Tibet, the highest country in the world.  Eventually, 
after a difficult trek, the two men enter Lhasa, the Tibetan holy city, 
where they are accepted as pilgrims who have achieved a great feat by 
completing such a journey.  There, they vie for the affection of an 
comely tailor (Lhakpa Tsamchoe) and Harrer attracts the attention of the 
11-year old Dalai Lama (Jamyang Wangchuk).  Soon, Harrer has not only 
met Tibet's young spiritual leader, but is spending hours a day with 
him, teaching him geography, English, and what the West is like.
     Those expecting a heavy dose of Buddhist mysticism may be 
disappointed by SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET, which keeps its religious elements 
low-key.  This is essentially the story of Harrer's redemption, and, 
until the film's final quarter, Annaud keeps the proceedings centered on 
him.  In fact, it's during SEVEN YEARS' last act, which depicts China's 
ruthless submission of Tibet during the 1950s, that the film's focus 
wavers.  This attempt to broaden the movie's scope detracts from its 
primary story.  The extra scenes serve only to divert our attention from 
Harrer and prolong a movie that would have been more enjoyable with some 
additional pruning.
     SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET also tries a little too hard to underscore 
Harrer's transformation by overemphasizing his negative traits at the 
beginning.  When SEVEN YEARS opens, he's a selfish prig who abandons his 
pregnant wife to go on the Nanga Parbat expedition.  During the climb, 
he endangers the others by concealing an injury.  And, all the while, he 
shows the arrogance of someone who believes himself to be infallible and 
who practices blaming others rather than examining his own culpability.  
However, by the closing scene, he's a virtual saint.  Of course, the end 
points of a spiritual journey matter less than the actual trek.  So, 
although Harrer starts out the movie as a cliche, his character is 
permitted enough growth to allow him to become progressively more human 
as the story advances.  
     SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET is at its strongest during those sequences 
when Harrer is crossing the Himalayas, adapting to Tibetan society, and 
forging a friendship with his surrogate son, the Dalai Lama.  The latter 
scenes are especially effective, due in large part to a remarkable 
performance by Jamyang Wangchuk, whose fine acting makes it possible to 
believe that this boy, with all the natural curiosity of someone his 
age, has access to the wisdom of ages.  Next to Wangchuk, Pitt comes 
across as rather pedestrian -- his portrayal isn't exactly uninspired, 
but it's nothing special, and his inconsistent accent is a source of 
irritation.  Of the other actors, only Lhakpa Tsamchoe manages to forge 
an impression.  David Thewlis, who has been on a downhill slide since 
NAKED, is even more unremarkable than Pitt.
     Nevertheless, although he may not have the strongest leads, Annaud 
compensates for the deficiency with stunning photography.  
Cinematographer Robert Fraisse has used the glorious mountainscapes to 
their best effect, almost always affording the viewer with the 
opportunity to see something spectacular, such as a scene where two 
climbers are ascending a mountainside while silhouetted against a 
glorious sunset.  It's a little ironic that, because of Asian politics, 
Annaud couldn't do any filming in the Himalayas, and was forced to use 
the South American Andes as stand-ins.  
     Ultimately, however, Annaud's desire to create an epic tale 
actually harms the production, since it results in unnecessary scenes 
that pad the running length to more than two hours.  The best moments in 
SEVEN YEARS are the quiet, intimate ones, and while there's some 
enjoyment to be gained from the more adventurous sequences, they pale in 
comparison to the interaction between Harrer and the Dalai Lama.  Those 
are the times when SEVEN YEARS is at its best; I just wish there had 
been a few more of them.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Aaron Price
Seven Years In Tibet is a simple movie about a complicated topic. It
is a Hollywood version of a story about a narcicistic mountain climber who
finds peace through a friendship with the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader
of Tibet. 
Brad Pitt stars as Heinrich Harrer, a famous German mountain climber
who visits the Himilayas to conquer a peak as part of Germany's late
1930's propaganda machine. Along the trip he is captured by the English
and interned in a prison camp in India.  While the conditions are not too
bad in the camp, he escapes and wanders the Himalayas for a couple of
years before stumbling into the capital of Tibet. 
It is here, in this city normally cut off from all foreigners, that
he befriends the Dalai Lama as a child and teaches him western ways. It is
a typical post-colonial fairy tale about what western society has to offer
the rest of the world:  cars and movie stars (literally). 
This film tries very hard to be epic in scope. It also tries very
hard to paint a sympathetic portrait of the Tibetans as they are crushed
by Chinese invaders. Finally, it tries very hard to show the turmoil
inside a man as he discovers that spirituality means more than worshipping
his body as a temple. 
It unfortunately fails in every attempt. 
 What we get is superb movie-of-the-week material full of Hollywood
cliche's, stereotypes, and feel good endings that resolve nothing of the
matter at hand. What little glimpse we get into the culture of Tibet is
relegated mainly to the typical jokes about a backwards people's first
glimpse at technology. (When they see their first movie all they can do is
stand around and make shadow puppets.) The spirituality of the Dalai Lama
is constrined to a couple of poor analogies bestowed upon Himmler and a
tendancy of the people to be charitable. 
The dialog is simple and uncluttered. There is no attempt to make the
movie great nor action packed. The sole battle scene in the movie is
heavily edited with special effects and fails in its attempt to bring out
emotion in the viewer. The score to the film is self-conscious and
frequently overburdens the imagery with a melodramatic feel and pace the
film cannot keep up with. 
What we end up with is a 2 hour long short story. Which is sad
considering the possibilities behind the ture story and the book this film
was based on.  Interestingly left out of the film is the fact that our
hero was a longstanding member of both the Nazi party and the SS while in
Germany. Yet this film even has a scene where Harrer rejects his German
citizenship to a fellow officer and rather claims "I'm not German, I'm
Austrian." So much for a true story. 
Brad Pitt should get some credit for playing his character
unsympathetically. He offers no excuses for his actions and plays the
egomaniac well.  Unfortunately for him the writing and direction does not
give us time to get to know him well enough to care nor even to get a
glimpse inside of this man in supposedly in pain. There is a single moving
scene in the film where Harrer realizes his brazen efforts at winning a
female have failed.  This side plot carried more truth and interest in it
than the rest of the 139 minute film.
David Thewlis, who was superb in the otherwise horrid cult-hit
Naked, has a demanding screen presense in his secondary role. He does well
to combat Pitt's star quality and is perfect in doing what a sidekick
should do in a movie without a real antagonist, give the star someone to
play against. 
Overall we have a film that either gave up halfway through shooting,
or never aspired to be better than average. It is a textbook walk through
a time in a man's life that is not profound nor realistic. The true
stories here, about a man changing and a culture collapsing, are simply
vehicles to get us to an ending. 
The ultimate fault for this lies in the writing. This is a well
meaning film created as a Hollywood story book. Such topics as this
deserve a more thoughtful and careful examination rather than a once over
with a 35 millimeter camera and a box of words. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
SEVEN YEARS IN TIBET
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 TriStar Pictures/Mandalay Entertainment
 Director:  Jean-Jacques Annaud
 Writer:  Becky Johnston
 Cast: Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, B.D. Wong, Mako, Danny
Denzongpa, Victor Wong, Ingeborga Dapkunaite, Jamyang
Jamtsho Wangchuk, Lhakpa Tsamchoe, Jetsun Pema 
   They say that travel broadens the mind, but sometimes you
wonder.  If you go on those if-it's-Tuesday-this-must-be-
Belgium tours, the only thing you'll broaden is your waistline. 
Perhaps we should distinguish between travel and tourism. 
The tourist visits places for status, for a pleasant change of
scenery, and for picking up souvenirs, rugs, and clothing that
he could get more cheaply at home. The traveler's motives,
by contrast, would include a genuine interest in a culture other
than his own and perhaps even the hope of a revelation that
will change his life.  When Heinrich Harrer trained and trekked
from his native Austria to the remote Himalayas in 1939, his
aim was to conquer the famed Nanga Parbat peak.  His
motive was only partly the physical joy of the expedition.  As
a self-absorbed Austrian who happened to be a member of
the Nazi party, he had a nationalistic agenda: he wanted to
succeed where others failed.  Little did he know that he would
wind up in the capital of Tibet, one of the few foreigners ever
allowed to visit the palace of the holy leader, the Dalai Lama. 
More important, his visit would change the man radically from
a narcissist who ran out on his very pregnant wife because he
had no interest in being saddled with a child, to a humble
human being who would return to his home and make his
peace with wife and son.
   Harrer wrote his memoirs about the seven years he spent
in Tibet.  The movie is a biographical drama loosely based on
his story.  Filming principally in the Argentine Andes which
stand in for the glorious Himalayan peaks, director Jean-
Jacques Annaud--who was at the helm for such films as
"Quest for Fire," "The Name of the Rose" and "The Lover"--
traces Harrer's journey in painstaking detail.  Annaud is better
at capturing Harrer's conflicts with nature and tussles with his
enemies than he is at seizing the inner struggle which
converts this hedonist into a mensch, but "Seven Years In
Tibet" is captivating material that should delight lovers of
adventure stories and National Geographic-style travelogues,
devotees of psychological drama, and of course, fans of
Hollywood's #1 matinee idol, Brad Pitt.
   The story opens in Austria just after its Anschluss with
Germany as Heinrich Harrer (Brad Pitt) boards a train,
arguing with his pregnant wife (Ingeborga Dapkunaite), who
opposes the four-month Himalayan trek he is about to make.  
Led by mountain climbing guide Peter Aufschnaiter (David
Thewlis), his group seeks to scale Nanga Parbat, where a
wounded Harrer saves the life of his guide.  The group are
arrested and made prisoners of war by British troops in India,
as World War II had broken out.  After several failed attempts
to escape Harrer--who repeatedly insists on "going it alone"--
makes good his breakout in Aufschnaiter's group where the
two traverse the Indian border to the kingdom of Tibet.
   Through cinematographer Robert Fraisse's lens, the
Tibetan capital of Lhasa is made to look like Shangri-La. 
Though suspicious of "foreign devils," the peaceloving
inhabitants accept Harrer, who becomes a teacher to the
religious leader, the Dalai Lama (played at age 14 by
Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk, a Bhutanese).  His Holiness
and Harrer become fast friends.  The Austrian teaches him
about the West and is in turn enchanted by the rituals of this
Eastern society.  Becky Johnston's screenplay takes every
opportunity to cram in details of this exotic culture, describing
the protocol for meeting the Dalai Lama; the regard the
people have even for the lowly worm which, they say, could
have been someone's mother in another life; the fierce desire
for independence which leads this peaceloving people to take
up arms against Chinese invaders.  In fact the film seems so
eager to educate its audience about the charm of the people
and the beauty of the landscape that Pitt's inner journey often
fades from our notice.  
   Movies are, after all, a visual form which can do a lot better
dazzling us with flashy settings, some brief but tautly edited
battle scenes, and colorful costumes, than with illustrating the
journey within.  Perhaps we should not blame director Annaud
from highlighting external points.  But the emphasis does not
do justice to its central figure who--we must be convinced--is
undergoing a profound metamorphosis into a caring and
humble fellow.  That said, Annaud does coax excellent
performances especially from Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk
as the nervy and terminally curious Dalai Lama, from David
Thewlis as the companionable and often humorous Peter
Aufschnaiter, and from dozens of Buddhist monks who were
transported to Argentina for the filming. Fans of Brad Pitt will
enjoy seeing him looking every bit the Aryan with shimmering
blond hair, and by contrast as the disheveled traveler, so
hungry that he rushes to steal some food from two spoiled
Lhasa Apsos. The $70 million budget shows, as technical
effects are A-1.  
   Some scholars have expressed disappointment that Harrer
is treated as a hero since he was a member of the Nazi party,
but the movie, doubtless reproducing the wishes of the man in
his own biography, downplays this component.  When Harrer
is given a Nazi flag while boarding his train for India, he
simply grabs it indifferently and tucks it into the bottom of his
backpack.  When he is arrested, he tells the British captors
that he has nothing to do with the war; he is just a climber. 
When told that Germany has surrendered, Harrer seems
pleased as this means he can return to his home.  During the
final credits we are given the poignant reminder that one
million Tibetans died at the hands of the Chinese conquerors,
who destroyed 6,000 monasteries as well.  Rated PG-13. 
Running Time: 139 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Vincent Merlaud
USA, 1997
directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud
written by Becky Johnson, based on Heinrich Harrer's autobiographical
novel, cinematography by Robert Fraisse, music by John Williams
with Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, B.D.Wong, Mako and Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk
130 min 40 sec, 1:2.35
seen at the Kurbel, Berlin
The key sequence in Seven Years In Tibet occurs halfway through the movie.
A Tibetan boy meets a blond young man in a colourfull room put in the darkness,
and asks him if he likes movies, what an elevator is and what the  identity of
Jack the ripper is.
Vienna 1939. The mountain climber Heinrich Harrer (Pitt) leaves a lousy
marriage and a pregnant wife (as well as a nazi Austria) to join an expedition
to the Nanga Parbat, one of the world's highests peaks, under the command of
Peter Aufschneider (Thewlis). WWII breaks out, they find themselves prisoners
in India, escape and eventually reach Tibet fives years later. At this point,
fans of Mr Thewlis (so good in Naked) can leave the theater, he vanishes
from the movie. Fans of the Dalai Lama (one of the global village's few
icons) can enter in silence.
I have always been puzzled by Jean-Jacque Annaud's career, a French
director whose first directorial efforts have absolutely nothing in common
with his latest epics (La Victoire En Chantant is about French colonists
lost in WWI's Africa, Coup De Tete about a soccer team in the provincial
town of Auxerre). Now that supporting Tibet against Red China has become
fashionable in Hollywood, he brings to the screen Harrer's book with
a major star in the lead. Considering the state of this industry today,
this story containing neither aliens nor natural disasters, it's unlikely
the film would have been made without Mr Pitt's commitment - though I
don't see Robert DeNiro among the cast of Martin Scorsese's own Tibetan
epic, who'll open later this year. So we'll have to be thankfull to Mr
Pitt, without whom this exemplary two-way ausbildung story would have
never been told.
The result is a technically superior film features gorgeous landscapes
(I kept wondering where was what shot, since the Chinese government is so
mean about whatever deals with Tibet), nice and sensitive music by John
Williams, a very handsome young actor and a talented one, who as I said
before disapears quickly. I must confess Mr Pitt is really convincing when
he throws himself on the barbed-wire fence of an Indian prisoners camp. Mr
Annaud's mise-en-scene is fluid and light and I'm happy to testify that
there are still some gifted men able to tell a classic tale without being
boring nor wasting their talent with superficious visual effects. Thanks
Heaven, the parallel between the young Dalai Lama and Harrer's abandonned
son is not overstressed.
This may however be badly received, hence the absence of romantic heroism,
like, say, becoming a nazi to recover a dead body.
Of course the film lacks the depth of the mythical Lost Horizon and Black
Narcissus, which were shot in Hollywood and in England respectively but
delivered a rich universal message - blame it on the fact that 1997
is a time to cynical (perhaps even to cynical to believe in its own
cynism) to enjoy such well-told and entertaining tales.
No nudity, but meany Chinese people and a dead horse being eaten.
Seven Years In Tibet opens on November 13 in Germany

Author
James Brundage
Finally, a well done piece of cinema! To see it this year is like finding an
oasis in the desert and drinking your full, a refreshing experience. As of
this point, I could and still can count the serious Oscar contenders on my
hands and feet, and "Seven Years in Tibet" ranks among them.
Brad Pitt actually surprised me (although the accent was a little poor),
with his wonderful portrayal of mountain climber Heinrich Harrer, a man who
left his home to climb the ninth highest mountain in the world, and ended up
having everything he ever knew changed. He turns on the charm for the camera
and for the film, actually making you perfectly connect with this different
character in them midst of World War II.
As is all-too-much used but timeless, a major theme of the movie is changing
of ideals from imperialistic to anti-imperialistic, placing the viewpoint of
Harrar among that of Oscar Schindler (although "Schindler's List" was by far
a greater movie). Also thrown in to put him next to the greats is his hate
of nationalistic pride, a trait exhibited by Count Almasy in "The English
Patient".
For those of you who think I am beginning to downplay the movie, make no
mistake : this is the best film of the year so far (With possible future
exceptions being "Boogie Nights", "Les Miserables" and "Titanic"., which,
with "Contact", would make up this years nominees.). Its characters deeply
move you, you fall in love with the Tibetan landscape, and it enters into
your mind and heart like few movies can.
Not made for the mass market, if you are someone looking for a load of fun
at the movies, then go see "I know what you did last summer". If you're
looking for a masterwork of modern cinema, see "Seven Years in Tibet".

Author
Michael Redman
Hollywood has a history of concentrating on a contemporary political topic for
a short time then rapidly moving on. This year's cause celebre is Tibetan
freedom and as usual, the tale of an exotic people is seen through the eyes of
a westerner. "Seven Years" will be followed in short order by Martin
Scorsese's "Kundun", another film about the Dalai Lama.          
In 1939, given the opportunity to climb Nanga Parbat in the Indian Himalayas,
obnoxious self-centered Austrian Heinrich Harrer (Brad Pitt) jumps at the
chance and abandons his pregnant wife. The expedition doesn't go well for the
Olympic medal-winner when the team fails to reach the summit. Then, before
they can try again, World War II breaks out and they are rounded up by British
troops and sent to a POW camp near the Indian-Tibetan border.
After several abortive escape attempts by the lone wolf, he reluctantly joins
a group plan and finds himself outside the barbed wire. Because he is
obviously superior to the rest of the escapees, he heads out on his own. He
hopes to make his way through Tibet to China, meet up with the Japanese troops
and eventually get back home.
Days later, fellow mountain-climbing prisoner Peter Aufschnaiter (David
Thewlis) chances upon Harrer as the arrogant adventure is starving and
vomiting in the wilderness. The two form an uneasy alliance and continue their
trek towards the mysterious nation.
Sneaking into the country that forbids entry to all outsiders, the two
eventually get to the holy city of Lhasa. Harrer attracts the attention of the
young Dalai Lama who grants him an audience. The teenage spiritual leader is
interested in western ways and asks him to teach knowledge of the distant
world. Forging a friendship, the two learn from each other until Harrer is
forced to flee the country during the Chinese onslaught of the early fifties.
The film is exquisitely beautiful and epic in scope. The Argentinean Andes
serve as a stand-in for the Himalayas because the Chinese government refused
permission to film in Tibet, but are no less majestic. The mystical city is
visually captivating. The esoteric costumes and setting are beyond reproach.
According to Mike Leonard's interview in the "Herald Times" with Thubten J.
Norbu, the Dalai Lama's older brother, the Winter Palace is "extraordinarily
realistic." Bloomington resident and retired IU professor Norbu and another
brother were responsible for bringing Harrer to the attention of the Dalai
Lama. Unfortunately this aspect of the story is not in the film as Norbu
refused to allow his depiction when the producers would not provide him with
any assurance of how he would be presented. Their sister plays the holy mother
in a cameo appearance.
Pitt is satisfactory in his role, but never completely engages the audience.
The most interesting aspect of the film -- his conversion to selflessness --
is glossed over and we are expected to just accept it. Every story depends
upon change in the lead character and more time spent with that transformation
would help to flesh out the tale. The recent revelation that Harrer was not
only Nazi but a member of the SS before his imprisonment would have made his
conversion even more dramatic, but that detail was withheld from the filmmakers.
Although Harrer's saga is enticing, director Jean-Jacques Annaud ("The Bear",
"Quest For Fire") could have eliminated some of the adventurer's solo deeds
and looked more at the relationship between him and the Dalai Lama.
Much more captivating is Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk as the 14 year old Dalai
Lama. Successfully combining the curiosity and energy of an adolescent boy
with the ancient wisdom of the reincarnation the Buddhist God of Compassion,
the young actor is easily the star of the film. The decision to humanize the
Dalai Lama rather than portray him as somber holy man is a wise one. Anyone
who has been in his presence can attest to his sense of humor and easy-going ways.
The film is guilty of some political heavy-handedness especially in the scene
of Chinese generals stomping through a sand mandala. Moments before, the
spectacle as soldiers in staid uniforms march through the flowing robes of
horn-blowing Buddhist monks is subtle and much more effective in demonstrating
the differences between the invaders and the peaceful Tibetans.
It is interesting to observe the ebb and flow of popular icons. During the
sixties, Chairman Mao was upheld as a hero by the American culturally elite.
Now he is the villain as attention is focused on the Chinese occupation of
Tibet.         There is no excuse for the murder of over a million Tibetans and the
destruction of 90% of the monasteries by the Chinese and it is obvious that
Tibet deserves its independence. However history has taught us that
over-simplification results in inaccuracies and very un-Buddhist-like
polarities. One would hope that the champions of Tibetan freedom don't make
this mistake.
The film accomplishes many rare feats. It is majestic, entertaining and at the
same time will undoubtedly aid in the mobilization of western sentiment for
the liberation of Tibet. With the notoriously short attention span of the
popular media, we can only hope that the focus lasts long enough to manifest change.
(Michael Redman, veteran of over 22 years of these film columns, is busy
bringing in his plants in the face of freezing weather. At least he is busy
thinking about it. Mredman@bvoice.com is the eaddress to send clever comments.)
[This appeared in the 10/15/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:mredman@bvoice.com

Author
David Sunga
Starring: 
Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, Jamyan Jamtsho Wangchuk, Sonam Wangchuck,
Tenzin Wangchuk, and Jetsun Pema
Ingredients: Austrian mountaineer, Dalai Lama, mountains
Synopsis: 
Rich Austrian mountaineer Heinrich Harrer (Brad Pitt) gets sidetracked
when World War II interrupts his mission to climb Nanga Parbat, a
Himalayan peak that in 1939 has never been successfully scaled. Trying
to get back to Europe, Harrer and climbing teammate Peter Aufschnaiter
(David Thewlis) get stranded in Tibet, where they settle down, and
Harrer becomes the tutor of the bright-eyed young Dalai Lama. (The Dalai
Lama is the spiritual and political leader of Tibet). Harrer reluctantly
leaves Tibet when Chinese forces under Mao conquer the tiny mountain
country.
Trivia:
Jetsun Pema, the woman who plays the Dalai Lamas mother in the movie,
is actually the real life Dalai Lamas sister. In real life she takes
care of Tibetan refugee children living in India and her organization
has educated over 40,000 children. 
The movie is based on the true memoirs of Austrian mountaineer Heinrich
Harrer, who is still alive today at age 84. Harrer was a Nazi in the
1930s, and Germany's Stern magazine published a photo of Harrer
hobnobbing with Adolf Hitler.
Director Jean-Jacques Annaud is presently banned from entering China.
The movie was filmed mostly in the Andes mountains in South America.
Opinion:
Director Jean-Jacques Annaud directed two previous movies about a person
being modified by contact with another culture (Quest for Fire and
The Lover), so with Seven Years in Tibet, he was probably aiming for
a movie where a brash jerk runs away from his home country and comes
into contact with Tibet and slowly changes into a spiritual human being
until finally hes ready to return. Annaud wanted to show the mountain
climber learning to climb his own spiritual mountain, and symbolically
he tries to show this by having Heinrich Harrers clothes change from
riches to poor rags and slowly back to riches again. This doesnt quite
satisfy.  Usually in movies, when a character undergoes a change of
heart, they demonstrate their newfound character by doing an action or
making a difficult choice that they wouldnt have made under their old
personalities. In Annauds movie, the hero makes no such difficult
decision or actions. He wanders around Tibet, changes clothes a lot, and
then leaves when the Chinese take over and the Dalai Lama advises him to
leave. This lack of tough choices gives the movie only postcard depth,
like "I went to Tibet, I had a lot of bad luck, ran out of options, and
went back home to my responsibilities." Postcards arent bad though; the
scenery is breathtaking, even if it was shot in the Andes mountains
versus  the real Himalayas. Having the Harrer character make one or two
tough choices that demonstrate his spiritual redemption would have given
this movie more punch.
