Title
Review for Telling Lies in America (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A great many Americans nowadays are not so eager to
receive the world's tired and poor.  Liberals fear that massive
immigration will take jobs away from long-term residents. 
Conservatives are wary of changes in the racial and ethnic
structure of the U.S.  But moderates on both sides cannot
plug the extra thump in the heartbeat when they hear the
classic story of immigration to U.S. shores.  The story goes
simply like this.  Father and son, refugees in the Old World
because of the vagaries of warfare and political programs,
seek a better life in the land of freedom and opportunity. 
They join the huddled masses, generally in the larger cities of
the promised land, where dad sticks to the traditional ways of
thinking and son tries his darndest to become all-American
cool.  Being different, the recent immigrant has a foreign
accent, is unaccustomed to the ways of his new location, and
is if a young person, he is often harassed in school and
treated like an outsider.  Eventually he become more
American than the natives and is accepted as an equal.         
   "Telling Lies in America," a semi-autobiographical
from the pen of Joe Eszterhas, is the tale of the that
Hungarian-American's experience during the early 1960s in
the Free World, specifically in Cleveland.  Eszterhas, perhaps
the most highly paid screenwriter in Hollywood, is best known
for his disastrous scrawl of the movie "Showgirls," panned
almost universally, but earning him a very handsome $2
million dollars.  While the 17-year-old Karchy Jonas (Brad
Renfro), the character meant to represent Eszterhas, shows
no particular talent or inclination to become a writer, he
possesses one great gift that would help him to become a
storyteller: he lies and lies and lies.  He is not necessary a
pathological fibber, but lets go with some whoppers to boost
other people's esteem of him.  Why does he need to do this?  
He feels--rightly so--that he is not accorded the respect which
any human being has the right to demand.
   "Telling Lies in America" is a heartwarming story which,
while offering nothing particularly new to the classic formula of
its genre, is boosted by remarkable performances from its
principals, particularly by Kevin Bacon in the role of a cynical,
hip disc jockey whose radio station WHK.  He is tuned in by
kids in the local Cleveland high school who swing to his music
at 1960s sock hops and is idolized by Karchy Jonas.  Billy
Magic (Kevin Bacon) is a magnetic personality who takes
payola, or bribes from record companies who want him to
play their discs over and over in order to give the songs a
chance to make the top 40 and thereby rake in the money. 
He does what he can to get ahead: he has a stable of bimbos
to maintain, a big red Cadillac still owned by the bank, and a
simple apartment to hold on to. But he is not a bad person.
He has been fired from one city's radio station after another
because he champions "race" music, giving considerable
attention to the songs composed by blacks and other
minorities.  When he spots Karchy (Brad Renfro), a nice-
looking, bland lad who is treated badly by his classmates and
by his school's principal, Father Norton (Paul Dooley), he
hires him to do odd jobs, but in reality he needs someone
who is under the legal age to accept sinister envelopes from
cigar-smoking producers.
   Renfro does a smooth job representing the Hungarian
immigrant who tells the girl he wants to impress that he has
received a scholarship to Princeton, informs police officers
that his father is a doctor, and advises Billy Magic that he has
had both girls and filet mignon "lots of times."  In the movie's
funniest scene, he slips Spanish Fly into the ice cream soda
of his date, Diney (Calista Flockhart), hoping that the alleged
aphrodisiac would make him irresistible to her.  Instead she
gets sick to her stomach and has to run home to throw up.  At
another point he sneaks into the confession booth of Father
Norton and hears the mea culpas of the young man in his
class who repeatedly picks on him.  Renfro holds onto to a
poker-faced expression at almost every turn, whether he is
using Billy's clout to get Amos (Damen Fletcher), a black kid
in his class, a record contract, or when he is trying to impress
a hooker hired by his idol.  When he lies, Billy Magic does not
chasten him but instead seems to get quite a charge from the
boy.  After all, Jonas was hired because Billy figures that he
would never tell the truth about the payola he collects for his
boss.
   Maximilian Schell is convincing as the hard-working
immigrant who wonders about the meaning of the words
"cool" and "slick," wants his son to succeed in school, and is
enthusiastic about the upcoming swearing-in to become a
citizen.  Despite the movie's lack of new ideas, it has a
touching and intelligent story, and should boost the political
agenda of people around the world who yearn to breathe free.
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 101 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey
Karten

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Controversial screenwriter Joe Eszterhas has a reputation for
producing pictures that push the edge of the acceptability envelope.
>From his highly successful BASIC INSTINCT to his widely ridiculed
SHOWGIRLS, he has managed to deliver many high profile and lucrative
scripts and has been called the highest paid screenwriter in the world.
When he was starting out, he made many excellent but less controversial
movies, including JAGGED EDGE and that perennial favorite, FLASHDANCE.
(One of the big hits of this year's art house circuit has been THE FULL
MONTY, and in it the amateur male strippers use FLASHDANCE as their
instructional video.)
     Before the house lights went down at the press screening for
Eszterhas's most recent film, TELLING LIES IN AMERICA, I read through
the press kit.  Apparently this was supposed to be a touching little
film about a teenage immigrant's experience growing up in America and
was a "semi-auto-biographical tale."  Eszterhas himself came from
Hungary at the age of 6 to live in Cleveland.  By the time the house
lights had come back up, I was surprised to have found that the film
was exactly as billed.  The story had many opportunities to get
outlandish and rejected them all in favor of serious character
development.  Although far from an outstanding film, the people in it
will touch your heart.
     Set in Cleveland in the rock 'n roll year of 1960, the movie tells
the story of an itinerant disk jockey whose current pseudonym is Billy
Magic.  Billy, played with a sleazy panache by Kevin Bacon in one of
his few bad guy roles, travels the DJ circuit gathering payola.
Whenever the heat from the local police gets too hot for him, he
crosses the state line and picks a new moniker.  His MO includes
carefully choosing a juvenile boy to be his bag man.  With the record
producers giving the money to an underage kid, Billy stays clean, or at
least clean enough to afford him time to beat a hasty exit when the
cops start closing in on him.
     Although Bacon's charismatic performance dominates the film, Brad
Renfro as Karchy Jonas gets more of the screen time.  Renfro and Bacon
worked together in last year's outstanding but underappreciated
SLEEPERS.  This time Renfro has grown up more and plays the high school
senior whom Billy uses as his shield against prosecution.  Renfro's
serious character contrasts nicely with Billy's flashy persona.  Karchy
lives with his somber and hard working father Dr. Istvan Jonas, played
by a difficult to recognize Maximilian Schell.  Dr. Jonas got his Ph.D.
in law from a Hungarian university, but barely scrapes by in this
country by working at a mill.  His wife died in the refugee camps in
the old country.
     Even when the story saddens, as it does frequently, the high
energy music of the era gives the story its hopeful underpinnings.
Billy's gaudy clothes by Laura Cunningham and Heather Priest and his
fire-engine red 1959 Cadillac convertible, with fins high enough to
scrape the moon, make him the idol of the local girls, who are dying to
go to bed with him.
     The sweetest subplot in the picture surrounds Karchy's first
girlfriend, a young woman named Diney Majeski, played with grace and
confidence by Calista Flockhart from THE BIRDCAGE.  Diney, being older
and wiser than Karchy, tries to help him come to terms with his
immaturity and lack of self-confidence.  "Why you got to show off so
much?" she asks.  In a revealing reply, he says it's "cause I ain't got
that much to show."
     The dialog, while rarely memorable, has a honesty that sounds like
it was lifted straight from a time capsule.  When cocky Billy inquires
about Karchy's sexual maturity, he couches it in just the right slang.
"Have you done the nasty yet?" Billy asks him.  Karchy lies rather than
reveal the truth.  "Lots of times," he shoots back.
     After seeing too many films lately in which none of the characters
are drawn sympathetically, it is refreshing to have one in which they
are all worth caring about.  Even if Billy is conning everyone, you
can't help but love him.
     TELLING LIES IN AMERICA runs 1:41.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual
situations and some profanity.  The film would be fine for kids twelve
and up.

Author
James Berardinelli
     It's said that every author, no matter how gory, grotesque, or 
sensationalistic their chosen genre, has a personal story to tell.  In 
the case of Joe Eszterhas, one of Hollywood's highest-paid script 
writers (his credits include JAGGED EDGE, BASIC INSTINCT, and 
SHOWGIRLS), that tale is TELLING LIES IN AMERICA, a semi-
autobiographical account of growing up as an immigrant in Cleveland 
during the early years of rock and roll.  Eszterhas drafted the original 
screenplay for TELLING LIES about 15 years ago, and it looked like it 
would remain unproduced until his wife, Naomi, fell in love with the 
subject matter and pushed for Eszterhas to do a rewrite in order to get 
it into theaters.  The result is director Guy Ferland's second feature 
(his first was THE BABYSITTER, which starred Alicia Silverstone) -- a 
movie that's vastly different from anything the writer has previously 
been involved with.  TELLING LIES is simple, low-key, and, sadly, banal.
     It's 1961 in Cleveland, and radio station WHK has a new rock and 
roll DJ.  His name is Billy Magic (Kevin Bacon), and the teens love him.  
Billy has something of a checkered past -- he has been in four cities in 
the last five years -- but he always gets good ratings, so station 
managers are willing to take a chance on him.  Inevitably, Billy starts 
looking for ways to supplement his income, and one of the most lucrative 
methods is to accept under-the-table payments from record producers in 
return for giving one of their songs extra play time.
     Karchy Jonas (Brad Renfro), a Hungarian-born teenager living in the 
U.S., is one of Billy's biggest fans.  In fact, in order to have his 
name read over the air as an entry into WHK's High School Hall of Fame, 
he forges dozens of his classmates' signatures on post cards he sends to 
the station.  Eventually, Karchy gets a chance to meet Billy, and the 
two strike up a friendship.  Billy, sensing a kindred spirit in his new 
pal, offers Karchy a job that includes changing records at the studio, 
helping out at sock hops, delivering money-filled envelopes, and lying 
to anyone who asks probing questions -- including the police.
     While the main story focuses on the relationship between Billy and 
Karchy, and how this changes Karchy's perception of fame, fortune, and 
the American Dream, there are a couple of moderately-interesting 
subplots, each of which deserves more screen time than it is accorded.  
The first involves an underused Maximilian Schell as Karchy's father, 
Istvan.  Istvan is studying to become an American citizen, and is 
suspicious of anything that could in any way jeopardize his chances -- 
including Karchy's friendship with Billy.  Then there's the obligatory 
"first romance" thread, which has Karchy falling for a timid, pretty 
twentysomething woman (THE BIRDCAGE's Calista Flockhart) who seems 
destined to break his heart.
     TELLING LIES possesses little to distinguish itself from numerous 
other period piece coming-of-age tales.  All of the plot elements are 
familiar:  immigrants struggling to assimilate into American society, 
the thrill of being recognized by someone important, the pain of falling 
for an older woman, and question of what constitutes friendship.  We may 
not have previously witnessed this particular story with these 
characters, but we're well-acquainted with the general trajectory of the 
narrative.  Additionally, the film's central theme, which deals with 
betrayal and its consequences, has the potential to be much more 
powerful than what's on screen.  We never really experience Karchy's 
pain and disillusionment when he realizes that he has been seduced, 
bought, and played for a fool by the man he most admires.
     TELLING LIES' one distinguishing characteristic is the level of 
acting.  Kevin Bacon, as the smooth-talking, slick-as-oil DJ, is 
fantastic.  This energetic performance ranks among the actor's best, and 
invigorates some of the film's less original sequences.  Brad Renfro, 
who got his start in THE CLIENT before appearing opposite Bacon in 
SLEEPERS, holds his own as the shy, ostracized Karchy -- a lonely 
teenager who is trying to find meaning and acceptance in life.  Renfro's 
portrayal rings true, and his scenes with Bacon mark TELLING LIES' best 
moments.  
     When writing TELLING LIES IN AMERICA, Eszterhas claims to have 
drawn upon many of his own experiences growing up in Cleveland as a 
Hungarian-born immigrant.  Indeed, some of the vignettes have the ring 
of authenticity, but the overall plot is disappointingly generic.  When 
compared to forceful coming-of-age tales like KING OF THE HILL and THIS 
BOY'S LIFE, TELLING LIES IN AMERICA finds itself in an unfavorable 
position.  It's a sincere-yet-uninspired diversion, and not even two 
strong performances can elevate it to a higher level.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."
