Title
Review for Divine Ryans, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Stephen Reynolds. Screenplay by Wayne Johnston, based on his
novel. Starring Jordan Harvey, Robert Joy, Pete Postlethwaite. Running
time: 93 minutes. Rated AA by the MFCB. Reviewed on August 29th, 2001.
Synopsis: Just days after young Draper Doyle Ryan's birthday surprise for
his father (Joy) goes mysteriously awry, the elder Ryan is dead. Draper
(Harvey) is haunted by nightmares, while his mother Linda (Wendel Meldrum)
must contend with her strict Catholic inlaws, who want Draper and his
sister raised in proper Ryan tradition. When Draper begins to experience
visions of his father's ghost, only Uncle Reg (Postlethwaite), the black
sheep of the Ryans, may be able to help him come to terms with his
father's death.
Review: Although set in Newfoundland, "The Divine Ryans" draws as much 
from the national passion for hockey as from anything specific to the 
Rock. As such, it should prove more accessible to mainstream audiences 
than many movies originating in this province. That's not to say that "The 
Divine Ryans" isn't a distinctively Newfoundland movie: Reynolds makes 
great use of St John's-area locations (mostly in the city's venerable 
Downtown core), and the humour and characters are unmistakable for anyone 
who has visited these shores. Like most major Newfoundland pictures, "The 
Divine Ryans" features familiar local faces, including Mary Walsh ("This 
Hour Has 22 Minutes"). But it is British import Postlethwaite who really 
steals the show, lighting up the screen as eccentric but kindly Uncle Reg. 
Harvey, in the pivotal role, offers a fine debut performance, though his 
inexperience is clear on occasion when he looks as though he's mostly 
reciting lines. Joy's role in the movie is too small, denying us a better 
glimpse of the relationship between Draper and his father which is key to 
the story. And though the production as a whole is accomplished, there are 
moments of letdown, such as the ludicrous realisation of the "Momataur" 
which haunts Draper's dreams. Still, "The Divine Ryans" is touching and 
funny, and distinguishes itself from more commonplace coming-of-age films.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/
