Title
Review for Ulee's Gold (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Seth Bookey
In a summer with movies filled with explosions, chases, and stunts, it is
interesting to see a movie centered around a quiet beekeeper who faces an
equal amount of danger with grace and patience. 
Peter Fonda might have gone down in film history best known for being
Henry Fonda's son and having been in a film that influenced a generation
(Easy Rider); but now he will have made an indellible impression on
anybody who sees Ulee's Gold. Fonda has mentioned in interviews that
he emulated his father when preparing for this role. 
Ulysses Jackson spends his days and years as he always has; living in
central Florida, looking after his bees and keeping his family business
within the family. Ulee is raising two granddaughters--Casey and Penny.
Their father Jimmy is in jail and their mother, Helen, has left them to do
God only knows what in Orlando.
Life is humming along as it needs to until the sins of the son are visited
on the father as well as the rest of the clan. Ulysses winds up leaving
his bees at the most crucial time of the season when he is asked to go
retrieve Helen (Christine Dunford) from Orlando, where Eddie and
Ferris--two criminal associates of Jimmy's--have loaded her up on drugs,
or have taken advantage of her condition, and have discovered that Ulee
can find something they want. They make it clear that they will do harm to
the family if he doesn't comply. 
Of course, all of this is a red herring. Much like The 39 Steps, Ulee
learns that no man is an island. Ulee is forced to realize that sometimes,
you need to accept help, and help others. Shut down since his wife
Penelope has died, Ulee finds that he is going to have to trust someone,
and that someone is his tenant Connie Hope (Patricia Richardson), a doctor
who helps detox his daughter-in-law. Even while a dangerous situation
exists, Ulee continues his backbreaking labors, but gets help from his
granddaughters and even his daughter-in-law, slowly, one by one
Great performances are turned out by all. It was great to see Patricia
Richardson do something beyond the limitations of her role as Tim Allen's
wife on Home Improvement. Especially wonderful is Vanessa Zima as the
younger granddaughter, Penny. An rather wonderful scene is her description
to her mother of how the bees are sometimes scared and fly off, and have
to be brought back. Watch for it.
The movie makes some wonderful use of dissolves and jump cuts; they really
accentuate the monotony and continuity of the life Ulee leads in swampy
rural Florida. If the film has any fault, it is sparing the expenses on
sound. Some dialogue seems to get lost between regional dialect and/or
mumbling. Other than that, writer/director Victor Nunez.
P.S.: You get two extra points if you can think of a classical story in
which Ulysses must leave the stalwart Penelope to help find the lost
Helen.
Copyright 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/8588/kino.html

Author
Jerry Saravia
        The late 60's and early 70's were arguably the most influential and
revolutionary years of personal filmmaking in history. Therefore, there must be
something said for the long-lost actors of that time who are suddenly popping
out now and reinventing themselves. John Travolta is the most phenomenal of the
70's artifacts because he has come back stronger and better than ever. Peter
Fonda is not really an icon (unless you consider his "Easy Rider" role to be
one) but for the first time in twenty years, he gives a performance of such
subtlety and strength that I became deeply overwhelmed. 
"Ulee's Gold" stars Fonda as Ulee Jackson, a Florida beekeeper who is trying to
hold a dysfunctional family together. He is a Vietnam veteran whose wife died
several years ago, and now he has two granddaughters at home, a son in jail,
and his bees to take care of. Ulee's older granddaughter is a brash teenager
who wants her life to be separate from their supposed family circle - she truly
hates her mother for having left them. Ulee's jailed son begs him to pick up
his sick, drugged wife (Christine Dunford) in Orlando since he's hoping to be
out soon to join his family. Ulee is hesitant at first because she fled from
her kids and has left him to raise them - Ulee is a righteous person who has
shielded himself from others even society (not unlike his daughter-in-law).
Trouble is coming his way, though, when his son's thieving partners are
searching for a stash of money hidden in Ulee's bee farm.
"Ulee's Gold" is written and directed by Victor Nunez ("Ruby in Paradise"), and
as long as he sticks to Ulee's loss of love and mixed feelings about his
family, the film is genuinely heartbreaking. However, when the rotten thieves
show up packing pistols and molesting Ulee's older granddaughter, the film
stops and doesn't quite recover. This whole subplot is meant to show Ulee's
redemption and while it isn't manipulative, sentimental or sensational, it
isn't particularly engaging or interesting either. The screenplay spends too
much time dealing with these lowlifes in a been-there-done-that atmosphere. The
moment where Ulee kicks the thieves' gun into the pond rather than shooting
them with it is a moment of pure humanity but it is too brief to resonate. The
rest of the film teeters on the melodramatic whereas the tightly structured
first half of the film relied on simple human observation as its tactic. 
The best moments in "Ulee's Gold" are the quiet ones: Ulee extracting honey
from the bees in his workshop; his delicate bedtime stories with his innocent
younger granddaughter (Vanessa Zima) who is inquisitive about her mother's
condition; his developing relationship with a caring nurse (Patricia
Richardson); the bitterness between Ulee and his son in the prison scenes; and
even the scenes where Ulee tries to reason with the thieves claiming they've
done him "a world of good."
"Ulee's Gold" is fluidly directed by Nunez, and beautifully performed
especially Fonda who brings a gleam and sense of regret in his eyes that is as
pure as gold (he was nominated for an Oscar). Kudos must also go to Christine
Dunford (should have been nominated) who is riveting to watch as she struggles
through her self-destructive, drug-induced convulsions to becoming a mature
woman and responsible mother who is full of regret as well. The dichotomy
between Ulee and his daughter-in-law unmistakably presents them as people
analogous in their loss of love and emotions. If the film stuck to these vivid,
three-dimensional characters, it would have been a masterpiece. As it is,
"Ulee's Gold" is only half of a great film, and ends abruptly just as the story
starts to get more interesting. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Walter Frith
     Peter Fonda turned 58 years old in February and he is beginning to look
and sound more and more like his famous father Henry who died in 1982.  Fonda
has pretty much always taken a back seat in popularity to his sister Jane who
retired from movies in 1990 and today is married to billionaire media mogul
Ted Turner.  Peter Fonda is probably most famous for his 1969 classic film
'Easy Rider' written by Fonda himself along with Dennis Hopper and Terry
Southern.  Fonda starred in that film but his career has been a mediocre one
at best and his daughter Bridget is now carrying the torch for the Fonda
family into the next generation.
     'Ulee's Gold' is a remarkable comeback opportunity for Peter Fonda and
the low-key presentation of the hard driving subject matter is also quite
impressive.  Fonda plays a bee keeper and honey manufacturer living in
central Florida with his two grand daughters and is involved in a friendship
with his neighbour (Patricia Richardson) who happens to be a physician.
 Fonda's son is in a correctional facility after being involved in a robbery
with two other men who maintain contact with Fonda's daughter-in-law and she
is a recovering drug addict as we discover later in the film.  It seems that
while high one night she tells the two men about money her husband stashed
from the robbery and upon his entrance to jail, kept this a secret.  The two
criminals want Fonda to locate the money and hand it over to them.  Fonda is
caught in a moral dilema concerning this crime while caring for the recovery
of his daughter-in-law, raising his two daughters and keeping his business
running.
     This film works because its deliberate slow pace gives the film's entire
tone a hint of reality and Fonda plays the aging bee keeper in a seasoned and
somewhat sympathetic manner.  This is a movie that will find a better
audience on video in a few months and 'Ulee's Gold' is intended for mature
audiences as it is free from the standard Hollywood trappings with a very
ordinary presentation yet powerful message about family and the heartaches
sometimes involved.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Peter Fonda, Patricia Richardson, Jessica Biel, 
      J. Kenneth Campbell, Christine Dunford, Steven Flynn, Dewey Weber, 
      Tom Wood, Vanessa Zima
Director: Victor Nunez
Producer: Victor Nunez
Screenplay: Victor Nunez
Cinematography: Virgil Marcus Mirano
Music: Charles Engstrom
U.S. Distributor: Orion Classics
     ULEE'S GOLD is the first movie since MICROCOSMOS to prod my 
thoughts towards the invisible world of insects (bees in particular).  
This film illustrates that the power of motion pictures isn't always 
about taking us to strange worlds or putting us in the path of an 
enraged dinosaur.  Instead, it can be something as simple-yet-profound 
as opening our eyes to how different people survive in the real world.  
The title character in ULEE'S GOLD is a beekeeper who lives and works in 
the Florida Panhandle's tupelo marshes, and, although this is a 
narrative feature, not a documentary, it taught me a great deal about 
the difficulties of harvesting of honey.  Yet, as important as 
honeycombs and beekeeping are to the story, they are not the central 
focus.  This movie, from writer/director Victor Nunez, whose previous 
film was Ashley Judd's debut, RUBY IN PARADISE, is about damaged 
characters and fractured relationships.  Ultimately, it's this aspect of 
the film that makes it compelling; the honey-making stuff is an added 
bonus.  
     It's worth noting that Ulee (Peter Fonda, in a performance that 
recalls the work of his late father, Henry Fonda) is more comfortable 
dealing with his bees than with people.  Since the death of his wife six 
years ago, he has turned into a physical and emotional recluse.  He 
lives with his two granddaughters, Penny (Vanessa Zima) and Casey 
(Jessica Biel), who were abandoned by their parents.  Their father and 
Ulee's son, Jimmy (Tom Wood), is serving a sentence for armed robbery.  
Their mother, Helen (Christine Dunford), has dropped out of sight.  One 
day, during the busiest time of the honey-making season, Ulee receives a 
call from Jimmy, who claims that a couple of his former criminal 
associates have located Helen, strung out on drugs, in Orlando.  
Reluctantly, Ulee makes the trip to bring his daughter-in-law home, and, 
in the process, becomes involved in a search for old robbery money.
     The crime-related activities of ULEE'S GOLD represent the film's 
least interesting aspect, and the criminals (played by Steven Flynn and 
Dewey Weber) scarcely rise about the stereotype level.  Fortunately, the 
movie offers far richer and more complex elements, such as how Ulee 
relates to Penny, a quiet, introverted child who misses her mother, and 
Casey, a rebellious teenager.  Or how he struggles to mend fences with 
Jimmy and Helen.  Or how he learns to once again trust outsiders, 
including the local sheriff (J. Kenneth Campbell) and Connie (Patricia 
Richardson), an attractive nurse renting a house across the street.
     With ULEE'S GOLD, Peter Fonda reminds us that he is capable of much 
more than making quirky cameos in the likes of LOVE AND A .45, BODIES 
REST AND MOTION, and ESCAPE FROM L.A.  This is a subtle, nuanced 
performance that brings to the fore all of Ulee's pain and uncertainty, 
then hides it beneath a carefully-constructed facade.  Fonda shows us a 
man who wants to relate to those around him, but is no longer sure how.  
It's fitting that Ulee bonds with his daughter-in-law and granddaughters 
amidst the bees and honeycombs.
     Supporting Fonda is a cast of fresh and familiar faces.  Patricia 
Richardson, best known for her role in TV's HOME IMPROVEMENT, plays a 
decidedly different sort of character here, and acquits herself 
admirably.  As Ulee's granddaughters, Vanessa Zima (THE BABYSITTERS' 
CLUB) and newcomer Jessica Biel give strong, unaffected performances.  
Christine Dunford has the difficult task of essaying the drugged-out 
Helen, and Tom Wood is quietly effective as Jimmy.  
     Nunez's script is thoughtful and intelligent, and it challenges his 
actors with fully-formed personalities for them to breathe life into 
(Peter Fonda, in fact, called Ulee "the best character I've ever read").  
The highest compliment I can offer ULEE'S GOLD is that it plays more 
like real life than a movie.  During the course of the film, we learn a 
little about the different grades of honey.  And, just as the light 
golden Tupelo is in the top echelon, so too is ULEE'S GOLD.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael Redman
This "small" film concerning the life a beekeeper in the Florida panhandle is
surprisingly enjoyable. The biggest surprise is that, as many people do, Peter
Fonda has become his father. At times he is the spitting image of his old man
with the same lean body, gaunt face and eccentric mannerisms.
Ulee Jackson (Fonda) is a Vietnam vet who has never recovered from his wife's
death several years ago and would like nothing more than to retire from the
world and spend his the rest of his life tending his bees and harvesting
Tupelo Honey. Because his estranged son Jimmy (Tom Wood) is in prison and his
daughter-in-law Helen (Christine Dunford) abandoned the family, Ulee is
raising his two granddaughters. He's doing the best he can in a situation that
he didn't create.
And things get worse. Jimmy calls to tell him that Helen is strung out and
staying with his former partners-in-crime in Orlando. She needs rescuing.
Ulee's existence is based on duty: to the bees, to his little girls and now to
Helen. He drives his pick-up to carry the unconscious woman back home.
The robbers are archetypal sleezoids and threaten the family unless Ulee comes
up with money that Jimmy kept from the robbery and hid in a swamp. Unlike
other directors, Victor Nunez doesn't go for the big gun shoot-em-up scenes.
The intimidation and threat of harm are readily apparent and create a tension,
but the only actual violence is realistically understated.
With the help of a nurse neighbor, he helps Helen through her cold turkey
while, at the same time, attempts to deal with the threats. His life of quiet
desperation has gotten a lot louder.
In many ways, it's easy to see Ulee as Fonda's "Easy Rider" Captain America as
he has gotten older. (Of course the fact that the character was killed at the
end of that generation-defining film makes it a bit difficult for this to be
fact.) In that film, he was a loner looking for America, now he is a loner
looking for his soul.
Very different from the vast majority of the summer cinema fare, this is a
breath of fresh air. Don't expect any explosions or bug-eyed aliens, but
you'll find a glimpse into the inner workings of a human being.
[This appeared in the 7/24/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:mredman@bvoice.com

Author
Chuck Dowling
Ulee's Gold (1997) *** out of ***** - Cast: Peter Fonda, Patricia
Richardson, J. Kenneth Campbell. Written and Directed by: Victor Nunez.
Running Time: 111 minutes.
Living a small town in Central Florida, Ulee Jackson (Fonda) is an aging
beekeeper who's had a difficult life. His wife has passed away, his son is
in jail for robbery, and his daughter-in-law has run off, leaving him to
raise her two daughters by himself until his son is released. With demand
for Ulee's honey slowly decreasing, the upcoming season will be his most
important. Unfortunately, some people from his son's criminal past are about
to re-enter the scene, and could possibly change Ulee's life forever.
"Ulee's Gold" is very slow-going, but thankfully the story's conflict
presents itself early enough, so the audience is interested to see what's
going to happen next. Peter Fonda, in a role I could easily have seen his
father play (and sometimes in this film the resemblance between Henry and
Peter is uncanny), gives probably the best performance I've ever seen from
him. He always seems to be playing Peter Fonda, but here he's give an actual
character to work with, and I'll admit I was impressed. It's not a fantastic
performance, but a very good one considering who's giving it.
My only real complaint with the film is the character of the youngest
daughter, who seems way too thoughtful, sensitive, and poetic for someone
that young. "Ulee's Gold" is a pleasant little film. Nothing great, but
certainly entertaining enough. [R]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This leisurely paced but increasingly gripping indy drama should be
high on any summer moviegoer's list.  In the first (the first?) Oscar-
worthy performance of the year, Peter Fonda plays Ulysses "Ulee" Jack-
son, a fiercely introverted Florida beekeeper who is playing single dad
to his jailed son's daughters.  He leads a reclusive life, forgoing
friends and the help of others, even during the busiest of bee seasons.
Everything expectedly changes with the arrival of the kid's drug-
dependent mother.  In her dazed and confused wake comes a kind nurse
from across the street (Patricia Richardson, from "Home Improvement")
and two small-time thugs who have unfinished business with Ulee's son.
While Fonda's performance is the obvious centerpiece here-- think an
eerie invocation of his father crossed with, say, Clint Eastwood--
writer/director Victor Nunez (RUBY IN PARADISE) has crafted a story
that's consistently engaging.  (Even if the methodical pacing is
potentially sleep-inducing.) I particularly enjoyed a beekeeper's-eye
view of honey-making, as well as watching the step-by-step process of an
entire family's healing.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Orion)
Starring:  Peter Fonda, Patricia Richardson, Christine Dunford, Jessica
Biel, Vanessa Zima, Steven Flynn, Dewey Weber, Tom Wood.
Screenplay:  Victor Nunez.
Producers:  Sam Gowan, Peter Saraf.
Director:  Victor Nunez.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Twenty-eight years ago, Peter Fonda became a counter-culture icon in
EASY RIDER.  If you can name two other Peter Fonda films since then, you
have my deepest sympathies; it probably means you sat through delights
like WANDA NEVADA.  Anyone who remembers Peter Fonda on film probably
remembers him as Captain America, which is why it's so startling to see
him in ULEE'S GOLD.  The broad forehead, the determined chin and the stoic
demeanor are all eerily reminiscent of another film Fonda.  At some point
during the past three decades, Captain America turned into Tom Joad.
     It's not just in his physical appearance that Peter resembles Papa
Henry.  In ULEE'S GOLD, Peter Fonda gives the kind of intense and
introspective performance which characterized his father's best work.  He
plays Ulysses "Ulee" Jackson, a Florida beekeeper trying to hold together
the tattered remnants of his family.  With his son Jimmy (Tom Wood) in
prison and Jimmy's wife Helen (Christine Dunford) run off to parts
unknown, Ulee cares for his two granddaughters (Jessica Biel and Vanessa
Zima) and keeps to himself.  That is before a call from Jimmy informs Ulee
that Helen is in the company of Jimmy's old running buddies Eddie (Steven
Flynn) and Ferris (Dewey Weber), and possibly in trouble.
     At first, Helen's predicament does not move Ulee in the least.  One
of the riskier steps writer/director Victor Nunez takes is making Ulee
fairly unlikeable at the outset, and not unlikeable in that fussy,
irrascible but ultimately good-hearted Hollywood way.  Wartime experiences
in Vietnam, the death of his wife and the problems of Jimmy and Helen have
left Ulee scarred and emotionally repressed; even worse, they have left
him bitter and judgmental towards those he considers responsible for their
own tragedies, like Jimmy and Helen.  He no longer knows how to reach out
to help others, or how to accept help when someone like his kindly 
neighbor Connie ("Home Improvement's" Patricia Richardson) reaches out to
him.
     Like Nunez's 1993 gem RUBY IN PARADISE, ULEE'S GOLD is about a
journey of self-discovery, not exactly a high-concept premise.  Nunez's
particular gift as both a writer and a director is the ability to convey
the struggles of troubled souls without resorting to melodramatic
situations or hyperbolic speeches.  The most spectacular thing about Peter
Fonda's performance is exactly that it is so unspectacular, a textbook
study of dramatic economy.  We understand his survivor guilt in one weary
line to his granddaughter about how he made it out of Vietnam ("Your
grandpa was tricky"); we see the comfort he takes in his solitary labor as
extended sequences follow him through the harvesting of the tupelo honey.
This stubborn, driven, hard-working man is not entirely pleasant to be
around, but he's fascinating and thoroughly human.  Even when the plot
takes a turn into crime drama with the search for money from a long-ago
holdup, Nunez and Fonda don't take the plot or the character into
steely-eyed reluctant heroism.  The action in Fonda's lined face is more
compelling than a shootout in the swamps.
     ULEE'S GOLD is exactly the kind of film some people get suspicious
about when the critics go ga-ga, primarily because it is the kind of film
critics are _expected_ to go ga-ga over.  As a casually-paced,
character-driven drama in the middle of summer, it certainly stands out in
a crowd, but it is not a flawless masterpiece.  Nunez has a tendency to
devote almost all his creative energy to his main character, leaving his
supporting players far less to work with.  There are moments when ULEE'S
GOLD starts to wander, when the languid character interactions are merely
slow instead of meaningful.  Still, one fascinating, carefully-constructed
character is one more than almost any other film of the last few months
has taken the time to give us.  In a way, that makes ULEE'S GOLD just as
rebellious a film as EASY RIDER was in its time.  Maybe there's still a
streak of Captain America in Peter Fonda after all.

Author
Long Che Chan
Bruce Barth's mellow piano plays in the background as conflict erupts in
a little country town of Florida.  Ulee's Gold feels like another Fonda
creation- On Golden Pond: it has a soft, calm surface with a tempest
brewing underneath, the cinematography creates a place of gold, yellow,
and olive colors, the music is stirring and tranquil.  Both deal with
the hardships of family life.  Peter Fonda gives his undoubtedly best
performance in Victor Nuńez's new film and Patricia Richardson (Home
Improvement star) shows she is worthy of big screen attention.  Nuńez is
probably independent film's greatest asset, along with John Sayles, and
he proves his talent with a slow pace and undulating, heavy tension.
Peter Fonda's performance borrows from his father Henry Fonda's in On
Golden Pond- there is a great vulnerability that he gives the character
Ulee Jackson and just like his father, Peter Fonda is quiet, emotional,
and weary in this exceptional role.  Ulee Jackson, the film's
protagonist, is struggling.  Pressure is mounting at the wrong time.  He
is a beekeeper and this is his "busy" season.  He has to deal with his
two granddaughters' needs and erupting hormones, he is forced to pick up
his daughter-in-law in Orlando who is strung out on drugs and take care
of her, and he is faced with a challenging task: unsettled business his
son, who is now in prison, has left behind.
He finds his daughter-in-law, Helen, with the two men his son robbed a
bank with.  She has apparently told these two men that the money that
resulted from the robbery is with her husband.  That is why he got
caught- the police found him with the money.  Now the two men are
demanding they get the cash, or they will come after Ulee's two
granddaughters.  Ulee promises he will bring it to them and takes a
deranged Helen back to his serene little home where her two children
that she abandoned scrutinize her with contempt.
Ulee is a man who lost his pals in war- he was the only man in his
platoon to survive.  He refuses help from anybody and does not respond
to affectionate gestures.  He is a bitter, closed-off man whose only
passion is his beekeeping, his granddaughters, and his dead wife.
Connie, his next door neighbor, finally gets through to him with
friendly favors.  She is a nurse and helps Helen get through her turmoil
with drugs.
Ulee's Gold is the story of a man who believes he is fine as he is-
until the truth is revealed painfully to him: He is cold and unfeeling.
Of course, in the end, Ulee softens up, but his journey is absorbing and
we have fallen in love with his tiredness and weariness.  What is
admirable about the movie is Peter Fonda's winning turn as Ulee and the
story that feels like Nobody's Fool but, in the end, ends up in a class
of its own.

Author
Justin K. Siegel
ULEE'S GOLD -- a movie review by Justin Siegel
Bee metaphors -- there are lots of 'em. I know; I've seen ULEE'S GOLD.
Living in a small city, most offbeat, indie, or small features don't
get shown here until a month or two after they've proven themselves
worthy. And then they only usually stay about a week, since nobody in
this town appreciates good films. ULEE'S GOLD will suffer this fate,
and it's a pity. Everyone is out enjoying that insipid Jennifer Aniston
comedy PICTURE PERFECT.
I saw ULEE'S GOLD on its opening day. Everyone in the theater loved it.
All six of us.
ULEE'S GOLD is a magical and inspirational new film from RUBY IN PARADISE
director Victor Nunez, and it caused quite a stir at Sundance this year.
It is the story of beekeeper Ulee Jackson (Peter Fonda), who lives with
his two grand-daughters: Penny (Vannesa Zima), 10, and Casey (Jessica Biel),
15. He is a widower and is more comfortable consorting with bees than with
human beings.
He has a son in prison, who he hasn't heard from since forever. Then he
gets the call. His son, Jimmy (Tom Wood), wants Ulee to go to Orlando
and bring Helen (Christine Dunford), Jimmy's wife, back to Ulee's home.
Ulee is none too excited about this, and neither are her daughters,
especially since she's a major druggie.
But, with the help of neighbor Connie (Patricia Richardson, from tv's
HOME IMPROVEMENT, proving that at least one star from that show can
make a _good_ movie), they get Helen through withrawal and try to steer
her in the right path. Not so easy with her old roommates coming back
to collect some money they think they're due.
ULEE'S GOLD, like Nunez's other film RUBY IN PARADISE, is about lonely,
tortured souls who just want a little peace and quiet. Fonda, eerily
resembling his father Henry in both looks and acting ability, is virtually
a shoe-in for a Best Actor nomination next March, and don't be too
surprised if both Nunez and the film itself get recognition too.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Ulysses "Ulee" Jackson (played by Peter Fonda) is a beekeeper from
a small, sweaty town in the Florida panhandle.  He lives with his two
granddaughters (Vanessa Zima and Jessica Biel) in what in a nicer
neighborhood would be called a "dysfunctional" family.  The older
granddaughter is a little wild and does not have a lot of respect for
her grandfather.  Ulee's son-in-law Jimmy (Tom Wood) is in the
penitentiary for robbing an armored car.  And his daughter-in-law Helen
has run off to have a good time, leaving her two daughters to Ulee.
Hurt by the most of the people he loved, Ulee has withdrawn into
himself emotionally.  He relies on nobody and nobody can let him down.
He has trained his family to never ask the help of outsiders.  Above
all he maintains his integrity and his dignity, even at the expense of
a backache or two or not meeting his honey production goals.
     Then Jimmy gets word from his two partners in the robbery, still
free, that they have Helen in Orlando, high on drugs, and they want
someone to take her off their hands.  When Ulee comes to pick her up,
they make clear how they have used her and at the same time tell Ulee
that they want the $100,000 of bank money from the robbery that they
just found out that Jimmy had and hid from them and the police.  Ulee
brings home Helen, but finds that she is too much to handle in drug
withdrawal and he is forced to ask help of the nurse who rents from
Ulee a house across the street from his house.  Ulee wants as little
help as he can manage, but it is the time of year he needs to give a
lot of attention to his business of producing honey.
     Peter Fonda has never been the most expressive of actors, but here
it works to his advantage playing a man who has retreated into his
shell and divorced himself from his emotions.  This is being called the
best role of Fonda's career, but it may be just a matter of calling for
the type of non-emotive acting that Fonda is best at.  The entire cast
does well with Steven Flynn and Dewey Weber genuinely detestable as
Jimmy's two slimy partners.
     The film DEAD CALM would have been a standard stalker if it had
not included some fascinating scenes of how Sam Neill, as a nautical
man, saves a foundering yacht.  Just seeing the processes used by an
expert makes for some good filmmaking.  Though ULEE'S GOLD does not
take full advantage some of the most interesting scenes of the film
show how Ulee maintains the hives and the discussions of rotating the
hives and the various grades of honey.  In addition these scenes
characterize Ulee as a careful and contentious man who does things a
step at a time.  His care to repair the hives and to return the bees
that have strayed makes a metaphor for Ulee's care for his home.  Later
his behavior around the bees is his guide for how to handle the two
hoodlums who threaten his family.  Unfortunately only in certain scenes
is it clear what Fonda is doing with the hives.  This is not a
documentary on beekeeping, but it would not have taken a lot of effort
to make the task a little more comprehensible.  Though even as it is it
does engage the viewer.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Writer and director Victor Nunez's last film was the widely
praised but rarely seen RUBY IN PARADISE (1993).  His latest picture,
ULEE'S GOLD, which stars Peter Fonda in an exquisite performance, seems
destined to suffer the same fate.  An incredible, but understated
character study, it has no special effects and the biggest surprise is
the way the story shuns all the popular movie cliches.
     Quiet and withdrawn Vietnam veteran Ulee Jackson (Fonda) has the
honorable profession of beekeeper.  ("The bees and I have an
understanding.  I take care of them, and they take care of me.")  Peter
Fonda, looking, sounding, and acting like his father Henry, gives the
best performance of his career -- an astounding piece of acting.  A
complex character who slowly reveals his feelings, but always seems to
have even more bottled up inside.  From Ulee's troubled eyes down to
the methodical way he takes off his glasses, this character burns with
some inner rage.
     Jaded viewers reading words like "troubled Vietnam vet" and "rage"
will probably have already finished the script in their minds, but they
will be wrong.  This is not a typical film.  Set in a working class
area of Florida, the fictional story has an authenticity that most
movies only dream of.
     Ulee takes care of his two grandkids, teenage Casey and 9-year-old
Penny, played by Jessica Biel and Vanessa Zima, since their father
Jimmy (Tom Wood) is in prison for robbery.  Ulee, who always refuses
help from outsiders, does his best to raise the girls.  Rebellious
Casey is almost more than he can handle.  "You'll pay for the rest of
your life for being a jackass," he warns her as she stomps out of the
house.  "Yeah, well, it's better than dying of boredom," she screams
back at him as she gets into her boyfriend's car.
     Prominently featured in the film is the art of beekeeping.  Ulee
finds solace in the serenity of the bees and satisfaction from the back
breaking work.  Whereas many shows lose it in the small details, Nunez
knows how to get everything right.  When Ulee comes in after a hard day
lifting the boxes, he takes a nap on the hardwood floor of the dining
room.  As he awakens, Virgil Mirano's careful camerawork shoots his
view looking up seeing the tablecloth and the light above and thus
increases the audience's empathy by showing exactly what Ulee's life is
like.
     Charles Engstrom's music manages to be melancholy without ever
being maudlin.  As a soft piano tune plays, you become one with the
bees and the troubled hero.
     One day, Ulee gets a call from Jimmy's two ex-partners in crime,
Eddie Flowers (Steven Flynn) and Ferris Dooley (Dewey Weber).  They
have Jimmy's wife, Helen (Christine Dunford).  A druggie, she is in bad
shape, and they want Ulee to come and take her away.  And, they have
something they need to tell Ulee.  What little narrative drive this
character study has will derive from that conversation, but do not be
distracted.  The show's bounteous rewards come from the character study
of Ulee.  The marvelous supporting cast serve mainly to help Ulee
reveal himself to us.
     Ulee has the good fortune to have recently rented out his nearby
cottage to a nurse he calls Miss Hope (Patricia Richardson), but she
asks him to call her Connie.  He tells her of his beloved wife who died
six years ago.  "Me, I'm divorced twice," she tells him.  "No kids
fortunately.  I guess, fortunately."  As with everything in this
realistic story, their relationship moves in sometimes surprising ways
and the dialog seems more natural than scripted.
     The gripping story, which manages to be both intense and peaceful,
eventually comes to a carefully orchestrated and satisfactory
conclusion.  Well, partially.  These characters, like good neighbors,
are not the sort you like to lose.
     ULEE'S GOLD runs 1:51.  It is rated R for violence and profanity.
The show would be fine for teenagers.  I loved this little gem of a
movie.  I strongly recommend it to you and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
