Title
Review for Jamón, jamón (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     JAMON, JAMON, a "tale of ham and passion" (and literally
translated HAM, HAM) could perhaps be described as a "Grade B art
film."  Although possessing a biting wit and excellent sense of the
offbeat, too much of JAMON, JAMON follows obvious paths.  Had this been
made in Hollywood, it would be on the fast track to the late night
cable circuit.
     When Silvia (Penelope Cruz) breaks the news to her boyfriend
Manuel (Juan Diego) that she's pregnant, he immediately proposes,
giving her a soda-can top ring to seal the engagement.  And, while
Silvia's mom Carmen (Anna Galiena), the local whore, is pleased with
the arrangement, Manuel's mother Conchita (Stefina Sandrelli) is
outraged.  Intent upon breaking up the prospective marriage at all
costs, Conchita hires Raul (Javier Bardem), a would-be bullfighter with
all brawn and little brains, to woo Silvia away from Manuel.
     One of the most obvious problems with JAMON, JAMON is its subpar
acting.  Everyone in this film looks good (especially Penelope Cruz,
Anna Galiena--of THE HAIRDRESSER'S HUSBAND, and Javier Bardem), but
even the most accomplished of the performers have at least one bad
sequence (although, in all honesty, Ms. Cruz, who also appears in BELLE
EPOQUE, emanates such sensuality that it's easy to overlook her
less-impressive acting moments).  There are several scenes likely to
cause winces because of the inability of certain cast members to
adequately deliver their lines.
     JAMON, JAMON never reaches a stable tone, vacillating between
absurd comedy and over-the-top melodrama.  For variety, there's also a
sequence of surprisingly graphic violence.  The film is at its best
when it ventures into the realm of eroticism (had it gone to the MPAA
for rating, an NC-17 would have been likely), and some of the humor
during the sex scenes is among the most amusing.
     The absurd is clearly JAMON, JAMON's playground, with ham and
garlic as appetizers for every activity from lovemaking to duels with
animal haunches.  The movie is steeped in sex, and sometimes it's
all-but-impossible to figure out who's sleeping with whom.  Or,
perhaps more appropriately, who isn't sleeping with whom.  And then
there's the naked bullfight....
     JAMON, JAMON is missing the element which could blend its
disparate segments into an engagingly campy whole.  Without this, it
seems like a cheap cross between last year's LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE
and the French DELICATESSEN.  JAMON, JAMON is good for a moment's
diversion, but the overall impression is more of a ham sandwich than a
full meal.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Everyone knows that good marketing can sell bad films, but
this phenomenon isn't limited to the plebeian masses. Even
the critics might fall for couple of well-thought
catchphrases and give raving reviews to films that don't
deserve it. That slogan can be something like "outrageous
sexy comedy coming from the country of Pedro Almodovar".
This is the only way to explain why JAMON, JAMON, 1992
comedy by Spanish director J.J. Bigas Luna, won all those
festival prizes.
The plot takes place in small Spanish town where young Jose
Luis (played by Jordi Mola) works in the underwear factory
owned by his parents. His 18-year girlfriend Sylvia (played
by Penelope Cruz), who works in the factory, is pregnant so
Jose Luis decides to propose her. Jose Luis' mother Conchita
(played by Stefania Sandrelli) sees this as unacceptable,
since Sylvia's mother Carmen (played by Anna Galiena)
happens to be notorious local prostitute. In order to break
the engagement Conchita hires services of local stud and
underwear model Raul (played by Javier Bardem) who is
supposed to seduce Sylvia. However, her scheme doesn't go as
planned - Conchita falls in love with Raul, Jose Luis finds
solace in Carmen, while Jose Luis' father begins making
moves on his son's fiancee.
JAMON, JAMON was supposed to be comedy but is actually a
drama. Lack of humour is just one of its problems - Bigas
Luna desperately tries to compensate laughs with series of
outrageous romantic twists more suitable for South American
soap operas. His attempts to give some "cool" visual
identity to the film through Freudian images or explicitly
sexual images barely keep our attention because of their
repetitiveness. Acting is fine, but commanding screen
personality of Javier Bardem, as well as girl- next-door
charm of Penelope Cruz seem wasted. The ending sacrifices
dramatic plausibility for the sake of "meaningful" final
shot and therefore only underlines the impression of a movie
which could be perfectly described by the phrase
"artsy-fartsy".
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
