Title
Review for Ŕ nos amours (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
A dysfunctional family is falling apart.  And the ones that suffer the most
are the teenagers.  The father has been having an affair and has made plans
to leave the house.  The daughter has a  boyfriend and the mother does not
approve of her behavior.  And the son commits himself to keeping the
family's business running while the mother is going through her tantrums.
There really is no solution, just some acceptance of the fact that things
are far from perfect.  The mother has the hardest time accepting this, and
takes it out on her daughter, no doubt suggesting that she made the same
errors in her earlier days which have brought her to the current situation.
There is really no solution to the whole thing, and as is the case with
another film maker in France, this is just another day in the life of these
people.  No solutions or suggestions are made.
This reminds me of Godard's theme at one time that he would like to make a
political film instead of a film about politics.  So he tears down the
fourth wall, and let's us see the whole thing from all sides and angles.
The result, is a film that only allows you to follow the emotional
outbursts, and avoid any serious conclusions about any thing.  We do know
one thing.  This family is pretty much broken up and where it is going is
not something anyone knows, or expect to know very soon.
The acting, is the strong point in this film.  It manages to keep the
tempestuous people alive and fighting for their own space, amidst little
sub-plots here and there.  The son has to side with the mother, and really
does not dislike his sister, but he is forced to play dad, since he is not
around.  The father comes and goes when he pleases, since he is paying the
rent, which he is about to stop, probably because he is out of a job.
Where will it all lead is the question, and since we do not get these, and
any, answers, the film is likely to be a frustrating adventure for many.
But the acting is tough, and solid, and very well prepared.  There is no
lack of consistency between any of the parts in the film.  It takes no
sides.
Well directed, considering the small script.  It appears ad-libbed many
times, but this is to its advantage in this specific situation.
