Title
Review for To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
     Lately, cross-dressing has become big in the movies.  Last year,
England gave us JUST LIKE A WOMAN and Australia took us on THE
ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT.  This year, the United
States has gotten into the act with the documentary WIGSTOCK and now TO
WONG FOO, THANKS FOR EVERYTHING! JULIE NEWMAR, the most oddly
punctuated and strange-sounding motion picture title of the year (it
refers to the inscription on a wall plaque in a restaurant).
Unfortunately, the content of the film is greatly inferior to the
title.
     The story centers around two drag queens, Vida Boheme (Patrick
Swayze) and Noxeema Jackson (Wesley Snipes), and their "drag princess"
protege, Chi Chi Rodriguez (John Leguizamo, sounding exactly like Rosie
Perez).  In a rented Cadillac, the trio are on their way from New York
to Hollywood to compete in the Miss Drag Queen America contest, but
something goes wrong with the car somewhere west of Bala Cynwyd, in
Hicksville, USA.  There, while they wait a long weekend for their car
to be repaired, Vida, Noxeema, and Chi Chi spend time teaching the
women of the small town how to be women and convincing an abused wife
(Stockard Channing) to stand up for herself.
     Is America ready for a mainstream cross-dressing motion picture
featuring macho action stars as frock-wearing gay men?  Perhaps,
especially with names like Snipes and Swayze in the cast list, but this
might have been a better test if the movie had been less bland.  Except
for the transvestite angle, this is essentially a run-of-the-mill feel
good/happy ending comedy that becomes more tedious the longer it runs.
There's a fair amount of effective humor here--mostly one-liners--but
the drama is insubstantial.  The overriding theme is to take chances
and be yourself--not exactly original, nor is it driven home with any
real conviction.
     The three leads are obviously having a lot of fun, and it shows.
The pleasure of watching these men in drag alone makes the first half-
hour worthwhile, but the effect wears off and the lame story has
trouble picking up the slack.  The cameo list is interesting--Robin
Williams, RuPaul, Naomi Campbell, Quentin Crisp, and (of course) Julie
Newmar--but these faces provide only momentary diversions.  TO WONG FOO
is in desperate need of something a little less superficial.
     Comparisons with THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA are natural, but,
aside from the obvious, the films aren't that similar.  PRISCILLA was
great fun, loaded with the kind of outrageous energy missing from TO
WONG FOO.  The musical numbers here are a pale shadow of those in the
Australian film.  Frequently, when this movie should soar, it crashes
to the ground with a dull thud.
     There are a few moments worth remembering, chief of which is
Noxeema's explanation of the differences between transvestites,
transsexuals, and drag queens.  There's also a wonderful bit where the
three "girls" transform their dreary hotel room into a drag queen's
paradise to the tune of "Wonder Woman."  Scenes like these provide
sporadic entertainment during TO WONG FOO.  However, as a whole, this
film--like the broken-down Caddy--may have style, but it lacks
substance.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
TO WONG FOO, THANKS FOR EVERYTHING! JULIE NEWMAR opens up with a parade of
drag queens on stage, dancing and frollicking to music. It strongly resembles
THE BIRDCAGE, not to confuse that TOO WONG FOO came first. The plot is
quickly unraveled as Vida Boheme and Noxeema Jackson (Patrick Swayze and
Wesley Snipes, respectively) tie for first place in a drag queen contest,
their prize being a trip to Hollywood. Naturally the two are thrilled, but
the more sympathetic one, Vida, takes pity on Chi Chi (John Leguizamo), an
amateuristic drag queen who's feeling quite a bit of self pity, and invites
him along.
TO WONG FOO doesn't take long to get to the goods, but it's somewhat boring
getting there so you still might feel anxious. The fun takes off when the
three "queens" end up stuck in the incredibly small town of Snydersville with
a broken down Chevy. They're forced to stay the weekend, and obviously become
a conspicuous group of flamboyantly dressed "women". Vida, Noxeema, and Chi
Chi end up teaching the women of the town how to be more independant, and the
men of the town how to be more gentlemanly. While the culture clash becomes a
close-knit family, the sherrif of a nearby town is on a hunt for these
"perverts". Apparantly he's not too happy about the embarrasing situation he
was left in after pulling them over with more-carnal-than-legal intentions.
Patrick Swayze is defintely the one who stands out in this film. While his
character may not be overly wonderful or impacting, he still put a lot into
it and does a fabulous job, as subtle as it may come off. TO WONG FOO is
pretty predictable even if it is predictable in a more wild-than-usual way.
Still, it's enjoyable and is worth seeing on video. While I only give it * *
1/2, it's a hearty * * 1/2!

Author
Christopher Null
     "Quirky" doesn't begin to describe the new, long-awaited film TO WONG
FOO, THANKS FOR EVERYTHING, JULIE NEWMAR.  If you've seen any of the
promos for the movie, you probably know the premise:  three drag queens
(Patrick Swayze, Wesley Snipes, and John Leguizamo) start a cross-country
trek to Hollywood, carting with them their wardrobes and an autographed
picture with the title inscription.  Hardly out of New York, their car
breaks down in middle-of-nowhere Snydersville.  Here, the "ladies" give
the town a makeover, bringing it not only fashion sense, but respect for
women, racial harmony, and an end to spouse abuse.  A drag queen can do a
lot when she puts her mind to it.
     The three are as different as drag queens can be.  Vida (Swayze)
sweeps around like a Southern debutante, while Noxeema (Snipes) acts more
like a pro wrestler.  Chi Chi (Leguizamo) is the Charo-type of the bunch,
a drag queen-in-training who never realizes when she's laying it on too
thick.  Of the three, Leguizamo is the one to watch.  It's almost
frightening how well he lands his role, while Swayze and Snipes are more
like guys acting like guys in drag.  The supporting cast is uninspiring,
but watching for the numerous cameos is fun.
     Most of the time, the film is so totally unconventional that it's
riotously funny, but the one-joke premise wears a little thin and often
becomes as silly as a Jim Carrey vehicle.  And although it borrows heavily
from last year's PRISCILLA:  QUEEN OF THE DESERT, TO WONG FOO is still
quite a bit different and takes cross-dressing into realms I never knew
existed.
     When it's all said and done, TO WONG FOO tries to make some wholesome
social statements, but they seem out of place.  The film is a fun time,
and that's about all that should be expected.  It faces a dilemma just
like the one the trio faces when choosing a vehicle to purchase:  should
they go with "style" or "substance."  The choice seems obvious.
-Christopher Null / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)
