Title
Review for Surviving Picasso (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Anthony Hopkins, Natascha McElhone, Julianne Moore, Joss Ackland, 
      Peter Eyre, Jeanne Lapotaire, Diane Venora, Joan Plowright
Director: James Ivory
Producers: Ismail Merchant and David L. Wolper
Screenplay: Ruth Prawer Jhabvala based on PICASSO: CREATOR AND DESTROYER 
      by Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington
Cinematography: Tony Pierce-Roberts
Music: Richard Robbins
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     For the second consecutive movie (following last year's 
unsuccessful JEFFERSON IN PARIS), director James Ivory is sticking to a 
fact-based story.  Bringing in Anthony Hopkins (HOWARDS END, THE REMAINS 
OF THE DAY), fresh from essaying the lead character in Oliver Stone's 
NIXON, was probably his best move.  Relying on the Ruth Prawer 
Jhabvala's superficial and ill-focused script was probably his worst.  
SURVIVING PICASSO is a passable film, but it's far from the kind of 
powerful motion pictures the producer/director team of Merchant/Ivory 
was turning out just a few years ago.
     Merchant/Ivory at their best means thought-provoking, emotionally 
wrenching drama that affects both heart and mind.  HOWARDS END and THE 
REMAINS OF THE DAY are both amazing feats of film making -- deep, 
resonant studies of repression.  SURVIVING PICASSO isn't close to the 
same level.  This shallow, almost-trite movie details Picasso's 
interactions with one of his many mistresses without ever giving us a 
meaningful portrayal of any of the characters involved, including the 
painter and the woman.  We go into a film like this expecting a full 
meal, but emerge never having gotten to the entree.
     SURVIVING PICASSO is often like a tabloid account of one decade 
during the great painter's life.  The film is primarily concerned with 
Picasso's affair with Francoise Gilot (Natascha McElhone), who was his 
mistress and companion from 1946 through 1953.  But, although Gilot's 
relationship with Picasso is the focus, the movie still offers us 
glimpses of the other four major women in his life:  his first wife, 
Olga (Jeanne Lapotaire); his mistress, Marie-Therese Walter (Susannah 
Harker); his mistress, Dora Marr (Julianne Moore); and his second wife, 
Jacqueline (Diane Venora).  There are moments when SURVIVING PICASSO 
rises above the ongoing soap opera of Francoise's attempts to make a 
life with her older lover -- brief discussions of painting, Picasso's 
adept handling of art dealers, and an enjoyable interlude with Henri 
Matisse (Joss Ackland).  During these sequences, Ivory's movie shines, 
but they represent a minority of the two-plus hour running time.
     Of course, it can be argued that no film with Anthony Hopkins could 
be all bad.  In fact, since winning the Academy Award for Hannibal the 
Cannibal, I can only recall two sub-par performances (FREEJACK and THE 
INNOCENT).  His Picasso is nothing to be ashamed of:  passionate, 
charismatic, and enigmatic.  Though he puts Francoise through hell, he 
is never intentionally cruel, nor is he ever abusive or violent.  
Picasso, as presented here, can often be short-tempered, insensitive, 
and neglectful, but he is never blatantly hurtful.  Hopkins displays all 
of the painter's faults while exhibiting a vulnerability that allows us 
to sympathize with him.  Often, Picasso comes across much like a child -
- happy and energetic when he gets his way; bad-tempered and 
obstreperous when he doesn't.
     Newcomer Natascha McElhone, who plays Francoise, has an attractive 
enough face and figure, but doesn't display great range.  She's fine in 
most of the low-key scenes, but doesn't appear comfortable with displays 
of deep emotion.  Of the supporting performers, Julianne Moore stands 
out as the most memorable.  Her Dora Marr, a hardened, bitter woman, 
gives us a keen sense of the lasting damage Picasso is capable of 
inflicting.
     Those who approach SURVIVING PICASSO hoping for insight into the 
artistic influences and philosophies of the painter will be 
disappointed.  This film is little more than a series of loosely-
connected vignettes about an aging man engaged in a sexual relationship 
with a woman young enough to be his daughter.  Even that would be okay 
if there was real depth and energy to their interactions, but, even 
given the acting talents of Anthony Hopkins, SURVIVING PICASSO can't 
manage better than spotty character development.  Occasionally, 
Francoise and Picasso come across as real individuals, but rarely do 
they click as a couple.  There's never any heat, even when Francoise 
first disrobes in front of the painter (in fact, considering Hopkins' 
startled reaction, this scene is actually more funny than erotic).  
     With Ismail Merchant producing, James Ivory directing, and Anthony 
Hopkins starring in a film based on the life of one of the most colorful 
and influential artists of this century, a movie-goer is justified in 
expecting a film of epic scope.  SURVIVING PICASSO definitely doesn't 
fit the bill, and, as a result, represents the second straight 
disappointment to come from Merchant/Ivory.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Natascha McElhone, Julianne Moore.
Screenplay:  Ruth Prawer Jhabvala.
Producers:  Ismail Merchant, David L. Wolper.
Director:  James Ivory.
MPAA Rating:  R (brief nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I'm not sure what it is that inspired the highly respected Merchant
Ivory production team to turn from fiction to biography, but I wish they
would drop it already.  For years, director James Ivory, producer Ismail
Merchant and screenwriter Ruth Prawer Jhabvala turned out exceptionally
well-crafted adaptations of novels commonly held to be too difficult to
film:  A ROOM WITH A VIEW, HOWARDS END, THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  Then last
year they made JEFFERSON IN PARIS, a study of Thomas Jefferson in which
Nick Nolte looked as bored in the title role as the audience must have
been watching him.  SURVIVING PICASSO is not nearly as paralyzingly dull,
but it demonstrates once again that real people seem to elude Ivory and
company.
     Frequent Merchant Ivory collaborator Anthony Hopkins stars as
celebrated artist Pablo Picasso, who is a living legend in his 60s when
the film opens in occupied Paris in 1943.  Picasso is all too aware of his
own celebrity, and uses it to seduce impressionable young women like
aspiring artist Francoise Gilot (Natascha McElhone).  Francoise becomes
his lover and the mother of two of his children, despite knowledge of the
previous lovers Picasso has taken in and abandoned like Marie-Therese
(Susannah Harker) and Dora (Julianne Moore), to say nothing of his wife
Olga (Jane Lapotaire).  Francoise believes it will be different with her,
but eventually discovers that Picasso uses far more than he loves.
     SURVIVING PICASSO is a particularly frustrating piece of work because
you can see what it is Ivory was trying to do.  Francoise is introduced
early as a strong-willed woman who risks the wrath of her domineering
father (Bob Peck) when she decides to pursue her artistic career, setting
up a conflict between Francoise and Picasso in which he has greater
difficulty reducing her to yet another of his weeping conquests.
McElhone, a newcomer with piercing eyes, brings out the intelligence in
Francoise, but she becomes a distressingly passive character, even more so
when she becomes a narrator for flashbacks.  Her unique personality has
little chance to emerge, and even seems to be contradicted directly by a
voice-over near the end in which Francoise notes that Picasso "made me
strong."  It is a baffling conclusion, since she seems infinitely stronger
before their relationship begins.
     Picasso himself is similarly enigmatic, played by Anthony Hopkins as
an egomanical bon vivant, turning his fame into a method for making people
feel insignificant, and honored merely to be in his presence.  Ivory and
Jhabvala do a fine job of showing us the effect of Picasso's behavior on
those around him, but they are much less effective at showing us the man
himself.  It does not help that we are never able to see Picasso's own
work to reflect his personality (his estate did not allow them to be
used), making his art little more than a footnote to SURVIVING PICASSO.
The film-makers remain distant, showing us bits and pieces of Picasso's
life, like a speech to a Communist Party conference, without connecting
them to the man he became.  We are never allowed inside the passionate
artist; Hopkins is technically proficient, wandering accent
notwithstanding, but his is a role which seems designed to be observed
rather than understood.
     You can always count on a Merchant Ivory film to look splendid, and
there is superb work once again from cinematographer Tony Pierce-Roberts
and production designer Lucianna Arrighi.  It is a beautiful environment
they have created for this story, but the characters in that environment
are disappointing.  There are several moments in SURVIVING PICASSO which
inspire a curiosity about this fascinating man, notably his rivalry
with contemporary Henri Matisse (Joss Ackland), but there is always the
nagging sense, as there was in JEFFERSON IN PARIS, that Ivory doesn't
really have a point of view.  His biographies are safe, almost documentary
detailings of events in an individual's life which do not add up to a
story.  Picasso and Jefferson were both fascinating historical figures
with private and public lives full of contradictions, and they should have
made for great drama.  Ivory simply seems too respectful of his subjects,
content to lay out events like they might appear in a history text without
much in the way of interpretation.  The irony is that he has been able to
take far more internalized fictional characters, like THE REMAINS OF THE
DAY's James Stevens, and make them extraordinarily vivid.  He has not
shown the same facility with bringing life to characters who actually
lived.

Author
Cooper Redwine
Starring: Anthony Hopkins, Natascha McElhone, Julianne 
Moore, Joss Ackland, Peter Eyre, Jeanne Lapotaire, Diane 
Venora, Joan Plowright. Directed by James Ivory. Screenplay 
by: Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. Adapted from: "Picasso: Creator and 
Destroyer" by Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington. Running 
time: two hours, three minutes. MPAA rating: R.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers!
Although SURVIVING PICASSO is a good-looking, easy-to-
watch film, I found it to be more like a good cable-TV docudrama 
than the big screen character study I was hoping for. It seemed 
more concerned with lovingly recapturing the details of period 
costume and setting than probing the depths of the 
characters' psyches. It even goes so far as to recreate the look 
of old photographs of the characters from the popular 
magazines of the day. In addition, the actresses seem to have 
been picked more for their physical resemblance to the people 
they are playing than for their acting ability.
I think that the script is the film's weakest point. Rarely 
lingering long enough on any one scene to explore anything in 
depth, the choppy and heavy-handed script relies on an 
intrusive voice-over narration to keep the story from falling 
into chaos.
I expect a lot from Merchant-Ivory, and in some ways this film 
does deliver. It has high production values, wonderful settings, 
and a fine performance by Anthony Hopkins that almost 
overcomes the script. But the film lacks the sensitivity and 
complexity that I have come to expect from Merchant-Ivory. 
However, I base my expectations on their earlier films adapted 
from literary fiction, while the credits for SURVIVING PICASSO 
claim that it was adapted from "Picasso: Creator and 
Destroyer" a best-selling biography by Arianna 
Stassinopoulos Huffington.
SURVIVING PICASSO is actually a Merchant-Ivory-Wolper 
production, and so it is not surprising that it has that big-
budget biopic feeling. I think that fans of Merchant-Ivory will be 
disappointed that the main characters, Francoise Gilot 
(played by Natascha McElhone) and Pablo Picasso (Anthony 
Hopkins), have been dumbed down to comic-book level. The 
performance of Hopkins is strong enough to give the character 
of Picasso some resonance. However, McElhone's portrayal of 
Gilot consists mainly of projecting an aura of sad grace and 
giving a resigned smile once in a while. It could have been that 
McElhone needed better direction or that the material she was 
given to work with was simply intractable. In this connection it 
should be mentioned that even though Gilot is the point-of-
view character, she is delineated even more sketchily than 
Picasso. 
The movie focuses on the period from about 1943 to the early 
1950s when Picasso shared his life with Gilot; it also takes 
brief excursions into his romantic relationships with other 
women. However, instead of fully developed characters like 
those in HOWARD'S END and A ROOM WITH A VIEW, I never 
gained much insight into any of the characters in SURVIVING 
PICASSO, including Picasso and Gilot. Also, I didn't perceive 
any chemistry between Hopkins and McElhone, which made 
their whole relationship seem not quite believable.
When I heard that Merchant-Ivory was making a film on 
Picasso and Gilot, I was excited, recognizing the rich dramatic 
and emotional potential a story about these two people has. I 
was disappointed to see that Merchant-Ivory opted instead to 
present these dynamic people as one-dimensional 
stereotypes. Picasso's artistic oeuvre shows him to be a multi-
dimensional man whose emotions ran the full spectrum, 
ranging from the tenderness and serenity of his Rose Period 
to the chaos and violence shown in his portraits of weeping 
women. Instead, in SURVIVING PICASSO we are presented 
with an overemphasis on only one facet of Picasso--he was an 
"enfant terrible" who saw it as his privilege as an artistic genius 
to selfishly use people in general and women in particular. 
I am starting to re-read Gilot's memoir "Life with Picasso." 
>From it I can gather that she was more complex than the 
woman portrayed in SURVIVING PICASSO and her 
relationship with Picasso had more nuances than this film 
even hints at. In the film, Gilot is presented as little more than 
a long-suffering angel who eventually awakens to what a cad 
her man is.
There are good scenes in the movie, but their strength is often 
undercut by the overall heavy-handedness. For example, there 
is a scene where Picasso shows pictures to his dealer, 
including work on what critics now call his Weeping Women 
Series. (Although the paintings used in the film are not actual 
Picassos, they are close enough to be effective.) The scene is 
used to reinforce the unrelenting theme of the film--Picasso's 
self-absorption eventually turned all the women he loved into 
the living, breathing equivalents of his portraits. The scene 
isn't bad in and of itself, but the point it makes is made too 
many times and in too many ways in the film, and it is made at 
the expense of creating fully-faceted characters.
Another strong, yet heavy-handed, scene also illustrates 
Picasso's "enfant-terrible" persona. Picasso forces Gilot to 
watch as a bird of prey swoops out of the sky, takes a scrawny 
cat in its talons, and carries it away to its death. I found this to 
be a powerful visual metaphor that draws parallels between the 
predatory bird and Picasso, the predatory man. Again, the 
scene taken by itself is good, but in the context of the rest of 
the film, it becomes trite because it is yet another didactic 
episode.
There are some films that merely entertain, while others go 
beyond that and take us to a deeper understanding of the 
human heart. This film doesn't get beyond the point of mere 
entertainment, and while there is nothing wrong with 
entertainment, I was hoping for something more given 
Merchant-Ivory's reputation and the rich subject of Picasso 
and Gilot. I think this movie is worth seeing, but I wouldn't 
blame anyone for preferring to wait for it to come out on 
videotape.

Author
Bradley Null
     If you learn only one thing while watching SURVIVING PICASSO, it
will probably be this:  Pablo Picasso was a big fat jerk.
     Unfortunately, that's about all you'll learn, as Merchant-Ivory's
latest exercise in excess sheds little light on the great artiste and
leaves the viewer with even less of an understanding as to why Picasso
was the man he was.
     Anthony Hopkins is the obvious choice for Picasso, and the film
takes the track of vaguely following Picasso's life along with his many,
many love interests, including the psychotic Dora Maar (Julianne Moore
in a fantastic performance), his wife Olga (Jeanne Lapotaire), a couple
of other relationships, plus the mysterious Francoise Gilot (Natascha
McElhone), who suffered with Pablo for some ten years.  (All of the
women perform their roles admirably.)
     What the film doesn't do is show you any insight into Picasso's
life, except for the fact that he was stingy, paranoid, stubborn, and
basically a lech.  The movie's liberal use of voice-over and thick
accents doesn't help matters, and this already cryptic tale becomes even
more inaccessible -- not only is it hard to understand what this movie
is really about, it's hard to understand what anyone is saying.
     As played by Hopkins, Picasso is transformed into a childish goon
with no redeeming qualities, and given SURVIVING PICASSO's 123 minute
running time, this gets extremely tiresome, extremely quickly.  For the
last 1 1/2 hours, I was really just waiting for the credits.  So I guess
we'll never really understand what Picasso was all about.
     The sad result is that, in the end, SURVIVING PICASSO is really
just one long exercise in survival itself.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Well, I survived SURVIVING PICASSO, but I am not sure why I chose
to.  I could have walked out after about thirty minutes and gotten the
gist of the picture which is that Picasso was a boisterous enigma who
had numerous parallel affairs with younger women.
     Usually reliable Anthony Hopkins's portrayal of Pablo Picasso shed
no light on him as a man or a painter.  I left knowing little more than
when I arrived.  The only bright light in the film is screen newcomer
Natasha McElhone as Francoise Gilot, who was one of Picasso's
girlfriends and wives.  McElhone has a infectious smile and inner
strength, and the camera loves her.  I look forward to seeing her in a
much better movie.
     SURVIVING PICASSO tells the story of Picasso's love affairs from
the time of the Nazi occupation of Paris to his death decades later.
His painting is treated as secondary material, but for me it is the
best part.  In fact the only truly involving scene in the entire film
is when cinematographer Tony Pierce-Roberts (REMAINS OF THE DAY,
HOWARDS END, and A ROOM WITH A VIEW) zooms in for a close-up of the
paint in one of the few times Picasso holds a brush in the show.
     Actually, all of the cinematography is done well and the colors
are reflective of the bright primary colors in Picasso's paintings.
Don't look for his paintings in the film however since his son would
not permit them to be shown in the picture.  Also, worth noting is the
colorful pastel costumes by Carol Ramsey and the surreal sets by
Luciana Arrighi.  They add a bit of fun to an otherwise dull movie.
     When Picasso first meets Francoise and her girlfriend, he warns
them, "You are in the labyrinth of the Minotaur.  You should know that
the Minotaur consumes at least two maidens a day."  His view of himself
as a dirty old man is shared by his previous lover Dora Maar (Julianne
Moore) who tells him, "You may be a great painter, but you are morally
corrupt.  You've contaminated the whole world."
     The script by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, based on the book by Arianna
Stassinopoulos Huffington, paints an unflattering picture of the artist
as a vain and sexist man.  Picasso explains to Dora that, "I really
like intelligent women.  Sometimes, of course, I like stupid ones too,"
referring to her.
     The show argues that Picasso viewed women as mere objects.  Upon
seeing a cat in a field he remarks, "I love wild cats.  They are always
pregnant because they think of nothing but love."  He then forces
Francoise to watch as a big bird swoops down and kills the poor cat.
Picasso is not shown to have a remorseful bone in his body.  The
closest he comes is when he declares, "I make a lot of mistakes, but so
does God."
     There is one bit of interesting Picasso trivia I did learn.  It
seems that he saved every piece of cut hair and every nail clipping of
his.  He had them carefully numbered and dated so that no one could
steal them and do black magic against him.  One strange guy.
     SURVIVING PICASSO runs a very s-l-o-w 2:03.  It is rated R, but it
is a soft R.  There is a single brief scene of full female frontal
nudity.  The language is pretty mild, and there is no sex or violence.
The film would be fine for any teenager, but I see no reason anyone
would want to sit through this pointless biography of Picasso's many
affairs so I give it a thumbs down and award it a single *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
