Title
Review for MatchMaker, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
James Berardinelli
United States/Ireland, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 10/3/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Janeane Garofalo, David O'Hara, Milo O'Shea, Denis Leary, 
      Jay O. Sanders, Rosaleen Linehan, Maria Doyle Kennedy, 
      Saffron Burrows
Director: Mark Joffe
Producers: Eric Fellner, Tim Bevan, Luc Roeg
Screenplay: Karen Janszen, Louis Nowra, Graham Linehan based on a 
      screenplay by Greg Dinner
Cinematography: Ellery Ryan
Music: John Altman
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     The production notes trumpet THE MATCHMAKER as "a romantic comedy 
for people who hate romantic comedies."  This statement implies that the 
film has something exceptionally original or daring to offer those who 
are tired of screen love affairs that follow a predictable trajectory 
from point A to point B.  In fact, it's false advertising.  There's 
nothing remotely special about the romantic component of this picture -- 
it's strictly boy meets girl, boy loses girl due to a silly 
misunderstanding, and boy gets back together with girl in time for the 
end credits. 
     So why would anyone who hates romantic comedies like this one?  
Presumably because the film makers believe that Janeane Garofalo is the 
type of atypical leading lady who will attract a more cynical audience.  
And, while this might have been true before THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND 
DOGS, Garofalo is widely remembered for her role as Abby the animal 
lover, and her presence in another romantic comedy will not surprise 
anyone.  Indeed, she shows the same unselfconscious charm in THE 
MATCHMAKER that made her character so irresistible in CATS AND DOGS.  
The primary difference is that the script for this film has a confused 
sense of what it wants to accomplish, and, as a result, director Mark 
Joffe (COSI) is unable to utilize Garofalo's talents fully.
     The film begins conventionally enough.  Garofalo plays Marcy 
Tizard, the tireless political aide to Senator John McGlory (Jay O. 
Sanders), who's running for re-election in Massachusetts.  He's behind 
in the polls, however, so his campaign manager, the hard-bitten Nick 
Ward (Denis Leary), comes up with a new strategy that involves sending 
Marcy overseas to the town of McGlory's ancestors, a place called 
Ballinagra in Ireland's County Galway.  While there, she's supposed to 
find a few of McGlory's relatives (the intention being to bolster his 
support in Boston's Irish American community).  Marcy isn't thrilled 
about making the trip, but, since she has no life, she agrees.
     While the setup may be a little long-winded, it succeeds in getting 
Marcy to Ireland, where she arrives in the midst of a matchmaking 
festival and is presented with the opportunity to find love with one of 
the locals.  (Of course, as with most romantic comedies, we know who her 
match is the moment that we see him.)  Unfortunately, instead of just 
allowing the story to coast along through familiar romantic comedy 
terrain, the film makers choose to bring back the political sideshow 
during the final half-hour.  This might have been okay had the material 
been well-written, but it's all trite and derivative.  THE MATCHMAKER's 
script doesn't offer one observation about the American political 
process that hasn't been presented many times before, frequently in 
better movies.  Worse still, as this aspect of the plot attains pre-
eminence during the closing twenty minutes, Marcy and her romantic 
situation are crowded out.  Maybe the reason romantic comedy haters are 
supposed to appreciate this film is because, after a hour's buildup, the 
love story gets shortchanged.  At the precise moment when Marcy and her 
would-be Irish beau, Sean (David O'Hara), should be THE MATCHMAKER's 
focus, they're standing off to the side.
     Despite the uneven and potentially-dissatisfying screenplay, there 
are still a few reasons to see THE MATCHMAKER, chief of which is a trio 
of finely-tuned performances from Garofalo, David O'Hara (an Irish actor 
who has appeared in the likes of SOME MOTHER'S SON and BRAVEHEART), and 
screen and stage veteran Milo O'Shea, who plays Dermot, the local 
matchmaker.  Also, since the movie was shot on location in Ireland, a 
dash of the local color and scenery gets thrown into the mix, and there 
don't seem to be as many stereotypes as one might normally expect from a 
production of this nature.
     Had THE MATCHMAKER been better focused, it might have resembled THE 
ENGLISHMAN WHO WENT UP A HILL BUT CAME DOWN A MOUNTAIN with gender and 
location changes.  However, while the romantic stuff here works, the 
unsavvy and unappealing political material proves to be a constant 
irritant (and leads to the film's worst moment -- a short, preachy 
speech on ethics delivered in strident tones by Garofalo).  As a result, 
the movie's marriage of true love and cynical campaigning turns out to 
be less than a match made in heaven.  
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
James Sanford
Every so often a new talent appears on the scene and instantly wins a
devoted following. That was certainly the case with Janeane Garofalo
last year: Her not-so-ugly duckling turn in "The Truth About Cats and
Dogs" proved to be an inspiration to millions of women who don't look in
the mirror and see Julia Roberts. It also provided plenty of room for
Garofalo to show off her sassy, self-deprecating style, previously seen
only in small doses in "Reality Bites" and "Bye Bye Love."
"The Matchmaker" probably seemed like a solid choice for a follow-up
vehicle, another romantic comedy casting Garofalo as a tough cookie with
a tender heart, who finds love when she finally breaks out of her usual
insulation. In this case, she's an American single women who finds
herself stuck in a small Irish town during the annual matchmaking
festival, a set-up that should have been the perfect springboard for
Garofalo's stinging observations about cultural differences and the
mysteries of the heart.
Unfortunately, though Garofalo is still a treasure, "Matchmaker" proves
to be a crock of fool's gold. The screenplay was penned by one writer
and reworked by three others, and the story bears the fingerprints of
too many hands. Often there's so much going on in this tale director
Mark Joffe doesn't have time to capitalize on what should have been
sure-fire comic ideas. Nor does Garofalo get many chances to fling her
customary zingers, which could have put some much-needed punch into this
nicely photographed but uninspiring blarney. James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sometimes even the slightest of comedies can come alive with the
right talent.  So it is with THE MATCHMAKER, an Irish comedy staring
Janeane Garofalo.  Garofalo, who usually is shuffled off to some minor
part as in COP LAND and LARGER THAN LIFE or made-up to look harshly
unattractive as in ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION, finally gets
a movie where she can take center stage.  And not since THE TRUTH ABOUT
CATS & DOGS has she been given a part where she looks so appealing.  In
the latter film she wasn't supposed to be cute, but was and even
outshone Uma Thurman.
     Garofalo plays Marcy Tizard, an aide to Massachusetts Senator John
McGlory (Jay O. Sanders).  The senator, with his reelection campaign
going down the proverbial toilet, sends Marcy to Ballinagra in Ireland
to discover his roots.  Although she has trouble finding any evidence
of the McGlory family there, she does not want for company since a
local matchmakers festival is in full swing.
     Ireland welcomes Marcy not with the normal picture postcard views,
but with a cold, gray day and a gale-force rain.  Soon, however, the
weather in this charming tale turns to bright, glorious sunshine.  The
mountains are snowcapped, the pastures are lush golds and greens, and
everywhere Irish music is in the air.
     As Dermot, the local matchmaker, Milo O'Shea gives a heartwarming
performance.  The story keeps cutting to a home video he is making
extolling the virtues of matchmaking.  As we learn in a Ross
Perot-style pie chart presentation, the four ingredients of a good
marriage are: love, sex, eating, and having a good laugh, with the
latter having the largest slice.  Dermot's dead seriousness would work
well on a late night infomercial.
     Although in competition with another matchmaker, Dermot has many
tricks to guarantee his success.  His "turbo tan" for the men is
claimed to make them instantly irresistible.  Nothing like a
third-degree burn to turn on the ladies.  One unlucky lad even attempts
suicide with a sun lamp, which is an extremely painful but normally
unsuccessful way to kill oneself.
     David O'Hara has played an Irishman in numerous dramas recently
including THE DEVIL'S OWN, SOME MOTHER'S SON and the TV show "Prime
Suspect 5."  As Sean, a shy and seemingly not too bright local man in
THE MATCHMAKER, he displays his flair for comedy.  He falls quickly in
love with Marcy, and soon the feeling is mutual.
     "It's so beautiful here," Marcy tells Sean, "If it just had the
New York Times, it would be perfect."  And then she goes on to confess,
"I long to fax someone."
     The supporting cast would have come to nothing without Garofalo.
Several times in the movie she delivers lines that should be no more
than mildly funny, but which elicit huge belly laughs from the
audience.  With her self-assured and winsome ways, her charm bowls you
over, which makes her acerbic wit all the more effective.
     The story frequently loses it way only to have some line or
gesture from Garofalo get it back on course.  The writers use several
nice plot twists to resolve the show's predicaments -- some of which
are easy to guess and others aren't, but it doesn't matter.  The only
reason to be in Ireland during the festival is to hang out with
Garofalo.
     THE MATCHMAKER runs 1:36.  It is rated R for a few words of
profanity, many of them with unfamiliar Irish pronunciations, and the
film would be fine for kids around 10 and up.  I recommend this
delightful picture to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
People are suckers for foreign accents. It doesn't matter what someone is
saying, as long as they have that accent, people will listen until the cows
come home. For that reason alone, THE MATCHMAKER captivates us, but were it
just another small town middle America flick, the small but bewitching amount
of magic this film possesses would be completely lost.
Janeane Garofalo takes on her usual cynical persona, this time as Marcy
Tizard, campaign aide for dim-witted senator, John McGlory (Jay O. Sanders).
It's re-election time and McGlory is behind, so in an attempt to garner some
votes out of good human interest, McGlory sends Marcy to Ireland to track down
some McGlory ancestry. Absolutely anything but delighted, Marcy travels
overseas to the remote Irish town of Ballinagra. It just so happens that Marcy
is arriving smack dab in the middle of the annual Matchmaker Festival, where
the local cupid, an older gentlemen by the name of Dermot (Milo O'Shea), uses
his knack for diagnosing compatibility to put together the singles of the
town.
The festival becomes a distraction for Marcy, who's already having a hard
enough time with the transition from Boston to a town functioning on
simplicity. Her aggravation is only enhanced by her slightly-larger-than-a-
closet hotel room and the annoying Sean (David O'Hara), a writer who resides a
few rooms down the hall, helps himself to Marcy's bathtub, and owns a luggage
desecrating dog. Despite the inaugural friction, Dermot sees real potential
between Marcy and Sean and begins a plot to put them together, especially when
motivated by his main competitor's doubts (and handsome wager).
For being a romantic comedy, there sure is a low amount of romance. It's not
that watching the characters interact isn't fun, but there seems to be a
deprived sense of development *between* the characters. Everyone is charming,
especially O'Shea as Dermot, but nobody is introduced beyond their initial
stages. We don't really get to know any of the characters better by the end.
We don't really see them go thru much of a change, and, unfortunately for this
film, that's what stories are all about. Even Garofalo, whom I highly admire
as one of my favorite modern female actresses, seems a bit dispassionate about
her appearance here.
This is a film that will be loved because, like Ballinagra, it's simplistic
and sincere almost to a point of naivety. But even though the charm is thick,
it's spread on a bit thin. To give some credit, there a few things that do
make THE MATCHMAKER watchable: a better than average soundtrack, some
beautiful Irish landscapes, and, of course, those cute little accents.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Long-time readers of this space will recall that I have never
promoted the myth of critical objectivity.  I am merely a man, folks, a
flesh-and-blood film fan with preferences and pet peeves just like
everyone else.  Brilliant special effects will never move me like a
brilliant script will.  I'm indifferent about baseball, but I love
baseball movies.  "Heartwarming comedies" leave me cold.  I'm too easy on
Woody Allen sometimes.  And so on.
     THE MATCHMAKER appears to have been made with a direct network
connection to my cinematic soft spots.  Put Janeane Garofolo in a leading
role, and I'm yours to lose.  Set a story in Ireland, and the battle for
my affections is half won.  Put Janeane Garofolo in a leading role in a
story set in Ireland...well, now you're just not playing fair.  Their
combined charm is irresistable, flimsy though the story may be.
     Garofolo plays Marcy Tizard, a second-tier worker for the re-election
campaign of Massachusetts senator John McGlory (Jay O. Sanders).  Trailing
badly in the pools, McGlory and his campaign manager Nick Ward (Denis
Leary) come up with a desperate plan to win over the state's Irish vote:
McGlory will visit with his actual kin in Ireland.  The job of actually
finding those kin is left to Marcy, who is sent to the small coastal town
of Ballinagra to dig up McGlory's roots.  Little does she know that she'll
be landing in the middle of the town's annual match-making festival, or
that the town's leading matchmaker (Milo O'Shea) has his eye on fixing up
Marcy with an enigmatic local fellow named Sean (David O'Hara).
     On a number of levels, it's clear that THE MATCHMAKER needs a bit
more fleshing out.  Character development for Marcy is sorely lacking,
leaving plenty of unanswered questions about her as she heads to Ireland.
What is her life like in America?  What kind of romantic history does she
bring to her relationship with Sean?  Why is she working for a pea-brain
like McGlory whose campaign slogan ("Hey Ho Let's Go") is a Ramones lyric?
In short, who is Marcy, besides a character for Janeane Garofolo to play?
Her relationship with Sean (nicely played by David O'Hara as a fiery
idealist) is better developed than you find in most romantic comedies, but
we never understand why it might be truly important to Marcy.  It's all
very pleasant, in an inconsequential sort of way.
     Then again, if you add up all the things about THE MATCHMAKER which
are very pleasant, you have a fairly pleasant film experience.  First
there is Garofolo herself, a screen presence unlike any other in film.
Acerbic, smart and unconventionally beautiful, Garofolo improves a story
by her mere presence.  She doesn't have as strong a character to latch on
to as she had in THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS & DOGS, but she's still an energetic
presence who's easy to root for.  O'Hara is also quite pleasant, as is
O'Shea as the ethically shaky matchmaker.  And of course there's the
scenery and the local Irish color, which is very pleasant indeed.  
     THE MATCHMAKER has a heavy strain of fish-out-of-water comedy to it,
but it rarely reeks of formula thanks to Mark Joffe's low-key direction
and Garofolo's ability to underplay a reaction take.  Still, as the 
film strolls along towards its conclusion with a few unnecessary
intrusions by the political sub-plot, it might be seen as a bit uninspired
and tedious, objectively speaking.  I'm not objectively speaking, of
course.  One viewer might find little to like about THE MATCHMAKER.
Another -- who shall remain nameless -- might spend 95 minutes smiling at
a friendly face in a friendly place.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Janeane Garofalo, David O'Hara, Milo O'Shea, Denis Leary, Jay O.
Sanders, Rosaleen Linehan, Maria Doyle Kennedy, Saffron Burrows
Director: Mark Joffe Producers: Eric Fellner, Tim Bevan, Luc Roeg
Screenplay:  Karen Janszen, Louis Nowra, Graham Linehan based on a
screenplay by Greg Dinner
This isn't the best romantic comedy of the year, but it does carry a
quaint Irish charm that will win the hearts of some. I never thought
there was a shortage of single women in Ireland until I watched THE
MATCHMAKER. Single women, this movie is for you. If anyone is suffering
from the dread lonely-hearts syndrome, then I'll recommend a good Irish
dose of matchmaking. Empty your bank account, throw caution to the wind
and buy a ticket to Ireland during matchmaking season. I will guarantee
that even if you can't find yourself a potential mate for a date, at
least you will be treated like a Queen for your entire stay. Imagine men
with good character drooling over you, lining up to ask for your hand to
dance and singing their hearts out for your affection. If this is your
fantasy, then this movie hits all the right notes.
Janeane Garofalo is by all means a charming young actress who came to
our attention as the bubbly, witty Abbey, the gal with the personality,
not the body in THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS. Whilst she was
outstanding in that particular role, her character Marcy in this movie
isn't much of an improvement, but a mere improvisation of what we know
she is capable off. The premise of the movie surrounds Marcy travelling
to Ireland to discover the Irish origins of a Senator McGlory (Jay O.
Sanders), who is eyeing re-election. She arrives during the matchmaking
festival and becomes the unwitting object of marriage for every single
male in the Irish town of Ballinagra. With a bit of Irish luck, a bit of
Irish ale and two Matchmakers working over time on the side - does Marcy
find Mr Right in the end?
This lightweight comedy is easy going and should be enjoyed like a
leisurely stroll on a sunny afternoon. It's weightless content and
innocent fun is great daydream material, carrying with it all the
trivialities of life at its charming best.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Steve Kong
I first saw Janeane Garofalo in Touch, which she had a small part.  Though
Touch was not a great movie, it was the one in which I fell in love with
Garofalo.  She's had small roles in some recent movies that I've caught,
including the recent Cop Land, but nothing major that I've seen.  The
Matchmaker marks the first film that she is the lead in that I've seen.
And what a wonderful film it is.
Marcy Tizard (Garofalo) works as an aide for Senator John McGlory.  McGlory
is up for re-election and needs something to run with.  He's not a
particularly bright man and that is why his campaign manager Nick Ward
(Denis Leary) is almost in full control of McGlory.  Ward needs something
to help promote the Senator as a "family" man and it is this that brings
him to the idea that they should dig up the genealogy of the Senator, who
is Irish.  Marcy is sent off to Ireland to find out about the Senator's
background.  And this is where the movie really starts.
Marcy is dropped into the Irish town of Ballinagra during it's matchmaking
festival.  It is during the festival that we meet Dermot (Milo O'Shea) who
is one of the town's professional matchmakers.  And with this we start the
romance between Marcy and one of the town's men, Sean (David O'Hare).
Garofalo has a fantastic down-to-earth aura to her, and her cynicism about
almost everything is something that I can 
relate to.  She shows that she has great comic timing and is very charming
all through the movie.  And because she's the lead in this film she is the
only reason to see this film.  Though there are some other things that you
might want to look for.
Milo O'Shea steals every scene that he is in, even the ones that are with
Garofalo.  His matchmaker character is a very memorable character.  O'Hare
is also someone to look for, he underplays his role, but it really works
for the film.
Kudos to the cinematographer who captures the beauty of Ireland.  There is
a moment in the movie where the sights are so awe inspiring that the story
almost gets lost.
The Matchmaker is definitely a date movie that is not to be missed.  It has
some great comedy in it, and I found myself laughing out loud many times
during the showing.  There is also the part that made me tear up, though I
didn't start crying.  All around The Matchmaker is a great showcase film
for Jeneane Garofalo who deserves a big movie like this.  Don't miss The
Matchmaker in the theatres.

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Usually when one is debating who the modern queen of the    
romantic comedy is they will bring up names like Julia      
Roberts or Sandra Bullock. Others will mention Meg Ryan. But
for me, it's not even close. Janeane Garofalo is not only   
the queen of the romantic comedy, she is the best comic     
actress in hollywood right now. And it's a good thing she's 
starring in The Matchmaker, because without her presence the
movie would be bland, unfunny, and dull.                    
The movie runs into a few roadblocks. For instance, the     
story is very thin. None of the characters (except the old  
local matchmaker) are nearly as interesting as Garofalo.    
Some of the characters, like the political aide played by   
Denis Leary, have wandered in from a completely different   
movie. I think the director realized this and decided to    
throw in numerous shots of the beautiful Irish scenery, and 
several close-ups of Garofalo's winning smile. The strange  
thing is that it works. Garofalo's charm and the irish      
scenery could carry the thinnest of stories, and it carries 
this one.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Janeane Garofalo in a romantic comedy -- it was a good idea 
a couple years ago with THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS but is almost 
excruciating in THE MATCHMAKER. This is a by-the-books movie that 
plods along on a predestined course with no surprises and very few 
laughs. It also jumps on the ever-popular political satire bandwagon 
and manages to fall flat there, too.
        Garofalo plays a campaign aide to a Massacusetts senator (Jay 
O. Sanders) running for reelection. Denis Leary plays the stereotypical 
Strategist With No Ethics who decides the only way for the scandal-
plagued senator to win is to play up his Irish roots and cash in on that 
Boston Roman Catholic Democrat contingent that's made the Kennedy 
family so popular. So Leary orders Garofalo to go to Ireland and dig 
up some relatives to exploit.
        She soon learns why "Easier said than done" is the mantra of 
movies like this. THE MATCHMAKER falls for every cliche of things that 
can go wrong -- Garofalo has to take a tiny plane to Ireland, almost 
misses the bus to town, can't get a hotel room, ends up in the smallest, 
trashiest one around, has a dog piss on her luggage, and so on.
        Then comes what Roger Ebert calls the "Meet Cute." It 
happens in every romance: the man and woman have to meet each 
other for the first time in some unconventional, cinematic way. In THE 
MATCHMAKER, it happens when Garofalo walks into her hotel bathroom 
and finds a nude Sean (David O'Hara) in the bathtub, his dog sitting at 
his side. No points for guessing it's the same dog that just made water 
on her luggage.
        Also no points for guessing Garofalo hates O'Hara on sight. 
That's how it works in movies like these. I know from the instant I saw 
that Irishman in the bathtub that she'd hate him for awhile, then 
succumb to his charms, live happily for a reel or so before allowing 
some superficial detail to throw the relationship into turmoil, after 
which they'd reconcile in time for a happy Irish tune to play over the 
end credits.
        I haven't mentioned the movie's twist yet. Garofalo comes to 
the small Ireland town during the annual matchmaking festival, 
during which lonely folks from around the county pair off into a future 
of bliss. Milo O'Shea (who looks like an Irish Tom Snyder) is the 
matchmaker who pops onscreen occasionally to spew his words of 
wisdom and bring lonely souls together. Rest assured he'll do all he 
can to match up Garofalo and O'Hara. Oh, and in keeping with THE 
MATCHMAKER's utter predictability, he dies toward the end.
        What the message here? Sometimes even the most respectable 
person of comedic distinction, like Garofalo, will sell out with a weak 
script. I was excited to see Garofalo and Leary in the same movie, but 
they actually only have two or three scenes together. Leary stays 
stateside, for the most part, yelling at Garofalo over the phone and 
generally being an asshole. He even undoes himself with the old 
Microphone's Still On After He's Done Giving The Speech cliche. 
Both of them should have known better.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE MATCHMAKER
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Gramercy Picture/Polygram Film Entertainment
 Director:  Mark Joffe
 Writers:  Karen Janszen, Louis Nowra, Graham Linehan
 Cast: Janeane Garofalo, David O'Hara, Denis Leary, Jay O.
Sanders, Maria Doyle Kennedy, Saffron Burrows, Milo O'Shea
   Do we all know that politicians often campaign not on the
issues but on appeals to ethnic backgrounds?  Do we also
know that people living on remote islands become inbred and
produce a number of individuals with eccentric behaviors?  Of
course we do.  And do we realize that these two concepts
can make for some entertaining stories and hilarious
comedies?  Granted.  "The Matchmaker," which features the
considerable comedic talents of Janeane Garofalo, exploits
these very notions, but the picture in all its blarney does not
elicit the required number of chuckles.  A thoroughly
derivative burlesque, "The Matchmaker" also highlights the
considerable wit of Milo O'Shea, particularly in brief
monologues he scatters throughout the production as though
he were performing in a play by Sean O'Casey on the stage
of Dublin's Abbey Theater.  Neither actor can muster enough
guffaws to compensate for the often vulgar commentary and
broad caricature.  The movie focuses on an unlikely romance
between a cynical, confirmed bachelor played by Ms. Garofalo
and a poor Irish man, played by David O'Hara, who lives in a
2x4 hotel room with his loyal dog, Murphy.
   If there is any reason to see "The Matchmaker" it would be
for its precious shots of rural Ireland, specifically the town of
Roundstone in County Galway and around the Aran Islands,
which are remote enough to allow its unconventional
inhabitants to speak in the lovely Gaelic tongue of times now
past.  
   In directing the film, Mark Joffe tries to milk bizarre traits
from his supporting actors, who play out folkloric parts like the
competition between matchmakers Dermot (Milo O'Shea) and
Millie (Rosaleen Linehan).  Joffe underscores quirky behavior
of the town denizens like that of the genealogy mavin who
masks his sophisticated computer software under a barrage of
old books, magazines and newspapers to give his clientele
the feeling that his services require heavy research.
   Marcy (Ms. Garafalo) is ordered to Ireland by her boss,
Senator John McGlory (Jay O. Sanders), who is running
behind in his re-election bid against a family-values candidate. 
To boost his campaign, he needs to show that he comes from
a long line of Irish forebears, or at least that's the advice that
comes from his less than ethical campaign manager, Nick
(Denis Leary).  Expecting to do her research and hurry back
to Boston, Marcy is instead caught up in a small-town's
annual Matchmaking Festival, where the cuddly matchmaker,
Dermot, tries to hook her up with the local manpower.  While
many become smitten with her, it's obvious from the start that
she will have her cynicism and smart-aleck exterior punctured. 
The man for the job is the not quite charismatic Sean (David
O'Hara), who is renting the tiny room next door to her and
whom she comes upon accidentally as he is taking a bath in
her tub--his dog Murphy standing guard.  
   Her search for Senator McGlory's roots becomes the
pretext for uncovering every aspect of local folklore, including
a singing contest, which she is chosen to judge; a solo dance;
a fight or two in the local pub; but most of all, "The
Matchmaker" gives Ms. Garofalo the opportunity for one-
liners, for camera mugging which captures her every wide-
eyed and rolling-eyes expression, and for her ultimate giving
in to the transcendent mandate of nature that inexorably
pushes the genders together.   Garofalo, one of our smartest
and most huggable comics, does not get the chance to equal
her role in "The Truth About Cats and Dogs," but there's
enough here for her to provide a modicum of entertainment. 
The local gentry, though, are unmercifully stereotyped in ways
that are unfunny, a particular sad hatchet job being done on
one of the older folks, a misogynist who ultimately warms up
in his Spartan quarters and offers Marcy a cappuccino.  The
story winds up with all the knots tied a tad too neatly, the
campaign manager getting his contrived comeuppance and
the good people finding their lifetime partners just before the
curtain closes. Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 100 minutes. 
(C) 1997 Harvey Karten
