Title
Review for Lawrence of Arabia (1962)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     While it is an old film, and a well-known one, I probably should say
something about the restored version of LAWRENCE OF ARABIA since its release
is one of the big events of the year.  ("What?  More words?" as Jack Hawkins
asks early in the film.)  And it's true, there has has been a lot of media
coverage.  As a labor of love, Robert Harris has organized the restoration
of a classic film, many people's favorite film of all time, and certainly
one that deserves a +4 rating from me.  The time spent on the restoration
was longer than was spent on the original film (19 months on the
restoration, 18 on the original film).
     I think it is now film history what Harris and his people went through
to restore the film.  First Harris got Steven Spielberg and Martin Scorsese
to tell Columbia that if the restoration did not get funded there would be
no more Columbia films by either director.  Harris's team scoured the world
for prints that might have some footage that may have been cut from more
commonly available editions.  They found footage for which they had no sound
and in some cases no script.  They hired lip-readers to tell them what the
actors were saying.  Then they re-hired Peter O'Toole, Alec Guinness, and
several of the other actors to recreate their voices for 1962 and to redub
the scenes, then they had to cut the new pieces in, artificially add hiss so
the transition would not be so noticeable, and so forth.  It was a
remarkable piece of work.  Further they had to remove the scratches for the
pieces they had.  Surprisingly, that is possible.  The scratches are only on
the surface and there is a process by which if you put the film in fluid, it
fills up the cracks and you can transfer a scratchless image as long as you
do so in the fluid.
     So it was a giant piece of work, though I am told not incredibly
expensive as new films go, and at the Ziegfeld in New York they did have
lines wrapped around the block.  I stood for 90 minutes in the cold to get
in, and would probably do so again, though I have to say I was less than
pleased with the Ziegfeld's presentation of the restoration, at least of the
sound.  The music was painfully loud and I would say it sounded distorted.
It is rare that you see a 70mm print that is not a blown-up 35mm print.
This was filmed on 70mm and you can see a difference, not a tremendous
difference, but it is noticeable.  The "mystical" experience of seeing the
desert in all the glory of the original film eluded me.  Yes, it is very
good photography and seeing it in this really wide-screen version reminds
you how good the photography is.  It is a very good cinematic experience
seeing the restoration, not much more.
     Now here comes one of those pieces of heresy that I get my ears pinned
back for occasionally.  The people who cut down the film from 223 minutes to
187, they diminished the film.  They did not butcher it.  That 187-minute
film that I got off of cable--that was a +4 film.  The restored version seen
on the wide screen is a better film, but not that much better.  Given that
the film was going to be cut, the "butchers" made pretty much the right
cuts.  There is one notable exception, the sequence of Lawrence massacring a
group of Turks toward the end of the film.  The cut version was incoherent;
the full version was bloodier and made Lawrence less sympathetic, probably
the reason for the bad cut.  With the exception of that sequence and what it
says about Lawrence, I find that what I like the film for was never cut out
of it.  (Speaking of what it says about Lawrence, I recommend an hour-long
program they run on PBS that tells you more about the real Lawrence than the
film does.)  I do not approve of the cuts that were made, but the result was
still a very good film.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Within a week, I've doused myself in the fountain of film retrospectives,
to wit, seeing the restored versions of GONE WITH THE WIND and LAWRENCE OF
ARABIA.  Both of these are film classics in the strictest sense of the term,
both are epics, both have intermissions (thank God!), and both are noted for
all-star casts and memorable scores and impressive cinematography.  And both of
them, while entertaining diversions, struck me as being less impressive than I
had expected from the superlative comments that have been written about them
(though one was far more disappointing than the other).
     First, GONE WITH THE WIND.  Not having read the novel by Margaret Mitchell
(nor having any particular wish to -- hint, hint), I can't comment on how well
I thought the actors played their particular roles.  If I have to give Victor
Fleming credit for anything, it's the way he frames a shot: zooming slowly
backwards to reveal the lines of wounded men in Atlanta (and the Confederate
flag), zooming back to take in the staircase of the Wilkes estate.  Come to
think of it, was GWTW Fleming's vessel for introducing the world to the use of
the zoom shot?  Or the back-lit shadowed-figures framing?  If he'd used the
zoom lens any more often, it would have looked like one of SCTV's old 3D movie
spoofs....
     Yeah, the Technicolor's impressive as heck, and Gable's performance rarely
sunk into ham acting, and Vivian Leigh had a few good scenes, too.  But most of
the writing isn't that impressive, and much of the acting is just plain
mediocre.  I've seen Leslie Howard in PYGMALION, and I know he can act (and
direct), but you wouldn't know it from this.  I can see why they picked Olivia
De Havilland for Melly, though; by the time this was shot, she had the
goody-two-shoes chipmunk look down pat.  (I'd have to put De Havilland down as
one of the three actors I'd have the most fun with if I dubbed over their
dialogue.)
     Okay, let's get down to brass tacks.  It's one big long soap opera.  Sure,
the first half has some epic parts, but the second half is all bubbles, and
then everybody decent dies in the final reel.  Two women sitting next to me
were crying during the last half hour.  Now I cry at movies at some pretty
stupidest things.  (Remember Vincent Spano's girlfriend reviving at the last
minute in CREATOR?  Eyes got runny and everything.  Yeah, I know, what a sap.)
But for these characters?  There's not a sympathetic one in the bunch, and
certainly not Scarlett.  Must be a side effect of all that zoom lens action...
     Now, LAWRENCE OF ARABIA is another thing.  It definitely *is* an epic, and
it uses the land as a symbol more powerfully in a single frame than 20 minutes
of Vivian Leigh holding up soil in the air while the camera zoooooms back...
anyway, I saw it in 70MM, and visually it is fantastic.  The panoramas, the
scenes of unbelievable scope (approaching the Bedouin camp, I kept thinking
"This must be a matte!"  It wasn't...), the aftermath of the battle with the
Turks.  This is a masterpiece of what can be done with a camera and some damn
talented actors.  It's also an amazing performance by O'Toole, though I had
thought, from other reviewers' comments, that his character would be considered
more heroic and/or tragic.  I came away with the feeling that this was a man
without all his marbles in one knapsack to begin with, and his combination of
delusions and conscience strive to send him completely off his bean.  A little
bit of lithium, and think of the wonders he could have achieved....  I also
thought that some of the desert/battle scenes dragged on a bit, but that could
be a) because of the added footage or, b) my allergies were in full swing and I
came home to discover I was running a slight temperature.  So take into account
a small bit of crankiness.
     In short, I went to both these films expecting to see something special;
only in LAWRENCE did I find what I was expecting.  If the latter arrives in
your town (especially in 70MM), do not miss it.  As to GONE WITH THE WIND, wait
for it to come on television again; then you'll be able to say you've seen it,
and get some ironing done while you're watching.

Author
Michael Turton
Retrospective:  Lawrence of Arabia (1962)
Directed by:  David Lean
Starring:  Peter O'Toole (T.E. Lawrence), Alec Guinness (Prince Feisal)
Anthony Quinn (Auda abu Tayi), Jack Hawkins (General Allenby)
Omar Sharif (Sherif Ali ibn el Kharish), José Ferrer (Bey of Deraa)
Anthony Quayle (Colonel Harry Brighton), Claude Rains (Mr. Dryden)
Arthur Kennedy ( Jackson Bentley).  
Running Time: 216 minutes.
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton
This awesome epic, recently re-released in letterbox format after a loving 
restoration, is simply one of the most greatest movies ever made.  Not 
merely a great epic, this is a painting whose tremendous canvas hides a 
universe of hidden detail and subtle symbolism that give the film its oddly 
uncommunicable emotional power.
_Lawrence of Arabia_ is a rather strange epic; indeed, one might 
profitably ask whether it is a heroic epic at all and not simply a very 
long movie about Lawrence of Arabia. There are no redemptive moments in 
_Lawrence of Arabia_, because almost everything Lawrence tries his hand at 
flops.   His dream of Arab freedom is betrayed by his superiors and by his 
disciples.  His death -- a failed attempt to avoid a bicycle while riding a 
motorcycle -- redeems nothing and no one.  His followers melt away as time 
goes on.  His close friends cannot comprehend him, his supporters are using 
him and in the end those around him admire him without understanding him. 
An assurance from Lawrence ("There's enough time.  Go and get another 
one.") is like a death sentence from anyone else.  He is even forced to 
shoot the man he saved from the desert.  And unlike the heroes of _Dr. 
Zhivago_ or _Spartacus_, Lawrence is neither caught up in or the mover of 
great events, he is merely the leader of "a sideshow of a sideshow." 
Much of the critical commentary on _Lawrence of Arabia_ has focused on the 
fierce, obsessive acting of Peter O'Toole in the starring role, the 
homosexual overtones of the film's womanless universe and sadomasochism and 
the wondrous directing skill of David Lean in using the desert as the 
backdrop for his story.  But many of the critics have missed the deft hints 
that stitch together what otherwise might be a canvas too big for the 
viewer to take in.  For though the pace of the story is slow, it never 
stops; a great many changes in the characters take place; but none seem 
absurd or unheralded; we empathize with that impossible creature, T. E. 
Lawrence, yet he has not a single monologue.  How can this be?  
The story is not about T. E. Lawrence, and critics who complain that it is 
some kind of (failed) psychological exploration of Lawrence's life a la 
_Citizen Kane_ have missed the boat. The film tells the story of another 
person, half-legend, half-autochthonic creation of a godlike will, Lawrence 
of Arabia.  Lawrence of Arabia does not even have a first name; his 
parentage is uncertain and we are told again and again that he is a man who 
may create himself.  Regardless of who is doing the talking, he is 
invariably addressed as "Lawrence." Further, we are never permitted to see 
him alone. Whenever Lawrence is on the screen, he is with someone, and we 
know him only through the eyes of his disciples, as if Lean were some 
modern-day Luke who had decided to film his gospel rather than jot it down 
in Amharic.  Thus, the commentary at his funeral is not some announcement 
to the moviegoer that we are about to go on a journey into the psyche of a 
hero, but rather, it is a clue to the way in which we will come to know 
Lawrence of Arabia, as much a creation of those around him as he is the 
realization of his own flawed genius.  Lawrence has no past (his dossier 
gives no hint of his extraordinary gifts) and, as we know from the 
beginning, no future.  He wanders through an eternal present made manifest 
both in the vastness of the desert wastes and in the utter lack of 
references to time in the film.  This is compounded by the weird 
rootlessness of Lawrence's universe, whose turbulence is an illusion hiding 
an eternal and unbreakable stability which rests on the pillars of mutual 
hatred and mistrust between Arab and Arab and Turk, and its absence of a 
future, with the British moving in and nary a woman in sight.  
So Lawrence is to become a hero, a prophet even.  And when do we see 
Lawrence awaken as a prophet?  He is ushered into the tent of Feisal and 
there, suddenly begins speaking from the Koran and urging his plans on 
Feisal.  And what are King Feisal's plans?  Why, he dreams of going to 
Damascus!  The Arab revolt is set on the road to Damascus.  Wasn't there 
another man too who became a prophet on his way to Damascus?  Thus we are 
forewarned, in an allusion that is more like an echo than a statement, of 
the fate of Lawrence. At one point Feisal remarks that with Lawrence, 
"mercy is a passion, with me, it is merely good manners.  You may judge 
which is the more reliable." Not just a sample of his suave wit, it 
foreshadows the changes which will take place in Lawrence after his 
experiences in Deraa.  Yet another reason we unquestioningly accept 
Lawrence's transition to sainthood is the allusions to the biblical 
travails of Jesus, as when Lawrence is tormented in the desert by Sherif 
Ali ibn el Kharish (Omar Sharif), then left alone, just as Jesus was, or 
when he brings back a man from the dead, just as Jesus did. And of course, 
the film takes place in the Holy Land, with its powerful associations for 
Westerners, with the Turks for latter-day Romans and the Arabs 
incongruously cast as Jews.  
_Lawrence of Arabia_ is layered with such understated allusions.  As 
Lawrence enters Cairo, whose deafening cacophony and crowds contrast 
harshly with the stillness and solitude of the desert, he is followed by an 
officer on a motorcycle, an officer whose voice we hear but whose face we 
never see.  As he leaves Damascus another man on a motorcycle passes him, 
leaving Lawrence in his dust.  We see him fading away, in the distance.  
Both are linked to the motorcycle which kills Lawrence, and both are 
harbingers of his ultimate doom.  The motorcycles relate to another theme 
whose recurrence helps bind the film together, that of the constant and 
jarring juxtaposition of the world of machines and the world of the desert, 
which almost always results in chaos and death, as when the Turkish planes 
attack Feisal's camp as Lawrence arrives, or the absurd horror of the 
broken trains spilling their mechanical guts across the pristine 
cleanliness of the desert, or the slaughter of the Arabs before the Turkish 
guns at Medina.  Another interesting touch is the strong use of color: the 
Arabs in blue, the British in Khaki, Dryden the diplomat (it goes without 
saying) in gray,  Lawrence always in unearthly white (which gets 
symbolically dirtier as he approaches Cairo after taking Aqaba).  Even when 
Lawrence wears a uniform as he attempts to become an ordinary man after 
Deraa, we can rest assured: the uniform belongs to *another man.* 
Another way Lean keeps the movie from sprawling from his grasp is his use 
of the small.  Details provide moments of transcendent clarity, like the 
clanking of kitchen utensils in the Turkish column moments before it is 
wiped out by Lawrence's cutthroats, or Lawrence's goggles hanging from the 
bush after his death.  Muscular personalities, brilliant acting, an 
unforgettable score and an often underappreciated script complete a movie 
of staggering emotional power.  
_Lawrence of Arabia_ is the finest work of an artist of almost terrifying 
skill.  No greater homage can be paid to Lean than to say that he made a 
sweeping film which is almost too subtle to understand, yet so powerful 
that it does not need to be understood.

Author
Robert Marley
Being the self-proclaimed professional film critic that I am, I am
somewhat embarrassed to admit that I had not seen Lawrence of Arabia
(coming soon to DVD) until only recently.  After all, it's considered by
just about everyone to be the masterpiece epic of director David Lean,
who also directed films such as Bridge on the River Kwai, and Doctor
Zhivago.  So one day, a friend of mine loaned me a copy of the video and
I sat down and watched it.  I was initially skeptical that something
made almost 40 years ago would be able to keep my attention for the
butt-numbing 3 1/2 hours of its duration.  But now I fully understand
why this has become the film that other epic films are judged against --
the winner of seven Academy Awards in 1963 for Best Picture, Director,
Editing, Cinematography, Art Direction, Music, and Sound.  After
watching the film again, I am convinced that it is simply one of the
finest works of cinematic genius to ever illuminate the big screen.
Based on the autobiographical writing of British officer T.E. Lawrence
during World War I, Lawrence of Arabia depicts Lawrence (played by
then-unknown actor Peter O'Toole) as a lieutenant lacking any sort of
military discipline whatsoever.  Bored with his assignment of coloring
maps for the British Army in a dimly lit headquarters building, Lawrence
jumps at the opportunity to be re-assigned as an observer for an Arabian
prince fighting against the Turkish army.  Lawrence quickly sees just
how caring and great these desert dwelling people can be and ends up
rallying the various tribes together to fight the Turks and help the
British turn the tide of World War I.
Shot in Panavision's famed Super 70mm format, the film beautifully
illustrates the definition of the word epic.  It is absolutely
breathtaking.  Using stunning cinematography, costuming, and direction,
shot in the most uninhabitable location on the face of the earth, I can
only imagine what it must have been like to sit in a theater in 1962 and
watch this story unfold before my eyes.  Every shot is choreographed as
a portrait -- a living tribute to a great land.  David Lean put his
reputation on the line to get this film completed, and the fact that it
was even greenlit in the first place says something about the ideology
of the motion picture industry at the time, a far cry from its pathetic,
uncreative existence today.
After watching the film, the first thing that came to my mind was, "I've
got to do a remake of this film!"  But then I thought about trying to
pitch the idea to a modern-day movie executive: "Okay, it's going to be
almost four hours long and shot over three months on location in the
Sahara desert.  We are going to need to blow up a full-size train
because computer-generated effects probably wont do it justice.  And we
are not going to use any big stars, and won't have any female actors
since there's no love story."
Yes, my friends, the velvet curtain fell on the golden-era of Hollywood
a long time ago.  But at least we still have the proof to show all
would-be producers and directors out there just how good a film can be.
Director: David Lean
Producer: Sam Spiegel
Screenwriter: Robert Bolt, Michael Wilson
Stars: Peter O'Toole, Alec Guinness, Anthony Quinn, Jack Hawkins, Omar
Sharif, Claude Rains, José Ferrer, Anthony Quayle
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Max Scheinin
Released 1962
A David Lean film, "Lawrence Of Arabia"
Starring: Peter O' Toole, Omar Sharif, Anthony Quinn, Alec Guiness, Jack
Hawkins, Claude Rains, Anthony Quale, Arthur Kennedy, Jose Ferrer
Rating: ****
Once in a very great while a truly special movie comes along. These movies
are like fairy tales; you don't just watch them you actually experience
them. A handful come to mind at once: Battleship Potemkin, Modern Times, 
The Wizard Of Oz, Citizen Kane, Casablanca, Singin' In The Rain, Some Like
It Hot, Vertigo, 2001, The Sound Of Music, The Godfather Part I and II,
Jaws. Lawrence Of Arabia is such a film. When T.E. Lawrence ( Peter O'
Toole ) stares across the simmering desert we feel his hesitation to go
ahead into the unknown. When the final battle scene unspools on the screen
you feel every man's anxiety and fear. And when, after days of dutifully
trudging through the desert, the party comes upon a small oasis you too
feel relief. The film involves you so directly that when you leave you have
been a little transformed. T.E. Lawrence was a remarkable man and his story
is truly amazing. 
Numerous moments live in your mind. I was so transfixed by the screen that
I nearly forgot I was sitting on my couch watching. I saw the film in it's
wide screen format, which means I probably didn't truly appreciate it's
full scope and breadth. But what I saw was so amazing. Words cannot
describe the sights. Characters develop so naturally; every flinch of a
muscle seems so lifelike; every time that someone tries to express
something it's all so utterly natural that by the end you are certain that
it had to be real. 
Movies were originally created for pure entertainment. Now they have came
to mean so much more. It's comforting to think that Lawrence Of Arabia will
never be forgotten. If the current 'Batman And Robin' is a turkey then
Lawrence is a feast for the eyes.  
LOA runs a lengthy 3:31. I must admit that I usually my doubts walking into
such a long film, but this one is never tedious or boring. David Lean
masterfully captured the reality of the desert on film; it is harsh but
fascinating, a windswept land of sun. Every minute is truly gripping. I
give it ****.  

Author
Mark O'Hara
What strikes me most about watching Lawrence of Arabia again is its length 
-well over three hours.  Yes, I think director David Lean could have edited 
out a good deal of footage and still had an epic.  On the other hand, I 
admire the pace Lean uses to build momentum;  and certainly momentum - of 
narrative if not of action - is a large part of what gives the film its epic 
impact.
The Arabian desert fascinates the viewer with its natural shadows and hidden 
but sure danger.  Lean's five-month shoot is legendary, with cleverness and 
endurance pitted against hardships mustered by nature.  Outside of The 
English Patient, I have not seen such an interesting use of the desert in 
any film.  This awesome land formation should be credited up there with the 
main players.
The acting is marvelous, too, the casting a series of strokes of brilliance. 
  In his first film, Peter O'Toole proves that the choice of a young and 
quirky style was the best choice.  This man has the eyes of a silent film 
star, large and expressive, outlined to an almost feminine degree.  O'Toole 
inhabits the character thoroughly; I cannot imagine another actor so intense 
in his changes of mood and ironies of ego.
As well, Omar Sharif is outstanding as Sherif Ali ibn el Karish.  A young, 
dark and handsome threat at first, his character grows nearly as dynamic as 
Lawrence's in its alteration by story's end.  How to match Sharif's 
magnetism was addressed by casting Anthony Quinn, that multi-ethnic utility 
man, as a rival tribal chief, Auda abu Tayi.  Quinn truly matches each iota 
of Sharif's anger and passion.  Auda embodies a great Bedouin's jingoism.
How to ensure a solid backup cast?  Let's face it, political intrigue is 
usually a sure way to comment on the ironies of human nature, and Jack 
Hawkins as General Allenby, and Claude Rains as Mr. Dryden - the 
plainclothes, behind-the-scenes manipulator - were about the best thing 
going in the field of character acting.  Further, Alec Guiness, the lead 
actor in Lean's The Bridge on the River Kwai, is subtly masterful as Prince 
Feisal.  The way the world is portrayed as both cruel and beautiful results 
mainly from the dimension of the script added by strong supporting roles.
Robert Bolt's screenplay is both spare and poetic.  It's like the best 
writing by Raymond Carver - laconic but not minimalistic, honest but not 
prideful.  Bolt surely relied on the strength lent by the desert, where 
one's actions are magnified as if by a brightly-lighted stage.  He also 
makes the political strife fairly understandable:  the desert tribes need 
unification if they are to be a threat to the Turks, who have included them 
for some time in an extensive empire.  As it is a World War, the British 
have it in their own interest to see the Turks defeated, as Turkey is allied 
with Germany.  What throws off British imperialism is the quasi-rebellion of 
one of their own - T. E. Lawrence, the officer who takes it upon himself to 
bring together a large faction of these desert peoples.  After he assists in 
the liberation of Damascus, he tries to ensure the area stays under Arab 
control:  not a popular path at a time Great Britain was still expanding its 
own empire.
Maurice Jarre's music is a masterpiece in its own right.  The main theme and 
its variations reach throughout the entire narrative, accompanying the major 
characters on their exploits and adding dramatic undercurrent to many 
confrontations.  It's truly music fit for an epic.
Watch for a cameo that has David Lean on a motorcycle asking the resonant 
question of identity, "Who are you?" as Lawrence and a young companion 
appear after crossing yet another desert.
It's been ten years since Robert A. Harris restored the old and rotting 70 
mm film he found in dented and rusting cans.  Had he left it there, perhaps 
we would not have such a bright and crisp version to enjoy today.  This film 
is a must-see for a number of reasons.  Yes, it's way up there on the 
American Film Institute's Top 100 List, but more importantly, it's a glimpse 
of vanished filmmaking, a real epic and a valuable piece of history in the 
areas of film and world politics.

