Title
Review for Texas Chain Saw Massacre, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
Seeing THE TEXAS CHAIN SAW MASSACRE, twenty-five years later, is like
ripping open the sarcophagus from which come ALL modern horror movies.  And
MASSACRE, which is now available once again in an excellent remastered
laserdisc and DVD edition, STILL scares the Shinola out of even today's
jaded audiences.
MASSACRE eschews plot and character development in terms of as much a pure
sensory experience as can be put on film.  After reports of graverobbing and
necrophilic mutilation, a group of young people head out to see if any of
their departed grandparents were among the ones desecrated.  Along the way,
they pick up a deranged hitchhiker -- he doesn't last long with them after
slicing himself open with a razor and laughing -- and wind up being forced
to stop for gas.  Then they make the mistake of wandering over to a nearby
house... and to say any further than that, of course, would be sacrilege.
See it for yourself.
Though the story has been ripped off by so many other horror movies that to
run through it seems a cliche.  But amazingly, when you experience the
original for the first time, all of that just vanishes.  The original blows
everything else even remotely like it so far off the screen, it's
astonishing.  The imitators can get the words, but not the music.
Surprisingly, MASSACRE is not that gory a movie.  Gore is not frightening,
and this is where most modern horror movies trip up: they're not really out
to scare anyone, but rather MORTIFY them.  What's genuinely frightening
about MASSACRE is the setup as much as the payoff, the atmosphere and the
primal dread of the goings-on, and the sense that whatever we are seeing
now, there are far, far worse things lingering offscreen.
Like NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD and HALLOWEEN -- two other genuinely horrific
films -- it is shot in a flat, spare, almost documentary-style fashion, but
at the same time is breathtaking to look at.  The shots of the house steeped
in the orange sunset, or the roomful of bones, have a raw beauty that no
other movie like it has been able to imitate.  On a nickle-and-dime budget,
they achieved what movies costing a hundred times as much can't even come
close to.
If the movie has a flaw, it's that it ends so abruptly.  It needed a third
act, another round of happenings, to make what came before seem more
complete.  But what it does achieve is astonishing.
Horror movies today, for the most part, aren't frightening.  They're too sly
and knowing to have any real elemental dread in their veins.  Something like
MASSACRE serves as a reminder of what movies like SCREAM or even FRIDAY THE
13TH were attempting to tap into.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Marilyn Burns; Allen Danziger; Paul A. Partain & William Vail
The Texas Chainsaw Massacre is one of the original slasher films. Unlike the
current crop of slasher films, like Scream -- The Texas Chainsaw Massacre is
a little more low budget. Actually, that is an understatement. Chainsaw
Massacre makes the original Halloween look as if it was shot on a budget the
size of Titanic. This is one cheesy movie. Cheesy camera shots, cheesy
locations and even cheezyer (is that a word?) acting, if you can even call
it acting. Even with that all said, Chainsaw Massacre wasn't as bad as I
though it was going to turn out to be. I'm not sure whether it was the fact
that I appreciated that it was one of the original classic slasher horror
films, or if it was the fact that it was just so bad that it was almost
good. Oh well, I guess it doesn't matter.
Chainsaw Massacre focuses on a group of teenagers out for a drive who go to
explore an abandoned property owned by one of their parents. In the true
tradition of horror films, this turns out to be a mistake. It turns out that
this old house has some neighbors nearby who aren't that friendly. Among
them is a kindly gent named Leatherface who has a tendency to cut people up
with a chainsaw. Never an endearing quality in a neighbor. Anyway, you can
undoubtedly figure out from the title of the film what good old Leatherface
ends up doing to these poor unsuspecting teenagers.
As I said, the acting, writing, camera work and just about everything else
you can think of is so low budget that a kid with a camcorder could almost
have done a better job. But that is sort of the sick charm of this little
film. Although, Scream it is not. If you are interested in watching Chainsaw
Massacre for nonstop terror, keep right on going past this title in the
video store. On the other hand, if you are looking for a few laughs (albeit
unintentional) and a kind of historical perspective on the genre, give
Chainsaw Massacre a look. At the very least you will appreciate just how far
these films have come over the years.
