Title
Review for Full Tilt Boogie (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
In late January 1996, Miramax released an odd little hybrid film from
their genre label Dimension Films.  FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, a gloriously
campy crime thriller/vampire horror B-film, based on Quentin
Tarantino's first screenplay and directed by Robert Rodriguez (of EL
MARIACHI and DESPERADO fame), marked the first feature film of TV
heartthrob George Clooney since skyrocketing to fame with the
popularity of the hit medical drama ER, and surprised the film
industry by exploding onto the market, scoring an unexpected $13.2
million domestic in its opening week and heralding Mr. Clooney as a
rarity -- an actor with the genuine screen presence to successfully
bridge the gap between TV-based fame and a prominent film career.
FULL TILT BOOGIE, the directorial debut of Sarah Kelly, is a
behind-the-scenes look at the filming of FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, but it
differs from typical "Making Of Film X" documentaries in that its
primary focus is the daily activities on a film set, as opposed to
the creative filmmaking process, and consequently a great deal of
screentime is devoted to members of the film crew usually overlooked
in films of these sorts -- the ADs, the caterers, the drivers, the
gaffers, the key grips, the personal assistants, and so on.  The film
not only serves as a document of the struggles and ordeals
encountered during the filming of FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, but also as a
basic introduction to the mechanics of a film production.
John Carpenter once remarked that, contrary to what one might
believe, there is usually more of a festive mood on the sets of
horror films than most other types of movies.  Such was certainly the
case during the shoot of FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, which at times
resembles a ten-week frat party as much as it does a film production;
despite occasional setbacks during filming, such as an
overly-ambitious explosion resulting in heavy damage to the Titty
Twister set and a blinding dust storm causing the postponement of the
day's shoot, the cast and crew seem to be having a smashing good
time.  Ms. Kelly, who first met Mr. Tarantino during the shoot of
Rory Kelly's SLEEP WITH ME (she was credited as key set production
assistant) and is clearly on friendly terms with both he and Mr.
Rodriguez, was given seemingly near-unlimited access to film both on-
and off-set activities, and much of FULL TILT BOOGIE shows the cast
and crew at play: beer-ladened hotel parties in the evenings (the
provision of free alcohol seemed to receive an inordinate number of
mentions as a favourite fringe by the interviewed crew), the
principal cast kicking back at a karaoke bar in Barstow, Texas (where
Juliette Lewis belts out her rendition of 4 Non Blondes' "What's Up?"
-- "Nice voice," remarks a surprised bar manager), and a mischievous
contest for "Best Butt" on the set.  During shooting, Mr. Clooney is
seen as eminently approachable, winning over the crew with his
playfulness and down-to-earth charm, and is frequently caught
flirting with the female crew members.  Mr. Rodriguez seems to be
directing the film with his guitar perpetually strapped over his
shoulder, relaxingly strumming between takes.  Ms. Lewis is more
guarded, but is clearly enjoying herself, and Mr. Tarantino is seen
amiably flittering about around the set.  FULL TILT BOOGIE depicts
the FROM DUSK TILL DAWN shoot as remarkably friendly and great fun,
with the only complaints being the generic ones: long hours and bad
food.  (Ms. Kelly was worried at one point that she'd be unable to
dredge up any negatives at all from the high-spirited crew.)
FULL TILT BOOGIE also skillfully handles the more-familiar aspects of
filmmaking documentaries.  The filming of scenes from FROM DUSK TILL
DAWN are included, such as the fiery stunt sequence at Benny's World
Of Liquor as well as the shooting of the subsequent explosion, and
candid interviews of the filmmakers and many of the cast are featured
in Ms. Kelly's film.  Unlike other behind-the-scenes documentaries,
where interview segments come off as carefully rehearsed and
impersonal, there is a casualness and spontaneity apparent as Ms.
Kelly conducts her interviews, which results in more revealing and
certainly more entertaining sound bites.  Her weeks on the set,
creating trust and a sense of familiarity with her subjects,
certainly pay off in this respect -- the interviews play off more as
friendly conversations than standard recitations of key pat phrases.
It however did apparently not work with Harvey Keitel, who chose not
to participate in the making of the documentary as noted in a sour,
obviously bitter title card midway through the film.  Smarmily noting
that Keitel claimed to be on the set to film FROM DUSK TILL DAWN
exclusively, and not to additionally participate in the making of
FULL TILT BOOGIE, this petty sniping is a low point in the film, and
the decision for Ms. Kelly to carry her spitefulness into her
documentary is a wrongheaded one which leaves a bitter aftertaste.
Perhaps the most interesting section of FULL TILT BOOGIE deals with
the politicized issues faced by FROM DUSK TILL DAWN's filmmakers
during their tumultuous shoot.  FROM DUSK TILL DAWN used a non-union
crew during production, and consequently were targeted for strike
action by IATSE, who threatened to shut down filming.  The political
maneuvering is intriguing and brings some drama to the film, although
FULL TILT BOOGIE's perspective of the situation is sadly a bit
one-sided: FROM DUSK TILL DAWN producer Lawrence Bender and Mr.
Rodriguez discuss their reactions and opinions of the union threat at
several points in the documentary, but unfortunately IATSE head Lyle
Trachtenberg, when finally tracked down by Ms. Kelly and her crew in
an investigative reporting-styled blitzkrieg on the IATSE union
convention (which amusingly was shown to have subsequently made
headlines in Daily Variety) refused to speak on camera with her due
to Ms. Kelly's perceived "associations" with the FROM DUSK TILL DAWN
production.
With the exclusion of the coverage of the IATSE conflict, FULL TILT
BOOGIE is not a solemn, formal, staid documentary about the FROM DUSK
TILL DAWN shoot; it's exuberantly cheerful and often very funny.
Much of the high spirits and cheerfulness on the FROM DUSK TILL DAWN
shoot comes across in Ms. Kelly's documentary, and she also playfully
stages a particularly amusing introductory scene where Mr. Clooney
and Mr. Tarantino, in costume as Seth and Richard Gecko,
respectively, wander the halls in search of the set and are accosted
by geeky autograph-seeking fanboys.  ("I quit school for you!"
squeals one.)  While trashing the fanboys with sneers, shoves and
disdain, Mr. Clooney and Mr. Tarantino later encounter and
affectionately embrace an autograph-seeking fangirl.
Strangely enough for a documentary dealing with the shooting of a
feature film, previous familiarity with FULL TILT BOOGIE's subject,
FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, is helpful, but not at all imperative.  (The
documentary does open with the outrageous full theatrical trailer for
Mr. Rodriguez's film, which is already beginning to seem dated -- the
joke in the "Interviews. No vampires." tag may be lost to those who
have already understandably forgotten about Neil Jordan's INTERVIEW
WITH THE VAMPIRE.)  FULL TILT BOOGIE is a joyous (almost *too* joyous
-- the group cavorting sequence is a bit too happy and sunny) and
often interesting document on the rigours of shooting a film and the
close bonds developed by tight-knit teamwork, and should be of
particular interest to those curious about filmmaking.  While it
doesn't capture the tedium associated with shooting a film, Ms.
Kelly's film superbly captures the experience of being on a film set.
I wonder if a similar documentary is in the works for the planned
prequel to FROM DUSK TILL DAWN?
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Man, that was a big spider.  It was so big I thought I saw a small dog
 caught in its web.  We are talking big.  That spider could've kicked
 Charlotte's ass." - Hope Davis, THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Let's say you have a day off.  It's sunny and you go for a
walk when suddenly you come upon a line of gigantic vans
advertising "Golden Productions."  The traffic department has
the No Parking signs up. somce that a scene is being
filmed for a movie scheduled to open in seven months.  Do
you hang around?  Probably not.  Why not?  Because being
privy to something that sets the pulse racing is not going to
happen.  Instead you'll probably observe some production
guys just hanging around chewing the fat and then, maybe if
you're the type who stays on the phone whenever a customer
service tape says "Your call is very important to us; please
stay on the line," your tarrying will be rewarded with seven
minutes of action.
   Watching a shoot on location is among the most tiresome
activities in the world.  Wouldn't it be grand if you could
compress several weeks of filming into two hours and could
wander freely, invisible, about the set to see what really goes
on?  Thanks to a new documentary about the making of a
1996 movie, consider it done.  "Full Tilt Boogie" is a chronicle
of the filming of "From Dusk 'till Dawn," a campy vampire
thriller starring George Clooney, but it's not one of those
"talking heads" sagas like "Ayn Rand."  It's more in the nature
of, say, that intriguing stalk of Woody Allen in "Wild Man
Blues" or the rib-tickling satire by Michael Moore, "The Big
One."  We're given the full run of the set without suffering the
120 degree heat of Barstow, California; without putting in
eighteen hours days, only to applaud when the producers
give you nonunion wages and throw in a few months' health
insurance--which you don't need because you're young; but
you're also not going to have as much fun as the folks who
have "romances" every minute that they're not on the set or
chugging the endless beers in a karaoke bar.  
   Did someone say "fun"?  If you take what some of the crew
people say literally, you'd think they were out strictly for the
cash. When the gaffers, grips and assistant directors are
asked the key question, "Why are you in the film business?"
their answers are unanimously "to make money."  After just
twenty minutes of viewing time, though, you'll know they're
fibbing--just as sure as the essential aspect of films (as
Juliette Lewis tells us) is lying.  Contrary to what Dieter Busch
says tongue-in-cheek, "The production process is not
important to me," making a film is nonstop pleasure for the
production proles as well as the stars.
   "Full Tilt Boogie"--the title seems to mean "full steam
ahead"--is both a primer on filmmaking and a joyous ode to
the fun people can have when they work as a team in the
entertainment business.  Sarah Kelly, the doc's director, has
the merry job of interviewing the stars, their personal
assistants, gaffers, grips, electricians, union delegates, make-
up people, costumers, and designers.  She delights that her
exchanges will be featured not on the wearisome Sunday
morning TV broadcasts which no one watches (and which
those who do cannot take seriously); but will instead be seen
by film buffs, horror fans, Clooney groupies and the like who
deserve this insight into the jobs of the lucky people who
concocted "From Dusk 'till Dawn."  To no one's surprise the
heavy-hitters--George Clooney, who starred in "From Dusk 'till
Dawn" and Quentin Tarantino who wrote it--get a
disproportionate amount of time to cavort.  Clooney, who
parlayed his success in the TV series "E.R." to become the
man with the most screen presence in the business today,
flirts with every female in sight, indicating that
he gets as much "romance" as one of the film crew reports. 
Flexing his ample muscles and mugging for the camera, Mr.
Clooney is well aware of his charisma with the crew as with
his large audience.  By contrast Quentin Tarantino,
whose writing ushered in a new vogue for violence-as-fun,
appears nervous, puffing on a big cigar as if admitting he
lacks George Clooney's charm but is conscious of his
celebrity status with a substantial coterie of fans.  Richard
Rodriguez, who directed "From Dusk 'till Dawn" after gaining
a name for himself with the no-budget "El Mariachi" and
"Desperado," parades around the large set with a guitar
strapped about his neck, fully prepared to lead the
sizable crew in song whenever they feel the urge to vocalize--
which is often.  As though to break up the tension--which is
nonexistent save for the usual gripes about the food, the heat,
and the impossibly long hours--the team set up impish
competitions, the most acclaimed being for "Best Butt" on the
set.  The rump delegates vote from an abundance of choices
of Polaroids tacked to the wall, with Juliette Lewis most
outspoken about her selection.
>From time to time you'll feel that the squad are aware that the
camera is trained on them and that they are expected to act
with joyful abandon, but if other documentary subjects like
Woody Allen ("Wild Man Blues") are correct, chances are they
have forgotten that their activities are being recorded and are
simply enjoying themselves like entertainment people
everywhere.  Even Harvey Keitel, the only
performer who allegedly shunned the documentary, turns in a
number which at first resembles a sadly philosophic discourse
until we remember that he is simply staying in character as
the preacher.
To appreciate the documentary, it helps to have seen "From
Dusk 'till Dawn," just as viewers of "The X Files" would do
well to have watched the TV series for five years in
preparation for that film.  But director Sarah Kelly throws in
enough segments from Mr. Rodriguez's 1996 work to
familiarize the unlucky few who passed it by and who will get
yet another chance to take in its campy horror when the
inevitable sequel hits the screens.

Author
Matt Williams
Most documentaries about the making of a movie are purely promotional
tools.  Occasionally, you'll run across a documentary such as Hearts of
Darkness, which breaks all the boundaries and reveals something beyond
the mundane techniques of the filmmaking process. Full Tilt Boogie lies
somewhere in-between, more than just a long advertisement, but never
quite as revealing as it could be.
Director Sarah Kelly takes us behind the scenes of the movie From Dusk
Till Dawn. The 1996 criminals-on-run-meet-vampires movie united writer
Quentin Tarantino with director Robert Rodriguez.  They added actors
George Clooney, Harvey Keitel, Juliette Lewis and Salma Hayek, and
created a unique, if only moderately successful horror film.
Unlike the traditional promotional film, we not only hobnob with the
"upper echelon" stars and director, but Full Tilt Boogie introduces us
to the assistants, the grips, the peons...the people who get things
done.  But the film never gets too much past the introductions. We never
really get to know these people.
There are times when the film seems to veer towards substance, such as
when it documents the union disputes over the film.  Rodriguez decided
to film From Dusk till Dawn with a non-union cast, a decision which did
not sit well with union leaders.  Threats of strikes and boycotts raged
on the periphery of the shoot.  Full Tilt Boogie documents some of
these, but merely skims the surface of the issues involved.
Fans of From Dusk Till Dawn may find parts of Full Tilt Boogie
interesting.  However, there's just not enough here to recommend it to
the general public.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
