Title
Review for Oleanna (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  William H. Macy, Debra Eisenstadt.
Screenplay/Director:  David Mamet.
     The advertising campaign for OLEANNA features the line, "Whatever
side you take, you're wrong."  Behind that statement is the conceit
that this adaptation of David Mamet's play, and by extension the
original play itself, is a balanced presentation of a controversial
issue.  It is not.  Whatever OLEANNA might be--provocative,
infuriating, incendiary--it is not balanced; it is a technically
proficient but inaccessible piece of reactionary agit-prop.  There are
two fine performances at the center of the film, but it was impossible
for me to separate them from Mamet's smug attempt to pass this off as
thought-provoking theater.
     OLEANNA is essentially a study of two characters:  an unnamed
professor (William H. Macy) at an unnamed college, and Carol (Debra
Eisenstadt), one of his students.  Carol, having just received a very
poor mid-term grade in the professor's social sciences class, comes to
his office to find out what she can do to improve her grade.  Though
the professor is extremely busy, he decides to try to explain some of
the concepts of the class to Carol, in a session that occasionally
becomes quite emotional.  The next day, the professor is stunned to
discover that Carol has charged him with inappropriate conduct--in
effect, sexual harrassment--during their encounter.  When he
confronts her, she attempts to show him how power has corrupted him,
though he isn't even aware of it.
     Those familiar with David Mamet's elliptical dialogue will
instantly recognize OLEANNA as his work; those unfamiliar with it will
wonder what the heck he's trying to do.  The staccato rhythms don't
sound conversational, and in fact sometimes seem even more stagey than
conventional stage dialogue.  But though the first act of OLEANNA is
occasionally very rough going, there is something compelling about that
dialogue.  I found myself paying closer attention, and noticing
recurring motifs and shifting roles.  William H. Macy, who originated
the role of the professor on Broadway, has a gift for making Mamet's
words sound as close to natural as they can, and gives a haunting and
haunted performance.  Debra Eisenstadt is also impressive, alternately
cowering and commanding, but the words sound more forced in her mouth.
Unfortunately, that is symptomatic of what is really wrong with her
role.
     Here, then, is where OLEANNA becomes truly insidious.  The
conflict between Carol and the professor, as it plays out in the second
and third acts, becomes one largely of interpretation.  Has the
professor, by virtue of the power inherent in his position, placed
Carol in a compromising position, or is Carol reacting too much in
accord with a pre-determined agenda?  Mamet pretends to make a case for
both sides, but in reality he has done no such thing.  Though Carol
talks a good talk bout how the professor has wronged her, and attempts
to make her case both to him and to the audience, the way Carol is
portrayed makes her completely unreliable.  In the first act, she is
deferrent to the point of neurosis, taking copious notes which it is
later suggested might have been part of a plan to bring him down;
later, she makes repeated references to an unnamed "group," a
presumably radical campus organization to which she belongs and has as
its insignia a pseudo-swastika design.  At this point, while Carol
speaks wearing this insignia on her lapel, nothing that Carol says can
be taken seriously, even if we are inclined to thing that we may be
seeing events through our own prejudiced lenses.  When the voice for
one side of an argument is presented as a devastated family man, and
the voice for the other side is a caricature of a fascist, the author
surrenders the right to claim that he is being balanced.
     Issues of politics aside, OLEANNA just doesn't connect beyond a
level of detached technical admiration.  Perhaps seeing the play live,
where post-performance discussions were almost always part of the
experience, provided more immediacy, more intensity.  On the big
screen, for all its controversy, OLEANNA is just too cold and
intellectualized.
     Mamet expressed concern when audiences at advance screenings
cheered when the professor struck Carol.  I think that reaction might
inspire Mamet to take a good, long look at the messages he is sending.

Author
Chuck Dowling
The content of a film has never made me angry. I have never seen a film
where one of the character's actions were so frustrating that I just wanted
to reach into the film and beat them. The story involves a college professor
(Macy) who tries to help one of the girls in his class understand what he's
teaching. Keep in mind that throughout the film the teacher does absolutely
nothing wrong.The student returns later and accuses the professor of sexual
harassment. Even though the professor explains to her that he was only
helping her to understand, she says it's not his intentions that are the
issue, it's how she interprets his actions. That's like if you are driving
along and way off in the distance there's a car behind you. You then drive
into a ditch because you think the car will catch up with you and crash into
you. So, as a result, you sue the driver because you thought he would damage
your car, even though the driver never even came remotely close to you.
This female character is clearly insane and if there are people like her who
think how she thinks, then society as we know it will surely crumble. The
film is well acted by Macy and not at all well acted by the psychotic
student. The dialog seems forced, however, and for the first thirty minutes
or so, the two characters have a conversation that would take normal people
thirty seconds to have. Written and directed by David Mamet.
Please visit my movie reviews web site at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
You'll be glad you did.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  11/4/94 (limited) 
Running Length:  1:30 
Rated:  No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, violence, language) 
Starring:  William H. Macy, Debra Eisenstadt 
Director:  David Mamet 
Producers:  Patricia Wolff and Sarah Green 
Screenplay:  David Mamet based on his play 
Cinematography:  Andrezej Sekula 
Music:  Rebecca Pidgeon 
Released by The Samuel Goldwyn Company 
     Consider this situation:  two people approach an intersection from
different vantage points.  When an accident occurs, they both observe
the same facts, yet afterwards their versions of events differ
considerably.  Neither is lying; rather, it is the subjective rather
than the objective element of their account which is unique to each
witness.  This sort of difference of perspectives (albeit in other
circumstances) is one theme explored by writer/director David Mamet in
OLEANNA.
     Sexual harassment is certainly an issue of some importance in
today's society.  While it's easy to attack the issue from an obvious
point-of-view (e.g., Michael Crichton's DISCLOSURE), Mamet has decided
against something so clean cut.  Instead, he frames his story around a
series of incidents that could be viewed as either completely innocent
or not.  Ultimately, perhaps the question in OLEANNA is not whether
sexual harassment has been committed, but exactly who is persecuting
whom.
     Given equal time and treatment to the sexual harassment case is an
examination of the significance of today's college education.  What
value is there in a typical college education?  Is it more important to
go through the expected routines--taking notes, reading texts, and
passing exams--than it is to have one's intellect stimulated and one's
interests awakened?  To use Mamet's words, "Is higher education
useful?"
     As titles go, this one is rather obscure.  OLEANNA refers to a
folk story about how a man (named Ole) and his wife (Anna) bought acres
of swampland then sold it as farmland to those who were willing to
invest their lives' savings.  Once the money had been collected, the
pair vanished and the buyers were left with worthless property.  This
became known as the "Oleanna swindle."
     Adapted with almost complete faithfulness from Mamet's own play
(which began its worldwide theatrical run in 1992), OLEANNA is a two-
character piece.  For the most part, the dynamics are played out in a
series of rooms on an unnamed northeastern college campus.  The only
two speaking parts belong to William H. Macy as a middle-aged professor
and Debra Eisenstadt as Carol, a student who comes to him to discuss
why she's failing his course.
     Needless to say, these characters are central to Mamet's
presentation of certain themes.  Their relationship is developed
through three acts, each showing a new phase of their interaction.  In
some ways, the progression of OLEANNA is more like that of a
psychological thriller than that of a drama.  The film spirals in on
itself, twisting from sanity and reason to primal emotion.
     In the first act, Carol approaches the professor (who is left
unnamed) for help.  She's failing his course.  Instead of giving her
conventional advice, the professor explains to Carol his entire
philosophy of education.  She is offended by some of what he says, and
they argue, but their eventual parting seems to be amicable.
     Act two, however, reveals that Carol has filed a protest against
the professor, accusing him of sexual harassment.  Her charges are
accurate in fact, but neither intent nor context are considered.
Bolstered by a group of nameless, faceless supporters, Carol is no
longer the nervous, uncertain girl of act one.  And, as her
self-assurances waxes, the professor's wanes.
     As is always the case, Mamet's dialogue has a rhythm and cadence
all its own.  Early in the film, this, combined with a sluggish tone,
causes OLEANNA to seem staged and unnatural.  Later, however, as the
pace builds, the strengths of what the actors are saying--and how
they're saying it--outstrip the weaknesses.
     By photographing OLEANNA using dim lighting frequently designed to
hood the eyes, motives, and feelings of the characters, cinematographer
Andrezej Sekula (RESERVOIR DOGS, PULP FICTION) enhances the sense of
claustrophobia created by Mamet's restrictive setting.  By the end of
the movie, we in the audience feel as trapped as the characters on
screen.
     OLEANNA is not a conventionally enjoyable experience, but it isn't
intended to be.  The film probes deep into some of the darker facets of
human interaction, and anything with this keen an edge will cause
discomfort.  Three out of four "characteristic" movie-goers are likely
to view this as a bad movie (too slow, too pedantic, too stilted).
OLEANNA, however, is no more intended for that crowd than are they for
it.  This film has been made for those willing to look beneath the
surface to see a taut, intellectual sparring match where there is no
absolute truth.  For these viewers, this picture will leave an
indelible imprint.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     David Mamet, among the best of the current American playwrights,
has adapted his two-character play by writing the screenplay and
directing the film, a story of sexual harassment.  Mamet maintains
there are two sides to every story.
     His play was written and completed shortly before University of
Oklahoma law professor, Anita Hill, testified to a Congressional
committee that Supreme Court nominee, Clarence Thomas, allegedly
subjected her to inappropriate behavior; U.S. Navy Lt. Paula Coughlin
spilled her story to the Washington Post of sexual abuse in the
Tailhook scandal ... and, of course, the Bobbit story.
     Mamet, in OLEANNA, tackles the problem of PC and what is sexual
harassment, how easily an innocent person can become a victim.
     In this case it is Carol (Debra Eisenstadt), a young college
student who visits her professor, John, (William H Macy), at his office
to complain about the low grade he has given her.   She comes as a
supplicant while the professor tries to explain to her the reason for
the low grade.  She blames him; he is a poor teacher.  He wonders if
that could be true.  He offers to erase the grade and give her an A for
the term if she will visit him once a week to discuss the course.
     She turns this into a case of sexual harassment which was the last
thing the professor, a happily married man, was thinking of.  Before
the session is over she has accumulated a list of grievances
(harassments) which she will turn over to the tenure committee that is
considering giving him tenure.
     As in most cases in real life, there is no real solution and the
film is no exception.  But the tense, very dramatic and literate
exchanges that are found in plays written for the theater rather than
TV or movies, make Oleanna a definite must-see film.   In addition the
acting is absolutely perfect; both Eisenstadt and Macy deserve to be
nominated when Oscar time rolls around.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Written and directed by David Mamet
Starring William H. Macy and Debra Eisenstadt
     In one of his books on how to write, David Mamet says to enter
scenes late and leave them early.  That seems to be the guiding
principle of his new film, OLEANNA.  At best it seems to be sections of
a story, lacking a beginning act.  It would be easy to dismiss this
project as a one-set two-person avant garde play that underwent an
unsuccessful canning process.  As a work of cinema, it is uncinematic.
Even as a play, the delivery of the lines is flat and emotionless.
Once the viewer leaves behind his notions of what a film or play should
be, however, the film becomes a challenging experience.
     OLEANNA is Mamet's most unconventional work for the screen.  His
trademark street language has been replaced by an at first annoying
semantic game.  This game is a metaphor for the academic process.  The
meaning of words and groups of words in and out of context are
questioned and requestioned by the two actors.  Replacing his freehand
use of the f-word in films like HOMICIDE is the constant use of "what
does that mean?"  With a lot of academic sounding words it seems
nothing is said, or even happens.  For an extended excruciating opening
act, the two characters, a professor and a failing student seem to
miscommunicate completely.  The subject of the class isn't even clearly
defined.  This scene is the key incident of the film.  What happened in
the non-event becomes the basis for minute discussion in the following
scenes.
     It is here that the flatness of the acting is brilliant.  The
audience can hear the words, but must  find their own meaning for
them.  The two characters are such blanks, with no developed past, that
whole personalities must be projected onto them.  Outside factors like
unseen student and academic groups must be completely imagined.  This
leaves the bare elements of the story open to various interpretations,
so much so that each viewer practically sees a different film.
     Mamet's project was to create a play, now a film, about sexual
harassment in the academic setting.  He wanted to raise questions but
not give answers.  It is impossible to leave this film without thinking
that one of the characters was greatly wronged, but the choice of which
one  is up to the individual viewer.
     The film has various flaws to be sure.  The student seems to
increase greatly in both intellect and self confidence from one scene
to the next, although a viewer could invent various reasons for this.
The professor, an intelligent man, seems to miss several crucial
phrases of dialogue.  In this manner the characters miss out on being
real people and instead become didactic homunculi for academic
patriarchy and feminist political correctness.
     Perhaps the subject is more immediate and successful as a play.
Nonetheless the film is, if not enjoyable, at least provocative.  It is
a welcome tonic to the multi-million dollar escapist films that have
recently had so little to say.
