Title
Review for Girl, Interrupted (1999)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by James Mangold.
Cast: Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea Duvall, Brittany Murphy, Elisabeth 
Moss, Whoopi Goldberg, Jared Leto, Jeffrey Tambor, Vanessa Redgrave, Joanna 
Kerns, Mary Kay Place.
1999 - 127 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 15, 2000.
"What exactly is crazy?" This is one of the provocative questions running 
throughout James Mangold's "Girl, Interrupted," based on Susanna Kaysen's 
1993 memoir about her experiences staying in a psychiatric ward in the late 
'60s. It has been documented that star Winona Ryder has been passionate about 
a film adaptation of Kaysen's intriguing story (despite her book not 
following any sort of narrative) for several years, and it was only until she 
found a home at Columbia Pictures and collaborated with director James 
Mangold (1996's "Heavy") that everything fell into place. The delays turn out 
to be well worth the wait, as the picture is one filled with sincerity, 
frankness, and perception, a highly respectable, realistic endeavor that 
treats Kaysen's story with the utmost respect.
Susanna (Winona Ryder) is an average 18-year-old who has just recently 
graduated from high school. Unlike most of her classmates, who are set on 
what college to go to and what to study, Susanna wants nothing more than to 
write, something that is often scoffed at by those she tells. After a 
half-hearted suicide attempt in which she downs vodka with a bottle of 
aspirin, Susanna's parents literally pack her bags and send her on her way to 
Claymoore, a psychiatric hospital in Massachusetts, where she is to stay 
until the doctor believes she is cured. She checks herself in without giving 
it a thought, but the unjust thing is that Susanna doesn't seem to belong 
there--the closest problem she has that resembles a disorder seems to be a 
bunch of teen angst built up inside.
At Claymoore, she, at first, is able to see she is dissimilar to most of the 
other residents, but the line between well and sick is gradually blurred when 
she sparks friendships with several of the other girls living there, 
including Georgina (Clea Duvall), her roommate, who is called a pathological 
liar and has a fondness for "The Wizard of Oz"; the sweet-natured Polly 
(Elisabeth Moss), who once lit half of her face on fire in an attempt to get 
rid of a rash; and the introverted Daisy (Brittany Murphy), who has an eating 
disorder involving only consuming her father's rotisserie chickens. Soon 
after Susanna has arrived, in waltzes Lisa (Angelina Jolie), a long-time 
patient and sociopath who has once again been caught after she attempted to 
escape. Susanna and Lisa are very different individuals, but they form a 
close bond, balancing each other's diverse personalities off of one another. 
Because Susanna is known to have slept with two men, her psychiatrist 
(Vanessa Redgrave) believes she is promiscuous, something that bothers 
Susanna because the standards are so altered between the sexes on who is 
labeled, more or less, a slut. Worrying her clueless parents, who clearly 
have more psychological problems than their daughter, Susanna is also 
diagnosed as having Borderline Personality Disorder. Claymoore is a 
discouraging place, as it becomes increasingly apparent, because the people 
with the major problems are the staff, not the patients, many of which were 
obviously stuck in the institution to get out of their wealthy family's hair.
As far as the story and developments in the characters go, "Girl, 
Interrupted" treads on overly familiar ground, and the film is almost never 
anything other than predictable. What the picture lacks in freshness, 
however, it more than makes up for it in the outstanding performances across 
the board, and in the sympathetic, but not sugarcoated, portrayal of the 
inmates. 
Despite the notices that Angelina Jolie has garnered for her performance here 
(including a Golden Globe nomination), Winona Ryder matches her in every way. 
Both are superb young actresses, but since Jolie's Lisa is the more outward 
and flashy character, she is inevitably the one whose talent jumps more 
quickly off the screen. In contrast, Ryder is subtle and quiet, but all the 
more genuinely real because of it, and the internal conflicts you sense she 
is going through are something many teenagers and twentysomethings will be 
able to identify with. Since Ryder is the one we follow throughout the story 
(she appears in every scene), without a captivating presence in the role, the 
film would have collapsed under its own weight, but she more than handles the 
responsibilities handed to her. 
In a smaller turn, Brittany Murphy is the clear standout, in a performance of 
almost insufferable pain, as Daisy, who is checked out of the hospital by her 
father and given an apartment to live in, despite her obviously not being 
prepared to face the outside world. In the most powerful sequence in the 
film, Susanna and Lisa run away from Claymoore and travel to stay with Daisy 
for the night, but things take a turn for the worse when Lisa second-guesses 
exactly who Daisy is--a depressed, frightened girl who is not well enough to 
be taking care of herself, and who is all set up for a very serious fall. The 
heartbreaking thing is, Lisa is right, and Daisy knows it. Murphy, usually 
appearing in comedic roles (1995's "Clueless," 1999's "Drop Dead Gorgeous"), 
successfully invades her memorably tragic character with equal measures of 
insecurity and despair.
Supporting parts are all impressive, as well, with Clea Duvall eliciting a 
sweetness to her ambivalent role as Georgina, and Elisabeth Moss affecting as 
the regretful Polly, who knows there is no chance of anyone falling in love 
with her because of her disfigured face. Whoopi Goldberg evokes an important 
amount of warmth as the most caring nurse in the wing, Valerie, while Jared 
Leto, as Susanna's past boyfriend, only makes a few fleeting appearances in 
an underwritten character, but is fine with what he is given.
The confrontational climax, set in the basement of the hospital, threatens to 
cross the line into melodrama, and it does very briefly, but is saved by the 
assurance of the actresses. Still, a less commotional, more refined finale 
might have been the wiser choice, as it would have been staying more in the 
spirit of what had succeeded it.
An improvement over his uneven 1997 drama, "Copland," James Mangold excels in 
the area of attracting notable talent and placing the principal cast in 
commendably juicy roles. But more than anything, "Girl, Interrupted" gains 
much of its footing from the way in which it loyally follows Susanna through 
the one year in her life which altered the way she viewed the world. The film 
persuasively argues that Susanna probably never had anything wrong with her 
in particular, as she was just going through a natural stage in her growing 
up process. Yet, in a strange way, that year at Claymoore changed her life 
all for the better, and, in a sense, aided in the self-discovery of who she 
really was. For as Susanna states in voice-over as she is looking back at 
what she was going through in the period of '67-'68, "maybe I was just a 
girl, interrupted."  

Author
Mac VerStandig
--- A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/girl,_interrupted.htm ----
---Those of you in the Portland, Maine area can hear Mac VerStandig's 
movie reviews every Friday on the 98.9 The Point morning show---
Girl, Interrupted is, on the surface, every man's dream: a bunch of 
crazy 20-something girls in a never-ending pajama party. Susanna, the 
film's protagonist and narrator, questions early on "Have you ever 
confused a dream with life?" Don't make the error. Despite having an 
uplifting trailer that seems to hit on every joke that is scattered 
about the film, Girl, Interrupted is a real downer of a drama that will 
do little more than confuse any horny male-chauvinists who mistakenly 
wander into the production.
The establishing shot of the movie is one of prison-like bars that 
slowly pans to some girls. This sets the tone for a film that takes 
place in a mental institution where the key character isn't a patient, 
nurse or doctor but rather the building itself. Susanna (Winona Ryder in 
a decent but not standout performance) is pressured into checking 
herself into Claymoore for what she is told will be a short rest. Before 
long, she is diagnosed as having Borderline Personality Disorder in the 
pre-Prozac setting and finds herself staying a lot longer than she 
wishes.
Susanna's roommate is Georgina (Clea Duvall), a sweet, Wizard Of Oz 
obsessed pathological liar. Although the film doesn't explore her in 
depth, something that would be well worth the added time, Georgina is 
one of the most fascinating girls in the female-dominated movie. She is 
attractive, apparently friendly and seems to be totally innocuous. Yet 
she is in a mental institution and you find yourself questioning 
everything she says and, ultimately, wondering of her the same thing you 
wonder of many characters: is she really nuts?
Lisa (Angelina Jolie, who gives one of the finest female performances of 
1999 in her supporting role) has an in-your-face persona dominated by 
her escapes from the mental institution that one nurse (Whoopi Goldberg, 
who reprises her standard role as the caring mother figure) describes as 
"a five star hotel." It is apparent that Lisa is single-dimensionally 
psychotic, but you get a feeling that there might just be something more 
to her.
The other patients include a pampered girl who has sex with her father 
in exchange for rotisserie chicken, a burn victim with a profile ala Mel 
Gibson in The Man Without a Face and a bunch of overly nice nurses that 
subsequently lack credibility in fortunately limited roles.  
The story, based on Susanna Kaysen's best selling book of the same 
title, is more similar to The Graduate than other loony-bin films like 
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. Susanna is like Benjamin Braddock in 
that she has no direction as she comes out of school and even has a 
sexual relationship (off screen) with one of her parents' friends. But 
unlike Benjamin, Susanna's parents give up on her almost altogether and 
she isn't nearly as naturally rebellious as Dustin Hoffman's landmark 
character.
The movie does venture slightly astray from Kaysen's book. For clearly 
dramatic purposes, Susanna finds herself in a creepy situation that she 
is only told about in the book. A pet cat that helps to define and 
humanize some characters is also added. And Susanna's life is only 
interrupted for one year here, compared to two in the book.
The film takes place in an era of Vietnam drafts, VW busses, RFK, MLK 
and Woodstock. A grade-A soundtrack is highlighted by pieces 
representative of the time including Bookends, Downtown, Time Has Come 
Today and The Weight. 
Girl, Interrupted is definitely a film that holds its own. A solid 
setting, intriguing characters and the aforementioned tunes make the 
movie well worth while- as long as you can take a PJ party seriously.

Author
Jerry Saravia
I never thought that mental illness could be portrayed in such a
stale, anonymous manner but that is how "Girl, Interrupted" unspools
its subject matter. The film wants to make the case that mental
illness can be a state of mind for some, and a strong reality for
others - If only the young women portrayed possessed some core of
humanity.
The film begins with Susanna Kaysen (Winona Ryder), an 18-year-old who
has just drunk a bottle of vodka while ingesting a bottle of
aspirin. She is diagnosed with "borderline personality disorder," and
is thus sent to Claymoore hospital in Boston. The screenplay, adapted
from Susanna Kaysen's true-to-life novel, never makes it clear whether
Susanna admitted herself to the hospital or if her parents had her
admitted. Nevertheless, she is taken in to Claymoore's psychiatric
facility, and supervised by a head nurse played by Whoopi
Golodberg. Susanna is faced with an array of distinguished women such
as one who nearly burned her face off, another one obsessed with
laxatives and chicken, and so on. The one foxy chick who seems truly
nutty, pardon the pun, is Lisa (Angelina Jolie), a highly dangerous
sociopath who confuses her aorta with her neck. Lisa feels threatened
at first by Susanna but gradually, they click together.
While watching "Girl, Interrupted," I was reminded of the stark
documentary, "Titicut Follies" by Frederick Wiseman, which dealt with
the horrors of a mental hospital. When you saw the patients, you knew
they were patients afflicted with an illness. The same holds true of
Milos Forman's classic "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest." "Girl,
Interrupted" features patients that might be at home in TV's "Dawson's
Creek" - that might be a little extreme but these women hardly seem
troubled, only bland occupants of a far too sanitized looking
institution.
The problem lies in the screenplay that supplies character types, not
true characters of depth and emotion. Susanna hardly seems the
slightest bit troubled - her scene with the psychiatrist should have
convinced him that she was perfectly sane but what do I know. Perhaps
in 1967, before Prozac became a household name, psychiatrists had
their own preconceived notions of what mental illness was.  But these
girls seem relatively harmless, even to themselves. This is more like
a watered down version of "Cuckoo's Nest," and far too bland to
inspire much interest.
The sparkle of "Girl, Interrupted" can be found in Jolie's vibrant,
edgy performance. She brings soul and an allure to Lisa, and it is
gut-wrenching to watch her. Her long blonde silvery hair and big,
clownish lips evoke a tough, sexy demeanor that is riveting to
watch. I would followed this complex character anywhere.
The rest of "Girl, Interrupted," however, is yawn-inducing and lacking
in thematic richness. It sort of drifts away and hardly leaves a trace
of itself. The boredom is seldom interrupted.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
James Sanford
 Author Susanna Kaysen's biggest problem was probably being born
in an era when conformity was the name of the game and well-to-do girls
who wanted to sample life on the edge or experiment sexually with more
than one partner were instantly labeled as mentally disturbed. That's
exactly what happened to Kaysen in the late 1960s, when she was packed
off to a psychiatric hospital following a botched suicide attempt.
Kaysen came out of the experience with a book, "Girl, Interrupted,"
which has become something of a touchstone for young female readers over
the years. Many of her fellow patients never came out at all.
 Had she grown up in the 1990s, with her gifts for communicating
adolescent angst through language, Kaysen would almost be assured of
having a record deal or at least her own website. She was Goth before
anyone ever heard of the term.
 There's no mystery as to why Kaysen's autobiography attracted
the attention of Winona Ryder. The role of Susanna fits the actress
marvelously, and her fans may even see Susanna as a continuation of the
smart, introspective teens Ryder played in such career-establishing hits
as "Beetlejuice" and "Heathers." And, after spending a large portion of
the last few years keeping a low profile onscreen, Ryder certainly must
be anxious to get back in the spotlight.
 Unfortunately for her, however, there's an even juicier part in
"Girl, Interrupted," and it has gone to the exotic, unpredictable
Angelina Jolie. So while Ryder is baring her soul and facing off against
such formidable types as Whoopi Goldberg (cast as a stern but
sympathetic nurse) and Vanessa Redgrave (in a cameo as a psychiatrist
who pierces the clouds over Susanna's psyche), Jolie strides in and
steals the film out from under its star.
 Jolie, who made a name for herself with a sensational
performance as an ill-fated supermodel in the 1998 HBO film "Gia,"
plays Lisa, an eight-year veteran of the hospital who appears to be
beyond treatment. She's a wildcat, flirting outrageously with both men
and women and generally creating havoc in any place she visits.
 Because Ryder's boyish look here seems patterned after the late
actress and cult figure Jean Seberg, it's not much of a stretch to link
"Girl, Interrupted" to Seberg's best film "Breathless," the french New
Wave masterpiece in which she played a confused American who tries to
lose her own identity in a whirlwind affair with a Parisian criminal
(Jean-Paul Belmondo).
 Susanna, like nearly everyone else in the ward, is initially
drawn into Lisa's orbit and savors the woman's boundless energy and
attitude. In just the same way Lisa overwhelms Susanna, the statuesque
Jolie dwarfs the tiny Ryder. But although Susanna eventually stands
tall, Ryder, fine as she is in the movie, cannot help but remain
eclipsed by Jolie.
 Ryder's work here is often affecting, particularly when she starts her
journey toward self-awareness in the story's second half. Jolie smartly
realizes Lisa is not a sympathetic figure and doesn't pander for the
audience's pity.
 Instead, she's always withholding a little something, teasing
the viewer about what's really brewing behind this hellion's half-open
eyes. Eventually, we find ourselves worrying more about what's going to
happen to Lisa than about Susanna's fate; hey, we all know she went on
to write the book anyway, so things must have worked out somehow. Lisa
has mystery on her side.
 The acting battle is the primary strength of "Girl,
Interrupted," which too often resorts to a melodramatic cliché (a
suicide, an escape attempt, etc.) whenever the plot stalls. All these
incidents may have actually happened during Kaysen's one-year "rest,"
but the screenplay doesn't make them feel real. On the other hand, there
are a few interesting touches scattered throughout the script, such as
Susanna's roommate's obsession with the "Oz" books by L. Frank Baum and
Ruth Plumly Thompson and Lisa's quoting of Dorothy Parker. True, these
kids may have some problems, but they've also got terrific taste in
literature. James Sanford

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: James Mangold
WRITTEN BY: Susanna Kaysen (book) and James Mangold
CAST: Winona Ryder, Angelina Joilie, Clea DuVall, Brittany Murphy
MPAA: Rated R for strong language and content relating to drugs, sexuality and suicide.
Runtime: USA:127
"When you don't want to feel anything, death sounds like a blessing". 
- Susanna, "GIRL, INTERRUPTED"
Susanna (Wiona Ryder ) is a girl, like any girl; living in a town,
like any town. She is eighteen and is like most teenagers - confused,
angry, scared. But there is something about her that makes you
wonder. She has a gift. She is the philosopher of her time, with her
own view at life and society. Her dream is writing and her wish is
sharing her doubts, fears and feelings with someone. But no one
listens. No body cares. She is not like everyone else. And therefore
she is crazy. Before long, she is transmitted to a mental institution,
where she can get excellent care. Here she meets people that are, like
herself, different. And though the personnel tries to help, they see
them only as patients and not for who they are as persons. There is
Giorgina (), the 'pathological liar', Polly, who wants to be a child
forever and Lisa (Angelina Joilie) - the rebellious lioness. Trapped
and helpless, Susanna begins to wonder about her situation. What's
really wrong with her? Is she really crazy? Is it the sixties? Or
maybe she is just a girl, interrupted.
Original? No, but nevertheless it makes a powerful emotional
impact. The story is not structured in chronological order. It jumps
back and forth in time and space, and we learn about Susanna's past
from her memories. Most of the time the film resembles Milos Forman's
"One Flew Over The Cocoo's Nest". It is a meditation on life, society
and human mind. It is a story about the courage and power of being
different. It is a fable about what it means to be brilliant. The
first half of the film is inspiring and is intelligent enough to stand
on its own feet, without being embarrassed. Another complementary
element in James Mangold's picture is characters. Every character is a
mystery, and most of the time the patients are trying to unlock the
doors to each others minds. The problems start emerging in the second
half of the film, where it is time for the director to tie loose ends
and elegantly end his fable. And this is a disappointing effort. All
its mysteries are revealed in the most obvious and primitive way. No
dark secrets remain. Nothing is left to our imagination and
thought. And what felt like a fresh breath of originality, disappears
completely. Acting is the only thing that remains constant during
these 127 minutes. Wiona Ryder is impressive. There are no flaws in
her delicately controlled performance. But the real acting skills are
provided by Angelina Joilie. She puts on a performance that make you
remember Jack Nicholson in "One Flew Over the Cucoo's Nest". But
unlike Ryder, who goes as far as the somewhat dry script unfolds,
Joilie stretches it and goes beyond, making the words her own. There
is some original improvisations in her wonderfully energetic
performance, that really pay off. The rest of the cast is nice, but
their screen time is limited and there is not much they can do with
their small parts. The technical aspect of the film is mediocre, with
Jack N. Green's dry cinematography and Kevin Tent's traditional
editing. This is probably the oldest looking film of the year. In the
end the film feels called interesting. The frightening themes about
control and mental breakdown are almost avoided and it seems like the
creators didn't come up with any interesting updates since Forman has
created his legendary picture. It is a cliché, and yet there is
something that prevents you from taking your eyes from the
screen. There is some kind of a bizarre connection. And even when you
know what's going to emerge from the corner, when you know exactly
what will happen, you feel surprised, amazed and moved. I can't really
explain that, but my guess is that it touches emotions and thoughts
that are so basic, so deep and important, that it simply demands
attention. Will it be remembered? No. It resembles the countless 'true
stories' that you can watch at home on your TV set. But for those who
enjoy a good cry, this is the perfect choice.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Back in the '60s, 17 year-old Susanna Kaysen wound up in
Claymoore, an upscale psychiatric hospital in Massachusetts, for more
than a year and used that experience to write a novel which fascinated
doe-eyed actress Winona Ryder enough to option it and make it into
this movie - in which she, of course, plays the dour, dreamy title
role. It's an episodic memoir, at best, showcasing the acting acumen
of Ms. Ryder as the passive, indecisive Susanna and, even more,
Angelina Jolie as a ferociously vicious sociopath, along with Clea
DuVall as a pathological liar, Elizabeth Moss as a severely scarred
burn victim, and Brittany Murphy as a pampered, rich girl with an
eating disorder and an overly attentive father. Vanessa Redgrave is
impressive as the chief psychiatrist. Problem is, Susanna Kaysen's
confused mental state, diagnosed as Borderline Personality Disorder,
is much like that of a lot of female adolescents - confused about her
self-image, uncertain about her long-term goals, and struggling to
make sense of a rapidly changing world around her. Directed by James
Mangold (Heavy, Cop Land) from a script co-written by him, Lisa Loomer
and Anna Hamilton Phelan, the implausibly detached, humorless
narrative examines the boundaries between confinement and freedom,
friendship and betrayal, madness and sanity, evolving into a female
version of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest with no group dynamic. As a
result, there's no emotional involvement. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, Girl, Interrupted is a sappy, superficial, frustrating
5. At one point, Whoopi Goldberg, as her no-nonsense nurse, tells
whiny Susanna Kaysen, "You are a lazy, self-indulgent little girl who
is driving herself crazy." Right on, Whoopi!

Author
Steve Rhodes
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, based on the best selling autobiography by Susanna
Kaysen, tells the true story of her 18-month stay at a mental
institution in the late 1960s.  With strong performances by Winona
Ryder, Angelina Jolie and an ensemble cast, the film can be thought of
as a female version of ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST.
When we meet Susanna (Ryder), she's a spaced-out, nervous 17 year old,
who recently woofed down a bottle of vodka after taking a bottle of
aspirin for her headache.  A withdrawn and angry girl with a mother who
appears to be the crazy one in the family, Susanna is sent by her
parents to a mental hospital to get better.  Once there, she is
diagnosed with "Borderline Personality Disorder," a disease that's as
mild as it sounds and probably afflicts half of the country.
While institutionalized, Susanna meets and bonds with girls who have a
cornucopia of cases of more traditional mental illnesses.  The movie's
problems start here.  Rather than concentrating on Susanna's case, the
democratic script feels duty bound to let everyone tell their story.
This lack of focus is frustrating.  Although the other characters -- the
burnt girl, the bulimic girl, the lying girl, the anorectic girl, the
fat girl, etc.  -- each have interesting moments on stage, they take
away time better devoted to the central story.  Certainly, when we do
learn more about Susanna's life, it is frighteningly fascinating.
As the patients' ringleader and chief bad girl, Lisa (Jolie) plays the
story's most unstable character.  Given equal screen time, Lisa is an
even more frustrating character than Susanna.  We learn little about
Lisa other than her behaviors, which include leading her band in various
sophomoric stunts like breaking into the principal's -- oops, I mean the
therapist's -- office, after lights out.  The movie, which sometimes
reminds one of a silly teen comedy, can be quite funny at times, usually
to the detriment of the drama.
Director James Mangold (COP LAND) has constant troubles maintaining the
show's tone.  It isn't until the last act that he tosses out all
pretense of humor and sticks to the dramatic.  The surprise is that,
rather than improving the movie, it makes you realize that it's only as
a comedy that this movie really works.
Susanna's brutally honest and benevolent nurse (Whoopi Goldberg) seems
to sum up her problems best, telling her that she is "a lazy,
self-indulgent, little girl, who is driving herself crazy."  The truth
to Susanna's real mental problems, if there are any, isn't revealed in
the picture.  This is a shame since the movie makes it easy to empathize
with her predicament.  The film just leaves you feeling empty and
wanting to know more.
GIRL, INTERRUPTED runs 2:05.  It is rated R for strong language and
content relating to drugs, sexuality and suicide.  It would be
acceptable for older teens.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Donlee Brussel
Cast: Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea DuVall, Brittany Murphy,
Elizabeth Moss, Jared Leto, Jeffrey Tambor, Vanessa Redgrave, Whoopi
Goldberg
Director: James Mangold
Screenplay: James Mangold and Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan,
based on the book by Susanna Kaysen
Rated R
127 minutes
It's time to soak up the estrogen with the chick flick version of "One
Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest."  "Girl, Interrupted" stars the dynamic
duo of homely Winona Ryder and Power Puff Girl Angelina Jolie.  Also
along for the ride are the latest pseudo-teen stars, Clea DuVall (the
dyke in "The Faculty") and Jared Leto (Angel Face in "Fight Club").
Thrown in for ethnic sprinkling is Whoopi Goldberg.  So get some
Kleenex and the Spice Girls CD because Girl Power rules for two hours.
The year is 1967; Susanna (Ryder) is dazed and confused.  She's the
only senior not going on to college.  She attempts suicide, fails and
is sent off to Claymoore by her parents.  Claymoore's a Boston
psychiatric ward with several colorful patients.  There's Georgina
(DuVall) the compulsive liar who's Susanna's roomie; Daisy (Brittany
Murphy), the stuck up daddy's girl with an eating disorder; Polly
(Elizabeth Moss), the deformed pyromaniac; and Lisa (Jolie), the sultry
sociopath.  It's the job of Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg), the head nurse,
to keep them all in line.
"Girl, Interrupted" chronicles Susanna's 18-month stay at Claymoore and
at times, it's an intriguing one.  Don't think for a second that it's
because of Winona Ryder.  She seems almost monotonous compared to the
extravagantly prodigious Angelina Jolie who is going to get the
recognition she deserves come award time.  Since Jolie won a Golden
Globe for her ardent performance in "Gia" she seems to only get better
with age.
Goldberg gives an a-OK performance as the nurse who watches Susanna
shave her legs.  Jared Leto struts around topless as Susanna's
boyfriend who mutters some "this is not right" BS in an after school
special manner midway through the film.  Jeffrey Tambor delivers
a "square" performance as Susanna's psychiatrist.  And Vanessa Redgrave
provides us an unnecessary mediocre performance that should've been
edited out.
Winona Ryder has been trying to bring Susanna Kaiser's autobiographical
book to the screen for years.  And now that she finally has, she can go
back to doing ping-pong ball tricks.  James Mangold does an admirable
job of helming "Girl, Interrupted."  He takes an attenuated and
conventional approach at the film. Often it works.  Often it doesn't.
Dig the groovy tunes on the soundtrack and behold the historical clips
of 'Nam and Martin Luther King Jr. in this seemingly ambitious 60s
period piece.  Dread the all-too-predictable basement confrontation
finale that is "Girl, Interrupted's" most fatal flaw.
Crazy people are people too...despite my proof that they aren't!  Don't
judge a book by its cover.  It doesn't matter how you look on the
outside, it's what's on the inside that counts.  Most of you know the
cliched moral of the story already.  Therefore, the only real reason to
see this film is Angelina Jolie's magnetic performance.  If that
doesn't interest you, pass on this formulaic work and get yourself some
Maxi Pads with wings.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by James Mangold. Screenplay by Mangold, Lisa Loomer and Anna 
Hamilton Phelan, based on the book by Susanna Kaysen. Starring Winona 
Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Whoopi Goldberg. Running time: 147 minutes. Rated 
AA for mature subject matter and offensive language. Reviewed on February 
28th, 2000.
Shortly after her 1967 high school graduation, Susanna Kaysen (Winona 
Ryder) nearly kills herself with a cocktail of aspirin and vodka. "I had 
a headache," she explains after being committed to the Claymoore mental 
hospital. But Susanna's brush with death is really symptomatic of the 
sheer aimlessness of her life. She is the only member of her class not 
heading off for college. While much of the United States is swept up in 
the furor of the Vietnam War, Susanna seems almost oblivious. So it is 
hardly surprising that someone so lacking in direction could allow control 
of her life to be handed to the doctors and nurses at Claymoore. At 
least now, direction will be forced on her if nothing else.
"Girl, Interrupted" is based on true events, depicted in Kaysen's book of 
the same title. Kaysen lost a year and a half of her life in a women's 
mental ward, and the film recounts the experiences which inspired 
Susanna to retake control of her own destiny.
Despite a lack of real incident, the first half of the movie is 
riveting. We are introduced to some of the other girls in Susanna's 
ward, including a disfigured young pyrophile named Polly (Elizabeth 
Moss); Susanna's roommate Georgina (Clea DuVall), who seeks refuge in the 
"Oz" books of L Frank Baum; and Daisy (Brittany Murphy), a woman with 
peculiar dietary beliefs. These characters are portrayed evenhandedly; 
their mental problems are neither sugarcoated nor demonized, and they 
seem real. Watching over everything is Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg), a stern 
but caring nurse who understands in minutes what the psychiatrists 
themselves never really figure out: that Susanna has come to Claymoore 
not for help, but simply to be. "Do not drop anchor here," Valerie warns 
Susanna, knowing that the doctors are perfectly content to keep her 
locked up forever. Since there is nothing really wrong with Susanna, how 
can she ever be cured?
Everything is stirred up by the arrival of Lisa (Angelina Jolie), an 
aggressive young woman who is no stranger to Claymoore. Despite the fact 
that Lisa herself has no desire to remain hospitalized (when we first 
meet her, she has just been recaptured after a two week absence), it 
is her presence which is Susanna's most attractive reason for staying in 
the asylum. Lisa plays the leader of the ragtag band of patients, taking
them on secret midnight excursions through secret passages and into 
restricted areas of the hospital. For a time, Claymoore seems less like 
an insane asylum and more like summer camp. Of course, a mental ward is 
not summer camp, and eventually events conspire to remind Susanna of this
fact. It is this reality -- and how Susanna reacts to it -- which 
comprises the film's second, more uneven half.
Much of "Girl, Interrupted" is a careful character study. We are witness 
to how insanity affects everyone from the delusional themselves, to those 
charged with their care, to the average people who by some happenstance 
come into contact with them. The film also observes how madness can be a 
relative and elusive concept. Some of Claymoore's patients have no 
business being there (Susanna herself, for instance), while some are 
there purely because of social tenets which today seem increasingly 
outdated (one woman's only "problem" is that she is a lesbian). But, more 
darkly, not all of those released and declared sane truly are, and this 
sets up the movie's most disturbing sequence.
Unfortunately, after an hour of terrific characterization and  
well-chosen set pieces, "Girl, Interrupted"'s final twenty minutes are a 
huge step backward into melodrama. These scenes feel awkwardly grafted 
onto the rest of the film, as though scriptwriters James Mangold (who 
also directed), Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan were afraid 
audiences would not be satisfied with a straightforward character study. 
Instead, the movie ends with a lot of contrived angst and, yes, even a 
chase scene (albeit one that is nicely photographed by Mangold).
The cast is well chosen; while it would be very easy to play any of the 
Claymoore inmates over the top, all the actors stay grounded in reality, 
and this lends authenticity to the picture. Jolie is terrific in a role 
that has already earned her an Oscar nomination and Golden Globe award. 
Of all the characters, it is Lisa who could most easily have been taken 
too far, but Jolie knows her limits. It is clear that she is having a 
great deal of fun in the role; Jolie really gets her teeth into the part, 
portraying as much of Lisa's personality in her body language and the 
inflection of her voice as in her actual words and deeds. Ryder's 
performance, meanwhile, is understated but not bland, projecting Susanna's 
uncertainty and desperation while making it clear that she should never 
have been committed.
Denouement aside, "Girl, Interrupted" is an absorbing venture inside the 
walls of a mental institution. Both scripting and acting are up to the 
challenge of translating Kaysen's experiences convincingly onto the 
screen. Although it lacks the power and drama of "One Flew Over the 
Cuckoo's Nest", to which it is perhaps most readily comparable, "Girl, 
Interrupted" should not be overlooked.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/GirlInterrupted.html

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
It was writer/director James Mangold who apparently resurrected Sylvester
Stallone's career a couple of years ago when he cast the ol' lad in a
"character role" in COPLAND. Recently, Stallone admitted that his phone had
ceased to ring shortly thereafter and that he basically felt a lot like a
piece of "driftwood". Hmmmm. Well, I've had that same feeling about Winona
Ryder for the past few years, so eager was I to see what she would come up
with in her executive producing debut.
PLOT:
Set in the sixties, this film takes place in a ward reserved for girls with
mental problems. The main character in the story is a depressed girl who is
not sure about whether or not she is really crazy, but knows enough to sign
herself into the recuperation center. Over time, she finds out more about
herself, life and the other so-called "insane" girls around her.
CRITIQUE:
Dry rehashed depressing material coiffed in a couple of solid performances
from Winona Ryder and Angelina Jolie, does not impress much in story,
original characters or insight, but did manage to haul itself in less than 3
hours, so I guess that it ain't all bad! Surprised was I that this film
wasn't as boring as I had initially anticipated, but definitely far from
being a visual page-turner as well. Jolie's performance alone kept me
interested for most of the runtime, with plenty of energy, attitude and
sheer presence to make up for the basically depressive story similar in vein
to Jack Nicholson and ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST. This film might
certainly be useful or even insightful to many people who could relate
stronger to its characters, but in my own case, I found very little new or
rich material here. In fact, the final "confrontation scene" which was built
up to be one filled with emotions, left me with little more than a roll of
the eyes.
Is it truly depressing and will you want to go out, find the nearest bar and
drown yourself in liquor over the pitiful state of your measly existence
after having seen the movie? Certainly not. It does provide for some levity
in parts and even teases you with an epilogue which definitely might be
mistaken as an optimistic one by some. Unfortunately, I just didn't find
anything fresh or engaging in much of the film's narrative, save for the
bang-a-gong performance by John Voight's daughter, Angelina. Actually,
Winona Ryder was also pretty solid as the girl falling apart at the seams,
as were most of the rest of the girls (Ixnay on Whoopie Goldberg, who
basically felt like Whoopie Goldberg in some big-ass hair!), but on the
whole, the film just didn't leave me with much more to think about once it
was over. The only thing on my mind after the movie was all that damn snow
that I was gonna have to clean off my car, but alas, that is my life in the
Great White North.
See it if you haven't seen ONE FLEW, enjoy depressing material, feel as
though you may relate to the unstable characters or really dig Jolie and
Ryder. Otherwise skip this downer and live to smile another day.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Winona Ryder's birth name is Winona Laura Horowitz, named after the town in
which she was born-Winona, Minnesota. She came up with her last name after
having shot her first feature LUCAS in 1986, when she received a phone call
from the producers who asked her how she wanted to have her name appear on
the credits of the film. She suggested Ryder as her father's Mitch Ryder
album was playing the background. And that was that!
Winona was also able to personally identify with the character that she
portrayed in this film because she once checked herself into a hospital when
she was 20 years old as well (Not sure if her break-up with Johnny Depp had
anything to do with this). Her condition was based around anxiety attacks
which she could not understand or explain. Most recently, Winona had a small
but memorable part in SOUTH PARK: BIGGER, LONGER & UNCUT (8/10).
Many are now familiar with Angelina Jolie's film work, but did you know that
she has also been in various music videos? "Has anybody seen my baby?" by
the Rolling Stones, "Rock 'n Roll dreams come through" by Meatloaf and
"Stand by my woman" by Lenny Kravitz.
The actress who plays Daisy in this film, Brittany Murphy, might be
memorable to some from her role as the
"loser-girl-to-be-turned-into-winner-girl" by Alicia Silverstone in
CLUELESS.
Of course, you all recognized the lovely Joanne Kerns playing Winona's mom
7in this movie. She played little Kirk Cameron's chipper mom, Maggie Seaver,
in the sitcom GROWING PAINS.
James Mangold, the director of this movie, and Cathy Konrad, one of the
producers of this movie, are married. He is also the son of two celebrated
painters and earned his undergraduate degree from the California Institute
of the Arts (in both the acting and the film schools) and a master's degree
from Columbia University. He is currently 35 years old.
This film is based on the true story of writer Susanna Kaysen and her
best-selling memoir, Girl Interrupted.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Girl,_Interrupted_ (R) *** (out of ****)
The title of _Girl,_Interrupted_ bears a singular subject, but audiences
will likely walk out of James Mangold's adaptation of Susanna Kaysen's
memoir thinking of two "girls"--Winona Ryder and Angelina Jolie, who further
cement their reputations as two of the most gifted young screen actresses
today.  It's unfortunate, however, that the script often isn't as strong as
they are.  But what is fortunate is that their performances more than
compensate for the shortcomings in the writing department.
Ryder plays the "girl" of the title, Susanna, who in the 1960s is sent to
the Claymoore mental hospital after pressure from her parents and a
therapist.  Though she was hospitalized for chasing a bottle of aspirin with
a bottle of vodka, Susanna is more depressed and unmotivated than truly
mentally ill--a statement which doesn't necessarily hold true for her peers
at Claymoore.  Her roommate is Georgina (Clea Duvall), a pathological liar;
she also spends time with self-inflicted burn victim Polly (Elisabeth Moss)
and laxative junkie Daisy (Brittany Murphy).
Susanna ends up bonding most strongly with the most volatile patient, Lisa
(Jolie), whom we first meet being dragged back into the ward after an escape
attempt.  Dangerous, carefree, and intensely charismatic, Lisa cannot help
but captivate Susanna's attention--and that of the audience.  It's a role
perfectly suited for Best Supporting Actress Oscar aspirations, and Jolie
(who has already garnered a Golden Globe nod and the Broadcast Film Critics
Association's Supporting Actress prize) runs with the opportunity.  There's
more to her performance than the expected fits and teary breakdowns; she is
able to make Lisa into a multidimensional person, with real humanity behind
the histrionics.  She will undoubtedly be competing for the golden statuette
in March.
By comparison, more likely to be overlooked is Ryder's performance, which is
very much Jolie's equal.  Susanna is basically the calm audience surrogate
in the middle of the storm, but the fact that she remains a strong presence
amid the flashier turns is a tribute to the effectiveness of Ryder's
measured, no-frills work.  Despite the many spotlight-stealing moments
afforded to Lisa, _Girl,_Interrupted_ is Susanna's story of growth, and one
is able to see her progression through Ryder's nuanced performance.
Less subtle, however, is the script by Mangold, Lisa Loomer, and Anna
Hamilton Phelan.  I think the honest portrait of these troubled young women
makes engrossing enough viewing, but the writers have decided to manufacture
blatantly "movie" situations for dramatic purposes.  It's an understandable
decision, but the mechanics behind such contrived scenes as an angry,
tear-stained climactic confrontation between Susanna and Lisa are a bit too
obvious and distracting to be completely believable.
Yet one does buy into such scenes to a certain degree, again thanks to the
work of the cast and the overall power of the story.  _Girl,_Interrupted_
may ultimately be a film, underrealized; but its desired emotional effect is
more than adequately achieved.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Scott Renshaw
GIRL, INTERRUPTED
(Columbia)
Starring:  Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Whoopi Goldberg, Clea Duvall,
Brittany Murphy, Jared Leto, Jeffrey Tambor, Vanessa Redgrave.
Screenplay:  James Mangold, based on the memoir by Susanna Kaysen.
Producers:  Douglas Wick and Cathy Konrad.
Director:  James Mangold.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, drug use)
Running Time:  127 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It's time now for another chapter from Scott's Book of Cinematic Pet
Peeves. Our subject today is something I refer to as Characterization Via
Accusation. It's that annoying thing some films do in which characters'
psychological back-story is revealed not through the actions of those
characters, but through the things other characters say about them in the
middle of dramatic confrontations. It's the kind of lazy writing that can
wound even a film like AMERICAN BEAUTY, as when Ricky Fitts tells Angela
"you're ugly and you're boring ... and you know it." Film is a medium of
showing, not telling. A script full of probing psychoanalytical dialogue
is a script unable --or unwilling -- to show viewers what the characters
are all about.
     Susanna Kaysen's memoir GIRL, INTERRUPTED found the writer exploring
her 18 month experience in a psychiatric hospital with a journalistic
distance, as though she were describing the experience of another person. 
That's a restraint James Mangold's adaptation could have used a lot more
of. The film version shows us Susanna (Winona Ryder) as she is evaluated
after a possible suicide attempt as an 18-year-old in 1968. Susanna
eventually commits herself voluntarily to Claymoore Psychiatric Hospital,
where she finds herself in the company of some uniquely troubled young
women. Her roommate Georgina (Clea DuVall) is a pathological liar; Daisy
(Brittany Murphy) will only eat her father's deli chicken. And Lisa
(Angelina Jolie) ... well, Lisa's just a good old-fashioned sociopath. 
Through her experience, Susanna begins to question who she is, and how
easy it can be to be defined by others -- or even by yourself -- as crazy.
     The question of whether or not Susanna ever belonged at Claymoore was
central to the book, in chapters exploring how quickly she was diagnosed
with the vaguely-defined condition of "borderline personality disorder." 
Mangold takes the subject just a bit farther, flashing back to Susanna's
life as a morose, directionless teenager in an upper class family. The
time period itself plays a role as well, especially when symptoms of her
condition like "rebelliousness" and "sexual promiscuity" were symptoms for
a majority of her peer group in the late 1960s. GIRL, INTERRUPTED becomes
something of a coming-of-age story in which Susanna begins to realize that
her own "insanity" is an affectation compared to the much more profound
problems of her Claymoore cohort. As one nurse (Whoopi Goldberg) tells
her, her psychiatric problem may simply be that she's a "lazy,
self-indulgent little girl."
     The problem is that the nurse has to tell her -- and, by extension,
us. That's also only one of half a dozen or so scenes in which characters
begin dissecting the others by revealing their deep, dark secrets. Lisa
taunts Daisy about her relationship with her father; Susanna screams at
Lisa about her own problems; a psychiatrist (Vanessa Redgrave) tells
Susanna about why she uses the word "ambivalent." GIRL, INTERRUPTED
becomes a film all about cathartic movie moments, including a
happy-go-lucky, CUCKOO'S NEST-like outing and a chase through tunnels
beneath the hospital (a chase through tunnels?!?). Whatever points Kaysen
and Mangold might have been trying to make about the fine line between
sanity and insanity -- or about how those lines may be defined differently
for women -- are lost in tearful breakdowns and manufactured drama.
     It would be remiss of me not to mention Angelina Jolie's performance
as Lisa, the wild child who serves as the ward's alpha female. It would be
remiss not because Jolie's performance is exceptional -- showy, flashy and
fun, perhaps, though not exceptional -- but because it's a movie
performance of a real-life character. Everything in GIRL, INTERRUPTED
seems designed to be satisfying as entertainment, not to be true to
Susanna Kaysen's life or her unique perspective on that life. It's a movie
that feels always and forever like a movie. That means punch lines and
crescendos; it means Winona Ryder shouting a story better told in quieter
tones; it means one of the worst false beards in film history on Jared
Leto as Susanna's boyfriend. And it means everyone telling everyone else
how crazy they are or aren't, every character's story an open book ... or,
in this case, an open script.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea DuVall, Whoopi Goldberg,
Vanessa Redgrave. Directed by James Mangold. Rated R.
I'm usually quite wary of resorting to clichés, but one is quite
appropriate in this case: Girl, Interrupted really is a One Flew Over
the Cuckoo's Nest for the younger generation. It's almost uncanny. But
even as such, it works. Reversing the gender focus and updating the
general storyline, it's an entertaining experience, though it doesn't
pack the emotional wallop of the Milos Forman/Jack Nicholson
collaboration. Sometimes it's trite, sometimes it's preposterously
overblown, but the performances of Winona Ryder and major awards
contender Angelina Jolie pull you through it.
Ryder plays Susanna, a deeply troubled high school senior who is
admitted to Claymoore, an upscale mental institution after she downs a
bottle of aspirin followed by a bottle of vodka. Though she claims she
wasn't trying to commit suicide ("I had a headache!"), her parents
insist that she gets help. So off to Claymoore she goes, predictably
finding herself to be the only remotely "sane" one there.
Susanna forms a peculiar friendship with Lisa (Angelina Jolie), a
psycho with a soft side. They and some other girls sneak off to a
hidden room at night for some female bonding, as well as to the head
psychiatrist office to secretly look at their patient profiles. Lisa
furiously rebels against the system every chance she gets, from slyly
eluding having to swallow her pills to running off from the hospital.
Since Susanna took to Lisa quite well, she tags along with Lisa on some
of her escapades, getting herself into some trouble along the way.
The movie makes a big deal about its title in the beginning, but by the
end it's still unclear how Susanna is a "girl interrupted." But no
matter. This isn't a particularly profound meditation on the human
spirit confined in a mental institution anyway. The scenes in the
hospital generate audience sympathy in precisely the way you'd expect
them to. It's manipulative, yes, but it's also well made, turning a
potentially shameless sap-fest into enjoyable fluff.
The movie works well because Susanna herself is such an engaging
personality. When head nurse Whoopi Goldberg throws her into a bathtub
and tells her that she is letting her life waste away in that damn
hospital, we believe that she is telling the gospel truth. We see
Susanna as an impressionable young woman; putting up the facade of a
rebel but a faithful follower on the inside. Her doctors and parents
tell her that she is crazy, so she believes she must be. She never
makes an attempt to legitimately get herself out of a mental
institution. Instead, she blindly follows the clearly disturbed Lisa
down a path that could never in a million years lead to any good.
The clincher is the lead actresses. Though Ryder gives a great, subdued
performance as (I guess) the title character, she's clearly going to be
upstaged by co-star Jolie's much flashier turn as Ryder's spunky
friend. I agree that Jolie was spectacular; definitely more noticeable
than Winona's. Her performance jumps off the screen while Winona's
stays there humbly. It surprises me, however, how the lead actress,
without whom there would be no movie, turns in a terrific piece of
acting and yet gets ignored. It reminds me of Shakespeare in Love,
which was nominated for every award in every category except for lead
actor Joseph Fiennes who was the life and soul of the film.
Without being particularly deep or, god forbid, ponderous, Girl,
Interrupted engages the mind. Although its ultimate point never really
becomes clear, it's an interesting little movie while it lasts.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on 24 March, 2000; certificate 15; 125 
minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by James Mangold; produced by Cathy Konrad, Douglas Wick.
Written by Lisa Loomer, James Mangold, Anna Hamilton Phelan; based on the 
book by Susanna Kaysen.
Photographed by Jack Green; edited by Kevin Tent.
"Girl, Interrupted" argues that mental institutions keep the sane and release 
the unstable, because of stuffy procedures and restrictive rules written by 
bureaucratic doctors disconnected from reality. While I am sure these things 
are true, the film never makes us care, because its heroine is a bitchy 
little nut-job. 
"Haven't you ever confused a dream with reality, stolen something when you 
had the cash, or thought your train moving as it sat in the station?" she 
pleads with us in the opening scenes. But that's not the kind of behaviour 
she's being locked up for. This is a young lady who responds "What?" whenever 
anyone asks her a question, drifts into daydreaming in the middle of 
sentences and thinks it's perfectly acceptable to guzzle great quantities of 
pills and vodka.
Her name is Susanna Kaysen, a real-life figure whose book this movie is based 
on. If the film is anything to go by, I'm lucky that I never read it. "Girl, 
Interrupted" is a pathetic example of someone denying she's in denial; it's 
as stupid as Sylvia Plath's "The Bell Jar" without the engaging style. There 
are journal entries in the film we're supposed to accept as profound 
philosophising. Most of them are just the kind of pretentious 
stream-of-consciousness drivel that many teenage girls write, only to look 
back on years later and cringe with embarrassment.
The story is set in the 1960s -- boys are being shipped to their deaths in 
Vietnam, and Susanna (Winona Ryder) thinks she's got a hard life because her 
mother is hassling her about going to college. After a suicide attempt, she 
is encouraged to sign herself into Claymoore, an expensive mental hospital 
where the head nurse (Whoopi Goldberg) gives a straightforwardly accurate 
diagnosis: "You are a lazy, self-indulgent little girl who is driving herself 
crazy."
Susanna does a lot of mellow lying around, drunk on her own superiority, 
convinced she's "artistic" rather than crazy. Fellow inmate Lisa (Angelina 
Jolie) offers her support, probably because the two women have the same 
problem -- thinking they know the secrets of the universe, when they're 
actually defective jerks. Other friendly faces include a pathological liar 
(Clea Duvall) and a girl who likes to set herself on fire (Elisabeth Moss). 
Anyone in a position of authority, or who displays the least bit of 
conventionality, is portrayed as an uptight white-collar conservative square. 
I am reminded of "Reality Bites" (1994), another film starring Ryder in which 
the alleged heroes were self-obsessed layabout losers.
"Girl, Interrupted" is moronic and arrogant crap, not least because its 
obnoxious onscreen behaviour is accompanied by a voice-over that asks, 
essentially, "Can you BELIEVE these stuffed shirts thought I was obnoxious?" 
Perhaps the book or true events would lead me to a different conclusion, but 
the Susanna Kaysen of this film could use a good hard slap in the face.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: James Mangold
Written by: Susanna Kaysen (novel), James Mangold
Before I begin, allow me to point out that this is hardly the type of movie I
would normally review, thus my opinion may be a tad biased. That said, "Girl,
Interrupted" is a rather unoriginal film (think of an all female version of
"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest") with some wonderful performances, but
without a great story to pull them together. In fact, I'm having difficulty
determining just what the point of this film was. If there were there a
stronger plot at work here, I believe this could have been a good little flick.
Susanna (Winona Ryder) has the distinction of being the only member of her
graduating class not going on to college. Due to this and several other minor
mental problems (such as taking a bottle of Asprin with a Vodka chaser), her
parents have decided the best place for her is Claymoore mental institute.
While there, she meets the sociopathic Lisa (Angelina Jolie), whom she forms a
friendship with. The two are soon driving the head nurse, Valerie (Whoopi
Goldberg), up a wall, and they decide the time has come for them to leave the
institute.
In addition to the uninvolving plot, we're given a story that is more than a
little implausible. The girls in this hospital seem able to leave the premises
whenever they feel like it simply by sneaking out through hidden tunnels and
picking locks. I know this is based on the book by Susanna Kaysen, and the book
is based on her real life experiences, but this still seems more than a little
implausible. Another rather irritating idea which is used here involves the
girls never taking their medication, but simply hiding and trading pills. This
isn't used to advance the plot in any way, it simply goes further to show how
ridiculously unbelievable the story is.
The reason to see this movie, and the reason I gave it three stars rather than
two and a half, is the acting. Angelina Jolie is in top form here as the
manipulative, unpredictable Lisa. I haven't been a large fan of Jolie in the
past; but I believe part of this is due to her choosing the wrong roles, such
as those in "The Bone Collector" and "Tin Cup". Wynona Ryder may not be quite
as effective as the ever confused Susanna, but she's still more than simply
adequate. She's given some interesting dialogue near the beginning of the film,
where she attempts to describe her illness to a doctor. The supporting cast is
uniformly good, with especially interesting performances from Clea DuVall,
Brittany Murphy, and Elizabeth Moss as fellow patients; and look for a
particularly good cameo by Vanessa Redgrave as a psychiatrist
At times, "Girl, Interrupted" is more a comedy than a drama, and I personally
wish it had tried to be comedy a bit more often. For example, a scene in which
the girls are taken to an ice cream parlor is hysterical; but it grows serious
again far too quickly, and you begin missing these moments of humor. The film
runs a tad too long at 127 minutes, and it never seems to know when to end. We
keep expecting each scene to be the last, but another soon follows. I can't
quite recommend "Girl, Interrupted" in theatres, but I would suggest trying to
catch it on video, if for no other purpose, to see Angelina Jolie's remarkable
performance. I give it three stars.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Girl, Interrupted (1999) 
Rated R; running time 127 minutes
Genre: Drama
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0172493 
Official site: http://www.girlinterrupted.com/  
Written by: Written by James Mangold (based on the book by 
Susanna Kaysen)
Directed by: James Mangold
Starring: Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea DuVall, 
Vanessa Redgrave, Whoopi Goldberg, Brittany Murphy, Elizabeth Moss, 
Jared Leto, Jeffrey Tambor, Travis Fine
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsgirl.html
Back in mid-December, one of our readers requested that we review "Girl, 
Interrupted", primarily because she's a big Angelina Jolie fan.  Well, I 
have good news and bad news...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
Based on a true story, Winona Ryder plays Susanna Kaysen, a young writer 
who, on the insistence of her therapist and parents after she chased a 
bottle of aspirin with a bottle of vodka ("I had a headache"), checks 
herself into the Claymore mental institution for "a short rest", leaving 
behind Toby (Jared Leto), about the closest thing she could claim as a 
"relationship".  There, she meets a variety of residents, including her 
new roommate and compulsive liar, Georgina (Clea DuVall, who I swear I 
remember from something, but even a cursory glance at the IMDB doesn't 
help me remember exactly what...ah, I see it: she was in a couple "ER" 
episodes); Daisy (Brittany Murphy), a "daddy's girl" in more ways than 
one; Polly (Elizabeth Moss), who is nicknamed "Torch" for reasons which 
become obvious as the film progresses; and the vibrant Lisa (Angelina 
Jolie), a firebrand and troublemaker, who Susanna comes to depend on.
Amongst the staffers are Dr. Wick (Vanessa Redgrave) and Dr. Potts 
(Jeffrey Tambor), who Lisa tags as "ther-rapists"; John (Travis Fine), 
an orderly who (inexplicably) comes to like Susanna, and she, him; and 
Nanny...uh, Nurse Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg), a no-nonsense, 
afro-puff-wearing nurse there to show Susanna the way back to good 
mental health.
The Upshot:
The good news is that Angelina Jolie was mostly decent in this movie.  
Though she played Lisa a bit over-the-top at times (especially in the 
way too corny and opaque end scenes), she and Vanessa Redgrave as Dr. 
Wick, were the bright spots of the story.  Jolie especially surprised 
me; having seen her for the first time in "The Bone Collector", this 
iteration of her was extremely different (the sign of a good actor being 
that he or she can easily lose themselves in the role they're playing).  
Looking much younger and less pretty here, her character reminded me of 
Jenny in "Forrest Gump"--taken to an extreme.  Jolie seemed to rise 
above the material, and have a lot of fun with it; Redgrave, normally 
quite the Dramatic Actress, seemed equally at ease with her character.  
I didn't recognize her at first (A Good Thing), but was quite pleased 
with the results of her portrayal.  
Would that I could say the same for the rest of the cast, especially a 
very spaced-out looking Winona Ryder.  She wasn't bad, exactly; it's 
just that, like Val kept saying, she never seemed like she really 
belonged in an institution.  "Well, DUH, Rose!", I hear ya saying; 
"wasn't that the point?"  Uh, no, not exactly.  It may have been the 
point that the character never really should've been institutionalized, 
but the actress shouldn't shine through the character, either.  What I 
mean by that is, I never saw Susanna, Depressed Writer when I looked at 
her; I only saw Wynona Ryder, Barely Emoting Actress.  That, my friends, 
is Not A Good Thing.
The other patient characters were also not really that bad; they just 
seemed to be there to fit whatever stereotypes of slightly-loony 
characters, needed to be filled.  DuVall was effective and quite 
charming as Georgina, but Murphy just spooked me out; I couldn't wait 
for her to get off the screen.  Everyone else was either quirky or just 
plain weird--staffers included.  "Cuckoo's Nest", it wasn't.
But my main beef is with the story itself.  It may have been based on 
the real Susanne's time in Claymore, but it couldn't have felt less real 
to me.  I can't for the life of me figure out why Susanne would have 
willingly stayed in a place that she knew she didn't belong in, or why 
she'd sign herself in in the first place (yes, I know what they said, 
but I didn't buy it for a moment).  And though I could easily believe 
that Susanne would be tagged with a negative label due to her 
"promiscuous behavior", it's hard for me to believe, in the "Decade Of 
Love" that the 60s were, that she'd remain institutionalized for 
seemingly little more than her choice in bedmates.
The institution itself didn't seem the horror that the trailers would 
have it being; even Val herself said that State institutions were a 
living hell, comparatively.  Mind you, I wouldn't want to be committed 
to either one, but except for a few straightjacket and "padded cell" 
scenes, the horror aspect was never really conveyed with any 
believability.  And without that, it all did seem, as Val said, that 
Susanna and Lisa (and to a lesser extent, the other patients) were just 
"lazy and self-involved".  And that's just boring to watch.
Nothing in the movie felt all that original; the phrase "derivative of" 
kept popping up in scene after scene.  The scene straight out of "Biloxi 
Blues", with the residents reading Susanna's journal, only made the 
whole feeling of "seen this before" worse; by the end, I was "calling" 
the scenes before they played out.  And most of the time, I was right.  
Definitely Not A Good Thing.   
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
Whoopi, Whoopi, Whoopi.  Chile, what we gwinta do with you? 
[/end sarcasm]
It's funny; the two movies I've seen this weekend ["Supernova", of 
course, doesn't count as a movie.  But that's another rant for another 
time] have had the same basic complaint about them, covering opposite 
sides of the spectrum.  In "The Hurricane", some have complained that 
the characters Rubin and Lesra were mere pawns of the Guilty White 
Liberals, there to be Saved by the knights in White armor.  Here in 
"Girl", Whoopi is seen by some (yes, yours truly included) as Yet 
Another nanny figure, there as a wetmaid for Missy's Young'uns to suckle 
on the teat of her Wisdom.  And the "funny" thing is, Susanna as much 
said the same about Whoopi's character, Val.  
Should there be a problem with Whoopi playing "Black nursemaid" 
(Susanna's words.  My sentiment.) to not only the characters in this 
flick, but more than her fair share of others she's played in (starting 
with "Clara's Heart")?  Should we be tired of this same ol' same ol' by 
now?  Should I take it as a personal affront, because in some ways, I 
look like Whoopi?  Probably not, but yet, I do.  Maybe that's my Black 
Factor cross to bear.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Perhaps with a better cast, or more compelling story, this movie 
could've Meant Something; perhaps not.  I was never emotionally involved 
in this film--and, despite their histrionics, neither were most of the 
characters.  And would somebody please find Whoopi a decent role to play?
"Girl, Interrupted": (rating: yellowlight)   
Methinks the young actresses took too many sleeping pills.  That, or 
somebody slipped a mickey into the concession stand popcorn.  **yawn**

Author
Greg King
GIRL, INTERRUPTED (M).  
(Columbia Tristar)
Director: James Mangold
Stars: Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea Duvall, Brittany Murphy,
Elisabeth Moss, Jared Leto, Whoopi Goldberg, Vanessa Redgrave, Jeffrey
Tambor, Travis Fine, Jillian Armenante, Angela Bettis, Joanna Kerns,
Mary Kay Place, Kurtwood Smith, Bruce Altman
Running time: 127 minutes.
This adolescent female version of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest is a bit of a grim ordeal, although, ultimately, it is uplifting.
Susanna Kaysen (Winona Ryder) is a victim of the '60's, a time
when America was undergoing its own identity crisis.  Vietnam, sex,
drugs, rock 'n' roll, youth rebellion were all helping to shape a new
generation, largely misunderstood and misjudged by parents and
authority figures.  This was a time when women were also seeking out a
more significant role for themselves beyond merely becoming dutiful
wives and mothers.
Because Susanna had no real idea of what she wanted to do with
her future, apart from some vague notion of becoming a writer, her
concerned parents sent her to a psychiatrist.  She diagnosed with a
Borderline Personality Disorder, a vague clinical analysis that could
apply to almost any troubled teenager at that time, and sent to
Claymoore, a local sanatorium, for a couple of years.  There she met a
number of other young women with various mental disorders, against
which she tries to judge her own problems.
For nearly two years Susanna tries not to succumb to her grim
environment and the general air of despair and hopelessness that
pervades the hospital.  Throughout the film Susanna is depicted as a
sort of latter day Dorothy trapped in her own bizarre Oz but trying to
find her way home, and the film draws some obvious parallels.  The
inmate who has the biggest impact on her though is Lisa (Angelina
Jolie, from The Bone Collector, etc), the self destructive but somehow
charming and persuasive sociopath who is constantly escaping from
Claymoore.  Fittingly, Jolie dominates the film with a combustible,
volatile and dynamic performance.
Ryder delivers a solid, but introspective and soulful
performance as the bewildered, passive Susanna, who finds a sort of
sanity in her writing.  For Ryder, this film has been something of a
labour of love, and has some personal resonances for her.  For the
past six years, she has nurtured the project, and has been largely
instrumental in helping to bring Susanna's inspiring story to the
screen.
Writer/director James Mangold (Heavy, Copland) is a dab hand
at character driven dramas, and he does a fine job of adapting
Kaysen's rather episodic book for the screen.  He eschews any sense of
saccharine sentimentality, giving this roller coaster ride a hard edge
that occasionally makes for harrowing viewing.  He has assembled a
solid ensemble supporting cast to help bring these disturbed but
fascinating characters to life.
Brittany Murphy plays the pampered, tragic Daisy, while
Elisabeth Moss brings a poignant quality to her role as burns victim
Polly, whose spirit remains unscarred.  Vanessa Redgrave has a small
role as Dr Wick, the understanding head psychiatrist, while Whoopi
Goldberg delivers one of her more earnest and less irritating
performances as Valerie, the understanding, compassionate nurse.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   What are Susanna's thoughts about suicide?  Does she
think about it consciously?  From the movie we are not sure. 
Read the book and you'll get her philosophy in a nut-shell (so
to speak): "Suicide is a form of murder--premeditated murder. 
You must practice imagining yourself dead, or in the process
of dying.  If there's a window, you must imagine your body
falling out the window.  If there's a knife, you must imagine
the knife piercing your skin.  If there's a train coming, you
must imagine your torso flattened under the wheels.  My
motives were weak: an American-history paper I didn't want
to write and the question I'd asked months earlier, Why not
kill myself?  Dead, I wouldn't have to write the paper."  How
is that for the author's dark humor?  How can you bring this
out in a movie short of using the deadening gesture of a
narrative soundtrack?  You could, I suppose, have her
express these beliefs to her therapist.  But serving up this
and other thoughts could easily make the film into another
Magnolia-like three and one-quarter hour epic.  After all, the
book is crammed with her unspoken contemplations and
inner deliberations: it would be a shame to include this one
and leave out others equally ironic and darkly whimsical.
   During the course of the movie, the audience is rarely
given an indication of Susanna's sanity.  Was she basically
OK and jostled into the institution because of a wicked
society determined to put away unconventional women?  Or
did she really pose a danger to herself, hallucinating, seeing
things so differently that she would be unable to function in
society?  I could not be sure from the film, but now,
consulting the text, I understand: "I was having a problem
with patterns.  Oriental rugs, tile floors, printed curtains,
things like that.  Supermarkets were specially bad because of
the long, hypnotic checkerboard aisles.  When I looked at
these things, I saw other things within them.  When I looked
at someone's face, I often did not maintain an unbroken
connection to the concept of a face.  Once you start parsing
a face, it's a peculiar item: squishy, pointy, with lots of air
vents and wet spots.  This was the reverse of my problem
with patterns.  Instead of seeing too much meaning, I didn't
see any."
   But wait!  She modifies her statement.  "I wasn't simply
going nuts.  I was at all times perfectly conscious of my
misperceptions of reality.  I never believed anything I saw or
thought I saw.  I correctly understood each new weird
activity."  This gives the reader plenty of stuff to chew on. 
What really classifies people as nuts?  Their actual belief in
the truth of their hallucinations?  Or the mere fact that they
see things that are not there?  The movie ignores this
question leaving us nothing to ponder.
   Strangely enough, Mangold leaves out much explanation of
the film's title.  The book clarifies...At New York's Frick
Museum, Kaysen ponders Vermeer's painting, one of a girl
seated with her piano teacher but looking wistfully through
the window.   "This time I read the title of the painting: 'Girl
Interrupted at Her Music.'  Interrupted at her music: as my life
had been, interrupted in the music of being seventeen, as her
life had been.  My boyfriend found me crying in the hallway. 
'Don't you see, she's trying to get out,' I pointed at her.  He
looked at the painting. 'All you ever think about is yourself. 
You don't understand anything about art.'"
  Depending on where you live, you should be able to access
between 100 and 450 brand new movies this year.  Some
use screenplays adapted from novels and biographies, others
are original.  There is no defining characteristic that allows us
to know to which category a given film lies, unless we have
advance knowledge of the production or are familiar with the
book from which it is taken.  Who is to say that "Being John
Malkovich" would be better on the printed page or on the
screen?  We have no way of knowing since the film is an
original.  But in the case of "Girl, Interrupted," Mangold
necessarily misses out on quite a bit of the author's anger,
even such basic information as the rationale of the title.
Kaysen's caustic wit, pronounced irony, personal viewpoints
and even ordinary descriptive information go largely and
perhaps necessarily neglected.  Do you think--as I do not--
that the movie is better than the book?
Copyright 2000 by Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
`Have you ever confused a dream with life?' asks Susanna Kaysen in the
opening line of Girl, Interrupted.  It's tough to say whether she asks
this question before or after her recuperative stint in the nuthouse.
Winona Ryder (Celebrity), who also executive-produced the film, stars as
Susanna, a suburban, chain-smoking writer-wannabe that almost kills
herself by chasing a bottle of aspirin with a bottle of vodka shortly
after her high school graduation in 1967.  She is sent to Claymoore, a
mental institution for young women, after one brief meeting with a
psychiatrist friend of her father's.  Since she is over eighteen,
Susanna must voluntarily check herself into the home, despite not
believing that she has any actual mental problems.  We learn later that
her diagnosis is Borderline Personality Disorder, an ailment with
generic symptoms that basically means that a person is lazy and
self-indulgent.
After taking a tour of the facility with Nurse Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg,
How Stella Got Her Groove Back), Susanna begins to unpack but is
sidetracked by the arrival of recent escapee Lisa (Angelina Jolie, The
Bone Collector), a willowy, whacked-out, alpha-female sociopath that
manipulates the other girls in Claymoore.  Within moments of her
entrance, Lisa does enough screaming to land Jolie her first Oscar
nomination.  She oozes crazy like she oozed sex in Pushing Tin.  She's
criminally insane, yet also an intelligent, self-absorbed button-pusher
that doesn't feel crazy as long as she is able to maintain control over
a situation.  Apparently, this could get you locked up in the 60s, but
this describes more than half of the people that I've ever known.
Susanna and Lisa hit it off almost immediately, the latter goading the
former into not taking medication and rallying against the
establishment.  She's the devil on Susanna's shoulder  Tyler Durden to
Susanna's Jack.  They dream of escaping from Claymoore and getting jobs
at the new DisneyWorld in Florida but settle for breaking into Dr.
Melvin's (Jeffrey Tambor, Teaching Mrs. Tingle) office and reading their
clinical diagnoses with fellow nutcases played by Clea DuVall (The
Astronaut's Wife), Brittany Murphy (Drop Dead Gorgeous) and Elizabeth
Moss (the First Daughter on The West Wing).
Ryder is decent enough as Susanna, but how long is she going to continue
to play teenage roles?  She even keeps a journal here like she did in
Heathers.  One of the problems that I had with the film is that at the
beginning, Susanna seemed to dwell on flashbacks of integral moments of
her life.  The flashbacks stop almost as soon as she hits Claymoore.
Does that mean she's cured?  I dunno.  Does it mean she was never
crazy?  I dunno that either.  Susanna never seems to make any real
progress until she meets with Claymoore's head head-shrink, played well
by Vanessa Redgrave (Mrs. Dalloway).  The hapless Jared Leto (Fight
Club) also has a small part as Susanna's draft-dodging boyfriend.
Based on a book by the real Susanna Kaysen, Girl, Interrupted is
directed by James Mangold (Copland), who adapted the script with debut
screenwriters Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan.  Some of Mangold's
flashbacks early in the film were done pretty well, but, like I said,
they stopped pretty quickly.  Like any film set in that era, the use of
music is of particular importance and Mangold doesn't shortchange us
here, using gem after gem  from Simon and Garfunkel's `Bookends' at the
opening to Petula Clark's `Downtown' during the closing credits.
2:05 - R for strong language and content relating to drugs, sexuality
and suicide

Author
Steve Kong
Girl, Interrupted is a Don't Miss film. It is also, whole-heartedly, a 
Winona Ryder film.
Girl, Interrupted follows a troubled girl named Susanna Kaysen (Ryder) who 
may or may not have a borderline personality disorder. After Susanna tries 
to kill herself, she is sent to a mental institution by her parents to 
recover. What we see is that Susanna doesn't really have a disorder but is 
more of a slacker who spoils herself. At the institution, Claymore, she 
meets all sorts of women with real disorders. The most enigmatic is Lisa 
(Angelina Jolie) who is a sociopath. The two befriend each other and we see 
their friendship bloom then wither. Girl, Interrupted is about a girl who 
discovers herself, and does just that in a mental institution. The story is 
based on the memoirs of Susanna Kaysen and covers about two years of her 
life starting in 1967.
The performances are excellent. Ryder as Kaysen puts up a wonderful 
performance. Jolie does well also, but I'm starting to think that although 
she is a wonderful actress and is always believable, her range in roles is 
not as wide. She's always doing a rebellious type and though she does it 
good, I wish she would expand her roles a bit. It was good to see Whoopi 
Goldberg in the film as the head of the ward that Susanna and Lisa live in.
Worth mentioning is the score by Mychael Danna which works very well with 
the movie. The song selection for the movie is also excellent. The music in 
the film ties in very well.

Author
Ross Anthony
"Some advice ... never stick your finger out at a crazy person," a wild cat,
dangerously honest, less than stable Angelina Jolie warns an older
acquaintance of Winona Ryder at a local ice cream parlor during a rare field
trip from the institution.
Essentially, this is the story of one woman's sabbatical from sanity. We
begin the film with an assortment of flashbacks as Ryder admits herself to
Clayman Mental Center in hopes of getting a little rest from all the
headaches, hallucinations, etc. After the first half-hour, we're up to speed
on the history, and spend most of the rest of the film in the institution,
making friends and getting used to the awkward routine. "Don't drop anchor,
here," Whoopi Goldberg (nurse) cautions the confused Ryder.
Ryder is very good. Jolie is awesome. The direction, script and editing are
also supreme until the climax, where the script dumps a preciously delicate,
off-balance momentum for a rather cliché resolution. It was an "A" before
that.
Girl, Interrupted. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea Duvall, Brittany Murphy, Vanessa
Redgrave, Whoopi Goldberg.
Directed by James Mangold.
Written by James Mangold, Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan.
Based on the book by Susanna Kaysen.
Produced by Douglas Wick, Cathy Konrad at Sony.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea DuVall, Brittany Murphy,
Whoopi Goldberg, Jeffrey Tambor, Jared Leto and Vanessa Redgrave
Director-James Mangold
Canadian Rating-PG
Released by Columbia Pictures - 01/00
In `Girl, Interrupted', Susanna (Winona Ryder) is diagnosed with
`borderline personality disorder' and sent for a `friendly rest' at the
Claymoore psychiatric hospital. The reason? She recently downed an
entire bottle of aspirin with a vodka chaser, a move that that has been
classified as a failed suicide attempt by her doctor and superiors. But
does Susanna really require a period of rehabilitation in a mental ward?
You would assume she doesn't belong, but before you can say `One Flew
Over the Cuckoo's Nest', Susanna is making new friends and finding
herself oddly comfortable within the walls of Claymoore.
`Girl, Interrupted' is the screen adaptation of Susanna Kaysen's memoir
that followed her 18-month experience in a psychiatric hospital. The
Hollywood interpreter is talented young director James Mangold (`Heavy',
`Cop Land'), and along with a capable ensemble cast of intelligent
up-and-comers,  Mangold is able to craft an intriguing character study
within an unsettling environment. The personalities at Claymoore are
interesting to behold, particularly the wild cat sociopath Lisa
(Angelina Jolie), the rebellious leader of the asylum hierarchy who has
been a patient there for eight years. Georgina (Clea DuVall), Susanna's
new roommate, is a relatively sane pathological liar. Daisy (Brittany
Murphy) has a problem with food, in that she will only eat her father's
rotisserie chicken. And the list goes on. While `Girl, Interrupted'
attempts to explore it's characters with great depth, the plot sits
inert and lacking destination. The result is an odd but engaging mixture
with separate objectives for storyline and characters. Due to the
tremendous abilities of the largely female cast, the latter arena
prevails.
`Girl, Interrupted' dances around a large portion of the character's
issues, always lacking the expertise to tackle them head-on.  Mangold
manages to persuade us that his film is more intuitive than it should
be, and that seems reason enough to remained tuned in to the character's
problems. Whoopi Goldberg, sporting an afro and smart-looking
spectacles, plays the wise welfare mom Nurse Valerie in a way only
Whoopi could. Unfortunately, in terms of helping Susanna cope with her
situation, Nurse Valerie only lays out the basic schematics of her
`unique' condition... and the character lacks the compelling nature that
was probably conveyed on paper. Jeffrey Tambor (as the head psychiatrist
at Claymoore) and Vanessa Redgrave (as Susanna's doctor) are not
portrayed in the same light. They appear to misunderstand Susanna's
condition (if she has one), and such an action would be not difficult to
comprehend given the screenplay's lack of proper definition and
encompassment.
Mangold's strong suits include being able to coax a convincing
performance out of his actors. Ryder has many stunning moments as
Susanna, the seemingly misplaced young girl whose troubles extend
further than initially evident. But Jolie's considerable talent (on
showcase in `Playing by Heart' and, most recently, `The Bone Collector')
is the most commanding aspect of the film. Interaction between Susanna
and Lisa strikes the perfect thought-provoking chord, right up to and
through the sloppy finale. Ensemble acting is what makes `Girl,
Interrupted' a worthwhile experience, followed closely by what Mangold
cleverly passes off as solid character development. These young women at
Claymoore aren't as troubled as the film's disorderly manner, but
there's enough youthful talent on either side of the camera to make up
for it in impressive fashion.
Just don't expect a chick flick. `Girl, Interrupted' is rough around the
edges, and you aren't going to feel particularly upbeat when you leave
the theater. It's a character-driven drama at it's core, and there is no
chocolate coating that's going to erase the bitter taste in your mouth.
Sure, it's good, but it could have been better; the film falls victim to
the same syndrome that has plagued similar projects in the past. Instead
of constantly informing us about the characters, why not let us learn
for ourselves? But I'll get over it. Next patient, please.
Your Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures
 Director:  James Mangold 
 Writer:  James Mangold and Lisa Loomer and Anna
Hamilton Phelan, book by Susanna Kaysen
 Cast: Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Bittany Murphy, Clea
DuVall, Vanessa Redgrave, Whoopi Goldberg
   "Girl, Interrupted" comes out at an opportune moment.  The
NY Times of Dec. 13 reports in its lead story that one out of
every five Americans will suffer a mental disturbance in any
given year and that two-thirds of those people will never seek
help for their problems.  A major reason for this passivity is
the belief that emotional problems are a sign of weakness. 
Yet decades ago, Freud and others had established that mind
and body are interconnected; that an emotional difficulty is no
more shameful than a physical handicap.  What many still do
not realize is that someone with such an impairment cannot
simply "snap out of it" any more than a guy with a fractured
ankle can simply get up and walk.
   Movies that have exploited such emotional difficulties have
often shown that the cure is worse than the disease.  Anatole
Litvak's "The Snake Pit," made 51 years ago featuring an
electrifying performance by Olivia de Haviland, was one of
the first films to deal intelligently with mental breakdowns,
while Milos Forman's "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest"
back in '75 featureed Jack Nicholson as a feisty misfit not
unlike one of the female characters in "Girl, Interrupted," who
pushes his fellow inmates to assert themselves against a
tyrannical nurse.
   "Girl, Interrupted" is dramatized from a true-life experience
of novelist Susanna Kaysen, whose best-seller by the same
name dealt with her episode in a private mental hospital
during the flamboyant era of the late '60s.  While director
James Mangold's adaptation written together with Anna
Hamilton Phelan and Lisa Loomer depicts the staff of the
hospital (filmed in an actual institution in Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania) as competent and rational, the film broadly
hints that some of the patients do not really belong there--that
they would not be dangerous if released and treated as out-
patients.  On the other hand, one inmate was obviously
released too early.  She committed suicide at home soon
thereafter.
   The author, Susanna (played by Winona Ryder) was the
product of an upper-middle class household, the only student
in her elite school without plans to go to college.  While her
classmates were accepted into Radcliffe and Wellesley,
Susanna was dazed and confused, knowing only that she
wanted to be a writer.  (In one of the movie's only humorous
moments, Susanna tells a caseworker of her ambition to
write, to which the latter asks, "Yes, but what will you do?")
When her psychiatrist diagnoses her as having Borderline
Personal Disorder, she all-too-quickly goes along with his
judgment and, being 18 years of age, checks herself into a
hospital.  It is there, at Claymoore, that she finds the best
friends she ever had, including Lisa (Angelina Jolie), a free-
spirited young woman who says whatever comes to mind and
has a heart of stone; Daisy (Brittany Murphy), who has had
an unhealthy relationship with her dad and is addicted to
rotisserie chicken and laxatives; Polly (Elisabeth Moss), who
is the kindest woman in her circle but has been facially
disfigured in a fire; and her roommate, Georgina (Clea
Duvall), who seems pretty normal to me.
   Though quite well acted particularly by Winona Ryder as
the author's stand-in, "Girl, Interrupted"--which gets its title
from a Vermeer painting in New York's Frick Museum to 
which Susanna's English teacher introduced her--has a
wholly predictable trajectory and is therefore only mildly
winning.  The book's frequent ironic passages appear absent
from this basic TV fare, which includes the expected reaction
of disbelief and displeasure from Susanna's bourgeois
parents; disgust and hostility from Mrs. Gilcrest (Mary Kay
Place), the wife of the English teacher with whom Susanna
had a brief affair; an equally brief sexual interlude with the
strikingly handsome Tobias Jacobs (Jared Leto), who is about
to escape the Vietnam draft by fleeing to Canada; and the
frequent interventions by the hospital staff whenever a
patient--particularly the fiery Lisa--would lose control.  
   Mangold covers the rooms of the psychiatric hospital
displaying a laundry list of types rather than drawn-out
characters, and treats the staff in a similar manner--the no-
nonsense nurse, Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg); the ivory-tower
head psychiatrist Dr. Wick (Vanessa Redgrave), and the
somewhat laughable Dr. Melvin Potts (Jeffrey Tambor)--all of
whom say exactly what you'd expect such professionals to
remark.
   On a philosophical note, the story also covers the usual
sophomoric grounds: What's normal and what's irrational? 
Susanna is labeled promiscuous, but shoots back at Dr.
Wick, "How many girls would a 17-year-old boy have to screw
to earn the label 'compulsively promiscuous'?"  We are led to
believe that what really shakes Susanna out of her doldrums
is not the professional treatment she receives but the
camaraderie she enjoys with the other young women on the
floor, particularly her acting as mentor to the erratic Lisa, a
role that Angelina Jolie takes over in one scene-stealer after
another.
   Aside from a quick look at a drug party that the girls attend
after a brief escape from the hospital and a soundtrack of
sixties music, there is little to signify that the story is taking
place during the flamboyant sixties, a period that would
encourage some to comment that the whole country was
crazier than most of the so-called loonies in the psychiatric
centers.
Rated R.  Running Time: 127 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Walter Frith
'Girl, Interrupted' asks us to recall the feelings we have for another film
about mental illness and the institutions that thrive on it and that film
is, of course, 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'.  Anyone who doesn't have a
re-collection of that film before, during or after 'Girl, Interrupted', is
not a movie fan or has a very short memory.  This film is taken at a mental
institution in the 60's.  So was 'Cuckoo's Nest' (although it was made in
1975).  This film has a large supporting cast aside from the main lead and
supporting character.  So did 'Cuckoo's Nest'.  This film has a field trip
where the characters are briefly free from the rules.  Ditto for 'Cuckoo's
Nest'.  This film has a head nurse who looks after the patients along with a
mousy assistant.  So did 'Cuckoo's Nest'.  So what's the attraction?
Primarily that 'Girl, Interrupted' is a true story, although it is a thin
one with all the trappings you would expect from a writer whom I suspect,
took liberties with the truth because some of the things we see in this film
are in direct relation to 'Cuckoo's Nest'.  All right, enough about the Jack
Nicholson/Milos Forman classic and let's get down to business.
Winona Ryder plays Susanna Kaysen, a young woman who displays suicidal
tendencies by downing a bottle of aspirin with a bottle of alcoholic.  She
checks into a mental hospital and begins therapy where she is diagnosed by
her physician as having Borderline Personality Disorder.  Oh, the irony of
it all.  Throughout it all, we wonder if this is really the case or if
Susanna is just a mixed up young woman who simply is succumbing to the
pressure of sorting out her chaotic life with pressure from her upper middle
class family not making it any easier for her.
Among the many people Susanna meets is Lisa (Angelina Jolie) who has a bumpy
first encounter with Susanna.  Susanna is given a room where a friend of
Lisa's used to reside.  Lisa is brought back to the institution after being
gone for a long period of time (she escaped) and violently confronts Susanna
as to why she is taking up the space occupied by her friend.  We learn that
the friend committed suicide and Susanna has taken her place.  Lisa displays
psychotic qualities that make her a danger to the outside world.  She has no
regard for peace and tranquility.  She is a psychotic.  Her body is in a
constant state of anarchy.  She has to be restrained at several points in
the film and threatens at one point to kill herself but gives in easily,
making her mental disorder all the more bizarre.
Like any film that has some sort of plot about mental illness, 'Girl,
Interrupted' forces us to take a look at ourselves and ask if, perhaps, we
need to evaluate our own lives.  In Canada, 25% of the population at some
point in life, will suffer from some sort of mental illness.  Many don't
realize that this DOESN'T mean being crazy.  It simply means suffering a
certain dismal aspect on the part of the mind.  Some suffer from depression,
some paranoia and some from sharp and severe mood swings.  Actually, Winona
Ryder's portrayal of Susanna seems quite normal compared to her friends in
the institution.
Director James Mangold ('Copland') directs the film in a pretty even
fashion, building his climax to a satisfying, if somewhat "all seen before"
conclusion.  The film is written by Mangold, Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton
Phelan based on the novel by Susanna Kaysen.
To its obvious credit, the saving grace in 'Girl, Interrupted', comes from
its bonding of the characters involved.  There is a genuine goodness in the
fact that deep down inside many of them are little girls living inside the
bodies of grown women.  The film, while diving right into the subject of
mental illness, also has a certain innocence about it that makes it warm and
likable to a large extent.  It is no classic but it is a film that is of
high social merit and has to its further credit the ability to pace itself
at a good level and it avoids being pretentious.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/3bc21da0ff283afb08256867005e860a?OpenDocument
Written by James Mangold, Lisa Loomer, and Anne Hamilton Phelan
Starring Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea DuVall, Brittany Murphy,
Elizabeth Moss, Whoopi Goldberg, and Vanessa Redgrave
 As near as I can tell, the 60s were about being crazy.  Whether it was
being crazy while fighting communists in Vietnam, or being crazy while
burning bras, or being crazy while marching on Washington, the 60s
resounded with insanity.  So what better way to tell the story of the
60s than from within the walls of a mental ward known as Claymoore?
Hence is the promise given to us in the ads of Girl, Interrupted.
 In the reality, the 60s are little more than a backdrop, an added
boo-hoo to an already lengthy list of depression.  The decade is briefly
touched upon.  It is only mentioned in the sense of the possibility of
someone being drafted for the Vietnam War.
 The rest of the movie is basically a One Flew Over the Cookoo's Nest in
an all-female ward.
 Unlike One Flew Over the Cookoo's Nest, which focused very strongly on
patients rights, Girl, Interrupted gets stuck in the same crisis as its
protagonist (Suzanne, played by Winona Ryder): it is unable to decide
what to do with itself.
 Stuck inside of Claymoore, we have an all-female cast of characters
that range from the ultra-bizarre to the downright surreal.  We have
Borderline Personality Suzanne, Sociopath Lisa (Angelina Jolie),
Compulsive Liar Georgina (Clea DuVall), Chicken-Fetishist Daisy
(Brittany Murphy), and half-burned Polly (Elizabeth Moss).  Add to this
bit roles by Whoopi Goldberg as a much more fun Nurse Ratchett and
Vanessa Redgrave as a psychiatrist rumored to have same-sex tendencies,
and you have the makings of a great comedy with mild touches of
seriousness.  However, Girl, Interrupted's director James Mangold (Cop
Land) never quite figures that out.  Instead, he vacillates between
making a movie that takes itself too seriously and a movie that doesn't
take itself seriously at all.
 Regardless, Mangold is able to pull off the difficult task of making an
insane-asylum movie that does not feel overwhelmingly political.  As a
result of its ability to not meddle in patients rights or politics,
Girl, Interrupted ends up being beyond the highly bearable that it could
have ended up as.  Going out on a limb, I will state that the film is
even moderately enjoyable.
 Angelina Jolie works wonders in her role as a sociopath, giving a
performance that makes you absolutely believe in the amorality of her
character.  Winona Ryder, on the other hand, proves that she and Keanu
Reeves would make a great couple, for they both have about the same
amount of thespian ability.  Clea DuVall once again proves to be a
darling up-and-comer.
 Despite these mixed performances (a bad main role and a great
supporting cast), Girl, Interrupted still results in being an incredibly
unfocused film.  This may be due to the fact that the film springs from
Suzanne's journal, which she describes as "the litter of her mind."  In
the end of it all, this is what hurts the film the most.  Coming out of
the theatre, you feel like Suzanne coming out of Claymoore: confused,
slightly empty, and mixed up.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
