Title
Review for To Sir, with Love (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Sidney Poitier had a banner year in 1967.
He starred in three commercially successful
and critically acclaimed films: "In the Heat
of the Night", "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner",
and "To Sir with Love".  While none of the
films were as good as their reputation,
which was enhanced by Hollywood's sudden
self-consciousness regarding past racism,
the films seemed better than they were because
of the presence of Poitier.  He seems more
than a mere actor, or even a role model.
Poitier's characters are as interchangeable
as John Wayne's.  Essentially, he is perfect:
intelligent, thoughtful, courteous, with a
sense of humor.  If you really act like a
jerk, you can make Poitier angry, but his
anger is never righteous or vengeful, and it
doesn't last long.
In "Blackboard Jungle" from 1955, Poitier
played a student from a troubled, low-income
high school.  Glenn Ford was a determined,
concerned teacher.  Twelve years later,
"To Sir with Love" was a role reversal for
Poitier, as he is cast as the teacher.  This
time, the high school is set in London, with
the rebellious students having working-class
British accents.
Frustrated by his student's lack of manners,
Poitier gives up teaching them with books.
Instead, he lectures them about how to behave
as adults.  This being a movie, they soon
come around, wearing beatific smiles and
becoming polite.  All except for troublemaker
Christian Roberts, who doesn't learn respect
for Poitier until he punches him in the stomach.
Which demonstrates that courtesy will only take
you so far in the real world.  Poitier must
also sidestep advances from lovestruck student
Judy Geeson.
Like "Blackboard Jungle", "To Sir with Love"
generated a number one hit single: the melodic
title song by Lulu.  Lulu also redeems herself
capably in a supporting role.  The Mindbenders,
a British rock group whose drippy hit "Groovy
Kind of Love" was then contemporary, also show
up at a dance gig.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
