Title
Review for Per qualche dollaro in piů (1965)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some STAR WARS fans might disagree, but movie trilogies tend
not to get better with each passing segment. It is quite
understandable, because now we know that even the second
sequel of the film, or the second part of the trilogy,
usually turns out worse than its predecessor. Even if the
second film somehow escapes that doom, the final film of the
trilogy is almost always the disappointment (STAR WARS and
MAD MAX are the best examples). Some thirty-five years ago
an exception to that rule happened in the form of Man With
No Name trilogy, series of three spaghetti westerns directed
by great Italian filmmaker Sergio Leone. The third and final
film in the trilogy, THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY, is
often considered as a true masterpiece, one of the best
films ever made, while the first, A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS,
although most copied, is often considered to be only the
embryonic shadow of its sequels. The second in a row, FOR A
FEW DOLLARS MORE, made in 1965, is least talked about,
although it represents not just the obvious improvement of
the series, but also one excellent western.
The plot of FOR A FEW DOLLARS MORE is set in New Mexico
Territory in the latter half of 19th Century, in a time when
the land is at the mercy of vicious bandits. As prologue
tells us, "when life has value, death sometimes has price",
and the bounty killers are there to do the dirty work for
the weak forces of law. One of them is Colonel Douglas
Mortimer (played by Lee Van Cleef), excellent shot and
former war hero, now reduced to having to track and kill
wanted fugitives for a living. The other is Manko (played by
Clint Eastwood), younger and somewhat less experienced, but
equally deadly with gun. Two of them often share hunting
area, but never the same prey. Such thing would happen when
Indio (played by Gian Maria Volonte), leader of vicious gang
of bandits and sadistic killer, escapes from prison with the
help of his cohorts and thus becomes the most wanted (and
potentially most lucrative) fugitive in the territory.
Having bounty killers on his back doesn't concern Indio,
since he has other things on his mind, like a big, fortified
and allegedly robbery-proof bank in El Paso. When Indio's
men begin coming to El Paso, preparing for their daring
raid, Manko and Mortimer must overcome their rivalry and at
least temporarily join forces in order to set a trap for
their common prey.
When FOR A FEW DOLLARS MORE and A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS get
compared with each other, the improvements in the 1965 film
are evident in almost any area. First of all, the script by
Sergio Leone, Fulvio Morsella and Luciano Vincenzoni is much
tidier, without plot holes and implausiblities, and the plot
is concentrated solely on three major characters. Instead of
one or two, this film features three major characters and
their interaction is much more intriguing. Musical score by
legendary Ennio Morricone (this time credited with his real
name) is also improved, providing at least two memorable
themes; the opening theme is often became trademark of
spaghetti westerns, and the last theme, used for the scene
of final showdown, was so effective that it would be
repeated in THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY. And, finally,
although higher budget at least has something to do with the
better quality of this film, the real reason is drastically
better directorial skills of Sergio Leone. The Italian
director has obviously worked very hard in order to avoid
repetition and this film looks very different from its
predecessor. Every scene, from those that introduce the
character at the beginning of the film, until the last, is
perfectly staged, with Leone combining Morricone's music,
superb talents of his actors, and editing to create desired
emotional impact. Dark, almost nihilistic tone of the script
is brightened with sharp, cynical dark humour (with episode
featuring Joseph Egger as an old man on the railway as the
best example), while in the same time Leone gives rather
new, unusual and for its time somewhat controversial spin on
the classical western motive of revenge.
Unlike the first, this film has three major characters, and
all three are played by three superb characters. Clint
Eastwood, whose character is (debatably) the only link to
the other two films, is shadowed by his two colleagues,
although he actually plays nominal lead. Eastwood actually
hadn't got much to do to bring some new life to the
character of cynical gunslinger already established in A
FISTFUL OF DOLLARS, although his interaction with other two
actors is fine to watch. Lee Van Cleef, until this film
specialised for the roles of heavies, brings somewhat more
texture to his character. Leone's "show, don't tell"
directorial style relies heavily on actors to tell his
stories, and Lee Van Cleef does just that, creating
character of a cold, distanced professional and ruthless
killer, whose motives, at the end of the day might not be
that simple. When we have two Good Guys in the form of
cold-blooded killers, it is understandable that the Bad Guy
must be bad with capital B. This is achieved through
wonderful performance of Gian Maria Volonte. He plays Indio
as truly psychopathic villain (who almost reaches orgasm any
time he kills a helpless victim), yet in the same time he
gives him charisma and intelligence of natural leader.
Although for some his role might be slightly over the top,
Volonte's Indio is one of the most impressive villains in
the history of cinema. Even those who play supporting roles
have something to offer, like Luigi Pristilli as Indio's
sidekick Groggy, whose face would appear again in THE GOOD,
THE BAD AND THE UGLY.
As a slick combination of western, powerful psychological
drama, violent action and dark humour, FOR A FEW DOLLARS
MORE provides entertainment for viewers even today, after
decades of exposure to other films promoted by it. The only
possible flaw of the film is in its length, but Leone
probably intended this film to be that long, because only in
a long, elaborate scenes his sense of detail could be
properly seen. Those viewers who are ready to sit for two
hours watching this film would be more than adequately
rewarded for their patience.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Sergio Leone
Writers: Sergio Leone and Luciano Vincenzoni
Starring: Clint Eastwood, Lee Van Cleef, Gian Maria Volonte
"Fistful of Dollars" consisted of one protagonist.  "The Good, the Bad,
and the Ugly" consisted of three.  "For a Few Dollars More," the second
film in the Man With No Name trilogy (featuring the other two
mentioned), deals with two, and how it is plotted is done by
characterization, and centers around a locale where "Manifest Destiny"
has basically ruined some people, caused them to lose themselves in the
vastness, and are confined to walking around, being paid to kill people
who are only a knotch worse than them.
The Man With No Name (Eastwood) returns in this one, dressing the same,
and looking like he may have lost the money he won in "Fistful of
Dollars."  There's also the Colonel (Lee Van Cleef), an old man who quit
the army and went into the bounty hunting business.  The first half hour
or so shows them wandering around, collecting money for their killings,
and almost crossing paths, as they, at one time, want to kill the same
man.
The actual plot takes off when a big-time criminal (Gian Maria Volonte,
who was the villain in "Fistful of Dollars") is broken out of a crap
prison, launching a campaign to find him.  Through posters, the two
bounty hunters, who have never met eachother, discover him and decide to
go out and search for him individually.  Yes, they run into eachother in
the same town (in a cool scene where they shoot off eachother's hats
over and over again), and yes, they team up in a partnership.
The villain wants to rob a large bank with a bizarre idea for a safe (an
armoir, but a heavily protected armoir) and then split the money up with
his gang.  They sucessfully do it halfway through the film, but when
they go to open it, the Colonel steps in to help them do it without
blowing up the bills.  The plot, as in all of Leone's films, twists and
turns over and over again, finally ending in a ghost town.
The ending is the usual cool-ass duel, but always done in the most
original way.  We find out more about our two protagonists, and even
about the villain, who is given some depth this time.   And the film is
equipped with the bitching kind of style only Leone can peform.  With
Ennio Morricone's amazing score, he sets up beautifully choreographed
scenes filled with shooting and some good old Italian carnage.
"For a Few Dollars More" is always seen as the black sheep of the bunch,
but this film is rather underrated.  It's plotting is ingenius, and the
film is just one hell of a fun film to watch.  It runs a tad over 2
hours, but it really doesn't seem that way since it's so fascinating to
watch.  "For a Few Dollars More" is just another reason why Sergio Leone
kicks ass.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335
