Title
Review for Railway Children, The (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Heartwarming film written and directed by character actor Lionel
Jeffries from E. Nesbitt's novel.  It may remind you in spirit of
Julio Cortazar's beautiful short story `The End of the Game'.  Set at
the turn of the century, story relates adventures of three Edwardian
children who move to a country house in Yorkshire after their father
is mysteriously taken away by police.  As their mother refuses to
inform the children of the exact nature of their circumstances, the
country retreat, with its stone cottages and buttercup fields, becomes
a kind of balmy, nostalgic limbo.  It's an inbetween world where the
children must while away the hours until their father's return - if,
in fact, he will return.  Reason this classic is so popular must
surely be because of its prewar innocence that yet manages to capture
elements of what it was like for urban and suburban Britons during the
Blitz:  there are children being relocated into the country by
railway; a father absent from home on "government business"; a brave
mother making do; a family playing at "being poor".  This strong sense
of reminiscence is established right from frame one - in the first few
minutes of the film we see the camera pan lovingly over mementoes and
trinkets; we see a photograph being taken, a Christmas dinner, a
spinning zoetrope, a panto performance of Peter Pan - and while it is
all rather sentimental, it never becomes mawkish.
It's wonderful how Jeffries creates an idyllic world that is entirely
plausible, a world where strangers are kind and one good deed always
deserves another.  His splendid work is more than matched by a
sterling cast.  You'll really want to spend more time with these
children and share their adventures - from the older sister Bobby
(Jenny Agutter, who has as much poise at 16 in a middy blouse or a
pinafore than she would as an adult), the younger sister Phyllis (A
cheerful, brunette Sally Thomsett, who would later find fame as the
dippy blonde Jo in the sitcom MAN ABOUT THE HOUSE, and was actually
older than Agutter), and brother Peter (Gary Warren, who starred in
the cult children's BBC serial CATWEAZLE).  Their performances are
matched equally by the adults Dinah Sheridan and most notably Bernard
Cribbins as a humble-yet-proud stationmaster.
This film has such a generous, humane spirit to it that you may feel
your eyes mist over during several occasions.  The finale is a
guaranteed tearjerker, but I always get a lump in my throat at the
very end when Agutter softly tells the audience "Goodbye", knowing
that she could not realize she was well on the way to becoming a
celebrated and popular actress in the film industry.  THE RAILWAY
CHILDREN probably works even better now than it did then in 1970, as
the nostalgia it evokes for those times works in tandem with the
nostaliga of the story itself.  They don't make films like this
anymore.  William Mervyn, as a train-travelling old gentlemen, sums it
up in one word.  "Charming....charming!"   Footnote:  Agutter,
Thomsett, and their screen father Iain Cuthbertson were reunited a
quarter-century later when the British Film Institute brought them
back together to a cheering crowd at the Yorkshire Station, whereupon
their film was commemorated with a special plaque. 
