Title
Review for Lion King, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  With the exception of BEAUTY AND
     THE BEAST this may be the best Disney animated feature
     since FANTASIA.  Rather than distorting an existing
     story, the filmmakers have created a myth brand new, but
     with elements going back to Jason and Pelias or Hamlet
     and Claudius.  Some of the artwork is spectacular.
     Rating: low +2 (-4 to +4)
     With the success of THE LITTLE MERMAID Walt Disney Studios returned
in a big way to making animated feature films.  It looks like it was a
good decision, since some of the best animated feature films they or
anyone have ever made were made by Disney in this period.  The formula
has always been to take a well-known fairy tale or children's classic
and retell it, usually distorting it nearly out of recognition.  I have
often wondered why they don't just write their own stories like they do
for Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck.  They have finally chosen to do a film
that is their own story entirely--well mostly.  Actually rather than
taking a fairy tale and very freely adapting it they have chosen to
retell an archetypical myth and move it to an African setting.  The
story is basically "The Return of the True King."  Simba is really Jason
or Arjuna or Hamlet or Aslan returning to defeat the usurper on his
throne.  It was a good idea for a film and it is told with a good deal
of style.
     The story begins with a prologue of all the animals in a kingdom
coming to see their new-born prince, the young Simba.  It is a powerful
scene beautifully rendered with impressive art and music.  The latteris
rendered by Hans Zimmer's beautiful interpretations of African folk
music, much like his work on THE POWER OF ONE.  Young Simba (voiced by
Jonathan Taylor Thomas) is the son of the great and powerful Mufasa, the
reigning Lion King (James Earl Jones).  One wonders how much a
wildebeest an antelope really loves this reigning family, given that he
might well become the family's next meal.
     As a cub Simba is fascinated by everything in the world including
his brooding uncle Scar (Jeremy Irons).  Scar has been waiting for the
day Mufasa would die and Scar would succeed him.  With the birth of
Simba that hope has been snatched away ... unless perchance something
nasty should befall both Mufasa and Simba.  Perhaps with an alliance
with the smirking hyenas--currently exiled to the dark regions of the
kingdom--something nasty can be arranged to happen.
     In the classic Disney films like SLEEPING BEAUTY and SNOW WHITE AND
THE SEVEN DWARFS the villains are usually far more interesting than the
heroes.  The margin is still there, but is starting to narrow a little.
Belle in BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was every bit as interesting as the
villain Gaston.  This time around Mufasa and Simba are still just a bit
handsome and empty.  So it is hardly surprising that Scar is the most
watchable character in the film.  The smirking hyenas, however, hold
their own for audience attention.  Their clowning around making fun of
Mufasa really is a lot of fun, villains or not.  A carefree meerkat and
warthog who figure into the later portions of the film make far more
interesting sidekicks with far more personality than Disney himself
would have created.  Note how much more engaging they are than the mice
in CINDERELLA, for example.
     For no apparent good reason, name actors are chosen to voice many
of the character.  Matthew Broderick is the young adult Simba, but does
not seem to need to do a whole lot anyone else his age could have done.
Jeremy Irons does give some real personality to Scar, though after
hearing him attempt to sing on of the film's songs, my suggestion is
that he should hold on to his day job.  James Earl Jones does Mufasa and
surprisingly we interpret his deep voice as noble, even after hearingit
so often as the less-than-noble Darth Vader.  But again only Irons seems
to give his character much that any moderate actor could not give him.
     Some of the artwork with majestic African scenery is the best that
has appeared in a Disney film.  Disney, of course, always had great
animation, but often his artwork often left something to be desired.It
might be cute, but was rarely impressive.  Here the art and animation
work beautifully together.  An early scene of birds flying over a
waterfall brought gasps from adults in the audience.  There are more
nice experimental touches in the visuals, playing with focus or having
characters appear out of dust.  This is a film in which the visual
interest goes well beyond the animation.
     Moments of direction are also very good.  After the prologue the
screen goes silent for the title of the film to appear and it is far
more dramatic than any chord that could have been played.  This also has
one of the better scripts of Disney animated features.  I think that The
producers realize that much of the audience is parents bringing
children, and there are many creative allusions and puns in the script
that children will miss but adults will appreciate.  There is even a
liberal dash of Swahili, and those who can recognize it can appreciate
that.  And for the kids who like that sort of thing, there are moments
of grossness.  And there were children in the audience who seemed to
liked being pleasantly grossed out by realistic details like animals
eating insects and grubs.
     One problem with the story is the whole theme of the hyenas.  They
are almost too likable for the film's own good.  Certainly they are
cynical, but considering their exile they have a right to be.  Their
motivation is that by any means necessary that they not go hungry.
Somehow that does not sound like so villainous a motivation.  The lions
who have exiled them are certainly not missing any meals.  On the face
of it such a Grand Order, a circle of life that exiles one of its
species, deserves to be toppled.  Why are hyenas chosen as the villains?
Probably because we find them unpleasing in appearance.  In any case the
film seems to take the (racist?) point of view that the hyenas are
intrinsically evil and in a well-run world should be banished.  When the
hyenas are given freedom the land withers, though just why is never
really explained.  The film seems to have a subtext of all the pretty
animals do cooperate and get along under a benevolent dictatorship
except for the ones who are born into an ugly and evil species.  These
uglies get thrown out of the society because if they got enough to eat
it would spoil everything.  The grand order of things assumes that
hyenas should stay confined to their ghetto, outside "the circle of
life" and the natural order of things is destroyed by letting them into
the circle.  One can question the message children will get from this.
Outwardly the film has a love of African rhythms and language and yearns
for a united world--everyone but hyenas united.  But the core is justa
bit ugly and scary.
     With that one objection, and clearly this film is not unique in
that regard, I would say that this is a rewarding film for both children
and adults.  Walt might have found reason to object to parts of it, but
he never made a better animated feature.  I rate it a low +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Rob Furr
     I went to see THE LION KING last night; it was hot, I had six
dollars to burn, and that was the only new movie in town, or so I
thought.
     In reality, THE LION KING is a fairly old movie, or, more
precisely, a whole bunch of old Disney movies tossed in the Mixmaster
and poured into a mold.  I'm sure that there was a plot in there,
somewhere, but most of the movie concerned itself with Disney's
trademarked cutting-edge animation, Warner Brothers-style comedy, and
some of the most forgettable music this side of your local elevator.
     As far as I was able to discern, the plot dealt with the efforts
of one Scar, the obligatory bad lion, to become king of the savannah by
killing the current king and attempting to kill the prince, and Simba's
(the prince and, later, king) eventual victory over Scar.  I'm a little
vague on the details of this supposed plot, because every time the
movie turned its attention that way, I kept having flashbacks to other
Disney movies.  With a few stripes and a couple of weeks with
Body-By-Jake, the nefarious Scar would be indistinguishable from THE
JUNGLE BOOK's Shere Khan.  The rightful king's death tossed me into
Bambi's mother's death scene, I'm sure Simba's exile differed from
Mowgli's time with Baloo only because Phil Harris is dead, and so on
and so forth.  Furthermore, even though what plot there was wasn't
original, there wasn't enough of it.  Even THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER
had more twists and turns to its plot, and I'm not even including THE
PRINCE AND THE PAUPER in that.  In point of fact, much of what passes
for the plot is actually written in shorthand, with plot twists
becoming acceptable not because that there's any meat to them, but
because they're such cliche'd events that the movie doesn't need to
flesh them out.
     There's also a problem with the music: It's less than twelve hours
since I saw the movie, and the only music I can remember from it is
"The Lion Sleeps Tonight." "Forgettable" is a kind way to describe the
musak that Tim Rice and Elton John have presented us with.  Even the
giant production numbers don't remain in memory: It's over a year since
I last saw BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and I can still sing most of "Be Our
Guest" from memory ... but I cannot for the life of me remember anything
about "The Circle of Life" except the title and the chord that they
brought the title card of the move in on.  This isn't going to win the
Oscar for Best Song, kids.
     However, that's not to say that there isn't a great deal to like
in THE LION KING.  When the plot isn't getting in the way and causing
flashbacks, there's an awful lot of comedy in this movie.  Rowan
Atkinson's avian major-domo provides several of the largest laughs in
the movie, from his long-suffering shepherding of the young Simba in
the first few minutes, to his tour of duty as Scar's stereo system
towards the end.  Whoopi Goldberg, Cheech Marin and "Ed," the lead
hyenas, are quietly amusing ... they completely lack any *menace*, but
they're amusing ("I just *gotta* get me a wildebeest!"), and there's
that rendition of "The Lion Sleeps Tonight" that rivals any comedic
moment Disney's had in years.  However, my personal favorite comedy
sequence occurs during the climactic battle, beginning with a meerkat
doing a slightly revised version of Spike Jones' "Hawaiian War Chant"
in drag, and ending with a baboon fighting off about eight hyenas in
perfect cheap-martial-arts-movie style, complete with sound effects.
     The animation is incredible, with the wildebeest stampede as the
possible high point of Disney's animation so far.  There are more
colors, more backgrounds, more of everything.  On a purely visual
level, THE LION KING is rivaled only by FANTASIA, and even FANTASIA
cannot compete with THE LION KING when Disney's latest decides to get
serious about its animation.  Words like "Breathtaking," which are
usually used by reviewers to indicate mild amusement, really *do* apply
to the absolute mastery of animation which Disney presents us with.
     Still, THE LION KING is a thin and weak structure covered with
strong comedy and beautiful animation.  It may have grossed $42 million
over its first weekend, but I can't imagine that it'll have the staying
power of ALADDIN.
     On the Furr Scale, THE LION KING is a two-and-a-half star
four-star movie. (In other words, it's *trying* to be the next BAMBI,
but it only manages to be the next GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE.) Go see it,
in a THX theatre, if possible, but don't pay full price.
     (As a final note, I was annoyed by this movie in another way:
After the traditional THX and Dolby Digital wallop-the-audience
commercials, it went straight into the movie.  No trailers at all.
Bummer.)

Author
Ethan Solomita
     First, the animation quality was amazing!  It was the best I've
ever seen from a Disney movie, certainly for anything of the length of
a feature film!. And, best of all, I couldn't tell where the computer
effects were used.
     In ALADDIN, I could pick it out: carpet, cave-o'-wonders,
carpet-chase, etc.  Here, I only had guesses.
     Also, unlike ALADDIN, the background artwork was a major factor in
the quality.  No boring backgrounds here (well, except for the simple
sheer rock cliffs).
     Moving on, however.  Yes, the songs needed improvement.  The
opening "Circle of Life" I really liked, thanks mostly to Hans Zimmer and
the Chorus.  And, like a prior poster, I thought that 'Can't Wait to be
King" felt thrown in just because they *had* to have a showy dance
number.  However, I did think the animation was quite good, and
interesting the way everything changed for that segment.
     The plot ...  Ah yes, the plot ...  Well, it was more "adult" than
old-time movies like BAMBI, in that it presented life more harshly.
But it was very rushed.  I'm afraid the sudden growth during "Hakuna
Matata" doesn't make up for character development!  In an effort to save
money, and time, Disney won't make their movies longer.  Other movie
houses have to spend $100M+ to bring in the blockbusters, and Disney
won't do it.  Disappointing.
     So it was enjoyable, and it really was very funny (I often
couldn't hear the lines over the laughter in the theater), but in the
end it was so rushed I wasn't drawn into the characters (especially
Simba) to care.
     By the way, was that the entirety of the lion pride?  Where's
everyone else?  How about some other males?  (Maybe I just don't know
enough about real lion packs, but then again, most lion packs don't
have kings that rule the jungle. :-) )
     So, that's it!  I did enjoy it, and I'm sure I'll see it again,
but for me the storyline didn't hold the adult level of appeal of
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.

Author
James Berardinelli
     HAMLET meets THE JUNGLE BOOK--that's what THE LION KING
is--adding, of course, a few special touches all its own.  Disney's
32nd animated feature film is its darkest since THE BLACK CAULDRON,
and, in many ways, a departure from the light-heartedness of THE LITTLE
MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and ALADDIN.  There are moments of fun
and humor, to be sure, but the undercurrent is of a far more serious,
"adult" nature.
     THE LION KING is primarily about guilt and redemption.  Simba, a
young lion cub and heir to his father's throne, is led to believe that
he was the cause of the king's death.  The trauma caused by this is so
great that Simba goes into exile, attempting to find peace-of-mind
through anonymity in the company of a warthog and a meerkat.  But it's
never that easy to escape the past....
     The HAMLET parallels are all there for the discerning adult to
note.  Mufasa, king of the lions, is killed by a treacherous brother
who subsequently takes over the rule of the kingdom.  Simba, the
beloved son, is wracked by guilt and impotence until the ghost of his
father gives him instruction on what actions he should take.
     Death, something not really touched on in the last three animated
Disney tales, is very much at the forefront of THE LION KING.  In a
scene that could disturb younger viewers, Mufasa's demise (at the paws
of his brother) is shown.  It is a chilling moment that is reminiscent
of a certain incident in BAMBI.
     The film also contains a fair share of violence, including a
rather graphic battle between two lions.  Parents should carefully
consider before automatically taking a child of, say, under seven years
of age, to this movie.
     After three animated motion pictures centered upon the love of two
people from different worlds, THE LION KING's focus is different.  This
time around, the love story (between Simba and the lioness Nala) is a
subplot.  The film is most concerned with its young hero's
coming-of-age, and the responsibilities that arrive with
adulthood--including the need to confront guilt and its associated
fear.
     Scar, Simba's treacherous uncle, is the latest in a long line of
Disney antagonists.  Gone is the buffoonery that has marked the recent
trio of Ursula, Gaston, and Jafar.  Scar is a sinister figure, given to
acid remarks and cunning villainy.  The cold-hearted manner in which he
causes Mufasa's death lets us know that this is not a lion to be
trifled with.
     An all-star cast was selected to supply THE LION KING's voices.
Jeremy Irons, with his dry British accent, is a critical element of
Scar's personality.  James Earl Jones lends his booming bass to Mufasa,
truly a lord of the jungle.  Whoopi Goldberg and Cheech Marin play a
pair of laughing hyenas, Rowan Atkinson uses his vocal talents for a
sour- tongued bird, and Moira Kelly's Nala is the sole significant
female character.  Matthew Broderick, with his rather nondescript
voice, is the adult Simba, with Jonathan Taylor Thomas as the cub.
     The animation, as expected from any Disney film, is superior.  As
usual, as much attention is given to small background details as to
foreground principals.  Lighting and color are used to highlight the
shifting tone of the picture (the sunny warmth of Mufasa's kingdom to
the dreary barrenness of Scar's), and the animators have never lost
sight that their subjects are not human.
     Since 1989's THE LITTLE MERMAID, the musical element of any Disney
animated picture has been nearly as important as the visual one (the
three previous movies have garnered a total of twelve Grammy awards).
With the songwriting team of Alan Menken and the late Howard Ashman
(replaced following his death by Tim Rice) in charge, the soundtracks
for THE LITTLE MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and ALADDIN have become
huge commercial successes.  For THE LION KING, Menken is absent.  The
songs here are by Elton John and Tim Rice, with the score coming from
composer Hans Zimmer.
     Two of the five John/Rice songs are rather unimpressive ("I Just
Can't Wait to Be King" and "Hakuna Matata"), one is decent ("Be
Prepared"), and two are quite good ("Circle of Life" and "Can You Feel
the Love Tonight").  "Circle of Life," the opening number, is a visual
extravaganza that may be the most astounding sequence ever in any
animated film.  "Can You Feel the Love Tonight" is THE LION KING's love
song, although it leaves you wondering if either Matthew Broderick or
Moira Kelly can sing, since the song vocals of Simba and Nala are
supplied by Joseph Williams and Sally Dworsky, respectively.
     The soundtrack weakness of MERMAID, BEAUTY, and ALADDIN--a dull
score--has been rectified in THE LION KING.  Hans Zimmer, using a
style similar to the one he employed for THE POWER OF ONE, brings an
African flavor to his music, and incorporates the five songs
seamlessly.
     With each new animated release, Disney seems to be expanding its
already-broad horizons a little more.  THE LION KING is the most mature
(in more than one sense) of these films, and there clearly has been a
conscious effort to please adults as much as children.  Happily, for
those of us who generally stay far away from "cartoons," they have
succeeded.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The LION KING is technically an amazing and dazzling movie.  I
find it hard to review a cartoon.  Perhaps, I could start by discussing
some of the characters that were made special by the actor's voice.
     Hands down, the best voice in this movie was that of Jeremy Irons
who was the evil Scar, brother of the king Mufasa.  Irons is brilliant
in everything he does, but I think his best roles were BRIDESHEAD
REVISITED and REVERSAL OF FORTUNE.  He can play villains and good guys
equally well.  James Earl Jones was the voice of Mufasa, and although
he was good, I expected more out of one of the most dramatic sounding
voices in the movies today.  Jones could have been a great orator (read
politician I guess) had he not become an actor.  Whoopi Goldberg was
funny as a laughing hyena.  I liked everyone except Mathew Broderick
who I felt was too weak and unconvincing as the grown up Simba.
     The movie's strengths, however, were not in the characters.  The
images and the soundtrack were the highlights.  All of the music was
very moving.  The images had a 3D effect that I have not seen before.
There was clear foreground and background in almost every shot, and
sometimes they even varied the focus as you would in a "real" movie so
that at first the foreground was in focus and then the background.  My
favorite part of the entire show was the vibrance of the colors.  Monet
would have come every day to see The LION KING.
     Sad to say, I can not give it as high a rating as I would liked
for two reasons.  First, the story and the characters were okay, but
they were not as interesting as they could have been.  When they have
to resort to lots of jokes about gas and bad breath, you know the
script writers have run out of steam.
     Second, the main audience for this movie is little kids.  I have a
5 year old boy who went with us.  Why oh why did they have to have
someone who viciously murders his own brother in the sight of his
brother's son?  And if they felt they had to kill off a character, why
be so explicit?  Yes, this part of life does happen, but so does rape,
incest, drive-by shootings and a lot of other stuff.  Being true to
life does not mean we have to subject little kids to it.
     By the way, my son spent almost the whole movie in one of our
laps, but claimed in the end to have not been scared (he was clearly
scared while it was going on), and wanted to see it again.  Actually,
he wants to see LASSIE even more.
     THE LION KING runs 1:26 (seems longer) and is rated incorrectly as
G.  Given the murders and attempted murders, it is clearly a PG show.
I am glad we went, and I do recommend the show with the reservations
noted.  I give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Disney has done it again!  Surprised?  Forget the cross promotions
and tie-ins-from-hell, the strengths of THE LION KING are many and you
could waste an entire afternoon going over the giddy delights of this
full-length animated feature. Rich imagery, colorful characters, and
timeless themes are just some of the reasons to roar about THE KING.
     The story--an agreeable blend of HAMLET, BAMBI, and THE JUNGLE
BOOK--introduces Simba, a young lion lad whose father, Mufasa, is
king. But when the king is crowned by his scheming brother Scar, young
Simba is led to believe that he caused his father's death.  Simba flees
the kingdom, instilled with the guilt that will inhibit his return as
an adult.  The cub pairs with a pair of jungle johns--Pumbaa the wart
hog and Timon the meerkat--who teach Simba the bare necessities,
including their philosophy of "no worries"--a mantra that will prove
quite convenient for Simba to run away from responsibility.
     THE LION KING borrows the best from "big three," incorporating the
anachronistic humor of ALADDIN, the somber splendor of BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST, and the youthful vigor of THE LITTLE MERMAID.  (Not to mention
almost *all* of BAMBI.)
     There's action and adventure and, of course, music.  Glorious,
sweeping music from a score (by Hans Zimmer) that, oddly, is better
than the songs (by Tim Rice and Elton John). These tunes lack the
obvious wit of previous partners Alan Menken and Howard Ashman and,
with the exception of the "Be Prepared" (sung by Irons), are little
more than agreeable filler.
     The characterizations are some of the most diverse that Disney's
done to date. No humans are on hand, for a change, and no one flies
solo ala Robin Williams. Not even second-half scene-stealer Nathan Lane
as Timon.  Best of the best is Irons as Scar, who takes his place in
the long-standing line of memorable Disney villains.
     The film stumbles a bit in the art department.  Some of the
segments--such as a computer-aided stampede of wildebeest--are
breathtaking to behold. Other, less-involved scenes use simple
backdrops that are almost eyesores by comparison.  The entire final
sequence, for example, looks almost unfinished.
     THE LION KING is an enthusiastic sign that the Disney *still* has
room for improvement. Sure, THE KING is a grand entertainment and is
easily one of the best films so far this year.  But add better songs
and more computer graphics and *then* we'll see something the likes of
which we've never seen before.

Author
Eric Walker
     Walt Disney came up with a winning formula when he made SNOW WHITE
AND THE SEVEN DWARFS, back in 1937; over the years, his company refined
that formula to a science.  With the re-birth of Disney in the late
1980s, the "magical" formula for Disney animation was re-discovered by
Jeff Katzenberg and Michael Eisner, the studio heads.  Unfortunately,
these two men are not Walt Disney: they're Hollywood studio
executives.  That means that you can expect them to milk a winning
formula for all it's worth, and not dare to push the edge.  If it
works, why change it?
     Because you can wear it out, that's why.  The spectacular
box-office success of Disney's animated films (except for THE RESCUERS
DOWN UNDER, which deserved to do better) has blinded the men on the top
of the heap; as long as the money keeps rolling in, they're not going
to want to make any changes.  But they don't see that when you rely too
heavy on a safe, predictable formula, you risk losing the life-granting
"spark" that infuses your creations with energy--and keeps the money
rolling in.  THE LION KING is going to make another pile of money for
Disney, and as a result we can expect to see no changes in the formula
for Disney animated films in the future.  That formula is laid bare
here:
     - Pour lots of money into producing great animation.  This is the
easy part.  The Disney studios have hundreds of artists and the latest
computer technology to produce lavish, dazzling animation that can be
matched by no one else.  There are some amazing moments here,
especially during the opening sequence (which Disney has pushed for
months, revealing this sequence at its many Disney Stores as early as
February) and a scene where Mufasa speaks to his son from the clouds.
The animation on the rest of the movie is also good, as one expects
from Disney.  But is great animation the only reason we watch Disney
films?  No. The formula has more ingredients, such as ....
     - Create an evil, sneaky villain, and then let him be utterly
defeated (preferably in the midst of an inferno of some sort, with
lightning and smoke and explosions and fire to make it more dramatic).
With the Disney formula, there are only the Good Guys and the Bad
Guys--you know whom to root for, because the Bad Guys are always drawn
in a cartoonish way that makes them look less than human.  The perfect
hero and heroine battle the freaks, and guess who wins in the end?
     - Create a hero, and give him a girlfriend--but make sure the
hero is nice and bland.  What's the difference between Simba, the hero
of this film, and Aladdin?  Nothing at all, other than being drawn
differently.  They're both young and naive; they both make a big
mistake; they both correct that mistake by beating the Bad Guy once and
for all.  And the girlfriend must be equally bland, though at least in
ALADDIN Princess Jasmine was a major character.  In THE LION KING, the
girlfriend is merely there for the hero to grow up with, and to bring
him back to face his big mistake so that the movie can reach its
climax.  Why must the hero and his girlfriend be so generic and
uninteresting?  So that they won't overshadow the supporting
characters, as we see in the next ingredient ....
     - For comic relief (and merchandising), through in a few goofy
characters to play the hero's friends.  These characters always act
silly, and they get the lion's share (pun intended) of the laughs,
except during the climax when they stay by the hero's side and battle
the bad guys.
     - And of course, include a bunch of musical numbers.  Ever since
THE LITTLE MERMAID won the Oscars for Best Original Score and Best
Song, Disney has been pushing its animated films as the last bastion of
the Hollywood musical.  Each of their animated films includes a bunch
of bouncy numbers as filler, one Busby Berkeley surrealist musical
number, and a sappy, treacly "love" song to get the audience all
weepy-eyed.
     When this formula works, it can awaken the child in us.  I enjoyed
THE LITTLE MERMAID, because it made the Disney films seem fresh and new
again.  I loved ALADDIN in spite of its flaws--but if it weren't for
Robin Williams, that movie would have fallen flat on its face, because
it was nothing but Disney formula.  THE LION KING doesn't have Robin
Williams; and while it does have James Earl Jones' booming baritone as
Mufasa, the great king, that's not enough to keep this film from
feeling like a re-hash.  There's nothing new here, and there's not
enough creativity to make it seem refreshing.
     Sure, the animation's great--that's easy for Disney to do,
because they've got millions of dollars to do it.  But there's more to
making a great film than merely dazzling the eyes, whether it's with
animated lions, computer-generated dinosaurs or exploding bridges
(which we'll see in TRUE LIES).  As in all great movies, it's the story
and the characters that count, and there's nothing in here that we
haven't seen before.  Mufasa himself is a regal, majestic figure; the
comic-relief characters are funny; and the evil Scar is wicked and
properly evil.  But Disney has given us a long line of majestic, funny,
and evil characters, from Cruella de Vil and Stromboli to Gaston and
Iago; the characters in THE LION KING simply aren't charismatic enough
to come out from the shadow of their predecessors.
     As if to add insult to injury, the musical numbers are downright
awful.  There's nothing in here to match the catchy, joyful "Under The
Sea and "Be Our Guest," or even the fun "Prince Ali" and "Never Had A
Friend Like Me."  The songs were written by Tim Rice (who also worked
on the ALADDIN soundtrack) and Elton John--who also sings the "love
theme" over the ending credits.  Bleah.  Disney is certain to push this
soundtrack for the Oscar...but if it actually wins, it will be
undeniable proof that taste is dead in Hollywood.  There IS a
reasonably good musical score by Hans Zimmer that's based on on African
music (though why didn't Disney just bring in some real African
musicians to compose it?), but that's about all the praise I can give
it.
     The problem is simply that we've seen it all before.  Nothing is
new here, and one gets the impression that Disney is merely spinning
its wheels.  The Disney formula is starting to wear thin ... but as
long as it keeps making millions for the company, we're not going to
see anything different.
     In this respect, one can say that BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was the
most original Disney film in a long time, because while it included
many aspects of the Disney formula (animation, musical numbers, comedy
relief characters), it actually worked on real characterization (at
least on the part of the Beast himself) and an entertaining story
(though I detested the character of Gaston).  But that film proved to
be an exception to the rule.  ALADDIN, despite Robin Williams'
delightful presence, was merely a return to the old formula ... the
same formula that mires down THE LION KING.
     This does not bode well for the long-term future of American
animated films.  Hollywood is falling once again into the trap of
trying to imitate Disney, rather than experimenting with other ways of
making animated films.  But Walt Disney himself knew that if you don't
keep looking forward and aiming for something new, fresh, and
different, you're liable to dig your own grave.
     Disney has reached the height of its popularity; in fact, it may
have already passed that peak (note the troubles of Euro Disneyland).
But if corporate history has any precedents, it is that the bigwigs at
the top don't notice that the tree is sick until it's already rotten
and ready to collapse or be cut down.  I suspect that the same thing is
starting with Disney:  THE LION KING is merely one symptom of corporate
rot that is starting to seep into the Disney empire--its movies are
safe, non-controversial, and bland; the theme parks are expanding with
seemingly endless re-hashes of the same few ideas (movie-based rides);
and all of the company's other projects (the BEAUTY AND THE BEAST stage
musical, or their proposed ceremonies for the World Cup tournament)
consist of them spending money like water to flash and dazzle the eyes
and promote themselves.
     Disney is in trouble--but they don't know it yet.  The next few
years are going to be *very* interesting times, indeed.

Author
Michael S. Huang
Disney Films
Featuring: James Earl Jones, Whoopi Goldberg, Moira Kelly,
           Matthew Broderick, Jeremy Irons, Cheech Marin,
           and a host of others
Music and Lyrics by Elton John and Tim Rice
     Just when you thought that Disney could do no better; just when
you thought that the pinnacle of an art form had been reached, Disney
dared to push the envelope, and make another animated feature.  To the
pleasant satisfaction of many, and in classic Disney style, this film
has outshined the sunrise over the African savanna.
     Disney has had a grand tradition of animated film, which has
spanned the greater course of this century.  Starting with such films
as SNOW WHITE, PINOCCHIO, and CINDERELLA, Walt Disney set the standard
by which all other animated features have ever been measured.
     This tradition wavered during the 1970's and early 80's, but made
a sensational return with its trio of films, THE LITTLE MERMAID,
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and ALADDIN.  Each of these films went back
to the tradition of a good story before excellent animation.  The magic
and charm of the art was brought back from a cellulose, near-death
experience.
     Throughout each of these films, not only did the Disney animation
house draw deeper upon their artful imagery, they also drew upon
stronger characters, and better vocal talents.  To this end, they have
drawn many a celebrity into the recording studio, including Robin
Williams, James Earl Jones, and Jeremy Irons, the latter two both
appearing in the Lion King.
     As the grandeur and spectacular sights and sounds of ALADDIN
thrilled audiences, and its timely, cutting-edge humor brought roarious
laughter, and an occasional tear.
     This film does one up from that, with spectacular vocal
performances, brilliant sights and more than a plethora of the
traditional Disney charm.
     The artful expression of the characters was wonderful, ranging
through the adorable Simba as a cub, to the evil Scar.  Not to be
outdone in expressing characters, Disney also went out of their way to
create beautiful scenic backdrops, with a sense of depth panning across
the wild African brush, often with hundreds of waterfowl flying across
the land.
     True to Disney style, the story is a tear-jerker, which is
apparently geared more towards adults than children, but which most
children will surely enjoy.
     This grand drama of a lion cub finding himself and his true place
in the call of the wild is a must-see, with some hilarious
characterizations, and charm which brings back great drama and art true
to the Disney tradition.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Voices:  Matthew Broderick, Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Jeremy Irons,
         Nathan Lane, Ernie Sabella, Rowan Atkinson, James Earl Jones.
Screenplay:  Irene Mecchi, Jonathan Roberts and Linda Woolverton.
Directors:  Roger Allers and Rob Minkoff.
     There is a yin to every yang, and if there is a down side to the
remarkable success of Disney's recent animated features, it's that the
Mouse keeps upping the ante for every subsequent feature.  1989's THE
LITTLE MERMAID became the highest grossing animated release ever, as
did 1991's BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and 1992's ALADDIN.  Is THE LION KING
ready to follow in those massive footsteps?  Most likely.  While not as
emotional as BEAUTY or as fast-paced as ALADDIN, THE LION KING is
genuinely entertaining, with moments of truly stunning visual
creativity.  Only weakness in the music and a fractured tone hamper the
proceedings.
     THE LION KING is the tale of Simba (voice of Jonathan Taylor
Thomas), the son of Lion King Mufasa (James Earl Jones).  The birth of
the new heir displaces the king's brother Scar (Jeremy Irons), leading
the envious Scar to plot the death of Mufasa and Simba.  When Mufasa is
killed while trying to save Simba, Scar convinces Simba he must go into
exile.  There Simba is befriended by meerkat Timon (Nathan Lane) and
warthog Pumbaa (Ernie Sabella), and grows to adulthood (adult voice of
Matthew Broderick) blissfully free of responsibilities.  However, when
childhood friend Nala (Moira Kelly) informs Simba that Scar is
destroying the prideland, Simba must decide whether to keep his
distance or to confront his demons ... and Scar.
     Like the last three big Disney hits, THE LION KING is a musical,
but it probably shouldn't have been.  Elton John and ALADDIN lyricist
Tim Rice have provided five new songs, but nothing has the sparkle of
the Menken/Ashman compositions, and for the most part the production
numbers seem more obligatory than inspired.  "I Just Can't Wait to Be
King" is a silly, gaudy bit, and "Hakuna Matata" is a recycled "Bare
Necessities."  The one exception is Scar's song, "Be Prepared," which
Irons delivers with zest.  It also features a chilling sequence with
goose-stepping hyenas parading past Scar against a subtle background
with images of swastikas.  Hans Zimmer's Afro-tinged arrangements and
incidental score make the most of the music, but THE LION KING is much
more effective when the story is spoken rather than sung.
     The story is a somber one, an animated "Hamlet" of sorts, and
frequently the animation matches that tone.  The elephant graveyard,
populated by Scar's hyena cohorts (voices by Whoopi Goldberg and Cheech
Marin), is a spooky wonder, while the later appearance of Pride Rock is
simply bleak.  These sequences might be less than entrancing to the
very young, but they are offset by lively, funny sequences featuring
Timon and Pumbaa.  Nathan Lane gives Timon a Bugs Bunny cockiness which
is charming, and Ernie Sabella is equally endearing as the affably
flatulent warthog.  Nala's pursuit of Pumbaa is the film's comic
highlight, but the action in THE LION KING tends to be more serious.
Parents should exercise some judgment regarding taking children under
six.
     None of this is to suggest that THE LION KING plods along
humorlessly.  Timon and Pumbaa get the most to work with, but they are
ably assisted by the other supporting characters.  Scar, while
sinister, gets of some dark one-liners; Robert Guillaume has a small
but goofy bit as a Yoda-like baboon.  The most entertaining vocal
performance, however, comes from Rowan Atkinson (the malapropping
minister from FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL).  As Zasu, a hornbill who
serves as Mufasa's chancellor and Simba's chaperone, he gets a fussy
part that's a cross between THE LITTLE MERMAID's Sebastian and BEAUTY
AND THE BEAST's Cogsworth, but Atkinson's droll delivery makes it his
own (and provides the single biggest laugh with a shot at one of
Disney's most annoying songs).  THE LION KING is not a masterpiece; it
is too slow at times, and has perhaps too many characters to juggle.
Still, it is witty and beautifully drawn, and is sure to continue
Disney's amazing animated winning streak.
