Title
Review for Rushmore (1998)
Number of Reviews
29

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Wes Anderson has the kind of comic sensibility that keeps you
watching just so you can see where he goes next.  His debut feature BOTTLE
ROCKET married bone-dry wit to good-natured character study in a tale of
would-be thieves whose inbred suburban politesse limits the effectiveness
of their crime spree.  Though the humor was often absurd, Anderson and his
co-writer Owen Wilson never sacrificed character for the sake of an easy
joke.  You got the feeling that they had a genuine affection for their
creations, that they respected the grandiose lengths to which they took
their dreams even as they chuckled at the results.
     It's that same sensibility that makes RUSHMORE such a quirky delight
-- it's a uniquely oddball comedy that's still about people.  One of those
people is Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman), a 15-year-old student at the
prestigious Rushmore Academy whose several dozen extracurricular
activities don't quite make up for his complete disinterest in academics.
His latest extracurricular interest is Rosemary Cross (Olivia Williams), a
first-grade teacher at Rushmore with whom Max is instantly smitten.  In
an attempt to win her affections, Max enlists the aid of his friend Herman
Blume (Bill Murray), a millionaire industrialist, to build an aquarium at
the school in Miss Cross's honor.  Unfortunately, Max soon finds Blume
turned from ally to competitor for the fair lady's heart, beginning a
strange war between the two.
     It would have been easy enough for Anderson to turn RUSHMORE into an
ever-escalating, bigger-must-be-funnier battle of pranks.  Instead, he
spends plenty of time getting us inside the messed-up heads of his two
central characters.  In a telling first scene, we see Max daydreaming
about solving a brain-cracking geometry problem and receiving a grand
ovation from his classmates.  Like a typical teen, Max is concerned with
how others see him; unlike a typical teen, his concern manifests itself 
in an obsession with grand gestures, with being perceived as important.
He lives and breathes for Rushmore because it gives him an impressive
stage to found dozens of clubs, produce his overwrought plays and forget
that he's the son of a barber.  As splendidly portrayed by first-time
actor Schwartzman, Max's egomaniacal infatuations -- first with the school
and then with Miss Cross -- come off as the sweetly immature behavior of a
kid trying way too hard to appear mature.
     There's plenty immature about Herman Blume as well, imbued with an
aura of pure defeat by Bill Murray.  Unhappy with his wife and sadistic
teenage twins, Blume longs for the simpler troubles of youth.  His
betrayal of Max to begin his own romance with Miss Cross could have made
him a villain; instead, his behavior indicates a man returning to
typically childish inconsiderate acts like stealing his best friend's
girlfriend.  Though the destructive salvos exchanged by Max and Blume are
wonderfully funny, they're also ridiculous because of the players 
involved:  a kid working desperately to be an adult, and an adult working
desperately to be a kid.
     With a foundation in those two marvelous characters, RUSHMORE is free
to let its comedy swoop from the sublime (Max appearing in the darkened
back seat of Blume's car like a double-crossed mafioso, cigarette glowing
ominously) to the ridiculous (Max's stage re-creation of Vietnam).
Anderson shows an equal facility for off-kilter compositions and deadpan
dialogue (Max to Vietnam veteran Blume:  "So...were you in the sh*t?"),
combining for one of the smartest comedies you'll see.  Anderson and
Wilson do bite off perhaps a few too many plot threads -- the friendship
between Max and his young Rushmore "chapel buddy" (Mason Gamble) doesn't
really go anywhere -- but there are so many deft comic touches that the
less interesting elements are somehow diluted.  At its core, the narrative
of RUSHMORE is quite conventional stuff about people who learn Important
Lessons about what they want from life.  Those lessons are given such a
singular presentation that you may only realize after you've stopped
laughing that these people, for all their foolishness, are all the more
appealing because they're real.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
RUSHMORE (1998) *** 1/2.  Directed by  Wes Anderson. Written by Anderson &
Owen Wilson. Photography, Robert Yeoman. Editing, David Moritz. Production
design, David Wasco. Music, Mark Mothersbaugh. Cast: Jason Schwartzman (Max
Fischer), Bill Murray (Herman Blume), Olivia Williams (Rosemarie Cross),
Brian Cox ( Dr. Guggenheim),  Seymour Cassel (Bert Fischer), Mason Gambl
(Dirk Calloway), Sara Tanaka (Margaret Yang), et al. A Touchstone  (Disney)
picture released by Buena Vista. 89 minutes plus end credits. Rated (too
severely) R for language.
In 1997's Good Will Hunting (a good film with an awful title), janitor Matt
Damon solved an almost impossible mathematical problem. Rushmore starts
this way too.
But this is no coincidence. It's got to be a spoof. The math genius,15-year
old Max Fischer, a 10th-grader at Rushmore Academy, triumphs at the
blackboard only in a daydream. Max, probably the sole student on
scholarship in that pricey school, is a disaster academically. But he's
also the BMOC, the Big (though short) Man on Campus when it comes to clubs
and activities. He runs, directs, presides over just about everything and
creates what's not already there.  The list includes the Rushmore
Beekepers, the Dodgeball Society, the French Club, the Debating Team, the
Fencing Team, the school's paper (as editor and writer),the yearbook... And
of course, the Max Fischer Players. He mounts, directs and acts in plays
written by --you guessed it-- Max Fischer. But you couldn't guess that the
bits of two of his plays that we see are "Serpico" (filmed with  Al Pacino
by Sidney Lumet, 1973) and "Heaven and Earth" (filmed by Oliver Stone,
1993), The latter with stage explosions and it version of the classic photo
of the raising of the Stars and Stripes on Iwo Jima 's Mt. Suribachi.
With delicious perversity, the makers of this movie saw to it that Max is
not necessarily an ace within those activities. Better yet, he is not
particularly liked by his schoolmates, except perhaps for much younger Dirk
who follows him around, acting as his secretary or factotum.
Max, with his thick-framed glasses, braces on his teeth, natty school
blazer and unexpectedly baggy khaki pants, is an original creation, too
complex to sum up by the vague terms of "nerd" or "geek." We don't really
ever get to know what makes Max tick, and that too, is a clever avoidance
of cliches and simplistic movie psychology.
He does have major problems. Sublimely disregarding his terrible grades, he
plans to go to Oxford. Instead, Rushmore's President Dr. Guggenheim (a name
that echoes those of Marx Brothers farces), tells him that because of his
academic record he's being dismissed.
Now Rushmore is the be-all for Max, his cocoon, his security blanket, his
whole life. Landing in a standard (read, inferior) public high school is a
horror. But I'm getting ahead of myself, trying not to give away too much
of a story that is full of surprises.
Rushmore was filmed at  St. John's School (in Houston) which director
Anderson graduated from before going to the University of Texas where he
met his collaborator Owen Wilson.
While at the Academy, Max meets chain-smoking steel tycoon Herman Blume
(Bill Murray), an alumnus, a benefactor, and the father of two jock sons he
doesn't like and who are now Rushmore students. His marriage is unraveling.
Like Max, he is an unorthodox maverick. Like Max he brings the art of
deadpan to new heights. The two males, one a child becoming a man, the
other a man wishing to be a child, bond. This without superfluous
elaboration.
In a book, Max finds a pen-written reader's quotation that impresses him.
>From library cards he tracks tracks down the writer. They become friends.
She is first-grade teacher Rosemary Cross (Olivia Williams) the 25-year old
widow of an alumnus. Ms Williams' only other film was The Postman  --not
the Italian gem but Kevin Costner's latest flop. She reminds me of another
English beauty (well, Anglo-Italian), her senior by 10 years Greta Scacchi.
Williams has that special kind of fresh looks and sweet naturalness that
makes it most understandable for schoolboy Max, whose sap is rising, to
fall in love with her. But then, Herman follows suit. He is Blume in Love,
to quote Paul Mazursky's 1973 movie. Can rivalry be far behind?
What has developed up to now, and what follows, is a marvelous comedy,
linear yet rich in content ane episodes. The film's surface is very funny
but some of its underpinnings are also serious, even sad. Its creators
never misses a chance to show absurdism in real life and real life in
absurdism. On the other hand, they pass up all kinds of gags and shticks
that could be included as gratuitous additions that would burden and dilute
the picture. It is sober filmmaking.
The performances are terrific. First-time performer Jason Schwartzman
(Max), is the son of Talia Shire and her late lawyer-producer husband Jack
Schwartzman (Lionheart, Never Say Never Again). Also the nephew of Francis
Ford Coppola, whose Apocalypse Now is partly parodied in one of Max's
plays. Jason was 17 when the film was shot. One thing that required my
suspension of disbelief was that his Max did look older than 15.
Jason's Max is charged with explosives. Like a land-mine: dynamite, but
without obvious external signs. So is Murray's Blume, perhaps his best
performance ever: restrained, intelligently minimalist, unrhetorical,
discreetly multi-leveled, amusing yet poignant. No clowning here. Even the
milking of some old gags of silent movies and screwball talkies takes a
fresh approach --as when the preoccupied Blume puts a second cigarette to
his lips; when he pulls a tiny branch off a tree, and the tree falls; when
retaliations involve a bicycle and a Bentley.
The filmmakers are in perfect tune with their subject and their cast. They
know exactly how not to insist, when to cut (most scenes are short),where
to place a camera, which lens to use, how to avoid the TV-type closeups
that infect so many features in attempts to add spurious intimacies. They
know how and when to involve us, how much and how little. They don't try to
make Max  really crazy or poignant or even likable.
Anderson's first feature was Bottle Rocket (1996) which he wrote with his
friend Owen Wilson. It was an expansion of an eponymous short (1994) by the
same duo. The 1996 movie was not a commercial hit but does have a strong
following. All of its collaborators (cinematographer, editor, production
designer, music director) have the same fuctions in Rushmore.
I mentioned earlier a number of older movies, and for good reason. The tone
and the strategies of Rushmore are original yet also have a "je ne sais
quoi," a "something" that's very much in the spirit of a certain American
cinema of the mid- 60s to the early 70s. Madness, irreverence, absurdism,
gently (or not) anarchism. Not only The Graduate (67) but several, among
which Dr. Strangelove (64), Mash (70), Brewster McLoud (70, with Bud Cort)
and especially Harold and Maude (71, also with Bud Cort), even some aspects
of films by Robert Downey, Sr., such as  Putney Swope or
Greaser's Palace. The older movie tactics are reinforced by the music,
mostly from the 1960s' British Invasion.
The picture did the 1998 festival circuit with great success. It joins the
pantheon of contemporary films that are on list of our BBNMM (the Bring
Back the Ninety Minute Movie Society). Next time there ought to be an Oscar
in a new category, "Best Retro Movie of the Year." Just for Rushmore.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Wes Anderson.
Cast: Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams, Bill Murray, Mason Gamble, 
Sara Tanaka, Seymour Cassel, Brian Cox, Luke Wilson, Connie Nielsen, 
Ronnie McCawley, Keith McCawley.
1998 - 93 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and brief nudity).
Reviewed February 13, 1999.
Perhaps it is wrong to label a film such as director Wes Anderson's 
"Rushmore" since it is such a completely original and thoroughly 
engaging motion picture that it does not really fall under any certain 
genre, but I will say that it is the best "coming-of-age" film since 
1986's "Stand by Me" and "Lucas," and one of the few movies made 
recently that I would call magical in everything it does, and in all of 
its little details.
"Rushmore" stars Jason Schwartzman, making his feature film debut, in an 
Oscar-worthy performance as Max Fischer, a bespectacled 15-year-old 
whose great love in life is the exclusive private school he goes to 
called Rushmore, and who dedicates so much of his free time to numerous 
petty clubs (he especially likes his acting troupe, who perform 
productions such as "Serpico") that he is failing all of his regular 
classes. Although his father (Seymour Cassel) works as a barber, Max 
says that his father is a doctor so that he won't be looked upon as of a 
lower financial status. One day things brighten up for Max when one of 
Rushmore's various school speakers actually doesn't put him to sleep. 
His name is Mr. Blume (Bill Murray), and he is burdened with two 
obnoxious teenage twin sons and a wife whom is having an affair. Also 
coming into the story is the lovely Miss Cross (Olivia Williams), a 
first-grade teacher who Max falls helplessly in love with when he 
discovers she has checked out the library book that he holds as a sort 
of spiritual guidance, Jacque Cousteau's "Diving for Sunken Treasure." 
Miss Cross lets him know right off that they can only be friends since 
he is so much younger than she, but Max feels betrayed to find out that 
she is beginning to take a fancy to Mr. Blume.
A regular filmgoer may think that they know where this story is headed, 
but they would undoubtedly be wrong since "Rushmore" is such a complete 
and utterly unpredictable film, and one that more or less puts to shame 
such recent films about teenagers as "She's All That" and "Varsity 
Blues." "Rushmore," as in life, is a mixture of comedy and drama, of 
surprises and inevitability, and most importantly, is purely human. 
Somewhat reminiscent of the aforementioned '80s gem, "Lucas," "Rushmore" 
is a movie that knows exactly how it is to be a teenager, with its air 
of uncertainties and disappointments, and its main character of Max is a 
likable, dedicated, but as all teens occasionally are, stubborn 
protagonist whom all audiences, ages 15 and up, should be able to 
wholeheartedly understand and sympathize with in his plight. 
Wes Anderson made his directing debut in 1996's offbeat "Bottle Rocket," 
a film that I was not too fond of, but it was apparent that he did have 
an undeniable spark for filmmaking. With his sophomore effort, 
"Rushmore," Anderson has finally lived up to his full potential, also 
due to the absolutely wonderfully-written screenplay by Anderson and 
Owen Wilson, which does not take the easy route by setting up a simple, 
clear-cut story, but instead lets the characters and their predicaments 
naturally flow. By challenging us, we are never quite sure where 
everything is going, and how everything is going to end up, and it was 
refreshing to finally feel that way about a film, especially after just 
previously sitting through the soggy, cliche-ridden "Message in a 
Bottle."
How the performances, writing, and film itself could be snubbed by the 
Oscars is beyond me, but I suspect that "Rushmore" was too offbeat and 
intelligent of a film for those members obsessed with war movies and 
those set in the Elizabethan era. Schwartzman is spectacular and 
perfectly cast in the lead role as Max, and has a genuine and 
naturalistic quality about him that you don't often see in young actors. 
Meanwhile, Bill Murray has been gifted with a career-reviving role here 
as the wily, but good-natured Mr. Blume. Olivia Williams as the object 
of Max's affection, Miss Cross, is also given a fully-developed 
character that we are able to care about. She is a woman who does like 
Max, but not at all in a romantic way, and is faced with the no-win 
situation of having to crushing his heart. Finally, Sara Tanaka is a 
godsend as Margaret Yang, a kind, fetching teenage girl who does show a 
liking in Max even though he is too absorbed in Miss Cross to notice her 
much.
In the first half-hour of "Rushmore," I noted to myself that I liked the 
film a whole lot, although I doubted it would end up being what I 
considered great. In a twist of the usual film that starts off 
promisingly, only to crash-and-burn in its climax, "Rushmore" 
progressively got better and better, and emotionally more deep and 
touching, that by the picture's magnificent and entirely satisfying 
ending I had absolutely fallen in love with the film. Played to the 
perfectly-chosen song "Ooh-La-La," by The Faces, "Rushmore" concluded on 
the highest note possible, and left me feeling cleansed of all of the 
motion picture rubbish I have had the misfortune of enduring thus far in 
1999. "Rushmore" is a splendidly-made motion picture in all respects, 
and one of 1998's very best films.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Max Fischer, 15 years old, seems to have a mind of a 40-
year-old business executive who is also a playwright, but he can't pass
his classes.  This is an amiable ramble through the affairs and
personality of a not very believable character.  Rating:  4 (0 to 10),
0 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Wes Anderson who directed BOTTLE ROCKET.  Made for
     Touchstone Pictures, though this is clearly not in the style of a
     Touchstone comedy.
   - Max Fischer (played by Jason Schwartzman) is a superb organizer
     who talks and acts like and adult three times his age.  He founded
     a dozen different clubs at his school Rushmore Academy and writes
     plays like a Broadway playwright.  The film follows several months
     of Max's life and his strategies to win an attractive first-grade
     teacher (Olivia Williams) as a lover and to befriend, then make an
     enemy of, then again to befriend a local business leader (Bill
     Murray).  That may make the plot sound more coherent than it
     seemed watching the film.  In truth you usually know where the
     film is, but it is hard to tell where the film is going or to
     remember where it has been.
   - Example: Max is trying to impress a teacher who likes fish so he
     hires contractors to construct a building to house an aquarium on
     the school baseball diamond.  He gets eight million dollars for
     the project from Bill Murray, but he never mentions it to school
     administrators.
   - Rarely clear what Max's plan is.  That could be fun, but it never
     seems to be.
   - Some of the appeal might be like the appeal of FORREST GUMP.  I
     did not care for that either but Max seems to have the same sort
     of luck.  He is like an intellectual Forrest Gump.
   - Another Luke Wilson film, my third of the festival.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Rushmore (1998) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jason Schwartzman, Bill
Murray and Olivia Williams.
 Rushmore is one of the most original and quirky, yet charming, movies of
the year.
 Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman) is a young nerdy type who lives and dies
for his private school.
 What he lacks in grades, he makes up for in enthusiasm and
extra-cirricular activities. This 10th grader is editor of the school
newspaper and yearbook; president of the French Club, German Club, Chess
Club, Astronomy Club; captain of the fencing and debating teams; and
founder and director of the Max Fischer players, who performs plays written
by, who else, Max Fischer.
 Max lives in his own world of denial. He is attending Rushmore Academy on
a scholarship, but is placed on sudden-death academic probation because of
his terrible grades.
 Yet Max continues to blithely to steer his own course. He falls madly in
love with Miss Cross (Olivia Williams), a first-grade teacher. To honor and
impress her, as well as win her favor, he works up a plan to construct an
enormous aquarium in her honor.
 For the money, Max turns to Mr. Blume (Bill Murray), a steel tycoon and
one of the school's biggest benefactors.
 But their friendship unravels when the married Mr. Blume also falls in
love with Miss Cross.
 Best friends become bitter rivals as Max and Blume use whatever means at
their disposal to try to destroy each other.
 Wes Anderson's film, which he directed and co-wrote with Owen Wilson, is
not as dark as parts of it sound.
 It is really rather genial, despite the mayhem that develops between Max
and Blume.
 As Max, Schwartzman is a bit pompous, obtuse, determined, touching and
vulnerable. You admire him while simultaneously hoping he never moves into
your neighborhood.
 Murray is a revelation as the rich Mr. Blume, a man-child with the
emotional stability of a teen-ager. He sinks to childish pranks to thwart
Max's pursuit of Miss Cross. Blume is a man who has difficulty expressing
his feelings. His own twin sons scorn him and he finds a surrogate in Max,
whom he sees as a younger version of himself.
 Rushmore is a delight, a movie that should not be missed. If you're tired
of car chases, disasters and special effects, check out a movie about some
oddball people. You'll be glad you did.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams, Mason Gamble and Bill Murray.
Directed By Wes Anderson
Running Time: 1 hour 33 minutes
A strange whimsical love story, Rushmore has enough charm, wit and style to
spare to rise it against it's predictable plot. It shouldn't work, but...it
works.Schwartzman plays Max Fischer, a student at the prestigious school of
Rushmore. Although he founded, or runs, nearly all of the societies at the
school, his school work performance is terrible, and he is constantly
threatened to be kicked out. Max falls in love with a new teacher Rosemary
Cross (Williams.) Max enlists the help of Herman Blume (Murray) who is
suffering the mother of a mid life crisis. But Max and Herman soon turn
against each other as they both try to win over the heart of the confused
teacher.
The plot is obvious from the word 'Go,' and sadly the film offers no
surprises story wise. Rushmore also leaves answers to a lot of questions,
principally why Max is so useless at school. But the quick pace of the film
detracts the mind from these questions, and the whole movie takes over and
charms. Wes Anderson adds a somewhat surreal feel to the film, with the
whole thing playing like a stage play. Each scene is played in a charming
manner. It's hard to describe how the film works, but...it works.
The characters are essentially a twisted and bitter lot, but it..works. Max
is a horrible, horrible person, but somehow it makes sense that he should be
the hero of this piece. But again his behaviour leaves a lot of questions
open: his father is a barber, but Max tells Herman that his dad is a brain
surgeon. Herman finds out he isn't, but nothing is said about this. Not even
his dad seems offended. Strange. While on the subject of Bill Murray, he is
excellent in this movie. This is Peter Venkman suffering married life at 50,
and Murray handles the role well. In fact, he's pretty bloody funny, and
although his character is a bastard, Murray makes it...work. Olivia Williams
is a slight disappointment, but she handles the role well.
Some tinkling muzak plays throughout the film, which again adds to the
charm. School life is portrayed well, including a big Scottish bully played
by George Farish. There's some cute, straight out comic scenes, such as when
Max visits his ill headmaster. Max also puts together some pretty amazing
stage plays, which are funny in themselves. There's so many nice quirks that
make Rushmore so pleasant to watch. Mason Gamble, previously known as the
live action Dennis, is really rather good as Max's friend Dirk Calloway and
Sara Tanaka is nice as Margaret Yang, who falls in love with Max.
Although the ending is obvious, the film has a fun time getting there, and
so does the audience. Although it leaves a few to many niggling thoughts to
make it truly great, Rushmore is a pleasant surprise, and will put a smile
on your face. Rushmore....works.

Author
Ross Anthony
"When one person has the opportunity to live an extraordinary life, he has
no right to keep it to himself." This quote, scribbled in a book at the
Rushmore School library, sums up this eccentric film.
The son of a barber, Max Fischer (Schwartzman), scores a scholarship to the
prim and expensive private Rushmore via a play he'd written in second grade.
Nerdy, yet rebellious, Max embraces the extra-curricular opportunities at
the prep school -- founding or leading every club from bee-keeping to
fencing. However, such diversion of attention leaves his grades severely
lacking. This, coupled with his extreme antics, intended to win the heart of
a young teacher (Williams), Max finds himself expelled.
"This was supposed to be my night! You hurt my feelings!" Max exclaims to
Miss Cross in an attempt to excuse his very funny berating of her boyfriend.
It's a delightful scene, and just one of many.
Max befriends Mr. Blume (Murray), a millionaire who hates rich people. Blume
attempts to help Max win over Cross, but ends up falling in love with her
himself.
Bizarre friendships develop well and richly in this oddly funny film. If
you're tired of the usual movie -- I strongly recommend "Rushmore," you'll
find it quite refreshing. (Check under the theater seating for "safety
glasses and air plugs.")
Starring Bill Murray, Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams.
Directed by Wes Anderson (Bottle Rocket).
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
RUSHMORE
Cast: Jason Schwartzman, Bill Murray, Olivia Williams, Seymour Cassel,
Brian Cox, Mason Gamble, Sara Tanaka
Director: Wes Anderson
Screenplay: Wes Anderson, Owen Wilson
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 stars
There are quirky films, and then there is Rushmore, a film that is
intent on deviating from the norm of filmmaking. The "hero" of this
story is unlike any other in recent memory. Geeky but sort of cool Max
Fischer (Jason Schwartzman, in a bold debut performance) is a wacky
protagonist, a guy with a mean attitude but a soft center.  Playing
alongside Schwartzman is Bill Murray (in one of his better roles of
recent years), who has an equally peculiar character.  Murray and
Schwartzman live out every comedian's dream: they get to act
simultaneously smart and silly, and receive a whole lot of laughs in the
process.  To further compliment the production, Wes Anderson directs
Rushmore intelligently and humorously, whilst not stripping his
intelligent moments of humor, and not making his humor particularly
intelligent.
Max is a 10th grader at Rushmore Academy, and for him, school is his
life.  He is involved in numerous extracurricular roles, ranging from
captain of the fencing and debating teams to the founder of the
Double-team Dodgeball Society.  With his thick rimmed glasses, blazer
and quick thinking mind, Max is often thought of as a kid genius.  Truth
is, he's a lousy student and is under constant threat of expulsion.  Max
falls in love with a first grade teacher named Miss Cross (Olivia
Williams), and tries to win her over by hatching various plans.  When
Latin classes are about to be replaced by Japanese, Max cleverly makes
the subject compulsory for all senior years; later, he attempts to
construct an aquarium on Rushmore's baseball field.
To help raise money, Max consults school benefactor Mr. Blume (Bill
Murray), a seedy millionaire who appears to be in the middle of a
mid-life crisis.  Blume is attracted to Max's energy and eccentric ways,
and the two become good friends.  But when Max discovers that Blume is
also in love with Miss Cross, a mean war initiates between the two (at
one stage, Blume runs over Max's bicycle, so Max removes the brakes from
his car).  As Max desperately attempts to act like an adult, Blume finds
excitement in acting like a child.
Almost all of Rushmore's oddly timed humor relies on its characters.
Whilst we develop a good understanding of Max and Blume's personalities,
they are never predictable and never boring.  The relationship between
these two really needed to work, and it does, much to the credit of
Jason Schwartzman and Bill Murray. Schwartzman's first film performance
is a memorable one, and is skillfully played with a mixture of nastiness
and goofy sincerity.  Murray has received great but small roles recently
in Wildthings and Kingpin, but his work in Rushmore is much closer to
what he is capable of achieving.  Murray is a brilliant comic performer
and this film channels his capabilities, producing a nice bit of
whimsical acting.
It's the winning formula of offbeat comedy and drama that makes Rushmore
such a delight to watch.  Wes Anderson's and co-writer Owen Wilson's
screenplay is smart and original - they understand how to craft
extraordinary characters, and have fun doing so.  Though some scenes in
Rushmore have little or no point, the film is always amusing enough to
warrant an audience.  Rushmore has reinvented the teenage comedy genre
(similar to what The Breakfast Club did in 1985, and what Can't Hardly
Wait attempted to do in 1998) by giving itself a quirkiness and
originality that is rarely found in contemporary cinema.  There are more
reasons to see Rushmore other than its originality, but none are quite
as refreshing.


Author
Dennis Schwartz

RUSHMORE (director: Wes Anderson; cast: Jason Schwartzman (Max Fischer),
Bill Murray (Blume), Olivia  Williams (Miss Cross), Brian Cox (Dr.
Guggenheim), Seymour Cassel  (Bert Fischer), Mason Gamble (Dirk
Calloway), Sara Tanaka (Margaret Yang), Stephen McCole (Magnus Buchan),
Ronnie McCawley (Ronny Blume), Keith McCawley (Donny Blume), Luke Wilson
(Dr. Peter Flynn), 1998)
This is a fantasy film that comically depicts one current student making
contact with another former student of the same school, who is now a
tycoon, who when he looks back at his high school days, might recall
what it was about those years that now fill him with nostalgia, and how
he might be an influence to other students not considered to be top
flight students yet who possess the guts it takes to become successful.
RUSHMORE opens, as an irrepressible sophomore at an elite private
school, the 15-year-old Max Fischer (Schwartzman), who is the future
tycoon, is daydreaming that he can solve an impossible math problem his
math teacher put on the board for extra-credit that no one else in the
world can solve. In reality, he is a poor academic student, having won a
scholarship to the school when he was in the 2nd grade, by staging a
play that the headmaster (Brian Cox ) of Rushmore Academy was impressed
with. His father is the town barber, but Max prefers to tell people that
his father is a neurosurgeon. The father is paternally played with a
very sweet charm, by veteran actor, Seymour Cassel.
This is an original and quirky story, but it also follows a long
tradition of films that took similar routes (FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF,
THE GRADUATE), so what seems to be taking place and in what direction it
is going and who Max is, cannot be simply or absolutely stated, which is
great in some ways but completely mind-blowing in other ways, as this
somewhat cheesy story has more holes in it than Swiss cheese, yet no
matter how it seems to be served, it always seems to be a story that is
tastefully done.
Max appears with thick spectacles, wearing braces, and not appealing to
girls or not even liked by any one on campus except for a young student
he is an advisor to, Dirk (Mason), who acts as a loyal subject to Max's
cause, only disillusioned when he hears that Max made some sexually
disparaging remarks about his mother. Max is not exactly a nerd, as he
is pushy, being neither completely likable nor obnoxious, who propels
himself into the Rushmore scene by pursuing extra-curricular activities
to such a degree that it reaches the point of absurdity, as he is
involved in so many diverse activities, that it is a wonder he has time
to even take off the preppy jacket he loves to wear around the campus.
The list of his activities includes: Beekeepers Club, The Dodgeball
Society, The French Club, The Debating Team, The Fencing Team, editor of
the school's paper, The Piper Cub Club, The Max Fischer Players, they
put on plays, which seem ridiculously overplayed, such as Serpico in
which he directs and stars in.
Rushmore is Max's symbolic place, tantamount to that august mountain top
where replicas of some of our greatest presidents are carved in stone.
It is at Rushmore where he is bursting with untold energy for adventure,
entrepenureship, and romance. Everything he does is what someone his age
might want to do or dream about, but he carries it out from fantasy land
into the real world, not deterred by what others may think of him, or of
how totally off-the-wall he appears. Oblivious to his poor school work,
except when the headmaster reminds him that if he doesn't improve his
grades, he will be expelled from school, scholarship or not.
He falls foolishly in love with a 25-year-old elementary teacher at the
school, charmingly played by Miss Cross (Williams), who looks bemusedly
perplexed at him, but, nevertheless, somehow admires him for the effort
he puts forth in stating his feelings for her. Her husband recently
died, but spoke fondly of his attending Rushmore, which is the reason
she chose for coming here to teach. Max plans to win her over by
building her an aquarium, as a token of his affection. The money for
this pie-in-the-sky project will come from a steel tycoon, Herman Blume
(Murray), whom he met after the former graduate of the school gave a
speech there that seemed to only impress him, as the tycoon told what
the school meant to him, in a flippant way that alumni usually don't
reminisce about when giving a formal speech in an auditorium.
Blume, as the present day tycoon looking back at his days at Rushmore,
as the springboard of his success, just as he looks back at his marriage
with remorse, develops a natural kinship with Max, the
tycoon-in-waiting, that is beautifully presented by an understated
performance by Murray, who draws comedy by just raising an eyebrow at
the right moment or when befuddled lighting two cigarettes in his mouth,
and who evinces pathos when he seems inundated by his dislike of himself
for the unfeeling person he has become.
There are many twists to come into play as the story is disarmingly
told, forcing us not too get too comfortable in what we expect to be a
sane commentary of the going-ons here. The twist in the story that works
best, and is both hilariously amusing and deadly serious, is that Blume,
trapped in a loveless marriage, falls for the teacher, also, and is able
to romance her. Max acts particularly upset by this turn of events,
venting out at all the parties he perceives are hurting him. These
scenes were wickedly cruel to comprehend, as the story flipped over from
comedy to psychological drama, and to a certain extent, a temporary
suspension of belief. Yet it was this facet of the story that was most
novel and daring about the film, as it let the characters freely play
out who they were without contrivance. Therefore, even if you didn't
particularly care about the way things were going, you were at least
taken aback by seeing how everyone interacted with each other. Max
showing himself to be rude and insulting, going to great lengths to end
the relationship between the two lovers, somehow believing that he
should have been taken seriously as a real suitor. Blume retaliating by
smashing the kid's bike. Max getting back at Blume, by cutting the
brakes to Blume's Bentley. Miss Cross by showing that she's a sensitive
and vulnerable woman, who wants to feel alive and romantic, and doesn't
really understood that she is being wooed by men who can't take no for
an answer.This is the part of the film that I had the most problems
with, especially when we see her going out with an attractive doctor
(Luke), a Harvard graduate, like she is, and he seems to be the odd man
out for no decipherable reason that the story expands on.
When Max gets kicked out of Rushmore and goes to the inferior public
high school, he continues to do poorly in his school work but will excel
once again in extra-curricular activities, even putting on an
anti-Vietnam War play with live ammo, requiring the audience to put on
earplugs and wear goggles. He even finds an Oriental girlfriend
(Tanaka), who is not quite the scientist she seems to be, which in this
case is a good thing, because that makes her just about right for Max.
The young director's previous film, BOTTLE ROCKET, was also written by
him with Owen Wilson, it was also quirky but a bit less professionally
done. Both films show promise of better things to come. There are still
patches to this story that need further developing and to be pruned
along the edges before we can say we have things in order, but after
saying that, I must say that this is still a first-rate film, with a lot
of bite to it, depicting characters in a discrete way that allows them
to be very real and formidable. This is Bill Murray's best role yet, and
for newcomer, Jason Schwartzman, the son of actress Talia Shire, a role
made for him in filmdom heaven.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
http://www.sover.net/~ozus
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Christopher Null
     When I asked Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson what would be next after
1996's BOTTLE ROCKET, they told me they were working on a number of
projects about "serious things."  I expressed skepticism then, and it
turns out it was justly founded.  RUSHMORE is anything but serious,
despite the Presidential-sounding name.
     So, what is Rushmore?  Rushmore is a prestigious private school in
Nowhere, U.S.A. (actually Houston and Dallas, Texas), where its most
vocal student, Max (Schwartzman), is also its worst academically. 
RUSHMORE the movie follows Max in his travails at school, where he falls
hopelessly in love with teacher Miss Cross (Williams, straight from THE
POSTMAN and a haircut).  Unwilling to accept that the age differential
is a concern, the 15-year old Max embarks on a grand scheme to build an
enormous aquarium as a symbol of affection.  That he builds it on the
school's baseball diamond is what gets him thrown out of Rushmore.
     Lest I forget myself in failing to mention Oscar-worthy Bill Murray
(with Billy Bob Thornton, one of the only two Best Supporting Actors
1998 had) as the wrench in Max's master plan.  Murray appears as one Mr.
Blume, a rich curmudgeon of an industrialist who at first funds Max's
plans, then tries to steal Miss Cross away for himself.
     Typing it out, it all sounds very conventional, but it's not.  Next
to THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, RUSHMORE is one of only a handful of
solid, funny comedies of 1998.  And how funny it is!  Anderson and
Wilson's writing is spot-on yet surrealistic.  The dialogue is bizarre
and full of non-sequiturs, yet wildly entertaining.  The whole film
plays as a near fantasy, where the adults act like children, and the
children act like adults.  And no one's the wiser to the switch.
     RUSHMORE is a truly American film that deserves to be seen by many,
many people.  How many of those are going to "get it" remains a mystery.
Director: Wes Anderson
Producer: Barry Mendel, Paul Schiff
Writer: Wes Anderson, Owen Wilson
Starring: Jason Schwartzman, Bill Murray, Olivia Williams, Brian Cox,
Seymour Cassel, Mason Gamble
http://movies.go.com/rushmore/index.html
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Nigel Bridgeman
Starring: Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams and Bill Murray
Written by: Wes Anderson & Owen Wilson
Directed by: Wes Anderson
While watching Wes Anderson's Rushmore, it may be surprising to think that
the role of Max Fischer, the film's anti-hero, was not written with Jason
Schwartzman in mind. The young actor, making his film debut as a 15 year
old student at the exclusive Rushmore Academy is so perfect in the role
that it comes as a shock that Anderson auditioned some two thousand other
prospective stars before discovering Schwarztman.
Schwartzman plays Max, a student who is more interested in his
extra-curricular activities (such as writing edgy plays like "Serpico" and
being president of the Rushmore Beekeepers) but sees his grades suffer as a
result. On the brink of being thrown out, he lands himself in even more hot
water when he falls for first grade teacher Rosemary Cross (Olivia
Williams) and enlists the help of millionaire acquaintance Herman Blume
(the great Bill Murray) to build an aquarium (on Rushmore's baseball field)
in her honour. Unfortunately for everyone involved, Blume finds that he has
feelings for Miss Cross as well, which gets in the way of Max's plans to
woo her.
Max is one of the best-written characters we've yet seen in the 90s, and
Schwartzman plays him to perfection in one of the finest comedy
performances ever given by someone of his age. As everyone else has
probably already pointed out, he is reminiscent of a young Dustin Hoffman
(although I was reminded more of Paul from "The Wonder Years", from a
visual standpoint, at least). Hopefully, if he avoids typecasting as weird,
quirky loner-types he should earn himself a good career. Bill Murray is his
equal as Blume, displaying a depth we haven't yet seen from him. While this
isn't his best performance (that honour goes to Groundhog Day) he is still
terrific here. Williams isn't given much to do except react to Schwartzman
and Murray, but still does fine work.
Rushmore seems to go just a little too long but, while it isn't a perfect
film, it is a definate must-see for anyone who wants to see that rarity, an
American coming-of-age film that actually works well without an excessive
amount of sentimentality. Anderson has created a modern classic with a star
who should, with any luck, rise to even greater success.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
I like the character of Max Fischer.  He loves his school, and is
totally dedicated to nearly every single extracurricular activity that
could ever be dreamed up.  So he joins them all, as his grades suffer.
He campaigns to save Latin from being dropped from the curriculum.  He
stages elaborate school plays with explosives and miniature subway cars.
Then something extraordinary happens.  Max falls in love.  Of course,
Ms. Cross, the First Grade teacher, is too old for him and has married
once before, but nevermind.  Max will win her heart by campaigning to
have an aquarium built in her honor.
So he enlists the aid of Herman Blume, a local steel tycoon.  Blume,
played by Bill Murray, is depressed, unhappy with his family, and nearly
has all the vigors of his youth nearly taken from him.  Then he falls in
love with the same teacher.
Thus begins the setup of one of the year+s most engaging comedies.  A
multi-generational love triangle between an underaged, overly active,
under-achiever and a successful schmuck with the wind taken out from
him.  Other than the minor references between _The Graduate_, _Good Will
Hunting_ and _Revenge of the Nerds_, this is totally original
entertainment.
Bill Murray has not only made a comeback, but has delivered the goods
with compounded interest.  It+s as if he+s read too many negative
reviews over his last several projects, and had it gone to his head.
The result is the most engaging, mature character in the entirity of
Bill Murray+s career.  While a few individuals are having a hard time
retaining their personas as they age (Eddie Murphy, Dan Ackroyd) while
others become more obnoxious (Woody Allen), Murray takes this original
character to the next logical step.  He interiorizes every bit of rage
we know is there, converting it to a dispirited demeanor, who cannot
believe the complications that ensued.  And yet he marvels and admires
Fischer+s ingenuity.
Max Fischer is played by newcomer Jason Schwartzman, the son of Talia
Shire, and cousin to Nicolas Cage and Francis Ford Copolla.  It is hard
to retain go neck and neck with Murray, with a complicated character
that+s on screen most of the time, but he succeeds.  He has the
endearing task of appearing smarter than he actually is ("Do they speak
Latin in Latin America?").  We root for him, but we root that he will
grow, not necessarily that he gets the girl in the end.
_Rushmore_ more than anything else, is a triumph of its creators Wes
Anderson and Owen Wilson.  It moves quickly, with a major plot secret
occuring within the first half-hour.  And when it+s all over, you will
be surprised how easy it was to take it all in, and find it hard to
forget a few precious moments.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
When you decide you don't like a film while you are still watching it, 
it is hard to turn back.
Sure, I like when films take quirky and unexpected turns as much as the 
next moviegoer.  But when the final third of 'Rushmore' commenced its 
pointless darkness - a futile evocation of the whimsicality of revenge 
and friendship - I had nearly made up my mind that all the press 
received by the film was wrong-headed.  The final minutes were more to 
my liking, but the film was still marred for me.
'Rushmore' opens with a fantasy in which the main character, Max Fischer 
(Jason Schwartzman), imagines himself solving a math problem that would 
baffle Will Hunting.  His classmates in the private academy are 
ecstatic, and Max is a hero.  Of course this scene proves ironic, as we 
soon see that Max is one of the worst students on campus.  Having 
attended Rushmore since his primary grades, Max has immersed himself in 
extra-curriculars - he is either an officer or the founder of 
organizations involving beekeeping, fencing, lacrosse, French, 
wrestling, stamp and coin collecting, and many others.  Most 
impressively, Max writes and stages his own plays.  In fact, one of the 
film's strengths is these productions:  their exaggerated grittiness 
becomes a tour-de-force, and we cannot help but admire and like their 
creator.  Behind the set of Max's 'Serpico' a small-gauge elevated train 
runs through a miniature city more detailed than David Letterman's set.  
Aside from Max's fantasies and quirky imagination, we also see inventive 
narrative techniques, such as a theater curtain opening and closing, the 
months of the story's span flashing across the velvet folds.  So there 
are several charming and eccentric elements that endear the story to the 
viewer.
Unfortunately, Max's behavior itself ends up over-the-top.
After 15 year-old Max meets and falls in love with a Rushmore first 
grade teacher (Rosemary Cross, played by Olivia Williams), he begins a 
pattern of behavior that is at first worshipping - pouring her lemonade 
as she grades papers in the library - and finally obsessive.  Practiced 
in the pathology of lying, Max deceives and manipulates countless 
friends;  because his actions become so despicable, we are perhaps 
unwilling to forgive him wholly.  Further, would the victims of such a 
young skunk realistically not only accept apologies but befriend Max 
again? Here's the rub.
Bill Murray acts very well in the film.  As Herman Blume, a wealthy 
alumnus of Rushmore, Murray tempers his goofy comic expression with a 
cynical ennui that fits just right with his part.  Max compares very 
favorably to Blume's twin hooligan sons, and Blume likes Max's 
sycophantic ambition so well that he chucks Max a job offer.  One of 
Murray's strong suits is his sudden bursts of silliness, sprinting away 
across a playground or darting into a children's basketball game to 
block a shot.  Later begins one of the major conflicts, the subplot 
encompassing the rivalry between Max and Herman, after Herman too falls 
in love with Miss Cross.  Again Murray is properly deadpan, the camera 
lingering on his jaded but hilarious expression just long enough.  Note 
his matching shirts and neckties, a wink at classy tackiness!
Jason Schwartzman does a fine job as well.  His resemblance to a very 
young Dustin Hoffman is inevitable, especially his head-on approach to 
other characters.  It's a shame that the screenplay by -------and 
director Wes Anderson does in the credibility of his character.  The 
writing also short changes Olivia Williams' character:  Miss Cross is 
pretty, but aside from missing a dead husband and reading to her 
students, she never does anything that develops her character.  We fail 
to witness even a montage of moments that bond her to either male 
character trying to win her attention and love.
Mason Gamble as Dirk Calloway, Max's protégé at Rushmore, and --------- 
as Margaret Yang, Max's quasi-girlfriend and gun moll in one of his 
plays, both hand in wonderful performances.  Most of their motivations 
seem right, and their acting shows a nice transparency.
The time of 'Rushmore' - 89 minutes - is right.  My wife looked at her 
watch even during this duration.  I am a man who like to fall in love 
with a movie, and with 'Rushmore" I was just able to like its 
characters.  Instead of watching a thoroughly engaging story, what I saw 
was a dark and underdeveloped character study.


Author
David Sunga
Written by: Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson
Starring: Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams, and Bill Murray
Synopsis:
Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman) loves writing plays. He is a 15-year-old
boy attending a prep school called Rushmore Academy. Manipulative, Max
claims his barber father is a neurosurgeon, and boasts to other students
about a (fictitious) sexual episode concerning his friend, a pleasant
schoolteacher named Mrs. Cross (Olivia Williams). Soon Max becomes
romantically obsessed with Mrs. Cross, to the point where his antics get
him expelled from school. The depressed teen he realizes he must act
within normal bounds to be socially acceptable.
Opinion:
I was hoping for an offbeat and lighthearted Bill Murray comedy, but was
surprised instead to find a quirky flick about an angst-ridden teenage
playwright. No problem. RUSHMORE starts out with one or two main oddball
characters, and that's a plus. The acting is solid, and you are
immediately pulled in to try to find out what makes the characters tick.
But aside from some flash moments of humor, that's as far and as fresh
as RUSHMORE gets. When the novelty wears off, the rest of RUSHMORE
doesn't seem to be propelled by any kind of dramatic event or
realization other than that time soothes anguish but not insecurity.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Murali Krishnan
Rushmore Academy is a prestigious private school and is also the main
passion of one of its worst students, Max Fischer. The reason Max is a bad
student is not because he lacks intelligence or because he cannot apply
himself. Rather, it is because he has devoted all of his energy in
participating in a multitude of extracurricular activities to the extent
that his grades are sagging. Max's most focused talent is as a playwright,
and it was his proficiency with drama at a young age that was the basis for
his admittance to Rushmore, not wealth like most of the other students. Just
as Max is being threatened with expulsion unless his academic performance
improves, he meets Rosemary Cross, a second grade teacher, and is instantly
smitten. Although a romance between the two would seem impossible to anyone
else, Max's unbounded determination and self confidence compel him to pursue
her. Age never appears to be a barrier for Max, as his best friend in school
is much younger than him, and he has established a friendship with an older,
wealthy Rushmore alumnus, the industrialist Herman Blume. However, Max's
friendship with Herman becomes a rivalry because Herman has also become
romantically interested in Rosemary. Herman's age and wealth does not
necessary give him an advantage over Max, because Herman is married, and he
is also a jaded man with a stiff personality.
The setup for the story is not an original one. Countless films have been
made about the misfit teen who pursues love and stumbles through many
obstacles along the way. Usually these films provide a skeleton plot and an
overdose of sophomoric humor. This film, thankfully, is a different entity
entirely. The characters are more than stereotypes, the humor does not
insult the viewers intelligence, and the plot is never predictable. In fact,
it is not really even a "teen comedy" as it initially might appear to be.
Although the humor is based mostly on the quirkyness of the characters, it
does not resort to cheap jokes for easy laughs. The drama provides plenty of
substance. The younger children characters, which are usually relegated to
cute comedy sources, are developed as full characters.
Bill Murray gives an exceptional performance as Herman, who is different
from the manic characters that Murray usually plays. Herman exists most of
the time with a blank, world-weary expression. This is a difficult role to
play, since body language and timing need to be utilized properly, and a
lesser actor would not have been able to pull it off. Newcomer Jason
Schwartzman is also successful as Max. He is able to express Max's youthful
zeal without going overboard.
Recommended. This is a fresh, entertaining story that shows that films based
around high school students need not be moronic. It has involving drama and
is also a consistently funny comedy.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:   Wes Anderson
Cast:  Jason Schwartzman, Bill Murray, Olivia Williams, Seymour Cassel,
Brian Cox, Mason Gamble, Sara Tanaka, Stephen McCole
Screenplay:  Wes Anderson, Owen Wilson
Producers:  Barry Mendell, Paul Schiff
Runtime:   93 min.
US Distribution: Buena Vista
Rated R:  language, brief nudity
Copyright 1999 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Rushmore is one of the most brilliantly funny and moving films I've
seen in years, and easily one of the best pictures of 1998.  Directed by
Wes Anderson, and written by Anderson and Owen Wilson, Rushmore shows
the trials and tribulations of young Max Fischer, including his love for
an older woman (Olivia Williams) and his childish sparring with a
millionaire (Bill Murray).  There isn't a failed comic moment to be
found in Rushmore, but it works ultimately because the characters are so
real and likable.  Schwartzman, Murray, and Williams all shine in their
roles, and you're certain to leave the theater smiling.

Author
MosseHood
   I know it already opened in December, but I finally got around to seeing
Rushmore last weekend, and it was one of those rare oppritunites that I got to
leave the theatre feeling proud about paying the expensive ticket price. As the
final scene closed out in happy slow-mo fashion, I felt happy to have been
priveleged enough to watch such a good display of filmmaking.
  Jason Schwartzman, his face oddly intriguing behind those large braces and
glasses, steals the show as Max Fischer, the most well known Rushmore Academy
student who gets terrible grades, but compensates for it by organizing most of
the school's clubs and organizations (i.e. the fencing team and writing and
producing school plays) and often pulling outrageous stunts, one that
eventually earns him an expulsion.
   This stunt, building an aquarium on the school's baseball diamond, is a plot
to steal the heart of widowed elementary teacher Rosemary Cross (Olivia
Williams). He funds this aquarium with the help of millionare Herman Blume (a
very Oscarworthy Bill Murray), who eventually finds himself falling in love
with Miss Cross.
   Rosemary and Herman begin dating-and the fun begins; Herman and Max go at it
head to head in a battle for Miss Cross. Herman manages to destroy Max's bike,
while Max cuts Herman's brakes, and it goes on like this. But eventually Max
realizes he is too young for Miss Cross, and he can't stand in the way of two
people in love.
   The Academy of Arts & Sciences really messed up this year; they completely
overlooked Rushmore (and, if you ask me, it wasn't an accident). It maybe
wasn't Best Picture material, but it certainly deserved a screenplay nod
(instead of Elizabeth), and Bill Murray's absense from the ballot is a complete
snub.
   The entire mood of the film is one reason it is so good; at one point it's
fun, and the next scene can turn serious and dramatic. The cinematography gives
the movie an important feeling, as well. 
   I hope Rushmore can overcome its' Oscar snubs, and be enjoyed by intelligent
film goers. Grade: A

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Writer/director Wes Anderson and writer/actor Owen Wilson take another stab
at the movies after the critical success of their initial independent effort
titled BOTTLE ROCKET. Nicolas Cage's real-life cousin, Jason Schwartzman,
offers his big screen debut in this film, while Bill Murray finally finds an
excellent script in which to rest his solid straight-man acting abilities.
Think of this film as a quirkier FERRIS BUELLER of our day!
PLOT:
Max Fischer is a unique high school student who has all the talent in the
world, but cannot seem to focus on any one thing that he enjoys doing,
besides attending Rushmore high that is. One day, he falls for a 1st grade
teacher who appreciates his persistent adoration, but cannot reciprocate his
feelings. Max's friend and rich mentor, an alumni of Rushmore himself, also
falls for the 1st grade teacher, and unintentionally creates a childish
"love war" between the two.
CRITIQUE:
Quirky, unique, original in style, funny as heck, with some great
performances put forth by the entire cast, this movie offers an extremely
viable alternative to all of us who are sick and tired of watching the same
old Hollywood comedies done in the same old boring way. This film has wit up
its ying-yang, a tremendous soundtrack that goes perfectly with the black
humorous tone of the flick, and a script that always has you wanting to see
and know more. I did find that the last act of this piece was not as solid
as the first two, the confidence seemed to be lacking, but all in all, a
great show! This movie made me laugh out loud during several scenes, enjoy
and smile gratuitously at various clever shots and moments, and fully
appreciate the originality of a film that doesn't seem to come around often
enough.
Bill Murray is amazing as the rich, indifferent old fart, who chain-smokes
like it's going out of style, and carries a lit fuse right into all of his
mannerisms. It's beautiful to see him finally chew into some material that
accentuates his underrated acting abilities. Jason Schwartzman is also
fantastic as the know-it-all, smart-aleck kid who carries around enough
enthusiasm to sustain a thousand regular kids in any high school of our day.
He's been given some great lines to work with here, but he delivers them all
perfectly, and essentially, turns into Max Fischer. I don't mind saying that
he reminded me a bit of a role by another diminutive actor by the name of
Dustin Hoffman, in a little film called THE GRADUATE back in 1967. Let's
hope that his career goes further than his mom's ever did . All in all, this movie's loaded with plenty of fun eye and ear
candy, a totally creative script, some great performances by everyone
involved, and a thoroughly original time at the movie theatre.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Jason Schwartzman is the son of actress Talia Shire (birthname Talia
Rose Coppola), who is best known for her role as "Adrian" in all of the
ROCKY movies. She is director Francis Ford Coppola's sister, which
essentially makes the legendary director, Jason's uncle. Seeing that actor
Nicolas Cage is also part of the Coppola's clan, his father is Francis
Ford's brother, Jason is technically cousins with Nic as well.
Screenwriter Owen Wilson is brother to actor Luke Wilson who appears in this
film as the pre-med student/companion to Ms. Cross, and Andrew Wilson who
plays the part of the baseball coach. Both brothers also had parts in Owen's
first written film, BOTTLE ROCKET, alongside Owen himself, who is also an
actor in his own right. He starred as "Oscar Choi" in 1998's big-ass hit
ARMAGEDDON (7.5/10), and "Gary Dixon" in 1997's ANACONDA, among various
other roles. He was also an associate producer on the big 1997 Oscar flick,
AS GOOD AS IT GETS (7.5/10). The director of that film, James L. Brooks, was
the guy who backed the dynamic duo's first film, BOTTLE ROCKET, as executive
producer. He is also "thanked" at the end of RUSHMORE.
Actor Bill Murray claims that he's only read three scripts in his lifetime,
which he did not alter in any way. RUSHMORE was one of them. GROUNDHOG'S DAY
(7.5/10) was the other. And MAD DOG & GLORY (6.5/10) the last.
At one point during filming, director Wes Anderson needed US$25,000 to shoot
an airplane scene. Not within the budget, he pleaded for the money from the
studio for a few days, but never got a "yes" for an answer. Bill Murray
heard all this and decided to write the man a personal check himself, so
that he needn't worry about money issues so much, and focus on his grand
vision instead. Wes accepted, they shot the scene, but it was never used in
the film. The studio never paid Murray back.
Director Wes Anderson shot most of this movie on location at the prep
academy that he once attended. He also used to mount fanciful plays there to
entertain his fellow students. He once did a stage version of STAR WARS.
Director Wes Anderson on his writing style, "I have a pretty rudimentary
method for formatting scripts. I use an old version of Microsoft Word and
just keep hitting tabs. Chop, chop, chop. At the end of the page, it might
say the character's name and then on the next page are the lines that he
says. Stuff that people say is wrong. So we have to retype it at the end.
Horribly unprofessional."
The kid who plays Max Fischer side-kick in this film, actor Mason Gamble, is
better known for his role as "Dennis" in 1993's DENNIS THE MENACE.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Touchstone Pictures
 Director:  Wes Anderson
 Writer:  West Anderson, Owen Wilson
 Cast: Jason Schwartzman, Bill Murray, Olivia Williams,
Seymour Cassel, Brian Cox, Mason Gamble, Sara Tanaka,
Stephen McCole, Ronnie McCawley, Keith McCawley, Connie
Nielsen, Kim Terry
   There are two kinds of students who drop out of high
school or get kicked out on their ear: the dullards who just
can't cut it and are likely to be disciplinary problems; and the
real brains, like chess champ Bobby Fischer, who are
understandably bored out of their minds by instructors who
can't teach them anything.  Max Fischer, whose name is
perhaps inspired by the chess wizard, is of the latter variety,
an obsessed tenth-grader who expends so much effort
spreading himself thin on extracurricular activities that he is
failing his classes.  "Rushmore," the story of Max's
sophomore year in high school, details the yarn in such a
vivid way that it stands as one of the most refreshing movies
of the year. Though directed by a mature adult, it's the sort of
story they annually try to put on in New York's annual Young
Playwrights Festival but never quite succeed in conveying
the polish that director Wes Anderson brings to a script
written by him and Owen Wilson.  Nor did the Young
Playwrights Festival ever capture the spirit of an idiosyncratic
15-year-old the way first-timer Jason Schwartzman does.
  Now, this is no ordinary tale of a kid whose brain and
ambition are outsized for his school.  Max's dilemma is that
he's in love with a twenty-something teacher, Rosemary
Cross (Olivia Williams), who towers over him in height and
poise but is barely a match for her youthful lover's attentions. 
What gives "Rushmore" its comic overlay is the presence of
Bill Murray as millionaire steel magnate, Herman Blume, his
rival for the affections of the first-grade teacher at Rushmore
Academy, whom he convinces to build a huge aquarium on
the prep school's campus as Max's dedication to the lovely,
bemused lass.
   A perceptive movie audience will immediately detect the
relationship between "Rushmore" and Wes Anderson's first
project, "Bottle Rocket," a 1996 low-key comedy about two
young, thwarted pals who try to embark on a life of crime. 
Like "Rushmore," Mr. Anderson's earlier venture is quirky but
accessible: this time around he's likely to connect to anyone
who has ever considered himself not an outsider but a person
so inside that he consistently finds himself in a heap of
trouble.  It's also for a congregation for whom a film like "The
Mighty" is just too conventional--for all its pseudo-imaginative
images of King Arthur and his knights.
   Anderson begins his story in a math class as Max, eyes
glazed-over in Walter Mitty mode, fantasizes a solution his
math teacher's problem--one which, the instructor informs the
class--was not solved even by M.I.T.'s Dr. Leaky.  After
finding the answer (in his daydream) Max is filmed in various
vignettes in his role as editor of the French club, and an
officer in such diverse activities as fencing, debating,
German, Astronomy and dodgeball.  He makes the
acquaintance of Rushmore's chief benefactor, steel tycoon
Mr. Blume (Bill Murray), who ultimately agrees to fund the
aquarium in Max's--and later Blume's--sweetheart's honor. 
When Max is finally expelled from Rushmore, he goes into
virtual combat with the much older Blume, a kind of love-hate
relationship, a knight determined to conquer his foe and win
his lady's hand.
   Jason Schwartzman is ideal in the role of the nerdy guy
who asserts himself everywhere, is overconfident (he
convinces himself that he will apply to Oxford and the
Sorbonne, with Harvard as his safety), with a toned-down Bill
Murray fitting the role of an unhappy millionaire whose buddy-
buddy relationship with a high-school kid shows that he wants
a new start in life.  (It's a healthy affiliation--after all, this is
not a Todd Solondz movie.)  Seymore Cassel stands in as a
supportive father, a barber whose son passes him off to his
friends as a neurosurgeons but who takes a large stride
toward maturity when he ultimately introduces him proudly for
what he is.  Olivia Williams's girl-next-door role charms.  She
appreciates the 15-year-old's attentions while warding off his
aggressivness, but is undoubtedly grateful to him for
introducing her to the steel tycoon.  
   Incidentally as plays-within-movies go, you'd look hard to
find a funnier, zestier example than the second-graders'
reenactment of the Vietnam War which pretty much
concludes the show.
Rated R.  Running Time: 91 minutes.(C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
Bill Chambers
Max Fischer, a fifteen year old student of Rushmore Academy, puts down
his newspaper and makes his way to the chalkboard, at which point he
deftly answers an impossible mathematical puzzle. His classmates applaud
his genius.
And then Max wakes up, having dozed off during a school assembly. A new
lecturer is introduced-Herman Blume, a low-key tycoon whose bizarre but
inspired speech prevents Max from falling back to sleep. Blume will
become his idol, and everywhere I was convinced Rushmore was going from
that obvious opening sequence the filmmakers avoid like the plague. The
movie is anything but predictable, and nothing less than brilliant, a
comic masterpiece that would win Best Picture in a perfect world.
Max's grades are dropping, but he dedicates himself to extracurricular
activities-over fifty of them, in fact. (His favourite is Drama Club;
his plays are hysterically funny in their earnestness.) Rushmore is not
so much an educational institution to Max as an outlet for his
gregarious and impetuous nature. No action better demonstrates this than
his relentless pursuit of teacher Miss Rosemary Cross (radiant Williams,
permitted use of her British accent again after playing The Postman's
American girlfriend); with the assistance of steel investor Blume, Max
plans to erect a marina and dedicate it to his love interest. Rosemary
is a few years Max's senior, and a widower to boot-she barely entertains
the dreamer's affections, eventually growing to prefer the company of
Blume.
The film features a colourful bouquet of supporting characters, from
Max's trusty peewee messenger (Mason Gamble) to Seymour Cassel as Max's
barber father. (Max attends Rushmore on scholarship.) One of the real
revelations here is Murray, who has not had a part this worthy of his
talents since Groundhog Day. His comedy here is so subtle-as the
manic-depressive multi-millionaire Herman, he conveys hate for his dumb
sons with a glance, love for Rosemary with almost that same look, and
his devotion to Max-despite his age, he's tightly part of Max's circle
of friends/assistants-is endearing. One scene in particular, which could
be interpreted as Blume's suicide attempt, is inimitably riotous-his
unfiltered cyncism on display again at last.
Not to give Schwartzman the short-shrift. Where did this guy come from?
Schwartzman's performance is so pitch-perfect I wondered if Rushmore had
been written for this unknown, Hollywood's Best Kept Secret. (The answer
is, "no," according to director Anderson.) Further research uncovered
that Schwartzman is the son of Talia Shire (Rocky's Adrian-and sister to
Francis Coppola). No other member of Schwartzman's legendary family has
hit it so thoroughly out of the park the first time at bat. He has none
of DiCaprio's androgyny, Renfro's handsomeness, or Taylor-Thomas's
smugness holding him back-meet the anti-teen idol, and revel in this
young actor's inspiring debut.
Congratulations to Anderson, Wilson (who can be seen as the blonde guy
in Armageddon), and co. for crafting a surprisingly confident, utterly
unique comedy that's thrilling in its inventiveness and heart-warming in
its sweetness of tone. (Though I was disappointed by their previous
effort, the aimless Bottle Rocket, both movies demonstrate what hopeless
romantics Anderson and Wilson are.) If there's an adjective I've missed,
feel free to add it-just thinking about Rushmore reconfirms my faith in
modern cinema.

Author
James Sanford
There aren't a lot of zippy one-liners or acidic putdowns. Slapstick
is kept to a minimum. Dirty jokes are practically non-existent.
So what is it that makes "Rushmore" so consistently funny?
The question is probably unanswerable, but it appears to have
something to do with the combined forces of director Wes Anderson and
Owen Wilson's offbeat script, the spectacularly dry comic performances
by Bill Murray and newcomer Jason Schwartzman and that peculiar magic
that seems to develop out of nowhere whenever the right elements fall
into place on a film set. As he proved in his debut film, "Bottle
Rocket," originality is Anderson's hallmark, and it's evident in just
about every aspect of "Rushmore."
For instance, rather than cast the latest Tom Cruise wannabe as his
lead, Anderson has opted for Schwartzman, whose hollow eyes and
slightly inflated facial features recall a young Dustin
Hoffman. Though his plot centers on the possibility of a May-September
relationship between 15-year-old Max (Schwartzman) and comely
thirtysomething Rosemarie Cross (Olivia Williams), Anderson steers far
clear of the territory covered by "The Graduate" and "Summer of '42."
Even the soundtrack selections are unpredictable: The Who's "A Quick
One While He's Away," Chad & Jeremey's "A Summer Song," and John
Lennon's "Oh Yoko."
And who could have guessed Murray would find such a role this late in
his career, especially after a string of recent failures?  His turn as
joyless millionaire Herman Blume is both hilarious and a splendid
characterization, on a par with his performances in "Tootsie" and
"Groundhog Day."
Set primarily at a stately private school, "Rushmore" involves an
increasingly intense competition between Max and Herman for the
affections of widowed Rosemarie. For overachieving Max - who divides
his time between such activities as representing Russia in Model U.N.,
serving as the founder of Rushmore's Trap and Skeet Club and presiding
over the Calligraphy Club - Rosemarie is simply one more challenge to
meet. For Herman, she's one of the few bright spots in his otherwise
dreary existence.
She's also almost as far off the beam as the men pursuing her. With
the possible exception of Seymour Cassel's part as Max's dad, everyone
in "Rushmore" is at least slightly twisted, although rarely in obvious
ways.
Even the throwaway details in Anderson and Wilson's screenplay are
surprising. Max, we learn, got a scholarship to Rushmore on the
strength of a play he wrote at age 7, "a little one-act about
Watergate." A tense confrontation between Herman and Max's
solemn-faced prodigy Dirk (Mason Gamble) is followed by a bizarre bit
involving Herman's gleefully moronic sons. The lead role in Max's
lavish drama about Vietnam goes to a Scottish transfer student whose
pronounced burr somehow goes unnoticed by the audience.
Quirkiness abounds in "Rushmore," yet the beauty of the film is that
the weird touches and slightly warped personalities always seem to
make perfect sense in the context of the story. Even though you may
not always understand exactly why you're laughing, laugh you will.

Author
Michael Dequina
Of all the surprises to be had in the 93 wild minutes of _Rushmore_, the
biggest comes right at the beginning: the appearance of the Touchstone
Pictures logo.  It's amazing that a Disney subsidiary would produce a film
so decidedly off-center.  It's also amazing that a major Hollywood studio
could produce something so refreshingly original that it almost defies
description.
The quirkiness of _Rushmore_ should come as no shock to anyone who has
seen director/co-writer (with Owen Wilson) Wes Anderson's first film,
1996's quirky and enjoyable trifle _Bottle_Rocket_ (which he also
co-scripted with Wilson).  Like that film, _Rushmore_ has a loose narrative
structure that feels like it finds its way as it goes along.  The film
traces five months in the life of one Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman), an
eccentric 15-year-old attending posh Rushmore Academy courtesy an academic
scholarship.  However, ever since coming to Rushmore, academics have taken
a backseat to extracurricular activities, and one hilarious montage gives
the rundown of his numerous club affiliations, from the presidency of the
fencing club to beekeeping club.  Closest to his heart, though, is "the Max
Fischer Players"--a theatrical troupe that regularly performs his own
original plays.  (In another memorable scene, the players put on a
production of _Serpico_.)
If there is a central plot thread to _Rushmore_, it is Max's hopeless love
for Rushmore first grade teacher Rosemary Cross (Olivia Williams), which
leads him to pull off elaborate schemes to win her favor, but instead he
ends up getting expelled from his beloved school.  While this story, which
is complicated by Max's friend/romantic rival Herman Blume (Bill Murray),
is involving and achieves unexpected moments of poignancy, it is almost
moot--individual moments like the ones touched upon earlier are what matter
here: Max giving a speech to his couldn't-care-less classmates at the
public school; Max and Miss Cross talking for the first time on the
bleachers; Mr. Blume drunkenly taking a dip in his pool during his twin
sons' birthday party.
Of course, the key to the film's memorable moments are the engaging
characters.  Mr. Blume could have been either a stock villain or a pathetic
loser, but Anderson and Wilson give him a nicely human balance, which is
brought to multidimensional life by Murray, who delivers a performance at
turns funny, sad, and strangely likable.  Williams, freed from the junkpile
that was _The_Postman_ displays immense charm and, crucially, strength as
Miss Cross, who still has a torch burning for her dead husband; it's easy
to see why Mr. Blume and Max would fight over her.  But the film's most
fascinating character is Max, flawlessly played by newcomer Schwartzman.
Max may be a loser, but Schwartzman exudes the right mix of intelligence,
youthful naivete, self-deprecating humor, and everyguy likability that
prevents the character from ever coming off as pathetic.  He's the
perfectly unconventional lead for such an unconventional film.
As good as Schwartzman is, the clear star of _Rushmore_ is Anderson, a
young filmmaker with a uniquely warped vision--one that, not so
surprisingly, plays well with film festival audiences, which embraced this
film.  I doubt general audiences will be so receptive to something so far
off the mainstream radar, and it's more than likely that this film's
one-week Oscar-qualifying run will not result in any nods from the
staunchly conservative Academy.  But _Rushmore_ is certain to find its just
rewards in passionate, if somewhat limited, fan base that can appreciate
its singular brand of bizarre brilliance.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Rushmore (1998)
Jason Schwartzman, Bill Murray, Olivia Williams, Brian Cox, Seymour 
Cassel, Mason Gamble, Sara Tanaka, Stephen McCole, Luke Wilson, Deepak 
Pallana, Andrew Wilson, Marietta Mariach, Ronnie McCawley, Keith McCawley,
 Hae Joon Lee, Adebayo Asabi, Connie Nielsen, Kim Terry. Music Supervisor,
 Randy Poster. Music by Mark Mothersbaugh. Screenplay by Wes Anderson and 
Owen Wilson. Directed by Wes Anderson. 93 minutes.
Rated R, 4.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
The tagline for "Rushmore" is "Love... Expulsion... Revolution." Without 
giving too much away, I would have also added "Reconciliation." For his 
sophomore film, "Bottle Rocket" director Wes Anderson has crafted a 
comedy virtually bursting at the seams with style and substance. 
"Rushmore" is at once wildly anarchic and deeply humane. I've seen it 
three times and enjoyed it more with each viewing. 
The story details the adventures of Rushmore Academy student Max Fischer 
(Jason Schwartzman), an intense 15-year-old so obsessed with becoming a 
Renaissance Man that he can't be bothered with actual studying. When not 
busy with a mind-boggling number of extracurricular activities, he writes,
 produces and occasionally stars in highly derivative, elaborately staged 
plays, including a surprisingly gritty high school adaptation of "Serpico.
" 
Shortly after we meet Max, two events radically alter his life. He falls 
in love with widowed first-grade teacher Rosemary Cross (Olivia Williams),
 and becomes friends with industrial tycoon Herman Blume (Bill Murray), a 
deeply depressed middle-aged Rushmore alumnus. Max enlists Blume's help 
with his grandiose plans to win the heart of Miss Cross, undeterred by 
her gentle, but increasingly stern rebuffs. Then the unthinkable happens..
 Blume also becomes enamored with the comely teacher. When Max learns of 
Blume's crush, he turns on the businessman, leading to a state of open 
warfare between the two.
It would be easy to think of "Rushmore" as simply a delightfully off-the-
wall comedy, but there is so much more to savor. Anderson is a whiz with 
a camera, using beautifully composed wide-screen images and gliding slow-
motion shots to visually punctuate the story. The music is just as good, 
blending a number of relatively obscure British Invasion pop gems with 
Mark Mothersbaugh's delicate harpsichord-laced score (the soundtrack 
album is one of the best I have ever heard).
Down to the tiniest supporting role, the casting is perfect. Jason 
Schwartzman, in his debut as an actor, gives a virtuoso performance. 
Employing a droll, deadpan delivery spiced with periodic bursts of pure 
adolescent angst, Schwartzman expertly creates a credible portrait of an 
over-reaching under-achiever. Max is absolutely determined to take on the 
world, despite the fact that he knows very little about it. Wearing the 
latest in geek chic, Max looks foolish, behaves horribly and takes 
himself very, very seriously. Anyone who remembers navigating the choppy 
waters of puberty will recognize bits of themselves in this totally 
focused and terribly lost young man.  
Bill Murray does the finest work of his career as passive-aggressive 
Herman Blume, an angry boy stuck in a respectable businessman's body. In 
an address to the Rushmore students, Blume speaks of the rich, urging the 
kids to "Get 'em in the crosshairs and take them down." He's not kidding. 
Blume hates what he has become and admires Max for possessing the 
vitality that he so desperately lacks. Even while being assaulted by bees,
 Blume can't resist smiling when he realizes that Max orchestrated the 
attack. Study Murray's eyes and subtle changes of expression and you'll 
understand just how good a dramatic actor he really is.
There is a lot of drama within the bittersweet comedy of "Rushmore." Miss 
Cross, in a nicely-tempered turn by Olivia Williams, mourns the loss of 
her husband, while Max mourns the loss of his mother and Blume mourns the 
loss of his spirit. Wes Anderson has nothing but affection for his 
damaged characters, and he treats them with the dignity they deserve. 
>From Bert (Seymour Cassel), Max's unconditionally loving father, to 
Magnus (Stephen McCole) a gregarious Scottish thug, it's a genuine 
pleasure to spend time with these people.
Anderson also creates an almost otherworldly feel by providing the 
characters with a level playing field. Young or old, tall or short, 
friend or enemy, each person carries equal authority depending on the 
circumstance. The towering Blume reacts like a whipped pup when little 
Dirk, Max's choir partner and sidekick (Mason Gamble, in a wonderfully 
solemn performance), indignantly berates him for betraying Max. Magnus 
abruptly shifts from wrathful foe to willing compatriot when presented 
with a benign offer from Max. In this weathered utopia, character 
actually matters more than size or social status.
And in the end, reconciliation is offered to one and all. As the tale 
reaches its hilarious climax, Max executes a grand gesture that pulls 
everyone to the same place at the same time, giving each character a 
chance to make peace with those around them. What a fine way to wrap up 
an ingenious, inventive gem of a movie. If you're like me, you'll enjoy 
"Rushmore" on first viewing and come to treasure it the second or third 
time around.

Author
Matt Prigge
Writers: Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson
Starring: Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams, Bill Murray, Mason Gamble, 
Seymour Cassel, Brian Cox, Sara Tanaka, Stephen McCole, Ronnie McCawley, 
Keith McCawley, Kim Terry, Connie Nielsen, Andrew Wilson, Luke Wilson
Max Fischer's such a sublime creation that the only way you could make a 
bad film about him would be by either determination or utter 
incompetence. At the very least, you'd have to make a mediocre film 
about him, with his character standing out amongst it as the film's 
true, and perhaps only, master stroke. In fact, a film called "Bottle 
Rocket" come to mind: made by the same guys (Wes Anderson and Owen 
Wilson), it featured several great characters, but most notably it 
featured a guy named Dignan (played by Wilson) who was about the 
funniest character of that year. With a short haircut, a mixed accent of 
parts hick and surfer dude, and a knack for devising overly ambitious 
schemes that were almost bound to fail from the moment they were 
introduced, he was the best thing about this frequently funny but 
somewhat unsatisfying film (read: it dragged here and there). But there 
was something about that film that made it better than a lot of comedies 
(indie or not): the creators came up with comic yet completely 
dimensional characters, people who were funny but complex and even 
human, making the laughs come without a sense of condescension (like 
you're laughing at them, but yet you're not, if that makes any 
sense...).
They bring the same droll detachment to "Rushmore," a giant improvement 
on "Bottle Rocket" because it's nearly successful in every way. It's 
witty, laugh-out-loud hilarious, and, for the kicker, strangely poignant 
and touching. The reason it's the most original comedy of the past 
couple years by a long shot is because Anderson and Wilson have managed 
to make big laughs out of the lives of fully realized characters, people 
who are very hilarious but whom we care deeply about and are deeply 
complex. For example, in the film's opening scene, Max is shown having a 
revealing dream about solving the hardest math problem in the world, and 
receiving the accolades of his entire class. Like many of us (read: me), 
Max is insecure and constantly worries about how other people perceive 
him, and maybe that's why he's so happy attending the elite Rushmore 
Academy, the stage where he sets his numerous overly ambitious artistic 
achievements. Max is currently enrolled in at least a couple dozen 
extracuricular activities, usually as either the founder or at least the 
president, including the leader of the Max Fischer Players, a dramatic 
club that is currently putting on a stage production of "Serpico." 
Always wearing his school blazer, while most students can barely stand 
the blue suit shirts, Max has set himself up as at least the school's 
most famous student, if not the most popular, and seems to take glee in 
his black-rimmed glasses, his braces, his perfectly combed hair, and his 
mature vernacular without letting anyone else know about it. Yet he 
never lets anyone know about the truth behind his life: that he was 
given a scholarship to the school in second grade for penning a one act 
play about Watergate, and his father is not a neurosurgeon but rather an 
unambitious barber (Seymour Cassell, of Cassavette films).
And, of course, as the film begins, he's placed on "sudden death 
academic probation" by the school's long-suffering dean (Brian Cox). But 
that only means more dandy work for Max, as his life is interrupted by 
meeting two people who begin to bring about his long-due "coming of age" 
(as this is, tradionally, a "coming of age" story, told 
untraditionally): Herman Blume (Bill Murray), a self-made millionaire 
whose two bratty teenage twins go to Rushmore; and Rosemary Cross (Olvia 
Williams, late of "The Postman" ha ha), a pretty first grade school 
teacher at Rushmore. The first becomes his mentor; the second becomes 
his objet d'obsession. Always needing something to do, he makes his main 
point of business the courting of Rosemary, first becoming her volunteer 
assistant (pouring her lemonade, replacing her red marking pens, etc.), 
but soon makes grand gestures in order to win her over, including a 
would-be romantic dinner and building a multi-million dollar aquarium 
(donated by Herman) on, of all places, the baseball diamond. But these 
grand gestures and his setting the bar way too high soon take a turn for 
the worse, and things begin escalating out of control. He's expelled 
from school. Max's best friend and loyal assistant (Mason Gamble, late 
of "Denace the Menace" ha ha) turns against him. Herman and Rosemary 
meet and fall in love. And Max and Herman go to war against eachother.
All this is done with a uniquely droll sense of humor, the kind that was 
the saving grace of "Bottle Rocket" and here just another way in which 
it's a phenomenal and original comedy. There are plenty of laughs in 
this film, from the ridiculously funny (Max as a back-flipping male 
cheerleader) to the deadpan (Max asking Herman about Vietnam: "So were 
you in the shit?" "Yeah I was in the shit.") to the sublime (a montage 
of static shots showing every actitivity Max takes place in), all 
presented with beautiful and even witty direction by Wes Anderson, who 
mightily improves over his completely deadpan direction of "Bottle 
Rocket." This is a film of lots of colors and glorious wide shots (I 
can't imagine this cropped for the TV screen), and filled with either 
glorious British Invasion obscurities (from The Kinks, The Who, Cat 
Stevens, Chad and Jeremy, and others) or Marx Mothersbaugh's hilarious 
neo-baroque score. The script is absolutely killer: there's more laughs 
than an episode of "Seinfeld," and more dead-on insights into teenage 
behavior than an entire multi-seasonal run of [pick your teenage soap 
opera, prime or daytime].20
And Max will go down in history as one of the truly great comic 
creations: he has the refreshing, cynicism of Holden Caulfield, the 
restlessness of Huck Finn, and the wit of Woody Allen, but a completely 
original desire to be more mature than he is, just because that will 
elevate him above everyone else. And he could have been cold and eerily 
manipulative, but as played by Jason Schwartzman (son of Talia Shire, 
proving once again that there's something in the Coppola bloodline, by 
god), he's easily an anti-hero, someone we root for even when we can't 
believe what he's doing, whether he's trying his best to form a fencing 
club at his newest high school or tampering with the brakes on Herman's 
car. Along with Eamonn Owens from "The Butcher Boy," this is the most 
striking new arrival of the year: a multi-dimensional performer who's 
not afraid to show the flaws of the character while also showing off his 
many redeeming qualities. Thankfully, his object of obsession, Rosemary, 
is also mutli-dimensional: a damaged widow who's also irresistable and 
easily charming, and Williams plays her with such ease and intelligence 
that I, who haven't seen "The Postman," cannot fathom that her 
performance can be anything short of wonderful (then again, I've been 
disappointed a lot). And there's many other great performances here, 
including sharp supporting turns from a gentle Cassell, a reserved Cox, 
a hilarious Gamble, and even a Ewan McGrgeor-lookalike Stephen McCole as 
a scotish bully/fellow student.
But if there's any truly brilliant performance here, it's by Bill 
Murray, recently snubbed greatly for an Oscar nomination for a 
performance that is not only delightfully Murraysian, but surprisngly 
subtle and tragi-comic. Herman, the opposite of Max, owns a giant 
factory but loathes his empty life, his potentially-unfaithful wife, and 
his two monstrous sons, and not only finds a refreshing change of pace 
in the friendship with Max (at first bewildered, but later finds pure 
ease with him), but he also finds that while Max yearns for adulthood, 
he personally yearns to be a kid again. In one wonderfully cinematic 
moment at his sons' birthday party, Herman gets up on the high dive of 
his pool, complete with cigarette dangling from mouth and cup of booze 
in his hand, he cannonballs into the pool, and stays underneath, curled 
up with eyes closed which is straight out of "The Graduate." What's so 
great about this performance is that it's so easy to overlook. Instead 
of the usual Murray schtick, like in "Stripes" or "Ghostbusters," Murray 
opts to speak in a defeated and saddened tone, and acts with 
worldweariness but new life thanks to Max. His performance is, yes, 
funny, but also touching and sad, and if anyone out there has recently 
lost faith in Murray for quality (with "The Man Who Knew Too Little," I 
had), here's the best performance he's ever given, and maybe the best 
supporting performance of the year (he and Billy Bob Thornton are, at 
the very least, head-to-head in my opinion).
Ditto the film. It's hilarious, and plenty witty, but it's also 
extremely affecting, and watching it, I not only felt for the 
characters, but also was able to identify with what was going on because 
everyone, I hope, at some point, faces something similar: a feel of 
inadequacy that you try to overcome in the most idiosyncratic ways. 
Someday, when the hype and all that has been lifted from this film, we 
may hopefully be able to rank it along with several Ernest Lubitsch and 
Woody Allen films, Hal Ashby's "Harold and Maude," and, well, "The 
Graduate," as one of the most unique and weirdly touching comedies to 
ever be made. Hopefully.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Luke Buckmaster
RUSHMORE
Cast: Jason Schwartzman, Bill Murray, Olivia Williams, Seymour Cassel, Brian
Cox, Mason Gamble, Sara Tanaka
Director: Wes Anderson 
Screenplay: Wes Anderson, Owen Wilson
Australian theatrical release: February 25, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 
4 stars
Their are quirky films, and then their is Rushmore, a film that is intent on
deviating from the norm of filmmaking. The "hero" of this story is unlike any
other in recent memory. Geeky but sort of cool Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman,
in a bold debut performance) is a wacky protagonist, a guy with a mean
attitude but a soft center.  Playing alongside Schwartzman is Bill Murray (in
one of his better roles of recent years), who has an equally peculiar
character.  Murray and Schwartzman live out every comedian's dream: they get
to act simultaneously smart and silly, and receive a whole lot of laughs in
the process.  To further compliment the production, Wes Anderson directors
Rushmore intelligently and humorously, whilst not stripping his intelligent
moments of humor, and not making his humor particularly intelligent.
Max is a 10th grader at Rushmore Academy, and for him, school is his life.  He
is involved in numerous extracurricular roles, ranging from captain of the
fencing and debating teams to the founder of the Double-team Dodgeball
Society.  With his thick rimmed glasses, blazer and quick thinking mind, Max
is often thought of as a kid genius.  Truth is, he's a lousy student and is
under constant threat of expulsion.  Max falls in love with a first grade
teacher named Miss Cross (Olivia Williams), and tries to win her over by
hatching various plans.  When Latin classes are about to be replaced by
Japanese, Max cleverly makes the subject compulsory for all senior years;
later, he attempts to construct an aquarium on Rushmore's baseball field.
For help raising money, Max consults school benefactor Mr. Blume (Bill
Murray), a seedy millionaire who appears to be in the middle of a mid-life
crisis.  Blume is attracted to Max's energy and eccentric ways, and the two
become good friends.  But when Max discovers that Blume is also in love with
Miss Cross, a mean war initiates between the two (at one stage, Blume runs
over Max's bicycle, so Max removes the brakes from his car).  As Max
desperately attempts to act like an adult, Blume finds excitement in acting
like a child.
Almost all of Rushmore's oddly timed humor relies on its characters.  Whilst
we develop a good understanding of Max and Blume's personalities, they are
never predictable and never boring.  The relationship between these two really
needed to work, and it does, much to the credit of Jason Schwartzman and Bill
Murray. Schwartzman's first film performance is a memorable one, and is
skillfully played with a mixture of nastiness and goofy sincerity.  Murray has
received great but small roles recently in Wildthings and Kingpin, but his
work in Rushmore is much closer to what he is capable of achieving.  Murray is
a brilliant comic performer and this film channels his capabilities, producing
a nice bit of whimsical acting.
It's the winning formula of offbeat comedy and drama that makes Rushmore such
a delight to watch.  Wes Anderson's and co-writer Owen Wilson's screenplay is
smart and original - they understand how to craft extraordinary characters,
and have fun doing so.  Though some scenes in Rushmore have little or no
point, the film is always amusing enough to warrant an audience.  Rushmore has
reinvented the teenage comedy genre (similar to what The Breakfast Club did in
1985, and what Can't Hardly Wait attempted to do in 1998) by giving itself a
quirkiness and originality that is rarely found in contemporary cinema.  There
are more reasons to see Rushmore other than its originality, but none are
quite as refreshing.  


Author
Matt Williams
No, this is not a film about the famous South Dakota presidential
monument. Rather, Rushmore is a unique comedy about two somewhat
obnoxious, but endearing, characters and their quest for happiness.
Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman) is one of the most outgoing students at
Rushmore Academy.  He is involved in every club and group that the
school offers, and has single-handedly established many more.  However,
despite his astounding extra-curricular efforts, academically he is also
one  of the worst students in Rushmore's history.
Max's latest project involves a new first grade teacher at Rushmore
Academy, Miss Cross (Olivia Williams).  Max is instantly smitten with
her and, ignoring the age difference, sets out to woo her with all his
resources.
To help out, Max enlists the aid of both his young protégé (Mason
Gamble) and a kindred spirit, the tycoon Herman Blume (Bill Murray).
Herman, despite having amassed a great fortune, is surrounded by
unhappiness.  He has an unloving relationship with his wife, and he
detests his two obnoxious sons (who happen to be classmate of Max).
Max's unbridled enthusiasm and determination makes Herman feel alive
again.  And the presence of Miss Cross stirs up other, long-dormant,
emotions within him...emotions which may run contrary to Max's plans.
It is rare for a film to create a character as unique and unexpected as
Max Fischer.  A lesser movie would have simply pegged Max as a
misunderstood genius or a goofball loser.  However, screenwriters Wes
Anderson and Owen Wilson never let us forget Max's central incompetence,
yet all the while endowing him with a degree of chutzpah rarely glimpsed
before.
Jason Schwartzman is a welcome new face, and tackles the role of Max
Fischer with gusto.  He's able to go toe to toe with any of the more
established actors in the film, and always comes away the winner.
In a more familiar role, Bill Murray is right at home as the unusual
millionaire.  He never devolves into all-out wackiness, but rather
delivers a much more focused performance than he has in years.
As the woman who comes between these two, Olivia Williams has a much
more passive role.  She simply doesn't have much to do, other than be
the object of desire.  However, it is a role which she plays well,
limited as it is.
With its unique characters and unusual plot, Rushmore is a truly
distinctive comedy. It never becomes the sort of film that will have you
convulsing with laughter, but it certainly will keep you smiling the
whole way through.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        If Wes Anderson's "Rushmore" isn't black comedy, it at
least has a healthy tan.  In an era when bodily functions are too
often mistaken for humor, it's a great joy to encounter a film that
draws inspiration from the ordinary and mundane, then turns them
into something witty.  In "Rushmore," laughs come from unexpected
places, while satire is stretched to the point of absurdity.  It's
a funny story, but it never sacrifices its characters for a cheap
laugh.
        Max Fischer (Jason Schwartzman) is a brilliant fifteen-year
old with a flair for theatrics.  He's delighted to be a student at
Rushmore, a prestigious private school.  Max, who won an academic
scholarship because of a one-act play he penned about the Watergate
scandal, is so enthusiastic that he throws all of his time and
energy into extracurricular programs, becoming a member (and often
the president) of nearly ever club on campus.  He also leads a
successful campaign to reinstate Latin, after the language is
dropped from Rushmore's curriculum in favor of Japanese.
        Max has basically missed the point of the word
"extracurricular," however: these activities occupy so much of
his time that he never gets around to studying, and he soon
finds himself in danger of losing his scholarship.  Max pleads
with the school's dean ("Couldn't you just let me float by, for
old time's sake?"), but is nonetheless placed on academic
probation.  If he fails one more class, Max will be forced to
consider the unthinkable: public school.
        But Max has another distraction: Rosemary Cross (Olivia
Williams), a new Rushmore teacher.  Max develops an instant crush,
and it's not hard to see why: Rosemary is wise, passionate,
beautiful, and, in Max's eyes, the perfect woman.  Who cares if
she's twice his age?
        Well, she does, for starters.  As Max gradually tries to
convert the budding friendship into something a tad more amorous,
his pal Herman Blume (Bill Murray), a Rushmore alumnus, tries to
talk him out of pining for a relationship they both know will
never happen.  Max sees the logic in Blume's words... but when he
discovers that Herman is seeing Rosemary on the sly, he declares
all-out war on his former friend.
        These scenes are scathing, yet director Wes Anderson
handles them with a light touch.  Max and Herman are too caught
up in their own petty bickering to realize what's painfully obvious
to the audience: neither of them deserve Rosemary.  Fortunately,
she's aware of this fact.
        "Rushmore" is a delicate balance of humor and drama.
Even though the plot description may sound like something from
the Marx Brothers, the movie feels real; even at its zaniest, we
never lose sight of the pain and confusion of our two suitors.
Yet the film never plays without the hint of a smile.  (There's
a great moment, for example, in which Max starts to realize the
seriousness of his academic probation.  "Maybe I'm spending too
much time starting clubs and putting on plays," he solemnly muses.
"I should be spending more time scoring chicks.")
        What impressed me the most was the way in which the film
conveys both touching drama and ridiculous dialogue simultaneously.
When Max and Rosemary realize they've each lived through the death
of a loved one, Max bluntly announces, "I guess we both have dead
people in our families."  His lack of tact works as screwball comedy,
yet remains touching in its honesty.  Or, during an angry
confrontation with Herman: "I saved Latin.  What have YOU ever
done?"
        Much has been written about Bill Murray's performance here,
and justly so.  We all know Murray can be funny; what's impressive
about his role as Herman Blume is the fact that he often attracts
big laughs by playing the straight man.  Herman is perhaps the most
downbeat character Murray has ever played, and the amount of
subtlety and restraint he shows is admirable-- a lesser actor might
have chosen to shoot for the moon, but Murray hits exactly the right
tone: Blume is a rather boring middle-age man stuck with a life and
family he despises, and a more upbeat performance would've been
disastrous to the character's believability.  This role indicates
a maturity I've never before seen in Murray's approach.
        Newcomer Jason Schwartzman is also splendid as Max, a
confused but highly intelligent young man whose hormones tell him
things his brain would just as soon not hear.  Watch how devoutly
he pursues Rosemary, turning away the affections repeatedly offered
by Margaret (Sara Tanaka), a sweet girl just the right age for him.
Max is the sort of person who would rather dream of the impossible
than accept the reality that's offered.  We feel sad for him, but
we can relate: many of us are guilty of the same crime.
        I never once knew where "Rushmore" was headed, and though
I tried to guess on a few occasions, I was wrong every time.  This
is a movie that's smart enough to know that the things in life
which appear simple often end up being insanely complicated, and
in this simplicity lies the story's success.  Anderson has crafted
a clever film that deviates from the beaten path in almost every
conceivable way.  I applaud him for it.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Nerdy 15-year-old Max Fischer, played by a perfectly cast Jason
Schwartzman, might appear to have it all.  A student at an elite private
school named Rushmore; he participates in every extracurricular activity
on campus from backgammon to beekeeping to wrestling.  And he's
constantly on the prowl for opportunities to establish new clubs.  No
activity is too mundane for Max to organize.  As he sees it, even the
old recess game sometimes called dodgeball, in which kids throw a ball
at each other, deserves incorporation into a school-sponsored sport.
With his prominent braces, bookish glasses and exceedingly plain looks,
Max overcompensates by being the only boy at school to a wear a blazer
and tie.   In a fancy prep school, he's the preppiest kid on campus.
Max's talents appear limitless.  He even writes, directs and produces
his own plays, including a realistic Vietnam war drama that requires his
audience to wear earplugs and safety goggles in case the bazooka or
other parts of the dangerously real pyrotechnics go awry.
RUSHMORE, written by Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson and directed by Wes
Anderson, isn't a movie that's easy to pigeonhole.  The trailers would
lead you to believe that it's a comedy and probably a bad slapstick one.
The movie is certainly funny, and, unlike what the trailers suggest, it
isn't that over-the-top.  In addition to the humor, the story has two
quirky romances and some sweet undertones.  Most of all, it's a poignant
tale about two people who have had limited success in their lives.
Although Max excels at some things, academically and socially he's am
unqualified disaster.  As the story opens, he has been put on "academic
sudden death" because of his poor grades.  (Max demands documentation.
A kid's got to know his rights.)
In a supporting role that the studio hopes will garner him an Oscar
nomination, Bill Murray plays Herman Blume, the school's superrich
supporter.  Herman is bored stiff with his life and his family, and he
is cursed with a pair of obnoxious twins who attend Rushmore.  In an
empathetic performance, Murray takes an understated approach.  With just
the rolling of his eyes, he imparts a deliciously mocking humor,
revealing how bereft his character is of any joy in his life.  Herman
may be financially well off, but he is terminally unhappy.
Perhaps the film's best scene occurs when Herman tries to obtain a
little solitude during a party at his house by floating underwater in
the swimming pool.  A kid also dives under and stares at him, thus
destroying his fleeting moment of peace.  The incident is reminiscent of
THE GRADUATE, as is some of the rest of this unusual motion picture.
Both Max and Herman fall in love Rosemary Crosswith, a new teacher at
Rushmore.  Olivia Williams, the female lead from THE POSTMAN, plays
Rosemary with an inviting sweetness.  Rosemary tells Max that he's too
young for her, but that doesn't dissuade him.  Ever resourceful, he
finds out what he thinks are her passions and then lobbies to obtain
them for her.  From keeping Latin as part of the curriculum to building
an aquarium, no challenge is too daunting for him.
Robert D. Yeoman's cinematography gives the picture a bleak and austere
look that has a FARGOish feel to it.  The images are colorful, yet flat
and devoid of warmth, reflecting the desperation of the characters.
It's not often that two award pins can summarize a person's life, but
Max's pins can.  Prominently displayed on his sport coat are his awards
for "Perfect Attendance" and "Punctuality."  If, as Woody Allen said,
"90% of life is just showing up," Max does have some major
accomplishments to his credit.
RUSHMORE runs 1:33.  It is rated R for profanity and mature themes and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Greg King
RUSHMORE (M).  
(Touchstone/Beuna Vista International)
Director: Wes Anderson
Stars: Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams, Bill Murray, Brian Cox, 
Seymour Cassel, Mason Gamble, 
Sara Tanaka, Stephen McCole, Luke Wilson, Connie Nielsen, Ronnie 
McCawley, Keith McCawley
Running time: 98 minutes.
Writer/director Wes Anderson is an audacious talent who possesses 
an unconventional and off 
beat sensibility.  Rushmore is the second film from Anderson, whose low 
budget, slacker crime caper 
Bottle Rocket was widely acclaimed but performed poorly at the box 
office.  In Rushmore he suffuses the 
typical elements of the dysfunctional teen genre, the coming of age tale, 
and adolescent school comedy 
with a subversive, wickedly anarchic spirit.  The result is a 
refreshingly offbeat and inventive comedy that 
at times becomes a little too clever for its own good.  Rushmore has an 
edgy, surreal quality that sets it 
apart from the puerile humour of most similarly themed comedies.  The 
film's deliberately eccentric style 
will probably hold more appeal to adult audiences.  
Fifteen year old Max Fischer (newcomer Jason Schwartzman) is a 
precocious student at 
Rushmore, a ritzy private school.  Although quite brilliant - he can 
solve complex mathematical equations 
quicker than that other prodigy Will Hunting - Max is also something of 
an obsessive under-achiever.  His 
grades have slipped because of his passion for pursuing extra curricular 
activities.  Max is the president 
and founding member of a number of clubs at Rushmore - bee keeping, 
fencing, chess.  He even formed 
the theatrical group that performs his offbeat plays, including a stage 
adaptation of Serpico and an 
ambitious Apocalypse Now-like scenario.  He is put on "sudden death 
academic probation," which simply 
means that if he fails one more exam he's out.  
Max is sort of like Ferris Bueller's evil brother - a devious, 
shrewd and manipulative schemer, but 
without the charm.  He is a thoroughly despicable character, and is never 
in danger of eliciting sympathy 
from the audience.  At times you want to strangle him, or shake him.  
Max's downfall begins when he falls heavily for Miss Cross 
(Olivia Williams, from The 
Postman), the junior grade teacher.  In an effort to impress her he 
attempts to build an aquarium on the 
edge of one of the school's sporting fields.  He approaches wealthy 
businessman and former alumni Mr 
Blume (Bill Murray) to fund the project.  The plan backfires, and Max is 
temporarily expelled from 
Rushmore.  Blume begins an affair with Miss Cross.  The jealous Max begin 
a vicious campaign of 
vengeance against Blume, which escalates out of control.  It is the 
unlikely relationship between these two 
eccentric characters that provides the film with much of its energy and 
humour.          The wealth of 
colourful incidents and wonderfully quirky characters suggests that 
Rushmore has been partially inspired 
by Anderson's own experiences at school.  Rushmore has a sophisticated 
and decidedly off beat sense of 
humour, although the laughs are not always obvious.  
The performers seem attuned to Anderson's off beat sense of 
humour.  In an impressive debut, 
Schwartzman delivers a strong performance as the thoroughly dislikeable 
Max.  Murray is at his 
smarmy, droll and laconic best, and delivers a wonderfully understated 
performance as the emotionally 
damaged Blume, who is little more than an overgrown child in a man's 
body.  
Anderson has an idiosyncratic visual style, which ensures that 
Rushmore is quite unlike any 
other coming of age tale that you've seen.  The quirkiness and 
originality of the scenario unfortunately 
doesn't last the distance however, as Anderson eventually settles for a 
rather conventional and somewhat 
unsatisfying resolution.
